OF THE ETERNAL FELICITY OF THE SAINTS, Five Books.

Written in Latin by the most Illustrious Cardinal Bellarmine, of the Society
of Jesus.

And translated into English by A. ^.

seal of the Society of Jesus

Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the Justice thereof, Matthew, 6. Permissu
Superiorum. 1638.

The Epistle Dedicatory of the Translatour, to the Reader.
GOOD Reader.
I here present thee with a Translation of one of the spiritual Books of the
learned, and pious Bellarmine, memorable in all future Ages. But before I
proceed further, I would wish thee call to mind, that two things necessarily
concur to the perfection, and consummation of a Good Christian. The first is
a true and Orthodoxall faith, residing in the understanding; The second a
devout and virtuous life, resting in the V^ill. Touching the first, it is
recorded in sacred Writ: That without faith it is impossible to please God,
Heb. 11. and of the other we thus read, Decline from evil and do good. Psalm.
36. Now this Blessed deceased Cardinal (whose happy Soul I most humbly
beseech to pray for me, his poor Client) endeavoring to forestall (as it were)
and surprise the contrary ways leading to man's perdition, did first for the
instruction of Christians of this Age in true faith, write his learned Tomes of
Controversies, for their worth deserving to be stamped in letters of Gould, and
for their continuance to future ages, in Characters of Brass, or Marble,
threatening therein a total prof^igation, or rather extinguishment of all
present Nouellisme.

After this his labor accomplished, and himself growing into greater years,
then did he turn his pen to write certain spiritual Treatises wholly
breathing devotion and Sanctity, and teaching the way of performance of the
foresaid Precept of declining from Evil, and doing Good. Among which his
devout Discourses, he made one of the Joys of Heaven, entituling it: De
aeterna Felicitate Sanctorum; The which book translated into English, I do now
present unto thee. In thy serious perusing whereof, thou will rest astonished
at the proceedings of most Worldlings, who are so wholly buried in Earth, as
that whereas Man is borne Heir to the Kingdom of Heaven (for we read to our
comfort, that we are Heirs of God, and Coheyres of Christ, Romans 8.)
Nevertheless diverse of them do even breathlesly labor and toil in seeking to
add earth for their Sons to inherit; and yet are of such nicenes and
delicacy themselves, as that they will not once stir a foot, that (not their
Sons, but) themselves may inherit, not Earth, but the true Land of promise, I
mean the kingdom of God; but in lieu thereof though their leading a wicked
life, become inheritours of Hell fire and everlasting damnation. But to
return to the most worthy Bellarmine. In the reading of this his Book thou
shall doublesly find him not to act Moses, who was permitted only to show the
Israelites the way to the La^d of Promise, and not to enter with them therein;
but rather Joshua, who conducted them into the Land, and also entered with them;
which Land was but a Type or adumbration of the Celestial Land or Country
here discoursed of.

Touching my course held in translating this Treatise, thou may be
aduertized, that I have translated it faithfully and truly. Bellarmines gravity
scorns to use in his Writings any flowers of youthful Oratory; but only writes,
whatsoever it pleased God to dictate unto his spirit: Therefore I should have
wronged him, and his work, in disuesting it of its own purity and easines of
style, by new clothing it in forced and borrowed robes of speech. No, let
Bellarmine be ever suffered to speak in the dialect of Bellarmine, that is
gravely, and persuadingly; for since his words are darted out of a fyery
devotion and charity, they therefore are most persuading; and if he speaks
persuadingly, no doubt he speaks eloquently; since Persuasion is the But, or
scope of true Eloquence.

I know full well that Translations in this our fastidious age, are slighted
or little regarded; and that highly prized, which comes heat out of the
forge, or mint of a Man's own wit, and invention. Let those men whom God and
their own endeauours have enriched with such high Talents, happily employ them
to the good of Gods Church; I am not emulous of their due reputation* and
deserved praise gained thereby: I content my self with the loely title of a
poor Translatour, a^ not being able to perform more: Only I desire to do good
thereby. Nevertheless to Apologize, and speak in defense of Translatours, I may
be bold to say, that they in some sense may be said to be the Authors of
other men's Works by them translated; seeing they are Authors and Causers, why
diverse (ignorant in the Latin Tongue) though benefit of their Translations, do
participate of the contents of the said Works translated, of which otherwise
they would never have taken notice. And thus a good Translatour is a good
Enginer, since he opens and ^is^loseth the Mines of the hidden, and goulden
Treasure of other Men's learning.

And thus leaving thee to the perusing or rather meditating of this goulden
Book, If thou be Catholic, and reap any profit thereby I entreat thy Prayers
to God in my behalf, for the remission of my infinite sins. This I speak
not, by way of Ceremony, and for fashion sake, as it is often usual to diverse
in their Epistles Dedicatory to do; but most humbly and earnestly beseech of
thee this favor; and if it shall please his divine Goodness out of his
bou^d-les mercy, to call me (before thy death) to the most happy place of
Eternal Felicity (of which this Book entreats) I will not there forget to
requite this thy Charity showed me.

Thine in Christ Jesus, A. ^.

The Preface of the Author.
THE last year, I wrote a small Treatise (chiefly for my own spiritual good)
of the Ascending of the mind to God, by consideration of certain steps, or
degrees of things created. Now, in that it has pleased the divine Majesty, to
draw out a little longer my feeble old age, it came into my thoughts, to make
the Heavenly City (to the which all we Sons of Adam, who bewayling do
inhabitate this Vale of mortality, do greedily seek after) the subject of my
present meditations: and to commit the same to print, to the end they may not
wholly perish. Therefore in the sacred Scriptures (which are, as it were,
certain Consolatory Epistles, sent from our Father in this our exile, or place
of banishment) I find four Names, by which the good and Felicity of that place
may in some sort be made known unto us.

The Names an these: A Paradise, a House, a City, a Kingdom, Of Paradise S.
Paul thus says, 2. Cor. 12. Scio hominem in Christo etc. I know a man in
Christ, above fourteen years ago, rapt even to the third Haven: And then a
little after: rapt into Paradise. And that we might not imagine, he spoke of the
earthly Paradise he did promise and set down before those words; rapt even to
the third Heaven. Concer-a House, the Son of God himself thus speaks: In
my Fathers House, there be many Mansions, Joan. 14. Touching a City these be
the words of the Apostle: You are come to the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem. Hebr. 12. To conclude, of the Kingdom of Heaven, our Lord
himself thus in S. Matthew 5. Beatipauperes spiritu etc. Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: And no other name through out
the whole body of the Scripture, is more frequently used, then this of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

The Place of the Saints in Heaven is called a Paradise, because Heaven is a
most pleasant place, abounding withal spiritual delicacies. But because some
Men may coniectu^e, that a Paradise is but a small Garden, placed in some one
corner of a House capable to receive but few Men; the Holy Ghost did adioyne in
the Scripture the Word and name of House, because a Regal and Princely House
is accustomed to be a great Palace, in which besides the Garden or Orchard,
there are certaaine open Halls, or places of disport, diverse Chambers and
rooms of repose and retirement, besides many others of different sort.

Now seeing a House (notwithstanding it be great) cannot contain many men;
therefore, that we should not think that they are but few, who belong to the
Kingdom of Heaven, the Scripture does annexe the Name of a City, which
usually comprehends in it self many Orchards, and many Palaces of Pleasure.
But seeing S. John writes in the Apocalypse 7. of the number of the Blessed:
Vidi turbam magna^ etc. I saw a great multitude, which no man could number. And
that there is no City, which is capable of an innumerable multitude; therefore
the Holy Scripture uses the name of a Kingdom, and of the Kingdom of Heaven;
then which place no other throughout the whole University of things created, is
more capacious.

But now again, to show other reasons in warrant of the former four different
Appellations or Names. Because in a most ample Kingdom, there are many Men,
who never see nor know the Names of d uers inahbitants of the same Kingdom;
nor know not whether such Men are, or have an Existence or Being; and also in
that it is certain, that all the Blessed do see and know one another, and as
friends conjoined in a strait bond of love, do familiarly converse among
themselves; therefore the Scripture, as not being content with the Name of a
Kingdom, added the Name of a City; giving us to understand thereby, that all
those, who do dwell in that (though most vast) Kingdom, are truly Citizens of
the Saints, and are so conjoined in familiarity among themselves, as the
Citizens of one small City are accustomed to be. And that we may be further
instructed, that all those happy Men, are not only the Citizens of the Saints,
but also the domesticke friends of God, yea the Sons of God; therefore the
same Holy Ghost, who had called it a City, calls it also a House. To
conclude, in that all the Blessed in Heaven do enjoy the same delights and
pleasures in Heaven, therefore is that place, entitled by the Name of Paradise.
Thus these four Words; to wit, a Kingdom, a City, a House, a Paradise do
signify one and the same thing: And that Paradise here mentioned, is so
spacious and large, as that it may be truly called a House, a City, a Kingdom.

Therefore I have here determined to commit to Print, whatsoever God shall
vouchsafe to suggest and minister to me (by way of meditation) in the secret
Closet of my soul, of this most happy place. And this, first vn-the name of a
Kingdom; next under the name of a City; then of a House; and lastly of
Paradise. Toward the end of the discourse, I will subioyne six other Names
(not of places, but of things) out of the Parables of our Lord* to wit, A
Treasure hidden in a field; A precious Pearl or Margarite; The daily Penny;
The joy of our Lord; A great supper; And a regal or Princely mariadge; As also
two other Names out of the Apostle, which are, a Price or Reward, and a Crown;
so in all, there shall be twelve distinct Considerations, by the which the
Eternal Felicity of the Saints is described in the sacred Scriptures.

OF THE ETERNAL FELICITY OF THE SAINTS, Under the Name, or Title of the
Kingdom of God. THE FIRST BOOK.
Of the Amplitude, or largeness of the Kingdom of God. CHAP. I.
OF what worth and dignity the doctrine of the Kingdom of Heaven is, may
partly be known, in that our Heavenly Master did begin his Sermons to his
Auditory from those words of Matthew. 4. De penance, for the Kingdom of Heaven
is at hand. And further, in that he made the Kingdom of Heaven, the Subject of
most of his Parables, saying ( Matthew. 13.18.20.21.22.25.) The Kingdom of
Heaven is resembled etc. And after his Resurrection, in the time of those
forty days before his Ascension, appearing to his Disciples, he discoursed of
the Kingdom of Heaven, as S. Luke does witness in the Acts of the Apostles.
Therefore we see, the beginning progress, and consummation or end of the
speeches of Christ, were ever of the Kingdom of Heaven. Now we in this place
will not undertake to dispute of all points, touching the Kingdom of Heaven;
but only so far forth, as concerns the place and state of the Blessed
Saints. And first, we will explicate, why the place and state of the Saints is
named in the holy Scriptures, The Kingdom of Heaven.

Well then, the Habitation of the Saints for several respects is entitled, The
Kingdom of Heaven. First, because Heaven is a most ample Region, and far more
ample and large, then the narrow limits even of Man's thought can comprehend.
The whole Earth, which is but a Prick or Point, in comparison of the highest
Heaven, does contain so many, and so great Kingdoms, as that with difficulty
they can be numbered. Of what immensenesse and huge Vastness then shall that
Kingdom be, which is but one, and yet dispersed and spread throughout the
whole latitude and breadth of the Heaven of Heavens? For the King^ome of Heaven
does not only contain through its own capacity) the Celestial Region, but
also all this University, and general State of things, For that
supercelestiall Region as I may term it, which is properly the Kingdom of
Heaven is as it were the first Province of the Kingdom of God, in which the
chief Princes (all which are the Sons of God) do reside and dwell. The second
Province may be called Eternal; in which the Stars are seated. Which Stars,
though they be inanimate, nevertheless they are so obedient and serviceable to
the will and beck of their Creator as that they may be well said to have life
and sense, according to that of Ecclesiasticus: Come, and let us adore the
King, to whom all things do^ live.

The third Province is that of the Air, wherein the Winds and Clouds, do
move to and fro: where also storms, Rain, Snow, Hayle, and Thunder are
engendered; and in which the Birds of several kinds do live and fly. The
fourth Province is that ^f the water, comprehending the Sea, Fountains, Rivers
and Lakes, in which the fishes are procreated, And which walk the paths of the
Sea, Psalm. 8. The ^f Province is th^s of the Earth, which being (as it were)
emulous of that of Heaven, is enriched with most noble Inhabitants, though not
blessed, to wit, with men, endued with Reason, but yet mortal, and obnoxious
to death; Who nevertheless have dominion of the beasts of the Earth, the birds
of the Air, and the fishes of the Sea.

The last Province is that, which may be called, subterranea, as being under
the Earth; being (as it were) as other desert of Arabia, and producing no good
fruits, but only thorns and briars. In which the wicked Spirits do live; who
through their Pride deserved this punishment, and who aspiring to be the first,
came thereby to be the last; And thus they endeavoring to advance their Seats
above the stars of heaven, were for such their attempt detruded from thence,
and cast out to ^he lowest Hell. And this place does daily expect the arrival
of such Men, who (as being companions to the di^ells) wallow in all flagitious
sins, and enormities; and who depart from the stage of this life without true
repentance. All these several Provinces God does hold within his Empire and
Government, according whereunto the Psalmist says: All things do serve thee.
Psalm. 118. All which most spacious Kingdoms God will communicate to such, as
love and serve him, as hereafter we will show.

Now, O Christian Soul, spread and dilate thy heart; suffer not thy self to be
confined within the niggard and narrow bounds of things only that are present;
why do thou so incessantly sweat and toil to obtain some small part of this
world, since if thou will, thou may purchase it all? Certainly, if mortal
men would with a serious and earnest thirst aspire to this Kingdom, or would
with mature reflection of the soul, meditate thereon, they would even blush to
wage war for any small, or narrow portion of the earth. God (O Man) offers
to thee the society and partage of his immense and eternal Kingdom; And thou
for the defense or gaining of one little Town; do enter into war and open
hostility, by means whereof many rapines, bloudsheds, and other innumerable
sins are committed: all which must justly provoke the King of Kings to wrath
and indignation. Where then is there any wisdom in this thy proceeding? Where
any judgment, or true consideration? I speak not this, as if I were
persuaded, it were unlawful for Christians to move war in defense of their
own Towns and Cities; For I well know, that just wars are maintained and
allowed, not only by the holy Fathers (and particularly by S. Austin Ep. ad
Marcel.) but also by S. Thomas (2.8. q. 40.) the chief of all Schoolmen. Yea
the Precursour of our Lord (then whom not any was borne gteater of Women) Luc
3. admonishes souldiars, not that they should forsake a lawful war; but
that, as being content with their stipends and pays, should forbear to wrong
any man. And I my self in my Books of Controversies of Religion. (...)
defended lawful wars: Therefore we^ do not ^bsolutely forbid and di^a^low of
war, but we only exhort to that, which is more perfect, and (for the most
part) more profitab^e, with the same inten^ion, with which Saint Paul speakech
to the Corinthians cap. 6. It is a fault in you, that you have judgments among
^ou: Why do you not rather take wrong? Why do you not rather suffer fraud?
And S. James in his Epistle (cap. 4.) From whence are wars and contentions
among you? Are the not of your Concu^iscences, which war in your mem^ers? You
covet, and have not; you kill and envy, and cannot obtain; you con^end, and
war, and you have not, because you ask not. Certainly, who is ^ruly
sollicitous of the Kingdom of Heaven would be little afflicted with ^he loss
of any one Town or City; ^ut rather would be desirous to use ^^e mediation of
others, for the com^ounding all depending Controuer^ies, without the calamities
and dan^ers of war. But let us pass on forward.

Of the Concourse and Frequency of the Inhabitants in the Kingdom of God.
CHAP. II.
THat supreme habitation is for ^ second respect called the Kingdom of God; to
wit, because it containet^ a greater multitude and diversity of Inhabitants,
within the capacity and largeness of its own Orb, then any House or City,
yea more then large and vast Kingdoms are accustomed to comprehend. For there
is (as the Apostle speaks in his Epistle to the Hebrews cap. 22.) the
intercourse of many thousand Angels. There is also a confluence of the Spirits
and Souls of all just and perfect men; under which number are comprised all
those, who shall close up their days of this life in the fear of our Lord,
even from the day of Abel the Just, until the consummation of the world.
Neither shall only the Spirits of lust men stay there after the ending of the
world; but also their glorious bodies, being reunited to their souls: All
which and every one of them shall shine (even as the Sun) in the Kingdom of
their ^ather, as our Lord assures us, Ma^hew 13.

Now, so much as appertains to the diversity of the Angels, we during our
^eregrination here upon earth, are ^carsely suffered to know any thing, ^ut
only their Names. For we know out of the vision of Esaias c. 6. that some of
them are called Seraphims; others Cherubims out of the Prophet ^zechiele, 28.
others, Thrones, others Cominations; others, Principalities; others, Powers,
from the Apostle to ^he Colossians, c. 1. Others, Virtues, from the same
Apostle to the Ephesi^ns, c. 1. Some, Archangels, from ^he same Apostle 1 Thessalonians. 4. and from ^he Epistle of S. Jude. To conclude, others Angels, of whom
most frequent mention is much celebrated in all the ^acred Books of Scripture.
From these ^ifferent nine names and appellations, ^he holy Doctors, with an
unanimous ^onsent, do prove, that there are nine different Orders of Angels,
under ^uery particular Order whereof many thousands of Angels are ranged,
according to the words of Daniel, c. 7. Thousand of thousands ministered unto
him, and ten thousand hundred thousand assisted him: with whom Job conspireth,
saying: Is there any number of his soldiers? And although the Angels be
doubtlesly most blessed, and shine with the splendor and brightness of all
virtues and divine gifts; notwithstanding those are termed Seraphims, who are
more remarkable and preeminent for their ardour and zeal of Charity: Those
Cherubims, who exceed in knowledge: Those Thrones, who enjoy an ineffable and
silent tranquillity of Contemplation: Those Dominations, to whom as to the
Ministers and Deputies of the supreme Emperor, the charge of this inferior
world is committed: Those Virtues, who at the command of God, are exercised in
the accomplishing of Signs and miracles: Those Powers, who have the
commandment and domination of the very powers of the unclean Spirits: Those
Principalities, who have a sovereignty over the Kings and Princes of this
world: Those Archangells, which are Adiutors and Assistors of the Prelates of
the Church: Lastly, those Angels, whose incumbency and charge is of every
particular man, whiles he lives hereupon the Earth.

Neither are these several Points signified only by the several Names of the
Angels: but for more proof thereof, these very Names are certain Ensigns, or
Images of Gods Omnipotency, or mirrours, wherein we may glass his Puissance.
For example; The Seraphims, as by a certain mark, Image, or glass, do
represent the infinite Charity of God, who moved only by the force of love, did
create the Angels themselves, men, and all other things; and being created,
does conserve them. The Cherubims by the like Standard, Image, or glass, do
proclaim and show the infinite wisdom of God, who has ordained all things in
number, weight, and measure. The Thrones do in like manner demonstrate (as it
were in a perfect Image) that secure Rest. which God sitting in his Throne does
enjoy; Who not being moved, moves and works all things; and resting in a
continual tranquillity, does dispose and govern all things. Dominations do
even preach, that it is God, who truly and properly has the full domination
and government over all Creatures; since it is in his power alone, either to
conserve all things, or else to annihilate and reduce them to nothing. The
Virtues also do signify, that it is God alone, who works mirabilia magna,
great and stupendous wonders* and who has reserved only to himself the power
to renew or multiply at his pleasure such prodigious matters. The Powers by
their name, do figure out, how God is absolutely and truly Potent; to whom
nothing is impossible, since in him alone all true Power does reside. The
Principalities do import by their Enseigne, that God is the Prince of all
Kings of the Earth, the King of Kings, and the Lord of all those who row at the
oar of government. The Archangells signify, that God is the true and supreme
Prelate or President of all Churches. Briefly, the Angels do manifest, that
God is the true Father of Orphans; And that although he has bequeathed
Angels, as Guardians to every particular man; yet that himself is present to
every man, keeps every man, and protecteth every Man For that same Prophet
who has savd: He that given his Angels charge of thee, that they keep thee in
all thy ways, does also introduce God thus speaking in the same place: With
him I am in tribulation, I will deliver him, I will glorify him. Psalm. 90. And
our Lord, who sa^d. Matt 18. Their Angels in Heaven always do see the face of
my Father, who is in Heaven, said also Matt. 10. Are not two sparrows sold for
a farthing, and not one of them shall fall upon the ground, without your
father? But the very hayres of your head are all numbered; fear not therefore,
better are you, then many sparrowes. And thus much of those few things, we know
touching the Angels. If it please the ^eader, he may peruse S. Bernard, from
whom I have borrowed these few Points l. 5. de consider. To these nine Orders
of Angels, does answer so great a multitude of Holy Men, as that no man (as we
have proved out of the Apocalypse) is able to number them: which multitude are
also reduced to nine Orders. For some are Patriarchs, some Prophets, some
Apostles, Others Pastors and Doctors, Others Priests and Levites, Others
Monks, and Hermites; To conclude, Others are holy Women, Virgins, Widows, or
those who have continued till death in conjugal State of Marriage.

And now, o Christian Soul, I here demand of thee, how an ineffable Felicity
shall it be, to interleague for all eternity with such holy Angels, and Saints?
S. Jerome in his Epistle to Paulinus, writes; that many are accustomed to
travail into other forrayne Provinces, to discourse with People of other
Nations; as also to pass the very Seas, to the end, they might see and
converse with such as were reputed most famous for learning and erudition. It
is also recorded, 3. Reg 10. how the Queen of Saba came from the furthest
parts of the Earth, to Solomon; for the so great opinion, she had conceived of
his Wisdom. To one Antony (by profession of life, a poor despicable Hermit)
men of all parts, even flocked, by reason of the report of his ^anctity: yea
Emperors themselves were ambitious of his friendship* and amity. What solace
then will it be, no^ only to see so great a confluence of Angels and most holy
Men; but also daily to converse and consociate with them, in most strict love
and participation of their felicity? If but one Angel should exhibit himself
in his full splendor to our sight now in our exile, who would not most
willingly hasten to see him? What then will it be to behold all the Angels
together at one sight? And if any of the Prophets, Apostles, or Doctors of
the Church should now descend from Heaven; with what a thirstines of attention,
would we, even drink up his words and speeches? But in the Kingdom of heaven
it shall be lawful for us, to see and hear not only one, but all the Prophets,
all the Apostles, all the Doctors, and to have daily intercourse and
familiarity with them. How much does one Sun exhilerate and rejoice the whole
Earth? What then will so many innumerable Suns do, being living Suns,
understanding Suns, and such as do make a continual Iubiley in the Kingdom
of God? I will even vnbreast my self, and speak what I think; to wit, the
consideration of this inward amity and familiarity with the Angels and holy Men
(of which not any is foolish, not any wicked, but all most good, and most wise)
is so pleasing and preuayling with me; as that it alone would seem a most
great happiness; and for the obtaining only thereof, I would most willingly
abandone and shake hands for ever with all the comforts and delights of this
world.

Of the true Monarchical form of the Kingdom of God. CHAP. III.
THe third reason, why that Celestial habitation is called a Kingdom, is,
because in that Place is found the perfect form of Government. This is the
difference between a Kingdom and a Commonwealth; whether the Commonwealth
consist of certain and eminent men, or of the Communalty and more vulgar sort.
To wit, that in a Kingdom all supreme Sovereignty is invested in only one;
whereas in a Commonwealth it is shared and divided among many. In these
temporal Kingdoms of men, the supreme power does not reside truly and properly
in one man; For it may be, that a King without either the counsel or consent
of others, may give commandment, that such or such a thing shall be done; but
yet his directions cannot be put in execution, except his Subjects do affoard
their concurrency and aid. And often it so falls out, that the King cannot
command (at least dare not) the effecting of a thing, if so he stand in fear,
to the multitude of his Subjects. For how many Kings and Emperors have been
dethroned, whose authority the Sub^ects have shaken off, and often with death
to the said Kings and Emperors? Histories are fraught with Examples of this
subject. Therefore that chief government in mortal Kings is languide and
weak; since those Kings cannot perform any thing, or atcheiue any exploite,
without the approbation, and allowance of the People. But the Sovereignty of
God, who alone is styled (and truly is) The great King, has no dependancy of
any thing, but only of his own Will. The which his Will (since it is
Omnipotent) cannot brook any resistance; neither stands it in need of
soldiers, warlike provision, or any other endeavor out of it self.

And although God does use Angels, or Men, as also even dead, and senseless
things, as his inferior Ministers; yet this he does not out of any necessity,
but because it so best pleases his divine Will. For he, who without the
ministerial assistance of any, created only by the virtue of his Word,
Heaven, and Earth, and every thing therein contained, and does conserve them
only by his Will, may also no doubt govern all things so created, only by his
own imperial dominion. Neither only is God said, most truly to rule, because
supreme, or (as I may term it) superlatiue power remains in him alone; but
also in that the chief mystery of governing is peculiar only to him. For God
needs not any Senators, or others to consult withal. Who has known
(says S. Paul Romans 11.) the mind of our Lord, or who has been his
counselor? And before the Apostle, Isay c. 40. thus contesteth the same,
saying: Who has helped the spirit of our Lord? Or who has been his
counselor, and showed to him? With whom has he taken counsel, and who has
instructed him, and taught him the path of Justice, and taught him knowledge,
and showed him the way of Prudence? Therefore it follows ineuitably from the
Premises, that a Monarchy (which is the best kind of government) is not only
found to be in God; but it is found to be in him alone, true and perfect. For
he is not only formidable over all the Kings of the earth, as we read, Psalm.
75. but also is a most Maiesticall King over all the Gods, as is said again in
Psalm 94. For there are certain false Gods, who are rather to be called
devils, according to that of the Prophet: The Gods of the Gentiles are devils:
Psalm. 95. There are also other Gods by participation, as the Kings of the
Earth, and the Angels of Heaven are, for we read: Psalm. 81. I have said, you
are Gods. But all these Gods stand subject and obedient to that one ouerruling
God, who reigns in Heaven.

The refore it necessarily follows from what is above said, that, that King
is truly a King, and most puissant, whom Nabuchodonosor, that fastigious King
of Babylon, (after his pride was justly punished) in these words fully
acknowledges: Dan. 4. Therefore after the end of the days, I Nabucodonosor
lifted up mine eyes to Heaven, and blessed the Highest, and praised him for
ever, because his power is an everlasting Power, and his Kingdom in generation
to generation. And all the Inhabitants of the earth are reputed with him for
nothing: for he does according to his will, as well in the Powers of Heaven,
as in: he Inhabitants of the earth And there is none, that can resist hi^ hand,
and say to him: Why did tho^ it? etc. Now therefore I Nabuchodonosor praise,
and magnify, and glorif^ the King of Heaven, because all hi^ Works are true,
and his ways Judgments, and them that walk in pride, he can humble

Thus King Nabuchodonosor confessed of himself: who may be an example to all
others, that they do humble and prostrate themselves, under the powerful hand
of God, as S Peter admonishes; And that they stand more prepared to serve the
King of Kings, thereby to deserve his benevolence and favor, then through
pride and cl^tio^ of heart, to resist his Will, by which their course, they are
in the end forced to suffer condign punishments under his most rigorous hand,
according to their just deserts.

That all the Blessed in Heaven are Kings. CHAP. IV.
THE fourth and most principal reason why the place and state of the Blessed
may be called the Kingdom of Heaven, is, because all the Blessed in Heaven are
Kings, and in that, all the conditions of Regal Authority do most aptly agree
to them. For although all the Saints in Heaven do serve and obey God, as is
said in the Apocalypse c. 22. yet with all, they govern and rule. For whereas,
it is said: in the same place his servants shall serve him; it is also there
said: And they shall reign for ever and ever. Neither only do all the B^essed
serve together, and rule together; but withal they may be termed both
Servants and Sons; for thus God speaks in the Apocalypse cap. 21 They who
shall overcome, shall possess these things etc And I will be his God, and he
shall be my Son. Thus therefore, as the same Saints may be said to be Servants
Sons; so, also may they be said to be Servants and Kings They are Seruanes in
that they are created of God, and do owe all obedience and vassalage unto him,
of whom they receive them Being, life, and other things for nothing created
is excepted out o^ this homage, even by the testimony of David, saying: All
things do seru^ thee, Psalm. 118. They may be also called the Sons of God,
because the^ receive their regeneration from God by water, and the Holy Ghost.
Finally they are Kings, since Regal^ Power and Dignity is communicated vnt^
them by the King of Kings, who ever in th^s respect is styled in the Apocalypse
cap. 19. The King of Kings, an^ Lord of Lords.

Perhaps it may be here urged, that it is not repugnant, that one and the same
man should be a temporal King, and withal a Servant of God; as it i^ said
accordingly in the 2. Psalm: An^ now your Kings understand, take instruction
you that judge the earth. But to be King of the Kingdom of Heaven, and withal
to be a servant of the King of Heaven, seem to be incompatible together. How
then can a man apprehend this difficu^ty, or believe it? ^ answer,
notwithstanding it is so, and facile to faith both to conceive, and to believe
it. Therefore the Just ^n the Kingdom of Heaven, shall also be Kings of the
Kingdom of Heaven, because they shall participate of that Regal Dignity and
power, as also of the spiritual riches and a^l other goods which are in the
Kingdom of Heaven. The Verity of which point the Holy Ghost contesteth in
three places of Scripture: One is, in the Ghospe^l of S. Matthew cap. 5.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Another
in the same Gospel, cap. 15. Come ye blessed of my Father; possess the
Kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning of the World. The third is in
the Apocalypse cap. 3. He that shall overcome, I will give unto him, to sit with
me, in my throne, as I have also overcome, and have sitten with my Father in
his throne. What can be more clearly spoken, then this? We have hear the
Kingdom of God prom^sed to us; we have the possession of the same Kingdom,
assigned to us in the day of Judgment; We have granted to us seats in the
Regal Throne of the Son of God, and of his Father the Eternal King. And
what other thing is all this, then the participation of the same Kingdom of
Heaven, which God possesses from all Eternity?

We may here adioyne the testimony of S. Paul 2. Tim. 2. saying: If we shall
sustain, we shall reign together. And of S. John in the beginning of the
Apocalypse: and of S. James in his Epistle c. 2 thus writing: God has chosen
the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which God
has promised to them that love him. Neither are we to fear, that because the
Kingdom of Heaven is communicated to many, and almost innumerable Angels and
men, it is therefore diminished or lessened; Since the Kingdom of Heaven ^s not
like to earthly Kingdoms which cannot brook any corriualls, or participation;
but if they be divided, by division they are ever made less; and in the end
are brought to nothing: I say, the Kingdom of Heaven bears no proportion
(...) lyknes to these but being whole, it is entirely possessed of all; as a so
being whole* it is entirely possessed of every particular. Even as ^he Sun ^s
wholly seen of all men, and wholly ^^ene of every particu^ar Man; And i^ self
does no less ^eate and illumin^^e each particular Man, then a l Men. Which
^oint shall be more clearly ^ll^^trated in our explication of the G^ods of the K
ngdome of Heaven. But now before we are here to assign the cond^tions and
qualities, required to be ^n Kings; that no Man may re^t doubtful, but that
the Blessed Saints in Heaven are justly called Kings, and Kings even of Heaven.

There are two qualities, with which kings ought necessarily to be invested: T^
wit, VVisdome and Justice. But with Wisdom the Scripture does join P^^dence,
Council, and all other things ^^^onging to Intelligence; with Justice ^^ngeth
Mercy, Clemency, and the (...) of the Virtues which do beauti^ and perfect the
Will. Wisdom before is required, that a King may ^^w, how to govern his
Subjects; ^^^^ice, how to govern them well. And according heerto, Solomon
being admonished from God in the beginning of his Reign, that he should
demand, what he most desired, he demanded Wisdom, which is the Queen of all
good qualities, necessarily required in Kings; And this his pet^tion was so
pleasing unto God, as appears out of the third book of Kings, that it was
granted unto him, as he desired. I could have wished, he had demanded also
Justice; for then perhaps he had not precipitated and cast himself into so
many crimes, and sins, as afterward he did. But with more judgment did David
pray for the good and prosperity of his Son Solomon, in those words of the
71. Psalm, O God give thy judgment to the King, and thy Justice to the Son
of the King. In which words he may be thought to have forseene, that Solomon
would ask for Wisdom; and that therefore himself prayed that Justice and
Judgment might be given also to his Son; the which without Wisdom cannot be;
whereas Wisdom (at ^east s^ming and imperfect) may be with out Justice. In like
sort, the Book of Wisdom, which was principally written for the erudition and
instruction of Kings, thus speaks unto them: Diligite Iustitia^, qui
iudicatis terram etc. Sap 1. and it begins at the virtue of Justice, because
that alone and of its own nature is not only necessary to Kings, but it is
also a disposition to Wisdom^; for a little after follows; Because wisdom
will not enter into a malicious soul. To conclude, pretermitting other
testimonies, Jeremy prophesying of Christ the eternal King thus says: cap.
23. Behold the days do come (says our Lord) and I will raise up David, a
just branch, and he shall reign a King, and shall be wife, and shall do judgment
and Justice in the earth. From all this then it ineuitably follows; that
Wisdom and Justice are the endowments* chiefly required Kings.

That all the Blessed in Heaven (though many of the^ perhaps* whiles they lived
here upon earth; were but ignorant persons) do excel in Wisdom and Justice,
so as they may deservedly be Kings of any K ngdome, is so evident, that it can
admit no contrad^ction: since there is not any one of the Blessed in Heaven,
who does not see the Essence of God, which is the first Cause of all things,
and consequently, he draws so much Wisdom out of that fountain of increated
Wisdom, as that neither Solomon, not any other Mortal man ever had in like
degree, our Lord Jesus Christ only excepted, who even in the time of his
mortality did see God, and in whom were all the Treasures of Wisdom and
knowledge of God. Now, to the measure of Wisdom in all the Saints, is given a
proportionable measure of Justice; so as for the time after, neither have they
a desire to sin, neither can they sin. For thus S. Austine speaks hereof
( de great. and cor. cap. 12.) Prima libertas voluntatis etc. The first liberty
of the will, was to have power not to sin: but the last liberty of the will
shall be far greater, it being not to have power to sin. And who cannot
sin, cannot therefore become unjust. And since Charity is perfect, therefore
Justice is also perfect. And accordingly S. Austin affirms that he, who
cannot love God but with a supreme and perfect love, cannot also but possess
supreme and perfect Justice. They also who behold God their supreme, pure, and
infinite Good, cannot divert their eyes from him, neither can they but
prosecute him ever with most ardent and burning Affection. From whence it is
euicted, that all the Saints in Heaven are perfectly wise, and perfectly Just;
and are therefore most apt ever to reign as Kings.

Now raise thy self up, O Christian Soul, and ascend in spirit, as much as
thou can, and meditate, how great a felicity it is to reign with God, and
penetrate with the Wings of conte^plation the very Heavens, and behold that
sublime Throne, of which our Savior speaks: Apoc. 3. He that shall overcome,
I will give unto him to sit with me, in my throne. O how ineffable a glory will
it be for a Soul in the presence of an infinite multitude of Angels, to be
placed in the Throne or seat it self of Christ, and God? And to be proclaimed
by the just judgment of God, as conqueror over the World, over the governors
or Lords of the world, and over all the invisible Powers? And with how much joy
shall that Soul exult, when she shall perceive her to be freed of all danger
and labor, and to triumph most happily over all her enemies? And what is left
more that she can defir when she shall be made partaker of all the goods of her
Lord and Creator; yea even to the par^icipation of his own Throne and
Kingdom? O, with what alacrity do those Men fight here upon Earth, and how
easily do they tolerate and undergo all adversities for Christ, who with a
vigorous faith, and erected hope, behold with the eye of the understanding,
such magnificent and supreme honors in Heaven!

Of the goods of the Kingdom of God. CHAP. V.
THe fifth reason of calling the happiness of the Saints, the Kingdom of
Heaven, may be taken from the similitude and resemblance of the Saints living
in Heaven, to the goods, which terrene Kings do enjoy: though those of Heaven
do so much ouer-ballance these of the earth, and are greater then they, by how
much Heaven is more worthy and noble then the Earth. Therefore the Kingdom
prepared for the blessed, is not simply, a Kingdom, but is called for more
fullness of speech, the Kingdom of Heaven; that thereby we may be instructed,
that the like proportion here is of goods, to goods which is of the Earth to
Heaven; that is, of a thing in it self narrow, base, sordid, temporary, to
that, which is most ample, most high, most noble, and (which is the chiefest)
eternal and everlasting.

The goods of a terrene Kingdom are accounted these, to wit, Power, Honor,
Riches, Pleasures. A temporal King may command over his subi^cts, and if they
be found disobedient or stiff-necked, he may punish them with bonds,
imprisonment, banishment, penalty of money, whipping, or even with death. And
hence it is, that Kings become fearful to their Subjects, and are reputed (as
it were) certain Gods. Again, Kings will be honored with a certain height of
veneration and worship, almost transcending man's Nature; for they expect the
bowing of the knee; neither will they often vouchsafe to hear their Subjects
speak but with a submisse and humble countenance, and deportement of body: and
if they pass through the streets, they look that all men should go back and
give them the way. Again, kings covet to have a most copious and rich
Treasury, replenished with gould ane silver: neither do they number their
reuenews by hundreds or thousands, but by ten hundred thousands; and this not
without just reason, since they are not to mantayne ten or twenty servants, or
followers, but great and powerful armies of soldiers against their enemies.
Lastly, they are not content to recreate themselves, with accustomed sports,
but they hold it as necessary to the splendor of their greatness and majesty
to wast many pou^ds of gould and silver, in banqueting, hu^ting, and in public
shows and sights. And these things above rehearsed are the sole goods almost
belonging to te^porall Princes: which goods have this one thing incident to
them all; that is, that they are but momentary and fading beginning at the
birth of the Princes, and ending with their death, except perhaps it may fall
so out, that the life of the Kings be of longer continuance then their Reign.

Furthermore these goods are not pure, but are accompanied with their ^tings.
Thus power is oftentimes balanced with infirmity and weakness: Honor with
ignominy: Riches with Pou^rty; and Joy with grief and lamentation. True it is,
that Regal Dominion is such, as that the People do depend upon the least
intimation or signification of the King his mind; yet this his power is mixed
with infirmity since the Prince rests upon the strength and courage of his
people. For what can the command of a Prince either in beseiging or defending a
City effect, if his subjects either be not able, or not willing to encounter
the Enemy? Neither does the authority of the Prince rest only upon the strength
of his Subjects, but also in the walls of the City, of the Trenches; of
weapons, of miliitary stratagems, and of Money, which is usually called, the
Sinew of War. Therefore the people rest at the command of the Prince; and
are subject to one man; But the Prince relyeth upon the Wills of many Men, as
also upon diverse other things, in all which he is forced in some sort to be
serviceable.

To conclude, it is in the Power of the King to chastize his subjects with
bonds, imprisonment, banishment, yea with death: notwithstanding the King
himself (I speak what actually may be done, not what by right ought to be
done) lies open to bonds, imprisonment, banishment, wounds, and death. The
truth of this point is proved from the pitiful examples of Julius Caesar,
Caius, Nero, Galba, Vitellius, Domitian, Commodus, Heliogabalus, and from
diverse others. Neither do these wicked Princes, but such as have been of great
modesty and moderation in their comportement, witness the same; as Alexander
Mamme^a, Gordianus the younger, Pertinax, Tacitus, Numerianus Probus, Gratianus,
Valentinianus the second. I could insist also in such Princes, which have been
most remarkable for piety and Sanctimony of life; as S. Edward, King of
England, S. Wenceslaus, duke of Bohemia, S. Sigismundus King of Burgandy, S.
Canutus King of Denmark, and some others.

In this next place let us discourse of Honor. Kings indeed in their own
presence, and in the presence of others, are much reverenced; but in their
absence they are often slaundered, and their Honors turn a^under with
contumelious Inuectiues. In like sort in their own presence, ^hey are much
flattered by such their Sycophants, who secretly bear to them a great
contempt, and inward hatred. And if account should be taken both of such, as
extol them in praise, and of others their detractours, these later would be
found far more in number. Therefore doubtlesly the glory of Kings is for the
most part less, then their ignominy; since those who in the presence of a
King, do honor him, are but few; whereas the absent are many, of which some
do tax the King with sordide avarice, some with cruelty, others with luxury,
and others with other vices.

To descend to riches. Perhaps some may think, that Kings have no mixture of
Poverty adjoined to their riches. Nothing less. For no men are found to be
more wanting, and poor then Kings. They have indeed great revenues and
treasure, but withal they often are indebted more they their Treasure can
discharge. And that man is not so poor who has little, as he who desires
much, because he wants much. And is it not a great argument of Poverty, for
Kings to extort farthings or halfpe^nies from their Subjects, being poor,
since they exact small customs or payments of all those, who sell things
necessary for man's sustenance and provision? I speak not this, as reprehending
such exactions, fot I well know that Kings may justly require these Tributs,
according to those words of the Apostle, in his Epistle to the Romans cap. 13.
Be subject not only for wrath, but for conscience; therefore give you Tributs
also, for they are the Ministers of God etc. Render therefore to all men their
due; to whom tribute, tribute; to whom custom, custom. Only my intention
here, is to paint out the miserable state of mortal Kings; who of necessity
are to abound with great affluence of riches, and yet are forced to gather no
small part thereof from poor and needy men.

But now in this place what shall we say of the pleasures and delicacies, which
Kings enjoy? Kings indeed have their gardens, their bowers, their Orchards,
most sumptuous tables of meat, their hunting sportes, their theaters, and
other such pleasures for their recreation; but these are often attended on with
the gout, the grief or pain of the stom^ke, or Head, and (which is more
violent) with most grievous solicitude and cares of the mind, which not seldom
do deprive them of their nightly rest: such are suspicious, fears, augours
etc. Thus if their Bedchamber door do but open, or make the least noise in the
night, they instantly suspect treachery and treason. If news be brought them,
that there is seen a multude of armed men together, they fear a combination
of their Subjects against them. Thus* is there made a compound of their joys
and griefs, of their repose and disquietnesse; which has been the Motive, why
diverse Kings, abandoning all domination and Rule, have finally chose^ to live
under the hatches of a private life.

But let us hear S. Chrysostom, who discourses of the Emperors of his time
in these words, hom. 66. ad pop. Antioch. Ne diadema respicias, sed curarum
tempestacem; neque purpuram intuere etc. Do not so much cast thy eye upon the
diadem or Crown of Kings, as upon the storm of their Cares; neither behold
the Purple garment and Robe, but the Soul and mind, more black then the
Purple. The Crown does no more incompasse the Head, then Care does the mind,
Neither think thou of the great company and train of Officers and Attendants,
but of the multitude of troubles. For thou shall ^ot find a private house so
replenished with cares, as Kings Palaces are. For in the day time death is
feared, in the night the very soul seems to leap out of the body, through
apprehension of terrors. And these things happen in time of Peace. But if the
trumpet be once sounded, and that VVarres rush on, what life is more miserable,
then the life of Kings? How many dangers do their familiars and subjects
threaten to them? For the very pauement and stones of Kings Courts do even
flow with the blood of their own friends and kindred. This will be fully
acknowledged, if I do insist in some examples both of former times, and of our
days.

This King (for example) having a wife suspected of Adultery, did tie her
naked, leaving her to be devoured of beasts in the mountains, though she
became mother of many Princes. Now what kind of life may we think this man
did live? For he would never have burst out into so great a revenge, had he
enjoyed the true use of Judgment. This other Prince did throtle to death his
own Son. This third being suprised by his enemy, became his own Homicide.
Another muthered his own Nephew, being Competitour to the Crown. The fifth is
reported to have deprived his own Brother of life. Another ended his life by
taking Physic being impoysoned; and the eye of his Son was pulled out, for
the preventing of future dangers, when as yet he had committed no wrong. The
next Emperor (as a Man, breathing only misery and infelicity) was burned with
his horses, wagons, and other his furniture. Words light short to express the
calamities which the next Prince to the former, was forced to suffer. And as
for this Emperor that now reigns, is it not most evident, that after he was
crowned with the Diadem, he spent no short time in labors, in dangers, in
disconsolation, and secret endeauours? At non talis Caelorum Regia; but such is
not the Court or Kingdom of Heaven.

Thus far S. Chrysostom. Who how truly he concluded, what we shall now
relate, will fully prove. For it is certain, that the Kings of the Kingdom of
Heaven (and such are all the blessed, who do live with God) have Power without
weakness, honor without ignominy, riches without Pouerry, and pleasure without
grief. For of them it is said in the 90. Psalm: There shall no evil come to
thee, and scourge shall not approach to thy Tabernacle. And in the Apocalypse
cap. 21. And God shall wipe away all tears from cheir eyes, and there shall
be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any
more pain. Therefore the power of those celestial Kings is most great, their
imbecility and weakness none.

We read in the 4. of Kings, that one Angel without any military forces,
without any artillery, or svvords or lances did kill at one blow a hundred
eighty thousand of Assyrians; neither did the Angel fear to receive any wound
from them. S. Gregory relates in his third book of Dialogues, cap. 36. how a
holy man being assaulted by a bloody and merciless fellow, with his arm
stretched out, and a naked sword in his hand, instantly cried out: O Saint
John, hold him, And presently thereupon his hand did grow stiff, so as he
could not move it. Therefore Saint John, did hear the prayer of his Client
from Heaven; and with such celerity did punish that wicked Man, as that it
prevented the blow, being already begun to be given. Such is the power of
Celestial Kings, as that neither almost an infinite distance of place, nor the
solitarines of one poor just man, nor the multitude of armed men, could hinder
S. John, from delivering his Suppliant from imminent death. Infinite other
examples l^ke to this might be produced.

Now concerning the Honor of those Kings of Heaven, it is so glorious, and
great, as that not only the godly and virtuous, but even the wicked, yea the
very Devils do reverence and give veneration to them. Many do contemn, and
be trample upon virtuous and holy men here living upon the earth; whom, after
that they be translated to Heaven and their sanctimony celebrated by the
public suffrage and decree of the Church, the former men do worship and
honor. And the Devils themselves do reverence and fear the relics and
Images of such holy Saints in Heaven, whom whiles they lived in flesh, they
vexed with their temptations; yea often times with stripes and blows, through
the permission of God.

What shall I say of the Riches of these Heavenly Kings? Their chiefest riches
is to want nothing, since God to them is, All in all, 1. Cor. 15. for he is not
rich, who possesses many things, but he who desires nothing, since he wa^teth
nothing. For it is the mind, which makes a man to be rich not his stored
chests or coffers. We may add heerto, that Heaven and eatth, and what is
therein contained, belong to the riches of the Saints: for what do not they
possess, who are, the heirs of God, the coheyres of Christ? Romans 8. And
whom, the Father will constitute, the heirs of all things. Heb. 1.

There now remains to speak of Pleasure. Certainly the pleasure, which the
celestial Kings enjoy, is most pure and clear, not contaminated with any
dross of grief or dolor. For we have above learned out of the Apocalypse c.
21. that God shall wype away every tear from their eyes, and that they shall
not suffer any more lamentation. But touching Pleasure, we shall enlarge our
selves more in discourse hereafter when we treat of Paradise. Now it is
evident from what we have above delivered, that the goods of the Kingdom of
Heaven shall be common to all the Saints and Blessed; and that they are of that
worth, as that they cannot brook any comparison, with the goods of this world;
especially since all terrene goods are temporary: but celestial goods,
everlasting.

How much earthly Kingdoms are prized by Men; and how much the Kingdom of
Heaven ought to be esteemed. CHAP. VI.
NOw let us a little observe, with what vehemence and heat of endeavor are
earthly Kingdoms desired and sought after by men, though they be uncertain,
small in their own nature, and even fraught with infinite fear and
sollicitudes; that from thence we may gather, with what a thirsty desire and
ardour the Kingdom of Heaven ought to be sought after. The greedines of
Domination and Rule does incomparably exceed all other humane desires: Since a
Kingdom is not one only particular good, but it is a massing or heaping
together of all the goods, which may be desired of men. For there is Power,
Honor, Riches, pleasure, as is above said. There also is found a liberty of
living after ones own will; which is incident and grateful not only to men,
but also to beasts. There is also a supereminency, and (as it were) a certain
Divinity in respect whereof Kings have no Equals in the Kingdom, but are above
all, command all, and are worshipped of all. And hence it rises, that when
Kings will promise any thing of greatness, they are often accustomed out of a
glorious boasting of their own sublimity and height, to promise the half of
their Kingdom.

Thus we read of Assuerus, in Hester cap. 5. What do thou desire to be given
thee etc. Though thou ask the half of my Kingdom, thou shall obtain. And in
like fort of Herod to the daughter of Herodias Mar. 6. Whatsoever thou ask,
I will give thee, though the half of my Kingdom. And from this ground it
rises, that for the obtaining of a Kingdom, men hold it lawful to pervert
all laws and right: neither do they think any thing so sacred and holy, which
they may not violate to satisfy their thirst of reigning.

Ninus was the first Man, who provoked his friends and neighbors by unjust
wars; that by that means (whether right or wrong) he might enlarge his
Empire, as S* Austin relates out of Justin. lib. 4. de Ciuit. c. 6. Maximinus
the Thracian having received many and great benefits from Alexander the
Emperor; notwithstanding caused him to be slain by his own Soldiers, that
thereby he might succeed in the Empire The like facinorous and unheard of act
did Philip of Arabia commit upon Gordianus his Lord and Emperor. Neither this
unquenchable lust of reigning has caused men to wash their hands in the blood
only of their Neighbors and Benefactours, but also of their Brethren, Nephews,
yea their own Father. Romulus killed Remus his brother, and Caracalla, Geta
his brother, and both through desire of reigning. Athalia deprived of life all
the nephews of Ochozias King, that herself might after govern the stern, as
we read in the 4. Book of Kings cap. 11.

Thus we see, that this greedines of Soueraingty inciteth not only men, but
even women, to commit most flagitious crimes, Sinochus (the Persian) procured
the murdering of Cosdroas his Father, and Medarses his brother, that himself
alone might sway the Government. Yea which is more, the Mother of Nero having
received answer from the Astrologers, that the Son should reign, but the
mother should perish, is reported to have said, Interimat, dum imperet, Let
Nero be the cause of my death, so that himself may reign: So much did this
ambitious Woman affect, that her Son should govern, as that in respect
thereof she nothing pryzed her own life.

Neither does this insatiable honger of raygning and governing make Injustice
only to seem just, and overcome the love which men use to bear to Brethren,
Nephews, and Parents; but withal it maintayneth, that even any religious oath
is to be violated for that end; which act of Religion was ever houlden most
sacred in all Countries, and was thought most fit to be kept even by the most
fierce and cruel Soldiers though with dangers of life. And according to this
(if we may believe Cicero) Julius Caesar had ever in his mouth those verses of
Euripides: Si iusiurandum violandum est, regnandi causa violandum est; in
caeteris pietatem colas. If an Oath be to be broken, it is to be broken for
government sake: in other respects thou oughtst to keep it religiously. Cic. l.
3. de Off. I pretermit infinite examples, demonstrating that in all ages nothing
has been so much esteemed, as a Kingdom, though the Kings do not reign long,
and though the Kingdoms also do in a short time come to utter ruin and
dissolution; whereas the Kingdom of the Saints in Heaven shall be established
for all Eternity. Hear the Prophet Daniel of this point, say, cap. 2. In these
days of those Kingdoms, the God of Heaven will raise up a Kingdom, that
shall not be dissipated for ever; and his Kingdom shall not be delivered up to
another People; and it shall break in pieces and consume all other Kingdoms,
and it self shall stand for ever. This Prophesy is to be accomplished in the
consummation, and end of the world: at what time, not only greater monarchies;
but also lesser Kingdoms, and Magistracies, and power of temporal Princes
shall vanish away, and resolve to smoke; and the Kingdom of Christ and his
Saints shall remain everlasting, according to that of the Angel: Et regni
eius non erit finis: and of his Kingdom there shallbe no end, Luc. 1.

Now if a Kingdom, which is to continue but for a moment; which of its one
Nature is weak and uncertain; which belongs but to few; and which stands
obnoxious and subject to many anxieties and troubles, be so ^rdently loved and
sought after, be to be preferred before all other things; yea to be acquired
and obtained by slaughter, and great effusion of blood: what is then the cause,
why so few do love the Kingdom of Heaven, but most negligently, and carelessly
do slight it? And nevertheless it is evident (if we believe the Sacred
Scriptures) that this Kingdom of Heaven lies open to all men; that the
getting thereof may be had without suffering of blows, or sheeding of blood,
and that it inco^parably surpasses all earthly Kingdoms?

If I should say to one; Contemn a whole Kingdom, that thou may obtain a
little field, or vineyard, thou would deservedly either laugh, or wonder at
me. But when I say, or rather God says: Contemn a small earthly Kingdom, and
seek after ^ most precious, great, and eternal Kingdom; the which thou may
purchase (if thou will) through the grace of God, which will never be wanting;
why do thou not raise up thy spirits both for the desiring and gayning of it?
Doubtlesly I cannot conceive, what may be answered heerto, but that the glory
of an earthly Kingdom as being present to the eye, may be (as it were) touched
with the hand; whereas the Kingdom of Heaven cannot be seen, cannot be
touched, nor scarce apprehended by Faith. This indeed is true; notwithstanding
if a man will seriously and intensly consider, what force and efficacy the
Verity, Antiquity, Sincerity and gravity of the sacred Scripture enjoys, and
how perspicuously, and clearly the said Divine Writ speaks of this point;
and how great a cloud of witnesses during already so many ages, not only with
miracles, but even with blood, have confirmed the authority of the said divine
writings; doubtlesly he cannot but burst out with the Prophet, and say: Thy
testimonies (O Lord) are made over much credible. Psalm. 98.

Wherefore we may conclude, that it is not the obscurity and darkness of Faith,
which withdrawes us from seeking after the Kingdom of Heaven; but it is
because our mynds are wholly absorpt in exterior things, and burdened with the
weight of custom; and therefore we do not take sufficient time and leisure to
meditate and ponder of such things as conduce to our Souls good, neither do we
(according to the counsel of our Lord, Mat. 6.) enter into the closet of our
heart, and the door being shut, we do not even besiege God with our feruerous
prayers, that in so great and wayghty ^ business he would assist us. Certainty
^f once laying a side all care of inferior and lesser matters, we would
seriously and with due preparation take into our thought, what the Kingdom of
Heaven is, and how easily, and certainly it might be obtained; and what
infinite disparity there is between things everlasting and temporal, between
matters of greatest weight, and trifles; and briefly between the Kingdom of
Heaven and earthly Kingdoms; without doubt so great a contempt of temporal
Thrones, Crowns, and Scepters, would be engendered in us; and on the contrary,
so ardent a desire of celestial affairs would so inflame us, as that we
should without difficulty, yea with much ease and facility, bestow all our
labor and diligence in pursuit of the Kingdom of Heaven; to the which, as to
one true and last end we are made by our Creator.

The first pathway, or Tract, leading to the Kingdom of God. CHAP. VII.
HEre we are now to know, what is necessarily to be done, that we may arrive to
the most desired, and most happy Kingdom of Heaven. But to know this, is no
great difficulty, since the King of Heaven himself to teach us the same, did
descend to the Earth; And being become our Master and Captain, sets before
us four chief, and most safe ways thereunto. Of these the first is contained
in those words of Mat. 6. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the Justice of
him, and all these things shallbe given to you.

Moral doctrine begins from the end; our End is the Kingdom of God; which
Kingdom shall be ours, if so we will walk in that path, wherein our Captain
walked. Also the Justice of the Kingdom of God is (as it were) ^he scope, or
mark, whereat we ^re to ^euell, if so we desire to enjoy ^he reward of the
Kingdom of Heaven, For as Cassianus rightly teaches, col. ^. cap. 2. The End
is one thing; the scope an other thing. The Scope is a sign or mark, unto
which arrows ^re directed in shooting; But the End, is the reward which those
do take, who have shot more near the scope, or mark. In like manner, the
Scope, of our Actions propounded by God, is justice; the Reward of those, who
ob^aine this mark is the Kingdom of Heaven. But the Justice of the Kingdom
of God, is not the Justice of the Scribes and Pharisees, which was placed in
the external observation of ^he Preceps: Neither it is the Iu^^ice of the
Philosophers, which did ^ot transcend the light of natura^l ^eason, corrupted
by Sin. But it ^s the Evangelical Justice, which tea^heth to love God with
all our heart, withal our soul, withal our strength and to love our neighbor
(though our Enemy) as our self. Of this Scope and End S. Paul Romans 6.
speaks, saying: You have your faith unto Justification; but the End, life
everlasting.

This is that, whereunto the Apostle admonishes us, that the first of all
things, we do seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Justice thereof; that is,
that our earnest and chiefest thoughts be not carried away to any temporal
goods, but be directed to the gayning of the Kingdom of Heaven, and to a most
diligent and inviolable keeping of that first and greatest Precept; The which
Precept being neglected, and broken by most men, therefore it is said, Matt.
22. Many are called, but few are chosen. For most men do so live and comport
themselves in their ma^ners; as that their furthest thought, is to seek, how
they may come to this Kingdom of Heaven; neither is there anything, which they
more couldly look after, then the Kingdom of Heaven and the Justice thereof.
As if our Lord had said: First seek after the Kingdom of this world, and its
injustice and deceyt, and the Kingdom of God shall be given unto you. But that
celestial Kingdom is not of that baseness and mean esteem, as that it should
be thrust upon those, who do prefer all other things before the obtaining
thereof. Therefore he that will learn a certain and easy way for gayning the
Justice of the Kingdom of God, which leads directly to the Kingdom it
self, let that man hear our foresaid Master and Lord, Christ Jesus, thus
affirming: Matt. 5. Blessed be they, that hungar and thirst after Justice, for
they shall have their fill.

But what, o Lord, is the facility of fynding Justice so great with thee, as
that it is sufficient only to be hungry or thirsty of it? Certainly all poor
me^ would be blessed, if only by thirsting after money, they should be so
replenished therewith, as that they should not need to be satiated with any
other thing. But the matter here is far otherwise, for it is one thing to be
hungry and thirst after money, and other thing after Justice. For they who
suffer hunger and thirst after Justice, that is, who so greedily and anxiously
seek after Justice, as men do who thirst after water, and are hungry after
meat; those men certainly do ever busy their mind with the thought of it, and
breathlesly labor after it, and (which is the chiefest) do humbly beseech it
of God with inutterable sighs, and lamentations. God does willingly hear men
praying in this manner, and is ready to replenish them with the gifts of
Justice, so as they being satiated therewith, may even breath nothing, but words
and works of Justice. But money or riches is not a good of this nature, as that
who desires or prays for it to God, is presently heard; Since many abuse the
use of money our riches, but of Justice there can be no abuse. To conclude,
Justice is like to Wisdom, of which S. James says, cap. 1. If any of you lack
VVisdome, let him ask of God, who gives to all men abundantly, and vpbraydeth
none.

O ineffable clemency of God, who is more ready and wi^ling to give us those
things, which conduce to our Souls good, then we are either to demand or
desire them! Whosoever therefore wants the wisdom of Saints, or the gift of
Justice, which are the chief dispositions for the gayning the Kingdom of
Heaven, let him most humbly beseech God by most earnest prayers, and deep sighs
and complaints, and he shall infallibly obtain his desire. For God gives to
men thus praying, and he do not repel or exclude any man; neither does he give
sparingly and nigardly, but largely, abondantly and without any vpbraiding or
delay, for God is not agrieued with man's importunity herein.

Now what may we here say? With what color of excuse can a man plai^ter over
either his ignorance or weakness, at the day of judgment? On^y thirst after
Justice, and demand it of God, and thou shall fully drink thereof to thy own
satiety; but do not thirst after the blandishments, or allurements of the
flesh, neither after the empty smoke of Honors, nor any other earthly
benefits; so shall thou draw out thy days in this world in all justice,
sobriety, and Piety; and in the next thou shall arrive to the everlasting
Kingdom of Heaven.

The second Path to the Kingdom of God. CHAP. VIII.
ANother Tract, or Path of the Kingdom of God, the which our Captain shows
us, is that of Matt. 5. Blessed are the poor in spirit. By which words we are
not commanded to empty our chests and bags altogether of money, but only to
keep our hearts void of all greedy affection and desire of earthly things. Our
Lord does offer to us great wealth and abundance of riches; but he will not
give them to us, except we do bring an open heart, free, and estranged from all
worldly covetousness. The root of all evils, is covetousness. 1. Tim. 6. Which
in the Greek is called Philargyria, that is, love of Silver. The root of all
good, is Charity, which two things, cannot stand together. Therefore except a
man become truly and wholly poor in spirit, so as whether he have great or
small store of riches, his mind be not fixed upon them; but that he be ready to
distribute to them that want, and reserve to himself, ^n^y what is necessary
to his state; this ^an I say, cannot fulfill the Justice of ^he Kingdom of
Heaven; and conse^uently cannot obtain that King^ome.

This is the true Tract to the King^ome of Heaven; and in this path Christ
himself did first tread, who for us was ^ade poor, that he might enrich ^s
through his Poverty. And although ^e had some money, yet he delivered ^t to
Judas to keep, whom he knew ^o be a thief; that thereby we might ^nderstand,
his mind was not posses^ed with the desire of money. This Tract the Apostles
also did follow, ^ho might easily have procured abun^ance of riches, since they
were fa^ous for working of wondrous si^nes and Miracles, did speak the ton^ues
of all Countries, and became ad^irable throughout the whole world ^or their
Wisdom. But they, who once ^yd: Behold, we have left all things, and followed
thee, did taste the sweet^es of liberty, as being free from the ^ares and love
of riches; and conten^ng themselves with meat, drink, clothes, did esteem
piety, and the Justice of the Kingdom of God, to be the greatest riches.

This path not only Monks and Hermites, but also Kings, and supreme Bishops
have walked in, who are arrived to the Kingdom of Heaven. Certainly S. Lewis
King of France was rich; but withal he was poor in spirit; for he did use but
ordinary clothing, did much fast, was liberal and open-handed to the poor,
and only to himself most sparing; nor do we read, that he wasted any money in
Plays, or Banquets. S. Gregory also, (being Pope) did possess in diverse
places great store of Ecclesiastical Patrimony and riches; yet because he was
poor in spirit, he was most profuse, and bountiful in giving Alms, and most
sparing, yea even almost covetous in bestowing any thing upon himself, or his
kindred: Thus he might well be thought to have exceeded the bonds of liberality
toward others, and of sparingnes toward himself, and his friends. But this
is the way, which leads to life everlasting.

We will adioyne to the former Examples, two rare Women. S. Paula ^e Roman,
(whose life was written (...) S. Jerome) was no less rich in possessions and
revenues, then poor in s^irit; for being a Woman of most ^^ble extraction, she
bestowed all her ^ealth and riches in erecting of Mona^^ries, and relieuing the
poor, and ^^is with such fervor of charity, as ^^at she desired in soul, to
be brought (...) that low degree of want as that the Charity and mercy of
others should discharge her funerals. Now how sparing in charges she was to
herself, appears, in that, she forbore to feed upon flesh, or eggs, or to
drink wine; for linen next to her body s^e wore a haire-cloath, she did lie
upon the ground, and did purge and cancel even her smallest offenses, with
continual prayers, and tears.

To proceed to the next. Heduigis Queen of Polonia, was rich in temporal
faculties, but more rich in po^erty of Spirit. She did content herself with
one poor gown, and wore i^ alone even in the greatest frosts. She f^sted
every day, Su^dayes and great festival days only excepted. She afflicted her
tender body with sharp disciplines, with great watching, and all manner of
austerities. Now from this he course of life, we may easily conjecture, upon
what things she did spen^ all her Regal wealth, and how small an affection (or
rather none) she bare to riches. Therefore we are not to wounder, that a woman
so poor i^ spirit, and so desirous to shake of al^ temporal cares, did at the
last through such spiritual endeauours, arrive to Heaven.

The third Path way to the Kingdom of God. CHAP. IX.
THE third way appointed by ou^ Spiritual Captain is this, Ma^^ S. Blessed
are they, who suffer persecuti^^ for Justice, for theirs is the Kingdom^ of
Heaven. The wisdom of Iesas Christ our Doctor is most admirable, yet
altogether secret and unknown to the wisemen of this world. For who would
believe (were it not that God auerret^ it) that it is good and expedient for us
t^ be poor in riches, and rich in pressur^ and Afflictions? And
notwithstanding ^his is most true, nothing more con^uceth to the acquiring of
true riches (...) which are the merits of the King^om of Heaven) then to have a
mind, ^oyd of all affection to temporal be^efits, and withal to have an
ardent desire to suffer for Christ. Hear then our Lord himself saying, Luc.
6. VVoe ^e to you, that are rich, because you ^aue your consolation: VVoe to
you that are filled, because you sh^lbe hungry: VVoe be to you that laugh,
because you shall mourn and weep. As also on the contrary side: Blessed are
you, poor; for yours is the Kingdom of God* Blessed are you that now weep;
Blessed shall you be, when men shall hate and revile you, and shall separate
you, and vpbraid you: and abandon your name as evil, for the Son of Man's
sake. Be glad in that day, and rejoice, for behold your reward is great in
Heaven.

Hear also S. James, how he magnifyeth Tribulation cap. 1. Esteem it ^ll joy,
when you shall fall into diverse temptations; knowing that the probation of your
faith works patience, and patience has a perfect Work. Where we are to
observe, that the Apostle he^ says not, Tolerate, sustain, be you patient,
when you fall in tribulation, be gaudete, rejoice, yea esteem it to be ^ joy.
That is, take tribulation not as tribulation but as matter of all joy, comfort,
and exultation. And as touching riches, observe the judgment of the same
Apostle S. James cap. 5. Go too yo^ Rich Men, weep, howling in your miseries,
which shall come to you. And i^ another place, the same Apostle says of rich
men: Be miserable and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turne^ into
mourning, and joy into sorrow. Iac^ 4. But from whence comes it, tha^
persecution does make a man blessed, the which rather should seem to make him
miserable? Many things might be alleged in proof of this verity, but I will
content my self with one reason. To wit, that persecution is like to a forge
of burning fire. For fire does prepare and dress meats, does purge silver,
and prove gould: Even so persecution, if it be patiently suffered, rectifieth,
and disposes Sinners, refineth the imperfect, and is a touchstone to the Just:
And thus is persecution become serviceable to all sorts of men. A sinner is
like to raw flesh, which except it be rightly dressed, is cast forth to the
beasts to be eaten, for ^ sinners is full of vnvvholesome and bad humors; to
wit, concupiscence of the flesh, which is Luxury; concupiscence of the eyes,
which is Avarice; and pride of life which is Ambition. But now if persecution
be at hand, threatening a sinner, then is he so prepared in that fire, as that
he may be fit to be honorably brought to the table of our Lord. For
persecution, or grievous tribulation violently rushing upon a sinner, he
instantly forgets all lust, lucre, and ambition, and so becomes
transformed, and another man, from what before he was.

A just man (but weak and imperfect) though he does not fall into any
grievous sin; yet he is a favorer of his flesh, follows his pleasures,
loves gain and wealth, does not detest the vanities of the world; This man is
like unto silver mixed with much dross; but if once the forge of Persecution
take hold of him, and that with patience he entertain it, then presently the
refuse matter in him does begin to be separated from the silver. For then ^e
begins to gather his forces together, to meditate of things which are
above, to abhor and loath carnal desires, and to live justly, temperatly,
and piously in this world, and to expect with great hope and alacrity the
approach and coming of the glory of that great and puissant God. To conclude,
a man perfect in Charity is gold, yet he is to be tried in the fire of
Tribulation, that both himself and others may be assured, that he is gold, and
not copper. For after it is seen, that he is able to endure the fire of
Peresecution with all patience and evenness of mind; not only others take
notice, what he in himself is, but also himself with a more erected
conscience, hope, and security does expect the wages and reward of the Kingdom
of Heaven; according to that of the Apostle: Rom 5. Tribulation works
Patience; and Patience, Probation; and Probation, Hope; and Hope confounds
not. And God himself does daily more and more raise and exalt his servant
tried in tribulation, until he makes him partaker of his Kingdom and
Felicity.

Behold here, how many goods Patience in persecution does engender. And indeed
it deserves admiration to observe, how few men there are, who have the
fruition of these goods of Persecution, although they do lie open to all men,
to be partakers of them; since persecution and affliction may be found in
every place. For in every place it does ^ffront us, whether in our own house,
in the way, in intercourse with others, yea even in the Church; because in
every place the wicked do assault the good and virtuous; and that Sentence of
the Apostle is most true, 2. Tim. 3. All, that will live godly in Christ Jesus,
shall suffer persecution. Notwithstanding we being over delicate and nice
soldiers do either fly from this trying-fire of Persecution wholly, or else,
we retort, and beat back the received injury or wrong upon our Adversary. And
thus we do not suffer persecution and wrong, but we commit it. And there are
not wanting, A man's own enemies (being) they of his own House, who do praise
and commend him, that disburdeneth himself of the wrong offered, and do
transfer it upon the Adversary: And yet these men will be accounted
Christians, who thus do violate and contemn the Precepts of Christ.

The fourth Way to the Kingdom of God. CHAP. X.
But because few men there are, who understand aright these great difficulties
above discoursed of, and more few, who will make trial of them by their own
practice; therefore our Captain Christ Jesus, has showed us a fourth way (and
that a most strait and narrow) leading us to the Kingdom of God, saying:
Matthew. 11. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent bear it
away. As if he would say; I well know, that it seems a strange Paradoxe to
men, that such as are blessed should be poor, and miserable men should be
rich; and that on the contrary, we ought to rejoice in Persecution, and weep
in Prosperity. Neither am I ignorant, that there are fevv, who would loose
and exchange goods present, for the gayning of goods future; and would embrace
and vvish for present evils, thereby to avoid evils to come. But I, who am
Truth it self, neither can I, nor ought to conceal the truth: and therefore I
have here added, That the Kingdom of God cannot be taken but by such, as offer
great violence, so as only men of violence do carry it away. Hence it is,
that in another place I have said, Luc. 18. How hardly shall they, that have
money enter into the Kingdom of God? For it is easier for a Camel to pass
through the eye of a nedle, then a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God.
And again: How narrow is the gate, and how strait is the way, that leads to
life: And few there are, that find it?

I have also compared the Kingdom of Heaven, to a Treasure hid in a Field, as
also to a precious Margarite which cannot be bought, without the sale of all
other things; intimating thereby, that a man must deprive himself of all
things, which he holds dear upon earth, if so he hope to possess the
celestial Treasure, and precious Margarite in Heaven, I have furthermore
perspicuously, and without any ambiguity of words, protested, Luc. 1. Who
does not renounce all things, which he possesses, cannot be my disciple. And
although this renunciation is to be understood of the preparation of the mind;
Nevertheless seeing this preparation of the mind, to renounce all
temporalities, when either the health of the Soul, or the glory of God does
require it, is not easily performed; and the accomplishment thereof is found
but in few: therefore I have adjoined the similitudes of him, who will build
a Tovver, not having sufficient provision and means to perform the same; as
also of that King, who thinks of vvaging war against another King, and
yet has not equal forces, vvherby he might hope for victory. Now if the
building of a Tovver without good store of money; and the encountering in
war and hostility against a potent King, be things most difficult, and
almost impossible: How much more difficult then is it to perform both these
two points together? But he ought to perform them, who vvil besiege or lay
battery to the Kingdom of God.

For first, a Tovver is to be built, which may reach to Heaven; That is,
merits and the price of good works, are to be procured, which may deserve
eternal life. And with all he is to fight with very many and most potent
enemies, to wit with the unclean and wicked Spirits; who shall labor by
their subtle endeauours to hinder the building of the foresaid Tovver. The
Tipe or figure hereof happened to the Israelits, who endeavoring to reedify and
build up the City of Jerusalem, then ruined and beaten to the ground by the
Chaldeans, were hindered by their neighboring Countries, warring against them;
so as they were forced to use incredible solicitude and care in building
with one hand, and fighting with the other. From all which the Conclusion
is, that the Kingdom of Heaven cannot without great pains and sweat be
purchased by such men, who become a prey to earthly and momentary pleasures and
benefits; not knowing how to bridle and tame the Concupiscence of the flesh, or
to fight with an invisible enemy. Nevertheless, whosoever, being assisted by
the the grace of God, shall seriously give his mind to Christian Perfection,
and shall most attentively consider the words of Christ, following the examples
of him and all other Saints; to this man by little and little the way and Tract
shall be enlarged, the gates shall be opened, the vigor and courage of the
mind shall increase, the enemies shall be enfeebled; and thus through the
charity of God in Christ Jesus, increasing in him, the burden shall begin to
be light, and the yoke sweet. And those words of Esaias c. 40. shall be verified:
They that hope in our Lord, shall renew their strength; they shall take wings
as Eagles; they shall run, and not labor, walk and not faint. And this man
shall say with the Royal Prophet: I did run the way of thy commandments,
when thou did dilate my heart. Psalm. 118.

Certainly, it was not grievous to S. Antony to spend whole nights without
sleep; yea the night did seem most short to him, in respect of the sweetness
of divine Contemplation; as well appeared, when he complained of the Sun it
self in these words: Quid me impedis, Sol, etc. Why do thou h^nder me, O
Sun, which risest so soon, to the end, thou may withdraw me from the
splendor and brightness of the true light? Cass. Col. 9. cap. 31. Neither
seemed it any difficult matter to this Saint, and such like holy men, to
continue their fasts by whole weeks, when they even fed upon, and were
refreshed with the reading and meditating of the sacred Word of God, as with a
celestial and supernatural bread. Neither was it painful to S. Austin to
weane himself from the sweetness of worldly pleasures (to the which even from
his youth he had been enthralled) after he once had tasted the sweetness of
divine love, and of internal Contemplation. Therefore let no man be
disanimated or let his heart and courage fall, but cast himself with an
immovable Hope into the Arms of Gods most holy assistance, who, as he made us
for himself, so will he draw us to himself; And who will vouchsafe to place
all those in his Kingdom, whom he vouchsafed to redeem with the precious
blood of his only begotten Son,

Now in regard of all this (O Christian Soul) thou ought not through the
asperity of the way to rest disheartened, but to trust in our Lord; who would
never have invited us to seek after his Kingdom before all other things
whatsoever, had he not been prepared to strenghthen us in this our journey,
with his most powerful and puissable help.

Therefore enter into this Path, or tract-way toward the Kingdom of Heaven,
with all cherefull animosity of mind. Here is no place left for a wavering mind
or judgment. For if the labor be great, which here presents it self to thee,
yet the reward propounded for this thy labor, is incomparably far greater;
and if the forces of thy enemies hindering thee in this thy voyage, be
powerful, yet the hand of God which leads and conducts thee, is more
powerful; And if many of all Ages and Sexes could by this way arrive to the
Kingdom of God why vvilt thou be so faint-harted and dejected in spirit, as
to despair by the same way, to arrive to the same Kingdom?

Their bodies were not made of stone or iron, but of flesh, and they were
mortal and frail; And therefore what they atcheiued, was not through their
own strength, but through the strength of our Lord. Why therefore may not
thou (though vveake and infirm) accomplish the like attempt? Cast thy self
upon God (faith S. Austin l. 8. confess. c. 11.) and be not afraid; He will not
withdraw himself from thee, that thou should fall: Cast thy self upon him
confidently, He will receive thee, He will help thee. God is faithfu^l, he
cannot deny himself. Two things are required at thy hands; The one, that most
firmly and vnalterably thou would resolve, to prefer the glory of God, and
salvation of thy own Soul, before all other things whatsoever. The other,
That thou would repose all thy hope and confidence, not in thy own
strength, neither in thy own vvisdome, but in the Omnipotency and infinite
Charity of God. Which two Points if thou do perform, Crooked things shall
become straight, and rough ways plain. Esa. 40. And thou shall serve our Lord
with ineffable comfort. joy, and exultation; And thou shall sing, in the ways
of our Lord, because the glory of our Lord is great. Psalm. 137.

OF THE ETERNAL FELICITY OF THE SAINTS, Under the Title of the City of God.
THE SECOND BOOK.
Of the Beauty of the City of God. CHAP. I.
GLORIOSA dicta sunt de te, Ciuitas Dei. Glorious things are said of thee, O
City of God. Psalm. 86. In regard hereof, I much covet to behold thy Beauty by
way of meditation, though it be (as it were) by a glass, in a dark manner. And
among other things this first occurreth to be considered, why the Felicity of
the Saints, which in the holy Scriptures is called the Kingdom of Heaven, is
also called the City of God. One chief reason thereof seems to be, because
as it is called a Kingdom in respect of its amplitude and largnes: so it also
deserves to be called a City with reference to its splenstour and beauty.
When one hears any speech of a most large and vast Kingdom, he may easily
think, that in the same there are many solitary and unpleasing places, left
only for beasts to inhabit, many hills vncultiuated, many Vales ouergrowne
with wood, many Rocks inaccessible, ways vneauen and unhaunted, and finally
most deep precipices, and the like.

But because all this infelicity of place ought to be most distant and remote
from the felicity of Saints; Therefore the holy Ghost does instruct us in the
Scriptures, that the Kingdom of Heaven is like to a most fair and adorned
City; and though this Kingdom be of a most immense and almost infinite
Circuit; yet that it does even shine, and appear fair, as any City that is
most populous and most rich, is accustomed to do. For in the chiefest and
greatest Cities there are to be seen most sumptuous and adorned Temples or
Churches, most stately and haughty Palaces, most pleasant Orchards, most large
places for resort of the Citizens, most replenished houses with people; besides
goodly fountains Columns, Pyramisses, Theaters, Towers, and shops fraught
with all things necessary for the use of Man. What had been the splendor of
Italy, if (wanting the barraine Apennines) it all should shine, not as Rome as
this day, but as it was under Augustus Caesar, who turned its Mud-wals into
edifices of Marble? And how beautiful had Syria been long since, if all of it
had been like to Jerusalem, before Jerusalem had come to desolation by the
Romans? For Josephus describes the magnificence of it with all wounder, so as
the Prophet might not without just cause say thereof, Gloriosa dicta sunt de
te, Ciuitas Dei, and yet even then, it was not brought to that height of
eminency, to the which after David and Solomon, Herod the great had advanced
it. Of what luster had Chaldaea, and all Assyria and Mesopotamia, or rather all
the East been, if the City of Babylon could have contained all the parts
thereof within the compass of its own Walls? For both Pliny and Strabo
describe that City in such manner, as that the largenes and beauty thereof may
seem to be incredible. And therefore the City of Babylon was worthily ranged
among the seven Miracles of the World.

But now to parallel things together: What kind of City then, shall that
heavenly City, that supernall Jerusalem be, which possesses, or contains
the whole Kingdom of Heaven? I mean that City, which makes, that great
Kingdom of Heaven so to cast forth its splendor and light, as if it all were
but one most fair and glorious City, in the which there is no vacancy of
place, no deformity, nothing vile or base. Doubtlesly the supernall City is of
such nature, as that no man can seriously and with due attention meditate
thereof, but that he must instantly burn with desire of so great a matter: And
no man can trul^ burn therewith, but that abandoning all things, he must
thirst after it, and never cease, till he has found it.

Observe, what Tobias the younger, rejoicing in spirit, speaks of this City
c. 13. Thou shall shine with a glorious light, and all the coasts of the earth
shall adore thee etc. The gates of Jerusalem shall be built of Sapphire and
Emerauld, and all the compass of the walls, of precious stones: With white
and clean stone shall all the streets thereof be paued, and in the streets
Alleluia shall be sung. And S. John accords to Toby herein, saying, Apoc. 21.
And the building of the wall thereof was of Iaspar-stone, etc. And the City
was pure gold, as it were transparent glass etc. And the foundation of the
City was adorned with all precious stones; and the several gates thereof were
of several margarites, and the streets of the City, pure gould. Now here we
are not to imagine, that the heavenly Jerusalem shall be seen, as adorned with
gould and precious stones, such as are here upon the earth; ^ut these things
are so delivered in holy Writ, that thereby we may understand, that the
Heavenly City is so far more noble then any earthly City, by how much gould
is better then mud or dyrt, Margarites then common stones, stars then lights,
the Sun then a torch or lamp, Heaven then the earth; and finally God the
immortal Workman, then any mortal Architect. But because we are hereafter
more fully to discourse of the beauty of all the parts of the City of God, I
will here forbear further speech thereof.

Of the Concord and Peace of the City of God. CHAP. II.
ANother reason, why the Kingdom of God may be called the City of God,
seems to be, in that a Kingdom is accustomed to comprehend within it almost
an infinite multitude of persons being among themselves distinct in language,
Manners, and Laws; of which number (though all of one Kingdom) many did never
see one another, much less ever contracted any mutual friendship or
familiarity. Now a City contains only those which speak one and the same
tongue, who are of like manners, and are governed by the same customs or
laws. Thus the same thing is called both a Kingdom, and a City, because the
inhabitants of the Heavenly Kingdom, are so many, as that they can hardly be
numbered; and as S. John says Apoc 7. they are gathered together of several
Nations, of several Tribes and People, and of several tongues; as also of
Angels, Archangels, Principalities, Powers, Virtues, Dominations, Thrones,
Cherubims, and Seraphims, who exceed men in number; of which every one of them
do differ from another, not in Country, people, language, but in diversity of
nature, I mean in a specificall difference: And yet nevertheless they are all
true Citizens, all of unanimous consent, and are governed only by the law of
Charity. And hence it is, that they are all one Heart, and one Spirit. And since
charity cannot brook Hatred, Envy, Contentions, discord, and the like;
therefore all such dissentio^s, and iarres are most remoted from that holy
City of Jerusalem; and only Charity there reigns being atte^ded on with
justice, peace, and joy, in the Holy Ghost.

In the beginning of the Creation of things there was a great wa^re in Heaven,
between S. Michael the Archangell, and the Dragon; But S. Michael and the
other Angels, who ranged themselves with him, and remained in the Truth, and
performed their loyalty and obedience to their Lord, obtained victory over the
Dragon and his Associats, who breathing nothing but pride, revolted from their
common Lord, and Sovereign: And the great Dragon was cast forth, the old
Serpent, which is called the Devil, and Satan, which seduceth the whole world;
and he was cast into the earth. Apoc. 12. From which time the Holy City (the
heavenly Jerusalem) did border it self within the limitts of Peace; Neither
has any warlike Trumpet been hard therein, neither shall hereafter be heard,
and this for a^l Eternity.

Now to reflect upon what is above said: What can be reputed more pleasing or
happy, then this City? Such men, who by their own experience have tried the
evils of wars, robberies, slaughters, Rapines, deuastation of places by
Lies, sacriledges and the like, may easily and truly preach of the great
pleasure and sweetness of peace. But passing over public wars and Hostility;
who has not made trial in his own City, yea in his own house, how
distasteful and unpleasing it is, daily to converse with men of an irefull, and
froward disposition, who do interpret every thing in the worst ^art? Depart
from the wicked, and evil shall fall from thee, says Ecclesiasticus c. 7. But
whither can we fly where we shall not be encountered with wicked men? And if
every place do swarm with such men, then doubtlesly must many evils,
discontents, and unquietness attend upon us, during this our time of exile. Give
ear to what the foresaid Ecclesiasticus pronounces of an evil wife: It shall
be more pleasant to abide with a Lion and Dragon, then to dwell with a wicked
woman. c. 25. And if she, who is the fellow and companion of man's l^fe, be
through wickedness, turned into a Lion, or Dragon, to how great angours and
infelicities are many men exposed? All, that will live godly in Christ Jesus
(faith the Apostle) ^* Tim. 3. shall suffer persecution.

Therefore how unhappy is the City of this world, in which a man of necessity
must be affronted with Adversaries, and wage war? For if thou vvilt live
piously and godly, thou shall suffer persecution at the hands of men; And if
thou vvilt give the bridle to all impiety, thereby to decline and avoid
persecution of men, thou shall then fall into the wrath and indignation of that
most high and powerful King, who shall persecute and punish thee, both living
and dead; whose anger no man can resist. Most unfortunate therefore and
calamitous is that Country in which no man can escape war, no man can fly
from persecution, no man can find true peace. What then remains, but that
even from the bottom of our heart, we do prosecute with a I love and praise
the Heavenly City, wherein no persecution can be found, no wars, broils, or
discord can take place.

Of the liberty, or freedom of the City of God. CHAP. III.
THe third Reason, why the Kingdom of God, may be called a City, is, in that
a Kingdom has a Monarchical form o government, which seems to be opposed
to liberty; whereas all the Citizens of Heaven, are free, and our Mother,
which is the supreme Jerusalem, is also free, as S. Paul witnesses to the
Galathians c. 4. Which blessed Apostle did well know, what he did speak, since
he being once taken up in spirit into the third Heaven, was thereby acquainted
with the manners, and laws of that City. Therefore seeing a Kingdom does
seem to include servitude, and a City liberty; that Kingdom may well be
called a City, in which all, who serve the King, are free. Now among the holy
inhabitants of Heaven, there is not one only liberty, but a liberty of several
kinds. For first, all the Citizens of Heaven are free from the bondage of
sin, seeing the first liberty, which was in the terrestrial Paradise, was to
have power not to sin; whereas the second liberty in the celestial Paradise
is far greater; to wit, not to be able to sin, as S. Austin teaches. lib. de
correp. and gra c. 11.

Another kind of liberty consists in being free from death, being like to the
former liberty. For Adam was so free in the terrestrial Paradise, as that it
was in his power not to dye: And the Sons of Adam are so free in the
celestial Paradise, as that they cannot dye. Neither must it seem strange,
that we p^ace liberty in that, which consists in not being able to do;
seeing not to be able to sin, and not to be able to dye, imply an eminency of
freedom from the captivity of sin, and thraldom of mortality. For who has
not power to sin, is not only free from sin; but also is so far from the
bondage thereof, as that he remains secure, that sin shall never have any
sovereignty over him. In like sort, he who cannot dye, remains not only free
from death, but is so far distant from death, as that he is ascertained, that
death shall never make any assault toward him: Which liberty only God through
his own Nature enjoys, according to those words of the Apostle 1. Tim. 6.
Who alone has immortality. For although the Angels and rational souls be
said to be naturally immortal, because they have no Principle, or cause of
Corruption in their nature; Nevertheless, God who first created them, can at
his pleasure, reduce them to Nothing. But the Angels, and the blessed Saints
are most secure, that they shall for never after sin, nor dye; and are in
this respect most free from the servitude of sin or death; which privilege
is a most honorable participation of the divine liberty of God.

The third kind of liberty, is to be free from Necessity; and this liberty, is
also of several sorts. For now mortal men are forced (through a certain
constraint of necessity) to eat, to drink, to sleep, to labor, sometimes to
stand, another time to walk, or to lie down, and repose themselves. But the
Saints in Heaven stand subject and thra l to no such necessity, but are freed
from all corporal necessitudes; And this is the liberty of the glory of the
Sons of God, of which the Apostle speaks in his Epistle to the Romans. Now
of what dignity this liberty is, first poor men, secondly spiritual men,
lastly rich men, and such as are lovers of this world, do fully testify. Men
oppressed with penury and want in the highest degree, what indefatigable pains
d^ they undergo, thereby to provide for themselves and theirs, meat, drink,
clothes, and other necessaries? And how much would they acknowledge themselves
to be obliged to such men, who would disburden and free them from all such
servitude of Want and Necessity? And hence it is, that many of them practice
theft, and other prohibited courses, for the maintayning of their lives; for
they say with that wicked Steward in the Gospel Luc. 16. To dig I am not
able, to beg I am ashamed, I know what I will do: To wit, I will deceive my
Lord; I mean, I will free my self by theft and rapine from this burden of want
and necessity. But the close or end of this is to fall into a necessity far
more grievous; that is, into the servitude of sin and the devil, man's
greatest enemy.

To come to holy men who greedly thirst after Heaven; these men account it a
great burden, to have the care of providing al things n^cessary for the body,
standing in need of so many things, and spending much time therein, which they
would bestow willingly upon more noble employments. Eusebius l. 2. hist. cap.
16 records out of Philo, that the first Christians of Alexandria in Egypt,
living under the gouernm nt of S. Mark the Evangelist, were so wholly devoted
to their accustomed heavenly meditations, as that they never refreshed their.
Bodies with meat, till after the Sun was set, that so they might spend the
whole day, and a great part of the night in such celestial studies; so
allotting but a small part of the night for their Bodies ease and cherishment.
Yea he relates, that diverse, for the space of three whole days, others for
six days together, abstayned from meat. In like sort Ioannes Cassianus in
his Collations, and Theodoret in his history, do affirm, that the same long
^bstinence from meat was much practiced by many holy ^rmites. Therefore from
hence we may gather, that the servitude of corporal necessities was a great
clogge to these men; they complaining and crying out with the Apostle: Romans 7.
Unhappy man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

Now to descend to the Citizens of this World, and particularly to rich men
(who breath nothing but temporal gain and pleasures:) To these this servitude
of necessity is not ungrateful; nevertheless if they weighed the matter in an
even balance, they would censure it to be most grievous. Meat, drink, and
sleep are pleasing to them, but if these benefits of nature be taken in a
superfluous degree, they fill the body with a troublesome ouercharge of bad
humors and diseases; which after to expel they are forced to drink diverse
better potions; and to suffer no slight pains. Again such men are violently
constrained either to profess open emnity to God, and thereupon to undergo
his most dread^ull wrath and indignation; or else most courageously to wage
War against concupiscence of the flesh for the obtaining of temperance and
sobriety; which kind of feight is accustomed to be most laborious, and most
dangerous. Therefore I conclude, that both the poor, the rich, the godly, and
the wicked, are disburdened and freed of a most fastidious wearisom necessity
and vassilage, when they are freed from the servitude of this miserable and
manifold Necessity.

The fourth kind of liberty consists, in being free and vnobliged to the Law,
and the Precepts; since the Law was instituted not for the just, but for the
iniust, as the Apostle teaches. Now there are none more just, then the
Blessed; for they are confirmed and corroborated in Justice, neither can they
possibly become iniust. True it is, that the threatening and pressing Law is not
ordained for just men, living in this World; since of their own accord, they
are obedient to the Law; nevertheless it cannot be denied, but the Law does
oblige and direct even them to do that, which the law commands, and to fly
that, which the Law prohibiteth.

But the just, who do enjoy the liberty of the glory of the Sons of God, do
stand in need of no Law, for they conte^plate all Justice in the Word; and as
being strenghtned and fortified in perfect Charity, they cannot deflect or
decline from the will of God. This liberty indeed is of great moment, which
discharges one of all solicitude and anxiety; and it is wholly opposite to
that captivity and thraldom of those unfortunate Souls, who having their
hands and feet bound, shall be cast into exterior darkness, and into a furnace
of fire; So as they shall not be able either to tolerate, or to avoid those
torments. And yet there is not any man, but of necessity he must undergo one
of these two contrary lotts or fortunes. Notwithstanding men are so blinded
with the empty smoke of present Honor, and the dust of terrene Benefits, as
that they make no cogitation, no introuersion of judgment upon these matters,
until a sudden overthrow and calamity do rush upon them; and thus does
irreuocable punishment open their eyes, which sin had before shut, and
closed up.

Of the Situation, and form, or structure of the City of God. CHAP. IV.
BUT let us return to the Heavenly City; and let us attentively co^consider
the situation, form, foundation, gates, walls, and streets thereof. And to
begin with the situation: This City is placed in Holy mountains; for thus
we read: Psalm. 86. The foundations thereof are in holy mountains: With whom
agrees S. John Apoc. 21. And he took me up in spirit to a Mountain great and
high, and showed me the holy City. Now Cities are seated upon Hills or
mountains, both for healthfulnes of the air, as also for strength. But what
mountains are higher then Heaven? And which is that mountain that is exalted
above all mountains, if not the Heaven of Heavens, of which David thus
sings: Psalm. 113. Caelum Caeli Domino. This is that mountain, to the which
the said Prophet coueted to aspire, when he said again, Psalm. 23. Who shall
afcend into the mount of our Lord, or who shall stand in his holy place? And
from whence he implored and expected aid, saying: Psalm. 120. I have lifted up
mine ^yes unto the mountains, from whence help shall come to me Therefore
from all this we may gather, that the Seat of the City of God, is most
sublime and high, and transcendeth al^ things, which may in any sort disturb
the peace and tranquillity of the said City: for it is erected to a greater
height then any dust, mire, thorns, the bitings of venomous beasts of the
earth can reach unto. It is more high, then any vapors, darkness of the air,
hayle, thunder, or lightning can terrify, or annoy. Briefly it is more high,
then those unclean, and ravenous Birds, which the Apostle Ephesians. 6. calls,
Spiritualia nequitiae in caelestibus, can ascend unto. He means spiritual
wickedness in heavenly places.

The form of the City of God is four square; for thus speaks S. John,
Apoc. 2^. And the City is situated quadrangle wise; and the length thereof is
as great, as the breadth. This signifies no other thing, but an admirable and
most perfect Justice, which reigns in that City, in which there is no
Injustice, no obliquity, or distortion of men's Actions; which point S. Austin
touches in explicating that of the Psalm. 64. mirabile in aequitate, that is,
wonderful in Justice. And doubtlesly it will deserve admiration, to behold so
many almost innumerable Citizens of that City, all of them enjoying a most
exact freedom of Will, and yet not any one (for all eternity) to be noted for
any exorbitancy or miscariadge either in work, word, or thought. Therefore
we may truly say, that that City is placed in a square, so as the length and
breadth thereof are equal.

Furthermore, this foure-squared form, may also figure out, that the latitude
of the Heavenly felicity is equal to the longitude; I mean, because as the
store or abundance of celestial Goods shall be infinite, so also shall their
continuance be infinite, and interminable. For according to the Dialect of holy
Scripture, Latitude is accustomed to be applied to the multitude of things, and
Longitude to their con^inuance. According heereto we read, that the manifold
vvisdome of Solomon is called in the book of the Kings, the Latitude of the
Heart, like unto the sand, which is in the sea shore; and in the Psalms,
duration or continuance of time, is termed the length of days. Therefore it
follows, that in the City of our Lord, the Latitude shall be equal with the
Longitude, because there shall be an immensity of good things, joined with an
eternity of their fruition. S. John adds, a little after the place above
alleged, that the height of this glorious City shall be of the same dime^sion
with its breadth, so as the City may be four square every way; the meaning
whereof is, that the goods of the Celestial Jerusalem shall not be only many
and everlasting, but also most noble, and most sublime or high. Neither does it
import any thing, that Vitruuius and Vigetius do not allow in Cities a
foure-square form; seeing they speak of Cities, which stand in fear of the
enemy; Whereas the Holy Scripture celebrateth in words, that City whose
borders and limitts are Peace; and to which, in regard of its height, no evil
can make approach, as the holy Prophet has auerred. Psalm. 90.

Of the foundations and gates of the City of God. CHAP. V.
THE foundation of the City of God is of that sort or manner, a^ that it alone
may deservedly be said to have a foundation or work; for thus does the Holy
Apostle speak: Heb. 11. He expected that City, that had foundations; whose
artificer and maker is God. For the Apostle does in these words give a reason,
why Abraham did not build a City in the Land of Promise, nor so much as any
house, or place of habitation, but did there live as a stranger. The cause
being, in that he was instructed, that, that Land of Promise was but a figure
of a greater Land of Promise: and therefore he was vnwi^ling to erect a house
or City, which was after to become a ruin and desolation; as expecting a
City built upon a firm and stable foundation, whose Architect or builder is
God. Therefore from hence it resulteth, that the Heavenly City is only that
City, which truly and properly has a foundation, and which, as being bu^lt by
God, shall last for ever.

The City which Cain, Nembroth, Ninus, Nabuchodonosor, Romulus, and others
have built, in that they were after subject to ruin, and shall all of them at
the end of the world come to utter desolation, do even proclaim, that they
had no foundation; And from hence we may gather, how much more wise and prudent
were the ancient Prophets, then we are; for they, although they l^ued as long
again, as we do now live, and were to expect for certain thousands of
years, before they could enter into the Heavenly City; nevertheless they
vouchsafed not to build either Cities or houses, but lived only in
Tabernacles, as strangers and Pilgrims; comforting themselves with a certain
and lively Faith and Hope, that since all things upon earth do finally come to
decay, they at last should enjoy the eternal City of Heaven. Whereas we, who
do live but few years, and may (if our selves will) presently after our
death, enter into that most b^essed Cit y, do so sweat and labor in building,
and adorning Ci^ties, and stately Houses, as if we were never to dye, or never
expected to arrive to Heaven; In which our proceeding, we doublesly imitate not
the bel^euing Patriarchs, but the misbelieuing Heathens: And yet we are
Christians, and do well know, that neither Christ nor any of the Apostles had
here upon Earth any City, Palace, or so much as an house; much less, that
they did build any of these.

I would not here be understood to reprehend Princes of this world (although
Christians) for erecting of Cities, and private men for building convenient
houses for themselves and their Posterity; for we well know, that David (a
pious King) did much enlarge the City of Jerusalem, and did in the same City
build himself a most Regal Palace, as we read in the second Book of Kings.
We likewise know, that S. Lewis (King of France) repaired at his own peculiar
charges, certain much ruined Cities of the Christians in Palestine. Neither
are we ignorant, that Princes should live in more magnificent Buildings, then
private men; and in like sort men of worth and dignity, then men of the common
and vulgar sort. All this ^e know; but but we on^y require and allow a
mediocrity in these things; the extreme we codemne, especially when we see that
Private men covet to have Palaces fi^ting for Kings; and Kings not content
with Palaces, do buyld for themselves huge masles and heights of Edifices,
equalling even towns in greatness: To conclude, we condemn an
ouer-affectionate desire to these temporal chings, as if we were to repose and
place our chi^fe felicity in them; and we praise and allow the contempt of the
world, and the humi^ity of Christ.

Now touching the Ports or Gates of the City of Heaven; they are said by S.
John in the place above alleged to consist of Margarites and Pearls. In like
sort, the structure of the walls is of Iaspar stone, and the streets of the
City, as also the whole City of pure gould. All which desc^iption does
signify, that that holy City is most precious, and withal most bright and
shining. For it is well known, that the Margarite or Pearl is precious, and
lightsome. Now, the Iaspar is either green or white; and therefore for the
better distinction of these two colors, S. John adds, Et lumen eius simile
lapidi precioso, and the light thereof, like to a precious stone, as it were to
the Iaspar stone, even as Cristal. Where he adioyneth the words, even as
Cristall, to signify that he spoke not of the green, but of the white and
transparent Iaspar: So also, where he says; that the streets are of pure
gould, he annexeth these words like to pure glass; that is trasparent* and of
a white color, like unto Cristall.

From this it follows, that the whole City, whether you respect the gates,
the wall, or the streets, is most precious, which has not within it any
ordure, or any thing that is base, abject sordid, or of small continuance. And
withal the City is said to be white, and plainly lies open to the eye; for
therein is nothing covered. All the Citizens then see all things; neither is
there any suspicion, or any imposture, or deceyte. And perhaps this is the
reason, why S. John subnecteth in the same place this short passage: An^ the
Gates thereof shall not be shut; because there shall be no darkness, no thieves,
no Enemies, for fear of whom the Gates should be shut. Neither is this
repugnant to the words of the Psalmist, who celebrateth the praise of his
Heavenly Jerusalem in these words: Psalm. 147. O Jerusalem praise our Lord,
because he has strengthened the locks of thy Gates. Since both the Prophet and
the Euangalist do insinuate one and the same thing; to wit, that there are not
any enemies or thieves, who can threaten danger to this heavenly Jerusalem. For
the Prophet, by the Gates being ever shut, sign fyeth that Gods holy Protection
will not suffer the enemy at any time to invade or enter into that City, so
much beloved by him. The Evangelist by the gates being open, shows, that that
City is so secure and free from all hostile incursions, as that it needs n t
to shut its Gates; much less to keep any Watch, or Centinall.

But let as proceed, and show, what the Gates, the VValls, and the Streets of
his City do import? The Gates (by their standsng ever open) declare, that now
after the Passion of our Savior, entrance into this City of God and Angels,
is given to men, since Christ himself, after he had suffered death, did open
the Kingdom of Heaven to the faithful. Neither is there one only Port or
gate, but twelve, by which the faithful may enter into this City: for thus S.
John speaks: On the East side three gates, on the North three, and on the
South three, and on the West three. Since not only the Jews (as themselves
dreamed) do enter into that City, but men even from ^ll the most remote and
discosted parts of the whole World. Yea, so few Jews do enter there into, as
with reference to men of other Nations, they may be said to be almost none at
all: for thus did our Lord (speaking to the Centurion) prophesy of them. Matthew.
8. I have not found so great faith in Israel; And, I say unto you, that many
shall come from the East, and the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of Heaven; but the children of the Kingdom
shall be cast out into exterior darkness. In like sort, in the Parable of the
Vine, our Lord thus says, Matt 21. The Kingdom of God shall be taken away from
you, and shall be given to a Nation yielding fruit thereof. And the same point is
inculcated most clearly in S Luke. When you shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you to be thrust out.
And there shall come from the East, and the West, and the North, and the South
and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God.

Now there are said to be three Gates from every part of the World, (and so in
number twelve) because entrance sha be given not only to those coming from the
East, the South, the West, and the North; but also from the beginning or first
entrance of the East, from the middle of the East, and from the end of the
East; the like may be said of the three other Parts of the World. Except this
other construction following of the foresaid number of the Gates, may be
perhaps more pertinent to the purpose, to wit, that three gates are assigned to
several parts of the Heavenly City, with reference to the mystery of the
Blessed Trinity, and the three most necessary Virtues; since they all, from all
the four parts of the World, do enter into this Heavenly City, who being
baptiz^d in the name of the three divine Persons, have perseuered to their last
end in Faith, Hope, and Charity.

Of the Wall, and streets of the City of God. CHAP. VI.
TO proceed. The Wall of the City signifies nothing else, then Gods holy
Protection and custody, which one thing alone is sufficient, to preserve this
City, without any watch, forces, or fortresses. I will be to it (says God by
the mouth of Zachary) A wall of fire round about; and I will be in glory in the
midst thereof. Zach. 2. A most wonderful Promise He says, I will be a wall
of fire round about, that I may hinder the entrance of Enemies; and I will be a
glory in the midst thereof that I may enlighten the Citizens: as if he would
say; Fire burns, and shyneth; therefore I will consume the enemy with fire,
and and will illuminate and comfort the Citizens. So I shall be a wall of fire
round about, and a light of glory in the midst: which very point S. John a
little after does explicate, when he says: Apoc. 21. And the City needs not
Sun nor Moon to shine in it; for the glory of God has illuminated it, and
the Lamb is the Lamp thereof. The clarity and brightness of God, as a Sun,
does enlighten the minds, and Christ being the Lamb of God, as a Lamp, does
illuminate the bodies of the blessed. Now Christ is here called a Lamp, not as
if this Lamp were necessary in the night time, but is so called in comparison
of the Divinity. For if the faces of the Saints shall shine as the Sun in the
Kingdom of God (as our Lord himself testifies Matthew. 13.) then how much more
shall the face of Christ, not as a Lamp, but as a chief Sun, enlighten the
City of God? And hence it is, that S. John does there subioyne, that there
shall be no Night in that City.

Here yet remains the street of this City to be discoursed of. This street
co^prehendeth the whole space, which is within the compass of the walls. And
this street is the common habitation of all the Celestial Citizens; The which
is all of pure gold; that is, of a fiery and bright Charity, which shall
contain all those Citizens; and through force of which one of the Inhabitants
shall even live in another, through the virtue of pure Love. Neither only shall
one live in another, but all of them shall live in God, and God in the^ all;
for who remains in Charity, remains in God, and God in him. 1. Joan. 4. The
which point, that it might be affected Christ our Lord asked of his Father in
that prayer which, ready to go to his Passion, he made in the hearing of all
of his Apostles, saying: Joan. 17. Not for them alone do I pray, but for the^
also, who by their word shall believe in me, that they all may be one, as thou
(Father) in me, and I in thee, that they also in us may be one.

O most blessed City, which being seated upon a most high mountain, do
enjoy a most pure air! Which art founded upon a Rock, as being supported with
eternal stability and firmenes! Whose gates do shine like Margarites, and
ever stand open for Holy Souls to enter into! Whose wall is God, encompassing
thee about with his vigilance and protection, and as a precious Ia^per-stone
does adorn thee! Whose street is Charity, more bright and glorious, then all
gould, more white then any Crystal! Which makes all the inhabitants to be of
one heart, of one mind! replenishing them with an inutterable joy, and placing
them in an interminable and everlasting tranquillity and peace! Concupiscit,
and deficit anima mea; my soul coueteth, and even faints, unto thy streets.
Psalm. 9^. What is more grateful, and more wished for, by our laboring, and
lamenting in the midst of a wicked Nation, among false brethren, and in that
world, which is wholly placed in malignity and wickedness, then even in all have
to fly to that place, in which only Charity reigns? When shall I come, and
appear before the face of God? Psalm. 41. What greater consolation and comfort
can be to a s^ule loving our Lord, then to see his beloved, and to be seen of
his beloved, and through an inward and most sweet connection reciprocally to
dvvell the one in the other? It is insufferable bouldnes (O Holy City) that
dust and ashes should dare to aspire to thy Palaces; and it is greater
bouldnes, that a vile and dejected soul should dare to approach to the
fruition of his Creator. But he will excuse and plead for this boldness, who
gave it, when he prayed to his Father, that we all might be one; and that as
the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father; so we may be but one,
in one another.

Of the Temple of the City of God. CHAP. VII.
WE are here further to enlarge our discourse of the City of God, in showing
the Temple therein to praise God, and the meat and drink, which there is to
be eaten and drunke^; for as for clothing the Inhabitants need not to be
sollicitous. For if Adam and Eve needed not any clothing in the terrestrial
Paradise, much less shall the Saints in the celestial Pararadise need any
such; who shall be all clothed with splendor and light, as with a vestment.
Now concerning meat and drink, Adam and Eve could not want them; neither do
the Angels themselves want them, according to those words of the Angel
Raphael: I use an invisible meat and drink, which cannot be seen of men.
Tob. 12.

And first touching the Temple, S. John thus speaks in the Apocalypse 21. And
temple I saw none therein, for our Lord God omnipotent is the Temple thereof,
and the Lamb. That S. John did not see any Temple in the City, may not seem
strange; since Temples are erected in the Militant Church for four ends; to
wit, that the Word of God may be preached in them to the faithful; that the
Sacraments and Sacrifices may be celebrated in them; that Public Prayer may be
in them offered up to God; And finally that due praises with singing and joy
may be performed to him. Now the preaching of the Word of God shall cease in
Heaven; seeing there the increated Word himsefe shall manifestly speak to
all; And according to the preaching of Jeremy the Prophet. cap. 31. Man shall
no more teach his neighbor, or his brother, saying, Know our Lord: for all
shall know me from the least to the greatest.

Sacraments in like manner and Sacrifices shall not be necessary in that City;
since neither Sins shall be there expiated, neither shall signs be there
required, where things signified shall manifestly appear. Prayers and Lauds
to God are here upon earth, performed in Churches and Temples, dedicated unto
God, because himself has promised, that in such sacred places his eyes shall be
open, and ears atte^t; for thus he speaks to Solomon: Paral. 7. Mine eyes
shall be open, and mine ears erected to his prayer, that shall pray in this
place. But now seeing in the Celestial City, God will be openly seen and heard
of all men, therefore not any Temple seems to be necessary in that place.
Hence then we may easily gather, why S. John said, And I saw no Temple in the
City.

But h^er it may be demanded, why S. John subioineth these words: The God
omnipotent, is the Temple thereof, and the Lamb? For if no Temple be required
in that City, why then is God himself said to be the Temple thereof? and not
only the Temple, but also the Lamb? Or what explication can it have; to say,
that God and the La^be shall be called Temples in Heaven? Or to what use shall
this Temple be in Heaven? In answer heerto, we are to recurre to the custom
of the holy Scriptures, where one text or sentence does comment, and explain
another, and the more dark and obscure passage receaues its illustratio^ from
that which is more perspicuous and clear. Well then, we thus read in the 90.
Psalm: He that dwells in the help of the highest, shall ab^d^ in the
Protection of the God of Heaven (...) sense and meaning of which Words is this:
Who by a firm Confidence and Hope is joined with God, he (as it were) makes
to himself a house in God, in the which he may securely live, as being exempt
and free from all evil. The same may be said of Praises and Prayers to God.
For he that, through an inward reverence, is conjoined with God, does in like
sort build to himself a place of Habitation in God, the which he inhabitating
in that sort as he ought to do, may therein pray, and offer up his praises
unto God,

So here we say, that our Lord (the Omniporent God of Heaven) is the Temple of
the holy City; because all those holy Citizens most intensly and with a
strong bent of fervor, meditating on the omnipotency of God (and so by this
means joined to him, by an inward reverence) do dwell in him, and exhibit to
him due praises; and when they pray for us, they are heard with a most willing
and ready care. In like manner, when they seriously contemplate the merits of
Christ, who, as an innocent Lamb, delivered himself up in oblation and
Sacrifice to God (...) odor of sweetness; they being firmly united by love,
and dwelling in him, as in a Temple, do power out their Prayers, and
impetrations for us, and do doubtlesly find the eyes of God open, and his
ears attentive, that they may obtain in our behalf any thing, for which they
pray.

But if those blessed Citizens be accustomed to dwell in God and in Christ, as
in a Temple, thereby to offer up their praises and prayers for us; what are we
(poor men) to do, who neither see God nor Christ? O would to God, that we
might be so happy, out of the immense favor of God, as to approach near, to
magnify and pray to God, as that now through true Humility and perfect
reverence, proceeding out of the consideration of his supreme Majesty, we being
with God, might dwell in him, as in a most sacred Temple.

For then would we not perform our praises and prayers with a yawning and
heedles attentio^, our thoughts being then fixed upon other things; but with
all serious and recollected devotion we would exhibit grateful Praises to
God, and profitable Prayers for our selves and our Brethren. And then would be
accomplished and fulfilled that sentence: The Sacrifice of praise shall glorify
me; and there is the way, by which I will show him the salvation of God. Psalm.
49. For divine praises offered up as an Holocaust upon the Altar of the Heart,
and heated with the fire of Charity, do ascend up, in an odor of wonderful
sweetness, and do obtain, that a way may be opened to us, by the illustration
of the heart, to behold that true health or salvation, which God has prepared
for all that love him. All which benefitts those poor souls loose, who
perform their Prayers with a wandering of the mind, and a voluntary dryness of
the Heart. And thus do these men partake of the labor and pains with others,
who pray, and sing Lauds to God; but of the divine consolation, and taste
before hand of the Heavenly Beatitude, they partake not at all.

Of the meat and drink of the City of God. CHAP. VIII.
TOuching the Meat and drink of the celestial Inhabitants, we thus read in
the Apocalypse cap. 22. And he showed me a river of living water, clear as
crystal, proceeding from the seat of God, and of the Lamb. In the midst
of the street thereof, and of both sides of the river, the tree of life,
yielding twelve fruits, rendering his fruit every month, and the leaves of the
tree for the curing of the Gentiles. I partly fear that some who read this
passage, may wonder at the parcimony of the supernall Citizens, and may be
persuaded that better provision of meat may be had in this our peregrination:
for here in Heaven we hear nothing concerning meat, but of the fruit of one
tree; and concerning drink, but of the water of a river But let such Men (who
thus talk) call to mind, that in the terrestrial Paradise (where no doubt
there were better meats, the^ are in this our exile and banishment) Adam had
nothing else granted him, but fruits and herbs for his meat, and water for his
drink; and nevertheless those fruits, herbs, and water exceeded the most
delicious meats and wynes of this life, and yet were many degrees inferior to
the tree of life and living water of the Heavenly Paradise.

In this vale of misery, all Men are sick, and have their sense of Taste
corrupted, through a certain bitter sharpnes; therefore to take away all kind
of loathing, they have found out diverse sorts of meats; But yet this delicate
variety of meats so diminishes the loathing, as that it engenders many
diseases. In the earthly Paradise all men were sound and healthful; and the
salubrity and sweetness of those fruits, and of that water was of that virtue,
as that it could with incredible delectatio^, perfectly nourish them (without
any nauseous saciety) and conserve them in their health: We may add heerto,
that they had their meat and drink even abundantly, and this without any
labor or pain of the body taken therefore. But howsoever these matters were in
the earthly Paradise; doubtlesly the lively Water and the tree of life in the
City of God are not meat and drink common to Beasts with men (as the Waters
and fruits here in the vale of our peregrination are) but they are of such
worth, and in nature so divine, as that the Prophet not without cause thus
speaks: Psalm. 33. They shallbe inebriated with the plenty of thy house; and
with the torrent of thy pleasure thou shall make them drink; for these meats
and drink are not corporal, but spiritual and divine things. The Water of
life is VVisdome, which we thus read: Eccles. 15. She shall give him Water of
wholesome VVisdome to drink; And the tree of life is that bread, of which in
the same place we likewise read: She shall feed him with the bread of life, and
understanding. For as S. Austin teaches; in corporal nourishments one thing
is meat, and another thing drink; but in spiritual nourishments one and the
same thing is both meat and drink; to wit, VVisdome, Understanding, or
intelligence; since wisdom is meat, as it nourishes; it is also drink, as
it quenches thirst.

Notwithstanding what is here said, I grant also, that as by the water of
life; VVisdome may be signified so by the tree of life Chaeity; for thus we
find in S. John, He who loves not, remains in death, 1. Joan 3. And again;
We know, that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren And ceriainly as well to understand, as to love, are vital Actions.
Therefore it follows, that the drink in the City of God, is to drink of
that lively river, which streameth from the fountain of life, which is God; to
wit, to enjoy the participation of that wisdom, by the which God is wise; the
which wisdom is most high, and not to be expressed in words. And the meat of
those Saints, is to ear of the tree of life; that is, to enjoy the
participation of that ineffable Love, with the which Goodness it self (being
clearly seen) may be loved, and with the which God (who is infinitely good,
and the fountain of all goodness) does love himself. What these things are,
may after a sort, come within the compass of our conjecture but of our
Understanding they cannot, nor ever shall, until we arrive to that City it
self.

Now where S. John says, that the tree was upon either side of the river; and
that several months it yielded forth fruit; all this is to be understood
figuratively, that so by the similitude, or resemblance of corporal things, we
may better apprehend spiritual things. For the Blessed Evangelist his scope
was, to paint forth in words a tree of supreme goodness and fertility, the which
to perform, he describes a tree, which grows at the bank of a River, and
which through its own goodness, and through a continual irrigation, brings
forth fruit (not every year only, as other trees usually do, but) every
month. Neither does the Evangelist mean, that there is only one tree in the
Heavenly City, but many trees of the same kind, which grow upon both sides of
the river, running though the middst of the City; so as between one tree and
another, the distance was not great, but of that convenient space, as that the
whole City may enjoy both the benefit of the W^ter, and the fruit of the
tree. The goodness of the tree is intimated and signified, in being called The
tree of life. The fertility thereof is showed, in that it brings forth fruit
every moves. Thus it falls out, that the Inhabitants of that City have ever
new and ripe fruit* new (I mean) of the present month, and ripe of the month
next past; so as the fruit is never rotten, never dry, never unpleasing to the
taste. All which descriptions and circumstances do signify, and figure out the
meat and drink of the Blessed; to wit, Wisdom, by the which they perfectly
understand God, and Charity by the which they perfectly love God; And this
meat and drink of the Saints being of chiefest worth, are never wanting.

Now where the Evangelist speaks of the leaves of that tree conducing to the
health of Nations, he may be thought to signify thereby, that during our
banishment in this world, the fruits themselves of the tree of life are never
sent to us, but only certain leaves of that tree; the which although they do
not confer eternal life, nevertheless they are very medicinable to cure our
diseases, to wit, the Concupiscence of the flesh, Concupiscence of the eyes,
Pride of life, and other such maladies, of which all of us either in a high,
mean, or low degree, are sick. These Leaves are the divine word of God,
brought to us, by the Prophets and Apostles from Heaven, that is, by divine
Revelation. O how sweet an odor do these leaves breath forth to such, as have
the spirit of our Lord! Read the Prophets, read the Psalmist, read the
Gospe^ls, read the Apostles, Peter, Paul John, James, and Jude, all these
leaves do even breath forth Humility, the Charity of God, Virginity into the
Readers heart; of all which the Philosophers are wholly silent: but this we are
not to wounder at, seeing these leaves are the leaves of Paradise; those of the
Philosophers, the leaves of the Earth. Therefore (O Christian Soul) gather
these Leaves most diligently, and make to thy self of them a daily medicine;
and from the worth of these leaves, make a conjecture what the fruit is; and
loathing the draffe of swine, aspire with a breathles and incessant desire, to
this fruit of Eternal life which is above: of this meditate and let the
remembrance thereof be ever deeply fixed in thy mind.

Of the Mystical foundation of the City of God. CHAP. IX.
WE have already taken into our consideration the structure of the supernall
Jerusalem, we will now entreat of another structure thereof. For a City does
not only contain the fou^dations, the walls, the streets, but also the
multitude of the Citizens, who in regard of the diversity of their functions
and offices, are also said in a figurative sense, to be the Foundations, Ports,
or Walls, and the like. And perhaps the gathering, and living together under
the same Laws, is more properly called a City, then a continuation of a
multitude of houses under the same walls; for thus does Tully (in somni^
Scipionis) speak hereof: Concilia coetusque hominum etc. The familiarityes,
and companies of men, linked together within one Law, are called Cities. Of
this celestial City, which consists of Citizens, not only S. John, but also
S. Peter, and S. Paul do speak. In the Apocalypse cap. 21. we read: that in the
twelve gates, were seen twelve Angels, and the inscription of their Names were
the twelve Tribes of the children of Israel; and in the foundations were
written twelve names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.

In S. Peter we thus read: Unto whom approaching, a living stone, of men
indeed reprobated, but of God elect and made honorable, 1. Pet. 2. And you as
living stones, be you made etc. To come to S. Paul: he thus writes Ephesians. 1.
Now therefore you are not strangers, and forreners, but are Citizens of the
Saints, and the domestiks of God, built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the highest Cornerstone. Therefore from
all this we gather, that the City of God has for foundation or ground work*
the Apostles and Prophets; for the doctrine of the Apostles and the Prophets
does support the whole fabric thereof. For faith is the beginning of
sa^uation. Now faith is ^e^^aled by the Apostl^s and Prophets, either by
writing, or preaching the mysteries of the Trinity, the In^arna^ion, the
Resurrection of the dead, the glory of the Saints, Eternal punishments, and
other poin^s transcending humane reason; all which we have learned from the
Prophets and Apostles, to whom God has vouchsafed to reveal these Mysteries.
For although Faith has no place in the blessed Souls, because that which they
did believe, they ^ow see (bu^ what is seen is not believed, but known;)
notwithstanding the Prophets and Apostles are said to be the foundation of the
supernall City, because Faith is the beginning of salua^ion, and therefore the
beginning of Beatitude.

But because S. Peter teaches 1. Pet. 2. That we (as living stones) are ^uilt
upon Christ: And S. Paul 1. Cor. ^. says: Other foundation no man can ^y
besides that which is laid, which ^ Christ Jesus: Therefore there is one
^oundation, and there are also twelve ^oundations, as S. Austin (in explic. Ps.
^6.) teaches, because in the twelve Apostles Christ was: for he, or his Spirit
did speak and teach by the^. Hear the Apostle himself, 2. Cor. 13. Do you
seek an experiment of him, that speaks in me, Christ? Hear Christ himself
saying; Who so hears you, hears me. And in another place: It is not you
that speak, but it is the spirit of your Father, that speaks in you. And it
is not to be doubted, but that one and the same spirit is of the Holy Ghost, of
the Father, and of the Son. From whence we may further learn, that by the
twelve foundations, not only the twelve Apostles are understood, but also all
those, who first preached the same faith with them; since otherwise S. Paul
himself, Barnabas, and the seauenty disciples (all who were not of the number
of the foresaid twelve disciples) should not hau^ belonged to these
foundations; ye^ neither the Prophets themselves should appertain thereto; And
thus (which God forbid) we should make the Apostle liar, who said, that we ar^
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.

But here occurreth no small doub^ to wit. How Christ can truly be calle^ the
foundotion of this Edifice or building, since he is the chief Cornerstone
thereof, as the Apostle speaks, and is exalted above the head of the Angle,
or Corner, as the Prophet affirms. For how can the same stone be in the
highest and lowest place? be in the foundation, and in topp of the building?
But he that shall call to mind, that these words are used in a Metaphorical
sense, will easily conceive, how by reason of diverse functions or offices,
contrary words may be applied to one and the same person. For not only Christ,
who is both God and Man, but every Prelate in his own Church, is both the
foundation, and height; because as he is the foundation, he ought to sustain
the burden or weight of the Edifice; to tolerate the infirmities of all; and in
this respect to be under all; And yet the same Prelate, as being the Summity,
or height of the building, ought to be above all, to command all: and to be
obeyed by All Therefore with much more reason, may Christ, as the foundation of
the Church, be of Power to bear all up, through his authority and virtue: And
withal, as he is placed in the head of the angle, may co^ioyne two Wall^
together, and constitute one People of the Gentiles and the Jews; and so
preside over All, and command over All.

Of the mystical Port, or Gate of the City of God. CHAP. X.
IT now follows, that we consider the ports or gates of this Celestial
Jerusalem. The common exposition of Interpreters, is, that by the Ports are
understood the Apostles; which expositours do herein follow the judgment of
S. Austin, in exposit. Psalm. 86. But the Evangelist, Apoc. 21. speaking of the
Gates, makes mention of twelve Angels, and twelve Tribes of the Children of
Israel, whose names (he said) were written in the twelve gates of the City of
God; but of the twelve Apostles he there speaks not at all, Yet from hence it
follows not, that the sentence of S. Austin, (and of others following him) is
false; since S. John speaks mystically, and not as the Words do sound, and
there speaks as a Prophet, not as an Historian; and all that description of
his is even most redundant of mystical significations.

The Land of Promise was (by the joint consent of all) a figure of this
Heavenly City. Abraham was the first to whom Promise of that Land was made,
for thus does God speak to Abraham: Genesis 13. All the Land which thou see,
will I give to thee, and to thy seed for ever. And the Apostle conspir^ngly
says the like: Gal. 3. To Abraham, and his seed the Promises were made; And a
little after: God gave is to Abraham by Promise, Isaac was the sole heir to
Abraham, Ismael (who was the Son of a handmaid) being excluded, the Scripture
thus speaking thereof: The Son of the Handmaid shall not be heir, with the
Son of a Freewoman The Son of Isaac, was only Jacob, Esau being excluded,
who sold his birth-^ight; Of whom the Prophet Malachy thus speaks: I loved
Jacob, and hated Esau. Which sentence the Apostle speaks to the Romans cap.
9. The Heirs of Jacob, were all his Sons, which were twelve, not any of them
being disinherited; And thus the Land of Promise was divided among the twelve
Tribes of Israel, as appears out of the Book of Iosue.

Now this therefore is the cause, why S. John in the Apocalypse said, that the
names of the twelve Tribes of Israel were written upon the twelve Gates, to
wit, because the Port or Gate of entering into the Land of Promise, was that
Heredita^y right, which belonged to all, and only the Sons of Israel. But as
I noted a little above, the Apostle S. John speaks mystically; and by the
twelve Tribes of Israel, are understood true Israelits, not according to the
flesh, but according to the Spirit, and Faith; and consequently the twelve
Apostles, and their spiritual Children are understood thereby. For as S. Paul
expressly teaches: Romans 9. Not all that are of Israel, be Israelites: Nor they,
which be the seed of Abraham, all be children. Which Apostle ^ little after
compares Israel to a Tree, of which many boughs are broken through
incredulity; and others inserted and implanted through faith. In this sense the
Gentills, being converted to the faith, did begin to become the children of
^srael; and many of the Jews did cease to be true Israelits.

Saint Austin d^monstrateth and expli^ateth all th^se points very ^argely, thus
writing: Ep ad As^l. Are not these great wounders, and a deep mystery, that
many not borne of Israel, should be Israel, and man^ should not be the
Children, who are the seed of Abraham? But how comes it to pass^, that they
are not? and how comes is to pass, that the other ^re? I will show, Those
are not the Sonne^ of the Promi^e* who do not belong to the grace of Christ,
but are the Sons according to the fles^* so enjoying an empty name or title;
and th^^^fore they ^re not Israel, as we are. Neither are we Israel, as they
are; for we are Israel ac^ording to spiritual regeneration; the^ are Israel,
in respect of carnal generation. And a little after the said S Austin thus
further enlarges himself, saying; Even among the Nephews of Abraham, the
Sons of Isaac, those two brethren (I mean) Esau, and Jacob who after was
called Israel, this great and deep mystery takes place; of which point the
Apostle speaks, when by Isaac he makes mention of the children of the
Promise, belonging to the grace of Christ. Certainly this Apostolical and
Catholik^ doctrine evidently shows, that according to the origin of the
flesh, the Jews did belong to Sara, the Ismaelits to Agar; But according to
the mystery of the Spirit, the Christians did appertain to Sara, and the Jews
to Agar. In like sort, according to the origin of the flesh, to Esau (who is
also called Edom) the offspring of the Idumeans belongs; and to Jacob (who was
also called Israel) the Progeny of the Jews appertains. Lastly according to
the mystery of the Spirit, the Jews belong to Esau, and to Israel the
Christians.

Thus far S. Austin; Who fully instructs us, that Christians are true
Israelits, not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit, and
consequently are the true Heirs of the Land of Promise, which is in Heaven,
And thus it appears, that the Gates of heavenly Jerusalem have the Names of
the twelve Tribes of Israel written upon them: because the Port or Gate by the
which entrance is made into that Heavenly Land of Promise, is the right, or
title of the inheritance of the Sons of God; who alone are true and sincere
Christians, being the Sons of the Holy Apostles, which are understood by the
name of Israelits, that is, by the Sons of Jacob the Patriarch. Now where S.
John adds, that in those gates were twelve Angels; this signifies, that the
Angels are the keepers or warders of the gates; their office being to take
care, that not any do enter therein, who have not right of Inheritance: And
perhaps for this reason, S. Michael (the Archangell) is pictured with a pair
of balance or weights in his hand, in that by the Ministry of the Angels,
subject unto him, he does examine and weigh the meritts of those, who do seek
to aspire to this Heavenly City. Thus much touching the Gates.

Of the Mystical stones of the City of God. CHAP. XII.
THE rest of the Edifice consists of stones, which are all the faithful,
that are built upon the foundation, as the Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul have
perspicuously expounded. Now since this part of the building extends it self
to all men, I hold it a thing conu^nient, to consider the conditions and
qualities, which are r^quisite for all those, who covet to be ^u^^t upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, under the supr^me Corner stone, Jesus
Christ; so as they may not only be in the City of God, but themselves may be
that high, and most happy City of God

Three things concur to the end: man may be built upon so noble and worthy a
foundation. First, that he be a stone; Secondly, that he be a living ston^;
lastly, that this stone be curiously polished, and squared. First then we ought
to be stones, not Wood, not Hay, not straw, that so we may make a solid and
firm Wall; that is, we ought to be grave and stab^e Men, perseuering in Faith,
in Charity, in Humility, in obedience of the Commandments, and not suffer our
selfs to be carried away and blown to and fro with every wind of doctrine, as
Heretics are accu^tomed to be; neither violently to be possessed with several
desires and Passions as some light and unsteady Catholics are wont to be. For
not any of these Men are admitted by the builders of the eternal City, but
only serve to make poor and weak cottages, which are after presently
overthrown and ruins. We ought also to be living stones, as S. Peter
admonishes, that is, to be full of Charity, of the Spirit of life, as the
Corner stone Christ is; who though he once dyed in flesh, yet he ever lived in
Spirit, and according to the flesh did revive, after he had tasted death, and
is never after more to dye. Dead stones do buyld and make dead howses, I mean
corporal howses; whereas the spiritual house or rather the City of the great
King (wh ch is both spiritual and Heavenly) requires spiritual stones, and
in this respect lively stones.

To conclude, it is necessary, that we be stones artificially wrought and
squared; not stones unpolished, and without form, because such building is
best sorting to the most noble City of all Cities. So we read, in Judith 1.
that Arphaxad (the King) did build the City Echatanis, of squared and cut
stones. And if King Solomon built the Temple of our Lord here upon earth, of
polished, carved, and curious stones; what stones then ought to be used for the
building of that Eternal City, which infinitely is exalted above all other
Cities? But this squaring and working is to be performed in this life and not
in Heaven; The figure, or Type whereof, was the building of the Temple of
Solomon; for thus we read in the third of the Kings cap. 6. When the House was
building, neither hammer, nor hatchet, nor any tool of Iron was heard in the
House. Because the stones were hewed, cut, and so perfectly and euenly squared
far from the house of the Lord, as that when they were brought to the Temple,
they were put in their place, without any noise, or sound of the Hammer.
Therefore we gather from hence, that no sound or blow of the striking Hammer
shall be heard in the Celestial Ierusalees; for there shall be no persecution, no
tribulation, no pen^tentiall labor, no complaining, no dolor, no heaviness;
And therefore the stones designed to the glory of this Heavenly house, ought in
this vale of misery and tears to be polished with strokes and pressures; for
thus the Church sings.

Tunsionibus, pressuris
Expoliti lapides,
Suis cooptantur locis
Per manus artificis,
Disponuntur permansuri
Sacris edificijs.
That is, The stones being polished with knockings and pressures, are made apt
for their places by the hands of the VVorkeman; And so they are disposed for
ever to remain in the sacred buildings.

Thus here in this world the burden of penance is necessarily to be undergone,
since we all offend in many things, as S. James affirms cap. 3. Here our
carnal concupiscences are to be tamed; Here our proper Wills are to be
overcome; Here our Body is to brought into servitude; Here the buckler of
faith through an indefatigable labor is to be interposed against the fyery
darts of unclean Spirits: Since otherwise if we cannot endure the stroke of
the Hammer, how can we then expect to be admitted by the Heavenly Architect,
unto the structure of the Celestial House? O! that Men would understood and
conceive, of how great a good they deprive themselves, whiles they do avoid and
decline the Hammer of persecution, and cannot (at least will not) suffer any
incommodity or loss, any asperity, any thing bitter and adverse unto them;
they would then, doubtlesly change their courses; they would ruin banquettings
and good fellowship into fasting; delicate and costly apparel into
hayre-shirts; and idle discourses and unnecessary words into watching, and
prayer. And if they suffered any injustice or wrong at the hands of false
Brethren, or open and professed enemies, they would not (in requital) meditate
upon revenge; but they would give thanks to God, and pray even from their heart
for their Calumniatours and Persecutours, because The sufferings of these times
are not co^digne to the glory to come, that shall be revealed to us. Romans 8. And
in that; Our Tribulation, which is now momentary and light, works above
measure exceedingly an eternal weight of glory in us. 2. Cor. 4.

And certainly if we cast our eye back upon those living stones, who are gone
before us toward the structure of this Heavenly edifice, we shall behold each
one of them to have b^n hewed with knockings or strokes, and polished with
several pressures. Christ himself (the most precious Cornerstone, who did not
stand in need of any hammering or working upon) did so suffer for us, as that
by such a sufferance he did leave to us an Example, who, when he was reviled,
did not reuyle, and when he suffered* he threatened not 1. Pet. 2. In like sort,
all the Apostles could say with S. Paul: until this hour we do both hunger
and thirst, and are naked; and are beaten with buffets, and are wanderers, and
labor working with our Hands; we are cursed, and do bless; we are persecuted,
and sustain it: we are blasphemed, and we do beseech; we are made the outcast
of this World, the dross of all. 1. Cor. 4. What may we relate of the
Martyrs; did not they all, being cut and wrought by many tribulations,
calamities, and most bitter deaths, ascend to the edifice of the Heavenly
Jerusalem? I pass over the Holy Confessors, Anchorets, Virgins, Widows, and
all others, grateful to God; who had not been admitted to this Celestial
building, if they had not crucified their flesh with their vices, and had not
proclaimed open war and hostility even against themselves.

Neither this refining and polishing of the lively stones was necessary only
after the coming of Christ; but it was practiced even from the beginning of
the world. The first living stone was Abel, who was cruelly slain by his own
brother Cain. The holy Patriarch Joseph was sold by his Brethren, Tobias
received these words from the Angel: Because thou wast acceptable to God, it
was necessary, that temptation should prove thee. Tob. 12. The Angel said not;
because thou were a sinner, and hatefu^l to God, it was needful that thou
should be punished with blindness and poverty; But the Angel said: Because
thou art grateful to God, as being a just and holy man, therefore as a living
stone, designed to the celestial edifice, it was necessary, that thou should
suffer the hammer of Persecution. Which of the Prophets escaped Persecution and
Injuries coming from the wicked? What torments did not the blessed children of
the Machabees endure? But let us hear the Apostle (touching this point)
preaching of the Saints of the Old Testament: They had trial of mockery and
stripes, and also of bands and prisons: They were stoned, they were hewed, they
were tempted; they died in the slaughter of the sword: They went abroad in
Sheepskins, in Goate-skins, needy, in distres, afflicted, of whom the world
was not worthy; wandering in deserts, in mountains, and dens, and in the
Caves of the earth. Heb. 11.

And now, o Christian Soul, what can thou reply hereto? If the hammer of the
builder did not spare those Men, of whom the world through their eminent
sanctity, was not worthy, that thereby they might be squared, labored, and
made fit for the celestial Edifice: what then shall become of thee, and such
as are like to thee; to whom sin is pleasing and grateful, but all penance
and satisfaction for sin, most grievous and ungrateful? One of these two
fortunes perforce thou must undergo, to wit, either thou must be hammered in
this life, or in Purgatory; or else thou shall not have any place in that
sublime building, but in lieu thereof the hammer of Hell, for all eternity
shall be striking upon thee Why then (O poor Soul) will thou not rather suffer
to be wrought fair and polished in this life, through a short and slight
tribulation, then in the next life to be reprobated, and cast into that place,
where thou must suffer an everlasting and intolerable pressure, and bruising
of the hammer?

Neither ought thou to slight or little regard the Purgatory-refyning and
hammering in the life to come, since that punishment (though not eternal) is
most grievous and oftentimes of longer continuance then any Pain of this life.
Hear S. Austin in Psalm 37. discoursing of this point. Dicitur, suluus eris,
sic tamen quasi per ignem etc. It is said. Thou shall be saved, as it were by
fyar: And because it is said, thou shall be saved, therefore this fyar is
contemned; and yet is more insupportable, then any thing which man can suffer
in this life. Thus this holy Father, who further adds, that the pains of
Purgatory do exceed all punishments inflicted upon Thieves and other
malefactors, as also all the torments of the Martyrs; Therefore such men are
even fools, and deprived of all true Judgment, who contemn the fire of
Purgatory, and do abhor all tribulations of this present life.

But observe how other fathers conspire with S Austin herein. S Bernard thus
writes: Know you this that such sins which are in this life neglected, shall
be punished a hundred times more in the purging places, even till the very last
farthing be paid. sermon. de obitu Humberti Monachi. To conclude, S. Anselm in
these words agrees with the former father: Sciendum est, quia grauior est ille
ignis etc. We are to know that this fire is more insufferable, then any thing,
which man can endure in this life. For all the torments here upon Earth, are
more sufferable and easy: And yet men for the avoiding of those pains here,
will perform any labor whatsoever imposed upon them. How much better then is
it and more profitable to do those things, which God comma^ds us, that thereby
we may not suffer those other pains, far more horrible and grievous? Ansel.
in explicat cap. 3. ad Cor. 1.

Of flying from the City of the World. CHAP. XII.
NOw having explicated the structure and building of the City of God; it
remains that we briefly show, what is chiefly requisite, that men may be
ascribed, and admitted Citizens into this most happy City. This may be
declared even in one word; to wit, that we do renounce and disclaim from the
City of this World, and that in the mean time we live here, as strangers or
pilgrims, for it is impossible for us, to be both Citizens of this world, and
Citizens in the Heavenly City. And a man no sooner gives (by disclayming from
it) his last farewell to this World, but that he is instantly admitted into the
bosom of the City of God. But let us stir more fully the earth, or mould,
about the root of this point.

Well then, there are two Cities set down and declared to us in the Holy
Scripturs; The Earthly City, which began in Cain, who first upon earth builded
a City, as we read in the book of Genesis cap. 4. And the Celestial City,
taking its beginning in Abel; of which City not Abel, but God was the Builder
and Workman, as above we have showed out of the Apostle, Heb. 11. Babylon the
Great (which signifies the Confusion) was a figure of that City of the world:
And Jerusalem (which is called, Vifio Pacis) was the type of this Heavenly
City, which is the City of the supreme King. The Citizens of the earthly
City are those, who not only in body, but in soul do inhabit the earth; who
even adore the earth; who gape after earthly pleasures and profitts; who
tumultuously fight and strive for them; finally who are wholly drowned in the
pursuit thereof.

The Prince of this City is the Devil, who being cast out of the Celestial
City, first possessed the Tyranny of the earthly City: for though our Lord,
approaching were unto his Passion said, Joan. 12. Now is the judgment of the
world; Now the Prince of this world shall be cast forth; and accordingly our
Lord did truly drive him forth with the staff of his Cross; and through the
said Cross did triumph over him, according to those words of the Apostle
Coloss. 2. Spoiling the Principalities and Potentates, have led them
confidently in open show, triumphing over them in himself; notwithstanding
this is not so to be understood, as if the Devil were wholly cast out of this
world, or had lost all Principality thereof; but that he is ca^t out from all
those, and among all such has lost his dominion and Empire, as have ranged
themselves under Christ; and who flying out of the terrene City, are designed
to the Heavenly

That the Devil exercises his rule and government yet in this City of the
world, the Apostle teaches, when he says: Our wrestling is not against flesh
and blood, but against Princes and Potentates, against the rulers of the world
of this darkness: Ephesians. 4. Therefore as yet Satan with his ministers has h
s rule and government in this world, and is Prince thereof, I mean, of worldly
men, and Citizens of the earthly City; of which world S. John says cap. 5.
The whole world is set in wickedness. As if he would had said: The world
adhereth to its head, who is called malign, or wicked transcendently; or, the
world is under the government and power of the wicked Devil.

But to proceed further. The Citizens of this Heavenly City, are those, who
being already blessed, do reign in the Kingdom of Heaven; as also all those,
who remaining yet in mortal body, do inhabitate the Earth; yet this not in
Heart, but only in Body; since in heart and soul their Conversation is in
Heaven, and they covet to be dissolved, and with Christ, who is the King of the
Celestial City. But now because the celestial Citizens are promiscuously
mixed with the earthly Citizens, therefore the holy Scriptures say (for greater
distinction) That the Citizens of Heaven are in the World, but not of the
World; And that they are in the World, not as Citizens thereof, but as
strangers and Pilgrims, for S. Peter speaks: I beseech you, as Strangers and
Pilgrims, to refrain from carnal desires: 1. Pet. 2. But of the Citizens of
the earth the Scripture changes its style, and thus speaks of them: They are
strangers of the Testament, having no Hope of the Promise, and without God in
this world, Ephesians. 2. Now these things being thus, Let no man deceive himself,
nor dream, that he can be a Citizen of the world, and withal a Citizen of
Heaven. The Citizens of the World, are of the World; The Citizens of Heaven,
are not of the World. To be of the world, and not to be of the world, are
contradictory, and incompatible together; and therefore cannot brook any
conuinction; In regard whereof let those men then, (to whom the world and
earthly matters are grateful) not persuade themselves, that they can have any
place in the Heavenly City, except they first go out, and (as it were) wholly
forsake the world, voyding their judgments and wills of all earthly Pleasures,
and Benefitts.

But because these Points are high mysteries, and are understood by few, at
least not thought and meditated on as they ought to be; therefore to the end,
that no man at the last day may pretend ignorance, there is not any thing,
which the Apostles and Evangelists do more often inculcate and repeat, then
this one point; Hear our Lord: Joan. 8. You are of this world, I am not of
this world. Again, he thus speaks to the Apostles: If you had been of the
world, the world would love its own; but because, you are not of the world,
therefore the world hates you. Hear S. Paul 2. Cor. 3. The wisdom of this
world, is foolishness with God. And again: You ought to have gone out of this
world. And yet more; That we may not be damned with this world. Hear S. James:
cap. 4. Know you not, that the friendship of this world, is the enemy of God?
Whosoever therefore will be a friend of this world, is made an enemy of God.
Hear S. Peter: Fly the corruption of the concupiscence which is in the world.
2. Pet. 1. Hear S. John: Do not you love the world, or those things in the
world: 1. Joan 2. And again: If any man love the world, the charity of the
Father is not in him; And yet more cap. 5. The whole world is set in wickedness.
To conclude hear our Lord himself, speaking in prayer to his Father: Joan 17.
For them do I pray, not for the world do I pray, but for them, whom thou have
given me. And the world does hate them, because they are not of the world, as
also I am not of the world.

Now from hence we may gather most evidently, that the world is so (as it were)
excommunicated and cursed by God, as that Christ thinks it not convenient to
pray for it. Yet may it be here objected, that if Christ does not pray for the
world, how is it said: Joan. 3. God so loved the world, as that he gave his
only begotten Son? what, does the Father love the world, and the Son hate
the World? Or how does the Son exclude the world from his prayer, which the
Father does not exclude from his love? S. Austin expounding this later place,
says, that the world for whom Christ denied to pray, signifies only the
wicked; according to which acceptance, the Apostle says, so that w^ may not be
damned with this world: 1. Cor. 11. But we may here furthe^ say, Christ did not
pray for the world because such things, as he then praye^ for his Apostles, did
not in any so^ agree to the world. For he prayed for the gift of Perseverance;
Keep the^ (says our Savior, Joan. 17.) in m^ Name; And withal he (...),
that they might obtain eternity of glory, saying: I will (Father) that where I
am, they may be also with me, that they may see my glory. But these things are
not agreeable to the world for neither is the world (except it be before
cleansed of its filth and ordure) apt for the Kingdom of H^auen even as it is
not fitting, for a man that is bemy^ed with dirt in riding, to enter into the
bedchamber of a K ng. God does truly love the world, and for it gave his only
Son, thereby to cleanse and purge the world, tha^ it may be fit for his
Kingdom; And so Christ prayed for his Crucifiers, not, that they should
persevere in that state, in which they then were; bu^ that his Father might
pardon them, and in p rdoning of them, might cause them to leave, and go out
of the world. An^ therefore though Christ did say, I do not pray for the world;
yet he adioyne a little after these words: That (...) world may believe, that
thou have (...) me. Thus the closure of all (...) Christ prayed for his own
Discip^^ not for the world; because exce^^ man do first go out of the world,
before he go out of his Body, he can never arrive to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Whosoever therefore does thirst after that supreme and high City, let him
hasten to go out of the world, for fear least his last day may suddenly and
unexpectedly surprise him, and take him out of this life, when he shall be
deprived of all hope of his conversion. But if he be once happily gotten out of
the world, then let him forsake the same with all its concupiscences, that he
may daily meditate only of the City of our Lord, and that he may even protest
with the Holy Prophet: If I shall forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right Hand
be forgotten; let my tongue cleave to my mouth, if I do not remember thee, if I
shall not set Jerusalem in the beginning of my joy. Psalm. 136. For this is the
true Character, or Note of the Citizens of the Eternal City; to wit, to be
more desirous to want both tongue and hands, then to speak, or attempt any
thing against the love of God their Father, and their Celestial Country; that
so the beginning of their joy, may be the City it self, which replenisheth
its Citizens with such beatitude, as that no worldly felicity can delight
them; and thus the only remembrance and expectation of future joys, is
sufficient in this their banishment to comfort them.

I hold it convenient, to close up this Book with the words of S. Austin, that
such, who will not perhapps believe me, may not doubt to give credit unto so
great and worthy a man. This Father in these following words does express,
which is the true note of the inhabitants of the City of the world, and of the
City of God; Thus he then writes: Omnes qui terrena sapiunt etc* All those,
who are wholly immersed in earthly affairs; All, who do prefer a temporary
felicity before God; All, who seek after their own things, not after those of
Jesus Christ, do belong unto that one City, which mystically is called
Babylon, and which has the Devil for their King. But all such others, who
bend their labors to things, which are supernall and above; who are even
absorpt in the meditation of Celestial matters; who live in this world with
all solicitude and care, that they do not offend God, or sin; who sinning,
are not ash^med to confess their offenses; finally who are humble, meek,
holy, just, pious, good: All such (I say) belong to that one City, which has
Christ for its King. Thus fa^re Saint Austin, in explicat. Psalm 61.

OF THE ETERNAL FELICITY OF THE SAINTS, Under the Title of the House of God.
THE THIRD BOOK.
That all the Blessed are the Domestics, and Sons of God. CHAP. I.
I Rejoiced in these things, which were said to we: We shall go into the House
of our Lord says the Royal Prophet, Psalm. 121. Certainly it is a great and
ineffable cause of rejoicing for a good and faithful servant after he has
painefully labored in the Vineyard, or has multiplied his Talents, through
negotiation and traffic, or (as first) has gained the Prize in the race; or
has deserved the Crown in war and spiritual fight; or has diligently fed
the sheep committed to his charge, courageously and valiantly defending them
from wolves; for then such a man, after the accomplishment of all these his
labors, does with all alacrity and cheerfulnes enter into the House of his
Lord. But let is first consider, why that is called a House, which a little
before was called a City. Truly we cannot think, that the cause of this
appellation is, that this House is strait, or narrow, and therefore does
deserve the name of a City; since indeed it is of that largenes, as that in
greatness, it gives not place to any City, or Kingdom. Give ear to what the
Prophet Baruch. cap. 3. (by way of acclamaaion) speaks hereof: O Israel, how
great is the House of God, and how great is the place of his Possession! It is
great, and has no end. Why then may not so great a House justly be called a
City.

The first reason heerof then is, because the blessed, though they be spread
throughout the Kingdom of Heaven, are the domestics and familiars of our
Lord. For perhaps a man might imagine, that if mention were made only of a
Kingdom, or of a City, that many might be in the Kingdom of Heaven, and in
the City of God, who did never see God, nor were ever admitted to speak or
have any intercourse with God but only by the mediation of other greater
Saints. But because the matter stands far otherwise; and that all the
Sa^nts do ever see God do co^uerse with him, and do speak to him face to face;
whether they be the supreme Seraphims and Cherubims, Patriarchs, Apostles,
Prophets, inferior Angels, and the lowest Saints. For even of our Angels
Gardians, who belong to the least degree of Angels, our Lord thus says:
Matthew. 18. Their Angels in Heaven always do see the face of my Father, which
is Heaven. And the Apostle writing to the Ephesians cap. 4. auerreth, that all
the Saints are not only the Citizens of God, but even the domestic friends of
God. Therefore from hence I infer that the habitation of the Saints is not
only called a City, but also a House. There are doubtlesly diverse Ma^sions in
Heaven; to wit greater, and lesser; there are also several Crowns, some more
illustrious, others not so illustrious, according to the disparity and
inequality of merits; nevertheless all those Citizens are blessed and happy,
and are clean in heart, and replenished with Charity. We may then from hence
conclude, that there is no Saint, who is not in that ce^estiall house, and who
sees not God, and conuerseth not with him, as a domestical and familiar
friend; howsoever contrary heerto in other Kingdoms and Cities, there are
many, who never see the King, and most few they are, to whom he vouchsafes any
speech, or familiarity,

Another reason, why the City of God is called a House, may seem to be, in
that in a City many do see the King, and do speak to him; yet all those are
not the Domestics, Sons and heirs of the King; but only those, who dwelling
in the Kings Palace, are acknowledged by the King, for such. But now in the
Kingdom of Heaven and in the City of God, all the Saints, whether o^ higher
or low degree, are truly the Domestickes of God, and Brethren of Christ; and by
reason heerof they are linked together in the strait conjunction of fraternity
or brotherhood; so as the Superiors among them do not contemn their
inferiors, neither with them is any contention or malignity. For when our Lord
did teach the Pater noster, that chief Prayer, which is daily to be recited;
he in these words excluded not any man; and when at the day of Judgment he
shall say: Come you Blessed of my Father, possess you the Kingdom, prepared
for you from the foundation the World. Matthew. 25. he shall not except any out
of this most confortable inuitation. And when the Apostle said to the Romans,
cap. 8. whosoever are governed with the spirit of God, those are the Sons of
God; and if Sons, Heirs also; Heirs truly of God; and Coheires of Christ:
He in these words shuts out no man, whether great or little, so that he
enjoys the Spirit of God, and will suffer himself to be sterned and guided
therewith. Which one Point is doubtlesly common to all the regenerate in
Christ, perseuering in Faith, Hope, Charity. In like sort S. Peter, 1. Pet. 1.
promises to all the regenerate, an incorruptible inheritance, incontaminate,
and not decaying, being reserved in Heaven. To conclude S. John without any
exception thus preaches to all the just: See (I pray) what manner of Charity
the Father has given us, that we should be named, and be the Sons of God. 1.
Joan 3.

From all this then we gather that the Place of habitation of the Saints is a
House, and not only a City or Kingdom; in which house all are Domestickes,
Sons and heirs of the great King, and all of them are beloved of God, as
Sons, and of Christ as brethren; and that they may by good right say with the
Prophet: Psalm. 132. O how good and pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to
dwell in one? For what greater consolation and comfort can be imagined to a
man, then to converse with innumerable Angels, with men of all degrees, either
superior, equal, and inferior to him, and he to be beloved of them all with
most sincere affection, as a brother, to be used as a brother, and embraced and
entertained as a brother?

Of the greatness, and Beauty of the House of God. CHAP. II.
ANother reason, for which the Habitations of the Saints is called a House, may
be taken from that, Houses (especially the houses of Kings) have many ornaments
in their Hals, in their Bedcha^bers, in other withdrawing rooms, which the
rest of the City does want. For who can recou^t the Arras, Tapestry, precious
vestme^ts, plate of Gold and Silver, with the which the Palaces of Kings do
glitter and shine? Neither are these interior ornaments only of great worth
and price; but also the external and outward building it self is accustomed
to be most admirable for the goodly marble, stately Pillars, gilded Porches,
hanging gardens, and such other delicacies, which is over long to relate,

Solomon King of Jerusalem, after he had built a Temple to our Lord, with such
cost and charges, as was fitting, did make a Palace for himself with such
profuse cost, as that he spent thirteen years in the building of it; although
he had many Masters and Overseers of the whole Fabric, and had (at hand,
with small labor) great store of precious and curious marble, and other
stones, and abundance of Cedar-trees. And not with less charge and
magnificence did he erect a Palace for his wife, being the daughter of the
King of Egypt, so sumptuous, as it seemed incredible. Therefore when the Sacred
Scripture calls that Habitation, the House of God, which in other passages
thereof, it calls the City of God, and the Kingdom of Heaven, it seems to
insinuate, that all that City, and Kingdom is as resplendent and glorious, as
any Regal house or Palace. For as we have learned above, out of the Prophet
Baruch; the House of God, is of that largeness and extension, as that it is
able to comprepend and contain the whole Kingdom of Heaven.

It seemed (a little above) a thing worthy of admiration, if any whole Kingdom
should appear to be of that splendor and fayrenesse, with which its chief
City is adorned: Who then will not rest astonished, ^^en he shall think, that
the whole Kingdom of Heaven is styled the House of God, in that, it is all
stately, all fair, all precious, as beseems the House of God to be?
Therefore with good reason did the Prophet David burst forth into those words:
Psalm, 83. My soul even coueteth, and faints unto the Courts of our Lord. For
who does not thirstingly desire to see and possess a most noble Kingly house,
which in its spacious greatness may equal any Kingdom? As on the contrary,
to see and enjoy a most ample and large Kingdom, which for ornaments,
splendor, and magnificence may contend and compare with any Princely house or
Palace? Neither would our soul only desire the fruition of such a House and
such a Kingdom, if attentively it did think thereof, and confidently believe
the same; but it would be wholly absorpt, and even faint, and transgress its
own limits through the incredible beauty, and worth of so great a matter.

But (alas) we, who lie upon the ground, and are become thrall to temporalities
and earthly things, and do admire so much what we here see, do little busy
our thoughts with invisible matters; we bearing our selves herein, like to
little children, who never going out of their Fathers house, do so love that
poor Cottage, as that they never once think of the Palaces of Kings. In like
sort, we imitate herein the Countrey-pesants, who never saw any City, but are
busied in tilling their ground, and in repayring their poor wodden, and clayie
house; never thinking on Palaces, Towers, Theaters, Honors, dignities,
increasing of silver, chargeable banquets, and the like. And perhapps these
Rusticks and Children are more happy, then many rich Citizens, and great
Princes; because those things which are in this world much prized and highly
esteemed, are commonly attended on with more anxiety, care, and danger, then
with solid profit and dignity. But the goods, which are in that Heavenly house
of our Father, are inestimable; neither are they accompanied with any
solicitude, discontent, or peril; but are exempted from all grief and
molestation; and this, not for any short time, but for all Eternity.

Therefore S. Paul, who was neither a Ch ld, nor a Rusticke, and who well knew
the goods and commodities of this world; for he was a man most learned, and
conuersed with most wise men; He also had been in the House of God, and had
perused and viewed the Heavenly City, as being rapt into the third Heaven, does
thus speak of himself: 2. Cor. 4. We not considering the things which are
seen, but which are not seen; for the things that are seen, are temporal;
but the things that be not seen, are eternal.

And again: Phil. 3. Our conversation is in Heaven And according hereto he
exhorts us all: Colloss. 3. To seek the things, which are above; where
Christ is sitting on the right hand of God. And to mind the things which are
above, not the things which are upon the Earth.

Of the Dyning Chamber of the House of God. CHAP. III.
ANother reason, why that, which is call ed a City, and a Kingdom, is also
called the House of God, may be taken from those words of our Lord, Joan. 14.
In my Fathers House there be many mansions: Thus we see, that in Houses, there
be Chambers or Partours to dine and sup in; Chambers also for men to take their
repose and sleep; Halles, and other spacious rooms for the exercise of
several Actions, which out of the House are not accustomed to be done. But to
begin with the Great Chamber (as I may say) or place of Refection: Certainly
there is a place in the House of our Lord, in which all the Saints are not only
fed with Princely viands, but (which is wonderful, and scarcely credible, were
it not that the Holy Ghost teaches us so much) where the King himself shall be
girded and prepared to minister and serve the Table. For thus does our Lord
himself speak: Luc. 12. Blessed are those servants, whom when our Lord
comes, he shall find watching: Verily I say unto you, that he will gird
himself, and make them sit down* and will come forth, and minister unto them.
What kind of ba^quetting House is this? Who ever heard of the like? The Lord
stands, the servant sits down; the Lord is girded, that without any
hinderance or let, he may wait; The Servant is vngirded, that so more freely
and co^modiously he may sit at Table: The Lord goes up and down, to bring in
and serve the meats; The Servant quietly feeds upon those Princely viands.
O, if we would seriously take these things into our consideration, how loathing
and cloying would all earthly pleasures seem unto us?

Our Lord did sometime gird himself with a towel, that he might wash his
Disciples feet. Peter was affrighted at this sight, and could not endure that
his feet should be washed by his Lord. But Peter was justly affrighted,
because he saw therein majesty humbled, to the end to give an Example of
Humility to his servants. But in that Celestial Mansion, thi^ ministry of our
Lord, is not of humi^iation, but of dignation or vouchsafing; for the servants
of God in Heaven shall not need any example of humility and submissiuenes,
since not one of them shall be once touched with any pride of mind, but they
all shall be confirmed and strengthened in all kind of virtue. Therefore that
girding of our Lord does signify, that he shall so freely, so readily, and
without any delay be present to every one of his Servants and Brethren; even
heaping upon them all goodness, as if there were no other employment remaining
for him, but only this.

O Christian Soul, what thing is this? would to God, thou would once truly
conceive and understand, what honors and true pleasures our Lord will
abundantly bestow upon his servants for eu^r. For certainly if the thought and
cogitation hereof did deeply descend into thy Heart, thou as eue^ boiling in
fervor of spirit, would gird thy loins together, and would prostrate
thy self most cheerfully in all obsequy and service before our Lord. And if any
one of thy brethren (oppressed with want) did meet thee, thou would not
only not disdain him with a scornful and side-cast eye, but even dilating
thy Bowels of Charity, thou would with all willingness refresh and feed him;
sollacing thy self with those words of the Gospel, Matthew. 25, Amen, I say
unto you, as long as you did it to one of these my least Brethren, you did it
to me, Now where it is said, that our Lord shall make all his servants to sit
down, this shows, that they being admitted into the House of his Father, may
most safely, and without any danger, or solicitude repose and rest themselves,
and enjoy all those goods, with the which the House of our Lord is replenished:
for there shall not be any after, who either by force, or by deceit shall
deprive them of the fruition of the same.

To conclude, where further it is said, that our Lord himself passing up and
down, shall minister and serve; the meaning hereof is, that the chiefest
dainties and meats of the Saints are in our Lord himself; for He, is the
Bread of life: He is the fountain of VVisdome; He is that hidden manna, which
no man knows, but he who receaueth and tastes of it. Therefore our Lord
passes through all, he ministers to all, unspeakable Viands and Banquets, the
which do satiate without fastidiousnesse, and fill without saciety.

Of the Bed-chambers of the House of God. CHAP. IIII.
LEt us pass from the Chamber of Repast, to the Chambers of Rest and repose.
David says: The Saints shall rejoice in glory, they shall be joyful in their
Bedds. This Bed is nothing else, then a full and continual Repose of the
Saints; and of that sleep which the same Prophet Psalm. 126. thus praises,
When he shall give sleep to his Beloved, behold the inheritance of our Lord.
Of which point he thus speaks: Psalm. 4. In peace, in the self same, will I
sleep and rest. To conclude, This is that Rest, of which it was thus said to
S. John. Apoc. 14. Write: Blessed are the dead, which dye in our Lord; for
hence forth, says the spirit, they shall rest from their labors, for their
works follow them.

This is a great felicity, and peculiar only to the Blessed For in this life
there is no man wholly disburdened of all labor; and even those men, who seem
most to be at rest and quietness (to wit, noble and rich men) are commonly
pressed with greater anxieties. And therefore not without cause did our Lord
compare Riches unto Thorns in the Parable of the Sower: Matthew. 13. And Job
says cap. 7. The life of man is a warfare upon the Earth. And one of his
fellows conspiringly thus auerreth, Job. 5. A man is borne to labor, and a
bird to fly. But Ecclesiasticus more copiously does enlarge himself upon this
point, thus preaching: cap. 4. Great travel is created to all men, and a heavy
yoke upon the children of Adam, from the day of their coming forth of their
Mothers womb, until the day of their burying into the mother of all. Their
Cogitations and fears of the Heart, imagination of things to come, and the day
of their ending, from him that sits upon the glorious Seat, unto him that
is humbled in earth and ashes; from him, that wears Hyacinth, and the
Diadem, even to him that is covered with rude sackcloth. Thus Ecclesiasticus.
In which words he teaches us, that no mortal man is at any time made entirely
partaker of Rest.

But to the end, that all men may understand, of what worth and moment the
sleep, that is, the sweet Repose of the Saints, is to be respected, therefore I
will (as it were) lay open the several points of the former sentence. First
then he says: Great travel is created to all men, and an heavy yoke upon the
children of Adam. Here occupation and business is opposed to rest; But because
many are busied in things comfortable and pleasant, as in hunting, playing,
singing, and the like; therefore Ecclesiasticus adds, an heavy yoke; thereby
to show, that he speaks of a laboursome, unpleasant, and toylesome
occupation, with which no man is delighted, and which All endeavor to decline
and avoid. And this most troublesome occupation, or negotiation he affirms to
be created for men; that is, adjoined and assigned to man, even from his
Creation, as an individual and inseparable Companion, Which point he further
explicateth (that men may better understand his meaning) by adjoining these
words, From the day of their coming forth of their mothers womb, until the
day of their burying into the mother of all. Therefore a more mild and gentill
course is taken with Oxen, which bear the yoke in the daytime, and rest in
the night, then with men, who both day and night are forced to bear the yoke
of labor, and solicitude. And after this, Ecclesiasticus briefly touches
upon particular troublesome molestitions, which like unto a most heavy yoke,
do press and bow down even the necks of mortal men, saying: Their
cogitations, and fears of the heart, imagination of things to come, and the day
of their ending.

Thus we see, that the first part or Scene of their laborious and painful
travel, is a cogitation of things to come. For a worldly man is ever anxious
and careful of the day to come, saying to himself: What shall heerter fall
out? Shall we lose the small good which we now enjoy? And from this rises a
continual fear of the Heart, which never suffers a Man to remain and quiet.
Now this intense cogitation is twofold. For one part is that, which the mind
frames and figures out to it self. The other is necessary, and such as no man
can avoid. Of the first, he says, Imagination of things to come; of the other,
the day of their Ending. A man does imagine, that is, he does frame to himself
diverse expectations of future things and perils, which do no less torment him,
then if it were certain they should come to pass, and take effect. But the
greatest torment to man, is the cogitation and fear of death, which
Ecclesiasticus above calls, the day of man's ending; the which day all men
have in so great an a horror, as that the Apostle, Heb. 2. calls it a
continual servitude: since the inevitable expectation of death does make
better, and (as it were) put wormwood, into all the sweetness and delicacies
of this life.

To conclude, Ecclesiasticus adds, that this laborious occupation and travel
is so common to all the Sons of Adam, as that every one of them from the
first to the last (even from him, who sits enthroned in the Chair of
Sovereignty, and wears the Diadem, and Hyacinth, to the poor and despicable
man, who lives upon the ground, and wears sackcloth) is made thrall thereto.
Thus in all these things men after the sin of Adam, are made more unhappy
then beasts. For beasts live without fear; are not sollicitous and forecasting
for the morrow; neither do they remember the labor once passed; neither are
they affrighted with expectation of things to come. And therefore the foresaid
wise Ecclesiasticus does here teach, that this burdensome yoke is laid upon
the Sons as Adan; partly to exclude beasts, as exempted from this yoke; and
partly to show the cause of this misery; which is, the first sin of the first
Man.

But this is the height of all misery, to those who labor, and cover not to
ascend to the Celestial House or mansion; to wit, that in this life they
suffer a grievous yoke, but a far mo^^ grievous shall they find in Hell. For
here in this life no man is free from labor; yet is his labor eased, being
joined with some consolation; but after this life in Hell, all labor and
dolor is without any comfort or repose: Only in the blessed House of God, Rest
is without any labor, and consolation without any dolor. Therefore the
Prophet Psalm. 149. justly pronounces; The Saints shall rejoice in glory, they
shall be joyful in their beds. Because they shall not rest, as men sleeping,
who do not feel or perceive their rest; but they shall rest with great
exultation and joy: well knowing and acknowledging with an eternal gratitude
the good of their most happy rest and quietness; it being most free from all
labor, grief, fear, or molestation. Certainly if no other good were in the
House of our Lord, but only this everlasting Rest, were it not (think you)
worthy to ouer-balla^ce and weigh down all the labors, pains, and dolours of
this life? And if in Hell there were no other torment, then an everlasting and
unquiet watching, did it not deserve to be redeemed with all daily and nighly
Prayers, and other penance whatsoever?

O how pleasant and grateful will it appear to the Saints, at their departure
out of the world, to behold an end of their labors, and other their pains;
and on the other side, how bitter will it be to the wicked, at their like
leaving this world, to see, that never after they are in hope for any
relaxation or ease of their labors, and dolours? Death is said to be the
greatest, and last of all terrible things; yet because death seems to have
some respiration or rest from pains, therefore those miserable wretches, who
shall descend into Hell, shall seek for death, and shall not find it, and they
shall desire to dye, and death shall fly from them. Apoc. 9. Therefore the want
of al Rest shall be judged a greater evil and infelicity, then the last and
greatst of all terrible things. And yet nevertheless such is the blindness of
Men in this world, as that they repute in nothing, to lose everlasting rest and
quietness, and to descend to that place, where torments shall admit no ease,
rest or intermission whatsoever.

Of the Princely Court of the House of God. CHAP. V.
IN a House there are several rooms, designed for several businesses and
negotiations; but in that supernall and blessed House there shall be but one
Office or business, common to all the Saints, to wit, the praising and lauding
of the King of Heaven. Here in this life diverse do busy themselves to gather
and heap up money and riches; others to aspire to honor and dignity; others
to adorn themselves with learning, that so they may be able to teach; others
again apply themselves to mechanical Arts, thereby to provide things
necessary, for the sustentation of their life. But in that region and
habitation of Immortality, there shall be no penury or want, no ignorance, no
necssity, no amb^tion; since all, being contented with their present state,
shall desire nothing more; but shall be wholly occupied and busied in the
fruition, love, and praises of their chief and supreme good.

But it may be, some men will say, that the office of praising God in Psalms
and Hymns, and especially in reciting the Canonical Hours, is accompanied
with labor, and of the Spirits; and heerupon perhaps some will auerre, yea
accomplaine, that a heavy burden is imposed upon them, in that they are
commanded to spend daily so many hours, in singing in the Church, and in
praising of God. To this I answer, that to perform lauds and praises to God
by Prayer, is in this life a Merit; and in the Eternal life a Reward; and from
hence it comes, that the exhibiting of lauds and prayers, is here laborious
and painful to many, which in Heaven shall be most pleasant and joyful. For now
we read and sing many passages, which we do not understand: besides during our
time of prayer, we are not a little troubled in driving away idle and vain
cogita^ions, as so many most importune fl^^s To conclude, the Body, which now
stands subject to corrupt on, cannot long be intent to the fu^ctions of the
Soul without wearisomnes: but in that blessed Country, the Body shall be
immortal, it shallbe impass^ble, the flies of d stractions and vnnecssary
thoughts shallbe absent; And (which is the chiefest) the performance of divine
service and prayers shall be nothing else, then the exercise of Felicity: and
therefore if eternal Felicity shall not be troublesome, then shall not the
eternal praising of God become troublesome. That our praises and lauds
exhibited in Heaven to his d^uine Majesty sh^llbe the exercise of our
Beatitude, the Prophet teaches Psalm 82. saying: Blessed are they that dwell in
thy house, O Lord; for ever and ever they shall praise thee.

For as it appertains to Beatitude, ever to love, and have the eye fixed upon
the chiefest good; so also it belongs to the exercise of Beatitude ever to
admire and praise the pulchritude and beauty of the said chief good. And as no
man shall be tired wi^h loving God, so also be shall not be tired in praising of
God. We may add heerto that we shall not on^y be not weary of loving and
seeing God; but neither shall we be weary in contemplating and praising the
works of God; all which works shall ever be present in our sight, and shall be
manifesting their own admirable splendor and beauty. And we cannot praise the
works of God, as very fair; but withal we must praise and offer up incense
of lauds to the ^uthour of those works, which shall ever proclaim, Ipse
fecit nos, and non ipsi nos; He made us, and not we our selves. To conclude, as
we shall never be able to forget the benefitts, with the which God does daily,
even ouerwhelme us, and has tied us to him by certain indisoluble knots (as
it were) of love; so also we cannot, but ever be pressed and ready to spend our
voices and breath in the praises and lauds of so great a benefactour. Therefore
let us conclude with S. Austin l. 22. de Ciuit cap. ^0. and let us burst forth
with him in like fervor of speech, saying: What other thing shall be there
performed, where neither it shall be intermitted through any sloth, nor
undertaken through aan want? God himself who is the end of our desires, shall be
seen without end, shall be loved without irksomnes, and shall be praised without
wearisomnes* This function, this affection, this exercise shall doubtlesly be
common to all, as even eternal life is common. For there we shall be at leisure,
and we shall see, and and we shall love we shall love; and we shall praise.
Thus behold, what shall be in the end, without end. For what other end shall be
assigned to us, but to come to that Kingdom, ^f which there is no End* Thus S.
Austin.

Of the first Part of the Port, or Gate of the House of God, which is Fayh.
CHAP. VI.
THese former Points being already explicated, one thing yet remains to be
consi^e^ed; that is, to show the Gate, by which we may be able to enter into
this most happy House. But our Lord himself does not only show in the
Gospel, what this Port, or Gate is, but with all has foretold, that it is
very strayt and narrow; admonishing us thereby, that we labor and strive to
enter the rat. For he being thus demanded: Luc. 13. Lord be they few, that are
saved? He replied saying: strive to enter by the narrow gate; because I say
unto you, many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able. But, when the
goodman of the House shall enter in, and shut the door, and you shall begin
to stand without, and knock at the door, saying, Lord open to v^; and he
answering shall say to you: I know yoe not etc. depart from me, all you
Workers of iniquity; there shallbe weeping and gnashing of teeth. Thus our
Lord. By which words he evidently enough teaches that the Gate of the House
of God, which is in Heaven, is very narrow, although the House it self be most
ample and large; and that through the straitnes thereof many shall nor enter,
who otherwise willingly wou^d; and t^^refore they are not to enter, because
they covet indeed to enter, but they are loath to suffer any thronge, or
pressure

But let us explicate, from whence it proceeds, that the Gate of so ample and
great a house, is strait. Well then, a Gate consists of four parts; That is,
of the Threeshould, the Transome over the door, and two side-stones; thus a
Gate consists of four stones; One below, another above, and two on the
sides. These four stones in this our Gate, are four virtues altogether
necessary, for a man's entrance into the House of God; to wit, Faith; Hope,
Charity, Humility, Faith, and Hope, are the laterall, or side-stones; Charity
the Transome-stone above, Humility, the threeshold, which is worn and trodden
upon with feet. But all these stones, I mean all these virtues have in
themselves but a small longitude, and latitude or breadth; so as they are
narrow in themselves, and do make a most strait entrance.

Let us begin with Faith. The Christian and true Faith does suffer such
straits, as that except man's judgment do offer to it self violence, and
endure it self to be brought into captivity, and (as it were) enthralled; no
man is of power to enter by it, into the Celestial house. And this is the
meaning of those words which the Apostle writes to the Corinthians 2. Cor. ^0.
Bringing into Captivity all understanding, unto the obedience of Christ. For
the Faith of Christ proposes many things to be believed, the which do so far
transcend a^ reason, as that it is most hard to give assent unto them; and yet
the said Faith does command these points so constantly and vndoubtfully to be
believed, as that a man ought to be ready rather a thousand times to spend his
l^fe, then to deny but any one A^ticle thereof. Certainly great are these
straits, and therefore the less wonder it is, if but few me^ do overcome such
diffi ulties. And this is the reason, why so many do apostate from the truth,
to the Mahometans and Heretics; for all these have taken away the straits of
Faith, and in lieu thereof have made the Gate more large and spacious; by the
which notwithstanding a man goes not to life, but to perdition, according to
that sentence of our Lord, Matthew. 7. Broad is the Gate, and large is the way
that leads to perdition; and many there be, that enter by it. Certainly every
Man is carried with a natural propension and desire to know, as the
Philosopher writes in his metaphysics, and therefore he is slow in giving any
credit to such speculations, except either they can be demonstrated, or at
least fortified with strong probabilities.

The Apostle S. Paul had experience hereof in himself, who though he preached,
as being instructed therein both by infused, and labored doctrine, as also by
the miraculous guyft of the tongues; yet when he was to teach the Resurrection
of the dead, there were not wanting some, who did deride and scorn him
therefore; and others, who in plain words thus reprehended him, what is it,
that this Word sower would say? In like sort, when he preached Christ
crucified, he was reputed a fool with the Gen^ils, and the Jews did suffer a
scandal therein, as himself witnesses. 1. Cor. 1. And from this source it
streamed, that the old Heretics by dilating and enlarging this narrow gate,
did set abroach diverse errors. For some of them took away the mystery of the
Trinity, as the Sabellians and Arians; others the mystery of the Incarnation,
as the Nestorius and Eutichians; others again the Resurrection of the dead, as
the Origenists etc. But all these ports or Gates (and almost 200. more) because
they were builded by humane and weak Architects, and did want a solid and
firm foundation, did decay, and became so ruinous (as I may say) in a short
time, as that scarcely their Names are now extant; neither should we at this
day take notice of their names, had they not been recorded in the Books of
Catholic Writers, who first impugned them, as Irenaeus, Philastrius,
Epiphanius, Austin, Theodoret, and the like.

Now the Mahometans who so long and so wide, have so spread ab^oad their Sect,
that they have destroyed and expunged almost all the most difficult po^nts of
Christian Faith; as the Trinity of the Divine Persons, the Incarnation of the
divine Word, the death and Resurrection of the Son of God, the Sacraments of
Penance and of the Eucharist. All which mysteries being taken away, all
straitness touching Faith, is taken away. And thus the Gate being enlarged,
admits entrance for an innumerable multitude. But those men, who say, they
preach the Gospel of Christ in these our days, have entered in by another way;
and those straites they have wholly taken away, which do not so much conduce to
the Understanding, as to the Will, and Practice. Christian Faith teaches,
that all sins are to be avoided, and that an account must be rendered of every
idle word. And that if a man do fall into mortal sin, he must confess the
same to a Priest, and wash it away by a vehement Contrition and satisfaction;
That good works (though laborious and difficult) are to be performed, being
prescribed and enjoined by the spiritual Pastors of man's soul; That the
Kingdom of Heaven may be obtained and purchased by good works, as the Crown
of Justice, and reward of labor; That single and unmarried life is to be led by
Ecclesiastical Persons, and such others of the Clergy; That the Vows of Monks
and Nuns are religiously to be observed.

These Catholic and Christian Articles, and such others, as seemed to straiten
the Gate of the Celestial house, our Adversaries in Faith have so overthrown,
as that they have opened a most large and wide Gate to Heaven; teaching in all
these points the contrary to us Catholics. But to proce^d. Neither have have
all Catholics overcome all the straites of Faith. For although they believe a^l
those points, which Faith teaches; yet whiles they live otherwise, then their
Faith instructs and binds them, they range themselves in the number of
those, of whom the Apostle speaks, Tim. 1. saying: They confess they know
God, but in their works they deny him. And so by this manner themselves do fly
from the straites of Faith, and enter into the broad Gate, which lead^th to the
most deadly overthrow of their Souls. Therefore so far forth as concerns
Faith, the answer to the question propounded to our Lord, Whether they be but
few, that are saved? is, That they are but few; and therefore men ought to
labor and strive to enter in, by the narrow Gate.

Of Hope, which is another part of the gate of the House of GOD. CHAP. VII.
NOw touching Hope, it also is straightened, and narrow on all sides, whether we
consider the greatness of the reward, or our baseness, and littleness. For
if one should command an unlearned clown, unexperienced in humane affairs to
hope, for that in a short time he should arrive to the wisdom of Solomon, or
at least of Plato and Aristotle; and withal should have the Empire of
Alexander the Great, or of Augustus, delivered up to him; when would this poor
silly fellow be persuaded, that from his dunghill state he should aspire to such
height of Wisdom and Sovereignty? Yet this is far more easy, then that a
mortal man should hope for the Wisdom and Power of Angels, who are in
Heaven, and are pure Intelligences, For that poor Country Pesant, and
Alexander, and Aristotle were of the same nature, and all were mortal men, And
the wisdom of Aristotle did not transcend humane wisdom; and the Empire of
Alexander did not comprehend within it the third part of the world. But the
Hope of the faithful commands them, to hope for the equality of the Angels,
our Lord himself thus saying: Luc. ^0. They, who shall be counted worthy of
that world, and the resurrection from the Dead, neither marry, nor take wives;
neither can they dye any more for they are equal to Angels, and are the
Sons of God.

In like sort, if a man, who only creeps upon the earth, should be commanded
to hope, that w^thin few days, he should be ab e to fly in the air, or to
continue a long time under the water; when could he be brought to hope for
these things? And yet Birds (though great) as Cranes, Storks, Eagles, do most
swiftly fly through the air* and most huge and loaded sh^pps do subsist in
the waters, passing to and fro with great speedines, as the Sailors shall
govern them. But the Hope of Christians, without the least doubt or wavering
commands, that a Christian man shall Hope, even with his body to ascend above
the Heavens; and that he shall descend from Heaven to earth, without any danger
of ruin or fall; and that in his po^^ing from the Ea^t to the West, he shall
strive even with the Sun, and shall doubtlesly overcome it in swiftness. To
conclude, if any poor man, who is deprived of his Parents, should be commanded
to Hope, that a great King (altogether unknown to him) should adopt him for
his Son; no doubt be would much struggle with his own judgment, before he
could be induced to hope for the true event thereof; And yet Christian faith
teaches, that every Man, who is baptized in Christ, and keeps the
Commandments of Christ, shall have the spirit of Adoption from God; shall be
coadopted into his Son; shall be truly heir of all those goods, which God
himself possesses; shall be the Coheyre of Christ; who is the natura l and
p^oper Son of God, and whom the Father has constituted Heir of a^l things
whatsoever.

This vigorous Faith, if according to its own worth, it were embraced by
Christians, would make them so fearlesse and resolute, as that they would yield
to no peri ls, and dangers; but would confidently say with the Prophet; Psalm.
117. God is my Helper, I will not fear, what Man can do against me. And: If
whole armies should stand against me, my heart shall not fear. And with the
Apostle: Phil 4. I can do all things in him that strenghn th me. And again,
Rom 8. Is God he for us, who is against us? But there are very few, who do hope
for such high and hard matters, as they ought; since there are many who do
expect to receive only temporal and small matters from God; but for the
gayning of them do confide and trust in, their own subtilties, in thefts, and
lies, rather then in the help of the Highest. Our Lord him elfe in Matthew 6.
and Luke 12. admonished the faithful by most forcing and moving similitudes,
tha they should not be over sollicitous in seeking of meat and clothing, but
that they should even anchor their hope and confidence upon Gods good
Providence; becau e (says he) our Heavenly Father does nourish the little
B^rds, which do neither sow nor gather, and cloatheth the lyllyes of the fie d,
which neither labor, nor spinne. Therefore much more will he provide for his
own Sons, for whom he has reserved the kingdom of Heaven; And yet
notwithstanding all this, there is so sma^l, or else no confidence in God found
in many Christians, as that in their necessities, they rather fly for their
sanctuary to the frauds and impostures of men, or to diabolical Arts, then to
God. Therefore we may bouldly conclude, that if such men do not hope for these
things from God, which God affords even to the Birds of the field, and which
himself promises to give to those who place their trust and Hope in him; that
then all these men have not that Hope, which is peculiar to the sons of God,
and which all such ought to have, who hope from God, to be partakers of the
kingdom of Heaven. And hence it comes, that seeing no man without an
inexpugnable and lively Hope (which is a part of the gate of this supernall
House) can obtain his salvation, that therefore they are not many who are
saved.

But there are yet remaining some greater straytes in the Virtue of Hope. For,
Christian Hope commands to sl^ight, or rather contemn things present which
are seen; to Hope for things future which are not seen. For example, it
commands to distribute a man's substance to the Poor, to the end that it
being mu^tiplied, may be restored to the giver in Heaven, where no man has
been, who could see, or think, what are those goods, which shall be restored
to us in Heaven, if so we sow and di^perse our goods here upon earth. We see,
that a Country Plowman is easily persuaded, that in sowing of wheat, it
multiplieth upon the earth; And of this the use and observation of many years
has warranted the truth; to wit, that what is sowed with labor, is reaped
with comfort; But that riches distributed among the poor, should be gathered
and reaped with great multip^ication thereof in Heaven, no experience has yet
taught us. Therefore it seems a difficult and harsh course to relinquish
things present, which are seen, and to hope for things future, which are not
seen. To conclude, it is a great Argument, that a firm and unshaken
Confidence in God, is a most narrow and strai^e Gate; in that we find in every
plac^, almost such a multitude of miserable, lamenting, exclayming,
blaspheming, and despayring Men. For God does either take away the Miseries
from those who do trust in him, or at least gives patience, conjoined with so
great consolation, as that they may well say with the Apostle. 2. Cor. 7. I am
filled full with consolation; I do exceedingly abound in joy, in all my
tribulation. Therefore that confused Multitude of disconsolate, and bewayling
Men in their Miseries, is an evident argument and demonstration, that (as S.
Basil writes in Psalm 45.) there are many, who have in their mouth; Deus
refugium nostrum and Virtus; but most few, who in their secret heart and mind,
do truly hope, and trust in God.

Of Charity, which is the third part of the Gate. CHAP. VIII.
LEt us come to Charity, which is the Transome, or highest stone of the
Heavenly Gate. Charity is the Queen of Virtues, which on the one side, seems
to be of a greater breadth and Latitude, in that it extends it self to God,
to Angels, to Men; yea such as be unknown to us, or our Enemies. On the other
side, it is made more narrow, in regard of the incredible difficulty, which
does accompany it, in our passing through by it; since not only in word and
tongue, but in work, and truth, the Precepts thereof are to be fulfilled. For
what does this Queen impose by Command upon her Servants? First, she
commands, that we love God with all our Heart, with all our soul, with all
our strength. Matthew. 20. Luc. ^0. Certainly, Man is brought into great straits,
when he prepares himself to the accomplishment hereof. For what other thing is
it to love God withal our strength, then to love him with a true and supreme
Love? That, (with our Heart and soul) signifies, that the Love toward God,
should be sincere, not counterfayted; not in word and Tongue, but as S James
says, in work and Verity. That other ( with all our strength, with all our
forces, as another Evangelist has) shows, that our Love of God ought to be
most intense and great. Therefore the force of this Precept is, that we love
God with a true and chief love; and that by no ballancing thereof, we either
prefer or equal any thing before, or with him; but that all things be cast
back, and set in a lower degree, in respect of our Love to him; So as a
Christian man o^ght to be prepared with he Patriarch Abraham (if so it
conduces to the glory of God) not to spare the life of his ow^e, and only
b^gotten, and most loving Child.

Neither is this only exacted, but man is obliged to hate (as our Lord
commands Luc. 14.) Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Brothers, Sisters, yea
also his own Soul, and to renounce and disclayme from all things which he
possesses; that is, he ought to be ready (with that promptitude of mind) to be
deprived of all his kindred, his own life, all his wealth and dignity, with the
which promptitude he should be deprived of them, if so he truly and from his
heart did ^ate all these things. Doubtlesly, these are great straits; and who is
prepared and ready to penetrate and pass through them? And how more easily can
we find Men (and those not few) who are pressed, and (as it were) ready
charged to abandon and renounce even God himself, and all his Promises, rather
then riches and temporal Honors, much less their own life, and the life of
their Children? Witness hereof is S. Cyprian in Tract. de lapsis, who writes,
that even in the primitive Church (at what time the heat of Charity was more
boiling in Men's breasts then in these days it is) for a small number of
Martyrs, very many were forsakers of the Christian says, who preferred their
temporal states (much more their lives) before their Charity, and Love of God.
The same Point is in like sort testified by Eusebius, in hist. Eccl. l. 8, c. 2.

Now what shall we speak of Charity toward a Man's neighbor? What does
Charity prescribe to perform to our Neighbor? It teaches, that we must love
him, as well as we love our selves. And what proceeding in matters we do expect
from him, the same, we should practice toward him. Who is he, if he much
labor with poverty, but that he wishes part of the superfluities of rich
men might be given to him? And yet it is no sufficient excuse for the rich-man
to say, that he takes money up at rent; or that he has lately bought a Farm
at a great price; Or that he has been at charges of buylding a stately House,
and of buying costly hangings for the rooms; For perhaps all these are needles
expenses; and Charity does not suffer, that a man should abound and flow in all
opulency of state, and his poor Neighbor should want things necessary to the
sustentation of his life. Of which point the Reader may peruse S. Basil, orat.
ad diuites, and S Bernard sup. illa verba, Ecce nos reliquimus. For he shall
there see, and vvithall rest terrifyed a^ the danger of those, who never
think, that they are to give an account, how they do spend their own goods,
but think that they may (without all impunitie) use them according as they
are svvayed by their o^vne Passions, and not according to the rules of Charity
toward their Neighbors. But let such be afraid; for if we must answer for
every idle Word ( Math 12.) why then not much more, for the bad expenses of
our riches?

But let us hear the Apostle S. John, and let us learn of him, how far the
due of Charity extends its limits who thus writes, 1. Joan 3. In this we
have known the Charity of God, because he has yielded his life for us, and we
ought to yield our lives for our Brethren Christ (being God) ^ayed down lis
life for his servants; what great matter then is it, if we lay down ours for
our Brethren? Where we are to observe, that the Apostle says not, we may, but
we ought to lay down our lives for our Brethren; neither says he, I do Judge,
think, or I do counsel; but he says, and prononceth ab^olutely, we ought to
lay down our lives for our Brethren. And if we ought to spend our lives for
our neigbour, then much more our goods: And therefore S. Gregory thus truly
concludes, Hom. 14. in Euang. Seeing that the life, by which we live, is
incomparably far better, then the earthly substance and riches which we
externally possess; he therefore, who will not give his riches, when will he
give his life? And the like inference we may deduce touching other things. For
He, that ought to lay down his life for his brethren, ought much more to
pardon, and remit an injury or offense to his Brethren. Again, He, that ought
to lay down his life for his brethren, ought with all diligence to be wary and
eautelous, that he do not hurt his Brethren either in word or deed. Now seeing
the Precept of Charity toward God and our Neighbor, is environed with such
straitnes, as few men do overcome it, therefore our Lord being demanded, If
they be few who are saved, might with just reason answer, that they were but
few; and consequently that we ought with all our forces strive, to overcome the
straitnes of that celestial Gate with those few.

Of Humility, which is the fourth Part of the Gate. CHAP. IX.
WE will here descend to Humility; which also has no small straites. What
does our Master command, who most truly thus speaks of himself, Matthew. 11.
Learn of me, because I am meek and humble of heart? Go in the lowest place.
Luc. 14. And what he spoke in words, he practiced in works. For he coming
into the world, did first lie in a manger; and then dying, did hang upon the
Cross. So as we see, neither in his birth, nor in his death, could he find a
more humble, and lover place. And vvhiles he lived, he was more poor not only
then men, but even then unreasonable creatures, For the Foxes have their holes,
and the birds of the Air their Nests Luc. 9. but he had no place to repose his
Head. But what means those words, Sit down in the lowest Place? They
signify, that whosoever thou art, or of what greatness soever, yet repute thy
self to be worthy only of the lowest Place. Of which point the Apostle
gives a resaon, saying: Gal* 6. For if any man esteem himself to be
something, whereas he is nothing, he seduceth himself. Here the Apostle says
not: Who thinks himself to be great, or greater then others either in
Wisdom, Power, or Virtue; neither says he; If any man esteem himself not to
be great, neither greater then others, but only like to others; But the Apostle
plainly said: If a man esteem himself to be something. To conclude, He did
not say: whereas he is but poor, or unlearned, or contemptible; but he said,
whereas he is nothing. Therefore the Apostle could not descend more by his Pen,
to design the lowest place, then he did, and to give a true Commentary of the
Words of our Lord*

But against this it may seem to be urged, that some Men ought to be in high
degree, and sublimity of state; as Prelates, Princes, Kings, Emperors, Popes.
This indeed is true, yet every one of these ought to sit in the lowest place,
and expect till our Lord says: Arise and sit higher: Of which matter we have a
Notable Example in S. Austin of himself, whose words I think good here to set
down. Thus then he writes in sermon. de com. vita Clericorum* Ab ijs, qui
diligunt saeculum, segregaui me etc. I have separated my self from those, who
love the World; and with those, who have a presidency and charge over the
common People, I have not equalled me. Neither in distributing the banquet of
our Lord have I chosen any high place, but that which is inferior and abject.
And it pleased our Lord to say to me: Ascend above: I did much fear to
undergo an Episcopal state, after my name did once begin to spread it self:
I did decline that dignity as much as I could, to the end, that my poor soul
might be saved in a low and humble place, and not endangered in a high place.
But as I said, the servant ought not to withstand or contradict his Lord and
Master. Thus this Holy Father. And I would to God, all men would be emulous
of S. Austin herein; for then we should have many good Prelates, many good
Princes, many good Magistrates. But because there are many, who thrust
themselves up into high places, and do not vouchsafe to expect the calling of
our Lord thereto, therefore God is sometimes offended thereat, and for the
example of others, he forces many of them to sit in the lowest place; to the
end, that all may understand and confess, that honors, riches (as other
temporal and spiritual goods) do depend upon the distribution of Gods hand.
And hence it is, that we often see, men most rich, in a short time, to be
brought to the extremity of all want and penury; and great Princes to be
dethroned, and cast out of their seats of Majesty.

But it is not sufficient only to expect the calling of God, but a man ought to
bear himself in his Prelature or Principality without any pride or elation of
mind; but according to the counsel of the Wiseman Eccl. 3. by how much a man
is greater, by so much to humble himself the more to all; and this not in
Body, but in Heart also, as S. Gregory teaches. Past. l. 2 c. 6. and more
perspicuously S. Austin, Ep. 109. saying: Let Government before men be in Honor
with you; but before God let it become ever prostrate to your feet: Since
every one ought to believe, that all others are better then himself; and
therefore greater then himself; For that man is truly and simply greater, who
is greater with God. Now with God he is greater, who is better; and he is
better, who more excels in Virtue, notwithstanding their Government, riches,
titles, crowns, or diademes; Since they are Virtues (not Prelacy, Riches,
Honors, and the like) which make a man good. And if Virtues do make man good;
then the greater Virtues he has, make him better; and the most Virtues make
him best; and consequently they who are invested with Virtues in a more high
degree, do the more excel others. Now that Humility is one of these Great and
prime Virtues, appears, from that our Lord gives exaltation and advancement
to Humility, in that (so often by him repeated) sentence: Matthew. 23. Every one
that humbles himself shall be exalted. Which sentence the Blessed Virgin
followed in her Canticle Luc. 14. He has deposed the mighty from their Seat,
and has exalted the Humble. In like sort, S. Peter saying, 1 Pet. 5. Be you
humbled under the m^ghty hand of God, that he may exalt you in the day of
Visitation. And S. James cap. 4. Be you humbled in the sight of God, that he
may exalt you. And to conclude. S Paul, Philip. 2. thus speaks of Christ
himself: He has humbled himself, for which thing God has exalted him.

Now because Virtues (and especially Charity and Humility) do make men truly
Good before God, and so proportionably better, and best of all; And because no
man knows certainly, how he stands in the sight of God, and how he now is, or
others are, or hereafter may be; therefore it is dangerous to prefer himself
before others, and most profitable to humble himself after others; Therefore
our Lord absolutely pronounces; Sit down in the lowest place. But who is he,
the observes our Lords Precept her^ For about what matter is there greater
contention and distaste among men, then about Precedence of place? And what
pains do men take, who labor to reduce to peace and friendsh^p such, as
contend about Points of Honor? ^ovv may have we heard alleging that sentence
of Scripture, Isa. 4: or rather usurping it: I will not give my Glory to
another? But let such remember, that the Prophet speaks these words in the
Person of Almighty God, to whom alone Glory justly agrees. For God alone ought
not to be humble; since Humility is a Virtue, which bridleth the desires of a
man, and will not suffer him to ascend above himself; But God, who is most
high, has nothing above him. Therefore it is an insufferable pride, that a
poor Worm of the Earth dare contest and say; I will not give my glory to
another. And yet we may observe, that these poor Worms, whom wind and pride
do so puff up, as that they say with God, I will not give my Honor to another,
do nevertheless so debase and cast themselves ^^wne, as that confessedly they
be^^^^e thrall, and slaves to Honor; I mean, to a wyndy estimation,
consisting in the breath of other men. And thus they do so faythful^y serve
this their Lord, or rather Idol, as that they rather choose, in ^ingle fight,
or Duellisme, to be cruelly slain, and so (by desce^ding to Hell) to loose
both eternal and temporal life, then that their Honor should suffer any
dispargement forsooth, or disgrace from them- O Vanity of Vanities! and how
wonderfully does this smoke of Honor blind the eyes of the soul? And yet,
notvvithstanding this, we are Christians, and we know, that Christ himself
did hear from the mouths of his Enemies, these ensuing reproaches: Behold a
man, that is a glutton, and a Wine-drinker. Matthew. 11. And again: Thou art a
Samaritane, and have a Devil. Joan. 8. And more: He casts forth Devils in
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils: And yet in answer to all this, no man did
hear from the mouth of our Lord this Word; Thou lie, or the like. But what
was the reason hereof? to wit, because he was meek and humble of H^rt, and,
when he was reviled, did not reuyle, and when he suffered, he threatened not; As
S. Peter says, 1 Pet. 2.

Now from these Points above discussed, it appears, that the Gate of Eternal
life is encompassed with great straites, and penetrable but unto few; and this
no less in regard of Humility, then of the Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope,
and Charity; And therefore if it be demanded, whether They be few, that are
saved; it may most truly be replied, That they are but few: because there are
but few, who (as they ought to do) do labor with all their force and
endeavor, to enter by the strait way of that Heavenly Gate.

A second Discourse of Faith, which is the first Part of the Gate of the House
of God. CHAP. X.
TO the end, that we may not be thought, through over much terror and fear,
to auert men from their entrance into this Gate, since our only drift and scope
throughout this book is, to inflame the minds of the faithful to desire and
seek after our most sweet, and most blessed Country; I will therefore briefly
show, that that Gate, which by reason of the eminency and perfection of the
former virtues, is most narrow and strait may also (through the Omnipotency,
truth, and mercy of God) be said to be most wide and large, and easy for
entrance; if so a man do truly desire to enter thereinto. And that we may
begin with Faith. True it is, that faith teaches Articles and Points most
hard, far transcending all sense and reason, and far advanced above the
natural capacity even of the Angels: yet when we are admonished by faith it
self, that we are to believe those points or sp^^^lations, through the
authority of God (who cannot lie) of Angels, or of men; then the straytnes of
this Port of Gate begins to be delated and enlarged.

If Faith should command and say: Believe, that there are three Persons* and
one God; believe, that the Son of God is made the Son of a Virgin; believe,
that Christ did rise after three days from the dead by his own virtue and
power, after being immortal. And believe all these things most firmly and
undoubtedly, because S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John, Isay, Jeremy, and Ezechiel
have delivered these points for true, I should without doubt waver and rest
doubtful therein, neither could I be easily induced to give credi^ thereto,
only for the authority of Men, like unto my self; Because it is written, Psalm.
115 Every man is a liar; and therefore so many Oaths and Sureties are exacted,
that we may credit men. But whereas Faith says: All these former articles of
belief God has first revealed; and that neither Peter, nor Paul, nor John,
nor the rest of the Apostles and Prophets taught these Points of their own
Authority; but they were instructed therein of God himself, and they did preach
the word of God, not their w^e word; the^ presently is the Heart dilated, and
prepared to believe, without the least doubt or wavering in faith.

Now that it was God, who taught and spoke by the Apostles and Prophets, is
made manifest from his working of so many manifest, and stupendous miracles;
so as it were not only simplicity, but great temerity to rest diffident and
distrustful of the Truth. For thus does the Apostle speak to the Hebrews cap.
2. Which when it was begun to be declared by our Lord, of them that heard was
confirmed on us, God withal testifying by signs and wonders, and diverse
miracles, and distributions of the Holy Ghost, according to his Will. But what
things God speaks, who dare deny to be true, seeing God cannot possibly lie;
for if he could iye, then were he not God? Yet is it urged: what things are
propounded to us to believe are above reason. This is true; but they are not
above the Power and Wisdom of God. And therefore S. John says, 1. Joan. 3.
God is greater then our Heart: because he is able to do, and which we are not
able to understand: And his Essence and Existence is more perfect and worthy,
then man's Soul can possibly comprehend, or take the true height thereof. If an
unlearned and ignorant man be ready to believe the Philosophers and
Astrologers, discoursing of the greatness of the Sun and the stars (which
seem incredible;) Why then may not man with the like promptitude and facility
give credit to God himself touching those points of faith, which it shall
please him to reveal, and the rather, seeing the Wisdom and power of God, do
by infinite degrees differ from that spark of Reason, with which men are
endued? Those men therefore, who have a true apprehension of these reasons, do
not suffer any straitnes or difficulty in believing those dogmaticall Points,
which the Church propounds to us to believe.

A second discourse of Hope, which is the second Part of the Gate of the House
of God. CHAP. XI.
What we have said of the Virtue of Faith, the same we may bouldly pronounce
of the Virtue of Hope; for if we should say, that what we expect in the life to
come, we do expect to proceed from the bounty and liberality of men, we might
be deservedly rejected, as vain Impostours; since men may lie; and it is not
in their power to afford and distribute so great and transcendent Rewards: But
we teach not, that they are to be hoped for from man, but from God; Who neither
can lie, since he is Truth; nor deceive, since he is Goodness; nor can promise
any thing impossible, since he is Omnipotent. Therefore a Rusticke fellow might
deservedly think himself to be mocked and derided, if any man should promise
to him the Wisdom of Solomon, or the Greatness of Augustus; because that man,
who thus should promise, should be reputed as a Liar. But why ought not a
Christian, to whom God has promised eternal life, the kingdom of Heaven, the
Paradise of all Pleasure, assuredly hope for the same? Is there perhaps wanting
an Earnest, or Pledge of Gods most bountiful Good Will to us? Not so. For did
not God by way of figure and adumbration of things Present, lead his People
without any step, or print of wet, through the Red Sea? did he not rain Manna
from Heaven? did he not draw Water from out a Rock? To conclude, did he not
bring his Servants, by the Conduct of Iosue, into the Land of Promise? And must
so remarkable a figure be reputed, as empty, and of no force?

Furthermore, If God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten son,
Joan. 3. Has be not then given with him all things to us? Romans 8. What great
thing do we hope for, to be given us from God, the which is not inferior to
that gift, which already he has given to us; we neither hoping for it, nor
demanding it? If God gave to sinners, and his Enemies the Death of his own
Son; will he not give to the lust, and his friends, the life of his Son?
Neither satisfying himself herewith, he gave and adjoined the Holy Ghost, as a
pledge of our Inheritance, who cries in our Hearts; Abba Pater. And the spirit
gives testimony to our spirit, that we are the Sons of God; and if Sons,
Heirs also of God, and Coheyres with Christ. Romans 8. Wherefore if the greatness
of the things promised may seem to overcome our Hope; yet can they not
overcome the greatness of him, that promises. Which greatness, since it is
infinite, may so easily strengthen our Hope, as that without any fearful
doubtfulnes, it may arrive, and attain to the things promised. Which Promise
(as the Apostle proves Heb. 6.) God has even confirmed with a most solemn
Oath: That so by force of two inexpugnable and immovable forts (to wit, the
Promise of him who cannot lie, and his annexed Oath) we may have Hope, as a
s^^me and safe Anchor leading us to those Penetralia, into which Christ entered
for us, who is made a Priest for ever, according to the Order of Melchisedech.

A second discourse of Charity, which is the third part of the Gate of the
House of God. CHAP. XII.
NOw, what shall we speak of Charity? This Virtue, as in regard of the
difficulty of fulfilling its precepts, is of a most narrow and strayt extent;
so in respect of the excellency of the Divine Goodness (whereunto Charity has
reference) it may be said to be of a most great breadth. For why ought it to
seem hard, to love God with all our Heart, with all our soul, with all our
strength, when as he is most sayre, most good, and most worthy of infinite
Love? It is not a hard matter here upon Earth, to love things that are fair
and good; but it is hard not to love them at all, or not to love them too much.
Therefore God* seems (after a certain manner) to offer us wrong, in
commanding, under so severe punishments to love him, as if of our own accord
and willingly we ought not to love him. But some may reply, saying: Those
things, which are good, and fair here upon the Earth, are so ardently loved,
and affected, because they are clearly seen, as being subject to the sense;
But God no man ever saw. Joan. 1. It is true indeed, we see not God;
nevertheless we have seen, and do daily see his works, which are very fair:
of which works the Wise Man thus says, Sap. 13. If with whose beauty being
delighted (meaning with the beauty of the Sun and the Moon) they thought
them Gods let them know, how much the Lord of them, is more beautiful then
they; for the Author of Beauty made all those things. We in like sort do make
trial and taste of the sweetness of God, in his daily Benefits conferred upon
us. To conclude, we have the testimony of him, who says, and cannot lie; to
wit, of the Holy Ghost, who preaches by the Apostles and Prophets in the Holy
Scriptures, that God is so good, and so fair, as that He alone deserves to be
styled Good, and Fair.

But here some will insist, and say, It is very hard, and even incompatible
with our Nature, to be forced (for Gods sake) to lose our substance and riches,
our nearest friends, yea sometimes our own lives. I confess, that this is
hard to men not loving God; but to such, as do love him; and covet to enjoy
him, say it is light and easy; especially seeing in recompense of our contempt
of these tempora^l goods, there are prepared for us, goods incomparably far
more in number, and better. O! observe the disparity. Thou losest corruptible
and fading riches; thou shall gain an everlasting Kingdom. Thou losest
Father, and Brothers and friends; thou shall gain God to be thy Father, and
Christ thy Brother, and all the Angels and Saints thy friends and Companions.
Thou losest a temporal life, even ouercharged with misery; thou shall gain an
eternal life, fraught with all felicity. Hear then this Canticle or song of
divine Love: If a man shall give all the substance of his house for love, as
nothing shall he despise it. Cant. 8. And a little before: Many Waters (meaning
of tribulatio^s) cannot quench Charity, neither shall floods ouerwhelme it.
Hear a so one of those, who loved God, Romans 8. Who then shall separate us from
the Charity of Christ? tribulation? or distress? or famine? or nakedness? or
danger? or persecution? or the sword? But in all these we overcome, because of
him that has loved us.

But some do yet further urge: So to love my neighbor, as to communicate and
impart my goods to him, yea though he were my deadly Enemy, and had much
injured me, so as I ought not only to pardon him, but to heap benefits upon
him; this appears to be very harsh and repugnant to Humane Nature. This
perhaps may be truly said, being spoken of ma^s Nature, as it is corrupted by
sin; but not of Nature repaired through the Grace of Christ. Does not God
himself communicate his goods and benefits, even to his Enemies? And does he
not duly pardon his enemies, rendering to them by way of a strange exchange Good
for Bad, whiles he makes the sun to shine upon the good and the evil, and
rayneth upon the Just and Unjust? Matthew. 5. Now if God do so bear himself
toward his Enemies; it then follows, that it is not contrary either to the
Nature of God, or of man (who is created to the Image of God) to love our
Enemies, or to do them benefits; but it is only contrary to the nature of
Beasts, and of those men, who, when they were in Honor, did not understand:
they were compared to Beasts without understanding, and became like to them.
Ps. 48.

A second Discourse of Humility, which is the fourth Part of the Gate of the
House of God. CHAP. XIII.
IN this last place I come to Humility, which is like to its Sisters, the which
Virtue, as it begets great straits to the proud and arrogant, so with ease
it begins to be dilated and made larger, to such who will be taught in the
School of Christ. For first, we ought to humble our selfs under the potent
hand of God, as the Chief of the Apostles has admonished us, 1. Pet 5. and as
his Coapostle S. James confirms, cap. 4. Now what difficulty can be imagined,
to be in the humiliation of a mortal man, to the immortal and Omnipotent God?
Furthermore, we ought also to make choice of the lowest place among men, as
presuming them to be better then our selves are, as the Apostle counsels us,
saying, Philip 2. Each one counting others better then himself. Therefore who
know themselves, and are privy to their own imperfections, but know not what
secret Virtue may lie hid in the breast of others, do suffer no difficulty to
repute others superior to themselves, and do willingly honor them, and give
to them the higher and more worthy place. For as Pride grows from the
ignorance of a man no knowing himself, so Humility from the true knowing of
himself.

A proud Heart quickly penetrateth into the Vices* which it self has not, but
which others have, because all these are out of him: yet his proper Vices,
though often far greater and known to all other men, this man sees not,
because they are within him: Even as the Eye, which sees not what is within it
self, but only what is without it. The Pharisy Luc, 18. may be an example
hereof to us, who gave thanks to God, that he was not, as other men were, to
wit, Robbers, Iniust; Adulterers; for he did see, that the Vices of Rapine,
Injustice, Adultery were not in him; but he did not see the more grievous Vices
which did lie lurking within him, I mean, Pride, blindness of mind, and
impenitency; and therefore he preferred himself before the Publican, praying
in the same Temple. But the Publican, who was of a more clear sight, did see
the Vices in himself, but not the Virtues; and therefore he took the lowest
place, standing a far off, beating his breast, and imploring the mercy of God:
And so the event was, that by the judgment of God, this poor humbled man
departed justified, that other, reprobated. Wherefore if a man (voyding his
judgment of all selfeloue) will labor diligently to know his own
imbecility and imperfections, he will not suffer any straits, in entering into
the Gate of the house of God.

To all these precedent discourses, it is needful to adioyne this one
Consideration. That vvheras the Port or Gate of the House of God seems most
narrovv, and almost impenetrable to those who come to is heavily burdened and
laden, or who are of a gross and corpulent body, or clothed with many
garments, or labor to enter therein, lifting themselves up in their full height
and stature; So is the same Gate become large, and easy for entrance to those,
who come unto it, without burden, naked, lean, and crooked, or bending
themselves: and therefore the fault is in us, why we may not easily enter by
that Gate, through the which many Saints without any difficulty, and trouble
have already passed.

Therefore let a Christian man lay down the burden of his Riches: Let him
know, that riches are given by God to him, to be a Dispenser, and not an
absolute Lord thereof, that so he do distribute them to the needy and poor, and
not reserve them to himself alone. And then it shall to fall out, that his
mind being free from the love of riches, and he lightened of the great burden
thereof, shall find the Gate wide enough for his entrance; In like sort, let
him free, and deliver himself of that overmuch fatnes (as I may term it) of
carnal delights; or rather let him cast out the hurtful and dangerous Humor
of several Concupiscences; which engender a spiritual Dropsy, and puff up
the Body. To conclude, let him disuest himself of all proper estimation and
self love; let him put on the Humility of Christ, let him incline and bend his
neck to the obedience of the Commandments; and then let him complain (if he
can) if with all convenient facility and ease, he cannot pass through the Gate
of Salvation.

That it is absolutely necessary to enter through the Gate, though it be
strait, if so a man will be saved. CHAP. XIV.
But whether this Gate, be large, or strait, we ought with all our endeavor
labor to enter thereinto. For there is no other place left us after this life
(which flies away like a shadow) where we can well repose our selves, but
within this Port, and Gate. Therefore our Lord exhorts us saying, Luc. 13.
Strive to enter in by the narrow Gate. Because as himself in the same place
subioyneth, all those who remain without, shall be cast down into those places,
where there is an everlasting weeping, and continual gnashing of teeth. Which
words do import extremity of dolours, with despair of remedy: from whence then
rises certain fury or madness, which impatiently suffers those torments,
which it cannot but suffer, and must be forced for all eternity to suffer How
much more secure therefore is it, to strive to enter by the narrow Gate, where
(after some small pains and labor endured) everlasting rest and felicity is
found?

If so the matter did st^nd, as that men might to avoid the straitnes of the
Gate, and withal the pains of Hell; perhaps the weakness and imbecility of
them might in part seem excusab^e, who have not the courage to lay battery to
the narrownes of that Gate; but since of necessity men most here for a short
time labor to enlarge this Gate, or otherwise irreuocably fall into eternal
pains and torments, what kind of judgment is that, or how can it be styled
Reason, which dictateth, that lesser and shorter labors are to be avoided,
that more intolerable pains thereby must after be suffered? But admit for the
time, that no torments were to seyze upon men after this life, but only they
should be deprived of the House of God, wherein there be everlasting, and
endless joys; yet these very joys alone ought to be a sufficient inducement to
encourage us, with all alacrity to enter into the House of God; not only
through the straitnes of the Gate, but even through thorns and briars, yea
through sword and fire.

And although during our peregrination here, we cannot feelingly conceive, what
it is to be deprived of everlasting Beatitude; yet after the separation of the
soul from the Body, then shall the Eyes of the mind be instantly opened, that
they may most clearly see, how great a detriment, yea how infinite a loss and
overthrow it is, not to arrive to that last End, to the which we are created.
And this desire is signified by those Words, which being related in the
Gospel, are repeated by those who shall remain excluded out of the Gate:
Math. 22. Lord, Lord, open unto us. Which desire truly of the Last end, shall
ever torment and afflict those miserable Wretches, and their remorse of
Conscience shall never cease; And so that sentence shall be fulfilled, Marc. 9
Their worm shall not dye, and their fire shall not be quenched.

O, if we could now seriously consider and think with what a greedy desire,
such men shall say: Lord, Lord, open unto us, as if they would say and
complain: Without entrance into this House of God, we cannot live; and yet to
dye, is not granted to us: therefore we live, not to the end we may live, but
to the end we may be ever miserable. Open to us therefore, O Lord; for we are
prepared to undergo any torments so that we may enter in. But it shall be
answered them: Matthew. 25. I know you not; The year of Iubily is now expired:
When you might have entered, you would not; now therefore it is but reasonable,
that when you would enter, you cannot. Thus these men being irremediably
excluded, shall nevertheless cease to cry out (pricked thereto through a
natural desire) Lord, Lord, open unto us. But because in this life they were
deaf to the exhortatio^s of our Lord, crying out and saying: Luc. 13. Strive
to enter by the narrow Gate; Therefore after, they shall cry to the deaf ears
of our Lord: Lord, Lord open to us. To conclude, if we have any spatke of true
judgment, let us provide and take care for the state of our own souls; whiles
we have time; Let us do that now when it is lawful, and in our power; the
which doubtlesly, then from our heart we shall covet to do, or to have done,
and yet it shall not be then lawful, nor in our power to do it.

OF THE ETERNAL FELICITY OF THE SAINTS, Under the Title of Paradise. THE
FOVRTH BOOK.
That in Heaven there are true Joys. CHAP. I.
PAradise is a name of Pleasure and Delight: For it signifies* most pleasant
Garden or Orchard, most apt for recreation and pleasure. In the Book of
Genesis (cap. 1. and 3.) where speech is made of the Terrestrial Paradise, it
is called oftener then once, The Paradise of Pleasure. But in Ezechiel cap. 28.
touching the Celestial Paradise it is said to the chief Angel, who after
fell, and became a Devil: Thou wast in the delicacies of the Paradise of God.
Now because we find nothing in the Holy Scriptures touching Paradise, but that
in it there were many trees, and a fountain of living water; Therefore I
thought good through occasion of the Title, or Name of Paradise, to explicate
the pleasures and felicity, which the Blessed do enjoy in Heaven. It will be (I
trust) a profitable contemplation to stir up and incite men's minds, to seek
and meditate upon those things, which be above; and consequently so to govern
and order our lives, that when we are to leave this our earthly habitation, we
may remove, not to lamentation and darkness, but (by the assistance of God) to
light and everlasting consolation. Most men (some few excepted) are accustom^^
to be drawn more with pleasure, then with any other good or benefit; and
accordingly the Church in one prayer says: Let our Hearts be fixed there, where
true joys are.

First therefore, we will consider what the Holy Scriptures do teach us
touching the celestial Paradise; from whence we shall be able to prove, that
there are true joys therein. That done, we will attempt to explicate what
those Joys may be. In the last place we will demonstrate by many reasons, or
rather comparisons, that those Joys be far greater, then we can either
apprehend, think, or but once conjecture. First then, the name it self of
Paradise does even sound Pleasure, and Delight, as we have shevved before our
of the Book of Genesis. And that there is a Paradise in Heaven, Ezechiel
testified as above is said. The same does our Lord in the Gospel witness,
when he said to the good Thief hanging with him upon the Cross, Luc. 23. To
day thou shall be with me in Paradise: For by the word Paradise our Savior
did understand the Kingdom of Heaven, and essential Beatitude. For when the
Thief had said: O Lord, remember me, when thou shall come into thy Kingdom;
our Lord promising to him the participation of his Kingdom, did answer: To
day thou shall be with me in Paradise. The same is also witnessed by S. Paul,
when he said, 2. Cor. 12. I know a man in Christ, rapt even to the third
Heaven; he was rapt into Paradise. S. John does witness the same in his
Apocalypse cap. 2. where he brings in our Lord thus speaking: To him, that
overcomes, I will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the Paradise
of my God. Now from these passages of Scripture it is evident, that the Region
of the Blessed is a place of delight and Pleasure.

Furthermore when our Lord said to the good and faithful servant, Math. 25.
Enter into the joy of thy Lord; does he not most openly declare, the House of
God, or the City of God, to the which all the good and faithful Servants are
admitted after their passing out of this world, to be a place of Joy? And where
in many places be compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a Supper, as in Luc. 14.
A certain m^n made a great supper. And again cap. 22. where he says: And I
dispose to you, as my Father disposed to me, a kingdom, that you may eat and
drink upon my Table, in my kingdom. To conclude in the Apocalypse ^t is said:
cap. 19. Blessed are they; who are called to the supper of the Marriage of the
Lamb. Certainly the Scripture by the Metaphor of a supper, signifies
delectation and pleasure; except we will maintain, that in the sense of
Tasting there is no pleasure. And we may annex hereto, that in the Gospel, and
in the Apocalips, the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a Regal or Princely
Supper; as is evident out of that King, Who made a marriage for his son; and
out of the Parable of the Wise and foolish Virgins; of which, the Wise Virgins
did enter with the Bridegroom to the Marriage, but the Foolish Virgins were
shut out. We also find in the Apocalypse many things to be spoken of the Marriage
of the Lamb in the Kingdom of Heaven, being celebrated with all magnificent
preparation. Furthermore, the felicity of the Saints is compared to Princely
Marriages, at what time all kind of pleasures almost are enjoyed; of which point
we are further to discourse in the next ensuing Book.

To conclude. S. John in the Apocalypse did see a Company of Virgins, who did
follow the Lamb wheresoever he went, and did sing a new song which no others
could sing: Which place S. Austin expounds of certain holy joys and
pleasures, which the Virgins (either men, or Women) do enjoy. His words are
these: You shall bring to the Marriage of the Lamb a new song, which you shall
sing upon your Citherns: that is, you shall sing praises in your Hearts; not
such as the whole Earth sings, but such, as not any can sing but your selves.
Aug. de sancta Virgin. c. 27. And then after: Whither may we think this Lamb
will go? Where none shall be able, or dare to follow him but your selves?
Whither may we think him to go, into what gardens or other pleasant places?
Thither I believe, where the grass is joys, not the vain joys of this
World being but lying Madness; neither the joys, which are granted in the
kingdom of God to others not being Virgins; but they are joys, distinguished
from all other kind of joys. And then again a little after: The rest of the
multitude of the faithful shall see you, which cannot follow this Lamb; They
shall see, but the shall not enjoy; and rejoicing with you that which they have
not in themselves, they shall have in you; for they shall not be able to sing
that new song peculiar to you, but they shall be able to hear it, and to be
delighted in your great delight. But you, who shall both sing and hear this
new song, because in that you shall sing it, you shall hear it, you shall with
more felicity exult or rejoice, and with more pleasure reign. ibid. c. 29.
Thus from all above expressed it is manifest, that in the Heavenly Kingdom,
and City, or House, there be many true Joys, and most true, and most great
Pleasures.

Of the Joy of the Understanding. CHAP. II.
Seeing above we have proved out of the Holy Scripture, that there are true
Joys in the Kingdom of Heaven, we will now explicate what those Joys be. And
first we will undertake to show, what the Joys of the Understanding, Will,
and Memory be, all which do belong to the spirit or soul; next, what the joys
of the several senses be, which do appertain unto the Body. We do not inten^
herby to maintain, that the Understanding, the Memory, and the s^nses of the
Body are the proper seats of Joy; for we are not ignorant that Joy (as also
desire) do properly belong to the will in the superior part, and to the
Appetite in the inferior. But we hear speak, as men do vulgarly speak, who
forbear not to say, that the Eye is delighted with the beauty of Colors* and
the Ear with sweetness of sounds. Therefore we understand by the Joy of the
mind, or of the Memory, or of the External senses, a delectation or pleasure,
which a man takes from those things, which either he does understand, or
remember, or which he does draw from the external senses.

The first Joy then of the Blessed, shall be to see with the eyes of the mind,
God, even face to face, as S. Paul speaks, and as S. John says; to see him,
as he is. Now how great a Joy this will be, we may in part conjecture, in that
the Prophet Isay, and the Apostle do witness, that it exceeds all the Joys,
which any man has either seen, heard, desired, or ever imagined: The eye has
not seen, nor the ear has heard, neither has it entered into the har^ of
man, what things God has prepared for them that love him. (Isa. 64. 1. Cor. 2)
For the Scripture here speaks of the chief, and Essential Beatitude or
Happiness, which is placed in the vision and sight of God himself, according to
that saving of our Lord: Matthew. 5 Blessed are the clean of Heart, for they
shall see God. And; This is life everlasting, that they know thee, the only
true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. And truly there seems in the
former Words a great amplification; to wit, That no man has either seen, or
heard, or desired, or thought, what kind of joy consists in the Vision of
God; Notw^thstanding it is no amplification, but a simple Truth; because the
Eyes, the ears, and the hearts of men are accustomed to perceive only joys
that have end; but the Vision of God is a Vision of an inaccessible light, and
of a Good which has no end, and which comprehends in it self All Good,
according to the words of our Lord to Moses: I will show thee all good, when
Moses a little before thus desired of Ged, Show me thy fa^e. Exodus 33.

But to proceed, and that we may prove the truth of this point by force of
Reason. We are to learn out of S. Thomas (p. 2. q. 31. a. 5.) that
delectation, which is taken from knowledge, requires three things; to wit, an
Intelligent or sentient Power; an Object, sorting to that Power; and an Union
of the Object with that Power. Now by how much the power is more apt to know,
and the Object more noble, and the Union more intrinsecall and inward; by so
much the delectation from thence proceeding, is greater. That the
Understanding, or the mind is more pure, more high, more noble, and more lively
(as I may say) and therein more apt for knowledge, then the external sense, is
so evident, as it needs no proof. Now that God is a more high, and more
noble Object, not only above all the Objects of the Senses, but even above all
the Objects of the soul or mind (since he is an Infinite Good, all good, or
rather Goodness it self) no man can doubt. That the Union of the Intelligence,
by an open and clear Vision, is an Union so inward, as that the Essence of God
does penetrate the whole mind of the seer, and the mind is even tra^sformed
into God himself, as into a great sea, is likewise certain.

Who therefore is able to comprehend or conjecture, how great that Joy is, or
what kind of kiss is that of the supreme good, or what imbracement is it of a
Spouse of an infinite Beauty? Certainly in the conjunction of a fair Color
with the sense of seeing, or of a sweet sound with the sense of Hearing (and
the like is to be said of other sensible Objects, with their senses) we receive
great pleasure, and often so great, as that diverse men by this means do almost
become madd; Nevertheless the Powers of the senses are material, and common
to us with Beasts: And the Objects of them, are things Corporal, and sometimes
do no less hurt, then delight and please. To conclude, the Union is but
superficial and external^; And in some senses, there is no Vni^n at all of the
Object it self, but only of its image or likeness with the Power. We may add
hereto, that spiritual Union, and the Union of God with the Intelligence or
mind by Vision, is more firm, more durable, and altogether entyre; whereas
corporal delectations, which are taken by the senses, because they are subject
to change, they cannot continue long; neither are they wholly taken together,
but are instilled by degrees, and as it were, by drops: Wherefore the
infallible Conclusion of all this is, that the delectation and pleasure of the
mind, is incomparably greater, then the Pleasure of the sense.

Now (O Man) gather thy self together, and weigh in a true balance, and with
a steedy hand, the Pleasure, which the World prostituteth and offers to
thee, with that Pleasure, which God does promise, when he promises the sight
and Vision of himself to those that love him; And then in this thy ballancing
make choice of that pleasure thou most do covet. Certainly if thou love
Pleasure, the which thou can not deny thou love, then will thou make
choice, of that Pleasure, which is greatest, rather then of that which is
least, and of that which is for all eternity, then of that which is momentary
and fading.

But neither the only Vision of God is promised to holy men in Heaven, but also
the Vision and sight of all things, which God has made. Here upon the Earth
we behold by the sense of our sight, the Sun, the Moon, the stars, the sea,
rivers, living Creatures, Trees, and Mettalls; but our mind sees nothing
hereof; that is, it perfectly sees no substance, no essential differences, or
proprieties: neither truly does it see its own soul, but only after the
manner of blind men, it gropeth after the effects, and so by discourse of
Reason it gains some knowledge. What then shall be that Joy, when the face of
things being vnueyled, our Understanding shall clearly see the Nature of all
things, their differences, proprieties, and forces? And with how great an
exultation, and comfort will it be even astonished, when it shall behold a
whole Army of innumerable Angel^s (all differing one from another, in specie)
and shall perspicuously observe the differences of all and every one of them?

O Good God, what a Theater and Co^templation will it be, how delightful, how
much to be loved, when we shall be admitted to behold, and view all the Holy
men, and women, which have been from the Creation of the World, to the End
thereof, gathered together, with all the Angels, as also their merits, Palms,
and Trophies of Victory? Neither shall we see and consider the Wickedness and
torments of the reprobate, without some pleasure, in whom the Sanctity of good
men, and Justice of God shall wonderfully shine: For then the Just shall wash
their hands in the blood of sinners, as the Prophet so long since foretold.
For what other thing is it to wash the hands in the blood of sinners, but that
the works of the Just shall more clearly appear, as being compared with the
Works of Wicked men? Certainly at that time the Virginity and Chastity of some
men shall be more resplendent and remarkable, when it is compared with the
Adulteries of others, their Equals. In like sort the Fastings and Almsdeeds of
some, when they are balanced with the Epicurisme, drunkenness, and cruelty of
others: I mean, when it shall be truly said; This young man was comely and
pleasing of Body, yet nevertheless he ever professed Virginity or Chastity:
That other young man was also fair; and of a good presence; yet not contenting
himself with his wife, he often defiled himself with Adultery and sacrilege.

Again, that man was rich and noble, and fasted, and prayed much, and most
bountiful in Alms deeds; This man being as rich; and noble by birth, was so
wholly given over to dainty fair, drinking, and Iouiallisme, as that consuming
all his substance and riches in voluptuousnes* he did leave nothing for the
relief of the poor. And thus from hence it shall arise, that the Joys of the
Just shall receive an increase, from their Knowledge of the wicked deportment
and carriage of the Iniust; and consequently, their Joy shall be augmented from
the contemplation of Gods Justice, which shall wonderfully shine in the rewards
of the Blessed, and punishments of the Wicked. For now in human proceedings,
a great deformity or irregularity appears; in that offense and sin is often
accompained with Revvard, and Virtue with Punishment; so as the Justice of
God may somevvhat seem to be obscured or darkened in the Eye of men; But then
all Punishment shall be conjoined with Sin, and all Reward with Virtue: And so
the co^formity or beauty of Justice shall stir up an incredible joy in the
minds of the Blessed.

Of the Joy of the Will. CHAP. III.
BEsides that Pleasure, which the Will takes from the good of the
Understanding, there are three things, which shall properly beget and cause
Joy in the Will it self. One of these is, a most ardent Love of God, and of
our Neighbor: For Love is a principal sauce, or seasoning of all things that
are to be beloved. He that loves, judges all those things which he loves, to
be most fair and good; and therefore he much rejoices at the presence and
sight of them: As contrary-wise at their absence he greatly lamenteth. We see
that Parents, who out of a natural affection love their Children dearly, do
believe, that they are most fair, most witty, and most wise; although often
they be deformed, and but shallow-witted; and if choice were given them, they
would not change them for any others, though in an impartial Eye far better
and fayrer. In like sort, we see, that men either through VVitchcraft, or some
unexpected accident, are taken and surprised with the Love of deformed persons;
houlding it a most pleasant thing to converse with them; and most unfortunate
to be separated from their company and familiariry. Which proceeding only Love
causes, being (as above we said) a sauce to all things, which are the subject
of Love.

Now seeing these things stand thus, what, and how ineffable shall the
pleasure of the Saints be, ever to converse with God, and all the Blessed whom
they shall most ardently love; who are truly most fair and most good, even in
a clear and impartial judgment, and from whom they shall know, that they are
never to be separated? As on the contrary, it shall be one of the greatest
punishments of Hell, to be forced ever to be in the Company of those damned
spirits, whom they extremely hate, and by whose diverse stratagems and devises
they know, themselves to have been circumuented and abused.

An other Consideration, which shall much increase the joy of the Blessed in the
will, shall be an unspeakable rest, and satiety without cloying, which shall
make them on all sides satisfied and content. Here upon Earth no man lives
contented with his state; There is no man, but he coueteth many things which he
cannot obtain. And hence it rises, that there are so many hungry and thirsty
men in the pursuit of temporal Benefits in the World. Neither is this to be
much wondered at; since our mind is capable of an infinite and everlasting Good;
whereas the things created are small in themselves, of a fading nature, and
cannot long continue. Therefore what exultation and joy shall it be to that
man, who shall see himself seated in that place, where he shall live in all
contentment and sweet repose of mind; where nothing shall be wanting, nothing
shall affright him, nothing shall be desired, nothing more shall be sought after? O
Peace surmounting all apprehension of sense, the which the World cannot
affoard, and which is found only in the heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the
peaceful and most great King. To thee, this our Peregrination does greedily
bend it self; We are here laden with temptations and sollicitudes, and we
greatly appease and quiet our selves only in the thought and expectation of
thee.

The third thing, which shall bring great Joy to a Blessed Will, is Justice;
and this perfect, and more perfect, then was the Original Justice in Adam. The
Justice of him did subject the inferior part of the soul to the superior, as
long as the superior was subject to God: But this Justice subiecteth the
inferior part to the superior, and the superior to God, by a most firm and
indissoluble band and connection: That was (as it were) a woollen or linen
Garment, this a silken, or goulden Vestment which makes the Will most fair
and amiable to God, to the Angels, and all Blessed souls. This is that
perfect Justice, which admits no spot, nor any venial blemish. So as of a
soul clothed with this Justice, it may be said: Thou art all fair, O my
Love, and there is no spot in thee. Cant. 4. This comprehends all Virtues, as
they are vnmixted with the dross of any imperfection. Now how great joy and
pleasure this Justice may bring to a soul in Heaven, the Wise Man does
witness, saying: A secure mind is as it were, a continual feast. Prou. 15.

Here only that mind is secure, which is never gnawed with the worm of
Conscience; in that through a perfect Justice it is so established in good, as
that even for any short moment it cannot slide. Of which point the Apostle is
also witness, saying: Romans 14. The kingdom of God is not meat and drink,
but Justice, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. In which words, the holy
Apostle clearly teaches, that the Kingdom of Heaven contains in it self
great Pleasure, consisting not in delighting the thtoat, and repletion of the
Belly (as carnal and sensual men perhaps could wish) but in Justice, which
engenders in the soul a firm Peace, and true Joy. For who is perfectly just,
has nothing in his heart, which may vpbraid or reprehend him: neither any thing
in his Actions, at which other men can take exceptions. And from hence
springs a most constant and sweet Peace between God himself, and all
others: From hence also rises an ineffable joy in the Holy Ghost; with which
joy no earthly or temporal pleasures can be compared.

Of the Joy of the Memory. CHAP. IV.
NOw the faculty of Memory through remembrance of things past, shall minister
no small matter of Joy. For first the calling to mind the benefits of God,
either touching spiritual or corporal matters, natural or supernatural,
temporal or eternal, throughout our whole life, shall bring an incredible
Joy, when the just soul shall call to mind by how many ways it was prevented
in the benedictions of all sweetness. Again, the remembrance of the perils and
dangers, out of which God by strange means has even snatched us, throughout
all our life, how great a comfort will it affoard? Among other dangers I put in
the first place, That a man being very near unto committing of a mortal
sin, and so thereby near unto Hell, God moved only through his benignity and
love, did hinder the committing thereof. Certainly this mercy of God being so
great, and often extended to the Elect, when it shall be called to mind in that
most safe and most peaceful Region, shall affoard most great Joy. Which
remembrance, if it were wanting to the Saints in Heaven, how then could it be
said of them in the Psalm 88. I will sing the mercyes of our Lord for ever?
Then which Canticle (says S. Austin) being song in the glory of the grace and
favor of Christ, nothing shall be more pleasant to that Heavenly City. l 22. de
ciuit. c. 30.

What may I speak of the deuolution and current of Times and ages, even from
the beginning to the End? What pleasure will the remembrance of so many
Vicissitudes of things, and of so great Variety bring, which the Providence of
God has governed so wisely, and brought to their due ends? And perhaps this is
that main current of that River, which so wonderfully exhilerateth the City
of God. Psalm. 45. For what other thing is the Order of ages passing away with
such speed, and never intermitting their course, then the great swiftnes of
the River, running without any cessation, till it be wholly absorpt in the main
Ocean? And now truly, whiles the River is in running, and the Times slipping
away, many do dispute of the Providence of God; yea some even of Gods servants
are much troubled with this impetuosity of the stream; for seeing that it is
often hurtful to good men, but commodious and beneficial to the Wicked,
whi^es it carries away the good earth, taken from the fields of the Virtuous,
unto the fields of the Wicked, thus they often suffer great Temptations, and
seem to complain of Gods Providence.

Hear of this point the Royal Prophet, thus moaning: Psalm 72. My feet were
almost moved, my steps almost slipped, because I had zeal upon the wicked,
seeing the peace of sinners. And a little after: Lo the sinners themselves; and
they that abound in the World, have obtained riches; And I said, then I have
justified my heart without cause, and have washed my hands among Innocents, and
have been scourged all the day. Hear also Jeremy the Prophet thus
expostulating cap. 12. Thou (O Lord) art just if I dispute with thee; but yet I
will speak just things to thee: Why does the way of the impious prosper? And
why is it well with all, that transgress and do wickedly? Thou have planted
them, and they have taken root; They prosper and bring forth fruit: thou art
nigh to their mouth, and far from their reins, To conclude, Hear the Prophet
Habacuc, c. 1. Why look thou upon them that do unjust things, and houldest
thy peace, when the impious deuoureth him that is more just then himself? Thou will make men, as the fishes of the Sea, and as the creeping Beast, not having
a Prince. Thus these former Prophets.

But after the revolution of times, and after the forsaid River has disgorged
it self into the sea, when the Saints in Heaven shall clearly see and read
the reasons of all those vicissitudes, or alterations, as written in the Book
of the divine Providence; then Words will light short to express the joy,
which the City of God shall receive thereby. There they shall read, why God
suffered the first Angel, and the first man to sin; and why the Mercy of God
did restore the man, but would not restore the Angel. There they shall see,
why God did make choice of the sons of Abraham for his peculiar people; whom
notwithstanding he did foresee, to be after of a most stubborn neck, and what
good through their obstinacy he was after to prepare for the Gentills. And that
I may pretermit the Universal Providence of God, there they shall see why he
did permit many just Men (or rather almost a^l) to suffer pressures and
^fflictions in this World, and to become balls to their Enemies, that thereby he
might after crown them most gloriously. And from this remembrance the Saints
shall with great joy even bless all those Crosses, which they suffered in the
Word, when they shall see them changed into everlasting Crowns, and shall say
with the Prophet, Psalm. 93. According to the multude of my sorrows in my heart,
thy Consolations have made my soul joyful.

Of the Joy of the Eyes. CHAP. V.
LEt us now take into our consideration the joys of a glorified Body. And
first the Joy of the sense of seeing presents it self; which sense among the
senses of the Body is most noble, and in its office and use dilateth it self
most largly. This sense in the Celestial Country shall first rejoice at the
splendor of its own proper Body, changed by Christ, and configured, or made
like to the Body of his Glory, as the Apostle speaks. Phil. 3. Neither shall
its brightness be less then the splendor of the sun. For the same Apostle
Act. 26. affirms, that Christ (according to whose brightne^ we are to be
co^formed) was seen of him, to exceed the brightness of the sun. And our Lord
himself thus speaks in the Gospel. Then the just shall shine as the sun,
in the kingdom of their Father. Matthew. 13. How pleasing and grateful a
spectacle will it be, when the Eyes of the Blessed shall behold their hands,
their feet, and all their members so to send forth beams of light, as that
they shall not need any more the light of the sun, or of the moon (much
less the light of a Candle) to dispense all darkness? And they shall see not
only their own body, to shine like to the sun, but also the bodies of all
Saints, and especially of Christ himself, and of his Blessed Mother.

How much does one Sun at its rising, rejoice the whole Earth? What then will
it be, to behold innumerable suns together, not resplendent only in light,
but also most fair for their variety and proportion of members? Neither in
that place shall the Eyes shut themselves, for fear least they be oppressed,
and hurt with over much brightness; for those Eyes shall be Blessed, and in this
respect impassible and immortal. For he, who shall so comfort the Eyes of the
mind, with the light of Glory, as that they behoulding God face to face, shall
not be oppressed by his Glory; he shall also comfort the Eyes of the body with
the gift, or privilege of Impassibility; so as without any danger they shall be
able to look upon, not one only sun but, innumerable suns.

This further shall be adjoined to increase the glory of the Eyes, as S. Austin
teaches; l. 22. de Ciu. c. 20. to wit, that the most Blessed Martyrs shall
bear most fair and beautiful prints, or signs of Virtue, even in those
particular parts of the Body, wherein they suffered their torments. What
solace to the eye then shall it be, to behold S. Stephen, shyning with as many
precious stones, as he suffered dints of stones in his Body? In like sort what
pleasure will it be to see S. Io. Baptist, S. James the elder S. Paul, and
almost infinite others (whose heads were cut of for professing Christ) to shine
with a most rich chain, more precious then any gould? What to see S.
Bartholomew (whose skin was fleaed off) so illustrious in body, as that it
may seem to exceed all Purple, though never so precious? What shall it be (to
omit all others) to behold S. Peter, S. Andrew, and many others (who suffered
death upon the Cross) to represent, or bear most shining stars (as it were)
in their hands and feet, with incred^ble Beauty? Concerning Christ, the king
of Martyrs, who for his glory, and our comfort will have the signs, or marks
of the nails and the Lance preserved, no tongue is able to express, with what
radiant splendor and light those most holy impressions shall shine, seeing all
the glory of Saints compared to the Glory of Christ, is less then the Beauty
of the stars, with reference to the Beauty of the sun.

But now what shall I speak of the Pleasures, which the Eyes of the Blessed
shall take in behoulding that most spacious and large City, which Tobias, and
S. John (as above we have proved) as not having Words worthy enough to set out
and proclaim its beauty, said, That it was all made of gould, and garnished
with rich Jewels. Margarites, and other precious stones? Tob. 13. Apoc. 21.
What lastly may I say of the New Heaven, and the New Earth, the which the Holy
Scriptures do promise to us after the day of Judgment, and of the renouation of
all things into a better state? For these things, as they are unknown to us,
so they shall delight the Eyes of the Blessed with a new and admirable joy,
when their Beauty shall begin to be seen.

Of the Joy of the Ears. CHAP. VI.
THat the sense of Hearing, and the Instruments of speech shall be in the
Kingdom of Heaven, no man may doubt: For the Bodies of the Blessed shall be true
and living Bodies, and in every part perfect. And such was the Body of Christ
after his Resurrection, as all the Apostles, many disciples, and others have
testified. For they did hear him speak, and he did answer to their demands:
And S. Paul himself did hear Christ speaking to him from Heaven; and he
answered to Christ hearing him. That there shall be Canticles, and songs, and
chiefly of that Word Alleluia, the aforesaid Toby and S. John do witness. From
hence then we may gather, that in that Heavenly City, there shall not be
wanting many most sweet Sonnets, with the which God may be praised, and the
Blessed ears of Holy men may be wonderfully delighted. And if these things
ought to be performed in proportion and measure, the^ doubtlesly those songs
ought to be the more sweet, and harmonious, by how much the singers shall be more
skillful, and he that is praised, more noble and sublime, and the place where
the Music is made, more high, and the Company or presence of the Auditors
more intelligent, and in greater number.

What consolation therefore will it be, in that most high peace, and in the
concord of souls, and in that ardour and heat of Charity toward their
supreme Benefactour, to hear the most clear voices of those, which shall sing
Alleluia? If S. Francis (as S. Bonauenture has left written) was so rapt and
moved at the sound of a Citherne, played upon but a very short time by an
Angel, as that he thought himself to have been in a new World; what delights
then shall our Ears enjoy, when millions of musicians with most concordant and
sweet voices shall with full accord and consent praise God; and other Millions
with like melody and fervor, shall many times repeat the said Praises? And
perhaps in that Heavenly City, not only the praises of God shall be celebrated
with Musical voices; but also the Triumphs of Martyrs, the Honor of
Confessors, the Glory of Virgins, and the victories of all the Saints against
the Devil, shall be extolled with Celestial Music. For we thus read Eccl. 31.
Who is proved therein and perfect, shall have eternal Glory: He that could
transgress, and has not transgressed; and do Evil, and has not done it;
therefore are his good things established in our Lord, and all the Church of
Saints shall declare his Alms. Although this may be understood of the praises
of mortal men, in the milita^t Church here upon Earth; yet withal it may be
meant of the immortal Citizens, and of the triumphant Church in Heaven; Since
there the Saints shall have truly eternal glory, and that is truly and
properly the Church of Saints.

And whereas our Lord in the Gospel says, that the faithful and prudent
servants shall be praised of God in the Heavenly Kingdom Matthew. 28. Well far
thee, good and faithful servant, because thou have been faithful over a few
things, I will place thee over many things: Enter into the joy of thy Lord; Why
may we not think, that those words of our Lord shall be celebrated with the
singing of the whole Celestial Court, and shall again and again be most
sweetly repeated? Certainly the Catholic Church doubted not thus to speak of
S. Martin: Martinus hic pauper and modicus, dives Caelum ingreditur, hymnis
caelestibus honoratur. Martin being but poor and temperate, did enter into
Heaven rich; and is honored with Celestial Hymns. To conclude, S. Austin
affirms the same point in express Words, l. 22. de Ciu. c. 30. saying: There
shall be true glory, where no man shall be praised through the error, or adulation
of the Prayser. True Honor, which shall not be conferred upon any, not worthy;
Neither shall any unworthy seek after that Honor, where none but he that is
worthy, shall be permitted to be. O therefore thrice Happy Souls, who in that
place, where all flattery is banished and exiled, and no lie is found to be,
shall hear their own Praises and Trophies to be celebrated without danger of
Pride, but not without increase of joy, and comfort.

Of the Joy of the sense of smelling. CHAP. VII.
TOuching the other senses, little is to be said; not in that they want their
great Pleasures; but because what Pleasures those shall be, the Holy Scripture
has not declared. Nevertheless this is evident to us, that many Bodies of
Holy Saints have after their deaths braathed out a most sweet Odor. This S.
Jerome testifies of the Body of S. Hilarion. For he affirms, that ten Months
after the Body was interred, it was found entyre, as if it were then living,
and did cast from it such a fragrant smell, as if it had been imbalmed with
sweet ointments. The like does S. Gregory witness of the body of S. Seruulus,
the Palseyman; His words are these: l. 4. Dial. c. 14. The soul departing,
such a fragrancy of smell did rise, as that all there present were replenished
with incredible sweetness. And a little after: Till the Body was buried, the
sweetness of that smell did not depart from their Noses. Neither are there
wanting many other such like Examples both of former and later times: from all
which we may gather, that if the Bodies of the dead Saints (after the Soul is
glorified) do send forth such sweet smells, then much more the living and
glorified Bodies of the saints shall breath forth a most delicious and sweet
Odor.

I will adioyne hereto that, which the said S. Gregory relates of the living
and most glorious Body of our Savior. Thus he writes: lib. 4. c. 16. and hom.
38. sup. Euang. Tarsilla the Virgin then looking up, sow Jesus coming; and
suddenly there was (as it were) sprinkled such a fragrancy of a wounderful
Odor, as that the sweetness thereof did assure all, that the Author of sweetness
was thither come. But if the glorified Body of our Redeemer did breath an odor
of such sweetness, then it is altogether credible, that all the Bodies of the
Saints shall send forth in Heaven a wonderful sweetness: For it is fitting,
that the members should be conformable to the Head, not only in splendor, but
also in suauity of Odor. Those men therefore, who are delighted with Odours,
let them think, with what sweetness they are to be replenished, when they shall
draw into their glorified sent, the diverse, and most sweet, odours of so many
thousands of Celestial flowers, on every side breathing forth in that divine
garden.

Of the Joy of the senses of Tasting, and Touching. CHAP. VIII.
COncerning the Sense of Taste, Deuines do write that the Blessed shall not use
any mortal meats: Notwithanding they shall have some delight in that sense,
that it may not seem to be superfluous. But concerning the Sense of touching;
or Feeling, all do agree, that the Use thereof shall not be wanting in Heaven.
Since the Bodies of the Blessed (as being true bodies with life) may doubtlesly
be touch; Our Lord thus speaking: Touch and see, for a spirit has not flesh
and bones, as you see me to have Luc. 24. Yet all impure touching shall be most
remote from their bodies, for they shall have no desire of Generation: And
therefore our Lord speaks thus: Math. 22. In the Resurrection neither shall
they marry, nor be married, But are as the Angels of God in Heaven. But we will
not here stay about these things, which are daily disputed in the Schools.
This one thing we affirm, that the Sense of Touching shall receive no small
pleasure from the perpetu^ll and most excellent habitude, or disposition of a
Glorious Body, through its qualities; of which the Apostle thus speaks: 1.
Cor. 15. The body is sown in Corruption, it rises in Incorruption; It is
sown in Dishonor, it shall rise in Glory; It is sown in Infirmity, it shall
rise in Power; It is sown a natural Body, it shall rise a spiritual Body.

Of these four qualities, or privileges of a glorified Body, that of glory or
splendor belongs to the sense of Seeing, as above we have said; the other
three seem properly to belong to the sense of Touching. For even as, when the
Body is oppressed with strokes, diseases, or wounds endangering the life, the
Sense of Touching is that, which suffers and grieueth; so in like manner,
when the Body enjoys perfect health, is sound, and of a strong constitution,
the Sense of Touching does rejoice. Therefore this sense shall have great joy
in Heaven, when after the Resurrection it shall be clad with Immortality,
Impassibility, and Health in the highest degree, and this for all Eternity.
What charges would not men willingly be at (especially Princes, and others of
great estates) to be freed all their life time, from the dolours of the Gout,
or of the Head, the stomach, or the reins? What joy shall it then be in
Heaven, from whence not only death, but all diseases and griefs shall be
altogether exiled? Furthermore, those Qualities, through the which a
corruptible body does rise incorruptible, and a body that is infirm, rises
impassible, do belong to the joy of the Sense of Touching.

In like sort, the qualities of Agility, or Subtility, by which a Natural Body
shall rise spiritual, seem to belong to the same Sense of touching: since
that Body shall be called spiritual, and shall be a glorious Body, not in that
it has not truly flesh and bones; but because it shall be so subject to the
spirit, as that at the very beck and pleasure of the spirit or soul, it shall be
able without any difficulty, toil, or wearines, to be moved most swiftly, to
ascend and descend, to go and return, to penetrate and pierce all places; and
this in such sort, as if it were not a Body, but a spirit. Therefore even as
the Sense of Touching grieueth and bears it self not well, when a heavy and
weighty body is forced to ascend high, or with great swiftnes and speed to be
removed from place to place; so also on the contrary, it much rejoices and
exulteth, when a Body without any toil, or wearines, either ascends above,
or passes most speedily from place to place.

Behold therefore from what servitude of Corruption the Blessed shall be freed,
when as they shall no more stand in need of Horses, Coaches, Gards of men,
Weapons, nor any other thing; but those Blessed Bodies even by their own
forces shall pass, and go, into what places themselves Will; and they shall
be every where most safe and exempt from all danger, yea in the midst and
thickest troops of armed men. I would to God, that such men, who cannot taste
or resent spiritual delights, in that they have an inuenomed and corrupted
palate or Taste; at least would entertayne with due consideration these most
great and perpetual Corporal Goods and Pleasures; and that they would labor,
with all endeavor, and bent of Will, for the purchasing thereof; For thus it
might come to pass, that by little and little they would aspire to higher
Matters; and so by these degrees they might at length, through the assistance
of God, arrive to everlasting Joys.

Of the Comparison of the Joys of the Earth, with the Joys of Heaven. CHAP.
IX.
WE have unfolded and explicated (according to our small ability) what Joys
are prepared in Heaven for those that love God. Now we will endeavor to
demonstrate by certain external Arguments, how great, and transcendent those
Joys are. Our first argument shall be taken from the comparison of the Joys,
which God often in this World, gives even to his professed Enemies, and to the
Reprobate. And certainly there is such a confluence of Joys consisting in
Riches, Honors, Power, and diverse pleasures, which God imparteth to sinners,
to his Enemies, either blaspheming against his dignity, or not believing in
him, as that of most men they are judged to be Blessed and most happy,
according to the words of the Prophet: Psalm. 143. They have said, it is a
happy People, which has these things. Which of the Lovers of this world does
not envy and grudge at Salomons Prosperity, who reigned forty years, abounded
with all affluence of riches and delights, and had seven hundred wives, and
three hundred Concubines? Who nevertheless (according to the judgment of S.
Austin) was a Reprobate: for thus this Father writes, in Psalm. 126. Even
Solomon himself was a lover of Women, and was reprobated of God. And in his
book de Ciuitate Dei c. 20. he says the same of Solomon, which Salust did of
Cataline: This man had a good beginning, but an evil ending. S Gregory
follows S. Austins judgment herein, thus writing: l. 2. moral. cap. 2. Hence
it is, that Solomon (though receiving VVisdome) did not persevere in Gods
favor etc. Neither are the Kings, or Emperors of the Turks, the Persians,
those of China, and Tartary, unlike to Solomon herein; all who enjoy most vast
and large Kingdoms, and are so devoted, or rather become slaves, to all sorts
of pleasure of the flesh, as that they give all liberty to the Heart, to the
Eyes, to the ears, to their taste, unto Lust, wallowing in all such
voluptuousnes, and sensualities, as may content any of these Parts.

But to pass over these Joys, of which but few are partakers: How great are
the consolations and Joys, which God gives to all men in Common, of whom the
Greatest part either know not God, or at lest do not adore him with that Honor
and fear, with which they oxght? Does he not give all the Earth, with all its
riches, delights, living Creatures, flowers, Metals to men in general? Does
he not give the seas, the fountaynes, Rivers, Lakes with so several sorts of
fish to all men promiscuously? Has he not created Heaven (which is, as a Cover
of this great House, and beautified with so many stars) for the general use
of Man? Has not this our most gracious and most bountiful Lord commanded the
sun to rise, and the Clouds to rain upon both the Just and Iniust? Now, if
he be so profuse (as I may say) in distributing so great benefits and comforts
to reprobate sinners, (being his ungrateful bondslaues, and worthy all
punishment) in this life; Is it then not most just and reasonable, that he
should reserve incomparably far greater Joys for his friends, and his sons?
Hear what S Austin meditateth hereof, saying: in Psalm. 10. Seeing God gives to
sinners (daily blaspheming him) the Heavens, the Earth, the Fountains, Fruits,
Health, Children, Ri^hes, abundance of all temporal Benefits; What then do
thou think, he lays up, and prouides for his servants, who giu^th all these
former joys and Comforts to sin^ers?

It is written of S. Fulgentius in his life, that he once behoulding the glory
and magnificence of the Senate of Rome, did burst forth into exclamation,
saying: How specious and illustrious may the Celestial Jerusalem be, if
Earthly Rome, do thus shine? And if in this world so great dignity and Honor
be ascribed to the Lovers of Vanity, what Honor and Glory shall be due to the
Saints, contemplating the Truth? Certainly S. Austin (who made a prudent and
true estimation of things) affirmed all earthly pleasures whatsoever, to be so
far short and inferior to Celestial, as he doubted not to say, that it were
more to be wished for a man to enjoy Heavenly pleasure, but for the space of
one day, then to enjoy all temporal pleasures for many thousands of Ages. His
words are these l. 3. de lib. arbit. c. vit. So great is the pleasure of
eternal Light, as that if it were permitted for one, to remain and stay
therein, no more, then the space of one day; yet even for so short a space of
the fruition thereof, innumerable years of this life, (though fraught with all
delights and affluence of temporal goods) are deservedly to be contemned. For
it is not said through any false or mistaking judgment, Psalm 83. Better is one
day in thy Courts, above thousands. Thus S. Austin.

Now what shall we from all this conclude? If these things be true (as they
are most true) have we not reason as length to begin to be wise, and open our
eyes? Hitherto we have been accustomed to say, that earthly pleasures are to
be contemned, because they are but short and momentary; and that Celestial are
to be loved, because they are everlasting: But we have heard S. Austin (a most
wise Doctor) inueighing against this our manner of speech, and earnestly
contesting, that if earthly matters were everlasting, and Celestial but
momentary, that nevertheless in a clear judgment, Heavenly goods and benefits
were to be preferred before Earthly. Are we not therefore deaf, are we not
blind, are we not fools and stupid, if for earthly benefits and pleasures,
which are not only base and ignoble, but also fading and momentary, we do
contemn or slight Celestial, which are most precious, and shall continue for
all Eternity? O most merciful Lord, dissolve this our deafnes, enlighten our
blindness, dispell our stupidity, and cure our madness. To what end have thou
signed upon us the light of thy Countenance, Psalm. 4. if we cannot discern,
and see these so great and so necessary matters? And why have thou given us
judgment of Reason, if we do not penetrate points so evident?

A Comparison of the Terrestrial Paradise, with the Celestial. CHAP. X.
WE have above compared the Joys of this World with the Joys of the kingdom
of Heaven. In this next place we will briefly parallel together the Joys of
the Terrestrial Paradise. How great the Joys of the Earthly Paradise were,
may be known from that it was (as it were) a Garden of Delights, allotted to
men who were created to the image and similitude of God, whereas the rest of
the Earth was given to Brute Beasts. And hereupon when Adam by sinning did lose
his Honor, in which God had constituted him, and was made like to Beasts
without Understanding, Psalm. 48. he was then cast out of that Place, and
banished into this. S. Alcuinus surnamed Auitas writing upon Genesis, does
lively describe this Terrestrial Paradise* and shows it to have been a Region
most pleasant and most temperate, where the Heat of the summer did not scorch
or burn, nor the cold of the Winter annoy or hurt; but a perpetual spring of
flowers did exhilerate, and refresh; and the Autumn to abound with all kind of
fruits. His words are these: Hic ver assiduum etc. In this place the mildnes of
the Air causes a continual spring; the te^pestuous Southwind is absent; the
Clouds do fly away from under the clear firmament, giving place to a
continual serenity. Neither does the nature of the Soil require any showers;
since the buds, and the young plant are content with the falling dew. Thus
seeing neither Winter to hurt, nor Summer to burn, the Autumn furnishes the
year with all fruits, and the spring-tyme with flowers. Thus he,

S. Basil in like manner (lib. de paradiso) thus describes this Terrestrial
Paradise, saying: Illic plantauit Deus etc. God placed Paradise there, where no
violence of wynds, nor vnpleasantnes of times, nor Hayle, nor lightning, nor
thunder, nor frost, nor moisture, nor scorching eat, nor drines is to be
found: But there is a peaceful and temperate agreement of all times among
themselves etc. And S. Austin agrees with the former doctors in describing
this Terrestrial Paradise lib. 14. de Ciuit. cap. 10. Quid timere vel dolere
poterant illi etc. What should those men fear or grieve at, who were even
encompassed about with such an affluency of so great goods, where neither
death, nor any evil disposition of the Body was to be feared; neither was
there any thing absent, which a virtuous will could desire; nor any thing there
present which could displease or offend the flesh, or mind of a man, living
happily etc. And then a little after: How happy therefore were our first Parents,
who were not troubled with any perturbations of the mind, nor hurt with any
discommodities of the Body? So happy should all mankind have been, if they had
committed no evil which after they did cast upon their children, nor any of
their posterity had perpetrated iniquity, which should deserve damnation, Thus
S. Austin.

But howsoever these particularities of the pleasantnes and frutfulnes of this
Terrestrial Paradise went; we infallibly gather from the holy Scripture, that
it was a far more happy place, then this our Habitation is; since it is said
to Adam by way of punishment of his sin, Genesis 3. Because thou have heard the
voice of thy Wife, and have eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee not to
eat, cursed he the Earth in thy work; with much toil and labor shall thou
eat thereof all the days of thy life; thorns and thisles shall it bring
forth to thee. And to the Woman it was said: I will multiply thy sorrows, and
thy childbearings in travel; thou shall be under thy Husbands Power, and he
shall have dominion over thee. Thus we see, that in Paradise there was not any
barrenes of Earth, nor was it to be inhabited with any labor or pains;
neither did it bring forth any thorns or thisle. In like sort the Women there
should never have conceived in vain, but their co^ceauings should ever have
been accompanied with most happy byrths. And although they had been subject
to their Husbands; yet this not after any Lord like authority over them, but
after a civil and moderate manner: Therefore men should there have led a happy
life, void of all fear, grief, or labor.

Now if the Terrestrial Paradise wanted all Evil, and abounded with many and
great goods and commodities, what then may we conceive of the Celestial
Paradise* which ought to be so much the more high, and so much the more good,
by how much the persons for which it is ordained, are better? But the Height of
the Heaven of the Blessed, is without any comparison, more sublime and high,
then the Paradise of Adam; and the Blessed men in Heaven, who can neither
sin* nor dye, are by infinite degrees better, then the inhabitants of the
Terrestrial Paradise, who could both sin and dye: Therefore we may ineuitably
infer, that the Heavenly Paradise does not only want all Evil, but that it
is replenished with Pleasures, Goodness, and Felicity; and this incomparably
greater in worth, and more in number, then the Earthly Paradise did abound. Now
these things being most certain, let us burst out into thanks and gratefulnes
to God, who for the Terrestrial Paradise, taken from us through the malice and
envy of the devil, has by the Redemption of his Son prepared for us the
Celestial Paradise, far more blessed, and happy. And to the end, that we may
not be unthankful to so great a Redemer, and also that we may not seem to be
enemies to our selves; let us strive with all our endeavor and forces, to
find a way to the Celestial Paradise, and to enlarge the way thereto by an
entyre Faith, sincere Hope, perfect Charity, and good Works.

A Comparison of the goods of this World, and the goods of the Terrestrial
Paradise joined together, with the goods of the Celestial Paradise only. CHAP.
XI.
BUT let us proceed further in this our ballancing of things; and let us
compare all the goods of this world, as also all the goods of the Earthly
Paradise (joined together) with the goods only of the Celestial Paradise; and
so see, whether of these do preponderate, and weigh down the other. This we
shall more easily effect if we conceive, that Riches, Empyres, Pleasures, and
all the glory of Solomon, and of all other like most happy men, could be
obtained without labor, and retained and kept without fear; as also if we
further suppose such most fortunate men never to sin, nor neuet to dye; yet so,
as that they might sin, and might dye: Now all this by supposall being
granted, I most confidently affirm, that the goods of the Celestial Paradise
only, do infinitely surpass all the goods of this world, and of the
Terrestrial Paradise together, From whence it will appear, that those goods
being joined together ca^ neither satisfy the mind; nor satiate the desire of
the mind; since the Heart of Man is capable of an infinite and boundless good.
Therefore that shall ever stand for a true and maine Position, which S. Austin
has left recorded lib. 1. Confess. cap. 1. Thou have O Lord made us for thy
self, and to the lykenes of thy self; yet our Heart is unquiet, till it rest in
thy sclfe, And so true also is that, which the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 16. I
shall be filled, when thy glory shall appear. Now so long as the Heart shall be
unquiet, it shall be miserable; and if it be miserable, so long it cannot be
blessed or happy.

But the Celestial Paradise enjoys this priuiledg, that, it is of power to
satiate the soul, and to exile and expel all unquietness and solicitude. For
what can that man want, who shall be like to God, Because he shall see God, as he
is, 1. Joan. 3.? What can he want, whom God shall constitute or appoint over
all goods. Matthew. 24.? What can he want, who shall reign with God, shall be
coheyre with Christ, whom the Father has appointed heir of all. Heb. 1.? I
say, what can this man want, except he will dream, that God himself is
miserable? Furthermore, those goods of the world, and of the Terrestrial
Paradise (how great, or of what Nature soever they might be) in that they stood
obnoxious to be lost, were not perfect goods; neither could they satiate the
mind, or give to it a full repose, or rest; and for this respect they did not,
nor could make a Man Blessed or happy: but the goods of the Celestial Paradise
are on every side perfect and stable; neither are they in any sort subject to
loss, or dimunition: for the Saints placed in those most happy Seats, can
neither dye, neither can they sin; and of their everlasting felicity they are
most secure. Therefore let mortal men open their eyes, let them often call to
mind, of what moment it is, not to loose the Celestial Paradise. For hear the
business touches the maine matter of all others, and is not about trifles, or
fading vanities, And therefore the Wisdom of God, even through a divine
Judgment, has pronounced: What does it profit a man, if he gain the whole
World, and sustain the damage of his soul? Matt. 16. Marc. 8. Luc. 9.

A Comparison of the price of the Celestial Paradise, and the Paradise it
self. CHAP. XII.
THe last Comparison shall be of the Price, with the which Christ did buy
Paradise, and with the which it ought to be bought of us, with relation to the
greatness and dignity of Paradise it self. Christ with effusion of his own
most precious blood did buy Paradise for us, which the Envy of the Devil had
before violently taken from us, not that himself might enjoy it, but only that
we might be deprived of it. For to this end the Devil seduced Eve, and by her
he caused Adam to sin, that so they might be Consorts and fellows in
punishment. Christ therefore is that prudent Merchant, ( Matthew. 13.) who gave
all his goods, that he might buy this precious Margarite; by the which he
clearly enough did teach, that the Kingdom of Heaven is signified: for it is
he, of whom the Apostle speaks, when he says, 1. Cor. 6. You are brought
with a great Price. And the Apostle S. Peter: Not with corruptible things,
gould, or silver are you redeemed, but with the precious blood (as it were) of
an immaculate and unspotted Lamb, Christ, 1. Pet. 1. And again; They deny
him, that bought them, the Lord. 2. Pet. 2. For Christ (at one and the same
time) did buy Paradise for us, and did buy us. For we before were made
Captives, and had lost Paradise by sin: But Christ redeeming us from sin,
and from the Captivity of the Devil, did withal adopt us the Sons, and
heirs of God; and in so doing, did restore Paradise unto us. From hence
therefore the greatness and vvorth of the Celestial Paradise may be conceived;
to wit, that in the Wisdom of God, it is thought to be worthy of an infinite
Price.

If here among men a prudent and rich merchant should be content to give all
his wealth for the buying of a precious Pearl; certainly no man would once
doubt, but that the Jewel were of so inestimable Worth and value, as that it
could hardly find a sufficient price. Of what account and estimation then (if
we have any spark of true judgment) ought the Possession of the Kingdom of
Heaven seem to us to be, the which the VVisdome of God, the Word Incarnate,
with all his labors, toils, and dolours, for the space of thirty three
years, and lastly with his own blood and most precious death, did purchase,
and buy? We are wholy stupid, yea mad, if we will sell our interest and
title of that thing, for a base and most vile price of temporal Good, which
Christ our Lord rated at an infinite Price and value.

But what? Not only Christ was content to buy Paradise with the effusion of
his own blood; but all Saints being herein taught by him, did most willingly
expose whatsoever they had, with all their force and strength, for the gayning
of the said Paradise. Yea the Blessed Apostle thus bursteth out in words: Romans
8. The Passions of this time are not worthy of the glory to come, that shall be
revealed to us. And if any of the Martyrs were demanded, whether they did
willingly buy Paradise with such Torments; as also if the Holy Confessors
were questioned, whether they did in like sort promptly and readily buy
Paradise with their so many Watchings, Fasts, Prayers, Alms deeds, and
Persecutions; no doubt they would all cry out in one voice with the Apostle:
The Passions and sufferings of this time, are not worthy of the glory to come,
which shall be revealed to us. For although the Blood of Christ was not only a
worthy price of Paradise for us, but also (as I may speak) more then a worthy
Price, as being supereminent, and exceeding the dignity of the thing which was
bought; nevertheless Christ's good pleasure was, that we also should buy
Paradise, thereby the more to honor and exalt us. The Glory of man is great,
in that he obtayneth Paradise, not only from the merits of Christ; but also
from his own merits, streaming from the Virtue and force of Christ his merits.
And if a man will not (when it is in his power) do good, and suffer evil, for
the buying of Paradise, he is worthily expelled from the buying of Christ, as
an evil and slothful servant, as Christ himself admonishes in the Parable
of the Talents, Matthew. 25. and the Apostle vehemently counsels, Romans 8. when
he says: If sons, Heirs also; Heirs truly of God, and Coheyres of Christ;
yet if we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with him.

And to prevent, that whereas some men may perhaps complain, they have not a
sufficient Price for the buying of Paradise; let such take notice, that nothing
more is asked of us here, but what our selves have. For thus S. Austin
speaks: The kingdom of God is worth so much, as thou have. Which point the
same Father proves from examples of divine Scripture, thus he writing tract.
in Psalm. 49. Quid tam vile etc. What is so vile, what is so terrene and
earthly, as to break and give a piece of bread to the Hungry? So much the
kingdom of Heaven is worth. For it is written. Possess the kingdom prepared
for you, for I was hungry, and you gave me bread. The VVidow did buy it with
two mytes. Peter bought Paradise by leaving his nets: and Zacheus by giving the
half of his Patrimony. Thus far S. Austin discourses. To whom Venerable Bede
is herein agreeable, when he says, that he, who has nothing besides himself,
yet in giving himself, he buieth Heaven. His words are these Sermon. 19. de
Sanctis: Regnum caeleste etc. The kingdom of heaven, requires no other price
then thy self. Tantum valet, quantum es tu; te da, and habebis illud.
Certainly Lazarus the beggar, had nothing, which he could give, but only his
patience in suffering his griefs and pains; and yet he was carried by the
Angels into the bosom of Abraham. And the good thief had nothing in this
World that was his, but only a free and ready voice, with which he cried out:
Remember me, when thou shall come into thy kingdom; and yet he presently did
hear, To day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

O most truly great liberality of God! O ineffable felicity of man, who can so
easily make bargain (as it were) with his Lord, for the price of a thing, most
precious above all other things! Do thou (O man) covet of God, and thirst
after the enjoying of Paradise, the height of all delights and pleasures? Give
thy self in price, and thou shall obtain it. But what is the meaning of these
Words, Give thy self? To wit Love God from the depth of thy heart; Humble thy
self under his potent and mighty hand; Praise him at all times; Submit thy
self with all promptitude of mind to his will, whether it shall be his pleasure,
that thou shall be rich or poor; glorious or ignoble; finally in Health, or in
sickness: for his Will in every thing is good, and all his Judgments are just.
Say to God: I am thine, dispose of me according to thy best pleasure and Will.
I do not resist, I do not reclayme, I do not withdraw my self out of thy
jurisdiction: My Heart is prepared and ready (O my God) my heart is prepared; Let
not my Will, but thy Will be done.

This Holocaust of Obedience did Christ daily offer up to his Father, as
himself does testify, when he said: The things that please him, I do always,
Joan. 8. And the like did the Apostle, the true imitatour of Christ, saying, 2.
Cor. 5. We strive, whether we be ahsent, or present, to please him. This
perfect renunciation, and disclayming from all things which a man possesses,
or desires to possess; this abnegation of a man's self, that he may serve only
God, is the true Price of Paradise. Neither follows it, that who gives
himself away after this manner, that he may buy Paradise, does loose himself:
but most truly and most happily he does find himself, according to those words
of our Lord Matthew. ^0. He that loses his life for me, shall find it; He that
hates his life in this World, does keep it to life everlasting. But because
this Wisdom is hidden from the wise and prudent men of this worcester d; who truly
are fools in the sight of God; and because the number of fools is infinite;
therefore many are called, but few are chosen. Matthew. 22.

OF THE ETERNAL FELICITY OF THE SAINTS, Under Parabolicall Names. THE FIFTH
BOOK.
Of a Treasure hidden in the field. CHAP. I.
HITHERTO I have written so far forth, as God has vouchsafed to dictate to me
in my Meditations, of the felicity of the Saints under the name of those places
which they do inhabit; I mean, under the places of the kingdom of Heaven; of
the City of God; of ^he House of our Lord; and of the Para^ (...) ^elights and
Pleasures. I will in this next place add something concerning the same
Felicity, under the name of such Things, to the which our Lord in Parables has
compared the Felicity of Saints. And here in the beginning, it is to be
aduertized, that those Words of our Lord, The kingdom of Heaven is like etc.
(the which our Lord does commonly use) are not ever referred to the Words
immediately following; As where our Lord says: The kingdom of Heaven is like
unto a Merchant man; he means not, that the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a
Merchant man, but he refers those words to the whole Narration, in which by
way of similitude, the way to the Kingdom of Heaven is demonstrated. And
further, we are to observe, that the Kingdom of Heaven, is sometimes in the
Parables described more obscurely, at other times more clearly, and sometimes
not touched at all. I will explicate the several members of this division.

Whereas our Lord in S. Matthew, sets down the Parable of the sower, he
describes the fruit, which the Preaching of the Gospel brings forth,
according to the diverse dispositions of the earth: and this he calls the
Mystery of the Kingdom of God: but touching the Beatitude of the Saints he
speaks nothing. But where our Lord in the same place, does add the Parable of
the Cockle, he briefly touches the felicity of Saints, when he says, that the
good Seed, or wheat is to be gathered up into the barn of our Lord, and the
Cockle to be tied together and burned. But when in the same Chapter he
relates the Parables of him that sought for good Pearls, and of him that did
find the Treasure hidden in the field, then more perspicuously he compares the
Kingdom of God to a Pearl, and to a Treasure: And of this third kind, among
the Parables of our Lord, I find only six. One of a Treasure hidden in a field;
another of a precious Margarite or Pearl; The third of the daily Penny; the
fourth of the Lord, or Master distributing the Talents; The fifth, of a Great
supper; the sixth of a Marriage. To the which we will adioyne two similitudes out
of the Apostle; the one of those who run in a race; the other, who fight, or
strive for the Maistery: So as there shall be eight Considerations touching the
Blessed life of the Saints, deduced from Parabolicall Names, or Titles.

The first Parable then is taken from S. Matthew: cap 13. The kingdom of heaven
is like to a Treasure, hidden in a field. Where our Lord teaches, how it may
be gotten, when he says: Which when a man having found, did hide it, and for
joy thereof goes, and sells all that he has, and buyeth that field.
Treasure signifies a great abundance of gould, silver, and precious stones;
as Paulus the Civil Lawyer teaches (de acquir. rerum dom. L. Nunquam) and
this Treasure ought to be so ancient, as that there remained no memory thereof
before; and therefore it has no proper Lord, but belongs by right to him,
that finds it. This Treasure in S. Matthew, is the Divinity it self, which is
hid in the field of the Humanity of Christ, as S. Hilarious and S. Jerome (in
Com. cap. 13. Matthew.) do rightly expound. For in Christ (as the Apostle says)
all the Treasures of the knowledge and VVisdome of God are hidden. Now the
Divinity is the most true Treasure of all goods, and is indeed so ancient
(since it is eternal, and did precede all Ages) as that there can be no former
memory of it extant. Neither had this Infinite Treasure any proper Lord to own
it, for it self is the Lord of all things. Nevertheless this Treasure of the
Divinity is said to belong to the right of them that find it; because God
gives himself freely to those, who by selling all their substance and Goods,
earnestly labor to acquire and purchase him.

It is further said to be had, as it were, and dug in a field, to wit, in
the Humanity of Christ; for although the Divinity be every where, yet it is in
no place so properly and peculiarly, as in the Humanity of Christ, to the which
it is so united* as that one and the same Person is both God and Man. And
therefore the Apostle says, 2. Cor 5. God was in Christ, reconciling the
World to himself. And though the Divinity be in no place more, then in the
Humanity of Christ; notwithstanding it seems to be so hid therein, as that it
is needful to use a light or candle, to demonstrate and show God to be in
Christ. And this light was S. John Baptist, who, as S. John writes cap. 5. was
the lamp burning and shining; Of whom David in the Person of God the Father,
did thus prophesy, Ps. 131. I have prepared a Lamp unto my Christ. For S. John
Baptist did manifest Christ, and did show, that he was God, and the only
begotten son of God, when he said Joan. 1. God no man has ever seen; the
only begotten son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared.
And again: He that comes from Heaven, is above all. And a little after: The
Father loves the Son, and he has given all things in his hand: he that
belieueth in the son, has life everlasting; but he that is incredulous to
the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God remains upon him. Joan. 3.

But although this burning and shining Lamp did manifest Christ openly to be
the Son of God; nevertheless the blinded Jews could not (at least would
not) acknowledge the Divinity to be hidden in Chrisi. For if they had known so
much, then, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 2. they would never have crucified
the Lord of Glory. Who therefore being enlightened from God, does find this
Treasure, does hide it, and for joy thereof goes, and sells all that he
has, and buyeth the field. To hide the Treasure being found, is nothing e^s,
but to conceal and cover the received Grace of God, under the veyle of
Humility, and not to vaunt* of divine Consolations and Revelations, for fear
that vain and aerie glory do corrupt true Glory. Therefore Esaias cap. 24. was
accustomed to say: My secret is to my self: And the Apostle 2. Cor. 12. If I
must needs glory (it is not expedient indeed) I will come to the Visions and
Revelations of our Lord. I know a man in Christ, above fourteen years ago
etc. For that most remarkable Revelation, which the Apostle being rapt into
Paradise, received, he concealed for the space of fourteen years, and would
have concealed it, but that the necessity of disclosing the same, forced him
thereto. And he plainly pronounces, that it is not expedient to publish and
make known such gifts or privileges; and therefore he did discover it under
an uncertain name, well showing thereby, how anxiously he suffered the
manifestation thereof. The like fell out unto S. Francis, when the sacred
Prints or wounds were from above impressed upon his body, as S. Bonauenture in
his life relates; For at other times he was accustomed to conceal his divine
revelations, and to say with Esaias: My secret is to my self etc. But when he
saw the matter could be concealed no longer, he related with great fear the
whole order of his Vision to his Brethren demanding him thereof.

But to proceed. To buy with joy that field, wherein the Treasure did lie
hidden, signifies only, that he, who will enjoy God and Cbrist in the Kingdom
of Heaven, ought to suffer in affection, renouncing and casting away of all
temporal things, and to bequeath both himself, and what he any way has,
unto the service and obedience of God: and this not with any painful
reluctation of Will, or necessity, but with all alacrity and joy, seeing that
God loves a chereful giver. 2. Cor. 9. But he who truly knows, how immense a
Treasure it is, to enjoy Christ in the Eternal Country, to behold his
Divinity with the Eye^ of his Soul, and his Humanity with the Eyes of his
Body, and to participate of all the goods of God and Christ, and to be sure and
certain of so great a Possession for all Eternity, will think it no great
matter to spurn at, and contemn all temporalities whatsoever, yea his own
life, for the love of God, and everlasting felicity. Witness to us of this Point
may be S. Ignatius Martyr, thus writing to the Romans: Fyar, the Cross,
cruelty of beasts, cutting asunder my Body, breaking of my bones, a rending of
all my members, the extinguishment of all my Body, yea all the whips, and
scourges of the devil, let shem full upon me, so that I may deerue to obtain,
and purchase Christ. Now he, who out of the fulness of his Charity toward
Christ, thus speaks, doubtlesly would little fear want, poverty, ignominy,
exile, prisons, so that he might not lose that incomparable Treasure. Whoseuer
therefore earnestly coueteth to gain the Treasure of Eternal life, let him
most seriously think and consider with himself, whether he be prepared with an
immovable resolution, to contemn and betra^ple under his feet all other
goods: since otherwise, neither a live, nor dead, shall he ever obtain that
Treasure, without the which he shall eternally be most miserable and poor.

But I here will demand, what is the reason, why so many men in such heat of
desire, do seek after the Treasures of Gould and silver: and not content to
use herein humane diligence, they fly, by most execrable Arts, to the help of
the Devil, with imminent danger both of their reputation and life? And yet thy
Treasure (O Lord my God) so few do seek, which alone is able to enrich a man,
and which they may easily purchase without labor, charge, or peril? Truly I
do see no other Cause hereof, but either want of faith in thy People, or their
overmuch negotiation in temporal affairs, which leaves them no time to
think, and meditate of thy divine Promises made unto men. Therefore (O
Blessed Lord,) increase our Faith and belief concerning thy Promises, and
extinguish our thirst in the pursuit of temporal riches. For so it may come
to pass, that with greater and more feruerous bent of desire, we shall seek
after thy Treasure; and finding it, with sale of all we have, may resolve to
purchase it.

Of the precious Margarite, or Pearl. CHAP. II.
AN other Parable like to the former, and which also next follovveth in S.
Matthew cap. 13. is of the Precious Pearl, or Margarite. For in that there was
a Treasure; in this a Pearl, which may be esteemed, as a Treasure. In that it
was needful by selling of all a man possesses, to buy the field in which the
Treasure was hid; In this in like manner it is necessa^y to buy the Pearl,
with the charges and expenses of all we have. Therefore it is convenient only
to explicate, in what points these two Parables do diff^r. They differ in two
things; to wit, that in the first a Treasure is mentioned, in this a Pearl.
Again, that the Treasure was found by chance; whereas the Pearl, was
d^ligently sought after by the Merchant. And truly in this place the Celestial
Beatitude, or Christ himself is understood by the Pearl, as S. Ambrose, sermon.
6. S. Gregory Nazianzen. orat. 49. Ruffinus and others do interpret. That is
called the Pearl in this Parable, which in the former Parable was called a
Treasure, to give us to understand, that the Divinity of Christ (which is the
Object of Eternal felicity, or, the Vision whereof (to speak in the Deuines
dialect) is the formal Beatitude or Felicity, is indeed a Treasure, but not
divided into several kinds of gould, silver, and precious stones; but is one
thing, which contains in it self the price of an infinite Treasure. Whereas
the Pearl is but one only thing, containing in it self (according to the
judgment of Pliny) (lib 9. c. 35.) the perfection and height of all Precious
things.

Furthermore, a Treasure may consist of only money or goods, though in very
great quantity, which Treasure respects only profit, and not pleasure, or
outward Pomp. Wherefore to prevent, that a man do not gather out of the former
Parable, that Celestial Beatitude is only profitable, and not specious and
honorable, our Lord did add this other Parable of the Pearl: in which he
teaches, that the Divinity of Christ, and our felicity is like to the Pearl;
which (besides the profit of a Treasure) has also in it fayrenes and splendor
which does adorn and delight. We may add heerto, that the Pearl is the
Symbol, Character, or sign of Christ, both as he is the Son of God, and
also as he is the Son of the Virgin. For as the Pearl is engendered of the
light of the Sun, and of the dew of Heaven (as Pliny in the place above
cited, and others do teach) so also the Son of God according to his Deity, is
begotten of the Father of lights, who is an increated Sun, and therefore it
is said in the Creed, Light of Light, True God of true God. And the same Christ
according to his Humanity, is begotten of the dew of Heaven; because he was
conceived of the Holy Ghost, and not of the seed of man. To conclude, the
Pearl is white, clear, solid, pure, light, and round; In like sort the
Humanity of Christ (much more incomparably his Divinity) is white through its
innocence, lucid or clear, through its wisdom, solid for its co^stancy, pure
as being without spot, light in regard of its sweetness and mildnes, round in
that it is of each side perfect.

Now the Pearl in the Gospel is not found by chance, but it is sought after
diligently by the prudent Merchant. Neither does this Parable contradict the
former, in which the Treasure is said to be found by chance; for both these
Points are true, but in diverse persons: And therefore our Lord even out of a
divine prudence, did adioyne this later Parable to the former, lest it might be
thought to happen to all men, to light upon the Treasure unexpectedly, and
casually. For God does illuminate some men upon a sudden, with singular or
special grace; so as they neither seeking, nor coveting, nor thinking thereof,
do notwithstanding arrive to truth of Faith, to a most ardent Charity, yea to a
certain hope of obtaining eternal life. And these men may be said to find
this Treasure by chance; although God, not by chance, but through his Eternal
Providence, did preordayne them to this grace, and to future Glory. Now other
men God does indeed prevent with his Grace, but he does not presently show to
them the Treasure, but as it were breaths into them a desire of seeking the
Truth, making them careful Merchants, and helping and directing them, until
they find the Precious Pearl.

We may glass this different proceeding of God in S. Paul and S. Austin, S.
Paul did not seek the true Treasure, which is Christ; but did persecute Christ
as a seducer, and the Christians as men seduced. And when he was in his
journey, Breathing forth threatenings and slaughter, against the disciples of
our Lord, Christ did appear unto him, and withal did blind the eyes of his
body, that he might illuminate the eyes of his heart; and this with so great a
splendor and brightness, as that instantly he became of a Persecutour a
Preacher. And although this by a happy chance did fall unto him; yet that which
was chance to S. Paul, was Providence in God. For thus himself speaks to the
Galatians, cap. 1. You have heard of my conversation sometime in Iudaisme, that
above measure I persecuted the Church of God, and expugned it: and profited in
Iudaisme above many of mine Equals in my Nation, being more abundantly an
Emulatour of the Traditions of my Fathers. But when it pleased God, that
separated me from my Mothers womb, and called me by his Grace, to reveal his
Son in me, that I should Euangelize him among the Gentills, incontinently I
condescended not to flesh and blood etc. Therefore S. Paul even from the womb
of his Mother, was separated by divine Providence, that he should preach the
Gospel of Christ notwithstanding he did not find the precious Pearl, or the
Treasure in the field; but the Treasure did of it self offer it self unto
him, and caused it to be beloved of him with so an inflamed Charity, as that he
spared no labor, but exposed himself to all dangers, prizing all things, as
dung, so that he might gain Christ. Phil 3.

But now S. Austin did tread contrary steps to the Apostle herein; for even
from his youth he began to burn with desire of fynding out this precious
Pearl, that is, true wisdom, and eternal Felicity. For when he fell into the
Sect of the Manichees, he much labored with himself, in searching, and
disputing with others, how he might find the Eua^gelicall Truth. And when as he
found nothing in that Sect, but fabulous and lying Narrations, h^ almost
despayred of finding the Truth, though he had spent many years in the search
thereof. For thus himself speaks, lib. 6. Confess. c. 6. I descended even
into the depth of the sea, and I did distrust and despair of fynding out the
Truth. Yet it pleased God, that at length he should find out the precious
Pearl. And then without any delay, selling all his substance; that is
abandoning the desire of marriage (with which he was most forcibly with-houlden)
and contemning all lucre, and honors (to which he before had enslaued himself)
he wholy for ever after espoused himself to the obedience and service of God:
this therefore is the cause, why our Lord in the first. Parable, compared the
Kingdom of Heaven to a Treasure, found without labor and by chance; and in
the later Parable resembled it to a Pearl, found out by the merchant, with
great labor, travel, and study.

Now this one thing remains* I mean, that a Christian Soul do seriously
ponder with it self, in the sight God setting aside all other business for a
time, what kind of traffic this is, how profitable, and easy, during this
time; and how difficult, or rather impossible will it be, if once the occasion
of the present Market be let slip and lost. Doubtlesly, the children of this
World would not pretermit occasion of buying a Pearl, which might be sold
for many thousands of Crowns of gold, and yet now at the present Fair might
be bought for one hundred only of silver; although they should be forced to
take up the momoney at excessive Use. And shall then the Children of light be
so imprudent, and negligent, as that they cannot be induced to buy that Pearl,
which shall enrich and beautify them for all Eternity; when as they need not
neither take up silver at use, nor yet run up and down for enquiry of the
price of the Pearl, but it may beholde^ as sufficient, freely to give that,
which they have, although all their substance arrive not to two Myres?
Therefore (O Lord God) let thy light shine in our Hearts, give to us a desire to
know the valuable price and Worth of this thy Pearl, and withal the vtility
of that price, which is exacted of us, that so we may obtain the Pearl. Add
(O Lord) to our Mercies, that thou will not in vain show to us so rich a
Pearl. And thou, who have said: Cast not your Pearls before Swyne (Matthew. 7.)
so work in us by thy grace, that if at any time, we have been like to swyne,
in not knowing the dignity and worth of this thy Pearl, but preferring
ackornes, and husks before it, we may now be illuminated by thee, to
acknowledge and seek after the same, and by the selling of all that we have,
with joy may purchase and buy it.

Of the daily Penny. CHAP. III.
Here follows the third Parable, touching the daily Penny, promised by the
Househoulder to such as labored in his Vineyard* Which Parable we find in S.
Matthew cap. 20. At the first sight, the reward of eternal life seems to be
much extenuated, and lessened in this Parable, since it is here compared but to
a daily Penny, which before was compared to a Treasure, and precious Pearl.
But this extenuation is annexed* that the reward may be suitable with the labor
and the Work: For the similitude would seem incongruous, if a huge Treasure,
or a Pearl, or a Scepter, or Regal Crown should be promised to laboring men
only for the space of one day. Now that this penny is not a penny of some few
brass pieces, but a Celestial Penny, which suffices for the procuring of all
necessary things, and this for all Eternity, may be easily demonstrated: seeing
the wages or reward ought to be answerable to the labor. Now the labor of
those, which work in the Vineyard of Christ, ought not to be prized and
esteemed, only according to the substance of the Work; For in this sense we
all ought to say with the Apostle Romans 8. The passions of this time are not
condign to the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us. But it is to receive
its value and estimation from the grace of God, inhabitant in the hearts of the
Just, which is a fountain of living Water, springing up unto life everlasting.
Joan. 4.

Al^o it is to be weighed from the Ve^tue of Charity, which is infused into us
by the Holy Ghost, who is given to us; for the Crown of eternal life is
prepared of God for all that love him, as S. James writes cap. 1. It is in
like sort to be prized from the Co^iunctio^ the labor has with Christ, who
gives a value and chief estimation to the fruits of the living branches, as
a true Vine; and to the works of the living members of his mystical Body, of
which he is the Head, and to whom himself said, Matthew. 5. Be glad and rejoice,
for your reward is very great in Heaven. To conclude, shall not our Lord at the
day of Judgment say, when the reward shall be given to all that have labored in
the Vineyard: Come you blessed of my Father, possess you the kingdom,
prepared for you from the beginning of the World; For I was hungry, and you
gave me to eat etc. seeing the Works of Charity belong chiefly to labor, by
the which we toil, and sweat in the Vineyard of Christ(

Behold therefore how precious and inestimable is that Penny, which of our
Lord himself is called a Kingdom. Neither can this Penny undeservedly be
called a Kingdom, since it does represent and figure out Christ, no less then
a Treasure, or a Pearl does. For in a Penny is engraven the Image of the
Prince; in it are also written certain words, and the form of it is round.
Now Christ is the Image of the invisible God, as we learn from the Apostle,
Coloss. 1. He is also the Word of the Eternal Father, as S. John the
Evangelist says; and he has no beginning of days, nor end of life, as the
Apostle teaches Hebr. 7. which is signified by the roundnes of the figure. To
conclude, the most wise Solomon says: All things are obedient and subject to
money: and Christ is the Lord of all riches, as S. Peter witnesses. Act. 13.
Therefore it follows, that the Penny, which is given to those that labor in
the Vineyard, is Christ, true God, and therein Eternal life; according to that
of S. John: That we may know the true God, and may be in his true Son, this
is the true God, and life everlasting. 1. Joan. 5.

But let us see, to whom this precious Penny is to be given; the which who have
once obtained, shall not stand in further need of any thing. Our Lord says,
Math. 20. Call the Workmen, and pay them their hyre. Therefore it is to be
given unto those, that labor in the Vineyard without intermission, without
cessation, without negligence. It shall not be given to those that stand idle
in the Marketplace, or to those who spend their time in hawking, hunting,
plays, or sports. For the Reward or hyre is given only to them that merit; it
is not given gratis, much less is it given to those that do demerit. Which
point the Apostle confirms saying, Romans 6. The stipend of sin, is death;
but the grace of God, is life everlasting. The Apostle thus speaks, because
without the precedent Grace of God no man can work well, so, as the reward of
Eternal life may be due to him; But Grace being received (I mean that Grace,
which is given Gratis, and not by reason of any works) then the reward of Good
works shall be Eternal life. And according hereto S. Austin thus speaks: As
death is given as a reward for the merit of sin; so Eternal life is given,
as a reward or stipend for the merit of Justice, Ep. 105. ad Sixtum.

Neither are we here to imagine, that because the same Penny is given
indifferently to all the Workmen and Laborers, that therefore in the Kingdom
of Heaven the Rewards are alike to all. For thou this Penny does signify
Eternal life, or God, or Christ; and that Eternal life, and God, and Christ
shall be common to all: Yet here we are to observe, that even as the same sun
is more clearly seen of an Eagle, then of any other Bird; and the same fire
does more heat those who stand near to it, then those who are further
distant: Even so among those, who shall see God and Christ, one shall see more
clearly, and in seeing shall rejoice with greater pleasure, then another. And
as the merits of men shall be different, so also shall their Rewards be
different. But here one doubt may be urged, why the Lord in distribution of his
rewards, did change the order, saying: Pay them their hyr^ beginning from the
last, unto the first; So shall the last be first, and the first last; for many
be called, but few Elect. But here we are to conceive, that this belongs to
the grace and privilege of the new Testament* that thereby we may understand
ourselves to be more happy, then the Fathers of the Old Testament; and that in
this respect we may be more grateful to God, and may with more diligence and
alacrity labor in his Vineyard.

The Holy Fathers, who before the Ascension of Christ, did cultiuate the
Vineyard of our Lord, were Adam, Noe, Abraham, Moses, and the rest of the
Patriarchs, and Prophets. They were called in the first, the third, the sixth,
the nynth hour; they not only labored a long time, because they lived long;
but even after their deaths for the space of many Centuries of years, and some
thousands, they expected not to receive their hyre, or wages, that is, their
Penny. But the Apostles, the Martyrs, and other laborers, who came to the
Vineyard at the eleauenth hour (that is, as S. John expounds, at the last
hour) wrought therein but few years, and presently upon their death, entering
into the Kingdom of Heaven, they received their Penny. Now how great and
worthy is this grace, that a Christian Man (if himself will) may through his
undergoing a most short labor, ascend to that place, to the which the holy
Patriarchs and Prophets for a most long time earnestly desired to arrive?
Therefore not without cause, did those ancient Fathers, say with a certain
murmr (which might seem to signify rather admiration, then complaint) Matthew.
20. These last have continued but one hour, and thou have made them equal to
us, that have borne the burden of the day, and the heat. But our Lord did
apologize, and answer for us thus: Friend, I do the^ no wrong, did not
thou covenant with me for a penny? take that is thine, and go; I will also
give unto this last, as unto thee. Which answer does not imply, that men of
the New Testament received from Grace or favor, and not from Justice the same
reward with them; but it only imports, that they of the new Testament had
greater abundance of Grace, by virtue whereof in a short time they labored no
less, but rather more in the Vineyard, then the Patriarchs and Prophets did in
a long time; and therein received justly the like reward, or rather greater.

Certainly the Apostles labored but a short time, yet they brought great
Profit to the Vineyard of our Lord. When ever did the Patriarchs, or the
Prophets, abandoning all temporalities, make a perlustration of almost the
whole Worcester d, and did draw whole Provinces of Heathens to the true Worship of
God? When in those ancient times, was there so numerous an Army of Martyrs,
suff^ring for the faith of the true God, all torments and most cruel deaths
whatsoever? When in the Old Testament were found so many Companyes of Holy
Virgins, who following the immaculate Lamb did deuote, and render themselfes
in all integrity of mind, and Body to God? Where were there in that ancient
time so many Pastors and Doctors, who using all Vigilance and care over their
flock, most valorously by their learned Writings, resisted and oppugned the
Wolves, I mean, the Heretics and Heathens? To be short, where was then that
number of Hermites, Monks, and other religious Persons, who being virtuously
emulous of the life of the Angell^, did spend both day and night in the praise
of God, and Prayers to him? These and other like Examples of most eminent and
remarkable Virtue, do belong to the Grace of the New Testament; in regard of
which Grace our Lord did rightly conclude his Parable in those words: So shall
the last be first, and the first last; for many be called, but few are chosen.
That is, many are called throughout all the ages of the World, to work in the
Vineyard, even at the eleauenth hour; but few are chosen, that is, not few in
number, but that few men of one hour, and that the last hour are elected to
the grace of the New Testament; by virtue and force whereof they made to
themselves great benefit by their laboring, and received in a short time, most
great Rewards.

Neither are we to think, that all those, who were called at the eleauenth
hour, did receive the Penny, but only those, who in that short time, with all
their forces even breathlesly and incessantly labored in the Vineyard of our
Lord. For there are many Men, who knowing this hour to be the last, and that
there is but a short time left them, do not say (as they have reason to say)
Our life is short therefore let us labor courageously, that so in a small time
we may ^eap great fruit; but they say with the foolish men, which we read in
the Book of Wisdom: cap. 2. They have said, thinking with themselves not
well: Little and tedious is the time of our life; and in the end of a man there
is no recovery, and there is none known who has returned from Hell. And a
little after: Come therefore, and let us enjoy the good things that are; let us
quickly use the Creatures, as in youth. Let us fill our selves with precious
VVynes and ointments, and let not the flower of our time pass Let us crown
our selves with roses, before they wither: Let there be no meadow, which our
riot shall not pass through. Let none of us be exempted from our riotousnes:
Every where let us leave signs of joy, because this is our portion, and this
our lot.

These be the words of those, who either know not God, or saying they know
him; do nevertheless deny him in their deeds, and Works. Which men indeed are
so many in number, as even to them may be extended that Conclusion. Many are
called, but few chosen. Woe therefore be to us, who being called in the last
hour, do consume a great part of that hour in playing and sleeping; whereas
we ought to be so sollicitous and careful, of every little moment thereof, as
that we should not suffer any one minute to slip from us idly, and without
fruit, since of these Moments all Eternity of rewards, or punishments do
depend. And without all doubt, by how much the Grace of the New Testament,
granted to Christians, is greater; by so much the more grievously shall they be
punished, who receive that grace in vain. And as of those, who painefully
labored in the last hour, the last shall be the first, in receiving of hyre or
reward; so of those who refused to labor manfully in the last hour, the last
shall be the first, in suffering of punishment.

Of the Talents, and Joy of our Lord. CHAP. IV.
THE fourth Parable is that, in the which our Lord in S. Matthew cap. 25.
speaks of the reward of Beatitude: VVelfare thee, good and fay hfull servant;
because thou have been faithful over few things, I will place thee over many:
enter into the joy of thy Lord. In which place two things are promised to
fayhfull servants; to wit, most ample Power, and most great and ineffable Joy:
I will place thee over many things: And which those many things are, he
explicateth in another place, when he says. Ibid. cap. 14. Blessed is that
servant, whom when his Lord comes, shall find so doing, for over all his
goods he shall appoint him. Now what other thing is it, to be appointed over
all the goods of our Lord then to receive power over all inferior things, and
to be made partaker of that Empire and Soueraingty which God has, over all the
universal Wolrd? Who is able to comprehend, how great this Power is? What King
or Emperor on Earth can be compared with the least Saint in Heaven? But
because so great power and domination in man is commonly attended on with much
solicitude, care, and perturbation of mind, therefore our Lord (as it were) to
alleuiate and ease such supposed pains, adioyneth thereto: Enter into the joy
of thy Lord. As if he should say; As I have made thee consort and fellow of all
supreme Power; so also will I make thee partaker of all desired rest and
pleasure; the which no anxiety, toil, or labor shall be of force to take
away, or diminish. Certainly how great this Joy is, which is promised to the
Just in Heaven, is altogether inexplicable; neither can we know it, before we
have tasted it by Experience. In the mean time, we may make some cohiecture
out of three Words of this very sentence, that this joy is most great.

The first word is, Intra, or Enter into. It is not said: Let the joy of thy
Lord enter into thee, but contrariwise, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord:
An evident Argument, that, that joy is greater, then we are able to contain
wholly in our selves. Therefore we shall enter (as it were) into a great Sea of
everlasting and divine Joy, which shall replenish us both within and without,
and shall have in it self a redundancy on all sides. Therefore in so great an
affluency of Joy, what place can be left for care, or sadness? The second word
is, In gaudium, Into the Joy. Where is not promised this or that joy, of this
good, or that good; but even joy it self is absolutely promised, to wit,
pleasure it self, sweetness it self, Contentment it self. And how then can it
be otherwise, but that the whole soul shall even melt, and be dissolved, being
thus replenished with so great a sweetness? And the third word, which does
mightily exaggerate this point, is, Domini tui, Of thy Lord. For we shall not
enter into a Joy, at which men or Angels do rejoice, but with which God
himself (in whom all things are infinite) does rejoice. What Understanding
can comprehend, of what nature the Joy of God is, who knows perfectly his
own infinite goodness, and who does enjoy the same, and rejoices thereat after
an infinite manner? And yet notwithstanding all this, it is in thy power (O
Christian) to enjoy, and taste, and to have the fruition of that for ever, the
which now thou art not able to conceive in thought, if so thou will be a good
and faithful servant.

But now let us consider, to what men such great Promises do belong. To them no
doubt, who have been careful to multiply the Talents delivered to them by
God. For this similitude is borrowed from a Rich man, who delivered his goods
to his Servants; entrusting one of them with five talents, an other with two, a
third with one; strictly commanding them, that by their careful and prudent
negotiation they should labor to multiply the same. Now what these Talents may
figuratively signify, the Judgments of the learned Interpretes are various. For
some do by the Talents understand Gratiam gratis datam, which is, Grace without
any interueniency on our part, freely given; Others do understand thereby the
holy Scriptures; Others will have the five Talents to signify the knowledge of
external things, which is gotten by the mediation of the five senses: And the
two Talents to signify the Understanding, and the Operation; and the one Talent
alone, to denote only the Understanding. But notwithstanding this their
disparity of judgments, they all jointly conspire in this, That to multiply the
Talents, is to work well, and painefully, for the good of their own
Salvation, and of others. There occurreth to me another Exposition, not
repugnant to the former, and seems to be fitly accommodated to all those
things, the which our Lord did speak of the Talents. And first, the Talents in
this place are called the Goods of the Lord, for it is said: He delivered his
goods unto them.

Furthermore, it is commanded, that the Talents by negotiation be multiplied in
the same kind: Five talents thou did deliver me, behold I have gained other
five besides. Thirdly, the Talents are said to be given to every one, according
to their proper virtue and ability; Lastly, the Talent is taken away from the
naughty and slothful servant. Therefore I, by the Talents, do understand the
Souls of faithful and pious men, which are committed to the trust and
diligence of Prelates. For these are truly the goods of our Lord, the which he
does not give to us, but only commits them to our care and multiplication of
the^: Therefore according heerunto, our Lord did not say to S. Peter: feed thy
sheep, but my sheep, Joan. 21. Other things are our goods (though given to us
by our Lord) as Wit, Judgment, the Scriptures, Grace freely given, and all the
rest: but faithful and pious Souls our Lord calls his Goods, his Vineyard,
his Family, his Spouse: For these he came into the World; for these he shed his
blood to gain these he sent his Apostles, to whom he said: I will make you to
be fishers of men. Matthew. 4.

Furthermore faithful souls are said to be multiplied in the same kind, when
the Prelate by word and example conuerteth sinners: Which thing S. Peter
performed; for when Christ had committed in the beginning, to his charge, a
hundred and twenty faithful persons, when he said, Feed my sheep; S. Peter
upon the day of Pentecost even by his first Sermon, converted three thousand
men, Act. 2. and after that, five thousand. Act. 4. and after that again many
thousands more. In like sort S. Gregorius Thanmaturgus, when he was first
created Bishop of Neocasarea, did find only seauenteene faithful Belieuers in
that City; but he so multiplied this small number, as that being near to his
death, he had left before his departure, in so populous a City, only
seauenteene Infidels, or misbelieuers; which point S. Gregory Nyssene relates
in the life of the said Thaumaturgus, which he had fully and diligently written.

But to proceed. These Talents are committed to every one according to his
proper Virtue and Ability. For God, who knows the strength, that is, the
prudence, knowledge, Charity, and Fortitude of all men, does not commend souls
to any, but to such whom he knovveth to be fit, and courageous enough to
sustain that burden. And therefore no man ought to intrude, and thurst
himself into the care of souls, especially into an Episcopal charge, except
he be first called thereto by him, who distributeth the Talents according to
the power, and sufficiency of every one: Since otherwise it will not seem
strange, if many do fall under the Burden. Neither shall they find any excuse
with God, if they say, their shoulders were not able to bear so great a
Burden: For it shall be ansvvered them: Who forced thee to undertake a burden
above thy strength? Wast not thou willing thereto, did thou not petition for
it, and labouredst by several means and endeauours to obtain it? Therefore
now suffer thy self with thy hands and feet bound together, to be cast into
exterior darkness.

To conclude, the Talent committed to the slothful servant, is taken from
him. And this point also most aptly agrees with my former exposition, in
teaching that the Talents are the souls of the faithful. For he that takes
one talent, that is, the care of his own only Soul, if he do not govern it
rightly, he will lose his own Soul: for it shall be made the bondslaue of the
Devil. For as the Blessed do acquire, and obtain the liberty of being the
sons of God, by the which they remain in all freedom where they will, and
do what they will; so on the contrary side, the Reprobate do lose all Liberty,
and being bound hand and foot, neither can they walk where they will, nor
do what they desire; but are forced to remain where they would not, and to
do nothing of those things which they would: and this is to lose a man's own
Soul. So as this sentence, according to which, by the Talents, are understood
Faithful souls, is altogether agreeable to the Parable. Our Lord therefore did
commit his Talents to three kinds of men; To those, who were perfect (and such
ought Bishops to be) he gave five talents; that is, the charge of many people
to be under them; To others, less perfect (as the Parish Priests are wont to
be) two talents, that is, a lesser number of souls, and such as are usually
contained within one Parish. To others yet more weak and infirm (which are
the common People) he gave to every one, one talent, that is, the care of his
own soul only: Yet nevertheless such men ought to convert other men by
private exhortation, and example of an innocent life, from their sins to the
way of Justice; and so after that manner, to multiply the talent delivered to
him.

And what is said of Bishops and Parish Priests, the same is to be understood
of Princes, and of secular Magistrates, and of Masters of families. For thus
S. Austin writes, tract. 51, in Joan. Every Master, or Father of a House, or
family (even by this Name) ought to acknowledge a paternall affection and care
to his family. It is his offiec in the fear of Christ, and for the hope of
Eternal life, to admonish, teach, exhort, and correct them; in like sort to
exercise his benevolence, and discipline toward them; so as he shall fulfill
and practice a certain Ecclesiastical, or Episcopal duty, or function in his
own House. And in this sense Constantine the Greae was accustomed to say, that
himself was a Bishop, extra Ecclesiam, out of the Church; because he was most
vigila^t (as far as he could) that the Church of Christ should be preserved and
propagated; and yet he did not usurp, or trench upon Ecclesiastical Offices,
or Orders.

But to prevent, that it may not be thought, that one only man, or one only
kind of men is reprehended in this Parable, because we read, that he only, who
had but one talent, is reprehended and punished; therefore we are to know, that
our Lord from this one, would have us to understand the dangers of greater
Nature. For as at the day of Judgment, in that he will reward those, who give
corporal Alms, and will punish such, as give none; we understand thereby,
greater rewards to be given to such as give spiritual Alms, and greatest to
the Blessed Apostles, Martyrs, and Virgins, exercising Heroical Virtues; and
on the contrary, that thieves, perjured and sacrilegious Persons ate to undergo
greater Punishments, then those, who did not relieve the poor and needy with
Alms: Even so in this place, in that he who received one talent, the which he
might easily have multiplied, and yet did not, is most grievously punished, we
may learn, that so much the more easy it is for Bishops, Pastors, Princes,
and Magistrates to offend in this kind, by how much they do exercise a more
weighty and dangerous function; and that they are so much the more to be
punished in the last judgment, by how much the loss of many souls is greater,
then the loss, and overthrow but of only one.

Let us hear, what S. Austin speaks of the danger of an Ecclesiastical
state or degree, Epist. 147. He thus writes to Valerius Bishop; I desire
before all other things, that thy religious Prudence would call to mind,
Nothing in this life, and especially at this present, is more easy and more
acceptable to men, then the Office of a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, if they
exercise their authority though but negligently, or slightly. But in the sight
of God, nothing is more fearful, miserable, or damnable. In like sort, there
is nothing in this lif^, and particularly in these days, more hard, laborious,
perilous, then the Office of a Bishop, Priest, and Deacon; but with God nothing
more blessed and happy, if so we serve in that War, as our Emperor and
General commands us. Thus S. Austin, who writes further of this very
Argument, through all that his Epistle to the aforesaid Valerius Bishop, as
that it is to be wished, that all Ecclesiastical Persons would with attention
and reflection upon themselves, read the same; especially such men, who rashly
aspire to the function of a Bishop, or Priest; and when they have obtained what
they desire, and found what they have sought for, do either forsake their
flock, or being busied with other affairs, do trouble their thoughts with
nothing less, then with the care of increasing the number of pious and
faithful Christians.

Truly the Shephards, upon the Night of the Birth of our Lord (the prince of
all Shephards) did watch all the night over their flock. And if this was done
upon a flock void of reason by those who figure out the Pastors of the
Church; how much more then ought it to be performed by Pastors, for their
sheep, endued with reason, for who^ Christ himself, when he was conversant
upon Earth, did watch whole nights? And if the Patriarch Jacob wasted himself
away with such labor for the care he had of the sheep of Laban his Father in
law, as that he said: Day and night was I parched with heat, and with frost,
and sleep did fly from my eyes; what indefatigable pains then ought the
Pastors of the sheep of Christ to endure? And if the Devil, as a roaring
Lion, goes about, seeking whom he may devour; is it not then fit, that a good
Pastor should also daily go about, seeking whom he may free and set at
liberty?

But here it may be urged, that the business and affairs of the Church, of
which a man is Pastor, may sometimes force him to leave his flock. I do not
deny, but if such necessituds be of great importance, and can be brought to an
end in a short time, that then a short leaving of the flock is pardonable;
Otherwise I say, let greater negotiations be preferred before lesser, And such
as are greater to be performed by the Pastor himself; whereas the lesser may
be undertaken by some others. For if business does force a man to depart from
his flock; then greater business, yea even bloody Wars do force a man not to
depart from the defense of his flock. The Apostolical Trumpet thus sounds in
our ears. Ephesians. 6. Our wrestling is not against slesh and blood; but against
Princes, and Potentates, against the Governors of this darkness, against the
spiritualls of wickedness, in the Celestialls. And if the Captain be absent,
who shall teach the soldiers how to avoid the Weapons of their Enemies?
Certainly our Lord said to S. Peter, and in him to all Pastors: Feed my
sheep: Of other things he spoke nothing, that we might understand thereby,
that the feeding of the flock is the principal charge, incumbent upon a
Pastor.

In like sort in the Consecration of a Bispop it is said: Vade, praedica populo
tibi commisso; Go preach unto the people committed unto thee. But touching
temporal business nothing is added or spoken; thereby to admonish the Bishop,
that Temporal things are not to be balanced and equalled with spiritual, and
much less to be preferred.

To conclude, in the fourth Council of Carthage Can. 17.18.19.20. Bishops are
earnestly commanded, that they shall not undertake the government of Widows,
strangers, Pupils by themselves, but by the means and labor of the
Arch-Priests, and the Archdeacons. In like sort, that Bishops shall not
undergo the defense of Wills, or Contentions, for any transitory matters, and
that they shall not ingrosse to themselves the care and dealing about other
men's states; but that they shall wholly, and only deuote their labors to
reading, praying, and preaching of the Word. Therefore the Council of Africa,
consisting of two hundred and fourteen Bishops (at which S. Austin was
present) commanded, that Bishops should negotiate and execute all temporal
affairs and occasions (though otherwise pious and necessary) by the
ministry, and labors of other men, that so themselves might more freely spend
their days in defending and multiplying of their flock.

Therefore this Parable, as it shows, that Eternal Felicity is chiefefly to
be desired, as containing most great power, accompained with most great
Pleasure; so also it demonstrateth, that the way to this felicity is continual
and indefatigable labor, placed in seeking and procuring the Health of a Man's
own Soul, and of other men's also. Which labor whosoever does seek to
decline and avoid, shall not only be deprived of that felicity, and of that
most excellent Power and Pleasure; but being damned to Hell, shall there suffer
eternal Punishments. For thus does our Lord speak Matthew. 25. The unprofitable
servant cast you out into utter darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. And here we are diligently to note and observe, that the servant in this
place eondemed to such punishment, is not called wicked, or facinorous, but
unprofitable only; for admitting that a Bishop, a Parish Priest or Prince, or
Magistrate, or Father of a family, or any other may be free from other vices;
yet in this respect only, that he is unprofitable, that is, he does not
procure and labor (according to his power) his own health, and the health of
others subject unto him; in this respect (I say) he shall be cast out into
utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, which shall never
have End. And if the unprofitable servant shall suffer these insufferable
calamities, what portion then is allotted to the wicked servant, who is
covetous, malignant, proud, luxurious and wholly drowned in all kind of vices?
If the unprofitable Servant be rejected, what account and reckoning then, must
he who is wicked render to our Lord, touching the talents delivered unto him?
Truly they who deeply and intensly consider these things, will not ambitiously
seek after Honor, or Authority; and if it be forcedly imposed upon them, let
them ever watch with fear and trembling, since they are to render a most exact
and strict account for the souls, committed unto their Charge.

Of the great Supper. CHAP. V.
THe fifth Parable (which is in Luke 14.) resembles the felicity of the Saints
to a Great Supper; and this truly not without just reason. In a Great,
Nuptial, or Regal Supper all things are there found, which may delight the
Senses of men, or which may show the Power, riches, and glory of this World.
Truly King Assuerus, who governed over an hundred, twenty and seven Provinces,
desiring in great vaunting, to show the riches, and glory of his Kingdoms, and
the largenes of his power, did not find a more fitting and convenient means
thereto, then to make a most sumptuous, and magnificent Banquet. For first at a
great supper the Eyes are delighted in the most costly furniture and hangings
of the Place, in the order of Officers, in costly and courtlike Apparel, in
the golden and silver plate, wherein the Meat is served. The Ears are much
delighted with melodious music. The sense of smell is satisfied with the
odor of flowers, of precious perfumes, and with other things, breathing forth
fragrant and sweet smells. The sense of Taste is ravished with the curious
seasoning of the meats of all sorts, and with delicious Wynes.

To conclude, the sense of Touching is greatly contented with reposing upon
most soft and downy Beds. Therefore at a Regal Supper all corporal goods do
meet together in the greatest affluency this World can afford. So as our Lord
willing to represent that Felicity, which comprehends in it self all sort of
Goods, would compare it to a Great Supper; Of which Supper we also thus read
in the Apocalypse: Blessed are they, who are called to the supper of the
marriage of the Lamb Apoc. 19. Furthermore, the greatness of that supper of our
Lord may be known, in that the Glory of all the glorified bodies shall be (as it
were) the last Table, upon whom all delicates and daintyes shall be placed.
Now the sweetness of these Dainties is so great, as that S. Peter once seeing
the Body of our Lord, to shine like to the Sun, said; Matthew. 17. It is good
for us to be hear. And if the dainties of Banquets be of so great worth; of
what dignity then shall the substance of the supper be, which is placed in the
fruition of the Divinity?

Finally, All the goods of this world are nothing else, then as barks, or
husks of the fruits of Paradise. And if these husks be of that force, as to
enchant men with the love and desire thereof; what then are the fruits
themselves able to work in men's souls? And if the fruits be of such Virtue,
what then may we conceive the more solid and substantial meats of this Great
Supper to be? Doubtlesly they shall be such, as that they may be ever eaten,
and ever desired without any fastidious satiety. Neither are we to imagine,
that there shall be a Supper in Heaven, such as great Princes have in the
celebration of their Marriage, seeing in Heaven we shall be as the Angels are, who
neither marry, nor feed on Meats necessary to the mantaining of a mortal
life. Therefore that Supper shall be full of riches, full of delights, full of
Ornaments, and full of glory, agreeable to the state of the Blessed. These
material things are spoken unto us in this our exile, because we do not here
see better, or greater Matters. But from these we ought to learn, that that
Celestial Supper shall so much excel our suppers upon earth (though never so
dainty, or curious) by how much Heaven is better then the Earth, and by how
much God, who shall prepare this Supper, does transcend and surmount mortal
Kings in power and riches.

But hear it may be questioned, why the felicity of the blessed is compared
rather to a supper, then to a dinner? of this point the reason is, in that the
time of Dinner is about the midst of the day, and the time after dinner till
supper is commonly spent in executing of business; whereas Supper is prepared at
the end of the day, when as all negotiations are finished; after which Supper
follows Rest and Repose. And therefore in another Parable, which is in Matthew.
22. where mention is made of the Incarnation of our Lord, the time of Dinner
introduced for the Marriage with the Church his Spouse, is begun in the middle
of the day; that is, long before the consummation of the World. After which
time of Dinner, many matters of greatest importance, especially the Redemption
of the world, and the reconciliation of Mankind with God, are treated. But
after all business and sollicitudes shall cease, then the bringing of the
Spouse to the House of the Bridegroom, and the Nuptial Supper shall follow;
that is, Eternal Repose at the close of the day, and end of the World.

But yet it will be worthy of observation to know what is to be done, that
we may be admitted unto this Supper. And of this our Lord himself has been
pleased to instruct us in this Parable, saying: Luc. 14. A certain Man made a
great Supper, and called many: but they began all at once to make excuse. The
first said, I have bought a Farm, and I must needs go forth and see it, I
pray thee have me excused. And another said. I have bought five yoke of Oxen,
and I go to prove them, I pray thee hold me excused. The third said, I have
married a Wife, and therefore I cannot come. A wonderful matter! Men are
invited by God to a Nuptial and Regal Supper, and they refuse to come: what
then would they do, if they were called to the labor of War, or to a long
and perilous journey? But this is humane blindness, which can hardly be brought
to believe any thing, but what it sees. But what is that which mortal men
prefer before the Divine Supper, which is our supreme and eternal good? Three
things our Lord sets down, as maine impediments of our Salvation, which of
their own nature are not evil; and yet through an affection to them not well
governed, they hinder man's Salvation. To buy a farm, to try Oxen, and to
marry a Wife, are no sins; but to advance and prefer them before the kingdom
of God, is incredible stupidity and blindness. And yet there be found many
Christians in every place, who do affect and seek after these temporalities
with a wonderful thirst and hunger, co^suming whole days and nights in
pursuing of Honor, which is noted in buying of the farm; and of Lucre or
Gain, which is signified in manuring of ground, or drawing of Oxen; and of
Pleasure, or Voluptuousnes, which it taken through new Marriage. Yea they are so
absort in the depth of these earthly matters, as that they remain wholly
forgetful of the eternal and most great rewards, which God has promised to
them that love him.

Neither are many men content to buy farms, to prove their Oxen, to marry
wives, but, that they may the further depart from hope of Salvation, they sear
not to invade other men's farms, to steal Oxen, and to maintain Concubins,
and prostituted women; never ever thinking (much less maturely considering)
what hurt and damage it is for such triffles, to suffer the loss of the Supper
of our Lord. Certainly if God did not promise unto us (being but poor Worms
of the Earth) a Supper of infinite sweetness in Heaven, but only did promise the
crumbs falling from that table, or the refuse of the meats; yet it were most
profitable for us to contemn all temporal things whatsoever, that so we might
feed upon those Offalls. What madness then is it to advance small, decaying, and
fleeting pleasures above the Supper of our Lord himself, which abounds with
all sempiternall goods, and at the which we shall sit down in the Heavenly
Kingdom with the holy Angels, and with him, who is the Lord of Angels?

To proceed. After our Lord had shevved what might hinder our entrance unto
this great Supper, he therpon adioyneth certain remedies to remove those lets
and impediments, for thus he goes forvvard in his Parable: Then the Master of
the House being angry, said to his servants; Go forth quickly into the
streets, and lanes of the City, and the poor, and feeble, and blind, and
lame, bring in hither. Because rich men being occupied in buying of farms, of
Oxen, and in marriage, refused to come to the supper of this great Lord, he
calls in the Poor, Weak, and Lame, who neither have money to buy Farms, or
Oxen, neither can easily get wives, as wanting means to maintain them. These
men therefore, as free from all intanglements, wherewith the others were
ensnared, are admitted to the Great Supper; who may deservedly congratulate
their own fortune and state, that God would have them to be Poor, weak,
blind, and Lame.

Many here in this life do much complain, that they ar^ borne Poor, or that
they are often sick, or deprived of sight, or are lame in their lymmes; and
for these imperfections they hold themselves most unfortunate and miserable;
not knowing what good God does provide for them in the World to come, even for
this very cause, which many men repute as an Infelicity: But if they did know
Gods sweet proceeding herein, they would doubtlesly exult and reioy^e.
Th^rfore no man ought to complain of the Providence of God, but in all things
to love him* with due thanks (who has a care and vigilance over us) and ever
to rest quiet* and reposed in his good Will, and pleasure. But how true soever
these things are in a literal sense; yet in this Parable, those are said
prop^rly to be poor, who are poor in spirit, not in riches and those weak,
not in strength, but in confidence and trust of themselves; those blind, not in
their bodily eyes, but in subtilty and craft; those lame, not in their feet,
but in their affections. I will speak more plainly.

The Poor, who are admitted to the Supper of our Lord, are those, who hearing
the Apostle (1. Tim. 6. desire not to be rich* and if they have riches, they
have them not to heap up together, and so to conserve them, neither to wait
and dissipate them in Vanities; but to perform and exercise that, which the
Holy Ghost speaks of, by the mouth of David Psalm. 111. He distributed, and
gave to the poor; his Justice remains for ever and ever And those are he^r
said to be weak and feeble, who do not confide and trust in their own force,
nor glory in their own strength; The blind are those, who truly believe those
things they see not; especially touching the rewards of the Virtuous, and
punishmnents of the Wicked. For who assuredly persuade themselves, that the
rewards of the Just, are most great and sempiternall, and the punishments of
the malignant and wicked; most rigorous and interminable; these men do not lie
groueling upon the Earth, neither do they much pryze any thing which ^s under
the Moon, but there their Hearts are fixed, where are true joys To conclude,
those men are happily lame, and may most hopefully aspire to the Supper of our
Lord, whose right foot is much longer then the least; that is; whose
affections toward God and everlasting Beatitude, are far greater, then their
sinister affections and desires tovva^ds their own flesh, and temporal goods
or Pleasures.

But let us hear the Sentence of the great Master of the House against those,
who inconsiderarly and foolishly contemned his Supper; Thus then he says: I
say unto you, that none of those men, that were invited, shall taste of my
Supper. For our Lord well knows, that it shall fall out within a short
time, that those who were invited, and contemned, and slighted future goods,
as vain (their souls even cleaving, and fastened to present Benefits) shall
after the dissolution of their Body, and after their departure from all
vvorldly matters, even hunger after that Supper, through an incredible desire.
For as the Prophet David speaks: Psalm 58. they will return at Evening, and
they shall suffer f^mine, even as dogs, and shall comp^sse the City. Then at
the Evening (the day of this present life being ended) they shall return, and
acknovvledge their folly, when their repentance shall be, unprofitable; and they
shall suffer hunger like ravenous dogs, and they shall incompasse the City of
our Lord, if perchance they may be suffered but to feed only upon the Crumbs of
that supper. But that Sentence stands unalterable, and irreuocable: None of
th^se men shall taste of my Supper.

O Christian Soul, that thou did but know, what it is to say: Thou shall
not taste of my Supper, Or that thou could possibly conceive, how great the
hunger of reprobate sinners shall be, and of how sweet a meat they shall be for
ever deprived; and what they would give, that they might but taste of that,
which they shall covet most ardently? But they shall gain nothing, though
they had the whole world at their command, and though they were ready to
renounce and disclaim from it, with all promptitude of mind. Now then since
these things are thus, let us return from our sins, while we have time, while
the day lasts, and while our Penance and Repentance is fruitful and
profitable. Now let us hunger after that most sweet Supper, let us suffer
famine for it, not as unclean and greedy dogs, who in eating, think nothing
but of the pleasure of their taste and belly; But as men endued with Reason, let
us hunger after the meat of Eternal L^fe, the Bread of Angels, yea that
hidden Manna, which no man knows, but he that receaueth; and which God
himself enjoys from all, and for all Eternity. By this means we shall so
live in this our banishment, as that we shall not love the same, but shall most
earnestly covet, and even breath after our Heavenly Country; to the which after
we are once arrived, we shall have no need, to compass about the City, but we
may enter by the open Gate; and being freely admitted to the Supper of our
Lord, we may feed and satiate our selfs upon most pleasing meat and drink;
that is, upon the Bread of life, and Water of Wisdom.

Of the Marriage; and of the Wise, and Foolish Virgins. CHAP. VI.
THe last Parable is that, which resembles the felicity of the Saints to a
Kingly marriage, to the which are invited ten Virgins, of which number five were
foolish, and five prudent. And first is to be explicated, what the Bridgrome
is, what the Bride or Spouse: Next is to be showed, how great a Good is
intimated by the name of the Marriage; Lastly what is required, that we may be
able to come to so infinite* and inestimable a Good.

And first it is not be doubted, but that the Bridegroom here is Christ. For
this S. ^ohn Baptist in express words affirms, when he says: He, that has
the Bride, is the Bridegroom; But the friend of the Bridegroom, that stands
and hears him, rejoices with joy, for the voice of the Bridegroom. Joan. 3.
The same does our Lord himself insinuate in the Parable of the King, who made
a Marriage for his Son. And the same also the Apostle most evidently
confirms, when he said to the Corinthians (2. Cor. 11. I have despous^d you
to one Man, to present you a chaste Virgin to Christ. To be short, S. John in
his Apocalypse signifies the same, thus saying cap. 19 Let us be glad and
rejoice, and give Glory unto him, because the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and
the Bride has prepared herself. And again, Blessed are they who are called
to the supper of the Marriage of the Lamb.

Now concerning the Bride or Spouse; it is certain, that by her is meant the
Church; For the Apostle in the Epist e to the Ephesians cap. 5. evidently
says: As the Church is subject to Christ, so also Women to their Husbands, in
all things. Husbands, love your wives, as Christ also loved he Church, and
delivered himself for it. And after again: For this cause, shall man leave
Father and Mother, and shall cleave unto his Wife, and they shall be two in one
flesh: This is a great Sacrament, but I speak in Christ, and in the Church.

But a^though the Church be the Spouse of Christ, and the faithful are said to
be Sons of the Church, because the Church after a certain miner by the
Sacrament of Baptism does beget them to Christ; nevertheless, because the
Church is nothing else but the company of the fa^thfull, therefore all faithful
Souls are so many particular Spouses, as the Church it self is the Universal
Spouse. For she does not untruly thus celebrate the dignity of Virgins: Veni
Sponsa Christi etc. Come thou spouse of Christ, receive the Crown which our
Lord has prepared for thee, for all Eternity. And although the Holy Virgins
after a peculiar manner are called the Spouses of Christ, beca^se they refused
Carnal Wedlock, that they might spiritually espouse themselves on y unto
Christ; Nevertheless other Christian souls are the spouses of Christ; since
they being (as it were) betrothed to him by Faith, and united by Charity, do
earnestly thirst after a spiritual Consummation, in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now if one could comprehend, or but worthi^y imagine, how great a good it is,
for a Christian Soul to be espoused unto Christ, even as he is God; perhaps he
could find nothing more honorable, more profitable, more sweet neither in this
world, nor in the next It is a great Glory, and pleasure, to serve the King of
Kings; It is a greater to be numbered among his friends, and to be ranged (as I
may say) in the role of his Domestics, It is the greatest, to be styled the
Son of God, and Brother of Christ: But to have the Honor to be called the
Spouse of God, the Consort, or partaker of his throne, the Consort of his
Chamber, of his Crown, of all his Titles, seems to be more, then the
greatest Good, if it be lawful so to speak. For this is that, which our Lord
speaks in Esaias of spiritual Eunuchs: I will give unto them in my house, a
Name better, then Sons, and daughters; That is, I will give to them the Name
of a Spouse, or Wife. Isa. 56. Who can conceive, how sublime, how honorable,
and how pleasant it is, not only to see God, but to converse and live with him?
What is it then to be made one spirit with God, that is, to be transformed and
changed into the Supreme Good? The Words of the Apostle are these 1. Cor. 6. He
that adhereth to a Harlot, is made one Body, for they shall be two in one
flesh; But he that adhereth to our Lord, is one spirit. And again: But we all
^ehoulding the glory of our Lord, with face revealed, are transformed into the
same Image, from Glory unto Glory, as our Lords spirit. What p^easu^e shall it
be, when we being united to God, and receiving our beams from the splendor of
his Countenance, shall be transformed into the splendor of God, that so we may
be made most like to God? S. John says: We shall belike unto him, because we
shall see him, as he is. 1. Joan. 3. We shall not be only like to him, as we
are Images created to his similitude, but like in glory, in beatitude, in
felicity. The Apostle S. Paul in that great Ecstasy, which he suff^red, when
being rapt up into Paradise, did hear those secret words, which were not
lawful to speak to Man, was not as then Blessed, and yet he was so absorpt in
God, as that be observed not, whether he was in Body, or out of Body. How great
then shall that most happy Union of a Soul with God be, and how shall that
Soul (which shall be one spirit with God) be even drowned as it were, in sea^s
of such inexplicable sweetness? Tru^y this joy shall be such, as that
(according to S. Bernards words Epist. 14.) in comparison thereof, All other
pleasure is grief, all sweetness dolor, every pleasant thing bitter, all
Beauty foul, and finally all that may any way delight, troublesome and
molestious.

But since this imbracement of the most beautiful Bridegroom with a blessed
soul, is ineffable; let us seek out of the propounded Parable* what is
necessari^y requi^ed of us, that we may be admitted ^ully to this most happy
Marriage. This we know from the qual^ties of the wise Virgins, seeing these alone
(the folish being excluded) did enter into the Nuptials of the Heavenly
Bridegroom. There are five Conditions, or Quali^ies which are exacted hereunto.
The first, that the sou^e be a Virgin. Next, that she be Wise; Then, that she
have light in her Lamp, and Oil in her Vessel. Lastly, that she be
watchful, diligently attending and observing the coming of the Bridegroom.
Concerning the first Condition: The spouses of Christ ought all to be Virgins;
but this not necessarily through Virginity of the flesh, but through Virginity
of faith and manners, as S. Austin (in sermon. de verb. Dom. 13.) truly
expounds, according to that of the Apostle: I have despoused you unto one
Man, to present you a chaste Virgin unto Christ. Where, by the chaste Virgin, he
understood the whole Church of the Corinthians, in which it is evident, that
all were not Virgins according to the flesh; since the same Apostle in his
first Epistle to the Corinthians, admonishes the faithful matried Persons of
their Duty. Therefore those men and Women are Virgins in this Parable, who are
not corrupted touching manners and Faith, and flying from all Evil, do not
contaminate their souls therewith.

But because it suffices not to the perfection of Justice, to decline from
evil, but it is necessary also to do Good according to the Prophetical King.
Psalm. 36. Decline from Evil, and do good; therefore the second Condition is
added; to wit, that the Virgin be wise, not foolish; Neither let her think it
to be enough, if she hurt no man, do not kill, do not steal, do not bear
false witness; but she is to understand, that she ought to proportion, and
ordain means to her End. And because Eternal life is the End, and the merit
of good Works are the Means; therefore there is annexed a third Condition;
that is, that the Virgin have light in her Lamp, or, a sbining Lamp, which are
good Works, as S. Austin teaches in the place above noted; Which very point
our Lord himself taught, when he said: Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father, which is in Heaven.

Now for that good Works do flow from Charity, as from their sourse; neither
can they be preserved, except they have their cherishment from the same
Charity, even as a light is infallibly extinguished in a Lamp, if it be not
nourished, and fedd with Oil; Therefore a fourth Condition is required, which
is, that the Wise Virgin ever have Oil in her Vessel. By Oil, Charity is
signified, as S. Austin in the place above alleged does teach. For as Oil
does swim (as it were) above all Humors, so Charity is supereminent to all
virtues, the Apostle saying: Eminentiorem viam etc. I show you a more eminent,
or more excellent way. And a little after: Nun autem manent fides, spes Cha^itas
etc. Now there remain, Faith, Hope, Charity. These three; but the greater of
these is Charity. Therefore if a man does either prefer or eq^a l any thing in
his Heart with Charity, she instantly departs; for she will have either the
precedence and first place in our Hearts, or else she goes away. Oil is a
Humor most subtle, aerie, and fiery, which ascends above all other Humors,
And so great is the force of the oil of Charity in ascending upward, as if it
were part into a soul o a Publican, or Common strumpet, it would instantly
draw it up, making it of sinful to become Holy, and of Carnal spiritual.
Yea, I dare be bold to say, that if this Oil of Cha^ity could be distilled
into the souls of damned men, or into the very Devils, we should presently
behold all the damned either Men, or Devils, to ascend upward: As on the
Contrary if this Oil should forsake the Holy A^g^lls, and the souls of the
Apostles, Martyrs, Vi^gins, they thereupon would become lumpish and Heavy, and
wou^d descend to the lower Parts. Behold therefore of what excellency and
virtue this Oil is, and how deservedly those Virgins were cal^ed Fools, who
did want this Oil.

But there yet remains another Reason, why by Oil, Charit^ is signified; to
wit, because Oil does lenify and sotten things; making them of hard and
sharp, smoth, supple, and sweet. This Oil maket^ the yoke sweet, of which
our Lord said: Iugum meum suaue est: My yoke is sw^et* and as Esaias says, the
yoke being anointed with the force of Charity, shall putrify at the face of
oil. What made the yoke o^ Obedience sweet in the Apostles, when they made a
peragration and travail through ^ut the whole World, to preach the Gospel to
every Creature, but the Oil of Charity? What in like sort sweetened the yoke
of Patience in Martyrs i^ suffering of many Torments, neu^r before that time
heard of, but the Oil of Charity? what has made the yoke of Poverty,
Continency, and Obedience so pleasing ^o so many thousands of Religious Men and
Women, but the Oil of Charity? For there is nothing more sweet to a Lover then
to manifest his love to the Party beloved, and to work, or suffer for him
great and hard matters; even as our Savior declared his love toward mankind,
in nothing so much, as in suffering for us.

I have discoursed more fully of Oil, because the reason is not obuious, and
facill to every one, why it should figure out and signify Charity. The fifth
Condition, which is the chiefest, and principally intended by our Lord in this
Parable, is Vigilance, or Watchfulnes; for thus is the Parab^e concluded:
Matthew. 25. Watch you therefore, because you know not the day, or the hour.
Which Sentence our Lord frequently repeateth, that he may firmly print it in
the Hearts of the faithful. In S. Matthew c. 24. he thus says: Watch therefore,
because you know not, what hour your Lord will come. In S. Mark cap. 13. Watch
therefore, for you know not when the Lord of the house comes, at Even, at
midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the Morning; lest coming upon a
sudden, he find you sleeping? And that which I say to you, I say to All, Watch.
In S. Luke c. 12. Blessed are those Servants, whom when their Lord comes, he
shall find watching. And in an other place: VVatch therefore, praying at all
times. In like sort, by the Apostle, S. Peter: Be wise therefore, and watch in
prayer. 1. Pet. 4. By the Apostle S. Paul: Let us not sleep, as others do, but
let us watch; and be sober. 1 Thessalonians. 5. By the Apostle S. John: Behold I come
as a Thief, Blessed is he, that watches. Apoc. 26.

All these sacred authorities signify, that the coming of our Lord to Judgment
(whether the judgment be universal at the Consummation of the World, or
particular at the death of every one) is uncertain; and that therefore God
requires of us, that we be always watching, and expecting his Coming, that
so he may find us prepared, and that he may not be forced to exclude us (with
the foolish Virgins) from his Marriage. Therefore to sleep, is nothing else, then
to forget death and Judgment, or to live so heedlesly, as if we never thought,
or took care of that so great a Matter, whereupon Eternal Salvation
depends. For we are not to think, that corporal sleep is forbidden to the
faithful; otherwise it would not have been said in the Parable: They
slumbered all, and slept; but only Forgetfulness and Inconsideration, is
forbidden.

Therefore every good Christian, who has a care of his own soul, ought every
day both morning and evening (the door of his heart being shut from all other
business) attently to think, and certainly to persuade himself, that that day
or night may easily be his last; and therefore ought seriously to provide, that
he be not found, and taken unprepared, so that he shall lose, through such his
great negligence, his own soul, and all goods attending on it. Some men have
altogether a horror to think, and meditate of death, and willingly they
divert their minds to other cogitations. But let such remember, that the sick
man has a loathing to take his prescribed physic; and yet for the love of
his own life, he willingly takes it. In like sort the eyes have a horror to
look upon a dangerous and deadly wound in their body; and yet they look upon
it earnestly, and covet to receive a medicinable plaster thereto: So is it
needful, that a prudent man do make a greater estimate of the detriment, and
loss of his own Soul, then of the dread and horror of death. And therefore
let him often, and often reuolue in his mind, that there is no age, no hour,
in which he may not d^e. Since the meditation hereof, when it en^^eth deeply
into the entralls of the Ha^t, is accustomed easily to change the whole Man;
so as of Carnal he may become spiritual, of a sinner, Holy; not any more
fearing, but loving, and expecting the Coming of our Lord.

Not without just Cause therefore does our Lord so often exhort us to watch:
neither in vain do we thus read in Ecclesiasticus cap. 7. In all thy Works,
remember thy last end, and thou will not sin for ever. For what man knowing,
that he is to hasten toward a Judge, and that he must speedily be conuented
before his Tribunal, dare yet in the mean time offend against the said Judge?
And yet we every moment, even posting toward our Judgment, do in our journey
thereto (^uch is man's blindness) prosecute the Judge with iniu^y, and justly
provoke his wrath and indignation against us. And who already condemned to
death, would, whiles he is ledd to the place of Execution, laugh, and sport, or
would vaunt of his adulteries, or of his gaining of Honor, or of his
increasing his temporal riches by his traffic, except he were wholly
distracted, and besides his wits? And notwithstanding we are truly condemned to
death; for not any of the Sons of Adam did ever escape the sentence of death;
and our mortal life is nothing else, then a pace to death; yet nevertheless in
this our journey (which cannot be long) what do the greatest part of
Christians? What do they think of, what do they discourse of, about what do
they negoriate and busy themselves, if not about gain, Honor, Pleasures, I
may well say, about all wickedness, and flagitious Crimes, as though the way to
death would never have end? And what other thing is this, then to sleep,
concerning matters serious, and of the greatest importance, and to watch and be
vigilant about toys and triffles? Or else to sleep, and in sleeping dream?

Therefore with good reason our Lord cries out: Watch, O watch: And happy are
those men, who are stirred up at this his Voice; and do often think and
meditate, where they are, and whither they are going, and in the mean time do
labor, that their Lamps may shine, and oil abound in their Vessels; As that
when the noise, or Watchword shall be heard: Behold the Bridegroom commetg, go
you forth to meet him, Math. 25. they with incredible joy may presently run to
meet him, and enter into the Marriage place with him. But woe to them, who
being forgetful of so great a Business, and are deaf to the words of holy
Srciptures, and who having their Lamps put forth, are found sleeping; and
thereby being excluded from the most pleasing and most delightful Marriage,
they shall in vain cry out, Lord, Lord, open to us. Matthew. 25.

Of the Price, or Reward. CHAP. VII.
THe Parabolicall Names, which do occur in the Gospel being explicated, it
remains, that we unfold the Names used by the Apostle in his first Epistle
to the Corinthians, which are Brauium, A Pryze, or Reward; and Corona, a
Crown. Of Bra^iu^, or Prize, the Apostle thus then speaks: They that run
in the race, all do run indeed, but one receaueth the Prize: So run you,
that you may obtain. And that in this place by the Word Prize; or Reward the
celestial Beatitude is understood, the same Apostle teaches in his Epistle to
the Philippians cap. 3. saying Forgetting the things that are behind; but
stretching forth my self to those that are before, I pursue unto the mark, to
the praise of the supernall vocation of God, in Christ Jesus. Therefore we see,
there is a Prize, or Reward in Heaven, to the which God does call us, through
Christ Jesus, Now although the Prizes, which the Princes of the world, are
accustomed to propose be of no extraordinary value or worth; Notwithstanding
the Celestial Prize must of necessity in every respect be of greatest
estimation; And this, whether thou considerest God, who does propose the Prize,
he being of infinite Power and magnificence, of whom the Prophet thus speaks:
Psalm. 8. Thy magnificency has ascended above the Heavens; or else the Persons
that do run and strive, to whom the Pryze is set forth; who are his Sons,
and the Brethren of Christ, whom doubtlesly the King their Father would not
have inui^ed to run, if the Prize, or Reward were not of that Worth and
dignity, as that the Sons of God might worthily desire and covet it.

But it imports much to show, what it is to run for the Prize, and with
what art and skill we may so run, as we may win, or obtain the same, To
run for the Prize is entirely to observe and keep the Commandments of our
Lord God. For stadium, or a Ra^e here signifies the Law of God, eue^ as David
witnesses in those words Ps. 118. Blessed are the immaculate in the way, which
walk in the law of our Lord etc. I ran the way of thy Commandments, when thou
did dilate my heart. Therefore they who run the way of the Commandments, do
run in a Race for a Prize or Reward. To proceed, the skill of running so, as
that we may arrive to, and obtain the Prize, comprehends three Documents.
The first is, that we do not decline, or depart any way from the Race; for he
who leaves the Race, although he may run speedily, yet he shall never gain
the Prize; since not to the Prize or reward, but to some other Vnce^taine scope
he directs his Course; The which error the Apostle testifi^th, that he
diligently avoided, saying 1. Cor. 11. I do so run, not (as it were) at an
uncertain thing. What then is it to run out of the place of the Race? It is
not to run in the way of the Commandments; but in running to decline either
to the right or left hand.

To instance this. The Law says, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Leuit. 19. Who so loves his neighbor as himself, runs in the Race, and
runs for the Pryze. But who so passionatly and vehemently loves his
Neighbor, as that for his sake, he is not afraid to offend God, thus making
of a man an Idol; this man declineth to the right hand, and running out of the
Race, runs not for the Pryze, but for some uncertain thing. And by how much
he more swiftly runs in heaping benefits and favors upon that Person, whom
he has erected to himself as an Idol; so much the more he erreth, and further
departs from the Prize, or Reward. But he, who less loves his Neighbor,
then he ought to do; as when he sees him to be oppressed with want and penury,
and yet shuts his bowels of mercy, and commiseration from him (as S. John
speaks) this man strayeth to the left hand, and neither does he run in the
race, neither runs he for the Pryze; although many other good Works he may
seem to do. Therefore we ought to love our neighbor as our selfs; That is, we
ought so to bear our selfs toward our Neighbor, as we expect our neighbor
should comport, and bear himself toward us; And this is to love our
neighbor, neither more, nor less then our selfs. For thus does our Lord God,
who gave this Precept, explicate the same, Math. 7. Luc. 6.

And what I have here spoken of love of our Neighbor (being an affirmative
Commandment) the same we may speak of Negative Commandments. For who
steals another Man's goods, declineth to the right hand of that Commandment,
Thou shall not steal, and strayeth from the race. But he who does not steal
another man's Goods, but makes profusion and wast of his own Substance and
state, such an one declineth toward the left hand, and in like sort goes out
of the race. For a Just man, who only remains in the race, does no less
depart from the race, if he violently take other men's goods, as if he did
vainly wast his own; Because the Virtue of Liberality (which belongs to
Justice) is encompassed with two opposite Vices, being extremes, to wit,
Avarice, and Effusion or Prodigality. The sum and Conclusion of all this is;
that he who will remain in the Race, ought altogether to avoid mortal sin.

Another document is, that he who desires to obtain the Prize, do run
swiftly, and constantly. He runs swiftly or speedely, who with an ardent
and feruerous will, keeps the precepts, according to that of the Prophet:
Psalm. 111. Blessed is the man, that fears our Lord, he shall have great
delight in his Commandments; As also of that other sentence of the Apostle: In
spirit fervent, serving our Lord. Romans 12. He runs Constantly; who is never
weary with running, nor ever cease from running; knowing, that it is written:
He that perseuereth unto the End, shall be saved. Matthew. 10. And truly these two
actions, I mean to run spedily, and not to be weary, or not to intermit
running, seem to be mere Contraries, and hardly compatible together. For he
who runs speedily, is quickly tired. But he who will not be vvearied,
runs a slow space, and with moderate gate perseuers in his running. This
thing is true, and therefore few they are, who do arrive, and gain the Pryze,
or Reward. For it is most necessary, that he who coueteth to gain the Prize,
does run speedely and incessantly; since the time allotted here for running,
is short, and the journey long.

Nevertheless if Christians would imitate men, running and aspiring but for a
corruptible and small Reward or Prize, they might be of power and hability to
run both speedily, and without vvearisomnes, to the gaining of an
incorruptible and sublime Prize or Reward, What course take they, who run
for the purchasing of a corruptible and tempora^l Pryze: They depose and lay
aside all Heavy burdens; they cast of all their superfluous clothes, that they
may run with greater expedition, and vvillingnes. The same let Christians
do, let them disburden themselfs of the heavy weight of the Cares of this
World; Let then put of the Clothes of Carna^l desires, and Cupidities; or at
least, let them put of all inordinate affections to earthly commodities, and
Pleasures. When they have performed this, let them not vaunt of their own
strength and forces, but let them trust in God; All which being accomplished,
then let them complain, if through speedy running, they be wearied in their
Course.

This doctrine is not mine, but it is the doctrine of the Proph^t Esaias and S.
Paul. Esaias thus says cap. 4. They that hope in our Lord shall run, and not
labor. And the Apostles words are these 1. Cor. 7. This I say Brethren; the
time is short, it remains, that they also, who have wives, he as though they
had not; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as
though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and
they that use this World, as though they used it not. In which words the
Apostle forbids not, that Christian men should have no wives, and that they
do not lament in time of adversity, and rejoice in prosperity, and that they
should not buy things necessary, or use the goods and benefits of this World;
but he only admonishes, that in the prosecution of all these matters, men
should use a mediocrity therein, and should so curb their own immoderate
Appetites in the fruition and practice of the forsaid Points, as if they did
not in any sort belong unto them.

S. Melania (a most noble Roman Matrone) may be to us an example, of whom S.
Iero. thus writes in Epitaph. Blesillae. S. Melania being of these times, and
of true Nobility among the Christians, when as sbe had lost at once two Sons,
and this immediately before the dead Body of her husband was cold, or interred,
did in this manner bear these her griefs: I am hear to relate an incredible
matter, but I call God to witness, that it is very true. Who would noe have
thought, but that she would have stricken her breast after an enraged manner,
with tearing of her hair, and rending asunder her clothes? But she stood
immouable, and kneeling at the feet of a Crucifixe did not sheed a tear* but
as it were (taking hold of Christ) smyled, and thus said: I am now to serve
thee hereafter with greater carefullnes and expedition, in that thou have freed
me of so great a burden. Thus S. Jerome; who by this example, as by a most
worthy Commentary has explicated, what it is, that those who have wives,
children, and other goods of this World, should be, as though they had them
not, that thereby they with greater speed, and celerity run unto the Prize.

But of this point we have a more wonderful and astonishing example in Job;
who in one day lost all his Sons and daughters, and his whole substance and
riches, and being full of Ulcers, lay upon a dunghill, who but a little before,
was the most happy man among all those of the East. And yet as if all these
losses had nothing concerned him, he thus brake out in Words, full of Wisdom.
Job. 1. Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked spall I return
thither: Our Lord gave, and our Lord has taken away; as it pleased our Lord,
so is it done: the name of our Lord be blessed. To conclude, S. Peter with the
rest of the Apostles (who were the first that followed Christ, running after
the Prize) that they might teach us, what is required to run both speedily and
constantly, thus say. Matthew. 19. Behold, we have left all things, and have
followed thee, what therefore shall we have? And our Lord approving this their
demand, by his answer clearly promised to them a Prize or Reward, saying:
Amen, I say to you, that you who have followed me, in the regeneration, when
the Son of man shall sit in the seat of his Majesty, you also shall sit upon
twelve Seats, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.

There remains yet the third document, which teaches us, that who desire in
running to gain the Goal* ought to be joined with Christ; for as the Apostle
says. 1. Cor. 9. All indeed do run but one gayneth the Prize. But by this One,
doubtlesly is understood Christ; who, ad currendam viaem, rejoiced as a Giant
to the race; And of whom it is said in S. John: No man has ascended into
Heaven, but he that descended from Heaven; the Son of man, which is ln
Heaven, Joan. 3. But Christ does not ascend alone, but with all those, who are
living and true members of his Body, of which himself is the Head. Therefore
all those who run, though they distribute all their goods upon the poor, and
deliver up their bodies even to the fire, do but toil and labor in vain,
except they be joined with Christ, by faith and Charity, and be made one with
him, as himself says: Joan. 17. As thou (Father) in me, and I in thee; that
they also in us may be One.

But there is yet another manner of Conjunction with Christ, which in a
wondefull sort does advantage us both to ru^ne for the Price both swifly, and
constantly. This manner consists in the union of the interior Eye of the
Soul with Christ himself, as Christ is the Price. For Christ, as Man did
run for the Price; and as he is God, so himself in the Price; For Christ is
true God, and eternal life, as S. John witnesses; which point our Lord
himself insinuated, when he said: I am the way, the truth, and the life: For
Christ as the Truth, does lead us; as the Way, does draw us by himself; as
the life, does bring us to himself. Therefore it follows, that nothing is
more profitable, or more conducing to the gaining of the Prize, then never to
divert our eyes from the Prize it self, and to say with the Prophet Psalm. 24.
Mine Eyes are always to our Lord. For that man, who has the Eye of his heart
united, and conjoined with the Prize, neither sees, nor hears, nor regards
what the behoulders do either say or do, whether they do deride, praise, or
dispraise him; but says with the Prophet. Psalm. 17. I am become, as a man not
hearing; and with the Apostle. 1. Cor. 4. To me, it is a thing of least
account, to be judged of you, or humane day.

But to pass on forward. By how much a man draws more near to the Prize, by
so much he better knows the greatness of the Prize, which greatness inspireth
strength and causes, that a man (though spent and tired out) do not intermit
his Course. Whosoever therefore aspireth to the Celestial Prize, let him not
depart, or decline from the race of the Precepts of our Lord; let him run
ardently, and constantly; and he being United with Christ, by true Faith and
Charity, let him never turn the Eye of his Heart, from the Pryze it self.

Of the Crown. CHAP. VIII.
THe last Name, or Appellation of eternal Felicity, is the Crown of Justice;
of which Crown the Apostle speaks thus in the same place, where he speaks
of the Prize, saying: 1. Cor. 9. Every one, that strives for the Maistry,
refraineth himself from al things, that he may receive a corruptible Crown,
but we an incorruptible. Neither can it be here doubted, whether by the word,
Agon, the Maistry, Race or Course may be understood; So as this similitude
should be the same with the former; or rather that a conflict, or conte^tion be
to be understood thereby. Now those words a little after following do
demonstrate, that by the word Maistry, a Fight, or Contention is meant, to
wit: I therefore do so run, not as it were, at an Uncertain thing; do so
fight, not as it were beating the air. The same do those words of the Apostle
show. 2. Tim. 4. I have fought a good fight, I have consummated my Course, I
have kept the Faith; concerning the rest, there is laid up for me a Crown of
Justice. For in both S. Paul distinguishes a Course from a Fight; using in the
one the name of Brauium, in the other the name of Corona, which two words are
in sense evidently distinct, and diverse.

Certainly by the name of a Crown, eternal felicity is signified, which by
the Apostle is called 2. Tim. 4. The Crown of Justice, because it is given, as
a Reward for works proceeding from Justice. With S. James it is styled, Corona
vita. Iac. 1. in that it contains everlasting life. With S. Peter, An
incorruptible Crown. 1. Pet. 5. seeing it comprehends in it self the
splendor and beauty of Eternal Honor. To conclude in Esaias, God himself is
said to be hereafter, A Crown of glory to the residue of his People. Esa. 18.
From which place of Scripture, we are to understand, that the Crown, whereof
S. Paul speaks, and which is allotted for the Ouerco^merrs, or Masters in
the fight, is most honorable, and most sublime, since God himself vouchsafes
to be the crown, encompassing, adorning, and glorifying the heads of the
residue of his People; that is of those few of his People, who in their
spiritual War have become victorious. For (as often I have said out of the
testimonies of the Scripture) Many are called, but few elected, and at the day
of Judgment the Crown of the Saints shall so much the more become glorious,
by how much the fewer can justly entitle themselves thereto.

In this place we must to observe, in what kind of fight we are to exercise our
selves, and what is incumbent to us to do, whereby to gain the victory. And
without doubt the fight (which we are to all undergo) is most cruel, and
fraught with danger; especially if comparison therewith be made to the fight,
which men here upon the earth do sustain for a corruptible Crown. For the
Apostle speaks of a sportfull fight, openly perf^rmed in the eye, and sight
of the People. Therefore the Agonists, or Cha^pions here did fight with men
like unto themselves, with equal weapons and but for a base Crown, and becam^
subject either to a popular applause, or ignominy. But Christians are to enter
in combat, with those enemies, whom they see not, and yet by whom themselves
are seen, and who are in number many, being most strong, and most subtle; who
fight with unlike weapons, in the sight of God and his Angels, and for a
Crown of eternal life; and this under the danger of eternal Damnation. To
conclude* Christians here fight not in a sportfull game, but in a most true,
most fierce, and cruel War. Our Antigonists, or Enemies in this battle, are
the Devils, whom the holy Scripture sometimes calls Lions, sometimes
Dragons, at other times Basilisks; who have Traitors even within our own
houses; I mean, the Concupiscences of the flesh, which are our Bodies, and
which do wage war against our souls in behalf of our Enemies, as S. Peter
teaches, saying: 1. Pet. 2. I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, to
refrain your selfs from carnal desires, which war against the Soul. We may
add hereto (which is most miserable and calamitous) that this fight is to be
undertaken even at that very time, at which the Course in the Race is to be
performed; And therefore the Apostle has conjoined these two different Points
together; that thereby we may understand, that those who are running for the
Pryze, or Reward, are hindered throughout their whole Course by their Enemies;
and ^^at therefore it is necessary, that such men, do at one and the same time,
run with their feet, and fight with their hands.

O if Christian men would have a full resent and feeling of these things, and
of their own dangerous estates, they would not so willingly rauell out their
time in trifles, sports, and plays; in banqueting, and good fellowship, in
heaping up together of riches, in seeking after Honors and dignities; as if
the main matter of all were secure and in safety; But let such men hear the
Apostle preaching, and crying out in these words: Ephesians. 6. Take the armor of
God, that you may resist in the evil day, being clothed with the Breastplate
of Justice, in all things taking the shield of faith, wherewith you may
extinguish all the fiery darts of the wicked One. And, Take unto you the Helmet
of Salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the Word of God: In all
prayer, and supplication, praying at all times in spirit, and in the same
watching in all instance. Good God, what an Exhortation is this, how full of
fear, terror, and vehemence, especially if a man do thoroughly ponder these
former words, In all prayer, and supplication; at all times; in all instance!
And yet many of us do bear our selfs in leading our lives, as if we had no
occasion either to run in the Race, nor fight in the Conflict.

But alas, what are we to do, that in this dreadful ware we may come of with
victory against our enemies? The Apostle dispatcheth, and declares this very
point in few words, when he says, 1. Cor. 9. Every one, that strives for the
maistry, refraineth himself from all things; and they, indeed that they may
receive a corruptible Crown; but we an incorruptible. Of which Words the sense
and meaning is this: All those Champions, that they may gain a corruptible
Crown, do abstain from al such things which may debilitate or weaken the
Body, and make it less apt for fight; to wit from over much gorging themselves
with meat and drink, from accompanying their Wives, from domestical
negotiations; and briefly from all things (through otherwise pleasant or
profitable) which may hinder the Victory in this their sportly Strife and
Contention. Therefore we, who do even sweat, and labor in a true War, for an
incorruptible and eternal Crown, ought much more to forbear, and withdraw
our selves from all those things, which may weaken the Soul, and cause it to
be less prepared to undergo this great and serious War, and withal to
continue its Course and running in the spiritual Race. But what are those
things, which weaken the Soul? Even those very things, which seem to make
the Body strong: To wit; much meat, much sheep, frequent exercise, mirth,
sporting, singning, hauking, hunting; to pray little, to avoid meditation, not
to bewail a man's own sins; finally not to do works of Penance; from all
which courses he ought to abstain, who coueteth to have his sou^e strong,
that it may be apt to run in the ^a e, and to fight for the Maistry. Our Lord
says Luc. 21. Look well to your selves, least perhaps your hearts be
ouer^harged with surfeit and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that they
day come upon you suddenly.

Now on the contrary part; The meat of the Soul, making it vigorous is
fasting; the refection and resocillation of the soul, is Prayer. The sheep of
the soul, is a healthful Contemplation of things divine. The purging of the
soul from all dangerous humors, is Confession of our sins. The joy and
delight of the soul, is Tears. The triumph and Victory of the Soul, is the
crucifying of our flesh and Concupiscences thereof. For the Apostle says. Gal.
5. They that be of Christ, have crucified their flesh together with their
vices, and co^cupiscences: And in like sort he thus speaks in the place above
alleged: I do so fight, not as it were beating the air: but I chastise my
Body, and bring it into servitude; best perhaps when I have preached to others,
my self become reprobate. Behold here a true Paraph^aze, or Explication of
those former words He abstayneth from all things. For the Apostle says. 1.
Cor. 9. I do so fight in this war, as that I do abstain from those things,
which please the Body, in which do reside carnal concupiscences which do fight
against me, even in behalf of my Enemies: And I do reduce my Body into
servitude, by chastizing it with Fasting, Watching, and other mortifications of
the flesh, that so it may not rebel against the Empire, and Command of the
Soul, or join in Combat with mine Enemies against me.

But whom are not those words (lest perhaps when I have preached to others,
my self become reprobate) able to affright, and cause to tremble and fear? If
a vessel of Election, an Apostle created and chosen by God himself, One who
was rapt into the third Heaven, feared that he might become a Reprobate, if he
did not punish his Body, and reduce it into seruitudes; Who then of us has not
just reason to fear Reprobation, except he crucify and mortify his flesh, with
all its Vices and Concupiscenses? Certainly this Apostolical Example is of
force to admonish all men, that they dare not presume to hope for Victory and
the Crown, except even in the depth of their Heart they make a serious and
impartial reflection of their own State. doing works worthy of Penance, and
subduing in every sort the flesh to the spirit. Therefore the madness and
blindness of the Heart of many is wonderful, who though they perform none of
these points so necessarily exacted; yea who are so far from abstaying from
things lawful, as that they will not abstain from things unlawful and
prohibited, do nevertheless live in such security and ioillity of mind, as if
they had already received a most certain and infallible promise of God,
touching their Salvation and Crown of Glory. But this is a demonstration (as
often we have said) that they are but few, who shall be saved; and that, Many are
called, but few Elected.

Within the arms therefore of thy goodness (O Blessed Lord) do I cast my self,
I am thy Servant, and the son of thy Handmaid. Even with all desire of my
soul I do greedily thirst after that Heavenly reward, and most shyning Crown,
which thou have prepared and promised to those that love. thee. I do
acknowledge the greatness of the War and Conflict, as also I do acknowledge the
length of the Race: I also ^aily feel, and am guilty of my own imbecilli^y
and weakness; and I do confess before thee, who searchest the reins and hearts
of m^n, that the Virtue which is n me, is very small, and almost nothing. And I
am not ignorant of the great forces, and crue^ty of my invisible Enemies, who
cannot brook or digest, that we poor souls are called to that unspeakable
Glory of the which Pride has deprived them. Enlighten (Sweet Jesus) my eyes,
that I may never sleep in death; Increase my strength, that I may not fail in
the Way; Let thy Grace fight for me, least at any time my Enemy do say, I have
prevailed against him. And what I here a^ke for my self, the same also I ask
and beseech for all my Brethren, but principally for those (whether Ecc^esiast
ca^l, or secular) who are placed by thee, in sublimity and height of Authority;
Whose danger is so much the greater, by how much their P ace and Function is
more eminent and high, and whose Crown of Glory shall be so much the more
illustrious, if so with care and sol^icitude they rightly perform their Duty;
by how much their damnation will be the greater, if the souls which thou (O
Blessed Savior) have redeemed with thy precious blood, do perish through their
own fault, and careless negligence.

The Conclusion of the whole* Work. CHAP. IX.
THe twelve Considerations touching the Eternal felicity of the Saints being
explicated, and unfolded, this Conclusion may seem justly to be gathered the
rout. To wit, That the Felicity of the Saints is in it self a most great and
supreme thing; as also that it is chiefly to be desired and sought after by all
men. But notvvithstanding that the Way to find and gain the same, is most
narovv, and laborious; so as, except a man come with an immovable resolution
(casting off the care of all other things) to labor with all his forces and
endeavor; he shall never be able, to pass or penetrate that way; much less
to arrive and come to his desired end. And that I may briefly make this more
evident to the Reader, I will in place of a Conclusion, repeat all the forsaid
Considerations, and their chiefest difficulties.

1. In the first place then we did consider Eternal Felicity, under the name
of the Kingdom of Heaven; yet; having this most great difficulty out of the
Word of God, annexed unto it, to wit: The kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent bear it away. Matt. 11.

2. We after considered the same felicity under the name of the City of God,
or the Heavenly Jerusalem; and there also we found no small difficulty, because
those, who are Citizens of this World, cannot be Citizens among the Saints;
for it is most hard to live in the World, and not to be of the World.

3. In the third place, we considered the same Felicity under the name of the
House of God, in the which there are many Mansions; and we advertised, that
the Port, or Gate of this House is most strait, and that it cannot be
penetrated or entered into, without great Labor.

4. Fourthly, we did consider the same place of Beatitude, under the name of
Paradise; but with all, we considered, with how high a price (not of gould or
silver, but) of tears and blood, our Lord himself, the Martyrs, Confessors,
and all the Saints both Men and Women, did buy this Paradise; For we read Luc.
24. Christ ought to suffer, and so to enter into his glory.

5. In the fifth place, we considered the same Felicity under the name of a
Treasure, hidden in a field; and we no less shevved, that this Treasure could
not be possessed of him that found it, except for the purchasing thereof, he
did sell all things, which he had, Matthew. 13.

6. Sixthly, we considered the same under the name of a precious Pearl, or
Margarite; for the obtaining whereof, the Buyar also ought to spend all the
goods he has, that so he may purchase the same.

7. Seauenthly, we considered the same under the name of a daily Penny, which
is not given, but only to such, who labor in the Vineyard diligently, and
daily.

8. Eighthly, we considered, the same under the title, or Name of a Great
Supper; and we saw, that those were not reputed worthy of that Supper, whose
affections were enthralled unto Temporal benefits, and pleasures.

9. Ninthly, we have considered the same under the appellation of the Joy of
our Lord; to which they only were admitted, who with great pains and labor
did multiply the Talents delivered unto them; such others, as did not perform
the same, being cast into utter darkness.

10. Tenthly, we considered the same under the title of a Princely Marriage;
from the which a^l those were excluded, who were given to Sloth and Idleness,
and who did not daily watch in the exercise of good works, and expectation of
the Celestial Bridegroom.

11. In the eleauenth place, we considered the same under the name of a Prize
or Reward; which they only took hold of who did run in the race toward the
Prize speedily, and constantly, and this not without great ^oyle and labor.

12. In the twelft and last place, we did consider it under the name of a
Crown, which they only did deserve, who most courageously in fight did
overcome their enemies.

Now what way soever thou do turn thy self, and under what name soever
thou do consider Eternal Felicity, thou shall find, that it cannot be
obtained, except in pursuit thereof, thou do labor withal thy forces both
of mind and Body. Therefore he who desires to become Blessed, (which no man if
he be in his Wits but wishes to be) let him shake off all drowsynes and
Sloth, let him labor and sweat for the gaining of so great a reward, by doing
of good Works, and suffering of Evils: And let him not prefer any temporal
affairs, before this so great and only necessary Business. And let him ever
retain in memory those words of S. Paul and S. Barnabas: By many tribulations
we must enter into the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX, OR Short discourse, of the Torments of Hell, taken out of another
spiritual Book of the forsaid Card. Bellarmine, entitled, Of the Mourning of
the Dove. lib. 2. cap. 2.
The Translatour to the Reader.
THe Common Axiom in Philosophy is, that Contraries compared one to the other,
do affoard a greater illustration; and do imprint in the Understanding a more
markable difference, and disparity between them. Which Consideration has
caused me now, after the former Translation of the Eternal felicity of the
Saints, and the Joys of Heaven, to adioyne hereunto (as an Appendix) a brief
discourse of the everlasting Misery of damned souls, and of their torments in
Hell; translated out of another spiritual Book of the Learned Bellarmine,
entitled, de gemitu Columbae. By which means the grieuousnes of the pains of
Hell hereafter declared, may the more stir up the Christian Reader to be
sollicitous in avoiding the same Pains, and thereby beget a greater desire in
him, of gaining the Joys of Heaven.

There are but two Landing places of the soul, for all Eternity, after its
departure from the Body; And these two are Heaven, and Hell. Either Heaven or
Hell must be its Lot; There is no Medium between them; A man cannot lose the
one, and yet avoid the other, This then being a most assured Verity; and seeing
Heaven is made for Man, and Hell for the Devil; why will men so much trench
(as I may say) upon the Devils right, as to share with him in his Unfortunate
Inheritance, and to remain with him in everlasting fire, and so become the
vessels of Gods wrath, rather then to seek their own designed inheritance of
Heaven, unto the which Man after his Baptism is borne Heir?

Well, We are men, and therefore endued with freedom of Will, and consequently
with freedom of Election, and it is engrafted in Man, even naturally, to
desire what is good and propitious, as also to decline from what is domageable,
and evil. How then comes it to pass, that most men will needs cease to be
themselves; and in a most retrogade manner, will choose Eternity of Torments,
before Eternity of Joys; the daily vpbraiding of the Infernal Spirits, before
the continual society and familiarity of the most Holy Angels and Saints; the
Enemy of Man, before the Creator of Man; the Devil, before God; and Hell,
before Heaven? O most deplorable bewitching, and enchantment!

If any of you, Idolatours of this World, were put to his choice, whether he
would be created a great Prince, or Potentate, living in all Regality and
supreme soueraingty; or to become a Bondslaue for ever, and to suffer daily
torments and rackings: he would no doubt presently dispatch the Election, and
choose the Better. Here then the choice is given you (to speak with the
Prophet Iosue c. 24.) whether after the day of Judgment, by your virtuous life
you will reign in the Kingdom of Heaven both in soul and body, and so
participate of all the Joys thereof; Or, through your wickedness, lie fast
bound Hand and foot in Hell, there suffering everlasting Torments, and
Conflagration of fire? Where then, by your vnderualewing of Heaven (as most of
you do) is your Judgment? Where is that light of Understanding, which the
Evangelist says, does illuminate every man? But (alas) it is darkened, or
rather extinct; yea so wholly extinct, as that for want of your true use thereof
(through your own negligence) diverse of you are to be sent and relegated into
utter darkness, for all Eternity, where shall be nothing but weeping, and
gnashing of Teeth. Matthew. 22. and 25.

Most men I say are so wholy drowned in the pursuit of worldly Benefits, and
Pleasures, as that it hides from them all true consideration of their Souls
spiritual Good. O blindness of man's Nature! Woe therefore be to those, who
breath nothing but Earth, and dunghill-Pleasures. Woe, Woe, to those, who
through their greedy thirst of these Trifles, slight, or rather contemn the
Joys of Heaven. But Woe, Woe, Woe, be to all such, who not only, through their
inordinate concupiscence, and affection of floating and transitory things,
neglect the joys of Heaven; but with all, by their sinful life, do incur
the just indignation of him, who is called the God of Justice and revenge,
Psalm. 46. and thereby purchasing to themselves insufferable torments, and
irreuocable damnation. Therefore, all those who are thus blinded, I remit unto
the reading of what immediately follows, in which they may glass their own
future calamitous states. But let them read it with horror and fear, as the
weight of the business requires, that so, (to speak with S. Bernard) they may
truly fear death, fear Judgment, fear Hell. (lib. de primordijs, medijs, and
nouissimis nostris.)

The Words of learned Cardinal are these.
Having above considered of malum culpae, the evil of the Offense, we will now
take into our consideration malum poenae, the evil of the punishment, due for
the said offense, or preuarication. For this consideration may well be called
the second Fountain of Tears, And although the fear and grief of the
Punishment be less perfect, then the fear and grief of the Offense;
notwithstanding both kinds of this fear and grief is good and most
profitable: And the one of them becomes a Means to beget the other.
Certainly our good Lord and Master (Christ Jesus) says in express words:
Luc. 12. Be not afraid of them that kill the Body, and after this, have no more
to do: but I will show you whom you shall fear. Fear him, who after he has
killed, has power to cast into Hell; yea I say unto you, Fear him. And
again, touching weeping, Christ thus spoke unto those holy Women, who
follovved him with tears to the mount Caluary where he was crucified: Luc.
12. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not upon me, but weep upon your selves, and
upon your children; for behold the days will come, wherein they shall say:
blessed are the barren, and the wombes that have not borne, and the Paps that
have not given suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, fall upon
us; and to the Hills, cover us; For if in the green wood they do these things,
in the dry what sball be done?

Our Lord was not offended, neither did he prohibit the Office of Piety, by
the which those Women did bewail his Passion; but only he signified in his
former words, that those Women had greater cause of lamenting, who had
brought forth wicked Sons; and such of them diverse were, who openly cried
out: Toll, Toll, crucifige eum, Away, away with him, crucify him; And, let
his blood be upon us, and upon our children. Io. 19. For these men shall say
(...) the day of judgment to the mountains, Fall upon us, and to the Hills,
Cover us. For if in the green wood, that is, if in Christ flourishing vvithall
kind of Virtue, the fire of his Passion has so burned for the sins of
others, what the^ shall become of the dry wood, that is, of wicked men, in whom
all humor of Charity is spent and exhausted?

To these two sacred Text of Scripture, in the which Fear, and Weeping, to
avoid the pains of Hell, is praised, or commended by our Lord, we will
adioyne two other places of the ancient Fathers. S. Basil explicating that of
the Psalm, Timorem Domini doceh^ vos; thus writes: Cogita profundum Barathrum
etc. Call to mind the depth of Hell, the inextricable darkness there; the fire
wanting light, yet having the force of burning. Then think of that kind of
Worms, casting out their venom, and devouring the flesh, insatiably feeding
upon the same, and fastening intolerable griefs and pains through their
gnawing. In the last place (which is most grievous of all) remember that shame
and everlasting Confusion which shall there fall upon then. Fear this, and
through thy fear thereof, withdraw thy soul, and bridle it from all
Concupiscences of sin; This fear of our Lord the Prophet promised, that he
would teach. Thus far S. Basil.

Let us now hear S. Bernard, thus speaking in sermon. 16. in Cantica. Vt paue^
Gehennam etc. How much do I fear Hell, and tremble at the teeth of the
infernal Beast, at the hollownes and concauity of the place etc. I much fear
that gnawing Worm, and the broyling fire, the smoke, and the Vapor, the
sulphurious spirit of storms. I fear those utter darknesses. Who shall give
to my head Water here, and to mine eyes a fountain of tears, that so I may
prevent that weeping and stridour, or gnashing of the teeth there? But
doubtlesly neither S. Basil, nor S. Bernard (of which the one was of the
Greek Church, the other of the Latin) were such sinners, who only through
fear did cease from sin: but they were men, perfect, learned, grave, able to
instruct others, and actually did instruct, not only the common People, but the
Clergy and Monks, reducing them to the rule of Perfection: Yet notwithstanding
we see, they do not only admit, or permit weeping for the fear of the pains
of Hell, but they also commend it, exhorting all men to conceive Fear, and to
power out Tears, even at the thought of the Horror thereof.

Now this foundation being laid, we will briefly show, what, and of what Nature
the torments of Hell are. And because we will not wander in our discourse, in
groping (as it were) at uncertain or coniecturall points, least we may be
thought to suggest vain fears, thereby to force Tears from the eyes of the
simple and ignorant; therefore we will produce and insist only in those things,
which are fully and clearly delivered in the holy Scriptures. We find then,
that eight several kinds of Torments are read in the Book of God, which
belong to Hell, to wit, Privation of eternal Beatitude, which is called by the
deuines, Poena damni, the pain of the Loss; Darkness, Fyar, the Worm,
Immobility, the Company of the Devils, of which pains in the damned weeping
and gnashing of the teeth do proceed, the which torments are called Poena
sensus, the Pain of sense or feeling; and lastly an everlasting, and
interminable duration of all these Torments.

1. Well then the first, is Paena damni, the Pain of the Loss, it being a
deuiation and straying from our last End. A want of the Vision and sight of
God, an everlasting banishment from our Celestial Country, an amission, or
deprivation of our hereditary right to the kinhdome of Heaven: To conclude a
loss of all, what is good, and this for all Eternity. Are not then these
names, and words alone, forcing enough, to extort tears even from our stony
Hearts? But where are these names read in the Book of God? Give ear to the
King of Heaven, pronouncing his Sentence at the last Judgment. Matthew. 25.
Depart you Cursed, Come you Blessed. That is said to the Reprobate, This to the
Elect. Hear the said King of Heaven again. Luc. 13. Strive to enter by the
narrow gate, because many, I say to you, shall seek to enter, and shall not be
able. But when the goodman of the House shall enter in, and shut the door, and
you sball begin to stand without, and knock at the door, saying: Lord, open
unto us; and he answearing sball say to you; I know your not whence your are;
depart from me all you Workers of Iniquity. Hear the Prophet Esaias Cap. 26. Let
us have mercy on the impious, and he will not learn Justice; in the land of
the Holy he has done wicked things, and he shall not see the glory of our Lord.

To conclude, if the Vision of God be promised only to the clean of Heart, our
Lord saying: Math. 5. Blessed are the clean of Heart, for they shall see God;
then follows it, that those who are not clean of Heart, shall not see God:
Neither only shall they not see God, but neither the City of God, which is the
supernall Jerusalem, fraught with all abundance of Good, according to those
words of S. John: And there shall not enter into it any polluted thing, nor
that does abomination, and makes a lie. And again: Blessed are they, who wash
their stoles in the blood of the Lamb, that their power may be in the tree of
Life, and they may enter by the Gates into the City. Without are dogs, and
Sorcerers, the Unchaste, and murderers, and seruers of Idols, and every one
that loves and makes a Lie. Apoc. 21. and 22. To proceed: Those Men, who are
enthralled to the Love of Temporal things, and who have not tasted Heavenly
sweetness, do little prize this pain of Loss: But such, whose eyes of the Mind
are pure and elevated, and who have received but some small delibation and
feeling of Celestial affairs, assure themselves that this Pain of Loss is
far more grievous and insufferable, then any Corporal torments.

Hear I pray you S. John Chrysostom discoursing of this point in these words,
Hom. 24. in Matthew. Qui in gehenna vritur etc. Who burns in Hell, wholly
loses the kingdom of Heaven: which pain is doublesly greater, then that
conflagration of flames can be etc. I know well, that many do much fear Hell;
Nevertheless I affirm the loss of that Glory to be far more heavy and
insupportable, then the punishment of Hell can be. If I cannot demonstrate and
prove the truth hereof by speech, it is not to be wondered; For as yet we have
not known the beatitude of those Rewards, that thereby we might make a just
proportion of the Infelicity, proceeding from the Loss of them. But this we
shall infallibly learn, when experience shall teach us therein. For then shall
the eyes of men be opened, then shall the veyle be drawn away, then shall the
wicked with inutterable dolor see, how great the disparity is between Goods
eternal or supreme, and goods decaying and temporary. Thus much S.
Chrysostom. Therefore whiles we cannot learn experimentally, how much the
Loss of Beatitude does exceed all corporal punishment, let us in the mean
time give credit to the words of so grave and worthy a man. And when by
experience we have learned, that the burning of the flesh is plainly
intolerable, we may then prudently gather and conclude, that the loss of
eternal felicity, is (if it be lawful so to speak) more then intolerable.
Therefore whiles the time is acceptable, and whiles that loss may be redeemed
with the price of tears, let us not be sparing of profitable tears, for fear
that we after do deplore that loss, but unprofitably.

2. Another punishment of Hell is exterior Darkness; for thus we read in the
Gospel. Matthew. 8. The children of the kingdom shall be cast out into exterior
darkness. And again, it is said of him, who was found without his nuptial
garment: Cast him into utter darkness. In like sort, of the servant who did not
multiply his talents: Cast you out the improfitable servant into utter darkness;
Which very thing Job seems to signify, when he calls the place of the
damned, A land of misery and darkness, where is the shadow of death, and no
Order, but everlasting horror inhabiteth. Job. 10. And the force of Reason
seems to euict the same, since the place of the Reprobate is in the Center of
the Earth, to wit, in a place most discosted and remote from the Seats of the
Blessed; which place is called in the Scriptures Psalm. 85. Infernus, the
inferior, or the lower Hell; Cor terrae, and Abyssus, the Heart of the Earth,
and an Abisse* Luc. 8. For since this place is under the Superficies of the
Earth certain thousands of miles; it follows that it is not penetrated of
the sun, neither receaueth it any light from the Moon or the stars. And
although there be fire (and that Corporal) as hereafter we will show:
nevertheless it appears from the Sentence of S. Basil above cited, that
that hellish fire has the power of burning, but not of shining. And if perhaps
some sulphurious and duskish light be in it, it shall serve only to the end,
that those miserable VVretches shall see (by the help of it) part of their
Calamities, to wit, their children, Brethren, and other their near friends
(through their fault) damned with them: Or also it may serve, that they may see
the Horrible f^ces and visages of the Devils, from whom (if they could) they
would most willingly auert and turn their Eyes.

Now this darkness in Hell is called Exterior, or utter Darkness, that it may be
distinguished from the interior darkness, which the Wicked do suffer in this
life. For now the wicked and the Idolatours of this world have their eyes both
of mind and body open to behold the felicity of the world, and therefore they
repute nothing to be good, neither do they affect any thing, but what lies
open to the senses of the flesh: As on the contrary, they loath and hate
nothing, but the Calamities and miseries of this life, wholly laboring with the
strongest bent of Endeavor to decline the same. But how Eagle-eyed soever they
are to external and corporal things, they are possessed with a Meale-like
blindness to interior and spiritual matters, of which men the Apostle thus
speaks, Romans 1. Their foolish heart has been darkened. And Ephesians. 4. That
now you walk not, as also the Gentills do walk, in the Vanity of their sense;
having their Understanding obscured with darkness, alienated from the life of
God by the Ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their Heart.

Therefore even as the Reprobate have, during this present time, interior
darkness, and exterior light; so in the time to come they shall suffer
exterior darkness, and interior Light; I mean not interior light toward the
knowledge of God, but toward their own Miseries; so as that light shall bring
to them a greater torment; for then they shall understand, that all
te^poralities have vanished away with time, and then they shall undergo an
improfitable and fruitless Penance. Of which Persons the Wise Man thus
speaks Sap. 9. They repenting, and sighing through anguish of spirit, shall
say within themselves: We have therefore erred from the Way of Truth, and the
sun of Justice has not shined to us. Therefore the Reprobate shall have
interior light, so far forth, as thereby they may see and acknowledge their
Errors; but they shall suffer interior darkness, so as they shall be able to see
and discern nothing, which may bring them any solace, or may in any sort
affoard the least ease or lessning of their Infelicity.

What this torment may be, especially to those, who are accustomed to please
and delight their Eyes with sights of things, Tobias the elder may well
testify, who, when the Angel said to him. Tob. 5. Let Joy be ever unto thee,
answered: Quale gaudium mihi erit etc. What manner of joy shall be to me, who
sit, in darkness, and sea not the light of Heaven? But if good Toby persuaded
himself, he could not be partaker of any Joy, whiles he remained blind, what
may we conceive of them, who for all Eternity shall lie in darkness? They shall
look for light, but they shall not see it, neither shall they see the rising
morning. When any of us lies alone in the darkness of the Night, troubled with
some sharp pain, which banisheth all sleep, how long and wearisome seems
all the Night to be? And how anxiously do we count the Hours, and expect the
end of the night? What then do those Miserable Creatures suffer, who are
assured, they shall watch in everlasting darkness and dolours, and shall never
find any Consolation.

3. But now in this next place, what shall we say of the torment of Fire, which
is the third pain of the damned? That the Wicked shall suffer a horrible
punishment of perpetual fire, the Scripture is so plentiful in proof, (and
this so evident and clear) as that no evasion can be excogitated against the
said divine Authorities, S. John Baptist speaking of Christ, thus says, Matthew.
3. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will gather his wheat into the barn,
but the chafe he will burn with unquenchable fire. And Christ himself
speaking of the darnell or Cocle in Corn, to wit of sinners, says: Cast them
into the furnace of fire. And again: Get you away from me (you eursed) into
everlasting fire, which was prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Matthew. 25.
And further our Lord says: It is good for thee to enter into everlasting life,
lame, rather then having two feet, to be cast into the hell of unquenchable
fire, Mar. 9. Also in Luke cap. 3. Every tree, that yields not good fruit,
shall be cut down, and cast into the fire. To conclude our Lord in S. John
says. If any abide not in me, he shall be cast forth as a branch, and shall
wither; and they shall gather him up, and cast him into the fire, and he
burns. Joan. 15. And accordingly we thus read in the Apocalypse, cap. 20. He
that was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the lake of
fyar. And there a little after: To the fearful and incredulous, and execrable,
and murderers, and fornicatours, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars,
their part shall be in the lake, burning with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death. Apo. 21. Therefore touching the punishment of Fire there can be
no doubt.

Neither are we here to conjecture, that the fire of Hell is a fire only
Metaphorical, or spiritual, because it is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, as we read in S. Matthew; For S. Gregory affirms in direct words, that
fire to be corporal^, and hereafter to burn the Bodies with the spirits. The
same is unanimously taught in the School of the deuines. Now how spirits can
be tormented and afflicted by corporal fire, is a large disputation; though S.
Austin solueth this doubt in one Word, when he writes; that it is performed by
a wonderful, yet true manner. l. 22. de Ciuit. cap. 10. Which same answer may
serve, if any over, curiously should demand, from whence this continual fire
does receive its nourishment and supply, and how are the bodies of the
Reprobate, ever burning, and yet never finally consumed? That all these things
are accomplished by wonderful, yet true means, the Catholic Church
belieueth, and securely belieueth; because he, that does this, is Omnipotent,
and who first revealed it, is Infinite Wisdom it self, and the first Truth.
But these things omitted, it is more incumbent upon us, most attentively to
think, what a punishment it will be for a man's Body (truly endued with the sense
of feeling) to be tormented with sulphurious fire, and extremity of dolor, and
yet never to be consumed; That thus, in whose Will sin would never have an
End, in his soul and flesh torments shall never have an End.

There are many punishments invented by Men; but not any more sharp, more
vehement, more insufferable then fire, And as there is no torment, which
tortureth more cruelly, and more intollerably then fire; so there is none,
which sooner consumes, and cease to afflict then fire. In what lamentable
plight then are those poor Wretches, who are tormented with Fire, which most
intollerably and most cruelly does burn, and yet shall never cease to burn?
Certainly if these points were attentively considered, and withal firmly
believed, no man, who is guilty of mortal sin, could refrain from
lamentation and tears. I would to God, at least, that those who are touched
with the guilty Conscience of their Crimes, would ponder again and again
those words of Esaias, as spoken to themselves by the spirit of God: Which of
you can dwell with devouring sire? Which of you shall dwell with everlasting
burnings? Isa. 35. As if the Prophet would say to sinners: Do not take upon you
a burden, which you are not able to bear: make trial, if you be able to dwell
with devouring fire: stretch out your hand into the fire, and see how long you
can endure the burning thereof. And if you be not of ability to suffer it for
the space but of one hour; how then can you be able to dwell with everlasting
fyres and ardours? Keep therefore your heart from wicked Concupiscences, bridle
your tongue from ill Words, withdraw your hand from evil Works; and if you
have already sinned in heart, word or work, wash your sins away with tears,
confession, Fasting, and Almsdeeds; for this is the way of escaping the
devouring fire, and avoiding of everlasting Ardours.

4. There follows the Fourth Pain of Hell; to wit, a gnawing Worm; which
worm Esaias the Prophet, and S. Mark the Evangelist do reckon up among the
other torments of Hell. Esaias his words are these, ca. 66. Their worm shall not
dye, and their fire shall not be extinguished. Which sentence our Lord
disputing in S. Mark cap. 9. of the Pains of Hell, does thrice repeat,
saying: Where the worm dies not, and the fire is not extinguished. And truly
S. Basil affirms, that this Worm is to be Corporal; to wit, a kind of
worm casting out venom, and devouring the flesh, insatiably eating without
saturity, and through gnawing causes intolerable pains. Notwithstanding S.
Austin with more probability teaches, that the fire which is not extinguished,
belongs to the Body, and the Worm which dies not, appertains to the Soul;
which Sentence the Deuines do commonly follow. Therefore this Worm which never
dies, is a guilty Conscience of sin, which as a mad and raging dog, is ever
barking, and as a venomous worm, ever gnawing. For it always calls to mind,
how imprudently and foolishly a man has carried himself, by losing the
kingdom of Heaven, for the gain of some most base and earthly Pleasure; and
by buying the most sordid, and short delight of the flesh, with the price of
suffering the intolerable torments of Hell.

Truly here in this life, we do mitigate, and as it were ease the like
reprehension of a barking Conscience, by several means, as one while by
sleeping, another while by reading, or doing of some other Work: But in Hell,
where there shall be no rest of sleep, no reading, no operation or working, that
worm of Conscience both day and night, without any intermission, shall gnaw the
very bowels of the soul: and the soul shall even fret against ^t self, even
withering away, without finding any ease, or repose. For thus shall those
wicked souls say, and discourse with themselves: O that goulden time now is
past, and shall never return. O blind fools, that we were! Who has thus
deprived us of all Understanding? Who has closed our eyes! Who has shut up
and stopped our ears, so as we did never once think of these present pains
and torments? And yet there have not men been wanting, who have admonished us
both by their public, and private exhortations. What do those things, which
the deceitful World did afford and proffer, now advantage us, that for them we
should provoke so terrible a God to wrath and indignation? But if the World
had proffered us Kingdoms, and Empyres, accompanied with all Affluency,
Riches, and Delectations, and that it had been lawful for us to have enjoyed
them for the space of many thousands of years; could the fruition of all this
stand in any equal balance with these our pains, and torments, which are to
endure for all Eternity? O no, Seeing then, (...) Kingdoms and Empyres to
continue any long time, but only are empty shadows of a most bitter and short
Pleasure the world has afforded us, who has thus cruelly enchaunted and
bewitched us, that we should never till this present cast an eye upon our most
Calamitous state, but ever reject and slight the wholesome counsel and advice
given to us by others? These and the like words shall those wretched Catiffes
(whose worm shall not dye, nor fire be extinguished) breath out, and repeat
again and again, but without any ease, or least mitigation.

5. The Fifth Pain of Hell, are those Bonds, with the which the Reprobat being
fast tied and shackled, cannot move themselves; for thus we remember our Lord
speaking in the Gospel of that man, who was found without his wedding garment,
to say: Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness. Matthew. 22. And
the same thing does the Apostle S. Jude write in his Epistle, of the wicked
Angels, when he says: The Angels which kept not their Principality, he has
reserved under darkness in eternal bonds. This tying, or binding of hands and
feet signifies no other thing, but that the Reprobate in Hell shall not have
faculty and power to walk or move whither they will, but shall for ever
remain in one, and the same place. And certainly if liberty were given to the
Inhabitants of Hell to rest, and be eased of their torments, it were perhaps
tolerable still to remain, and stay in one place; but when they shall be on each
side pricked with the bitings of worms, and tormented with the flames, of
Fire, it shall be most insupportable to them, when they see they cannot stir or
move a hand or foot. What pains do sick men endure, when they are vexed with
but burning fevers, and cannot move themselves? How cruel a torment did the
impiety of the Gentiles excogitate, when they did expose Marcus Aretusius the
Martyr, fast bound naked to the sun, being anointed all over with honny, and
his hands tied that so the bitings of the VVaspes and the flies (the which he
could neither by removing out of his place, nor with his hands drive away)
might more afflict him?

S. Gregory Nazianzen orat. 1. in Julian, relates this passage, to show, how
far the subtilty and craft of the Devil did extend it self in torturing of
Martyrs. But the shortness of the time, in which he was forced to endure this
vexation, and the eternity of joy, which he was after to have in Heaven, did
comfort this Martyr. And perhaps that saying of the Apostle among his pains
might occur unto his mind: This our Tribulation, which for the present is
momentary and light, works above measure exceedingly an eternal weight of
Glory in us. 2. Cor. 4. But (alas) the miserable souls in Hell, who are to be
bewailed with a whole fountain of tears, and whom their own wickedness has
thrust and detruded into that unfortunate Place, being bound hand and foot,
and set open to the bitings of the worms, and to the incendious fyrebrands,
can neither drive away the Worms, nor put by the Heat; nor procure any
relaxation of those torments (much less any comfort,) and this for all
Eternity.

6. The sixth torment of the damned shall be the Society and daily accompanying of
the Devil and his Angels. For thus does our Savior speak in the Gospel:
Matthew. 25. Get you away from me (you cursed) into everlasting fire, which was
prepared for the Devil, and his Angels. The which thing we also read in the
Apocalypse cap. 20. the words are these: And the Devil, which seduced them, was
cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, where both the Beast and the false
Prophet shall be tormented day and night. And a little after is aided, that all
those are to be sent to that Lake of fire and brimstone, who are not written
in the Book of Life. Neither only the sacred Scripture (which alone were
sufficient) but also the holy Fathers do unanimously teach the same, to wit, S.
Basil, S. Austin, S. Bernard and many others. Now how great a punishment it
is, for ever to remain, and dwell with most cruel Enemies, who do persecute
mankind with such a deadly hate, and who for their Hate and Malice are compared
in the Scriptures to Lions, Dragons, Serpents, and Basilisks, it is easy to
judge. It is a great part of the felicity of the Saints, to be daily
conversant and in the company of the holy Angels, who are many in number,
friends among themselves, and shyning with the splendor of all wisdom and
virtue. Therefore by the same reason it shall be no small vnfortunatnes, and
misery of the Reprobate, continually to remain in the company and sight of
unclean Spirits, who are many, enemies to man, and most deformed and ugly.

7. 8. Wherefore it is no wonder, if the Wicked in the lowest depth of Hell
do daily weep, and gnash with their teeth; the which are the two last pains
of the damned, according to the words of our Lord: The Children of the kingdom
shall be cast out into exterior darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. And again: Depart from me all you workers of Iniquity; there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. And more: Those that work iniquity, he shall
cast into the furnace of fire, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And
yet more: Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. To conclude in another place we thus read: The
unprofitable servant cast you out into utter darkness; there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.

Not without just cause did our Lord so often repeat this sentence; to wit,
that by the frequent iteration thereof, as a most wholesome verity it might be
more firmly printed in the heart of Men. Since continual weeping and
everlasting gnashing of the teeth, do (as it were in an Epilogue, and closure
of all) contain and comprehend all the torments of Hell. For weeping
discovers dolor or grief, and gnashing of the teeth shows horror: both
which do rise from the loss of Beatitude, from the broyling fire, from the
gnawing Worm, from a darksome Prison, and to conclude from the cohabitation
of infernal Beasts. Therefore the Reprobate, who here on earth, will not
bewail their sins but for a short time, shall hereafter inconsolably bewail
them for all eternity: And because they would not have a horror of offending
their Creator in this World, as they ought to have had; they shall have in
Hell a perpetual Horror of the incredible acerbity of their pains. The
Apostle did cry out: It is horrible to fall into the hands of the living God.
Hebr. 10. but they were before deaf to this voice; now they shall testify the
truth of it, ^ith the gnashing of their teeth.

All these things are written for ^ur good, who yet are in the way of Heaven,
or Hell. Those wretches who ^re arrived at their End, can have no ^ope of
health, though they should e^uall the waters of the main Ocean, with tears of
Penance. Wherefore ^O Christian soul) now use the price and worth of Tears,
whiles they are of force, and whiles they are accepta^le to our Lord God. Do
not expect and ^ayte for time, since Time will not wai^e for thee. Observe, how
many are ^arried and snatched away to Hell, through sudden death, who if they
would have bewailed and lamented their sins, and have had a horror of Hell
when time was, they should not have been at this present in that place, where
weeping and gnashing of ^eeth, (that is, everlasting Horror) ^oth inhabitate
and dwell.

FINIS.

