THE Terrors of the night Or, A Discourse of Apparitions.

Post Tenebras Dies. THO: NASHE.

LONDON, Printed by John Danter for William Jones, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Gunne nere Holburne Conduit. 1594.

TO THE NEW KINDled clear Lamp of Virginity, and the excellent adored high
Wonder of sharp Wit and sweet Beauty, Mistres ELIZABETH CAREY; sole Daughter
and Heir to the thrice noble and renowned Sir GEORGE CAREY, Knight Marshall,
etc.
RAre adorned Mistress, whom all that know admire, and not malice it self but
does honor. True Stem of Nobility, out-flourishing your sex or your age;
pure saint-like picture of Sobriety and Modesty, sacred and immaculate virgin
Star, clear (if any living) from the original sin of thought: give me
leave (though contemptible and abject) once more to sacrifice my worthles wit
to your glory. Many fervent vows and protestations of observance, your
bountiful gracious deserts toward me, have entrancedly extracted, which yet
remain in the over unwrought and untried. As touching this short gloss or
annotation on the foolish Terrors of the Night, you partly are acquainted from
whose motive imposition it first proceeded, as also what strange sudden cause
necessarily produced that motion. A long time since has it line suppressed by
me; until the urgent importunity of a kind friend of mine (to whom I was
sundry ways beholding) wrested a Coppie from me. That Coppie progressed from
one scriueners shop to another, and at length grew so common, that it was
ready to be hung out for one of their signs, like a pair of indentures.
Whereupon I thought it as good for me to reap the fruit of my own labors,
as to let some unskillful penman or Nouerint-maker startch his ruff and new
spade his beard with the benefit he made of them. Accept of them, exquisite
Mistress, as the best testimony I have yet to expres the duty that I owe. A
little more leisure and prosperity, will beget better labors; wherein I will
enjoin my spirit to be a peremptory combattant for your praises, against all
vulgar deep flattred mediocritie, and pale penurious beauty; which gives dull
Painters store of gold to solder up their lean dints of deformity. Against
your perfections no tung can except. Miraculous is your wit; and so is a
acknowledged by the wittiest Poets of our age, who have vowed to enshrine you
as their second DELIA. Temperance her self has not temperater behavior than
you; religious Piety has no humble hand-maide that she more delights in. A
worthy Daughter are you of so worthy a Mother; borrowing (as another Phoebe,
from her bright Sunne-like resplendaunce) the orient beams of your radiaunce.
Into the Muses society her self she has lately adopted, and purchased divine
Petrarch another monument in England. Ever honored may she be of the royallest
breed of wits, whose purse is so open to her poor beadsmens distresses. Well
may I say it, because I have tried it, never lived a more magnificent Lady of
her degree on this earth. A number of men there be, who pursuing the high way
to the Indies, have perished in lingering expectation before they could get
thither; but a nearer Cut have I found in her extraordinary liberality and
bounty: and to a company of my malcontent companions will discover if it
please them, how to be gainful and gain-coping nauigators if they will insist
in my directions. Now I must tie my self to the Printers paper limits, and
knit up much thankfulness in few words. Dear Mistress persuade your self,
that no srowning misfortune or any accident whatsoever, shall divorce me from
your reverence. No more I crave in requital, but that you would put me in the
checke-roule of your remembrance, and not salute me as a stranger.

Your virtues immovable Votarie: THO: NASHE.

To Master or Goodman Reader, generally dispersed East or West.
GEntlemen (according to the laudable custom) I am to court you with a few
premises considered: but a number of you there be, who consider neither
premises nor conclusion, but piteously torment Title Pages on every poast:
never reading farther of any Book, than Imprinted by Simeon such a sign, and
yet with your dudgen judgments will desperately presume to run up to the hard
hilts through the whole bulk of it. Martin Momus, and splaiefooted Zoylus that
in the eight and sixth age of Poetry, and first year of the reign of Tarltons
toies kept a foul stir in Poules Churchyard, are now reuined again: and like
want on Whelps that have worms in their tungs, slauer and betouse every
paper they meet withal. Yea, if they chance but on a moate or a wind bladder,
they never have done with it till they have clean bandied and tossed it out of
sight. For my part, I wish that I may be both out of their sight and out of
their mind too: and if their winy wits must needs be working, that they would
rather be Tailors to make, than botchers or cobblers to amend or to mar. Come,
come, I know their dull tricks well enough, you shall have them lie in child bed
one and thirty weeks and eight days of three bad lines and a half, and
afterward spend a whole twelve month in spunging and sprucing them, honest
thriftie Peter Littleton discharging their commons all the while: but such
poor fellows as I, that cannot put out money to be paid again when we come
from Constantinople, either must have our work dispatched by the weeks end, or
else we may go beg: and yet I will not beg of them neither go the world never so
hard, no not so much as a good word: but if in word or deed I hear that they
wrong me, I Will meet them right if I can, And so I leave them to stop mustard
pots with my leaves if they will, or to their own will what soever.

THOMAS NASHE.

The Terrors of the Night. OR A Discourse of Apparitions.
A Little to beguile time idly discontented, and satisfy so me of my solitary
friends here in the Country, I have hastily undertook to write of the weary
fancies of the Night, wherein if I weary none with my weak fancies, I will
herafter lean harder on my pen and fetch the petegree of my praise, from the
utmost of pains.

As touching the terrors of the night, they are as many as our sins. The
Night is the Devils Black book, wherein he records all our
transgressions. Even, as when a condemned man is put into a dark dungeon,
secluded from all comfort of light or company, he does nothing but
despairfully call to mind his graceless former life, and the brutish outrages
and misdemeanors that have thrown him into that desolate horror: so when
Night in her rustie dungeon has imprisoned our ey-sight, and that we are shut
seperatly in our chambers from resort, the devil keeps his audit in our
sin-guilty consciences, no sense but surrenders to our memory a true bill of
parcels of his detestable impieties. The table of our heart is turned to an
index of iniquities, and all our thoughts are nothing but texts to condemn us.

The rest we take in our beds is such another kind of rest, as the weary
traveler takes in the cool soft grass in summer; who thinking there to lie
at ease, and refresh his tired limbs, lays his fainting head unawares on a
loathsome neast of snakes.

Well have the Poets tearmd night the nurse of cares, the mother of despair,
the daughter of hell.

Some Divines have had this conceit, that God would have made all day and no
night, if it had not been to put us in mind, there is a Hell as well as a
Heaven.

Such is the peace of the subjects as is the peace of the Prince under whom
they are governed. As God is entitled the Father of light, so is the devil
surnamed the Prince of darkness, which is the night. The only peace of mind
that the devil has is despair, wherefore we that live in his nightly
kingdom of darkness, must needs taste some disquiet.

The Raven and the Dove that were sent out of Noah's Ark, to discover the world
after the general Deluge, may well be an allegory of the day and the night.
The day is our good Angel the Dove, that returns to our eyes with an Olive
branch of peace in his mouth (presenting quiet and security to our distracted
souls and consciences); the night is that ill angel the Raven, which never
comes back to bring any good tidings of tranquillity: a continual messenger
he is of dole and misfortune. The greatest curse almost that in the scripture
is threatened, is, that the ravens shall pick out their eyes in the valley of
death. This cursed raven the night, pecks out men's eyes in the valley of death.
It hinders them from looking to heaven for succor, where their Redeemer
dwells: wherefore no doubt it is a time most fatal and unhallowed. This
being proved, that the devil is a special predominant Planet of the night,
and that our creator for our punishment has allotted it him as his peculiar
segniorie and kingdom, from his inueterate envy, I will amplify the ugly
terrors of the night. The names importing his malice, which the scripture is
plentiful of, I will here omit; least some men should think I went about to
conjure. Suffices us to have this heedfull knowledge of him, that he is an
ancient male content, and seeks to make any one desperate like himself.
Like a cunning fowler to this end he spreads his nets of temptation in the
dark, that men might not see to avoid them. As the Poet says.

Quae nimis apparent retia vitat auis.
Too open nets even simple birds do shun.
Therefore in another place (which it cannot be but the devil has read) he
counsaileth thus. Noctem peccatis and fraudibus obiice nubom.
By night time sin, and cloak thy fraud with clouds.
When has the devil commonly first appeared unto any man but in the night?

In the time of infidelity, when spirits were so familiar with men that they
called them Du Penates, their household Gods or their Lares, they never sacrificed
unto them till Sunne-setting. Their Robbin-good-fellowes, Elfes, Fairies,
Hobgoblins of our latter age, which idolatrous former days and the
fantastical world of Greece ycleaped Fawnes, Satyrs, Dryades and Hamadryades,
did most of their merry prankes in the Night. Then ground they malt, and had
hempen shirts for their labors, daunst in rounds in green meadows, pincht
maids in their sleep that swept not their houses clean, and led poor
Travelers out of their way notoriously.

It is not to be gainsaid, but the devil can transform himself into an
angel of light, appear in the day as well as in the night, but not in this
subtle world of Christianity so usual as before. If he do, it is when men's
minds are extraordinarily thrown down with discontent, or inly terrified
with some horrible concealed murder, or other heinous crime close smothered in
secret. In the day he may smoothly in some mild shape insinuat, but in the
night he takes upon him like a tyrant. There is no these that is half so
hardy in the day as in the night, no more is the devil. A general principle
it is, he that does ill hates the light.

This Macheuillian trick has he in him worth the noting, that those whom he
dare not united or together encounter, disioined and divided, he will one by
one assail in their sleep. And even as Ruptures and crampes do then most
torment a man when the body with any other disease is distemperd, so the
Devil when with any other sickness or malladie the faculties of our reason are
enfeebled and distemperd, will be most busy to disturb us and torment us.

In the quiet silence of the night he will be fare to surprise us, when he
infallibly knows we shall be unarmed to resist, and that there will be full
auditorie granted him to undermine or persuade what he lists. All that ever he
can scare us with, are but Seleucus ayrie Castles, terrible bug-beare brags,
and naught else, which with the least thought of faith are quite vanished and
put to flight. Neither in his own nature dare he come nere us, but in the name
of sin, and as Gods executioner. Those that catch birds imitate their voices,
so will he imitate the voices of Gods vengeance, to bring us like birds into
the net of eternal damnation.

Children, fools, sicke-men, or madmen he is most familiar with (for he
still delights to work upon the advantage) and to them he boldly reuealeth,
the whole astonishing treasury of his wonders.

It will be demanded why in the likeness of ones father or mother, or
kinsfolks, he oftentimes presents himself unto us?

No other reason can be given of it but this, that in those shapes which he
supposes most familliar unto us, and that we are inclined to with a natural
kind of love, we will sooner harken to him than otherwise.

Should he not disguise himself in such sub til forms of affection, we would
fly from him as a serpent, and eschew him with that hatred he ought to be
eschewd. If any ask why he is more conversant and busy in churchyards and
places where men are buried, than in any other places? It is to make us
believe, that the bodies and souls of the departed rest entirely in his
possession, and the peculiar power of death is resigned to his disposition. A
rich man delights in nothing so much as to be incessantly raking in his
treasury, to be turning over his his rustie gold every hour: the boanes of
the dead the devil counts his chief treasury, and therefore is he continually
raking amongst them; and the rather he does it, that the lining which hear it
should be more unwilling to die, insomuch as after death their boanes should
take no rest.

It was said of Catiline, Vultum gestauit in manibus, with the turning of a
hand he could turn and alter his countenance. Far more nimble and sudden is
the Devil in shifting his habit, his sorme he can change, and cogge as quick
as thought.

What do we talk of one devil? there is not a room in any man's house, but is
pestred and close packed with a camp royal of devils. Chrysostom says, the
air and earth are three parts inhabited with spirits. Hereunto the Philosopher
alluded, when he said, Nature made no voydnes in the whole universal: for no
place (be it no bigger than a pockhole in a man's face) but is close thronged
with them. Infinite millions of them will hang swarming about a worm-eaten nose.

Don Lucifer himself their grand Capitano, asks no better throne than a
bleare eye to set up his state in. Upon a hair they will sit like a nit, and
ouer-dredgea bald pate like a white scurffe. The wrinkles in old witches
visages, they eat out to entrench themselves in.

If in one man a whole legionof devils have bin billetted? how many hundred
thousand legions retain to a Term at London. If I said but to a Tavern, it
were an infinite thing. In westminster Hall a man can scarce breath for them:
for in every corner they houer as thick as moates in the sun.

The Druides that dwelt in the I Will of Man, which are famous for great
coniurers, are reported to have been lousie with familiars. Had they but put
their finger and their thumb into their neck, they coud have plucked out a
whole neast of them.

There be them that think every spark in a flame is a spirit, and that the
worms which at sea eat through a ship, are so also: which may very well be;
for have not you seen one spark of fire burn a whole town, and a man with a
spark of lightning made blind, or killed outright. It is impossible the gunnes
should go off as they do, if there were not a spirit either in the fire, or
in the powder.

Now for worms: what makes a dog run mad, but a worm in his tung? and what
should that worm be, but a spirit? Is there any reason, such small vermin
as they are, should devour such a vast thing as a ship, or have the teeth to
gnaw through iron and wood? No, no they are spirits, or else it were incredible.

Tullius Hostillius who took upon him to conjure up Jove by Numa Pompillius
books, had no sense to quake and tremble at the wagging and shaking of every
lease, but that he thought all leaves are full of worms, and those worms are
wicked spirits.

If the bubbels in streams were well searched, I am persuaded they would be
found to be little better. Hence it comes that mares (as Columella reports)
looking their forms in the water, run mad. A flea is but a little beast, yet
if she were not possessed with a spirit, she could never leap and skip so as she
does. Froisard says, the Earl of Fois had a familiar that presented it self
unto him in the likeness of two rushes fighting one with another. Not so much as
Tewksburie mustard but has a spirit in it or else it would never bite so. Have
we not read of a number of men that have ordinarily carried a familiar or a
spirit in a ring in stead of a spark of a diamond? why I tell ye we cannot
break a crum of bread so little, as one of them will be if they lift.

From this general discourse of spirits, let us digress and talk another
while of their separate natures and properties.

The spirits of the fire which are the purest and perfectest, are merry,
pleasant, and well inclined to wit, but nevertheless gyddie, and unconstant.

Those whom they possess, they cause to excel in what ever they undertake.
Or Poets or boon companions they are out of question.

Socrates Genius was one of this stamp, and the Dove where with the Turks
hold Mahomet their Prophet to be inspired. What their names are, and under
whom they are governed, the Discovery of witchcraft has amplified at large,
wherefore I am exempted from that labor. But of the diuinest quintessence of
metals and of wines are many of these spirits extracted. It is almost
impossible for any to be encumbred with ill spirits, who is continually
conversant in the excellent restoratiue distillations of wit and of Alcumie.
Those that rauenously englut themselves with gross meats, and respect not the
quality but the quantity of what they eat, have no affinity with these
spirits of the fire.

A man that will entertain them must not pollute his body with any gross
carnal copulation or inordinate beastly desires, but love pure beauty, pure
virtue, and not have his affections linseywolsey, intermingled with lust, and
things worthy of liking.

As for example if he love good Poets he must not countenance Ballet-makers,
if he have learned Physicians he must not favor horse-leaches and mountebanks:
for a bad spirit and a good can never endure to dwell together.

Those spirits of the fire, howeuer I term them comparatively good in respect
of a number of bad, yet are they not simply well inclinde, for they be by
nature ambitious, haughty and proud, nor do they love virtue for it self any
whit, but because they would ouerquell and outstrip others, with the
vaineglorious ostentation of it. A humor of monarchizing and nothing else it is,
which makes them affect rare quallified studies. Many Atheists are with these
spirits inhabited.

To come to the spirits of the water, the earth, and the air; they are dull
flegmaticke drones, things that have much malice without any great might.
Drunkards, mizers, and women they usually retain too. water (you all know)
breeds a medley kind of licor called beer; with these watrie spirits they
were possessed, that first invented the art of bruing. A quagmire consisting of
mud and sand, sends forth the like pudly mixture.

All rheumes, poses, Sciaticaes, dropsies, and gouts, are diseases of their
flegmaticke engendring. Seafaring men of what sort soever, are chief
entertainers of those spirits. Greedy vintners likewise give hospitality to a
number of them; who having read no more scripture, than that miracle of Christ's
turning water into wine in Chanaan, think to do a far stranger miracle than
ever he did, by turning wine into water.

Alehouses and cooks shadie pauisions, by watrie spirits are principally
vpholden.

The spirits of the earth are they which cry, all bread and no drink, that
love gold and a buttond cap above heaven. The worth in naught they respect,
but the weight, good wits they naturally hate; insomuch as the element of fire
their progenitor, is a wast-good and a consumer. If with their earth-plowing
snowtes they can turn up a pearl out of a dunghill, it is all they desire.
Witches have many of these spirits, and kill kyne with them. The giants and
chiefetaines of those spirits, are powrfull sometimes to bring men to their
ends, but not a jot of good can they do for their lives.

Soldiers with these terrestrial spirits participate part of their essence,
for nothing but iron and gold (which are earths excrements) they delight in.
Besides, in another kind they may be said to participate with them, insomuch
as they confirm them in their fury, and congeale their minds with a bloody
resolution. Spirits of the earth they were that entered into the heard of swyne
in the Gospel. There is no city merchant, or country purchaser, but is haunted
with a whole host of these spirits of the earth. The Indies is their
Metrapolitane realm of abode.

As for the spirits of the air, which have no other visible bodies or form,
but such as by the unconstant glimmering of our eyes is begotten; they are in
truth all show and no substance, deluders of our imagination, and naught else.
Carpet knights, politic statesmen, women and children they most conuers with.
Carpet knights they inspire with a humor of setting big looks on it, being the
basest cowards under heaven, covering an apes heart with a lions case, and
making false alarums when they mean nothing but a may game. Politic statesmen
they privily incite, to bleare the worlds eyes with clouds of common wealth
pretenses, to broach any enmity or ambitious humor of their own, under a
title of their cuntries preservation. To make it fair or foul when they list
to procure popularity, or induce a preamble to some mighty piece of prowling,
to stir up tempests round about, and replenish heaven with prodigies and
wonders, the more to ratify their auaritious religion. Women they underhand
instruct to pownce and boulster out their brawn-falne deformities, to new
perboile with painting their rake-leane withered visages, to set up flaxeshops
on their forheads, when all their own hair is dead and rotten, to stick
their gums round with Comfets, when they have not a tooth left in their heads
to help them to chide withal.

Children they seduce with garish objects and toyish babies, abusing them many
years with slight vanities. So that you see all their whole influence is but
thin ouercast vapors, flying clouds dispersed with the least wind of wit or
understanding.

None of these spirits of the air or the fire have so much predominance in the
night as the spirits of the earth and the water; for they feeding on
foggie-braind melancholy, engender thereof many uncouth terrible monsters.
Thus much observe by the way, that the grossest part of our blood is the
melancholy humor, which in the spleen congealed whose office is to disperse
it, with his thick steaming sennie vapors casts a mist over the spirit, and
clean bemasketh the fantasy.

And even as slime and dirt in a standing puddle, engender toads and frogs, and
many other unsightly creatures, so this slimie melancholy humor still still
thickning as it stands still, engenders many misshapen objects in our
imaginations. Sundry times we behold whole Armies of men skirmishing in the
Air, Dragons, wild beasts, bloody streamers, blasing Commets, fiery strakes
with other apparitions innumerable, whence have all these their conglomerate
matter but from fuming meteors that arise from the earth, so from the fuming
melancholy of our spleen mounteth that hot matter into the higher Region of
the brain, whereof many fearful visions are framed. Our reason even like
drunken fumes it displaceth and intoxicates, and yields up our intellectiue
apprehension to be mocked and trodden under foot, by every false object or
counterset noise that comes near it. Herein specially consists our senses
defect and abuse, that those organicall parts which to the mind are ordained
ambassadors, do not their message as they ought, but by some misdiet or
misgouernment being distempered, fail in their report, and deliver up nothing
but lies and fables.

Such is our brain oppressed with melancholy, as is a clock tide down with
too heavy weights or plummets; which as it cannot choose but monstrously go a
square, or not go at all: so must our brains of necessity be either
monstrously distracted, or utterly destroyed thereby.

Lightly this extreamitie of Melancholye never comes, but before some notable
sickness; it faring with our brains as with Bees, who, as they exceedingly
toil and turmoile before a storm or change of weather, so do they beat and
toil, and are infinitely confused before sickness.

Of the effects of melancholy I need not dilate, or discourse how many
encumbred with it, have thought themselves birds and beasts, with feathers,
and horns, and hydes; others, that they have been turned into glass; others,
that if they should make water they should drown all the world; others, that
they can never bleed enough. Physicians in their circuit every day meet with
far more ridiculous experience. Only it shall suffice a little by the way to
handle one special effect of it, which is dreams.

A dream is nothing else but a bubling scum or froath of the fancy, which the
day has left undigested; or an after feast made of the fragments of idle
imaginations.

How many sorts there be of them no man can rightly set down, since it scarce
has been heard, there were ever two men that dreamed alike. Diverse have
written diversely of their causes, but the best reason among them all that I
could ever pick out, was this, that as an arrow which is shot out of a bow is
sent forth many times with such force, that it flies far beyond the mark
whereat it was aimed: so our thoughts intentiuely fixed all the day time upon a
mark we are to hit, are now and then ouer-drawne with such force, that they
fly beyond the mark of the day into the confines of the night. There is no
man put to any torment, but quaketh and trembles a great while after the
executioner has withdrawn his his hand from him. In the day time we torment
our thoughts and imaginations with sundry cares and devices; all the night time
they quake and tremble after the terror of their late suffering, and still
continue thinking of the perplexities they have endured. To nothing more aptly
can I compare the working of our brains after we have vnyoakt and gone to bed,
than to the glimmering and dazeling of a man's eyes when he comes newly out of
the bright Sun, into the dark shadow.

Even as ones eyes glimmer and dazzle when they are withdrawn out of the light
into darkness: so are our thoughts troubled and vexed when they are retired
from labor to ease, and from skirmishing to surgerie.

You must give a wounded man leave to groan while he is in dressing: Dreaming
is no other than groaning, while sleep our surgeon has us in cure.

He that dreams merrily is like a boy new breetcht, who leapes and daunceth for
joy his pain is past: but long that joy stays not with him, for presently
after his master the day seeing him so iocond and pleasant, comes and dooes as
much for him again, whereby his hell is renewed.

No such figure of the first Chaos whereout the world was extraught, as our
dreams in the night. In them all states, all sexes, all places are confounded
and meet together.

Our cogitations run on heaps like men to part a fray, where every one
strikes his next fellow. From one place to another without consultation they
leap, like rebels bent on a head. Soldiers just up and down they imitate at
the sack of a City, which spare neither age nor beauty: the young, the old,
trees, steeples and mountains, they confound in one gallimafrie.

Of those things which are most known to us, some of us that have moist
brains make to our selves images of memory: on those images of memory
whereon we buyld in the day, comes some superfluous humor of ours, like a
Iacke-anapes in the night, and erects a puppet stage, or some such ridiculous
idle childish invention.

A Dream is nothing else but the Echo of our conceits in the day. But
other-while it falls out, that one Echo borrowes of another: so our dreams
(the Echoes of the day) borrow of any noise we hear in the night.

As for example; if in the dead of the night there be anic rumbling, knocking,
or disturbaunce near us, we straight dream of wars, or of thunder. If a
dog howl, we suppose we are transported into hell, where we hear the
complaint of damned ghosts. If our heads lie double or uneasy, we imagine we
uphold all heaven with our shoulders like Atlas. If we be troubled with too
many clothes, then we suppose the night mare rides us.

I knew one that was crampt, and he dreamt that he was torn in pieces with
wild horses; and another, that having a black sant brought to his bed side at
midnight, dreamt he was bidden to dinner at Iron-mongers Hall.

Any meat that in the day time we eat against our stomachs, begets a
dismal dream. Discontent also in dreams has no little predominance: for
even as from water that is troubled, the mud dispersingly ascends from the
bottom to the top; so when our blood is chafed, disquieted and troubled, all
the light imperfect humors of our body, ascend like mud up aloft into the
head.

The clearest spring a little tutcht, is creased with a thousand circles: as
those momentarie circles for all the world such are our dreams. when all is
said, melancholy is the mother of dreams, and of all terrors of the night
whatsoever.

Let it but affirm it has seen a spirit (though it be but the moone-shine on
the wall) the best reason we have cannot infringe it.

Of this melancholy there be two sorts; one that digested by our liver swimmeth
like oil above water, and that is rightly termed women's melancholy, which
lasts but for an hour, and is (as it were) but a coppie of their
countenance: the other sinketh down to the bottom like the lees of the wine,
and that corrupts all the blood, and is the causer of lunacie. well moderated
recreations are the medicine to both: surfeit or excessive study the causers of
either.

There were gates in Rome, out of which nothing was carried but dust and dung,
and men to execution: so many of the gates of our senses serve for nothing but
to conueigh out excrementall vapors, and afrighting deadly dreams, that are
worse than executioners unto us.

Ah woe be to the solitary man that has his sins continually about him,
that has no withdrawing place from the devil and his temptations.

Much I wonder how treason and murder dispense with the darkness of the night,
how they can shriue themselves to it, and not rave and die. Me thinks they
should imagine that hell imbraceth them round, when she over spreads them with
her black pitchie mantle.

Dreams to none are so fearful, as to those whose accusing private guilt
expects mischief every hour for their merit. Wonderful superstitious are
such persons in observing every accident that befalls them: and that their
superstition is as good as an hundred furies to torment

Bondmen in Turkey or in Spain are not so ordinarilye fold, as witches sell
familiars there. Far cheaper may you buy a wind amongst them, than you can
buy wind or fair words in the Court. Three knots in a thread, or an odd
grandams blessing in the corner of a napkin, will carry you all the world over.

We when we frown knit our brows, but let a wizard there knit a noose or a
riding snarle on his beard, and it is hail, storm and tempest a month after.

More might be spoken of the prodigies this country sendes forth, if it were
not too much erring from my scope. Whole Islands they have of ye, on which they
build and ttaffique as on the maine land.

Admirable (above the rest) are the incomprehensible wonders of the bottomless
Lake Vether, over which no foul flies but is frozen to death, nor any man
pasleth but he is senselesly benumbed like a statue of marble.

All the inhabitaunts round about it, are deafned with the hideous roaring of
his waters when the winter breaks up, and the ye in his dissoluing gives a
terrible crack like to thunder, when as out of the midst of it (as out of
Mont-Gibell) a sulphurous stinking smoke issues, that welnigh poisons the
whole Country.

A poison light on it, how come I to digress to such a dull, Lenten Northren
Clyme, where there is nothing but stock fish, whetstones and cods-heads? Yet
now I remember me, I have not lost my way so much as I thought for my theme is
The terrors of the Night, and Island is one of the chief kingdoms of the
night; they having scarce so much day there, as will serve a child to ask his
father blessing. Marry with one commodity they are blessed, they have Ale that
they carry in their pockets like glue, and ever when they would drink, they
set it on the fire and melt it.

It is reported, that the Pope long since gave them a dispensation to receive
the Sacrament in ale, insomuch as for their incessant frosts there, no wine but
was turned to red emayle, as soon as ever it came amongst them.

Farewell frost: as much to say, as farewell Island, for I have no more to say
to thee.

I care not much if I dream yet a little more: and to say the troth, all this
whole Tractate is but a dream, for my wits are not half awaked in it: and yet
no golden dream, but a leaden dream is it; for in a leaden standish I stand
fishing all day, but have none of Saint Peter's luck to bring a fish to the
hook that carries any silver in the mouth. And yet there be of them that
carry silver in the mouth too, but none in the hand: that is to say, are very
bountiful and honorable in their words, but except it be to swear indeed, no
other good deeds comes from them.

Filthy Italionat complement-mungers they are, who would feign be counted the
Courts Gloriosos, and the refined judges of wit; when if their war drops and
the withred bladders of their brains were well searched, they have nothing but
a few moath-eaten cod-peece suits (made against the coming of Mounsier) in
the one, and a few scraps of outlandish proverbs in the other: and these
alone do buckler them from the name of beggars and idiots. Other-while perhaps
they may keep a coil with the spirit of Tasso, and then they fold their arms
like Braggarts, writhe their necks alla Neapolitano, and turn up their
eye balls like men intraunced.

Come, come, I am entraunced from my Text I wot weil, and talk idly in my
sleep longer than I should, those that will harken any more after Dreams, I
refer them to Artimidorus, Synesurs, and Cardan, with many others which only
I have heard by their names, but I thank God had never the plodding patience
to read, for if they be no better than some of them I have perused, every
weatherwise old wise might write better.

what sense is there that the yoalke of an egg should signify gold, or
dreaming of Bears, or fire, or water, debate and anger, that every thing must
be interpreted backward as Witches say their Paternoster, good being the
character of bad, and bad of good.

As well we may calculate from every accident in the day, and not go about any
business in the morning till we have seen on which hand the Crow sits.

O Lord I have heard many a wise Gentlewoman say, I am so merry and have laughed
so heartily, that I am sure ere long to be crossed with some sad tydinges or
other; all one as if men coming from a Play should conclude, Well we have
seen a Commedie to day, and therefore there cannot choose but be a Tragedy to
morrow.

I do not deny but after extremity of mirth, follow many sad accidents, but
yet those sad accidents (in my opinion) we merely pluck on with the fear of
coming mischief, and those means we in policy most use to prevent it,
soonest enwrappe us in it, and that was Satan's trick in the old world of
gentillisme to bring to pass all his blind Prophecies.

Could any man set down certain rules of expounding of Dreams, and that
their rules were general, holding in all as well as in some, I would begin a
little to list to them, but commonly that which is portentiue in a King is but a
frivolous fancy in a beggar, and let him dream of Angels, Eagles, Lions,
Griffons, Dragons never so, all the augurie under heaven will not allot him so
much as a good alms.

Some will object unto me for the certainety of Dreams, the Dreams of Cyrus,
Cambyses, Pompey, Caesar, Darius, and Alexander. For those I answer, that they
were rather visions than Dreams, extraordinarily sent from heaven to foreshew
the translation of Monarchies.

The Greek and Roman histories are full of them, and such a stir they keep
with their Augurers and Soothsayers, how they foretold long before by Dreams
and beasts and birds intrayles, the loss of such a battle, the death of such
a Captain or Emperor, when false knaves, they were all as Prophet Calchas,
pernicious Traitors to their Country and them that put them in trust, and were
many times hired by the adverse part to disharten and discourage their Masters
by such Conycatching Riddles as might in truth be turned any way.

An easy matter was it for them to prognosticate treasons and conspiracies, in
which they were underhand inlincked themselves, and how ever the world went it
was a good policy for them to save their heads by the shift, for if the
treasons chaunst afterward to come to light, it would not be suspected they
were practisers in them, insomuch as they reueald them, or if they should by
their confederates be appealed as practisers, yet might they plead and pretend
it was done but of spite and malice to supplant them for so bewraying and
laying open their intents.

This trick they had with them besides, that never till the very instant that
any treason was to be put in execution, and it was so near at hand that the
Prince had no time to prevent it, would they speak one word of it, or offer to
disclose it: yea, and even then such unfit seasons for their colorable
discovery would they pick forth, as they would be sure he should have no
leisure to attend it.

But you will ask why at all as then they should step forth to detect it?
Marry to clear themselves to his successors, that there might be no revenge
prosecuted on their lives.

So did Spurina the great Astrologer, even as Caesar in the midst of all his
business was going hastily to the Senate house, he popt a bill in his hand of
Brutus and Cassius conspiracy, and all the names of those that were colleagued
with them.

well he might have thought that in such have by the high way side, he would not
stay to peruse any schedules, and well he knew and was assertained, that
as soon as ever he came into the Capitol, the bloody deed was to be
accomplished.

Shall I impart unto you a rare secrecy how these great famous Coniurers and
cunning men ascend by degrees to foretell secrets as they do. First and
foremost they are men which have had some little sprinkling of Grammar learning
in their youth; or at least I will allow them to have been Surgeons or
Apothecaries prentises, these I say having run through their thrift at the
elbowes, and riotouslie amongst harlots and make-shifts spent the annuitie of
halfpennie ale that was left them, fall a beating their brains how to botch up
an easy gainful trade, and set a new nap on an old occupation.

Hereupon presently they rake some dunghill for a few durtie boxes and
plasters, and of tosted cheese and candles ends, temper up a few ointments
and sirrups: which having done, far North, or into some such rude simple
country they get them, and set up.

Scarce one month have they staid there, but what with their vaunting and
prating, and speaking fustian in steed of Greek, all the Shyres round about
do ring with their fame: and then they begin to get them a Library of three or
four old rustie manuscript books, which they themselves nor any else can read;
and furnish their shops with a thousand quid pro quos, that would choke any
horse: besides, some wast trinkets in their chambers hung up, which may make
the world half in iealouzie they can conjure.

They will evermore talk doubtfully, as if there were more in them than they
meant to make public, or was appliable to every common man's capacity: when
God be their rightful Judges, they utter all that they know and a great deal
more.

To knit up their knaueries in short, which in sooth is the hang-mans office,
and nones else) having picked up their crummes thus pretely well in the Country,
they draw after a time a little nearer and nearer to London; and at length
into London they filtch themselves privily: but how? Not in the heart of the
City will they presume at first dash to hang out their rat-banners, but in
the skirtes and out-shifts steal out a sign over a Cobblers stall, like Aqua
vitae-sellers and stocking menders.

Many pore people they win to believe in them, who have not a barreld Herring
or a piece of poor John that looks ill on it, but they will bring the water
that he was steept in unto them in an vrinall, and crave their judgment whether
he be rotten, or merchant and chapmanable or no. The brute of their cunning
thus traueling from alehouse to Alehouse, at length is transported in the
great hiltes of one or other country Seruing-mans sword to some good Tavern
or Ordinary: where it is no sooner arrived, but it is greedily snatched up by
some dappert Mounsier Diego, who lives by telling of news, and false dice, and
it may be has a pretty insight into the cards also, together with a little
skill in his Jacobs staff, and his Compass: being able at all times to
discover a new passage to Virginia.

This needy Gallaunt (with the qualities aforesaid) straight trudgeth to some
Noble-mans to dinner, and there enlarges the rumor of this new Physician,
comments upon every glass and violl that he has, rayleth on our Galenists
and calls them dull gardners and hay-makers in a man's belly, compares them to
dogs, who when they are sick eat grass, and says they are no better than
pack or malthorses, who if a man should knock out their brains will not go out
of the beaten high way; whereas his horsleach will leap over the hedge and ditch
of a thousand Dioscorides and Hippocrates and give a man twenty poisons in
one, but he would restore him to perfect health. With this strange tale the
Nobleman inflamed, desires to be acquainted with him: what does me he, but
goes immediately and breaks with this mountebanke, telling him if he will
divide his gains with him, he will bring him in custom with such and such
States, and he shall be countenanst in the Court as he would desire. The
hungry druggier, ambitious after preferment, agrees to any thing, and to Court
he goes; where being come to enterview, he speaks nothing but broken English
like a French Doctor prete^ding to have forgotten his natural tung by travel,
when he has never been farther than either the Low Countries or Ireland,
enforced thither to fly either for getting a maid with child, or marrying two
wives. Suffifeth he fet a good face on it, and will swear he can extract a
better Balsamum out of a chip than the Balm of Iudaea: yea, all receipts and
authors you can name he syllogizeth of, and makes a pish at in comparison of
them he has seen and read: whose names if you ask, he claps you in the mouth
with half a dozen spruce titles, never til he inverted them heard of by any
Christian. But this is most certain, if he be of any sect, he is a
mettle-bruing Paracelsian, having not past one or two Probatums for all
diseases. But oafe he be called to practice, he excuses it by great cures he
has in hand; and will not encounter an infirmity but in the declining, that
his credit may be more aute^tical or else when by some secret intelligence he
is through lie instructed of the whole process of his unrecoverable
extremity, he comes gravely marching like a Judge, and gives peremptory
sentence of death; whereby he is accounted a Prophet of deep prescience.

But how he comes to be the devils secretary, all this long tale vnrips not.

In secret be it spoken, he is not so great with the devil as you take it. It
may be they are near a kin, but yet you have many kindred that will do
nothing for one another; no more will the devil for him, except it be to damn
him.

This is the Tittle est amen of it: that when he wexeth stale, and all his
pispots are cracked and will no longer hold water, he sets up a coniuring
school, and undertakes to play the baud to Lady Fortune.

Not a thief or a cutpurse, but a man that he keeps does associate with,
and is of their fraternity; only that his master when any thing is stolen may
tell who it is that has it. In petie trifles having gotten some credit, great
Peers entertain him for one of their privy counsel, and if they have any
dangerous enterprise in hand they consult with him about success.

All malcontents entending any inuasiue violence against their Prince and
Country run headlong to his oracle. Contrary factions enbosome unto him
their inwardest complots, whilst he like a crastie Jack a both sides, as if
he had a spirit still at his elbow, reciprooallie embowelleth to the one what
the other goes about; receiving no intelligence from any familiar, but their
own mouths. I assure you most of our chief noted Augurers and Soothsayers in
England at this day, by no other Art but this gain their reputation.

They may very well pick men's purses, like the vnskilfuller cousning kind of
Alchumists, with their artificial and ceremonial Magic, but no effect shall
they atchieue thereby, though they would hang themselves: the reason is, the
devil of late is grown a puritan, and cannot away with any ceremonies; he
sees all Prinees have left off their States, and he leaves off his state too,
and will not be inuocated with such solemnity as he was wont.

Private and disguised he passes too and fro, and is in a thousand places in
an hour.

Fair words cannot any longer beguile him, for not a cue of curtsie will he
do any man, except it be upon a flat bill of sale; and so he chaffers with
wysards and witches every hour.

Now the world is almost at an end, he has left form and is all for matter;
and like an Embroyderer or a Tailer he makes have of work against a good
time, which is the day of judgment: therefore you goodmen exorcisers his old
acquaintance must pardon him, though (as heretofore) he stay not to dwell upon
complements.

In diebus illis when Corineus and Gogmagog were little boys, I will not
gainsaye but he was wont to jest and sport with country people, and play the
good fellow amongst kitchin-wenches, sitting in an evening by the fire side
making of possets, and come a woing to them in the likeness of a cooper, or a
curmogionly purchaser: and sometimes he would dress himself like a Barbar,
and wash and shave all those that lay in such a chamber: otherwhile like a
stale cutter of Queen hyue, he would iustle men in their own houses, pluck
them out of bed by the heels, and dance in chains from one chamber to
another: now there is no goodness in him but miserablenes and covetousness.

Sooner he will pare his nails cleanly, than cause a man to dream of a pot of
gold, or a money bag that is hid in the eaues of a thatcht house.

(Here is to be noted, that it is a blessed thing but to dream of gold,
though a man never have it.)

Such a dream is not altogether ridiculous or impertinent, for it keeps flesh
and blood from despair: all other are but as dust we raise by our steps; which
awhyle mounteth aloft, and annoyeth our ey-sight, but presently disperseth and
vanishes.

Senior Satan when he was a young stripling, and had not yet gotten perfect
audacitie to set upon us in the day time, was a sly Politician in dreams; but
those days are gone with him, and now that he is thoroughly steeled in his
scutcherie, he plays aboue-boord boldly, and sweeps more stakes than ever he
did before.

I have rid a false gallop these three or four pages: now I care not if I
breathe me, and walk soberly and demurely half a dozen turns, like a grave
Citizen going about to take the air.

To make a shaft or a bolt of this drumbling subject of dreams, from whence I
have bin tossed off and on I know not how; this is my definitive verdit: that one
may as well by the smoke that comes out of a kitchen guess what meat is there a
broach, as by paraphrasing on smokie dreams praeominate of future events. Thus
far notwithstanding I Will go with them; Physicians by dreams may better
discern the distemperature of their pale clients, than either by urine or
ordure.

He that is inclining to a burning fever shall dream of frayes, lightning and
thunder, of skirmishing with the devil, and a hundred such like. He that is
spiced with the gowte or the dropsy, frequently dreameth of fetters and
manacles, and being put on the bilbowes, that his legs are turned to marble
or adamant, and his feet like the giants that scaled heaven kept under with
Mount Ossa and Peleon, and erst while that they are fast locked in quagmyres.
I have heard aged mumping beldams as they sat warming their knees over a coal
scratch over the argument very curiously, and they would bid young folks beware
on what day they pared their nails, tell what luck every one should have by
the day of the week he was borne on; show how many years a man should live by
the number of wrinkles on his forhead, and stand descanting not a little of the
difference in fortune when they are turned upward, and when they are bent
downward; him that had a wart on his chin, they would confidently assertaine he
should have no need of any of his kin: marry they would likewise distinguish
between the standing of the wart on the right side and on the left. when I was
a little child, I was a great auditor of theirs, and had all their witchcrafts
at my fingers ends, as perfect as good morrow and good even.

Of the signification of dreams, whole catalogues could I recyte of theirs,
which here there is no room for: but for a glannce to this purpose, this I
remember they would very soberly affirm, that if one at supper eat birds, he
should dream of flying; if fish, of swimming; if venison of hunting, and so
for the rest: as though those birds, fish, and venison being dead and
disgested, did fly, swim and hold their chase in their brains; or the
solution of our dreams should be naught else but to express what meats we
eat ouer-night.

From the unequal and repugnant mixture of contrarious meats I iumpe with
them, many of our mystie cogitations proceed: and even as fire makes iron
like it self, so the fiery inflammations of our liver, or stomach transform
our imaginations to their analagie and likeness.

No humor in general in our bodies ouer-flowing or abounding, but the tips of
our thoughts are dipped in his tincture. And as when a man is ready to drown,
he takes hold of any thing that is next him: so our flutring thoughts, when
we are drowned in deadly sleep, take hold, and coessence themselves with any
ouerboyling humor which fourseth hiest in our stomachs.

What heed then is there to be had of dreams, that are no more but the
confused giddie action of our brains, made drunk with the innundation of
humors?

Just such like impostures as is this Art of exposition of dreams, are the
arts of Phisiognomie and Palmestrie: wherein who bears most palm and
praise, is the palpablest fool and Crepundio. Lives there any such slow
yce-braind beefe-witted gull, who by the riueld bark or outward rynde of a
tree will take upon him to forespeak how long it shall stand, what mischances
of worms, caterpillars, boughs breaking, frost bitings, cattells rubbing
against, it shall have? As absurd is it, by the external branched seames or
furrowed wrinckles in a man's face or hand, in particular or general to
conjecture and foredoome of his fate.

According to every ones labor or exercise, the palm of his hand is wrythen
and pleyted, and every day alters as he alters his employments or pastimes:
wherefore well may we collect, that he which has a hand so brawned and
enter-lined, uses such and such toils or recreations; but for the mind or
disposition, we can no more look into through it, than we can into a looking
Glass through the wooden case thereof.

So also our faces, which sundry times with surfets, grief, study, or
intemperaunce, are most deformedlye welked and crumpled; there is no more to
be gathered by their sharp embossed Ioyners anticke work, or ragged
ouer-hangings or pit-falls; but that they have been laid up in slouens press,
and with miscarriage and misgouernment are so fretted and galled.

My own experience is but small, yet thus much I can say by his warrantize,
that those fatal brands of phisiognomie which condemn men for fools and for
idiots, and on the other side for treacherous circumuenters and false brothers,
have in a hundred men I know been verefied in the contrary.

So Socrates (the wisest man of Greece) was censured by a wrinckle-wyzard for
the lumpishest blockehead that ever went on two legs: whom though the
Philosopher in pity vouchsafed with a nyce distinction of Art and nature to
raise and recover, when he was utterly confounded with a hiss and a laughter,
yet sure his insolent simplicity might lawfully have su'd out his patent of
exemption; for he was a forlorn creature, both in discretion and wit-craft.

Will you have the sum of all: some subtle humorist, to feed fantastic
heads with innouations and novelties, first invented this trifling childish
gloss upon dreams and phisiognomie; wherein he strove only to boast himself
of a pregnant probable conceit beyond philosophy or truth.

Let but any man who is most conversant in the superstition of dreams, reckon
me one that has happened just; and I Will set down a hundred out of Histories,
that have perished to foolerie.

To come to late days; Jews the xj. dreamt that he swam in blood on the top
of the Alps: which one Father Robert (a holy Hermit of his time) interpreted
to be present death in his next wars against Italy: though he lived and
prosperd in all his enterprises a long while after,

So Charles the fifth sailing to the siege of Tunis, dreamt that the City met
him on the sea like an Argosie, and overwhelmed his whole Navy: when by
Cornelius Agrippa the great Coniurer (who went along with him) it was expounded
to be the overthrow of that famous expedition. And thereupon Agrippa offered the
Emperor (if it pleased him) to blow up the City by Art Magic in the air
before his eyes, without any farther ieopardie of war, or besieging. The
Emperor utterly refused it and said, Since it was Gods wars against an
Infidel, he would never borrow aid of the devil.

Some have memorized, that Agrippa seeing his counsel in that case rejected,
and that the Emperor (notwithstanding his unfortunate presage) was prosperous
and succesfull, within few days after dyed frantic and desperate.

Alphonso King of Naples in like case, before the rumor of the French Kings
coming into Italy, had a vision in the night presented unto him of Aeneas
ghoast having Turnus in chase, and Juno Pronuba coming betwixt them, and
parting them; whereby he gest that by marriage their iarring Kingdoms should
be united: but far otherwise it fell out, for the Freuch King came indeed, and
he was driven thereby into such a melancholy ecstasy, that he thought the very
fowls of the air would snatch his Crown from him; and no bough or arbor
that ouershadowd him, but enclosed him, and took him prisner; and that not so
much but the stones of the street sought to iustle him out of his Throne.

These examples I allege, to prove there is no certainty in dreams; and that
they are but according to our deuisings and meditations in the day time.

I confess the Saints and Martirs of the Primitive Church had infallible
dreams fore-running their ends, as Policarpus and other: but those especially
proceeded from heaven, and not from any vaporous dreggie parts of our blood or
our brains.

For this cause the Turks banish Learning from amongst them, because it is
every day setting men together by the ears, moving strange contentions and
alterations, and making his professors faint hearted and effeminate. Much more
requisite were it that out of our civil Christian Common-wcalths we severely
banish and exterminate those fabulous commentaries on toyish fantasies, which
feare-benum and effeminate the hearts of the stoutest, cause a man without any
ground to be jealous of his own friends and his kinsfolks, and withdraw him
from the search and insight into more excellent things, to stand all his whole
life sifting and winnowing dry rubbish chafe, whose best bottom quintessence
proves in the end but sandy gravel and cockle.

Molestations and cares enough, the ordinary course of our life tithes of his
own accord unto us, though we seek not a knot in a bulrush, or stuff not our
night pillowes with thistles to increase our disturbance.

In our sleep we are agasted and terrified, with the disordered skirmishing
and conflicting of our sensitive faculties: yet with this terror and agastment
cannot we rest our selves satisfide, but we must pursue and hunt af^ter a
further fear in the recordation and too busy examining our pains ouer-passed.

Dreams in my mind if they have any premonstrances in them, the preparatiue
fear of that they so premonstrate and denounce, is far worse than the
mischief it self by them denounced and premonstrated.

So there is no long sickness but is worse than death, for death is but a
blow and away, whereas sickness is like a Chancerie suit, which hangs two or
thee year ere it can come to a judgment.

O a consumption is worse than a Capias ad Ligatum, to nothing can I compare it
better, tha^ to a repriue after aman is condemnd, or to a boy with his hoase
about his heels, ready to be whipped, to whom his master stands preaching a long
time all law and no Gospel, ere he proceed to execution. Or rather it is as a
man should be roasted to death, and melt away by little and little, whiles
Physicians like Cooks stand stuffing him out with herbs, and basting him
with this oil and that sirrup.

I am of the opinion, that to be famisht to death is far better, for his
pain in seven or eight days is at an end, whereas he that is in a
consumption, continues languishing many years ere death have mercy on him.

The next plague and the nearest that I know in affinity to a consumption, is
long depending hope friuolously defeated, than which there is no greater
misery on earth: and so per consequens no men in earth more miserable than
courtiers. It is a cowardly fear that is not resolute enough to despair. It
is like a cowardly fear that is not resolute enough to despair. It is like a
pore hungerstarvd wretch at sea, who still in expectation of a good voyage,
endures more miseries than Job. He that writes this can tell, for he has never
had good voyage in his life but one, and that was to a fortunate blessed Island,
nere those pinnacle rocks called the Needles. O it is a purified Continent, and
a fertile plot fit to seat another Paradise, where or in no place the image of
the ancient hospitality is to be found.

While I live I will praise it and extol it, for the true magnificence and
continued honorable bounty that I saw there.

Far unworthy am I to spend the least breath of commendation in the
extolling so delightful and pleasant a Tempe, or once to consecrate my ink
with the excellent mention of the thrice noble and illustrious Chiefetaine,
under whom it is flourishingly governed.

That rare ornament of our Country, learned Master Camden, whose desertfull
name is universally admyred throughout Christendom, in the last repollished
Edition of his Brittania, has most elaborate and exactly described the
sovereign plenteous situation of that I Will; as also the inestimable happiness
it inherites, it being patronizd and carefully protected by so heroical and
courageous a Commander.

Men that have never tasted that full spring of his liberality, wherewith (in
my most forsaken extremities) right graciously he has deigned to revive and
refresh me, may rashly (at first sight) implead me of flattery, and not
esteem these my fervent terms as the necessary repaiment of due debt, but
words idly begotten with good looks, and in an ouer-ioyed humor of vain hope
slipped from me by chance: but therein they shall show themselves too uncivil
injurious, both to my devoted obseruant duty, and the condign dear purchased
merit of his glory.

Too base a ground is this, whereon to embroyder the rich story of his
eternal renown; some longer lived Tractate I reserve for the full blaze of
his virtues, which here only in the sparks I decypher. Many embers of
encumbraunces have I at this time, which forbid the bright flame of my zeal to
mount aloft as it would. Perforce I must break from it, since other turbulent
cares sit as now at the stearne of my invention. Thus I conclude with this
chance-medley Parenthesis, that whatsoever minutes intermission I have of
calmed content, or least respite to call my wits together, principal and
immediate proceeds from him.

Through him my tender wainscot Study door is delivered from much assault and
battrie: through him I look into, and am looked on in the world: from whence
otherwise I were a wretched banished exile. Through him all my good (as by a
conduit head) is conueighed unto me; and to him all my endeavors (like rivers)
shall pay tribute as to the Ocean.

Did Ovid entitle Carus a Nobleman of Rome, the only constant friend he had,
in his ungrateful extrusion amongst the Getes: and writ to him thus, Qui quod
es idvere Care vocaris. And in another Elegy, O mihi post nullos Care
memorande sodales? Much more may I acknowledge all redundant prostrate
vassailage to the royal descended Family of the Careys: but for whom, my
spirit long ere this had expyred, and my pen served as a puniard to gall my
own heart.

Why do I use so much circumstance, and in a stream on which none but gnats
and flies do swim, sound Fames trumpet like Triton, to call a number of
foolish skiffes and light cock-boates toparley?

Fear (if I be not deceiud) was the last pertinent matter I had under my
displing; from which I fear I have strayed beyond my limits: and yet fear
has no limits, for to hell and beyond hell, it sinkes down and penetrates.

But this was my position, that the fear of any expected cuill, is worse than
the evil it self; which by diverse comparisons I confirmed.

Now to visions and apparitions again, as fast as I can trudge.

The glasses of our sight (in the night) are like the prospectiue glasses one
Hostius made in Rome, which represented the images of things far greater than
they were: each moate in the dark they make a monster, and every slight
glimmering a giant.

Asolitarie man in his bed, is like a poor bed-red lazer lying by the high way
side; unto whose displaied wounds and sores a number of stinging flies do
swarm for pastance and beuerage: his naked wounds are his inward hart-griping
woes, the waspes and flies his idle wandering thoughts; who to that secret
smarting pain he has already, do add a further sting of impatience, and new
lanch his sleeping griefs and vexations.

Questionless this is an vnrefutable consequence, that the man who is mocked
of his fortune; he that has consumed his brains to compass prosperity, and
meets with no counteruaylement in her likeness, but hedge wine and lean
mutton, and peradventure some half eid good looks that can hardly be discerned
from winking; this poor piteous perplexed miscreant either finally lie
despair; or like a lanke frost-bitten plant loses his vigor or spirit by
little and little: any terror, the least illusion in the earth, is a
Cacodaemon unto him. His soul has left his body; for why, it is flying after
these ayrie incorporeate Courtly promises, and glittring painted allurements;
which when they vanish to nothing, it likewise vanishes with them.

Excessive joy no less has his desectiue and ioylesse operations, the spleen
into water it melts* so that except it be some momentarie bubbles of mirth,
nothing it yields but a cloying surfeit of repentance.

Diverse instances have we of men, whom too much sudden coment and
ouer-rauished delight has brought untimely to their graves.

Four or five I have read of, whom the very extremity of laughter has bereft
of their lives: whereby I gather, that even such another pernicious sweet,
superfluous mirth is to the sense, as a surfeit of honnie to a man's stomach,
than the which there is nothing more dangerous.

Be it as dangerous as it will, it cannot but be an easy kind of death. It
is like one that is stung with an Aspis, who in the midst of his pain falls
delighted asleep, and in that suauitie of slumber surrenders the ghost:
whereas he whom grief undertakes to bring to his end, has his heart gnawenin
sunder by little and little with vultures, like Prometheus.

But this is nothing (you will object) to our iourneys end of apparitions.
Yes, altogether: for of the ouerswelling superabundance of joy and grief, we
frame to our selves most of our melancholy dreams and visions.

There is an old philosophical common Proverb, Vnusquisque fingit fortunam
sibi, Every one shapes his own fortune as he lists. More aptly may it be
said, Every one shapes his own fears and fancies as he list.

In all points our brains are like the firmament, and exhale in every respect
the like gross mistempred vapors and meteors; of the more foeculent combustible
ayrie matter whereof, afrighting forms and monstrous images innumerable are
created: but of the slymie vnweeldier drossie part, dull melancholy or
drousines.

And as the firmament is still moving and working, so incessant is the
wheeling and rolling on of our brains; which every hour are tempring some
new piece of prodigy or other, and turmoyling, mixing and changing the course
of our thoughts.

I write not this, for that I think there are no true apparitios or prodigies;
but to show how easily we may be flouted if we take not great heed, with our
own anticke suppositions. I will tell you a strange tale tending to this
nature: whether of true melancholy or true apparition, I will not take upon me
to determine.

It was my chance in February last to be in the Country some threescore mile
off from London; where a Gentleman of good worship and credit falling sick,
the very second day of his lying down, he pretended to have miraculous
waking visions: which before I enter to describe, thus much I will inform ye
by the way, that at the reporting of them he was in perfect memory; nor had
sickness yet so tirannizd over him to make his tongue grow idle. A wise grave
sensible man he was ever reputed, and so approou'd himself in all his actions
in his life time. This which I deliver (with many preparatiue protestations)
to a great Man of this Land he confidently avouched: believe it or condemn it,
as you shall see cause, for I leave it to be censured in differently.

The first day of his distemprature, he visibly saw (as he affirmed) al his
chamber hung with silken nets and silver hooks, the devil (as it should
seem) coming thither a fishing; whereupon every Pater noster while he looked
whether in the nets he should be entangled, or with the hooks ensnared; with
the nets he feared to be strangled or smothred, and with the hooks to have his
throat scracht out, and his flesh rent and mangled: at length, he knew not how
they suddenly vanished, and the whole chamber was clered. Next a copanie of
lusty sailers (every one a sharker or a swaggerer at the least) having made a
brave voyage, came carousing and quaffing in large silver kans to his health.
Fellows they were that had good big pop mouths to cry Port a helm Saint
George, and knew as well as the best what belongs to haling of bolings yare,
and falling on the star-boord buttocke.

But to the issue of my tale: their drunken proffers he utterly put by, and
said he highly scorned and detested both them and their hellish disguisings:
which notwithstanding, they tossed their cups to the skies, and reeled and
staggered up and down the room like a ship shaking in the wind.

After all they danst Lusty gallant, and a drunken Danish Laualto or two, and
so departed. For the third course, rust tin a number of statcly devils,
bringing in boystrous chests of massy tresure betwixt the. As brave they were
as Turkish Ianissaries, having their apparel alll powdered with gold and pearl,
and their arms as it were bemayled with rich chains and bracelets; but faces
far blacker than any ball of Tobacco, great glaring eyes that had whole
shelues of Kentish oysters in them, and terrible wide mouths, whereof not one
of them, but would well have made a case for Molenax great Gloabe of the world.

These lovely youths and full of favor, having stalkt up and down the just
measures of a sinkapace, opened one of the principal chests they brought, and
out of it plucked a Princely royal Tent, whose empearled shining canopie they
quickly advanced on hie, and with all artificial magnificence adorned like a
state: which performed, pompous Lucifer entered, imitating in goodly stature the
huge picture of Laocoon at Rome: who sent unto him agallant Ambassador,
signifying thus much, that if he would serve him, he should have all the rich
treasure that he saw there, or any farther wealth he would desire.

The Gentleman returned this mild answer, that he knew not what he was,
whether an Angel or a wicked seend: and if an Angel, he was but his fellow
servant, and no otherwise to be served or regarded; if a fiend or a devil, he
had nothing to do with him, for God had exalted and redeemed him above his
desperate outcast condition, and a strong faith he had to defy and with-stand
all his iugling temptations. Having uttered these words, all the whole train
of them inuisibly avoided, and he never set eye on them after.

Then did there for the third pageant present themselves unto him, an inueigling
troop of naked Virgins, thrice more amiable and beautiful than the bright
Vessals, that brought in Augustus Testament to the Senate, after his decease:
but no Vestall-like Ornament had they about them; for from top to toe bare
despoyled they were, except some one or two of them that ware maskes before
their faces, and had transparent azur'd lawne veyles before the chief jewel
houses of their honors.

Such goodly lustful Bonarobaes they were (by his report) as if any sharp
eyd Painter had been there to peruse them, he might have learned to exceed
divine Mihel Angclo in the true boske of a naked, or curious Tuns in quick
life, whom the great masters of that Art do term the sprightly old man.

Their hair they ware loose vnrowled about their shoulders, whose dangling
amber trammells reaching down beneath their knees, seemed to drop baulme on
their delicious bodies; and ever as they moved too and fro, with their light
windye wauings, wantonly to correct their exquisite mistresses.

Their dainty feet in their tender birdlike trippings, enameld (as it were)
the dustie ground; and their odoriferous breath more perfumed the air, than
Ordinance would, that is charged with Amomum, Musk, Cyuet, and Ambergris.

But to leave amplifications, and proceed: those sweet bewitching naked maids,
having maiestically paced about the chamber, to the end their natural
vnshelled shining mother pearl proportions might be more imprintingly
apprehended, close to his bedside modestly blushing they approached, and made
impudent profer unto him of their lascivious embraces. He obstinatly bent to
withstand these their sinful allurements no less than the former, bad them
go seek entertainment of hotter bloods, for he had not to satisfy them. A
cold comfort was this to poor wenches no better clothed, yet they hearing
what to trust too, very sorrowfully retired, and shrunk away.

Lo in the fourth Act there sallied out a grave assembly of sober attyred
Matrones, much like the Virgins of Marie Magdalens order in Rome, which vow
never to see man; or the chaste daughters of Saint Philip.

With no incontinent courtesy did they greet him, but told him, if so he
thought good they would pray for him.

Thereupon, from the beginning to the ending he unfolded unto them, how he had
been mightily hanted with wicked illusions of late: but nevertheless, if he
could be persuaded that they were Angels or Saints, their inuocations could
not hurt him; yea, he would add his desire to their requests, to make their
prayers more penetrably enforcing.

Without further parley, upon their knees they fell most devoutly, and for
half an hour never ceased extensiuely to intercessionate GOD for his speedy
recovery.

Rising up again on the right hand of his bed, there appeared a clear light,
and with that he might perceive a naked slender foot offering to steal betwixt
the sheets in to him.

At which instant, entered a messenger from a Knight of great honor
thereabouts, who sent him a most precious extract quintessence to drink: which
no sooner he tasted, but he thought he saw all the forenamed Enterluders at
once, hand over head leap, plunge, and drown themselves in puddles and ditches
hard by, and he felt perfect ease.

But long it lasted not with him, for within four hours after, having not
fully settled his estate in order, he grew to trifling dotage and rauing did
within two days following.

God is my witness, in all this relation, I borrowe no essential part from
stretched out invention, nor have I one jot abusde my informations; only for
the recreation of my Readers, whom loath to tire with a course homespunne tale,
that should dull them worse than Holland cheese, here and there I welt and
guard it with allusiue exornations and comparisons: and yet me thinks it comes
off too goutie and lumbring.

Be it as it will, it is like to have no more allowaunce of English for me.
If the world will give it any allowaunce of truth, so it is: For then I hope
my excuse is already lawfullye customed and authorized; since Truth is ever
drawn and painted naked, and I have lent her but a leathren patcht cloak at
most to keep her from the cold: that is, that she come not off too lamely and
coldly.

Upon the accidental occasion of this dream or apparition, (call or miscall
it what you will, for it is yours as freely as any wast paper that ever you
had in your lives) was this Pamphlet (no bigger than an old Praeface) speedily
botcht up and compyled.

Are there any doubts which remain in your mind undigested, as touching this
incredible Narration I have unfolded? well, doubt you not, but I am mild and
tractable, and will resolve you in what I may.

First, the house where this Gentleman dwelt, stood in a low marish ground,
almost as rotten a Clymate as the Low Countries; where their mystie air is
as thick as mould butter, and the deaw lies like froathie barme on the ground.

It was noted over and besides to have been an unlucky house to all his
predecessors, situate in a quarter not altogether exempted from witches.

The abrupt falling into his sickness was suspicious, proceeding from no
apparent surfeit or misdiet. The outrageous tyranny of it in so short a time,
bred thrice more admiration and wonder, and his sudden death incontinent
ensuing upon that his disclosed dream or vision, might seem some probable
reason to confirm it; since none have such palpable dreams or visions, but
die presently after.

The like to this was Master Allingtons vision in the beginning of her
Majesty's reign; than the which there is nothing more ordinarily bruted.
Through Greek and Roman common-places to this purport I could run, if I
were disposed to vaunt my self like a ridiculous Pedant, of deep reading in
Fulgosius, Licosthenes, and Valerius.

Go no farther than the Court, and they will tell you of a mighty worthy man
of this Land; who riding in his Coatch from London to his house, was all the
way haunted with a couple of Hogs, who followed him close, and do what his
men could they might not drive them from him: wherefore at night he caused
them to be shut up in a barn, and commanded milk to be given them; the barn
door was locked, and the key safely kept, yet were they gone by morning, and no
man knew how.

A number of men there be yet living, who have been haunted by their wives
after their death, about forswearing themselves, and undoing their children,
of whom they promised to be careful fathers: whereof I can gather no reason
but this, that Women are borne to torment a man both alive and dead.

I have heard of others likewise, that beside these night terrors, have been
(for whole months together whether soever they went or rid) pursued by wesels
and rats, and oftentimes with squirrels and hares; that in the traueling of
three hundred mile, have still waited on their horse heels.

But those are only the exploytes and stratagems of witches, which may well
astonish a little at first sight, but if a man have the least heart or spirit
to with-stand one fierce blast of their brauadoes, he shall see them shrink
faster than Northren cloth, and outstrip time in dastardly flight.

Fie, fie, was ever poor fellow so far benighted in an old wives tale of
devils and vrchins. Out upon it, I am weary of it, for it has caused such a
thick fulsome Serena to descend on my brain, that now my pen makes blots as
broad as a furd stomacher, and my muse inspyres me to put out my candle and go
to bed: and yet I will not neither, till after all these nights reuells, I have
solemnly bid you good night: as much to say, as tell you how you shall have a
good night, and sleep quietly without affrightment and annoyance.

First and foremost drink moderately, and dice and drabbe not away your money
prodigally, and then forswear your selves to borrow more.

You that be pore men's children, know your own fathers; and though you can
shift and cheat your selves into good clothes here about Town; yet bow your
knees to their leathern bags and russet coats, that they may bless you from
the ambition of Tiburne.

You that bear the name of soldiers, and live baselie swaggering in every
alehouse, having no other exhibition but from harlots and strumpets; seek
some new trade, and leave whoring and quarrelling, least besides the nightly
guilt of your own banqurout consciences, Bridewell or Newgate prove the end
of your caueleering.

You, whosoever or wheresoever you be, that live by spoiling and ouer-reaching
young Gentlemen, and make but a sport to deride their simplicities to their
undoing, to you the Night at one time or other will prove terrible, except you
forthwith think on restitution: or if you have not your Night in this world,
you will have it in hell.

You that are married and have wives of your own, and yet hold too nere
friendship with your neighbors; set up your rests, that the Night will be an il
neighbor to your rest, and that you shall have as little peace of mind as the
rest. Therefore was Troy burnt by night, because Paris by night prostituted
Helena, and wrought such treson to Prince Menclaus.

You that are Macheuilian vain fools, and think it no wit or policy but to
vow and protest what you never mean, that travel for nothing else but to
learn the vices of other countries, and disfigure the ill English faces that
God has given you with Tuscan glickes and apish tricks; the night is for you
with a black saunt or a matachine, except you presently turn and convert to
the simplicity you were borne too.

You that can cast a man into an Italian ague when you list, and imitate with
your diet drinks any disease or infirmity, the night likewise has an
infernal to act before ye.

Traitors that by night meet and consult how to walk in the day undiscovered,
and think those words of Christ vainly spoken, There is nothing done in secret
but shall be revealed and laid open: to you no less the night shall be as a night
owl to vex and torment you.

And finally, O you Judges and Magistrates, if there be any amongst you,
that do wrest all the Law into their own hands, by drawing and receiving
every man's money into their hands, and making new golden laws of their own,
which no Prince nor Parliament ever dreamed of; that look as just as Jehovah
by day, enthronizing grave zeal and religion on the elevated whites of their
eyes, when by night corrupt gifts and rewards rush in at their gates in whole
Armies, like Northren Carriers coming to their Inn; that in steed of their
books turn over their bribes, for the deciding of causes, adiudging him the
best right, that brings the richest present unto them. If any such there be I
say, as in our Commonwealth I know none, but have read of in other States, let
them look to have a number of unwelcome Clients of their own accusing
thoughts and imaginations, that will betray them in the night to every idle
fear and illusion.

Therefore are the terrors of the night more than of the day, because the
sins of the night surmount the sins of the day.

By night time came the Deluge over the face of the whole earth; by night time
Judas betrayed Christ; Tarquin ravished Lucretia.

When any Poet would describe a horrible Tragical accident; to add the more
probability and credence unto it, he disinally begins to tell, how it was
dark night when it was done, and cheerful daylight had quite abandoned the
firmament.

Hence it is, that sin generally throughout the scripture is called the
works of darkness; for never is the devil so busy as then, and then he
thinks he may as well undiscovered walk abroad, as homicides and outlawes.

Had we no more Religion than we might derive from heathen fables; me thinks
those doleful Querristers of the night, the Scritch-owle, the Nightingale, and
croking Frogs, might ouer-awe us from any insolent transgression at that time.
The first for her lavish blabbing of forbidden secrets, being for ever ordained
to be a blabbe of ill news and misfortune, still is crying out in our ears,
that we are mortal, and must die: the second puts us in mind of the end and
punishment of lust and rauishment; and the third and last, that we are but
slyme and mud, such as those watrie creatures are bred of: and therefore why
should we delight to add more to our slyme and corruption, by extraordinary
surfets and drunkenness.

But these are nothing neither in comparison: for he whom in the day heaven
cannot exhale, the night will never help: she only pleading for her old
grandmother hell, as well as the day for heaven.

Thus I shut up my Treatise abruptly, that he who in the day does not good
works enough to answer the objections of the night, will hardly answer at
the day of judgment.

FINIS.

