An Admonition published by the General States of the Netherlandish united
Provinces: unto the States, and Cities their adversaries: touching his now
intended proceedings, against the Spaniards and their adherents.

Whereunto is annexed a caveat, or Proclamation, to the United Netherlandish
Provinces.

Translated out of the Dutch Printed Copy*



LONDON, Printed for Walter Dight, and are to be sold by Thomas Pauier, at his
shop at the sign of the Cat and Parrets near the Royall-Exchange. 1602.

An admonition published by the General States of the Netherlandish-Vnited
Provinces: unto the States and Cities, their adversaries, touching his now
intended proceedings, against the Spaniards and their adherents.
TO the high and-well borne, Reverend, Noble, right Worship. most learned,
Wise, Provident, most discreet Lords, good friends and neighbors: The
Prelates, Princes, Earls, Lords, Gentlemen and Cities of Brabant, Flaunders,
Artois, Haynolt, Valenchien, Lylle, Donay, Orchies, Namen, Tornezie, Tournay
and Mecheld, representing the States of the Netherlands, under the government
of the Spaniards or the Archduke: and to every one of the^ in general and
particular. MOst high and well-borne, Reverend, Noble, right worshipful,
worthy, learned, wise, provident, and most discreet Lords, good friends and
loving neighbors:
We doubt not but your Excellen. Lordsh, worsh. and beloved are: yet mindful
of the manifold amiable exhortations done unto you by us at several times,
tending to provoke your Excellencies, Lordships, worships etc. only once with
a ripe and settled sense, to consider the wicked pretenses of the Spaniards and
their adherents: enemies to the welfare, rights, preuiledges, goods, and
persons of the Netherlands: namely, utterly to destroy and ruinate (generally)
all the inhabitants of the Netherlandes, of what estate, quallitie, or
condition so ever: which indeed has been their original, and deep noted
mischievous and shameful pretense.

It is not also unknown to us (although the said pretense be nothing less
believed, and held for most vnreplicable amongst you then with us) that yet
notwithstanding some of your Excellencies, Worships etc. Partly through the
natural instinct of their Noble kindenes, and partly by persuasions, are
reduced to a self feeling knowledge etc. and that through the Archdukes
means, and their highnesses presences, these matters might be righted and
brought to a better point. But considering that we have a perfect knowledge of
the continuance of this Spanish pretense which cease not, but with their
adherents (by all means) endeavor to procure the ruin and overthrow of these
Netherlands, thereby for ever to reduce them to the thral-dome of the Spanish
yoke, and according to their own appetites and pleasures to rule* not only
over the good inhabiatantes of the same, but also over their consciences,
bodies, rights and goods, which the Archduke himself shall not be able to
prevent nor remedy. We have not been able to conform our selves to any such
liking but to the end your Excelle^cies Lordships, worships etc. nor our
selves, be not thrown down headlong into an eminent, Infallible, continual,
and unrecoverable overthrow and servitude, we having compassionatly found it
better (with a steadfast courage) to continue and persist inour laudable
resolution, originally, sprung from the chiefest and notablest Persons and
members of the general Netherlandish Provinces of all estates and conditions.
Trusting assuredly upon the merciful help of the Almighty God: upon the
favors, aides, and assistaunces of the Kings, Princes, and common wealths,
with which we are in league, and friendship, together with the iustnes of our
cause: and with all patience to expect (especially by means of your
Excellencies, Lorships, Worships etc. good furtherance, direction, and inward
wise government in your states) a godly and most wished issue thereof. And to
that end most willingly to bear all the burdens, perrils, charges, and
pains: which in so holly, laudable, honorable, serviceable, and needful a
resolution shall be requisite: without that at any time we have, or ever shallbe
moved to any kind of alteration, by means of that unworthy transportation,
done of these Netherlands, by the late king of Spain unto their Highnesses: we
having in regard of the same (after the said transportation) by our letters and
verbal co^munications, held with your Exe Lo. Mo. etc. Commisioners:
earnestly admonished, yt good care might be taken upon ye matters of war on
your sides, as well within and without the land: and we trust yt if the same were
censured with an unpassionate and impartial mind, and with clear eyes well looked
into, none were able vprighly to judge, but yt the said deceiptful
transportation was vnceplicable tending to the assured and eminent overthrow
and suppression of the general Netherlands, and of all estates and persons
therein. Your Excellenties, Lordships, Worships, etc. manifestly see, hear,
understand and feel, what passes among you, and you are able easily to
conjecture what else is apparent to follow: in so much that we esteem it
needles to write any tedious circumstance thereof. Only, as yet we will most
friendly wish, exhort and pray your Excellen. Lord. Morsh. etc. earnestly to
consider the worthy and laudable reputation, which by your Exc. Lor. Mor etc.
and our forefathers, has bin purchased so many hundred years a go: and
until this present is left us a leuelled line, for us to follow thereby, and to
be come true Champions and defendors of the free Netherlandish rights and
privileges in general: and perticularly of the countries, members, cities,
and the inhabitants thereof. And to examine if the contents of the said
anullated and unworthy transportation, and the dealings which sithence have
followed (and yet daily are continuing) do agree together, with the duties
wherewith your Excel. Lord. Worcester. etc. their worthy housen, estates, posterities
(but especially our beloved natural country) is bound unto: if ye, (which we
by no means can persuade our selves unto) we must beseech God Almighty of his
mercy to illuminate and endue your Excel. Lor. Worcester. etc. with a more sounder
judgment and understanding: But if in case your Exc. Lo. Woe doiudge the said
pretended unworthy transportatio^ (although it has bin accepted through
necessity, d to shun a further or greater mischief) to be dishonorable,
deceiptful, and a shameful spot and blemish unto al worthy Netherlanders:
Considered moreover, that the proceedinges of the Spaniards and their adherents
follow thereon, and until this present, do continue from bad to worse, as well in
matters of State as in war, are (as we assure our selves, that most of your
Excellences, Lordships, Worships, etc. well know) are altogether ruinous and
intolerable: And consequently your Excellences, Lordships, Worships, etc. are
not bound nor beholden unto them, as those which war and strive against the
general good, and the Netherlandish Laws, Rights, and Privileges. If
likewise your Excellences, Lordships, Worships, etc. consider how all the
extremity of Forces, Interdictors of trade and commerce, con^piracies and
plots, to entrap her princel^ Majesty of England, and the united Prou^nces,
daily appear and are discovered: and not only their pretenses are vain and
forcelesse, but allo have a quite contrary operation. That the treacherous
enterprises upon Cities and Forts of the French Kings, give great occasion,
that some day or other, a sudden and tirrible revenge may be undertaken. That
the Books, and famous Libels and odious Ballades, whereby they seek to make
the French King and his proceedinges, hateful in the Commons hearts, and to
make the Rights of Succession of the Crowns of France and England doubtful,
are nothing e^^e but idle prepositions, only tending to the iritation and
provoking of their Majesty's: And that in vain it is attempted, to raise
tumultes and dissentions among the Communaltie of the united Provinces, since
that the^ (praise unto Go^) their Condition considered, are in estate a hundred
times better, and more assured, then the Communaltie on the Spanish, or their
Highnesses side: and that they not having any reason of mistrust in their
lawful Magistrates, nor of their actions, do bear themselves most quiet and
obedient. But that to the contrary, the Commons of the Spanish or Archdukes
side being that all matters do daily ware worse and worse,) That the
authority of the States, Prelates, Princes, Lords, Nobles, and Cities, of the
Counties both generally and perticulerly, more then ever tosore, is trodden
under foot and reduced to no regard nor respect. Yea, that a^l matters have
their foundation and ground upon Strangers, with a deiection of all worthy
Inhabitants and home-borne Nobility, not only in the government of the
pricipall Cities and Fortes, but ^ufficiently in general in every thing:
except that sometime here and there Proforma, in some matters they seem to
do some thing to the purpose, the which also (they once being Masters) would
soon leave aside.

That the Countries and Inhabitants are robbed, disrobed, and disfurnished, not
only of a^l traffic, negotiation, navigations, welfare, and dealings; but
also the very three fourth parts of the good Inhabitants, are utterly
destitute of all means of maintenance. The principal Cities conu^rted to
Doue-cots, the Villages and Country grounds even brought to the extremest
point of poverty, eaten up and ransackt by the men of War: and ^et the
Soul^iers themselves to ill paid, that the mutenie o^ one party cannot be
appea^ed, but there are two l^ke, or worse, to be expected. And that in brie^e,
it is most evident, that all ^ill fall into a most apparent dangerous
desperation.

This then all considered, we pray your Excellencies, Lordships, Worships, etc.
that in effect, the nee^efull remedies heereto may be taken in hand and
ministered. And namely, that it may please you to effect thus much, as that
their Highness will vouchsafe to depart out of the Netherlandes, to purchase a
more quieter and securer partage or portion: At which time, it will be little
difficult for your Excellencies, Lordships, Worships, etc. and us together, to
make the Spaniards and other Strangers to follow them: and for the best part of
their adherentes, to make and convert unto good and worthy Netherlanders.

If now by any one this were held for an Impossibility, and that your
Excel^encies, Lordships, Worships, etc. could not securely take, nor use this
court; that it may please them then to the contrary to believe: that if in
case your Excellen^es, Lor^sh^ps, Worships, etc. will furnish us with so much
Money and means for six Months, as importes the half of the oulde
or^inarie Tax of Brabant,Flaunders, Artois, Haynolt, Valencinen, Lylle, Douay,
Orchies, Namen, Tournez^e, Tourrage, and Mechelen, to the same: which through
Gods gracious permission, we inten^e this* ^eere to perform in manner of War:
And in respect of their Highnesses, keep themselves quiet, or tall to us*
(which we put to your Excellencies, Lordships, Worships, etc choice and good
lyking, that the matter by Go^s help) shall be brought to that pass, that
your Excellencies, Lo^dships, Worships, etc. themselves, shall iu^ge therein to
be most apparent lignes of good success.

And touching the assurance, whereon diverse kind hearted and well enclyned
persons trouble themselves, are kept back and stand reselute, your
Excellences, Lordships, Worships, etc. shall them selves set or hold such
orders, as well of the Government as of Religon, as themselves shall think
most meet and convenient: neither need to put any doubt therein, but may be
assured that therein by us nothing shall be done nor attempted. Assuring
moreover your Excellences, Lordships, Worships, etc. that in so laudable,
honorable, serviceable, and needful a cause, neither your Excellences,
Lordships, Worships, etc. nor we, shall want any backing, support, or succor,
from the neighbor Kings, Princes, Commonweals, our neighbors and allies.
Wher^vpon, once more most friendly we require your Excellences, Lordships,
Worships, etc. that you will commit to oblivion all passions, suspicions, and
former mistakinges: and with this good opportunity and occasion, to accept and
embrace this ground, as being the right and only way to bring the Netherlands
into their ancient rightes, welfare, peace, tranquillity; and to her most
famous and flourishing former estate: without giving any ear unto the new
pretended Forces, which are naught else* but such as will cause a greater
destruction and misery. Otherwise, and in default hereof, we foresee that the
damages, calamities, and miseris, are destined this year to fall more greater,
then ever heretofore: whereof, before all the world, we will be held
guiltless. Heerewith, we beseech the Almighty GOD, most high and well
Reverent, Noble, Right Worshipful, Worthy, Learned, Wise, Prudent, and most
discreet Lords, Friends, and Neighbors, to inspire your Excellences
Lordships, Worships etc. with that which may stretch to the good an^ Welfare of
the Netherlandes, and the good ^nhabi^a^ts thereof.

Given from S'Grauen-hage the 7. o^ ^^^e. 1602. The Lord of Hero van Hottinga,
Vt.
Your Excellences, Lordships, Worships, etc. good friends and neighbors. The
general estates of the united Provinces: And by order of the same signed.

C. Aerssen.



The Proclamation, or Letter of Saueguard, Which according to the former Letter
of admonishment, is to be published to the before named Countries.
WHereas, by means of the General Estates of th'vnited Netherlands, through
the grace of GOD, the a^de o^ Pote^tates and Princes, with whom they are in
league and ^r^endsh^ppe, together with their good endeavors, the welfare of the
general Neth^rlandes is intende^: jointly with her deliverance from the bondage
of the Spanish, and her adherent^s ^^^^rame. And since equity and reas^n
requires, that also all Provinces, Cities, Towns, Villages, and Inhabitants
of the Netherlandes, which are ouerburthened and suppressed by the Spanish
yoke, should be assisters and furtherers thereof: By these presented
therefore, are now for the first and last time summoned and admonished, the
Governors of the City of (...) that within three days after the receipt
hereof, they pay and deliver into the hands of the Deputy unto our General
Receiver of the Netherlands, being in our Camp, the sum of (...) poun^es, in
deducting the consented sums of money both heretofore borne, and hereafter to
be disbursed, for the freeing of the Netherlandes. Also, the said Governors at
the sight hereof) shall send into our Camp two Pledges, for the said payment:
as also with charge, to deal further with our Commissioners, as well upon a
reasonable Contribution as for their defense against the encursions and spoils
of the resolute Soldiers of this party: for the which, these presents shall
serve for a Saueguard and ^asport: Or, in default of not accomplishing these
our Letters, we shall to our griefs) befores actually to proceed against them
with the Martial executions. Thus done, resolved and concluded in the
assembly of the said Lords the general States:

In S'Grauen-hage the. 7. or June. 1602. Hero van Hottinga, Vt. At the
appointment of the above named Lords the general States. C. Aerssen.


BY Letters received from the Brill, dated the 19. of June, (according unto
their Computation) is credi^ly reported, that the Camp of his Excellency
Prince Maurice, was mustered about ^^tten, near to Skencke his Scour being in
number about 24000 Foot men and 70^0. Horse, and about 2200. Wa^g^ns, to each
Wagon belonging three Horse and two Men. with great quan^ite of Ordenance*
with drawing Horses and their furniture thereunto belonging: Th^se Wagons
being all laden with all necessary Implem^ntes great quantity of Meal,
Milles, Ouens to bake, S^^^s Flayles Boats and Bridges of Leather, with other
such like necessaries: his Excellency did begin to set his Marti^l and
discipline orders for the M^t^h. And was reported, that certain Cap^^i^es were
hanged for their falsehood and deceit in th^^^ M^st^rs, and a Soldier, for
having stolen a (...) from the friends party* so that now each day is to be
(...) to hear of their ^^^^tention and proceedinges; which (...) must daily
may and beseech the Almighty with his all^^^^p^ng (...) give such su^cesse, as
shall ^ende to the praise an^ (...) ^a^e, the protection of his faith, and to
(...).

FINIS.

