A PROCLIMATION, BY THE WHICH IS prohibited in the research of the Passengers
Ships between France and England, not to use any disorder in words nor deeds,
neither to use any bad or slanderous speeches of the Kings Majesty of Great
Britain, etc. nor his Subjects in any manner whatsoever.

Translated out of Dutch.

AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoot, for William Fearbrand.

THe general Estates of the united Low Countries. To all those that shall see
these presents or hear them to be read, send greeting and let to wete, or make
known. Whereas we are informed, that in the research of Passengers ships
between France and England by the Ships of War, which are in service of these
Countries, to the end to know whether in the same there be any Soldiers going
toward the Enemy, or other persons actually of the service of the Enemy,
many abuses and wrongs are offered by the Ships Company, and others which do
abord the said Passengers Ships, as beating, thrusting, wronging, and ryfling
of the Passengers contrary to our order, good intention, instruction and all
reason. Likewise that the Ships Company through ignorance, and otherwise in the
mean time upon the Ships, but espectally in the said research, do speak
hardly of the Kings Majesty of Great Britain etc. From whom the united
Provinces, and the Inhabitants of the same, many years have enjoyed, and as
yet do enjoy many Royal favors and pleasures; under pretense that his
Majesty has made Peace with the King of Spain: notwithstanding his Majesty
by reason thereof, has not changed, altered, nor diminished his affections
toward these Countteys in the least point, wherein they do not only wrong
his Majesty, but also us the Inhabitants of the united Provinces in general.
Forasmuch as every one is holden and bound to endeavor to requite his
Majesty's good affection and great favors with due thanks, and the same to win
and conserve for these Countries, and that such misrules and unlawful research,
as also the said bad speeches and abuses might happen to breed a
coffeehouse between his Majesty and his Subjects with the Inhabitants of
the united Provinces, to the prejudice of the welfare of these Countries,
wherein it is needful by times by all means to foresee. Therefore have we
expressly forbidden and prohibited, do forbid and prohibit by these presents
all and singul^e of what condition or quality they be, and namely the
Commanders ship, Captains, ship Officers, and Mariners of the ships of war
of our Fleet, which do lie in weight in the narrow Seas and upon the coasts
of Flaunders, and all others which shall be commanded for the research of the
said Passengers ships between England and France, not to use any disorder or
unlawful means by words or deeds, but to do the same with all discretion
without beating, thrusting, wronging, or ryfling any one. And further we do
forbid all the Inhabitants of the united Provinces and others frequenting the
same: as also al those as are in our service by water or by land, not to use
any bad or injurious speeches of the Kings most excellent Majesty of Great
Britain, etc. nor of his subjects in any manner of wise, nor to slander nor
impute them with any calumnious speeches, under any pretense whatsoever, upon
pain to be punished, (as disturbers of the Common welfare) in body and goods,
without contradiction or delay. Provided always, that we do not herewith
exempt those of what Nation or condition soever they be, which shall be found by
the said research in ye Passengers Ships going to the service of the King of
Spain, or of the Archdukes, nor those which shall be found to be in their
service, but our express intention and commission is, that such shall be dealt
withal and used according to the order to that effect given in the Fleet. And
to the end no man do pretend to be ignorant of these presents, we do ordain
and give commission to our well-beloved the Estates, Governors, and committed
counsel of the several Provinces of Gelderland, and County of Sutfen,
Holland and Westfreesland, Sealand and Wretcht, Freesland, Ouerissell, the
Town of Greenighen, and places adjoining, and all others Justices, Officers,
and Ministers being thereunto required, to make known, proclayme and publish
this our order in all places, where it is usual to publish and proclayme,
charging also the Governors, Presidents, and provincial Counsel: likewise the
Colleges of the Admiraltie, the Fiscalladuocats, and also the general
Atturneys, and all other Officers, Judges, and Justices of the said Countries,
and likewise the Admiral, Vice-Admirals, Chiefetaines, Colonels, Commanders,
Captains, and Officers to accomplish, and cause to be accomplished this our
order, and to proceed, and cause to be proceeded against these which shall do
any thing to the contrary, without any favor, grace, dissembling, or
forbearance, for such is our express meaning.

Thus done and concluded by the said Lords* the general Estates being
assembled in S'Grauenhaghen, the Nineteenth of July Anno. 1605. And was
subscribed in Eluckema VI.
Under is written by order of the said Lords the general Estates subscribed.
G. Aerssen.


