A proper new Ballad, declaring the substance of all the late pretended
Treasons against the Queens Majesty, and Estates of this Realm, by sundry
Traitors: who were executed in Lincolnes-Inne field on the 20. and 21. days
of September. 1586.

To Wilsons new tune.
WHen first the gracious God of heaven, by means did bring to light:
the Treasons lately practiced, by many a wicked wight.
Against their Prince whose life they sought, and many a noble Peer:
the substance of whose treasons strange, you shall most truly hear.
O Lord preserve our noble Queen, her Counsel long maintain:
Confound her foes and grant her grace in health to rule and reign.
Their Treasons once discovered, then were the Traitors sought:
some of them fled into a Wood, where after they were caught.
And being brought unto the Tower, for joy the Belles did ring:
and throughout London Bonefiers made, where people Psalms did sing
O Lord preserve our noble Queen, etc.
And set their Tables in the streets, with meats of every kind:
where was preparde all signs of joy, that could be had in mind.
And praysde the Lord most heartily, that with his mighty hand:
he had preserved our gracious Queen, and people of this Land.
O Lord preserve our noble Queen, etc.
Which thing was taken in good part, by our renowned Queen:
who by her Letters gave them thanks, as plainly may be seen.
Assuring them that all her care, was for their safety still:
and that thereby she would deserve, their love and great good will.
O Lord preserve our noble Queen, etc.
The Traitors well examined, (whom God himself bewrayed:)
their Treasons known, then were they straight to Westminster conuaied.
Whereas they all indicted were, of many a vile pretense:
seven pleaded guilty at the Bar, before they went from thence.
The manner how they did begin, herein will plain appear:
their purposes in each respect, you shall most truly hear.
Herein unto you will be seen, if they had not been foylde:
our Queen, our Realm, yea rich and, poor together had been spoilde.
One Sauidge lurking long in France, at Rheames did there remain:
whom Doctor Gifford did persuade, great honor he should gain.
If that he would go take in hand, (these matters very strange:)
first to deprive our gracious Queen, Religion for to change.
And then for to invade the Realm, by troops of foraine power:
to overthrow the government, and kill her in her Bower.
Or forceably to dispossess, the Queen of Englands Grace:
and to proclaim the Scottish Queen, and set her in her place.
Which matter Sauidge promised, his full performance too:
so that he might see warrant with, safe Conscience so to do.
The Doctor vowed by his Soul, and bad him understand:
it was an honorable thing, to take the same in hand.
When Sauidge heard that merits were, to him thereby so rife:
he vowed for to do the same, or else to lose his life.
And shortly into England hyed, and did imparte the same:
to Babington of Darby shire, a man sure void of shame.
And told him how that he had vowed, to do it or to dye:
desiring him of help and aid, and that immeadiatly.
A Jesuit Priest whom Ballard hight, came over to that end:
he came also to Babington, and daily did attend.
Still to persuade him that he would, attempt and take in hand:
this vilde and wicked enterprise, and stoutly to it stand.
And told him that he should have aid, of sixty thousand men:
that secretly should landed be, and told him how and when.
And in respect of all his pains, he truly might depend:
that it was lawefull so to do, Renown should be the end.
But let all Traitors now perceive, what honor he has won:
whose traiterous head and wicked heart, has many a one undone.
This proud and hautie Babington, in hope to gain renown:
did stir up many wilful men, in many a Shire and Town.
To aid him in this deuilish act, and for to take in hand:
the spoil of our renowned Prince, and people of this Land.
Who did conclude with bloody blade, a slaughter to commit:
upon her Counsel as they should, within Star Chamber sit.
Which is a place whereas the Lords, and those of that degree:
yeeldes Justice unto every man, that craves it on their knee.
Yea famous London they did mean, for to have sacked beside:
both Mayor and Magistrates therein, have murdered at that tide.
Each rich man's goods had been their own, no favor then had served:
naught but our wealth was their desire, though we and ours had starued.
Besides these wicked practices, they had concluded more:
the burning of the Navy and, the cheifest Ships in store:
With fire and sword they vowed, to kill and to displace:
each Lord Knight and Magistrate, true subjects to her Grace.
They had determinde to have cloyde, and poisoned out of hand:
the chief and greatest Ordinance, that is within this Land.
And did entend by violence, on rich men for to fall:
to have their money and their Place, and to have spoild them al.
The Common wealth of England soon, should thereby have been spoylde:
our goods for which our Parents and, our selves long time have toylde.
Had all been taken from us, besides what had ensued:
the substance proves plainly, to soon we all had rewed.
Those were the Treasons they conspyrde, our good Queen to displace:
to spoil the states of all this Land, such was their want of grace:
But God that does protect her still, offended at the same:
Even in their young and tender years, did cut them of with shame.
These Traitors executed were, on Stage full strongly wrought:
even in the place where wickedly, they had their Treasons sought.
There were they hangde and quattred, there they acknowledged why:
who like as Traitors they had lived, even so they seemde to dye.
O wicked Impes, O Traitors vilde, that could these deeds devise:
why did the fear of God and Prince, depart so from your eyes.
No Rebels power can her displace, God will defend her still:
true subectes all will lose their lives, ere Traitors have their will.
How many mischiefs are deuisde? how many ways are wrought:
how many vilde Conspyracies against her Grace is sought.
Yet God that does protect her still, her Grace does well preserve:
and works a shame unto her foes, as they do best deserve.
O heavenly God preserve our Queen, in plenty health and peace:
confound her foes, maintain her right, her joys O Lord increase.
Lord bless her Counsel evermore, and Nobles of this Land:
preserve her Subjects, and this Realm, with thy most mighty hand.
FINIS.
The names of those Traitors that were executed on the 20. and 21. days of
September.
Ihon Ballard, a Priest. Anthony Babington, Esquier. Ihon Sauidge, Gentleman.
Robert Barnwell, Gentleman. Chidiacke Tichborne, Esquier. Charles Tylney
Esquier and a Pentioner. Edward Abington, Esquier.
Thomas Salisburie, Esquier. Henry Dunn, Gentleman. Edward Ihones, Esquier.
Ihon Trauers, Gentleman. Ihon Charnocke, Gentleman. Robert Gage, Gentleman.
Jerome Bellamie, Gentleman.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, for Edward White.


