A SHORT And faithful Narration from certain Citizens of note of the Town of
Goch, concerning the abominable and wicked Treasons attempted and concluded by
eighteen persons to have been executed upon the Towns of Goch, Cleef,
Emmeryck, and Rees, discovered by Gods providence the last of February. 1615.

At London Printed. 1615.

A SHORT AND True Narration of the abominable and wicked Treasons intended
against Goch, Cleef, Emmerick and Rees.
ON the last of February, (by Gods holy and wise providence who is an enemy
of all Treachery) came to the knowledge of the Lords Governors of Goch,
Emmerick and Rees, the murtherous and false Treasons practiced by eighteen
persons upon the said Cities, for to bring them under the obedience of
Marquess Spinola. To this end, they had purposed to break a hole in the
Towne-walls of Goch, behind the Nunnerie, for to let in at the appointed hour
in the night, the Garrison of the said Marquess, and in the like manner to
betray the other three Cities, at the self same time and hour. This execrable
intention being revealed by one Matthias Ceulenaer, (faining himself to be one
of the Conspiratours for to know their secrets) unto one of the said Lords
Governors, there was a meeting ordained of the said Lords Governors in all
have, in the City of Cleef, and consulted how to attrappe these Traitors:
whose final resolution was, that in the night, between eleauen and twelve of
the clock, those of Cleef should shoot off two Pieces of Ordnance, and that
there-vpon the Governors of these sundry places, should apprehend all the
Traitors that were discovered. Thus accordingly were apprehended on the second
day of March, in the said places, these persons following, Gosen Exkens* old
Borgmaister of the Town, Albert Vuyst Counselor, Jacob Hasenberch, Coenraet
Keysers, Peter Exkens, Lenart R^elofsoon, Dirick van Heuck^lum, Rutger
Sheriff, Father Cornelis, and Father Henry Friars from Gaesdonck (a Monastery
situated some half an hours going from Goch) Item, Willem B^rbier, Ian Abels,
Goert Franck, Thijs the Hatter, John Verlinck, Master Hendrick Fuyst Licentiat
of Cleef, and Matthias Ceulenaer, the discouerour of this Conspiracy, who gave
himself willingly into their hands for the better assurance of his safety for
this happy Discovery. All these persons were brought together at Goch; where
there was found with the afore-saide Jacob Hasenberg a Roll, wherein he had
noted all that he had observed and heard these four or five years, concerning
the Dukes of Brandenburg and Nuyburg, and who were addicted to the Duke of
Nuyburg, and who not; and for this purpose frequented daily the public Innes,
that so he might in due time make use thereof. Besides this, there were found
with him diverse Pasquils or Libels, very vilainously made against the Duke of
Brandenburg, and the reformed Religion. Some of the said persons had also
written certain Letters to Marquess Spinola, and sent them to Brussel^ by
Peter Exkens: and after the apprehension of these Traitors, there came a
Letter from Marqu^sse Spinola, unto the said Peter Exkens, which was taken and
intercepted by the Lord Governor of Goch, the contents whereof are not yet
published. Peter Exkens and Jacob Hasenberg were racked, but their confession
is not yet revealed. The time will tell us, what shall be further done in this
matter, and we will be ready (being advertised of the truth) to make the same
further known unto all those that love the truth: Thanking God almighty that
such Traitors of their own Country, and consequently of their own Mother,
are discovered, to the opening of the eyes of Christian Princes and States,
that they trust not too much to the fair inticings of the Papists, and their
Princes: But being bound together as a bundle of arrows, they keep good
watch, that the Wolf break not in any farther by his subtle and cruel
tricks, to the ruin of Christian Religion, and the euersion of the Estate of
the Country of Cleef; as also of the neighbour-places, whom this matter
likewise concerns, which the Lord preserve us from. Amen.

Corten waerachtich verhael with de mont van eenighe loffweerdige Borgers van
Goch, vant abominabel end boos verraet by seeckere achthien persoonen
geintenteert end besloten op de Steden Goch, Cleef, Emmerick end Rees, door
de voorsichticheyt des alder hoochsten Godts uyt ghecomen op lesten Februwarie.

Anno 1615.

TOT VTRECHT

Ghedruckt by Ian Amelissz. woonende onder de Laeckensnijders, int vergulde A,
B, C.

Anno 1615.

Cort warachtich verhael vant Abominabel end boos verraet, op de Steden Goch,
Cleef, Emmerick end Rees.
OPden lesten Febrauwary verleden is door de wise voorsichticheyt des
alderhoochsten Godts (die even Vyant is van all moordadicheden) ter kennisse
ghecomen vande Heeren Governeurs tot Cleef, Goch, Enmerick end Rees, her
moordadich end valsch verraet gepracktifeert by seeckere achtien persoonen op
de voornoemde Steden, om die te brenghen onder de ghehoorsaemheyt vanden
Marquis Spinola, daer toese voorghenomen hadden even gat te maetken inde Stadts
Mueren van Goch achter het Bagimen Clooster, om doer door ter bessemder ure
end stont inde nacht het Garnisoe^ vanden voorseyde Marquis inn te laten,
end voorts op sulcke wise te verraden d'andere dry Steden, all te saemen op
den voorseyden bestemdeu tydt end stont, end nae dat dit voorseyde end
execrabel voornemen, door eenen Mathijs Ceulenaer, die mede van haer complice
sich veynsde, om dat by haere secreten soude weten, aen even vande voornoemde
Heeren Gouverneurs aen ghebracht was, so zon de voorseyde Gouverneurs daeromme
in allerley by malcanderen outbooden tot Cleef, hebben aldaer raet ghehouden om
de verraders opt behendelicxste te attraperen, end in verseeckerheyt te nemen,
end eyntlick gheresolveert dat des nachts tusschen elf end twaelf uren als
die van Cleeftwee scheuten met grof Geschut souden hebben gheschooten, yeder
Gouverneur in zijn respective Stadt all de verraders die ondeckt waeren soude
ghevanghen nemen, end zijn dien volghende op den tweeden Martij
gheapprehendeert inde respective plaetsen, dees nae benoemde personen, als
naementlick Gosen Exkens out Burghemeester der voorseyde Stadt, Aelbert-Vuyst,
Raet, Jacob Hasenberch, Coenraet Keysers, Peter Exkens, Leenardt Roeloefsoon,
Arent Roclofsoon, Dirck van Heuckelu^, Rutgher Abels Scheepen, Here Cornelis,
Here Henrick beyde Monicken with de Gaesdonck, even Clooster ghelegen ontrent even
halve ure van Goch, Willem Berbier, Ian Abels, Goert Franck, Thijs den
Hoemaker, Ian Verlinck, Meester Heyndrick Fuyst Licentiat van Cleef, end
Mathijs Ceulenaer, als ondecker van dese conspiratie die hem ghewillichlickenin
apprenhentie ghestelt heest, tot sekerheyt van zijn heylsame outdeckinghe, dese
all zijn te samen tot Goch ghebracht, by den voornoemden Jacob Hasenberch is
gevo^de^ seeckere Roll waerinne by gheteeckent had all het ghene hy sedert
vier end vijf iaeren herwaerts with d'een end d'anders mont ghehoort had, so
den Hertoghe van Brandenburch als Nuyburch aengaende, end wie de sake vanden
Hertoch van Nuyburch toe ghedaen was, wie met, daer toe meest all daghe inde
Herberghe ghefrequenteert, om hier mede ter gheleghener tijt zijn profijt te
done, oock zijn by den voorseyden Hasenberch ghevonden dieversche pasquillen,
seer vileynich op den Hertoghe van Brandenburch end de Ghereformeerde Religie
fulminerende, de voorseyde ghevanghens hadden oock seeckere brieven gheschreven
aenden Marquis Spinola end den selven door Peter Exkens bestelt op Bruysel, is
ooc (nae dat de voorseyde verraders ghevanghen waeren) seeckere brief vanden
Marquis Spinola aenden voorschreven Peter Exkens gheschreven, in handen vanden
Here Gouverneur van Goch ghecomen, waer van den inhout als noch niet en is int
licht, als oock niet de belijdenisse van den voorschreven Peter Exkens end
Jacob Hasenberch, die beyde gepijnicht zijn. Wat vorder in dese saecken vallen
sal, sal den tijt leeren, end wy, als wy de waerheyt sullen ver staen hebben,
bereyt zijn all waerheyt lief hebbende menschen deelachtich te maecken, Godt
danckende dat sulcke verraders van haer eyghen Vaderlant, end consequentelick
van haer eyghen Moeder in haer boos voornemen ghesteut zijn, tot openinghe der
Christen Princen ooghen end Herten, om de aenlock end Sausien, der Patps
gesmden end hare Vorsten, met te veel te betrouwen, maer met malcanderen als
ghebonden pijlen goede wachte te houden, dat nict hier often daer de Wolf, door
zijne aengheboren wretheyt end loose treken erghens eenighe afscheuringe en
do, tot ruvyne der Christelucke Religie end eversie vanden welstant end
vrede, so vant Lant van Cleef, als alled'omgh-eleghen Plaetsen, die dese sake
mede aengaet, twelck Godt verhoede. Amen.

FINIS.
Pope Paul the fifth his ten Commandments given to Marquis Spinola.
THis is Pope Paul's Commandment,
Which from his holy seat he sent,
And gave to his son Spinola
A Merchants son of Genua.
Your God here on the earth I am,
See you adore my holy name,
And in all things perform my will
In this war, as I trust you will.
First take the land of Gulick in,
Then to besiege Franckfort begin,
And let the siege vnto't be held,
Till it constrained be to yield.
In Winter with your Army lie,
In Hessen, that to it is nie.
Plague Germany with War, until
You force them to obey my will.
Make show to do it in The Emperors name,
And say men must obey the same.
Proceed with courage stout, my Son:
Leave not till Germany be won.
The Margraves Land see you destroy,
With fire and sword kill man and boy,
Wife, maid, and all you find therein,
And place my son Lupold therein.
Let Wurtenburg the Palsgraues Land,
And Baden, feel your puissant hand,
Bring th'heretickes into subjection,
By force and Spanish inquisition.
A Germane Monarch thou shall be,
Which for thy pains I Will give to thee,
Take th'heretickes Towns, and lands, and all
You win, and pay your debts with all.
With neighbors house, wife, maid and man,
T'your hearts desire, do what you can,
Or will: for all their goods and lands
I freely give into your hands.
These ten Commandments, my Son,
I charge you, that you see them done.
To your discretion I commit
The rest, to do as you think fit.
And see you break the Union.
The Conclusion.
OH God that art in heaven above,
Convert these blinde-mens hearts to love:
(That only on their strengths rely)
Or else destroy them utterly.
And strengthen still the Union.
DE SPAENSCHE GHEBOODEN, INGESTELT DOOR, Paus Paulus V.
DEese ghebooden end wet,
Van den Paus Paulus ingheset,
Gafhy zyn' Soon, dien Spinola,
Eens coopmans Soon van Genua,
Breeckt de Vnie.
Ick ben v Godt in dit aertsch' dal,
Siet toe dat ghy vuyt recht te mael,
Met dit Crycks heyr, all mine bevell,
Gelyck ick v vertrow zeer well:
Breeckt de Vnie.
Neemt eerst het Landt van Gulick in,
Treckt dan naer Franckfort to uwen gh'win,
Belegt de Statt met cloecken moet,
Lot datse haer opgheven doet,
Breeckt de Vnie.
V winterleger houdt dan vry,
Int Landt van Hessen naest daerby,
Ghy sult so lang met crych zyn vuyt,
Dat Duytslandt danst nae mine fluyt,
Breeckt de Vnie.
Dit doet all onder deesen schyn:
Men moet den Keyser g'hoorsaem zyn,
Also vaert voort met cloecken zin,
Lot dat ghy hebt to best deel in,
Breeckt de Vnie.
Des Marckgrauen, volck, goet end Landt,
Besoeckt met gh'welt, met swert, met brandt,
Vermoort eall, end set daerin,
Myn' Soon Lupoldt, dien ick benim.
Breeckt de Vnie.
Paltz, Baden oock, end Wurtenbergk,
Moeten daeraen, ghebruyckt vsterck,
De Ketters doet ghehoorsaem zyn,
Deur Spaensche Inquisitie fyn.
Breeckt de Vnie.
Even duyts Monarcq sult ghy dan zyn,
Met Ketters goet versaet v fyn,
Haer Steden oock int roomsche ryck,
Wint, end betaelt v schulden gh'lyck.
Breeckt de Vnie.
Met s'naesten huys, wife, knecht, end maecht,
Doet stoutlyck wat v heart behaecht,
Haer geldt end goet, end wat mere is,
To ecom' uwen Soldaten fris,
Breeckt de Vnie.
Deese ghebooden, lieve Soon,
Beveel ick v, vuyt mynen troon,
De rest stell'ick tot uwen vlyt,
Ick weet well, dat ghy nerstigh zyt.
Breeckt de Vnie.
Conclusie.
O Hoocsten Got, even here der Herren,
Wilt dit verblinde volck bekeeren,
Die haer verlaeten op eygen macht,
Often verderft se door uwe kracht.
Sterckt de Vnie.

