ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT, CONCERning the Cessation of War, between the
Archduke and the States of the united Provinces.

Procured by a Friar, called John of Ney, Confessor to the Archduke and the
Infanta.

Whereunto is annexed the state of other things happened about the same time.

With Wars Testament, or his last Will, made at his departure out of the said
Netherlands.

Translated out of the Dutch.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes
head Alley, near the Royal Exchange, 1607.

News to the Reader, or to whom the Buyer desires to send News.
SVch is the time, that when friends congratulate, the second word is what is
the news? So likewise, when our urgent occasions require conference by
letters, yet we expect with those letters, what News; if we come from the
Court, what News; if we come from the Country, what news: So from
whencesoeuer we come or go, what News. Therefore for them that desire news,
especially to you, I present these Netherland accurrents, lately come to my
hands from a worthy friend out of Holland, this 18. of June. 1607.

Thine W.B B.

Articles of Agreement concerning the Cessation of war, between the
Archduke and the States of the united Provinces.
YOu have heard how a Friar, the Confessor to the Infanta, has brought about
a Cessation of Arms for 8. months, to the end that in that 8. months, these
States might acquaint their best friends, and counsel themselves, whether
they will make a peace or no, upon reasonable terms; in which it is propounded
beforehand, that the Archduke shall disclaim from all interest in them, and
pretense over these Provinces united, that they shall, as a free State, treat,
and hold all that they now do, except by consent, some town or place may be
changed, for the accommodating of the Archduke or this States and that the
King of Spain shall, within the term of three months, send to the States his
agreement to and of the same Act.

Now upon this, there has been question moved; first concerning the word
Invasion, then for the calling home of the Fleet: and what has been done in
that, I send you herewith; and the present state of things here.

Touching the interpretation of that word, it is this concluded; that during
the Cessation, their Provinces, Territories, and other particular possessions
on either side, as well by water as land, shall be free from all invasion, and
all manner of hostility, by Army, troop, or party.

That in the neutrall Countries adjoining, no actions of hostility shall be
used against the inhabitants passengers, and others being no soldiers, nor
against horses, driuers of horses, or those men which shall draw ships and
boats, on both sides the rivers.

That all actions to the contrary, shall of all sides be hindered, punished
and repaired: with this prouiso, that it must be understood, that such offenses
committed against the Contract, tend not to the violation or breaking of the
Cessation unless they be done by the order and appointment of the King of
Spain or the Archduke on the one side, or the States on the other.

That all soldiers by land and water, horse and foot (out of the towns or
fortes where they serve) as also all others, having no pasport or residing
under safeguard, all vnfree goods, and the persons and goods which shall be
transported from one side to the other, without pasport and license, are
excepted out of those limits, and remain subject to the order and rigor of
the war.

That the Contribution on either side (during the Cessation) shall be raised and
executed, as they were at the day of the conclusion of Cessation, (namely the
12. of April last) without enhauncement, and at the peril of those that shall
execute the same.

Touching Cessation of Arms at Sea.
THe States have agreed to call home their Fleet from the coast of Spain,
with their first means after the King of Spaines declaration, agreeable to
that of his Highnesses, which shall (according to promise) be delivered unto
them; and during the time limited for the said delivery, (whereof there is
yet seven weeks or thereabouts to come) not to re'nforce their said Fleet.

That when 6. weeks are expired, after the said delivery, all prizes (except
ships of war and soldiers) which shall be taken on the sea, from the
Gorlings south and toward the west, along the coast of France, Spain and
Barbary, and in the Straight of Giberalter, and in the Midland sea, shall be
held for unlawful Prize, and restorde.

That all Prizes on either part (except ships of war and soldiers) which
shall be taken on the north seas, or on the narrow seas, between great
Britain and France, as far as the Gorlings, after the fourteenth of June
(after their computation) shall be held for unlawful prize, and restorde.

And those Articles of Cessation to be of force during that limit.

Provided, that the order presently observed by the States, against the going
out and into the havens of Flaunders, shall remain lawful for the States to
execute, notwithstanding the Cessation; granted only to the Archduke, that
they shall suffer his small Fisherie without the havens, during the Cessation.

I Must give you likewise the Report of a Fight at Sea, between the shipping
of Spain and the States.

On the 15. of April, 1607. the States Fleet being 29. ships of war, and
provision, arrived in the Bay of Giberalter, where they found the Armado of
Spain, about 12. or 13. ships of war, (besides seven or eight Merchants) who
had order to hale on the Hollanders, going in or out the straights. The States
ships resolved with order and courage, to attempt the Spanish, as they lay in
the Road, under the shot of the Town and Castle. The Admiral with another
good ship, commanded by Captain Lambrecht, boarded the Spanish Admiral with
full sail, and beat her so violently with ordinance and musket, that in a
short space she lost her General, with almost 300. men, being a ship of 400.
last or burden, manned with 500. and carrying 21. great brass pieces.

After five hours fight, the States had the victory, but with danger: for
fire happening in the Spanish Viceadmirall, when she was grappled, the States
ships had much ado to save themselves from burning. The Spanish Admiral
with some others ran aground, suffered the fire to lay hold on them, and
increased it, to prevent the States profit by taking them. The next day
examining the success, they left (of the 21. ships which they found in the
Bay at their ariual) but two Gallions, one French ship, and a small pinnasse
all which were so grounded, that they could neither take nor burn them.

Three Merchants besides, comprehended in the 21. committed themselves to the
States fleet. So that the Spaniard lost seven great Gallions, and six or
seven other good ships besides. The States lost their Admiral with the first
shot from the Spanish Admiral; and among others, one captain Laughen
Heyndricke of Amsterdam, and captain Lambrechts son.

They have great hurt done to their masts, sails, cables, and tacklins.

I Must further let you know, that certain ships of these Countries, of the
Company that trades to the East Indies, have taken a very rich Carracke, which
they have lightened of her most precious and rich lading, and laden it into
their own ships, of which, one is come into Amsterdam, and the other into
Zeland, and the Carracke, into which they have put their Spices, is coming
also.

THe French Ambassadors are gone a progress into North Holland, attending the
enlarging of their Commission.

THe most of these people conceive and fear, that the king of Spain will never
send the Agreeation, upon which most depends. June 16. 1607. From the Haghe.

Later News.
THere are letters come from Breda, that 2000 Spaniards are entered a back way
into the Castle of Antwerpe, have turned the Artillery upon the Town, and do
make war with the Citizens. This is believed at the Haghe: but I will not
report it for truth, until the first be seconded. Farewell. From the Haghe,
June 16. 1607.

FINIS.
WARS TESTAMENT, now ready to dye, after so long continuance in the
Netherlands.
THe sickness great that does oppress my heart,
And cause each vein and pulse to pant and beat,
As signs that soul and body must depart,
Do show, that spite my heart, I cannot let
The hour ta'pproch which fatal death has signed;
For all things must return unto their kind.
And since it is so, I then am fully bent,
Before I part, for to declare my Will,
And make my last and fatal Testament,
And to each one, great, little, good, or ill,
Bequeath my goods, and all that I possess,
And teach all these that Martial Art profess,
How to devise the Wars for to increase,
And make them worse and greater then before,
And find the means that they shall never cease,
And that each country people, rich and poor,
May feel the edge of my devouring blade,
Which in the world such slaughter great has made.
For though I die, and Netherlands forsake,
Yet must you think, that I mine heirs do leave,
That will not fail in ought my part to take,
And Countries far and near of peace bereave,
And make my fame, when I am dead and rotten,
Still to increase, and never be forgotten.
1.
First I bequeath unto the Potentate,
That many men has brought unto their end,
By my contentious bloody mind and hate,
Great store of goods and lands, his state to mend,
And though he served me with great desire,
And rather sought for wealth, then war require,
And happily full many dangers past:
Yet let him know, what ever he has won,
That from it all he must depart at last,
When he his fatal course on earth has run;
And therefore counsel him for to beware,
And of his life to have a better care.
2.
To Tyrants great, to whom their law is will,
Who by my means much wrong and hurt have done
By false pretense of war, and sought to kill
Both man and child, and many Countries won
By fire and sword, consuming towns and towers,
And wrongfully destroyed pleasant Bowers,
I do bequeath Kains curse and banishment,
And though their fame b'extold unto the air,
Yet shall their hearts and minds be discontent,
And filled with confusion and despair,
And at the last with woe and misery,
Their bodies shall with lice consumed be.
3.
To those that have bin valiant, stout and bold,
T'aduenture life and limme for to defend
Their Countries cause, and it from dangers hold,
And have continued true unto the end,
Offered no wrong, nor used villainy,
But with their pay themselves did satisfy,
I cannot choose but wish them well in heart,
And praise and honor leave them for their meed,
And when that they out of this world shall part,
Desire of God to help them in their need,
And give them constant faith for to persevere,
In godly life to live with him for ever.
4.
To Spiritual men, that are of careful mind,
To preach and teach, I cannot leave them much,
And they do know, and well by proof do find,
Their Cloisters spoild, whereat they seem to grutch,
Their Churches burnt, their living taken away,
And which is more, where they have seen the day,
That all their Sellers stored were with drink,
Their Barnes full, their Kitchins fraught with meat,
And all things else what ever heart could think,
Were in their Houses found, now naught to get,
And they poor Priests and Couents without land,
To other men's reuersions forced to stand.
5.
Unto the Towns in Netherlands so great,
I do bequeath and leave a great Excise,
And many Impositions that are set
Upon them, though they rather would devise
The means to live in peace and quiet state,
And think themselves to be most fortunate.
Mean time they must behold their rased walls,
Their Towers cast down, uncovered and defaced,
Their Houses burnt, their Palaces and Halles
Even with the ground: for what can ever last,
But must of force consume and eke decay?
For in this world there is no certain stay.
6.
Unto the country Village and the Town,
I do bequeath a desolate estate,
And uncouth sight of Castlis, broken down,
And houses spoylde, which war unfortunate
Has causde and made full many a man to be
Amazed lore such woeful sights to see:
I leave them Sluices fallne unto decay,
Great store of lame and miserable folk,
Murders committed amongst them night and day,
Women deflowrde, and men brought under yoke
Of every ravening freebooter and slave,
To take from them what ever that they have.
7.
To those that by dissension and by strife,
Deceit and subtlety have gotten wealth,
And all the days of their unhappy life,
Have lived by cousinage, and by secret stealth,
Gathering great store of riches and of good,
And never cease to suck the poor man's blood,
And Usurers, and such as live by gain,
And sweat of others brows, and have no care,
But only how to get, and to attain
To speedy wealth, to them I will not spare
To tell them, that all gain by them so got,
With them at last will be the devils lot.
8.
You Clarks that lived by my warlike bands,
And were accounted amongst the Martial crew,
And yet never used weapons in your hands,
But served for to pay the Soldiers due,
And lay with them where ever they did go,
Let me but tell you some that I know:
I doubt, if that I once be dead and rotten,
You will be glad to work and take some pain,
And think a penny that way sweetly gotten,
Though now by idleness you make your gainet
Remember what I say, and pray that I
May live, and make you rich before I die.
9.
You Ostes, that wonted were to lodge my train,
And did prepare them meat and drink with speed,
At such excessive rates, and monstrous gain,
As't pleased you, respecting not their need,
And so did fill your coffers and your bags,
And made the Soldiers go in tornerags,
I you bequeath a beggarly estate,
And to be paid by gentle words and blows,
And think your selves well used and fortunate,
To escape so well, and as the world well knows,
Be glad to ebb and flow as time falls out,
And many times be forced to play bankerour.
10.
To Armorers and Spurriers by their Art,
Gunpowder men, and Sadlers that do live
By me and mine, and get the greatest part
Of all their wealth, a Legacy I Will give,
Which after my decease with present speed,
Shall be paid them at the castle of Saint Need:
Although I know they have great store of wealth,
Which easily into their cofers came,
By buying goods that gotten were by stealth,
And gave but easy prices for the same.
But let them know, goods by that means so won,
Consume and melt like butter in the Sun.
16.
Your Horsemens boys, Dead paies, and Billet men,
All call and cry to me for some relief:
For by my means they lived and knew both when
And where to get their meat: but now with grief:
They must go seek to make some other shift,
Or else go steal to help them at a lift.
The house of seldom full must be their Inn,
And if they leave not off their villainy,
The gallie, gallows, prison or some ginne
Will be their last reward for knaucrie:
Therefore beware in time, and learn to thrive,
And seek some honest means for you to live.
17.
You filthy shameless Drabs, that long have thriuen
Under the guard of my most warlike train,
And by your beastly lives, have forced and driven
Full many a man to live in grief and pain,
And in the end, when all from him had gotten,
Have filled him with disease to make him rotten,
Convert in time, ere that it be too late,
Take better course, and now live honestly,
And call for grace, while you are in the state
To get the same, lest graceless you should dye:
And follow Mary Magdalen in this,
Mercy to crave, confessing your amiss.
18.
Lastly unto the Hangman I bequeath
An hundred pair of breeches that be old,
Well filled with lice, above and eke beneath,
For that ere it be long, you shall behold
Great store of thieves, along the high way stand
To ask your alms with weapons in their hand:
And rather then they will denied be,
They Will be so bold to venture (by your leave)
To put you to the worst extremity,
And take your purse by force out of your sleeue:
But for reward, I will them plainly show,
That to the gallows they are sure to go.
Now all at once thank me for my good will,
And every man in several wise apart.
My course is run, I must Gods hests fulfill,
For I am sick, even at the very heart,
I fall to ground, like to the Cripple lame,
And must return to place from whence I came.
Watch now and pray, attend me but a while,
And I Will bid you adieu, for I must die.
When I am dead, yet do me not revile:
For though that I have caused much misery,
I Will pray to God, and while I live, not cease,
To send to you a long and happy peace.
FINIS.

