THE VNFORTVNATE TRAVELLER. Or, The life of Jack Wilton.

Qui audiunt audita dicunt.

Tho. Nashe.

LONDON, ^^inted by T. Scarlet for C. Burby, and are to be sold at his shop
adjoining to the Exchange. 1594.

To the right Honorable Lord Henry Wriothsley, Earl of South-hampton, and
Baron of Tichfeeld.
INgenuous honorable Lord, I know not what blind custom methodicall antiquity
has thrust upon us, to dedicate such books as we publish, to one great man or
other; In which respect, least any man should challenge these my papers as
goods vncustomd, and so extend upon them as forfeite to contempt, to the seal
of your excellent censure lo here I present them to be seen and allowed.
Prize them as high or as low as you list: if you set any price on them, I hold
my labor well satisfide. Long have I desired to approve my wit unto you. My
reverent duetifull thoughts (even from their infancy) have been retayners to
your glory. Now at last I have enforst an opportunity to plead my devoted
mind. All that in this fantastical Treatise I can promise, is some
reasonable conueyance of history, and variety of mirth. By diverse of my good
friends have I been dealt with to employ my dulpen in this kind, it being a
clean different vain from other my former courses of writing. How well or ill
I have done in it, I am ignorant: (the eye that sees round about it self, sees
not into it self): only your Honors applauding encouragement has power to
make me arrogant. Incomprehensible is the height of your spirit both in
heroical resolution and matters of conceit. Vnrepriueably perishes that book
whatsoever to wast paper, which on the diamond rock of your judgment
disasterly chances to be shipwrackt. A dear lover and cherisher you are, as
well of the lovers of Poets, as of Poets themselves. Amongst their sacred
number I dare not ascribe my self, though now and then I speak English: that
small brain I have, to no further use I convert, save to be kind to my friends,
and fatal to my enemies. A new brain, a new wit, a new style, a new soul will
I get me, to canonize your name to posterity, if in this my first attempt I
be not taxed of presumption. Of your gracious favor I despair not, for I am
not altogether Fames outcast. This handful of leaves I offer to your view, to
the leaves on trees I compare, which as they cannot grow of themselves except
they have some branches or boughs to cleave too, and with whose juice and sap
they be evermore recreated and nourisht: so except these unpolished leaves of
mine have some branch of Nobility whereon to depend and cleave, and with the
vigorous nutriment of whose authorized commendation they may be contiually
fosterd and refresht, never will they grow to the worlds good liking, but
forthwith fade and die on the first hour of their birth. Your Lordship is the
large spreading branch of renown, from whence these my idle leaves seek to
derive their whole nourishing: it rests you either scornfully shake them off,
as worm-eaten and worthles, or in pity preserve them and cherish them, for some
little summer fruit you hope to find amongst them.

Your Honors in all humble service: Tho: Nashe.

To the Gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen, in my absence (through the Printers oversight and my bad writing)
in the leaves of C. and D. these errors are ouer-slipt:

C. page 2. lin. 35. for sweating read sneaking. Page 3. li. 1. for hogs read
bars. lin. 7. for Calipsus, read Rhaesus. Page 4 lin. 34. for Live read I
live. Page 5. li. 14. for upon his read upon him his. Page 7. lin 13. for drild
read dyu'd. lin. 22. for color) read collar nor his hat-band).

D. Page 1 lin. 2. for black read cape. lin. 5 for fastens read thirleth. lin
7. for badge read budge. lin. 8. for shinne read chinne. lin. ^1 for in this
begun read thinking in. Page 3. lin 33. for increased then, read enclosed them.
Page ^ lin. 8. for thread button, read breast like a thread bottom. Page 8 lin.
3. for Esla read Ossa. lin 4. for dissolution read desolation lin 13 between
also, and but read If you know Christianity, you know the Fathers of the
Church also. lin. 18. for quocunque read qua gente.

Other literal faults there are which I omit.

Yours T. N.

The Induction to the dapper Mounsier Pages of the Court.
GAllant squires, have amongst you. at mumchance I mean not, for so I might
chance come to short commons, but at nouus, noua, nouum, which is in English,
news of the maker. A proper fellow Page of yours called Jack Wilton, by me
commends him unto you, and has bequeathed forwast paper here amongst you
certain pages of his misfortunes. In any case keep them preciously as a Privy
token of his good will toward you. If there be some better than other, he
craves you would honor them in their death so much, as to dry and kindle
Tobacco with them: for a need he permits you to wrap velvet pantofles in them
also, so they be not woe begone at the heels, or weather-beaten like a black
head with graye hairs, or mangie at the toes like an ape about the mouth. But
as you love good fellowship and ames ace, rather turn them to stop
mustard-pots, than the Grocers should have one patch of them to wrap mace in: a
strong hot costly spice it is, which above all things he hates. To any use
about meat or drink put them too and spare not, for they cannot do their
Country better service. Printers are mad whoresons, allow them some of them
for napkins. Iost a little nerer to the matter and the purpose. Memorandum,
every one of you after the perusing of this Pamphlet, is to provide him a case
of ponyards, that if you come in company with any man which shall dispraise it
or speak against it, you may straight cry Sicr^^pondeo, and give him the
stockado. It stands not with your honors (I assure ye) to have a Gentleman and
a Page abusde in his absence. Secondly, whereas you were wont to swear men on
a pantosle to be true to your puissaunt order, you shall sweeare them on
nothing but this Chronicle of the King of Pages hence forward. Thirdly, it
shall be lawful for any whatsoever to play with false dice in a corner on the
cover of this foresaid Acts and monuments. None of the fraternity of the
minorites shall refuse it for a pawn in the times of famine and necessity.
Every Stationers stall they pass by whether by day or by night they shall put
off their hats too, and make a low leg, in regard their grand printed Capitano
is there entoombd. It shall be flat treason for any of this forementioned
catologue of the point trussers, once to name him within forty foot of an
alehouse. Marry the tavern is honorable. Many special grave articles more
had I to give you in charge, which your wisdoms waiting together at the
bottom of the great Chamber stairs, or sitting in a porch (your parliament
house) may better consider of than I can deliver: only let this suffice for a
taste to the text and a bit to pull on a good wit with, as a rasher on the
coals is to pull on a cup of wine. Heigh pass, come aloft: every man of you
take your places, and hear Jack Wilton tell his own tale.

THE VNFORTVNATE TRAVELLER.
ABout that time that the terror of the world, and fever quartan of the
French, Henry the eight, (the only true subject of Chronicles) advanced his
standard against the two hundred and fifty towers of Turney and Turwin, and
had the Emperor and all the nobility of Flanders, Holland, and Brabant as
mercenarie attendants on his ful-saild fortune, I Jack Wilton, (a Gentleman at
lest) was a certain kind of an appendix or page, belonging or appertaining in
or unto the confines of the English court, where wrat my credit was, a number
of my creditors that I coosned can testify, Caelum petimus stultitia, which of
us all is not a sinner. Be it known to as many as will pay money enough to
peru^^ my story, that I followed the camp or the court, or the court and the
camp, when Turwin lost her maidenhead, and opened her gat^^ to more than Jane
Trosse did. There did I (soft let me drink before I go any further) reign
sole king of the cans and black iackes, prince of the pigmeis, county pallaine
of clean straw and prouant, and to conclude, Lord high regent of rashers of
the coals and red herring cobs. Paulo maiora canamus: well, to the purpose.
What stratagemicall acts and monuments do you think an ingenious infant of my
age might enact? you will say, it were sufficient if he slurre a die, pawn
his master to the utmost penny, and minister the oath on the pantoffle
arteficially. These are signs of good education, I must confess, and
arguments of In grace and veriue to proceed. Oh but Aliquid later quod non
patet, there is a farther path I must trace: examples confirm, list Lordings to
my proceedinges. Whosoever is acquainted with the state of a camp, understands
that in it be many quarters, and yet not so many as on London bridge. In those
quarters are many companies: Much company, much knauerie, as true as that old
adage, Much courtesy, much subtlety. Those companies, like a great deal of
corn, do yield some chafe, the corn, are cormorants, the chafe are good
fellows, which are quickly blown to nothing, with bearing a light heart in a
light purse. Amongst this chafe was I winnowing my wits to live merrily, and by
my troth so I did: the prince could but command men spend their blood in his
service, I could make them spend all the money they had for my pleasure. But
poverty in the end parts friends, though I was prince of their purses, and
exacted of my unthrift subjects, as much liquid allegiance as any keisar in
the world could do, yet where it is not to be had the king must loose his
right, want cannot be withstood, men can do no more than they can do, what
remained then, but the foxes case must help, when the lions skin is out at the
elbowes.

There was a Lord in the camp, let him be a Lord of misrule, if you will, for
he kept a plain alehouse without welt or guard of any Iuibush, and sold syder
and cheese by pint and by pound to all that came, (at that very name of syder,
I can but sigh, there is so much of it in renish wine now a days.) Well, Tendit
ad sydera virtus, there is great virtue belongs (I can tell you) to a cup of
syder, and very good men have sold it, and at sea, it is Aqua coelestis, but
that's neither here nor there, if it had no other patrons but this peer of
quart pots to authorize it, it were sufficient. This great Lord, this worthy
Lord, this noble Lord, thought no scorn (Lord have mercy upon us) to have his
great velvet breeches larded with the droppings of this dainty liquor, and yet
he was an old seruitor, a cauelier of an ancient house, as it might appear by
the arms of his ancestrie, drawn very amiably in chalk, on the in side of
his tent door.

He and no other was the man, I chose out to damn with a lewd monylesse
device: for coming to him on a day, as he was counting his barrels, and
setting the price in chalk on the head of every one of them, I did my duty
very devoutly, and told his alie honor, I had matters of some secrecy to
impart unto him, if it pleased him to grant me private audience. With me young
Wilton, quoth he, marie and shall: bring us a pint of syder of a fresh tap into
the three cups here, wash the pot, so into a back room he lead me, where
after he had spit on his finger, and picked off two or three moats of his old
moth eaten velvet cap, and spunged and wrong all the rumatike driuell from his
ill favored Goats beard, he badde me declare my mind, and there upon he
drank to me on the same. I up with a long circumstance, alias, a cunning shift
of the seuenteenes, and discourt unto him what entire affection I had borne him
time out of mind, partly for the high descent and lineage from whence he sprung,
and partly for the tender care and provident respect he had of poor soldiers,
that whereas the vastitie of that place (which afforded them no indifferent
supply of drink or of victuals) might humble them to some extremity, and so
weaken their hands, he vouchsafed in his own person to be a victualer to the
camp (a rare example of magnificence and honorable courtesy) and diligently
provided, that without far travel, every man might for his money have side:
and cheese his bellyfull, nor did he sell his cheese by the way only, or his
syder by the great, but abast himself with his own hands, to take a
shoomakers knife, (a homely instrument for such a high personage to touch) and
cut it out equally like a true iusticiarie, in little penny worthes, that it
would do a man good for to look upon. So likewise of his syder, the poor man
might have his moderate draught of it (as there is a moderation in all things)
as well for his doit or his dandiprat, as the rich man for his half soul or
his ^enier. Not so much, quoth I, but this tapsters linen apron, which you
wear before you, to protect your apparel from the im^^^fections of the
spi^ot, most amply (...) is your lowly mind. I speak it with tears, too few
such humble spirited noble men have we, that will draw drink in linen aprons.
Why you are every child's fellow, any man that comes under the name of a
soldier and a good fellow, you will sit and bear company to the last pot,
yea, and you take in as good part the homely phrase of mine host heeres to you,
as if one saluted you by all the titles of your baronie. These considerations,
I say, which the world suffers to slip by in the channel of carelesnes,
have moved me in ardent zeal of your welfare, to forewarne you of some dangers
that have beset you and your barrels. At the name of dangers he start up, and
bounst with his fist on the board so hard, that his Tapster ouerhearing him,
cried, anon anon sir, by and by, and came and made a low leg and asked him
what he lackt. He was ready to have stricken his Tapster, for interrupting him
in attention of this his so much desired relation, but for sear of displeasing
me he moderated his fury, and only sending him for the other fresh pint, wild
him look to the bar, and come when he is called with a deuilles name. Well,
at his earnest importunity, after I had moistened my lips, to make my lie run
glib to his iourneies end, forward I went as follows. It chanced me the
other night, amongst other pages, to attend where the king with his Lords, and
many chief leaders sat in counsel, there amongst sundry serious matters that
were debated, and intelligences from the every given up, it was privily
informed (no villains to these (...) informers) that you, even you that I now
speak to, had (O would I had no tongue to tell the rest, by this drink it
grieves me so I am not able to repeat it.) Now was my dronken Lord ready to
hang himself for the end of the full point, and over my neck he throws himself
very ^ubberly, and entreated me as I was aproper young Gentleman, and ever
looked for pleasure at his hands, soon to rid him out of this hell of suspense,
and resolve him of the rest, then fell he on his knees, wrong his hands, and
I think on my conscience, wept out all the syder that he had drunk in a week
before, to move me to have pity on him, he rose and put his rustie ring on my
finger, gave me his greasy purse with that single money that was in it,
promised to make me his heir, and a thousand more favors, if I would expire
the misery of his unspeakable tormenting uncertainty. I being by nature
inclined to Mercy (for in deed I knew two or three good wenches of that name)
bad him harden his ears, and not make his eyes abortiue before their time, and
he should have the inside of my breast turned outward, hear such a tale as would
tempt the utmost strength of life to attend it, and not die in the midst of
it. Why (quoth I) my self, that am but a poor childish welwiller of yours,
with the very thought, that a man of your desert and state, by a number of
pesants and varlets should be so injuriously abused in bugger mugger, have wept
al my urine upward. The wheel under our City bridge, carries not so much
water over the city, as my brain has welled forth gushing streams of sorrow,
I have wept so immoderatly and lauishly, that I thought verily my palate had bin
turned to pissing conduit in London. My eyes have bin dronk, outragiously
drunk, with giving but ordinary intercourse through their sea-circled Islands
to my distilling dreariment. What shall I say? that which malice has said is
the mere overthrow and murder of your days. Change not your color, none can
s^ander a clear conscience to it self, receive all your fraught of misfortune
in at once.

It is buzzed in the kings head that you are a secret friend to the enemy, ^
under pretense of getting a license to furnish the camp with syder and such
like prouant, you have furnished the enemy, and in empty barrells sent letters
of discovery, and corn innumerable.

I might well have left here, for by this time his white liver had mix it
self with the white of his eye, and both were turned vpwardes, as if they had
offered themselves a fair white for death to shoot at. The troth was, I was
very loath mine host and I should part to heaven with dry lips, wherefore the
best means that I could imagine to wake him out of his trance, was to cry
loud in his ear, hough host, what is to pay, will no man look to the reckning
here, and in plain verity, it took expected effect, for with the noise he
started and bustled, like a man that had been scard with fire out of his
sleep, and ran hastily to his Tapster, and all so belabored him about the
ears, for letting Gentlemen call so long and not look in to them. Presently
be remembered himself, and had like to have fallen into his memento again, but
that I met him half ways, and asked his Lordship what he meant to slip his
neck out of the collar so suddenly, and being revived, strike his tapster so
rashly.

Oh, quoth he, I am bought and sold for doing my Country such good service as
I have done. They are afraid of me, because my good deeds have brought me
into such estimation with the communalty, I see, I see it is not for the lamb
to live with the wolf.

The world is well amended, thought I, with your Sidership, such another forty
years nappe together as Epemenides had, would make you a perfect wise man.
Answer me, quoth he, my wise young Wilton, is it true that I am thus underhand
dead and buried by these bad tongues?

Nay, quoth I, you shall pardon me, for I have spoken too much already, no
definitive sentence of death shall march out of my well meaning lips, they have
but lately sucked milk, and shall they so suddenly change their food and seek
after blood?

Oh but, quoth he, a man's friend is his friend, fill the other pint Tapster,
what said the king, did he believe it when he heard it, I pray thee say, I
swear to thee by my nobility, none in the world shall ever be made privy,
that I received any light of this matter from thee.

That firm affiance, quoth I, had I in you before, or else I would never have
gone so far over the shoes, to pluck you out of the mire. Not to make many
words (since you will needs know) the kings lays flatly, you are a miser and
a snudge, and he never hopt better of you. Nay then (quoth he) questionless
some planet that loves not syder has conspired against me. Moreover, which is
worse, the king has vowed to give Turwin one hot breakfast, only with the
bungs that he will pluck out of your barrells. I cannot stay at this time to
report each circumstance that passed, but the only counsel that my long
cherished kind inclination can possibly contriue, is now in your old days to
be liberal, such victuals or provision as you have, presently distribute it
frankly amongst poor soldiers, I would let them burst their bellies with
syder, and bathe in it, before I would run into my Princes ill opinion for a
whole sea of it. The hunter pursuing the beauer for his stones, he bites them
off, and leaves them behind for him to gather up, whereby he lives quiet. If
greedy hunters and hungry tel-tales pursue you, it is for a little pelf which
you have, cast it behind you, neglect it, let them have it, lest it breed a
further inconvenience. Credit my advice, you shall find it prophetical, and
thus I have discharged the part of a poor friend. With some few like phrases
of ceremony, your honors suppliant, and so forth, and farewell my good youth, I
thank thee and will remember thee, we parted.

But the next day I think we had a dole of syder, syder in houles, in
scuppets, in helmets, and to conclude, if a man would have filled his boots
full, there he might have had it, prouant thrust it self into poor soldiers
pockets whether they would or no. We made five peals of shot into the town
together, of nothing but spiggots and faussets of discarded empty barrels:
every underfoot soldier had a distenanted tun, as Diogenes had his tub to
sleep in. I my self got as many confiscated Tapsters aprons, as made me a
Tent, as big as any ordinary commanders in the field. But in conclusion, my
well-beloved Baron of double beer got him humbly on his marybones to the king,
and complained he was old and stricken in years, and had nere an heir to cast
at a dog, wherefore if it might please his majesty to take his lands into his
hands, and allow him some reasonable pension to live on, he should be
marvelous well pleased: as for the wars, he was weary of them, and yet as
long as highness should venture his own person, he would not flinch a foot,
but make his withered body a buckler, to bear off any blow that should be
advanced against him.

The king meruailing at this strange alteration of his great merchant of syder,
(for so he would often pleasantly term him,) with a little further talk
bolted out the whole complotment. Then was I pitifully whipped for my holy day
lie, although they made themselves merry with it many a fair winters evening
after.

Yet notwithstanding his good asse-headed honor mine host, perseuered in his
former simple request to the king to accept of the surrender of his lands, and
allow him a beadsmanry or out-brothership of brachet, which at length, through
his vehement instancie took effect, and the king is iea^^ingly fayd, since he
would needs have it so, he would distrain on part of his land for impost of
syder, which he was behind hand with him, and never paid.

This was one of my famous atchieuements, insomuch as I never light upon the
like famous fool, but I have done a thousand better ieasts if they had bin
bookt in order as they were begotten. It is pity posterity should be
deprived of such precious records, and yet there is no remedy, and yet there
is to, for when all fayles, welfare a good memory. Gentle readers (look you
be gentle now since I have called you so) as freely as my knauerie was mine own,
it shall be yours to use in the way of honesty.

Even in this expedition of Turwin (for the king stood not long thrumming of
buttons there) it happened me fall out (I would it had fallen out otherwise for
his sake) with an ugly mechanical Captain. You must think in an army, where
tronchio^s are in their state house, it is a flat stab once to name a Captain
without cappe in hand. Well, suppose he was a Captain, and had nere a good
cap of his own, but I was feign to lend him one of my Lords cast velvet caps,
and a weather-beaten feather, wherewith he threatened his soldiers a far off,
as Jupiter is said, with the shaking of his hair to make heaven and earth to
quake: suppose out of the paringes of a pair of false dice, I apparelled both
him and my self many a time and often: and surely not to slander the devil, if
any man ever deserved the golden dice, the king of the Parthians sent to
Demetrius it was I, I had the right vain of sucking up a die twixt the dintes
of my fingers, not a creuise in my hand but could swallowe a quater trey for
a need: in the line of life many a dead lift did there lurk, but it was
nothing toward the maintenance of a family. This Monsieur Capitano eat up the
cream of my earnings, and Cred emihi res est ingeniosa dare, any man is a fine
fellow as long as he has any money in his purse. That money is like the
marigolde, which opens and shuts with the Sun, if fortune smileth, or one be
in favor, it sloweth: if the evening of age comes on, or he falls into
disgrace, it fades and is not to be found. I was my crafts master though I was
but young, and could as soon de^line Nominatiuo hic asinus, as a greater
clarke, wherefore I thought it not convenient my sol^a^^ should have my purse
any longer for his drum to play upon, but I would give him Jack drums
entertainment, and send him packing. This was my plot, I knew a piece of
service of intelligence, which was presently to be done, that required a man
with all his five senses to effect it, and would overthrow any fool that
should undertake it, to this service did I animate and egg my foresaid costs
and charges, alias, senior veluet-cappe, whose head was not encombered with too
much forecast, and coming to him in his ca^^in about dinner time, where I
found him very devoutly paring of his nails for want of other repast, I
entertained him with this solemn oration.

Captain, you perceive how near both of us are driven, the dice of late are
grown as melancholy as a dog, high men and low men both prosper alike,
langrets, fullams, and all the whole fellowshippe of them will not afford a
man his dinner, some other means must be invented to prevent imminent
extremity. My state, you are not ignorant, depends on trencher service, your
advancement must be derived from the valor of your arm. In the delays of
siege, desert hardly gets a day of hearing, it is gowns must direct and guns
enact all the wars that is to be made against walls. Rosteth no way for you
to climb suddenly, but by doing some strange stratageme, that the like has
not been heard of heretofore, and fitly at this instant occasion is ministered.

There is a seat the king is desirous to have wrought on some great man of the
enemies side, marie it requires not so much resolution as discretion to bring
it to pass, and yet resolution enough shall be showen in it to, being so full of
hazardous ieopardy as it is, hark in your ear, thus it is. Without more
drumbling or pausing, if you will undertake it, and work it through stitch (as
you may ere the king has datermined which way to go about it) I warrant you
are made while you live you need not care which way your staff falls, if it
prove not so, then cut off my head.

Oh my auditors, had you seen him how be stretched out his lims, scratcht his
sca^d elbowes at this speech, how he set his cap over his eye brows like a
politician, and then folded his arms one in another, and nodded with the head,
as who should ^aie, let the French beware, for they shall find me a devil, if
I ^ay, you had seen but half the actions that he used of shrucking up his
shoulders, smiling scornfully, playing with his fingers on his buttons, and
^iting the lip, you would have laughed your face and your knees together. The
iron being hot, I thought to lay on load, for in any case I would not have
his humor cool. As before I laid open unto him the brief sum of the
service, so now I began to urge the honorablenesse of it, and what a rare thing
it was to be a right politician, how much esteemd of kings and princes, and how
diverse of mean parentage have come to be monarchs by it. Then I discourst of
the qualities and properties of him in every respect, how like the wolf he
must draw the breath from a man before he be seen, how like a hare he must
sleep with his eyes open, how as the Eagle in flying casts dust in the eyes of
crows and other souls, for to blind them, so he must cast dust in the eyes of
his enemies, delude their sight by one means or other, yt they diue not into
his subtilties: how he must be familiar with all and trust none, drink
carouse, and lecher with him out of whom he hopes to wring any matter, swear
and forswear, rather than be suspected, and in a word, have the art of
dissembling at his fingers ends as perfect as any courtier.

Perhaps (quoth I) you may have some few greasy cauelliers that will seek to
dissuade you from it, and they will not stick to stand on their three half
penny honor, swearing and staring that a man were better be an hangman than
an intelligencer, and call him a sweating eausdropper, a scraping hedgecreeper,
and a piperly pickthanke, but you must not be discouraged by their talk, for
the most part of those beggarly contemners of wit, are huge burlybond butchers
like Ajax, good for nothing but to strike right down blows on a wedge with a
cleaning beetle, or stand hammering all dais upon hogs of iron. The whelps
of a Bear never grow but sleeping, and these beare-wards having big limbs
shall be pref^rd though they do nothing. You have read stories, (I Will be
sworn he never lookte in book in his life) how many of the Roman worthies
were there that have gone as spies into their enemies camp? Ulysses, Nestor,
Diomed, went as spies together in the night into the tents of Calipsus, and
intercepted Dolon the spy of the Trojans: never any discredited the trade of
intelligencers but Judas, and he hanged himself. Danger will put wit into any
man. Architas made a wooden dove to fly, by which proportion I see no reason
that the veryest block in the world should despair of any thing. Though
nature be contrary inclined, it may be altered, yet usually those whom she
denies her ordinary gifts in one thing, she doubles them ^n another. That
which the ass wants in wit, he has in honesty, who ever saw him kick or
winch, or use any iades tricks, though he live an hundred years you shall
never hear that he breaks pasture. Amongst men, he that has not a good
wit, lightly has a good iron memory, and he that has neither of both, has
some bones to carry burdens. Blind men have better noses than other men: the
bulls born^ serve him as well as hands to f^ght withal: the lions paws are as
good to him as a pol-axe, to knock down any that resists him: so the Bores
tushes serve him in better stead than a sword and buckler, what need the snaile
care for eyes, when he feels the way with his two horns, as well as if he
were as sharp sighted as a decypherer. There is a fish that having no wings,
supportes her self in the air with her finnes. Admit that you had neither wit
nor capacity, as sure in my judgment there is none equal unto you in
idiotisme, yet if you have simplicity and secrecy, serpents themselves will
think you a serpent, for what serpent is there but hydeth his sting: and yet
whatsoever be wanting, a good plausible alluring tongue in such a man of
employment can hardly be spard, which as the forenamed serpent, with his
winding tail fetches in those that come near him: so with a rauishing tale,
it gathers all men's hearts unto him, which if he have not, let him never
look to engender by the mouth, as ravens and doves do, that is, mount or be
great by undermining. Sir, I am assertayned that all these imperfections I
speak off, in you have their natural rest^nce, I see in your face, that you
were borne with the swallow, to feed flying, to get much treasure and honor
by travel. None so fit as you for so important an enterprise, our vulgar
reputed politicians are but flies swimming on the stream of subtlety
superficially in comparison of your singularity their blind narrow eyes
cannot pearce into the profunditie of hypocrisy, you alone with Palamed, can
pry into Ulysses mad counterfeting, you can discern Achilles from a chamber
maid, though he be decked with his spindle and distaffe: as Jove dining with
Licaon could not be beguiled with humane flesh dressed like meat, so no humane
brain may go beyond you, none beguile you, you gull all, all fear you, love
you, stoop to you. Therefore good sir, be ruled by me, stoop your fortune so
low, as to bequeath your self wholly to this business.

This silver sounding tale made such sugared harmony in his ears, that with
the sweet meditation, what a more than myraculous politician he should be, and
what kingly promotion should come tumbling on him thereby, he could have found
in his heart to have packt up his pipes and to have gone to heaven without a
bait, yea, he was more inflamed and rauishte with it* than a young man called
Taurimontanus was with the Phrigian melody, who was so incensed and fyred
therewith, that he would needs run presently upon it, and set a curtizans
house on fire that had angered him.

No remedy there was but I must help to furnish him with money, I did so, as
who will not make his enemy a bridge of gold to fly by. Uerie earnestly he
coniurd me to make no man living privy to his departure in regard of his place
and charge, and on his honor assured me his return should be very short
and succesfull, I, I, shorter by the neck, thought I, in the mean time let
this be thy posie, Live in hope to escape the rope.

Gone he is, God send him good shipping to Wapping, and by this time, if you
will, let him be a pitiful poor fellow, and undone for ever, for mine own
part, if he had bin mine own brother, I could have done no more for him than
I did, for straight after his back was turned, I went in all love and kindness
to the Marshall general of the field, and certefide him that such a man was
lately fled to the enemy, and got his place bedgd for another immediately.
What because of him after you shall hear. To the enemy he went and offered
his service, railing egregiously on the king of England, he swore, as he was a
Gentleman and a soldier, he would be revenged on him, and let but the king
of France follow his counsel, he would drive him from Turwin walls yet ere
ten days to an end. All these were good humors, but the eragedie follows.
The French king hearing of such a prating fellow that was come, was desirous to
see him, but yet he feared treason, wherefore he wild one of his minions to take
upon his person, and he would stand by as a private man whilst he was
txamined. Why should I use any idle delays? In was Captain Gogges wounds
brought, after he was thoroughly searched, not a louse in his doublet was let
pass, but was asked Queuela, and chargd to stand in the kings name, the mouldes
of his buttons they turned out, to see if they were not bullettes covered over
with thread, the codpeece in his devils breeches (for they were then in
fashion) they said plainly was a case for a pistol, if he had had ever a
hovnaile in his shoes it had hangde him, and he should never have known who
had harmd him, but as luck was, he had not a mite of any metal about him, be
took part with none of the four ages, neither the golden age, the silver age,
the brazen nor the iron age, only his purse was aged in emptiness, and I
think verily a puritan, for it kept it self from any pollution of crosses.
Standing before the supposed king, he was asked what he was, and wherefore
became. To the which in a glorious bragging humor be answered, that he was a
gentleman, a captain commander, a chief leader, that came a way from the king
of England upon coffeehouse. Questiond particular of the cause of his
coffeehouse, he had not a word to bless himself with, yet feign he would
have, patcht out a polt-foote tale, but (God he knows) it had not one true
leg to stand on. Then began he to smell on the villain so rammishly, that
none there but was ready to rent him in pieces, yet the minion king kept in
his cholar, and propounded unto him farther, what of the king of Englands
secrets (so aduantageable) he was privy to, as might remove him from the flage
of Turwin in three days. He said diverse, diverse matters, which asked longer
conference, but in good honesty they were lies, which he had not yet stamped.
Heereat the true king stepped forth, and commanded to lay hands on the lozell,
and that he should be tortured to confess the truth, for he was aspie and
nothing else.

He no sooner saw the wheel and the torments set before him, but he cride out
like a rascal, and said he was a poor Captain in the English camp,
suborned by one Jack Wilton (a noble man's page) and no other, to come and kill
the French king in a bravery and return, and that he had no other intention in
the world.

This confession could not choose but move them all to laughter, in that he
made it as light a matter to kill their king and come back, as to go to
Islington and eat a mess of cream, and come home again, nay, and besides
he protested that he had no other intention, as if that were not enough to
hang him.

Adam never fell till God made fools, all this could not keep his joints
from ransacking on the wheel, for they vowed either to make him a confessor or
a martyr in a trice, when still he sung all one song, they told the king he
was a fool, and some shrewd head had knauishly wrought on him, wherefore it
should stand with his honor to whip him out of the camp and send him home.
That persuasion took place, and soundly was he lasht out of their liberties,
and sent home by a Heralde with this message, that so the king his master hoped
to whip home all the English fools very shortly: answer was returned, that
that shortly, was a long lie, and they were shrewde fools that should drive
the French man out of his kingdom, and make him glad with Corinthian Dionisius
to play the schoolmasters.

The Herald being dismissed, our afflicted intelligencer was called coram nobis,
how he spedde, judge you, but something he^ was adjudged to. The sparowe for
his lechery lives but a year, ^e for his treachery was turned on the toe,
Plura dolor prohibet.

Here let me triumph a while, and ruminate a line or two on the excellence of
my wit, but I will not breath neither til I have diffraughted all my knauerie.

Another Swizer Captain that was far gone for want of the wench, I lead
astraie most notoriously, for he being a monstrous unthrift of battle axes (as
one that cared not in his anger to bid fly out scuttels to fl^e score of them)
and a notable emboweller of quart pots, I came disguised unto him in the form
of a half a crown wench my gown and attire according to the custom the^ in
request. I wis I had my cur^esses in cue or in quart pot rather, for they drild
into the very entrails of the dust, and I simpered with my countenance like a
porredge pot on the fire when it first begins to sees. The sobriety of the
circumstance is, that after he had courted me and all, and given me the earnest
penny of impiety, some six crowns at the least for an antipast to
iniquity, I fained an impregnable excuse to be gone, and never came at him
after.

Yet left I not here, but committed a little more scutcherie. A company of
coystrell clerks (who were in hand with satan, and not of any soldiers
color) pincht a number of good minds to Godward of their pronant. They would
not let a dram of dead pay ouerslip them, they would not lend a groat of the
week to come, to him that had spent his money before this week was done. They
out-faced the greatest and most magnanimious seruitours in their sincere and
^inigraphicall clean shirts and cuffe^. A lowse that was any Gentleman's
companion they thought scorn of, their nere bitten beardes must in a devils
name be dewd every day with rose water, hogs could have nere a hair on
their backs, for making them rubbing brushes to rouse their crab lice. They
would in no wise permit that the m^ates in the Sunne-beames should be full
mouthde beholders of they clean phini^i^e apparel, their shoes shined as
bright as a slike-stone, their hands troubled and foiled more water with
washing, than the ca^uell does, that nere drinks till the whole stream be
troubled. Summarily, never any were so fantastical the one half as they. My
masters you may conceive of me what you list, but I think confidently I was
ordained Gods scourge from above for their dainty finicalitie. The hour of
their punishment could no longer be proroged, but vengeance must have at them
at al a ventures. So it was, that the most of these above named goosequil
braccahadocheos were mere cowards and crauens, and durst not so much as throw
a pen-full of ink into the enemies face, if proof were made, wherefore on the
experience of their pusellanimitie I thought to raise the foundation of my
roguerie. What did I now but one day made a false alarm in the quarter where
they lay, to try how they would stand to their tackling, and with a pitiful
out-crie warned them to fly, for there was treason a foot, they were environed
and beset. Upon the first watch word of treason that was given, I think they
betook them to their heels very stoutly, left their pen and inke-hornes
and papers behind them for spoil, resigned their deskes, with the money that
was in them to the mercy of the vanquisher, and in fine, left me and my
fellows (their foole-catchers) Lords of the field: how we dealt with them,
their disburdened deskes can best tell, but this I am assured, we fared the
better for it a fortnight of fasting days after. I must not place a volume in
the precincts of a pamphlet, sleep an hour or two, and dream that Turney and
Turwin is won, that the king is shipped again into England, and that I am
close at hard meat at Windsore or at Hampton court. What will you in your
indifferent opinions allow me for my travel, no more seigniorie over the Pages
than I had before? yes, whether you will part with so much probable friendly
suppose or no, I Will have it in spite of your hearts. For your instruction and
godly consolation, be informed, that at that time I was no common squire, no
vndertroden torch-bearer, I had my feather in my cap as big as a flag in the
fore-top, my French doublet gelte in the belly as though (like a pig ready to
be spitted) all my guts had been plucked out, a pair of side paned hose that
hung down like two scales filled with Holland cheeses, my long stock that sat
close to my docke, and smoothered not a scab or a leacherous hairie sinew on
the calfe of my leg, my rapier pendant like a round stick fastened in the
tacklings for skippers the better to climb by, my black cloak of black
cloth, ouer-spreading my back like a thorubacke, or an Elephantes ear, that
hanges on his shoulders like a country huswiues banskin, which she fastens
her spindle on, and in consummation of my curiosity, my hands without gloves,
all a more French, and a black badge edging of a beard on the upper lip, and
the like sable auglet of excrements in the first rising of the anckle of my
shinne. I was the first that brought in the order of passing into the court
which I derived from the common word Qui passa, and the heralds phrase of arms
Passant, in this begun sincerity, he was not a Gentleman, nor his arms
current, who was not first past by the pages. If any prentise or other came
into the court that was not a Gentleman, I thought it was an indignity to the
pre-eminence of the court to include such a one, and could not be salud except
we gave him arms Passant, to make him a Gentleman. Besides, in Spain, none
compass any far way but he must be examined what he is, and give three
pence for his pass. In which regard it was considered of by the common table
of the cupbearers, what a perilsome thing it was to let any stranger or
out-dweller approach so near the precincts of the Prince, as the great chamber,
without examining what he was, and giving him his pass, whereupon we
established the like order, but took no money of them as they did, only for
a sign that he had not past our hands unexamined, we set a red mark on
either of his ears, and so let him valke as authentical. I must not discover
what ungodly dealing we had with the black iackes, or how often I was crowned
king of the dronkards with a court cup, let me quietly descend to the
waining of my youthful days, and tell a little of the sweating sickness,
that made me in a cold sweat take my heels and run out of England.

This sweating sickness, was a disease that a man then might catch and never
go to a hot-house. Many masters desire to have such servants as would work
till they sweat again, but in those days he that sweat never wrought again.
That Scripture then was not thought so necessary, which says, Earne thy
living with the sweat of thy brows, for then they earnd their dying with the
sweat of their brows. It was enough if a fat man did but trusse his points, to
turn him over the perch: mother Cornelius tub why it was like hell, he that
came into it, never came out of it. Cooks that stand continually basting
their faces before the fire, were now all cashierd with this sweat into
kitchin-stuffe: their hall fell in to the kings hands for want of one of the
trade to uphold it. Felt-makers and furriers, what the one with the hot steame
of their w^ell new taken out of the pan, and the other with the contagious
heat of their slaughter budge and conny-skins, died more thick than of the
pestilence: I have seen an old woman at that season having three chins, wipe
them all away one after another, as they melted to water, and left her self
nothing of a mouth but an upper chap. Look how in May or the heat of Summer we
lay butter in water for fear it should melte away, so then were men feign to
wet their clothes in water as Diers do, and hide themselves in wells from the
heat of the Sun.

Then happy was he that was an ass, for nothing will kill an ass but cold,
and none did but with extreme heat, The fishes called Sea-starres, that
burn one another by excessive heat, were not so contagious as one man that
had the sweat was to another. Masons paid nothing for hair to mix their lime,
nor glouers to stuff their balls with, for then they had it for nothing, it
dropped off men's heads and beardes faster than any Barber could shave it. O if
hair breeches had then been in fashion, what a fine world had it been for
Taylers, and so it was a fine world for Tailers nevertheless, for he that
could make a garment sleightest and thinnest, carried it away, Cutters I can
tell you, then stood upon it, to have their trade one of the twelve Companies,
for who was it then that would not have his doublet cut to the skin, and his
shirt cut into it to, to make it more cold, It was as much as a man's life was
worth, once to name a freeze ierken, it was treason for a fat gross man to
come within five miles of the court, I heard where they did up all in one
family, and not a mothers child escapt, insomuch as they had but an Irish rug
locked up in a press, and not laid upon any bed neither, if those that were
sick of this malady slept on it* they never wakt more. Physicians with their
simples, in this case wexe simple fellows, and knew not which way to bestir
them. Galen might go shoo the gander for any good he could do, his
secretaryes had s^ long called him divine, that now he had lost all his virtue
upon earth. Hippocrates might well help Almanac makers, but here he had not a
word to say, a man might sooner catch the sweat with plodding over him to no
end, than cure the sweat with any of his impotent principles. Paracelsus with
his spirit of the butterie, and his spirits of minerals, could not so much as
say, God amend him, to the matter. Plus erat in artisice quam art, there was
more infection in the physician himself than his art could cure. This
mortality first began amongst old men, for they taking a pride to have their
breasts loose basted with tedious beards, kept their houses so hot with these
hairy excrements, that not so much but their very walls sweat out salt Peter,
with the smoothering perplexity, nay a number of them had marvelous hot
breaths, which sticking in the briers of their bushie beardes, could not
choose, but (as close air long imprisoned) engender corruption. Wiser was our
brother Banks of these latter dais, who made his iugling horse a cut, for
fear if at any time he should foist, the stink sticking in his thick
bushie tail might be noisome to his au^ditors. Should I tell you how many
purseuants with red noses, and sargeants with precious faces shrunk away in
this sweat, you would not believe me. Even as the Salamander with his very
sight blasteth apples on the trees, so a purseuant or a sargeant at this
present, with the very reflexe of his fiery facias, was able to spoil a man a
far of. In some places of the world there is no shadow of the sun, Diebus
illis if it had been so in England, the generation of Brute had died all and
some. To knit up this description in a pursnet, so fervent and scorching was
the burning air which increased then, that the most blessed man then alive,
would have thought that God had done fairly by him if he had turnde him to a
goat, for goats take breath not at the mouth or nose only, but at ye ears
also.

Take breath how they would, I vowed to tarry no longer amongst them. As at
Turwin I was a d^mie soldier in jest, so now I became a martiallist in
earnest. Over sea with my implements I got me, where hearing the king of France
and the Swizers were together by the ears, I made toward them as fast as I
could, thinking to thrust my self into that faction that was strongest. It was
my good luck or my ill, I know not which, to come just to ye fighting of the
battle, where I saw a wonderful spectacle of blood shed on both sides, here
the unwieldy swizers wallowing in their gore, like an ox in his doung, there
the sprightly French sprawling and turning on the stained grass, like a roach
new taken out of the stream, all the ground was strewed as thick with battle
axes, as the carpenters yard with chips. The plain appeared like a quagmire,
ouerspread as it was with trampled dead bodies. In one place might you behold
a heap of dead murdered men overwhelmed with a falling steed, in stead of a
tomb stone, in another place a bundle of bodies fettered together in their
own bowels, and as the tyrant Roman Emperors used to tie condemned living
caitifes face to face to dead corses, so were the half living here mixed with
squeazed carcases long putrifide. Any man might give arms that was an actor
in that battle, for there were more arms and legs scattered in the field that
day, than will be gathered up till dooms day, the French king himself in
this conflict was much disstressed, the brains of his own men sprinkled in
his face, thrice was his courser slain under him, and thrice was he struck
on the breast with a spear, but in the end, by the help of the Uenetians, the
Heluesians or Swizers were subdude, and he crowned victor, a peace concluded,
and the city of Millain surrendered unto him, as a pledge of reconciliation.
That war thus blown over, and the several bands dissolved, like a ccow that
still follows aloof where there is carrion, I flew me over to Munster in
Germany, which an Anabaptisticall brother named John Leiden kept at that
instant against the Emperor and the Duke of Saxony. Here I was in good hope to
set up my staff for some reasonable time, deeming that no City would drive it
to a slege except they were able to hold out, and pretily well had these
Munsterians held out, for they kept the Emperor and the Duke of Saxony sound
play for the space of a year, and longer would have done, but that dame famine
came amongst them, whereupon they were forced by messengers to agree upon a
day of fight, when according to their anabaptisticall error they might be all
new christened in their own blood.

That day come, flourishing entered John Leiden the betcher into the field,
with a scarf made of lists, like a bow-case, a cross on his thread button, a
round twisted Tailers cushion buckled like a tancard bearers device to his
shoulders for a target, the pike whereof was a pack needle, a tough prentises
club for his spear, and great brewers cow on his back for a corslet, and on
his head for a helmet a huge high shoo with the bottom turned upward, embossed
as full of bobnailes as ever it might stick, his men were all base handie
crafts, as cobblers, and curriers, and tinkers, whereof some had bars of
iron, some hatchets, some cool staves, some dung forks some spades some
mattockes, some wood knives, some addises for their weapons, he that was best
provided, had but a piece of a rustie brown bill bravely fringed with cob
webbes to fight for him: perchance here and there you might see a fellow that
had a canker eaten scul on his head, which served him and his ancestors for a
chamber pot two hundred years, and another that had bent a couple of iron
dripping pans armour-wise, to fence his back and his belly, another that had
thrust a pair of dry old boots as a breast plate before his belly of his
doublet, because he would not be dangerously hurt: another that had twilted all
his trosse full of counters, thinking if the enemy should take him, he would
mistake them for gold, and so save his life for his money. Uery devout asses
they were, for all they were so duns^ically set forth, and such as thought they
knew as much of Gods mind as richer men, why inspiration was their ordinary
familiar, and buzde in their ears like a Be in a box every hour what news
from heaven, hell, and the land of whipper ginnie, displease them who durst,
he should have his mittimus to damnation ex tempore, they would vaunt there
was not a pease difference twixt them and the Apostles, they were as poor as
they, of as base trades as they, and no more inspired than they, and with God
there is no respect of persons, only herein may seem some little diversity
to lurk, that Peter wore a sword, and they count it flat hell fire for any man
to wear a dagger, nay so grounded and grauelled were they in this opinion,
that now when they should come to battle, there is nere a one of them would bring a
blade (no not an onion blade) about him, to die for it. It was not lawful
said they, for any man to draw the sword but the magistrate, and in
fidelity, (which I had welnigh forgot) Jack Leiden their magistrate had the
image or likeness of a piece of a rustie sword like a lusty lad by his side,
now I remember me, it was but a foil neither, and he wore it, to show that he
should have the foil of his enemies, which might have bin an oracle for his
two-hande interpretation. Quid plura, his battle is pitched, by pitched, I do
not mean set in order, for that was far from their order, only as sailers do
pitch their apparel, to make it storme-proofe, so had most of them pitched
their patcht clothes, to make them impearceable. A nearer way than to be at the
charges of armor by half: and in another sort he might be said to have
pitched ye field, for he had pitched or set up his rest whither to fly if they
were discomfited. Peace, peace there in the belfrie, service begins, upon their
knees before they join, falls John Leiden and his fraternity very devoutly,
they pray, they houle, they expostulate with God to grant them victory, and use
such unspeakable vehemence, a man would think them the only well bent men
under heaven, wherein let me dilate a little more gravely than the nature of
this history requires, or will be expected of so young a practitioner in
divinity: that not those that intermissiuely cry, Lord open unto us, Lord
open unto us, enter first into the kingdom of heaven, that not the greatest
professors have the greatest portion in grace, that all is not gold that
glisters. When Christ said, the kingdom of heaven must suffer violence, he
meant hot the violence of long babbling prayers to no purpose, nor the violence
of tedious inuectiue sermons without wit, but the violence of faith, the
violence of good works, the violence of patient suffering. The ignorant arise
and snatch the kingdom of heaven to themselves with greedines, when we with
all our learning sink down into hell. Where did Peter and John in the third
of the Acts, find the lame cripple but in the gate of the temple called
beautiful, in the beautifullest gates of our temple, in the forefront of
professors, are many lame cripples, lame in life, lame in good works, lame in
every thing, yet will they always sit at the gates of the temple, none be
more forward tha^ they to enter into matters of reformation, yet none more
behind hand to entee into the true temple of the Lord by the gates of good
life. You may object, that those which I speak against, are more diligent in
reading the scriptures, more careful to resort unto sermons, more sober in
their looks and modest in their attire than any else: but I pray you let me
answer you. Does not Christ say, that before the latter day the Sun shall
be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, where of what may the meaning
be, but that the glorious sun of the gospel shall be eclipsed with the dim
cloud of dissimulation, that that which is the brightest planet of salvation,
shall be a means of error and darkness: and the moon shall be turned into
blood, those that shine fairest, make the simplest show, seem most to favor
religion, shall rent out the bowels of the Church, be turned into blood, and
all this shall come to pass, before the notable day of the Lord, whereof this
age is the eve. Let me use a more familiar example since the heat of a great
number has outraged so excessiuely. Did not the devil lead Christ to the
pinnacle or highest part of the temple to tempt him, if he lead Christ, he will
lead a whole army of hypocrites to the top or highest part of the temple,
the highest step of religion and holiness, to seduce them and subvert them. I
say unto you that which this our tempted savior with many other words besought
his disciples, save your selves from this froward generation. Uerily, verily
the servant is not greater than his master: verily, verily, sinful men are not
holier than holy Jesus their maker. That holy Jesus again repeats this holy
sentence, Remember the words I said unto you, the servant is not holier or
greater than his master, as if he should say, remember then, imprint in your
memory your pride and singularity will make you forget them, the effects of
them many years hence will come to pass. Whosoever will seek to save his
soul shall loose it, whosoever sakes by headlong means to enter into heaven,
and disanull Gods ordinance, shall with ye giants that thought to scale heaven
in contempt of Jupiter, be overwhelmed with mount Essa and Pe^ion, and dwell
with the devil in eternal dissolution. Though the high priests office was
expired, when Paul said unto one of the^, God rebuke thee thou painted
sepulcher, yet when a stander by reproved him saying, Reuilest thou the high
priest? he repented and asked forgiveness. That which I suppose I do not
grant, the lawfulnes of the authority they oppose themselves against, is
sufficiently proved, far be it my vnder-age arguments should intrude
themselves as a green weak prop to support so high a building, let it
suffice, if you know Christ, you know his father also, but a great number of
you with Philip have been long with Christ, and have not known him, have long
professed your selves Christians, and not known his true ministers, you follow
the French and Scotitsh fashion and faction, and in all points are like the
Swizers, Qui quaerunt cum quocunque cadunt, that seek with what nation they
may first miscarrie.

In the days of Nero there was an odd fellow that had found out an exquisite
way to make glass as hammer proof as gold: shall I say, that the like
experiment he made upon glass, we have practiced on the Gospeil? I,
confidently will I, we have found out a slight to hammer it to any heresy
whatsoever, but those furnaces of falsehood and hammer heads of heresy must be
dissolved and broken as his was, or else I fear me the false glittering glass
of innovation will be better esteemed of than the ancient gold of the gospel.
The fault of faults is this, that your dead borne faith is begotten by to too
infant fathers. Cato one of the wisest men Roman histories canonized, was not
borne till his father was four score years old, none can be a perfect father
of faith and beget men aright unto God, but those that are aged in experience,
have many years imprinted in their mild conversation, and have with Zacheus
sold all their possessions of vanities, to enjoy the sweet fellowshippe, not of
the humane but spiritual messiah, Ministers and pastors sell away your sects
and schisms to the decrepite Churches in contention beyond sea, they have been
so long inured to war both about matters of religion and regiment, that now
they have no peace of mind, but in troubling all other men's peace. Because the
poverty of their provinces will allow them no proportionable maintenance for
higher callings of ecclesiastical magistrates, they would reduce us to the
president of their rebellious persecuted beggerie: much like the sect of
philosophers called cinikes, who when they saw they ware borne to no lands or
possessions, nor had any possible means to support their desperate estates,
but they must live despised and in misery do what they could, they plotted
and consulted with themselves how to make their poverty better esteemed of
than rich dominion and sovereignty. The vpshot of their plotting and
consultation was this, that they would live to themselves, scorning the very
breath or company of all men, they professed (according to ye rate of their
lands) voluntary poverty, thin fare and lying hard, contemning and inueighing
against al those as brute beasts whatsoever whom the world had given any
reputation for riches or prosperity. Diogenes was one of the first and foremost
of the ringleaders of this rustie moros^tie, and he for all his nice dogged
disposition, and blunt deriding of worldly dross, and the gross felycitie of
fools, was taken notwithstanding a little after very fairly coining money in
his cell: so fares it up and down with our cinicall reformed foreign Churches,
they will digest no grapes of great Bishoprikes forsooth, because they cannot
tell how to come by them, they must shape their cotes good men acding to their
cloth, and do as they may, not as they would, yet they must give us leave
here in England that are their honest neighbors, if we have more cloth than
they, to make our garment some what larger. What was the foundation or
groundwork of this dismal declining of Munster, but the banishing of their
Bishop, their confiscating and casting lots for Church livings, as the
soldiers cast lots for Christ's garments, and in short terms, their making
the house of God a den of thieves. The house of God a number of hungry church
robbers in these days have made a den of thieves. Thieves spend loosely what
they have got lightly, sacrilege is no sure inheritance, Dionisius was nere
the richer for robbing Jupiter of his golden coat, he was driven in the end to
play the schoolmaster at Corinth. The name of religion, be it good or bad that
is ruinated, God never suffers unrevenged, I Will say of it as Ovid said of
Eunuchs: Qui primus pueris genitalia membra recidit
Vulnera quae fecit debuit ipse pati.
Who first depriude young boys of their b^st part,
With self same wounds he gave he ought to smart.


So would he that first gelt religion or Church-liuings had bin first gelt
himself or never lived, Cardinal Wolsey is the man I aim at, Qui in suas
poenas ingeniosus erat, first gave others a light to his own overthrow. How it
prospered with him and his instruments that after wrought for themselves.
Chronicles largely report, though not apply, and some parcel of their
punishment yet unpaid, I do not doubt but will be required of their
posterity.

To go forward with my story of the overthrow of that usurper John Leiden, he
and all his army (as I said before) falling prostrate on their faces, and
fervently given over to prayer, determined never to cease, or leave soliciting
of God, till he had showed them from heaven some manifest miracle of success.
Note that it was a general received tradition both with I. Leiden and all the
crew of Cnipperdolings and Muncers, if God at any time at their vehement
outcries and clamors did not condescend to their requests, to rail on him and
curse him to his face, to dispute with him, and argue him of injustice, for not
being so good as his word with them, and to urge his many promises in the
scripture against him: so that they did not serve God simply, but that he
should serve their turns, and after that tenure are many content to serve as
bondmen to save the danger of hanging: but he that serves God aright, whose
upright conscience has for his mot, Amor est mihi causa sequendi, I serve
because I love: he says, Ego te potius domine quam tua dona sequar, I Will rather
follow thee O Lord, for thine own sake, than for any covetous respect of that
thou can do for me, Christ would have no folowers, but such as forsook all
and follow him, such as forsake all their own desires, such as abandon all
expectations of reward in this world, such as neglected and contemned their
lives, their wives and children in comparison of him, and were content to take
up their cross and follow him. These Anabaptists had not yet forsook all and
followed Christ, they had not forsook their own desires of revenge and
innovation, they had not abandoned their expectation of the spoil of their
enemies, they regarded their lives, they looked after their wives and children,
they took not up their cross of humility and followed him, but would cross
him, vp^raid him, and set him at naught, if he assured not by some sign their
prayers and supplications. Deteriora sequuntur, they followed God as daring him.
God heard their prayers, Quod petitur poena est, It was their speedy
punishment that they praide for. Lo according to the sum of their impudent
supplications, a sign in the heavens appeard the glorious sign of the
rainbow, which agreed just with the sign of their ensign that was a rainbowe
likewise. Whereupon assuring themselves of victory, (Miseri quod volunt,
facile credunt) that which wretches would have they easily believe. With
shoutes and clamours they presently ran headlong on their well deserved
confusion. Pitiful and lamentable was their vnpittied and well performed
slaughter. To see even a Bear, (which is the most cruellest of all beasts) to
too bloudily ouermatcht, and deformedly rent in pieces by an unconscionable
number of curres, it would move compassion against kind, and make those that
beholding him at the stake yet vncoayte with, wished him a suitable death to his
ugly shape, now to recall their hard hearted wishes, and mean him suffering as
a mild beast, in comparison of the foul mouthed mastifes his butchers: even
such compassion did those ouermatcht ungracious M^nsterians obtain of many
indifferent eyes, who now thought them suffering, to be as sheep brought
innocent to the shambles, when as before they deemed them as a number of wolves
up in arms against the shepheardes. The Emperyalles themselves that were their
executioners (like a Father that weeps when he beats his child, yet still
weeps and still beats) not without much ruth and sorrow prosecuted that
lamentable massacre, yet drumms and trumpets sounding nothing but stearne
revenge in their ears, made them so eager, that their hands had no leafure to
ask counsel of their effeminate eyes, their swords, their pikes, their bills,
their bows, their caleeuers slew, empierced, knocked down, shot thorough, and
overthrew as many men every minute of the battle, as there falls ears of
corn before the sith at one blow, yet all their weapons so slaying,
empiercing, knocking down, shooting through, overthrowing, dissoule joined not
half so many, as the hailing thunder of their great ordenance: so ordinary at
every footstep was the imbrument of iron in blood, that one could hardly
discern heads from bullettes, or clottered hair from mangled flesh hung with
gore.

This tale must at one time or other give up the ghost, and as good now as stay
longer, I would gladly rid my hands of it cleanly if I could tell how, for what
with talking of cobblers, and tinkers, and r^apemakers, and botchers, and
durtdaubers, the mark is clean gone out of my muses mouth, and I am as it
were more than dunsified twixt divinity and poetry. What is there more as
touching this tragedy that you would be resolved of? say quickly, for now my
pen is got upon his feet again: how I. Leiden did, is yt it? he did like a
dog, he was hanged and the halter paid for. For his companions, do they trouble
you? I can tell you they troubled some men before, for they were all killed, and
none escapt, no not so much as one to tell the tale of the rainbow. Hear what
it is to be Anabaptists, to be puritans, to be villains, you may be counted
illuminate botchers for a while, but your end will be Good people pray for me.

With the tragical catastrophe of this munsterian conflict, did I cashier the
new vocation of my caualiership. There was no more honorable wars in
christendom then toward, wherefore after I had learned to be half an hour
in bidding a man boniure in germane sunonimas, I traveled along the cuntrie
toward England as fast as I could. What with wagons and bare tentoes having
attained to Middleborough (good Lord see the changing chances of us knight
arrant infants) I met with the right honorable Lord Henry Howard Earl of
Surrey my late master, Jesus I was yerswaded I s^oulde not be more glad to see
heaven than I was to see him, O it was a right noble Lord, liberality it
self. (if in this iron age there were any such creature as liberality left on
the earth) a prince in content because a Poet without peer. Destiny never
defames her self but when she lets an excellent poet die: if there be any
spark of Adams paradized perfection yet emberd up in the breasts of mortal
men, certainly God has bestowed that his perfectest image on poets. None come
so near to God in wit, none more contemn the world, vatis auarus non temere
est animus, says Horace, versus amat, hoc studet vnum, Seldom have you seen
any Poet possessed with avarice, only verses he loves, nothing else he
delights in: and as they contemn the world, so contrarily of the mechanical
world are none more contemned. Despised they are of the world, because they
are not of the world: their thoughts are exalted above the world of ignorance
and all earthly conceits.

As sweet angelical queristers they are continually conversant in the heaven
of arts, heaven it self is but the highest height of knowledge, he that
knows himself and all things else, knows the means to be happy: happy,
thrice happy are they whom God has doubled his spirit upon, and given a
double soul unto to be Poets. My heroical master exceeded in this
supernatural kind of wit, he entertained no gross earthly spirit of
avarice, nor weak womanly spirit of pusillanimity and fear that are fained to
be of the water, but admirable, airie, and fiery spirits, full of freedom,
magnanimity and bountihood. Let me not speak any more of his
accomplishments, for fear I spend al my spirits in praising him and leave my
self no vigor of wit, or effects of a soul to go forward with my history.
Having thus met him I so much adored, no interpleading was there of opposite
occasions, but back I must return and bear half stakes with him in the
lotterie of travel. I was not altogether unwilling to walk along with such a
good purse-bearer, yet musing what changeable humor had so suddenly seduced him
from his native soil to seek out needless perils in these parts beyond sea,
one night very boldly I demanded of him the reason that moved him thereto.

Ah quoth he, my little Page, full little can thou perceive how fa^re
metamorphozed I am from my self, since I last saw thee. There is a little God
called Love, that will not be worshipped of any leaden brains, one that
proclaims himself sole king and Emperor of pearcing eyes, and chief
sovereign of soft hearts, he it is that exercising his empire in my eyes,
has exorcized and clean coniured me from my content. Thou know stately
Geraldine, too stately I fear for me to do homage to her statue or shrine,
she it is that is come out of Italy to bewitch all the wise men of England,
upon Queen Katherine Dowager she waits, that has a dowry of beauty
sufficient to make her wooed of the greatest kings in christendom. Her high
exalted sun beams have set the phoenix neast of my breast on fire, and I my
self have brought Arabian spiceries of sweet passions and praises, to furnish
out the funeral flame of my folly. Those who were condemned to be smoothered
to death by sinking down into the soft bottom of an high built bed of
roses, never did so sweet a death as I should die, if her rose colored
disdain were my deaths-man. Oh thrice imperial Hampton court, Cupids
inchaunted castle, the place where I first saw the perfect omnipotence of the
Almighty expressed in mortality, it is thou alone, that tithing all other men
solace in thy pleasant situation, affoordest me nothing but an excellent
begotten sorrow out of the chief treasury of all thy recreations.

Dear Wilton, understand that there it was where I first set eye on my more
than celestial Geraldine. Seeing her I admired her, all the whole receptacle
of my sight was uninhabited with her rare worth. Long suit and incessant
protestations got me the grace to be entertained. Did never unloving servant so
prentise like obey his never pleased mistres, as I did her. My life, my wealth,
my friends, had all their destiny depending on her command. Upon a time I
was determined to travel, the fame of Italy, and an especial affection I had
unto Poetry my second mistres, for which Italy was so famous, had wholly
ravished me unto it. There was no dehortment from it, but needs the other I
would, wherefore coming to my mistres as she was then walking with other
Ladies of estate in paradise at Hampton court, I most humbly besought her of
favor, that she would give me so much gracious leave to absent my self from
her service, as to travel a year or two into Italy. She very discreetly
answered me, that if my love were so hot as I had often avouched, I did very
well to apply the plaster of absence unto it, for absence, as they say,
causes forgetfulness, yet nevertheless since it is Italy my native Country
you are so desirous to see, I am the more willing to make my will yours. I pete
Italiam, go and seek Italy with Aenaeas, but he more true than Aenaeas, I
hope that kind wit-cherishing climate will work no change in so witty a
breast. No country of mine shall it be more, if it conspire with thee, in any
new love against me. One charge I will give thee, and let it be rather a
request than a charge: When thou come to Florence (the fair City from
whence I fetched the pride of my birth) by an open challenge defend my beauty
against all comers.

Thou have that honorable carryage in arms, that it shall be no discredit
for me to bequeath all the glory of my beauty to thy well governed arm.
Feign would I be known where I was borne, feign would I have thee known
where fame sits in her chiefest theater. Farewell, forget me not, continued
deserts will eternize me unto thee, thy full wishes shall be expired when thy
travel shall be once ended.

Here did tears step out before words, and intercepted the course of my
kind conceived speech, even as wind is allayed with rain: with heart
s^alding sighs I confirmed her parting request, and vowed my self hers, while
living heat allowed me to be mine own, Hinc illae lachrimae, here hence
proceeds the whole cause of my peregrination.

Not a little was I delighted with this unexpected love story, especially from a
mouth out of which was naught wont to march but stern precepts of gravity and
modesty. I swear unto you I thought his company the better by a thousand^
rrownes, because he had discarded those nice terms of chastity and
continency. Now I beseech God love me so well as I love a plain dealing man,
earth is earth, flesh is flesh, earth will to earth, and flesh unto flesh,
frail earth, frail flesh, who can keep you from the work of your creation.

Dismissing this fruitless annotation pro et contra, toward Uenice we
progrest, and took Roterdam in our way, that was clean out of our way,
there we met with aged learninges chief ornament, that abundant and
superingenious clarke Erasmus, as also with merry sir Thomas Moore our
Countrieman, who was come purposely over a little before us, to visit the said
grave father Erasmus: what talk, what conference we had then, it were here
superfluous to rehearse, but this I can assure you, Erasmus in all his speeches
seemed so much to mislike the indiscretion of prin^es in preferring of
parasites and fools, that he decreed with himself to swim with the stream,
and write a book forthwith in commendation of folly. Quick witted sir Thomas
Moore traueld in a clean contrary province, for he seeing most
commonwealths corrupted by ill custom, and that principalities were nothing
but great piracies, which gotten by violence and murder, were maintained by
private undermining and bloodshed, that in the chiefest flourishing kingdoms
there was no equal or well divided weal one with another, but a manifest
conspiracy of rich men against poor men, procuring their own unlawful
commodities under the name and interest of the commonwealth: he concluded with
himself to lay down a perfect plot of a commonwealth or government, which he
would entitle his Vtopia. So left we them to prosecute their discontented
studies, and made our next journey to Wittenberg.

At the very point of our entrance ^uto Wittenberg, we were spectators of a
very solemn scolasticall entertaiment of the Duke of Saxony thither. Whom
because he was the chief patron of their university, and had took Luthers
part in banishing the mass and all like papal jurisdiction out of their
town, they croucht unto extremely. The chief ceremonies of their
entertainment were these: first, the heads of their university, (they were
great heads of certainty) met him in their hooded hypocrisy and doctorly
accoustrements, secundum formam statuti, where by the Orator of the
university, whose pickerdeuant was very plentifully be sprinkled with rose
water, a very learned or rather ruthful Oration was delivered (for it raind
all the while) signifieng thus much, that it was al by patch and by piece meal
stolen out of Tully, and he must pardon them, though in emptying their phrase
books, the air emptied his intrailes, for they did it not in any ostentation
of wit (which they had not) but to show the extraordinary good will they bare
the Duke, (to have him stand in the rain till he was thorough wet) a thousand
quemadmodums and quapropters he came over him with, every sentence he concluded
with Esse posse videatur: through all the nine worthies he ran with praising
and comparing him, Nestors years he assured him off under the broad seal of
their supplications, and with that crow trodden verse in Uirgil, Dum iuga
montis aper, he packt up his pipes, and cride dixi.

That pageant ouerpast, there rusht upon him a miserable rabblement of junior
graduats, that all crid out upon him mightily in their gibrige like a company
of beggars, God save your grace, God save your grace, Jesus preserve your
highness, though it be but for an hour.

Some three half penny worth of Latin here also had he thrown at his face,
but it was choice stuff I can tell you, as there is a choice even amongst
rags gathered up from the dunghill. At the towns end met him the burgers and
dunstical incorporationers of Wittenberg in their distinguished liueries, their
distinguished liuerie faces I mean, for they were mest of them hot liuered
dronkards, and had all the coat colors of sanguin, purple, crimson, copper,
carnation that were to be had in their countenaunces. Filthy knaves, no cost
had they bestowed on the town for his welcome, saving new painted their houghs
and bous^ng houses, which commonly are built fayrer than their Churches, and
over their gates set the town arms, which sounded gulping after this sort,
Vanhotten, slotten, irk bloshen glotten gelderlike: what ever the words were,
the sense was this, Good drink is a medicine for all diseases.

A bursten belly inkhorne orator called Vanderhulke, they picked out to present
him with an oration, one that had a sulpherous big swollen large face, like a
Saracen, eyes like two kentish oysters, a month that opened as wide every time
he spoke, as one of those old knit trap doors, a beard as though it had bin
made of a birds neast plucked in pieces, which consists of straw, hair, and
dirt mixed together. He was apparelled in black leather new licourd, and a
short gown without any gathering in the back, faced before and behind with a
boistrous Bear skin, and a red nightcap on his head. To this purport and
effect was this bro^cing double beer Oration.

Right noble Duke ( ideo nobilis quasi no bilis) for you have no bile or cholar
in you, know that our present incorporation of Wittenberg, by me the tounge-man
of their thankfulness, a townesman by birth, a free Germane by nature, an
orator by art, and a scriuener by education, in all obedience and chastity,
most bountifully bid you welcome to Wittenberg: welcome said I? O orificiall
rethorike wipe thy everlasting mouth, and afford me a more Indian metaphor
than that, for the brave princely blood of a Saxon. Oratorie vncaske the bard
hutch of thy complements, and with the triumphantest troop in thy treasury
do trewage unto him. What impotent speech with his eight parts may not
specify this inestimable gift holding his peace, shall as it were (with
tears I speak it) do whereby as it may seem or appear, to manifest or
declare and yet it is, and yet it is not, and yet it may be a diminitiue
oblation meritorious to your high pusillanimitie and indignity. Why should I
go gadding and filgigging after firking flantado Amphibologies, wit is wit,
and good will is good will. With all the wit I have, I here according to the
premises, offer up unto you the Cities general good will, which is a gilded
Can, in manner and form following, for you and the heirs of your body
lawfully begotten, to drink healths in. The scolasticall squitter books clout
you up cannopies and footclothes of verses. We that are good fellows, and
live as merry as cup and can, will not verse upon you as they do, but must do
as we can, and entertain you if it be but with a plain empty Can. He has
learning enough that has learnd to drink to his first man.

Gentle Duke, without paradox be it spoken, thy horses at our own proper costs
and charges shall kneed up to the knees all the while thou art here in spruce
beer and lubeck licour. Not a dog thou bringst with thee but shall be
banketted with rhenish wine and sturgion. On our shoulders we wear no lamb
skin or miniuer like these academikes, yet we can drink to the confusion of
all thy enemies. Good lambes-wooll have we for their lamb skins, and for their
miniuer, large minerals in our coffers. Mechanical men they call us, and not
amiss, for most of us being Maechi, yt is, cuckolds and whooremasters, fetch
our antiquity from the temple of Maecha, where Mahomet is hung up. Three parts
of the world, America, Affrike and Asia, are of this our mechanike religion.
Nero when he crid O quantus artifex pereo, professed himself of our freedom.
Insomuch as Artifex is a citizen or crafts-man, as well as Carnifex a scholar
or hangman. Pass on by leave into the precincts of our abomination. Beny
Duke, frolike in our bower, and persuade thy self that even as garlike has
three properties, to make a man wink, drink, and stink, so we will wink on
thy imperfections, drink to thy favorites, and all thy foes shall stink
before us. So be it. Farewell.

The Duke laughed not a little at this ridiculous oration, but that very night,
as great an ironicall occasion was ministered, for he was bidden to one of the
chief schools to a Comedy handled by scollers. Acolastus the prodigal
child was the name of it, which was so filthily acted, so leathernly set
forth, as would have moved laughter in Heraclitus. One as if he had been
playning a clay floor stampingly troade the stage so hard with his feet,
that I thought verily he had resolved to do the Carpenter that set it up
some utter shame. Another floung his arms like cudgelles at a pear tree, in
so much as it was mightily dreaded that he would strike the candles that hung
above their heads out of their sockets, and leave them all dark. Another did
nothing but wink and make faces. There was a parasite, and he with clapping
his hands and thripping his fingers seemed to dance an antike to and fro. The
only thing they did well, was the prodigal childs hunger, most of their
scholars being hungerly kept, and surely you would have said they had been
brought up in hogs academi^ to learn to eat acornes, if you had seen how
sedulously they fell to them. Not a jest had they to keep their auditors from
sleep but of swill and draffe, yes now and then the servant put his hand into
the dish before his master, and almost choakt himself, eating slouenly and
rauenously to cause sport.

The next day they had solemn disputations, where Luther and Carolostadius
scolded level coile. A mass of words I wot well they heapt up against the
maste and the Pope, but farther perticulars of their disputations I remember
not. I thought verily they would have worried one another with words, they
were so earnest and vehement. Luther had the louder voice, Carolostadius went
beyond him in beating and bounsing with his fists, Quae supra nos nihil ad nos.
They uttered nothing to make a man laugh, therefore I will leave the^. Mary
their outward iestures now and then would affoorde a man a morsel of mirth: of
those two I mean not so much, as of all the other train of opponents and
respondents. One peckte like a crane with his forefinger at every half
syllable he brought forth, and nodded with his nose like an old singing man,
teaching a young querister to keep time. Another would be sure to wipe his
mouth with his handkercher at the end of every full point. And ever when he
thought he had cast a figure so curiously, as he diu'de over head and ears
into his auditors admiration, he would take occasion to stroke up his hair,
and twine up his mustachios twice or thrice over while they might have leisure
to applaud him. A third wauerd and wagled ^is head, like a proud horse playing
with his bridle, or as I have seen some fantastical swimmer, at every
stroke, train his chin side-long over his left shoulder. A fourth swet and
foamed at the mouth, for very anger his adversary had denied that part of his
sillogisme which he was not prepared to answer. A fifth spread his arms like
an usher that goes before to make room, and thript with his finger and his
thumb when he thought he had tickled it with a conclusion. A sixth hung down
his countenance like a sheep, and stutted and slauered very pitifully when
his invention was slept aside out of the way. A seventh gaspt and gapt for
wind, and grened in his pronunciation as if he were hard bound with some bad
argument. Gross plodders they were all, that had some learning and reading,
but no wit to make use of it. They imagined the Duke took the greatest
pleasure and contentment under heaven to hear them speak Latin, and as long
as they talked nothing but Tully he was bound to attend them. A most vain thing
it is in many universities at this day, that they count him excellent
eloquent, who steals not whole phrases but whole pages out of Tully. If of a
number of shreds of his sentences he can shape an oration, from all the world
he carries it away, although in truth it be no more than a fools coat of
many colors. No invention or matter have they of their own, but tacke up a
style of his stale galimafries. The leaden headed Germans first began this,
and we Englishmen have surfetted of their absurd imitation. I pity Nizolius
that had nothing to do, but pick thrids ends out of an old ouerworne garment.

This is but by the way, we must look back to our disp^^a^ts. One amongst
the rest thinking to be more conceited (...) ^is fellows, seeing the Duke have
a dog he loved well, (...) sa^^ by him on the tarras, converted all his
oration to him (...) not a hair of his tail but he kembd out with
comparisons. (...) ^o have courted him if he were a hitch had bin very
suspicious. Another commented and descanted on the Dukes staff, new tipping it
with many queint epishites. Some cast his nativity, and promised him he should
not die till the day of judgment. Omitting further superfluities of this
stamp^, in this general assembly we found intermixed that abundant scholar
Cornelius Agrippa. At that time he bare the fame to be the greatest coniurer in
Christendom. Scoto that did the iugling tricks here before the Queen, never
came near him one quarter in magic reputation. The Doctors of Wittenberg
doting on the rumor that went of him, desired him before the Duke and them to
do something extraordinary memorable.

One requested to see pleasant Plautus, and that he would show them in what
habit he went, and with what countenance he looked, when he ground corn in
the mill. Another had half a months mind to Ovid and his hook nose. Erasmus
who was not wanting to that honorable meeting, requested to see Tully in that
same grace and majesty he pleaded his Oration pro Roscio Amerino. Affirming,
that til in rerson he beheld his importunity of pleading, he would not be
persuaded any man could carry away a manifest case with rethorike, so
straungely. To Erasmus petition he easily condiscended, and willing the
Doctors at such an hour to hold their convocation, and every one to keep
him in his place without moving: at the time prefixed in entered Tully,
ascended his pleading place, and declaimed verbatim the fornamed Oration, but
with such astonishing amazement, with such fervent exaltation of spirit, with
such soule-stirring iestures, that all his auditors were ready to install his
guilty client for a God.

Great was the concourse of glory Agrippa drew to him with this one feate.
And in deed he was so cloyed with men which came to behold him, that he was
feign sooner than he would, to return to the Emperors court from whence he
came, and leave Wittenberg before he would. With him we traveled along,
having purchased his acquaintance a little before. By the way as we went, my
master and I agreed to change names. It was concluded betwixt us, that I
should be the Earl of Surrie, and he my man, only because in his own
person, which he would not have reproched, he meant to take more liberty of
behavior, As for my carryage he knew he was to tune it at a key, either high
or low, or as he list.

To the Emperors Court we came, where our entertainment was every way
plentiful, carouses we had in whole galons in stead of quart pots. Not a
health was given us but contained well near a hogshead. The customs of the
Country we were eager to be instructed in, but nothing we could learn but
this, that ever at the Emperors coronation there is an Ox roasted with a
stagge in the belly, and that stagge in his belly has a kidde, and that kidde
is stuf^e full of birds. Some courtiers to weary out time would tell us
further tales of Cornelius Agrippa, and how when sir Thomas Moore our country
man was there, he showed him the whole destruction of Troy in a dream. How
the Lord Cromwell being the kings Ambassador there, in like case, in a
perspectiue glass he set before his eyes, King Henry the eight with all his
Lords hunting in his forest at Windsore, and when he came into his study,
and was very urgent to be partaker of some rare experiment, that he might
report when he came into England, he wild him amongst two thousand great
books to take down which he list, and begin to read one line in any place,
and without book he would rehearse twenty leaves following. Cromwell did so,
and in many books tried him, when in every thing he exceeded his promise
and conquered his expectation. To Charles the fifte then Emperor, they
reported how he showed the nine worthies, David, Solomon, Gedeon, and the rest,
in that similitude and likeness that they lived upon earth. My master and I
having by the high way side gotten some reasonable familiarity with him, upon
this access of miracles imputed to him, resolved to request him something in
our own behalfes. I because I was his suborned Lord and master, desired him
to see the lively image of Geraldine his love in the glass, and what at that
instant she did, and with whom she was talking. He showed her us without
more ado, sick weeping on her bed, and resolved all into devout religion
for the absence of her Lord. At the sight thereof he could in no wise
^efrayne, though he had took upon him the condition of a servant, but he
must forthwith frame this extemporall Dittie. ALL soul, no earthly flesh, why
do thou fade,
All gold, no worthless dross, why lookst thou pale,
Sickness how dare thou one so fair invade,
Too base infirmity to work her bale.
Heaven be distemperd since she grieved pines,
Never be dry these my sad plaintiue lines.
Perch thou my spirit on her silver breasts,
And with their pain redoubled music beatings,
Let them toss thee to world where all toil rests,
Where bliss is subject to no fears defeatings,
Her praise I tune whose tongue does tune the spears,
And gets new muses in her hearers ears.
Stars fall to fetch fresh light from her rich eyes,
Her bright brow drives the Sun to clouds beneath,
Her hairs reflexe with red strakes paints the skies,
Sweet morn and evening deaw flows from her breath:
Phoebe rules tides, she my tears tides forth draws,
In her sick bed love sits and makes laws.
Her dainty limbs tinsell her silk soft sheets,
Her rose-crownd cheeks eclipse my dazeled sight,
O glass with too much joy my thoughts thou greets,
And yet thou shewst me day but by twie-light.
I Will kiss thee for the kindness I have felt,
Her lips one kiss would unto Nectar melt.


Though the Emperors court, and the extraordinary edifieng company of
Cornelius Agrippa might have been arguments of weight to have arested us a
little longer there, yet Italy still stuck as a great moat in my masters eye, he
thought he had traveled no farther tha^ Wales til he had took survey of that
Country which was such a curious moulder of wits.

To cut off blind ambages by the high way side, we made a long stride and got
to Uenice in short time, where having scarce looked about us, a precious
supernatural pandor, apparelled in all points like a gentleman, and having
half a dosen several languages in his purse, entertained us in our own
tongue very paraphrastically and eloquently, and maugre all other pretended
acquaintance, would have us in a violent kind of courtesy to be the guests of
his appointment. His name was Petro de campo Frego, a notable practitioner in
the policy of baudrie. The place whether be brought us, was a pernicious
curtizans house named Tabitha the Temptresses, a wench that could set as civil
a face on it, as chastities first martyr Lucrecia. What will you conceit to be
in any Saints house that was there to seek? Books, pic^ures, beads,
crucifixes, why there was a habe^^ashers shop of them in every chamber. I
warrant you should not see one set of her neckercher perverted or turned a
wrie, not a piece of a hair displast. On her beds there was not a wrinkle of
any wallowing to be found, her pillowes bare out as smooth as a groaning wives
belly, and yet she was a Turk and an infidel, and had more dooinges than all
her neighbors besides. Us for our money they used like Emperors, I was master
as you heard before, and my master the Earl was but as my chief man whom I
made my companion. So it happened (as iniquity will out at one time or other)
that she perceiving my expense had no more ventes than it should have, fell in
with my supposed servant my man, and gave him half a promise of marriage, if
he would help to make me a way, that she and he might enjoy the jewels and
wealth that I had.

The indifficultie of the condition thus she explaind unto him, her house stood
upon vaults, which in two hundred years together were never searched, who came
into her house none took notice of, his fellow servants that knew of his
masters abode there, should be all dispatched by him as from his master, into
sundry parts of the city about bu^^nes, and when they returned, answer
should be made that he lay not there any more, but had removed to Padua
since their departure, and thither they must follow him. Now (quoth she) if you
be disposed (...) into their hands, devised the means to make me immortal. I
could drink for anger till my head akt, to think how I was abused. Shall I
shame the devil and speak the truth, to prison was I sent as principal, amd
my master as accessarie, nor was it to a prison neither, but to the master of
the mints house who though partly our judge, and a most severe upright justice
in his own nature, extremely seemed to condole our ignorant estate, and without
all peradventure a present redress he had ministered, if certain of our
country men hearing an English earl was apprehended for coining, had not come
to visit us. An ill planet brought them thither, for at the first glance they
knew the servant of my secrecies to be the Earl of Surrey, and I (not worthy
to be named I) an outcast of his cup or his pantofles. Thence, thence sprung
the full period of our infelicitie. The master of the mint our whi^some
refresher and consolation now took part against us, he thought we had a mint
in our head of mischievous conspiracies against their state. Heavens bare
witness with us it was no so, (Heavens will not always come to witness when they
are called.)

To a straiter ward were we committed: that which we have imputatiuely
transgressed must be answered. O the heathen heigh pass, and the intrinsecall
legerdemain of our special approved good pandor Petro de Campo Frego. He
although he dipped in the same dish with us every day, seeming to labor our
cause very importunatly, and had interpreted for us to the state from ye
beginning, yet was one of those treacherous brother Trulies, and abused us most
clarkly. He interpreted to us with a pestilence, for whereas we stood
obstinatly upon it, we were wrongfully detained, and that it was naught but a
malicious practice of sinful Tabitha our late hostess, he by a fine
conny-catching corrupt translation, made us plainly to confess, and cry
Miserere, ere we had need of our neck-verse.

Detestable, detestable, that the flesh and the devil should deal by their
factors. I Will stand to it, there is not a pandor but has vo^ed paganism. The
devil himself is not such a devil as he, so be he perform his function
aright. He must have the back of an ass, the snout of an elephant, the wit of
a fox, and the teeth of a wolf, he must faune like a spaniell, crouch like a
Jew, li^re like a sheepbiter, If he be half a puritan, and have scripture
continually in his mouth, he spe^ds the letter. I can tell you it is a trade of
great promotion, and let none ever think to mount by service in sorain courts,
or creep near to seem magnifique Lords, if they be not seen in this science.
O it is the art of arts, and ten thousand times goes beyond the intelligencer.
None but a staid grave civil man is capable of it, he must have exquisite
courtship in him or else he is not old who, he wants the best point in his
tables.

God be merciful to our pandor (and that were for God to work a miracle) he
was seen in all the seven liberal deadly sciences, not a sin but he was as
absolute in as satan himself. Satan could never have supplanted us so as he
did. I may say to you he planted in us the first Italionate wit that we had.
During the time we lay close and took physic in this castle of contemplation,
there was a Magnificos wife of good calling sent in to bear us company. Her
husbands name was Castaldo, she hight Diamante, the cause of her committing was
an ungrounded ielous suspicion which her doting husband had conceived of her
chastity. One Isaac Medicus a bergomast was the man he chose to make him a
monster, who being a^ courtier and repairing to his house very often, neither
for love of him nor his wife, but only with a drift to borrowe money of a
pawn of wax and parchment, when he saw his expectation deluded, and that
Castaldo was too charie for him to close with, he privily with purpose of
revenge, gave out amongst his copesmates, that he resorted to Castaldos house
for no other end but to cuckolde him, and doubtfully he talked that he had and
he had not obtained his suit. Rings which he borrowed of a light curtizan that
he used to, he would feign to be taken from her fingers, and in sum, so
handled the matter, that Castaldo exclaimd, Out whore, strumpet, six penny
hackster, away with her to prison.

As glad were he almost as if they had given us liberty, that fortune lent us
such a sweet pue-fellow. A pretty round faced wench was it, with black eye
brows, a high forehead, a little mouth, and a sharp nose, as fat and plum
every part of her as a plouer, a skin as slike and soft as the back of a
swan, it does me good when I remember her. Like a bird she tript on the
ground, and bare out her belly as maiesticall as an Estrich. With a licorous
rouling eye fixed percing on the earth, and sometimes scornfully darted on the
tone side, she figured forth a high discontented disdain, much like a prince
puffing and storming at the treason of some mighty subject fled lately out of
his power. Her very countenance repiningly wrathful, and yet clear and
vnwrinkled, would have confirmed the cleernes of her conscience to the
austerest judge in the world. If in any thing she were culpable, it was in
being too melancholy chaste, and showing her self as covetous of her beauty as
her husband was of his bags. Many are honest because they know not how to be
dishonest: she thought there was no pleasure in stolnebread, because there was
no pleasure in an old man's bed. It is almost impossible that any woman should
be excellently witty, and not make the utmost penny of her beauty. This age
and this country of ours admits of some miraculous exceptions, but former
times are my constant informers Those that have quick motions of wit, have
quick motions in every thing: iron only needs many strokes, only iron wits
are not won without a long siege of entreaty. Gold eastly bends, the most
ingenious minds are easiest moved, Ingenium nobis molle Thalia dedit, says
Psapho to Phao. Who has no merciful mild mistres, I will maintain, has no
witty but a clownish dull flegmatike puppte to his mistres.

This Magnificos wife was a good loving soul, that had metal enough in her
to make a good wit of, but being never removed from under her mothers and her
husbands wing, it was not molded and fashioned as it ought. Causeless
distruct is able to drive deceit into a simple woman's head. I durst pawn the
credit of a page, which is worth ams ase at all times, that she was immaculate
honest till she met with us in prison. Marie what temptations she had then
when fire and flare were put together, conceit with your selves, but hold my
master excusable.

A lack he was too virtuous to make her vicious, he stood upon religion and
conscience, what a heinous thing it was to subvert Gods ordinance. This was all
the injury he would offer her, sometimes he would imagine her in a
melancholy humor to be his Geraldine, and court her in terms correspondent,
nay he would swear she was his Geraldine, and take her white hand and wipe
his eyes with it, as though the very touch of her might stanch his anguish. Now
would he kneel and kiss the ground as holy ground which she vouchsafed to
bless from barrenness by her steps. Who would have learned to write an
excellent passion, might have bin a perfect tragic poet, had he but attended
half the extremity of his lament. Passion upon passion would throng one on
another neck, he would praise her beyond the moon and stars, and that so
swatly and rauishingly, as I persuade my self he was more in love with his own
curious forming fancy than her face, and truth it is, many become passionate
lovers, only to win praise to their wits.

He praised, he prayed, he desired and besought her to pity him that perished
for her. From this his intranced mistaking ecstasy could no man remove him. Who
loves resolutely, will include every thing under the name of his love. From
prose he would leap into verse, and with these or such like rimes assault her.
If I must die; O let me choose my death,
Suck out my soul with kisses cruel maid,
In thy breasts crystal bals enbalme my breath
Dole it all out in sighs when I am laid.
Thy lips on mine like cupping glasses claspe,
Let our tongs meet and strive as they would sting,
Crush out my wind with one strait girting graspe,
Stabs on my heart keep time whilst thou do sing.
Thy ties like searing yrons burn out mine,
In thy fair tresses stifle me outright,
Like Circes change me to a loathsome swine,
So I may live for ever in thy sight.
Into heavens joys can none profoundly see,
Except that first they meditate on thee.
(...) over to an artlesse envy. Four universities honored Aretine with these
rich titles, Il flagello de principi, Il veritiero, Il deuino, and L'vnico
Aretino.

The French king Frances the first, he kept in such awe, that to chain his
tongue, he sent him a huge chain of gold, in the form of tongues fashioned.
Singularly has he commented of the humanity of Christ. Besides, as Moses set
forth his Genesis, so has he set forth his Genesis also, including the
contents of the whole Bible. A notable treatise has he compiled, called Il
set Psalm poenetentiarii. All the Thomasos have cause to love him, because he
has dilated so magnificently of the life of Saint Thomas. There is a good
thing that he has set forth La vita della virgin Maria, though it somewhat
smell of superstition, with a number more, which here for tediousness I
suppress. I flasciuious he were, he may answer with Ovid, Vita verecunda est,
musa iocosa mea est, My life is chaste though wanton be my verse. Tell me who
is most traveled in histories, what good Poet is or ever was there, who has
not had a little spice of wantonness in days? Even Beza himself by your leave.
Aretine as long as the world lives shall thou live. Tully, Virgil, Ovid,
Seneca, were never such ornaments to Italy as thou have been. I never thought
of Italy more religiously than England til I heard of thee. Peace to the Ghost,
and yet me thinks so indefinite a spirit should have no peace or
intermission of pains, but be penning Ditties to the Archangels in another
world. Puritans spue sorth the venom of your dull inventions. A Toade swelles
with thick troubled poison, you swell with poisonous perturbations, your
malice has not a clear dram o^ any inspired disposition.

My principal subject pluckes me by she elbowe, Diamante Castaldos the
magnificos wife, after my enlargment proved to be with child, at which
instant there grew an insatiable famine in Uenice, wherein, whether it were
for mere niggardise, or that Castaldo still eat out his heart with jealousy,
Saint Anne be our record, he turnde up the heels very deuou^ly. To master
Aretine after this, once more very dutifully I appeald, requested him of
favor, acknowledged former gratuities, he made no more humming or haulting,
but in despite of her husbands kinsfolks, gave her her Nunc dimittis, and so
established her free of my company.

Being out, and fully possessed of her husbands goods, she invested me in the
state of a Monarch. Because the time of childbirth drew nigh, and she could
not remain in Uenice but discredited, she decreed to travel whether so ever I
would conduct her. To see Italy throughout was my proposed scope, and that
way if she would travel, have with her, I had where withal to relieve her.

From my master by her ful-hand prouokement I parted without leave, the state
of an Earl he had thrust upon me before, and now I would not bate him an
inch of it. Through all the Cities past ^ by no other name but the young Earl
of Surrey, my pomp, my apparel, train, and expense, was nothing inferior to
his, my looks were as lofty, my words as magnificall. Memorandum, that
Florence being the principal scope of my masters course, missing me, he
iourneied thither without interruption. By the way as he went, he heard of
another Earl of Surrey besides himself, which caused him make more have to
fetch me in, whom he little dreamed of, had such art in my budget, to separate
the shadow from the body. Overtake me at Florence he did, where sitting in my
pontificalibus with my curtizan at supper, like Anthony and Cleopatra, when
they quafte standing bowls of wine spiced with pearl together, he stole in
ere we sent for him, and had much good it us, and asked us whether we wanted
any guests. If he had asked me whether I would have hanged my self, his
question had been more acceptable. He that had the^ vngartered me, might have
plucked out my heart at my hams.

My soul which was made to soar upward, now sought for passage downward, my
blood as the blushing Sabine maids su^prized on the sudden by the soldiers of
Romulus, ran to the noblest of blond amongst them for succor, that were in no
less (if not greater danger) so did it run for refuge to the noblest of his
blood about my heart assembled, that stood in more need it self of comfort
and refuge. A trembling earthquake or shaking fever assailed either of us, and
I think unfeignedly, if he seeing our faint heart agony, had not soon cheered
and refreshed us, the dogs had gone together by the ears under the table for
our feare-dropped lims.

In stead of menacing or afrighting me with his sword, or his frounes for my
superlatiue presumption, he burst out into a laughter above Ela, to think how
bravely napping he had took us, and how notably we were dampt and stroke
dead in the neast, with the unexpected view of his presence.

A^ quoth he, my noble Lord, (after his tongue had borrowed a little leave of
his laughter) is it my luck to visit you thus unlooked for, I am sure you will
bid me welcome, if it be but for the names sake. It is a wonder to see two
English Earls of one house, at one time together in Italy. I hearing him so
pleasant, began to gather up my spirits, and replide as boldly as I durst. Sir,
you are welcome, your name which I have borrowed I have not abused. Some large
sums of money this my sweet mistres Diamante has made me master of, which I
knew not how better to employ for the honor of my country, than by spending it
manificently under your name. No Englishman would I have renowned for bounty,
magnificence and courtesy but you, under your colors all my meritorious works
I was desirous to shroud. Deem i^ no insolence to add increase to your fame.
Had I basely and beggarly, wanting ability to support any part of your
roialtie, undertook the estimation of this high calling, your alledgement of
injury had been the greater, and my defense less authorized. It will be thought
but a policy of yours thus to send one before you, who being a follower of
yours, shall keep and uphold the estate and port of an Earl. I have known
many Earls my self that in their own persons would go very plain, but
delighted to have one that belonged to them (being laden with jewels,
apparelled in cloth of gold and all the rich imbroderie that might be, to
stand bare headed unto him, arguing thus much, that if yt greatest men went not
more sumptuous, how more great than the greatest was he that could command one
going so sumptuous. A noble man's glory appears in nothing so much as in the
pomp of his attendants. What is the glory of the Sun, but that the moon
and so many millions of stars borrow their light from him? If you can
reprehend me of any one illiberall licentious action I have disparaged your
name with, heap shame on me prodigally, I beg no pardon or pity.

Non veniunt in idem p^dor and amor, he was loath to detract from one that he
loved so. Beholding with his eyes that I clipped not the wings of his honor, but
rather increast them with additions of expense, he entreated me as if I had bin
an Ambassador, he gave me his hand and swore he had no more hearts but one,
and I should have half of it, in that I so inhanced his obscured reputation.
One thing, quoth he, my sweet Jack I will entreat theee (it shall be but one)
that though I am well pleased thou should be the ape of my birthright, (as
what noble man has not his ape and his fool) yet that thou be an ape without
a clog, not carry thy curtizan with thee. I told him that a king could do
nothing without his treasury, this curtizan was my purs-bearer, my countenance
and supporter. My earldome I would sooner resign than part with such a
special benefactresse. Resign it I will how ever, since I am thus challenged
of stoine goods by the true owner: Lo, into my former state I return again,
poor Jack Wilton and your servant am I, as I was at the beginning, and so will
I persevere to my lives ending.

That theme was quickly cut off, and other talk entered in place, of what I
have forgot, but talk it was, and talk let it be, and talk it shall be, for
I do not mean here to remember it. We supt, we got to bed, we rose in the
morning, on my master I wai^ed, and the first thing he did after he was up, he
went and visited the horse where his Geraldine was borne, at sight whereof he
was so impassioned, that in the open street but for me, he would have made an
oration in praise of it. Into it we were conducted, and showed each several
room thereto appertaining. O but when he came to the chamber where his
Geraldines clear Son-beams first thrust themselves into this cloud of flesh,
and acquainted mortality with the purity of Angels, then did his mouth
ouerflowe with magnifica^^, his tongue thrust the stars out of heaven, and
eclipsed the Sun and Moon with comparisons, Geraldine was the soul of heaven,
sole daughter and heir to primus motor. The alcumy of his eloquence, out of
the incomprehensible drossie matter of clouds and air, distilled no more
quintescence than would make his Geraldine complete fair.

In praise of the chamber that was so illuminatiuely honored with her radiant
conception, he penned this sonet. Fair room the presence of sweet beauties
pride,
The place the Sun upon the earth did hold,
When Phaton his chariot did misguide,
The tower where Jove raind down himself in gold.
Prostrate as holy ground I Will worship thee,
Our Ladies chapel henceforth be thou named
Here first loves Queen put on mortality,
And with her beauty all the world inflamed.
Heavens chambers harboring fiery cherubines,
Are not with thee in glory to compare,
Lightning it is not light which in thee shines,
None enter thee but straight intranced are.
O if Elysium be above the ground,
Then here it is where naught but joy is found.


Many other Poems and Epigrams in that chambers patient alablaster enclosure
(which her melting eyes long sithence had softened) were curiously ingraued.
Diamondes thought themselves Dii mundi, if they might but carue her name on the
naked glass. With them on it did he anatomize these bodiewanting mots, Dulce
puella malum est. Quod fugit ipse sequor. Amor est mihi causa sequendi, O
infoelixego. Cur vidi, cur perii. Non patienter amo. Tantum patiatur amari.
After the view of these veneriall monumentes, he published a proud challenge
in the Duke of Florence court against all comers, (whether Christians, Turks,
Canibals, Jews, or Saracens, in defense of his Geraldines beauty. More mildly
was it accepted, in that she whom he defended, was a town borne child of that
City, or else the pride of the Italian would have prevented him ere he should
have come to perform it. The Duke of Florence nevertheless sent for him, and
demanded him of his estate, and the reason that drew him thereto, which when
he was advertised of to the full, he granted all Countries whatsoever, as well
enemies and outlawes, as friends and confederates, free access and regresse
into his dominions vnmolested, until that insolent trial were ended.

The right honorable and ever renowned Lord Henry Howard Earl of Surrey my
singular good Lord and master, entered the listes after this order. His armor
was all intermixed with lyllies and roses, and the bases thereof bordered with
nettles and weeds, signifieng stings, crosses, and ouergrowing encumbrances in
his love, his helmet round proportioned like a gardeners water-pot, from which
seemed to issue forth small thrids of water, like citerne stringes, that not
only did moisten the lilles and roses, but did fructify as well the nettles
and weeds, and made them ouergrow their liege Lords. Whereby he did importe
thus much, that the tears that issued from his brain, as those arteficiall
distillations issued from the well counterfeit water-pot on his head, watered
and gave life as well to his mistres disdain (resembled to nettles and weeds)
as increase of glory to her carecausing beauty, (comprehended under the
lillies and roses.) The simbole thereto annexed was this, ex lachrimis
lachrimae. The trappinges of his horse were pounced and boulstered out with
rough plumed silver plush, in full proportion and shape of an Estrich. On the
breast of the horse were the forepartes of this greedy bird advanced, whence
as his manner is, he reached out his long neck to the raines of the bridle,
thinking they had been iron, and still seemed to gape after the golden bit,
and ever as the courser did raise or curuet, to have swallowed it half in. His
wings, which he never uses but running, being spreaded full sail, made his
lusty steed as proud under him as he had been some other Pegasus, and so
quieueringly and tenderly were these his broad wings bound to either side of
him, that as he paced up and down the tilt-yard in his majesty ere the
knights were entered, they seemed wantonly to fan in his face and make a
flickering sound, such as Eagles do, swiftly pursuing their pray in the air.
On either of his wings, as the Estrich has a sharp goade or prick wherewith
he spurreth himself forward in his saile-assisted race, so this arteficiall
Estrich, on the imbent knuchle of the pinion of either wing, had embossed
crystal eyes affixed, wherein wheel wise were circularly ingrafted sharp
pointed diamonds, as rays from those eyes derived, that like the rowels of a
spur ran deep into his horse sides, and made him more eager in his course.

Such a fine dim shine did these crystal eyes and these round enranked
diamonds make through their bolne swelling bowres of feathers, as if it had
been a candle in a paper lantern, or a gloworme in a bush by night,
glistering through the leaves and briers. The tail of the Estrich being short
and thick, served very fitly as a plume to trick up his horse tail with, so
that every part of him was as naturally coapted as might be. The word to this
device was Aculeo alatus, I spread my wings only spurd with her eyes. The
morral of the whole is this, that as the Estrich, the most burning sighted bird
of all others, insomuch as the female of them hatcheth not her eggs by covering
them, but by the effectual rays of her eyes) as he, I say, out strippeth the
nimblest trippers of his feathered condition in footmanshippe, only spurd on
with the needle quickening goade under his side, so he no less burning sighted
than the Estrich, spurd on to the race of honor by the sweet rays of his
mistres eyes, persuaded himself he should outstrip all other in running to
the goal of glory only animated and incited by her excellence. And as the
Estrich will eat iron, swallow any hard metal whatsoever, so would he refuse
no iron adventure, no hard task whatsoever, to sit in the grace of so fair a
commander. The order of his shield was this, it was framed like a burning
glass, beset round with flame colored feathers, on the outside whereof was his
mistres picture adorned as beautiful as art could portrature, on the inside a
naked sword tied in a true love knot, the mot, Militat omnis amans. Signifieng
that in a true love knot his sword was side to defend and maintain the high
features of his mistres.

Next him entered the black knight, whose beauer was pointed all torn and
bloody, as though he had new come from combatting with a Bear, his he^^ piece
seemed to be a little oven fraught full with smoothering flames, for nothing
but sulphur and smoke voided out at the cleftes of his beauer. His bases were
all imbrodered with snakes and adders, ingendered of the abundance of innocent
blood that was shed. His horses trappinges were throughout bespangled with
hunnie spots, which are no blemishes, but ornaments. On his shield he bare
the Sun full shining on a dial at his going down, the word sufficit tandem.

After him followed the knight of the Owl, whose armor was a stubd tree
ouergrowen with iuie, his helmet fashioned like an owl sitting on the top of
this iuie, on his bases were wrought all kind of birds as on the ground
wondering about him, the word, Ideo mirum quia monstrum, his horses furniture
was framed like a cart, scattering whole sheaues of corn amongst hogs, the
word Liberalitas liberalitate perit. On his shield a be entangled in sheep
wool, the mot Frontis nulla fides. The fourth that succeeded was a well
proportioned knight in an armor imitating rust, whose head piece was prefigured
like flowers growing in a narrow pot, where they had not any space to spread
their roots or dispearse their flourishing. His bases embelisht with open armed
hands scattering gold amongst trunchions, the word Cura futuri est. His horse
was harnished with leaden chains, having the outside guilt, or at least
saffrond in stead of guilt, to decypher a holy or golden pretense of a
covetous purpose, the sentence Cani capilli mei compedes, on his target he had
a number of crawling worms kept under by a block, the faburthen, Speramus
lucent. The fifth was the forsaken knight, whose helmet was crowned with nothing
but cipresse and willow garlands, over his armor he had on Himens nuptial robe
died in a duskie yelow, and all to be defaced and discolored with spots and
stains. The enigma Nos quoque florimus, as who should say, we have bin in
fashion, his stead was adorned with orange tawnie eyes, such as those have that
have the yellowe iandies, that make all things yellow they look upon, with
this brief, Qui inuident egent, Those that envy are hungry. The sixth was
the knight of the storms, whose helmet was round molded like the Moon, and
all his armor like waves, whereon the shine of the Moon slightly siluerd,
perfectly represented Moone-shine in the water, his bases were the banks or
shores that bounded in the streams. The spoke was this, Frustra pius, as much
to say, as fruitles service. On his shield he set forth a lion driven from his
pray by a donghill cock. The word, Non vi sed voce, not by violence but by
his voice.

The seventh had like the giants that sought to scale heaven in despite of
Jupiter, a mount ouerwhelming his head and whole body. His bases out-layde
with arms and legs which the skirts of that mountain left uncovered. Under
this did he characterise a man desirous to climb to the heaven of honor,
kept under with the mountain of his princes command, and yet had he arms and
legs exempted from the suppression of that mountain. The word, Tu mihi
criminis author (alluding to his Princes command) thou art the occasion of my
imputed cowardice. His horse was trapt in the earthie stringes of tree roots,
which though their increase was stubbed down to the ground, yet were they not
utterly deaded, but hoped for an after resurrection. The word, Spe alor. I
hope for spring. Upon his shield he bare a bal^ stricken down with a man's
hand hat it might mount. The word, Ferior vt efferar, I suffer my self to be
contemned because I will climb. The eighth had all his armor tharoughout
engrayled like a crabbed brierie hawthorne bush, ou^ of which notwithstanding
sprung (as a good Child of an ill Father) fragraunt Blossoms of delightful
May Flowers that made (according to the nature of May) a most odoriferous
smell. In midst of this his snowie curled top, round wrapped together, on
the ascending of his creast sat a solitary nightingale close encaged with a
thorn at her breast, having this mot in her mouth, Luctus monumenta manebunt.
At the foot of this bush represented on his bases, lay a number of black
swollen Toades gasping for wind, and Summer liu'de grasshoppers gaping after
deaw, both which were choakt with excessive drouth, and for want of shade. The
word, Non sine vulnere viresco, I spring not without impediments, alluding to
the Toades and such like, that erst lay sucking at his roots, but now were
turned out, and near choakt with drought. His horse was suited in black sandy
earth (as adjacent to this bush) which was here and there patched with short
burnt grass, and as thick ink dropped with toyling ants and emets as ever it
might crall, who in the full of the summer moon. (ruddie garnished on his
horses forehead) hoorded up their provision of grain against winter. The word
Victrix fortunae sapientia, providence preuents misfortune. On his shield he
set forth the picture of death doing alms deeds to a number of poor desolate
children. The word, Nemo alius explicat. No other man takes pity upon us.
What his meaning was herein I cannot imagine, except death had done him and
his brethren some great good turn in ridding them of some untoward parent or
kinsman that would have been their confusion, for else I cannot see how
death should have been said to do alms deeds, except he had deprived them
suddenly of their lives, to deliver them out of some further misery, which
could not in any wise he because they were yet living.

The ninth was the infant knight, who on his armor had ennameld a poor young
infant, put into a ship without tackling, masts, furniture, or any thing.
This weather beaten and ill apparelled ship was shaddowed on his bases, and
the slender compass of his body set forth the right picture of an infant. The
waves wherein the ship was tossed were fretted on his steads trappings so
mouingly, that ever as he offered to bound or stir, they seemed to bounse,
and toss, and sparkle brine out of their hoarie silver billows. Their mot,
Inopem me copia fecit, as much to say, as the rich pray makes the thief.

On his shield he expressed an old Goat that made a young tree to wither
only with biting it. The word thereto Primo extinguor in aeuo. I am
frost-bitten ere I come out of the blade.

It were here too tedious to manifest all the discontented or amorous devises
yt were used in that turnament. The shieldes only of some few I will touch to
make short work. One bare for his impresse the eyes of young swallows coming
again after they were plucked out, with this mot, Et addit et addimit, your
beauty both bereaues and restores my sight. Another a siren s^^ling when the
sea rages and ships are overwhelmed, including a cruel woman, that laughs,
singes and scorns at her lovers tears, and the tempests of his despair, the
word Cuncta pereunt* all my labor is ill imploid. A third being troubled with a
cursed, a treacherous and wanton wanton wife, used this similitude. On his shild
he caused to be limmed Pompeies ordinance for paracides, as namely a man put
into a sack with a cock, a serpent and an ape, interpreting that his wife was
a cock for her crowing, a serpent for her stinging, and an ape for her
unconstant wantonness, with which ill qualities he was so beset, that thereby
he was thrown into a sea of grief. The ^orde Extremum malonim mulier, The
utmost of evils is a woman. A fourth, who being a person of suspected religion,
was continually hanted with intelligencers and spies that thought to pray
upon him for that he had, he could not devise which way to shake them off,
but by making away that he had. To obscure this, he used no other fancy but a
number of blind flies, whose eyes the cold had closed, the word Aurum reddit
acutissimum. God is the only physic for the eie-sight. A fifth, whose
mistres was fallen into a consumption, and yet would condescend to no treaty
of love, emblazond for his complaint, grapes that witherd for want of pressing.
The dittie to the mot, Quid regna fine vsu. I will rehearse no more, but I have
an hundred other, let this be the vpshot of those shows, they were the
admirablest that ever Florence yielded. To particularize their manner of
encounter, were to describe the whole art of tilting. Some had like to have
fallen over their horse neck and so break their necks in breaking their
staves. Others ran at a back in stead of a button, and peradventure whetted
their spears points, idly gliding on their enemies sides, but did no other
harm. Others ran a cross at their adversaries less elbow, yea, and by your
leave sometimes let not the lists escape scot-free they were so eager. Others
because they would be sure not to be vnsadled with the shocks, when they came
to the spears utmost proof, they threw it over the right shoulder, and so
tilted backward, for forward they durst not. Another had a menstrous spite at
the pommell of his riuals saddle, and thought to have thrust is spear twixt
his legs without rasing any skin, and carried him clean away on it as a
coolest ass. Another held his spear to his nose, or his nose to his spear,
as though he had been discharging a caliuer, and ran at the right foot of his
fellows stead. Only the earl of Surry my master observed ye true measures of
honor, and made all his encounterers new scour their armor in the dust. So
great was his glory yt day, as Geraldine was thereby eternally glorifide.
Never such a bountiful master came amongst the heralds (not that he did enrich
the^ with any plentiful purse largess) but that by his stern assaults he
tithed them mo^e rich ^ffals of bases, of helmets, of armor, than the rent of
their offices came to in ten years before.

What would you have more, the trumpets proclaimed him mas^er of the st^ld, the
trumpets proclaimed Geraldine the exceptionlesse fairest of women. Every one
striued to magnify him more than other. The Duke of Florence, whose name (as
my memory serves me) was Paschal de Medices, offered him such large proffers
to slaie with him as it were incredible to report. He would not, his desire was
as he had done in Fl^rence, so to proceed throughout all the chief cities in
Italy. If you ask why he began not this at Uenice first. It was because he
would let Florence his mistres native city have the maidenhead of his
chivalry. As he came back again he thought to have enacted something there
worthy the Annals of posterity, but he was debard both of that and all his
other determinations, for continuing in feasting and banketting with the Duke
of Florence and the Princes of Italy there assembled, post-half letters came to
him from the king his master, to return as speedily as he could possible into
England, whereby his fame was quite cut off by the shins, and there was no
repriue but Bazelus manus, he must into England, and I with my curtizan
traveled forward in Italy.

What adventures happened him after we parted, I am ignorant, but Florence we
both forsook, and I having a wonderful ardent inclination to see Rome the
Queen of the world, and metrapolitane mistres of all other cities, made thither
with my bag and baggage as fast as I could.

Attained thither, I was lodged at the house of one Johannes de Imola a Roman
caualiero. Who being acquainted with my curtisans deceased doting husband, for
his sake vs^ us with all the familiarity that might be. He showed us all the
monuments that were to be seen, which are as many as there have been
Emperors, Consuls, Orators, Conquerours, famous painters or plaiers in Rome.
Till this day not a Roman (if he be a right Roman in deed) will kill a rat,
but he will have some registered remembrance of it. There was a poor fellow
during my remainder there, that for a new trick he had invented of killing
Cymess and scorpions, had his mountebank banner hung up on a high pillar, with
an inscription about it longer than the king of Spaines style. I thought these
Cymesses like the Cimbrians had been some strange nation he had brought under,
and they were no more but things like sheep lice, which alive have the
venomost sting that may be, and being dead do stink out of measure. Saint
Austen compares heretics unto them. The chiefest thing that my eyes
delighted in, was the church of the 7. Sibels, which is a most miraculous
thing. All their prophestes and oracles being there enroulde, as also the
beginning and ending of their whole catalogue of the heathen Gods, with their
manner of worship. There are a number of other shrines and statues also
dedicated to their Emperors, and withal some statues of idolatry reserved for
detestation. I was at Pontius Pilates house and pist against it. There is the
prison yet packt up together (an old rotten thing) where the man that was
condemned to death, and could have no body come to him and succor him but was
searched, was kept alive a long space by sucking his daughters breasts.

These are but the shop dust of the sights that I saw, and in truth I did not
behold with any care hereafter to report, but contented my eye for the
present, and so let them pass. Should I memorize half the miracles which they
there told me had been done about martyrs tombs, or the operations of the
earth of the sepulcher, and other relics brought from Jerusalem, I should be
counted the monstrous lier that ever came in print.

The ruins of Pompeies theater, reputed one of the nine wonders of the world,
Gregory the sixths Tomb, Priscillas Grate, or the thousands of Pillars
arreared amongst the raced foundations of old Rome, it were here frivolous to
specify: since he that has but once drunk with a traveler talks of them.
Let me be a Historiographer of my own misfortunes, and not meddle with the
continued Trophies of so old a triumphing City.

At my first coming to Rome, I being a youth of the English cut, ware my hair
long, went apparailed in light colors, and imitated four or five sundry
Nations in my attire at once: which no sooner was noated, but I had all the
boys of the City in a swarm wondering about me. I had not gone a little
farther, but certain Officers crossed the way of me, and demanded to see my
rapier: which when they found (as also my dagger) with his point vnblunted,
they would have haled me headlong to the Strappado, but that with money I
appeased them: and my fault was more pardonable, in that I was a stranger,
altogether ignorant of their customs.

Note by the way, that it is the use in Rome, for all men whatsoever to wear
their hair short: which they do not so much for conscience sake, or any
religion they place in it, but because the extremity of the heat is such
there, that if they should not do so, they should not have a hair left on
their heads to stand upright, when they were scard with sprights. And he is
counted no Gentleman amongst them that goes not in black: they dress their
iesters and fools only in fresh colors, and say variable garments do argue
vnstayednes and inconstancy of affections.

The reason of their straight ordinance for carrying weapons without points is
this. The Bandettos, which are certain out laws that lie betwixt Rome ^
Naples, and besiege the passage that none can travel that way without robbing:
Now and then hired for some few crowns, they will steal to Rome and do a
murder, and be^ake them to their heels again, Disguised as they go, they are
not known from strangers, sometimes they will shroude themselves under the
habit of grave citizens. In this consideration neither citizen nor stranger,
gentleman, knight, marquis, or any may wear any weapon endamageable upon
pain of the strappado. I bought it out, let others buy experience of me better
cheap.

To tell you of the rare pleasures of their gardens, their baths, their
vineyards, their galleries, were to write a second part of the gorgeous
Gallerie of gallant devices. Why, you should not come into any man's house of
account, but he had fish ponds and little orchards on the top of his leads. If
by rain or any other means those ponds were so full they need to be ^^uste
or let out, even of their superfluities they made melodious use, for they had
great wind instruments in stead of leaden spoutes, that went duly in consort,
only with this waters rumbling descent. I saw a summer banketting house
belonging to a merchant, that was the marvel of the world, and could not be
matched except God should make another paradise. It was builte round of green
marble, like a Theater without, within there was a heaven and earth
comprehended both under one roof, the heaven was a clear ouerhanging vault of
crystal, wherein the Sun and Moon, and each visible Star had his true
similitude, shine, situation, and motion, and by what enwrapped art I cannot
conceive, these spheres in their proper orbs observed their circular
wheelings and turnings, making a certain kind of soft angelical murmering
music in their often windings and going about, which music the philosophers
say in the true heaven by reason of the grosenes of our senses we are not
capable of. For the earth it was counterfeited in that likeness that Adam lorded
out it before his fall. A wide vast spacious room it was, such as we would
conceit prince Arthurs hall to be, where he feasted all his knights of the
round table together every penticost. The floor was painted with ye
beautifullest flowers that ever man's eye admired, which so lineally were
delineated, that he that viewd them a far off, and had not directly stood
poaringly over them, would have sworn they had lived in deed. The walls round
about were hedgde with Olives and palm trees, and all other odoriferous
fruit-bearing plants, which at any solemn intertainment dropped mirrhe and
frankensence. Other trees yt bare no fruit, were set in just order one against
another, and divided the room into a number of shadie lanes, leaving but one
ouer-spreading pine tree arbor, where we sat and banketted. On the well
clothed boughs of this conspiracy of pine trees against the resembled Sun
beams, were pearcht as many sorts of shrill breasted birds, as the Summer
has allowed for singing men in her siluane chapels. Who though there were
bodies without souls, and sweet resembled substances without sense, yet by
the mathemeticall experimentes of long silver pipes secretly inrinded in the
intrailes of the boughs whereon they sat, and vndiscerneablie conuaid under
their bellies into their small throats sloaping, they whistled and freely
carold their natural field note. Neither went those silver pipes straight, but
by many edged vnsundred writhings, and crankled wanderings aside strayed from
bough to bough into an hundred throats. But into this silver pipe so writhed
and wandering aside, if any demand how the wind was breathed. Forsooth ye tail
of the silver pipe stretched it self into the mouth of a great pair of
belowes, where it was close soldered, and bailde about with iron, it could not
stir or have any vent betwixt. Those bellows with the rising and falling of
leaden plummets wound up on a wheel, did beat up and down incessantly, and
so gathered in wind, serving with one blast all the snarled pipes to and fro of
one tree at once. But so closely were all those organizing implements obscured
in the corpulent trunks of the trees, that every man there present renounst
conjectures of art, and said it was done by enchantment.

One tree for his fruit bare nothing but inchained chiriping birds, whose
throats being conduit pipt with squared narrow shells, and charged siring-wise
with searching sweet water, driven in by a little wheel for the nonce, that
fed it a far of, made a spirting sound, such as chirping is, in bubling
upwards through the rough crannies of their closed bills.

(...) Under tuition of the shade of every tree that I have signified to be in
this round hedge, on delightful leauie cloisters, lay a wild tyrannous beast
a sleep all prostrate: under some two together, as the Dog nusling his nose
under the neck of the Dear, the Wolf glad to let the Lamb lie upon him to
keep him warm, the Lion suffering the Ass to cast his leg over him:
preferring one honest unmannerly friend, before a number of croutching
picke-thankes. No poisonous beast there reposed, (poison was not before our
parent Adam transgressed). There were no sweete-breathing Panthers, that would
hyde their terrifying heads to betraye: no men imitating Hyaenaes, that
changed their s^xe to seek after blood. Wolves as now when they are hungry
eat earth, so then did they feed on earth only, and abstained from innocent
flesh. The Unicorne did not put his horn into the stream to chase away venom
before he drunk, for there was no such thing as venom extant in the water or
on the earth. Serpents were as harmless to mankind, as they are still one to
another: the rose had no cankers, the leaves n^ caterpillars, the sea no
Sirens, the earth no usurers. Goats then bare wool, as it is recorded in
Sicily they do yet. The torride Zone was habitable: only Iayes loved to
steal gold and silver to build their nests withal, and none cared for
covetous clientrie, or running to the Indies. As the Elephant understands his
country speech, so every beast understood what men spoke. The ant did not
hoord up against winter, for there was no winter but a perpetual spring, as
Ovid says. No frosts to make the green almond ^ree counted rash and
improuident, in budding soonest of all other: or the mulberie tree a strange
politician, in blooming late and ripening early. The peach tree at the first
planting was fruitful and wholesome, whereas now til it be transplanted, it is
poisonous and hateful. Young plants for their sap had balm, for their yeolow
gum glistering amber. The evening deawd not water on flowers, but honnie.
Such a golden age, such a good age, such an honest age was set forth in this
banqueting house.

O Rome, if thou have in thee such soule-exalting objects: what a thing is
heaven in comparison of thee, of which Mercators globe is a perfecter model
than thou art? Yet this I must say to the shame of us Protestants, if good
works may merit heaven, they do them, we talk of them. Whether superstition
or no makes the^ unprofitable servants, that let pulpets decide: but there, you
shall have the brauest Ladies in gowns of beaten gold, washing pilgrims and
poor soldiers feel, and doing nothing they and their waiting mayds all the
year long, but making shirts and bands for them against they come by in
distress. Their hospitalls are more like noble-mens houses than otherwise: so
richly furnished, clean kept, and hot perfumed, that a soldier would think
it a sufficient recompense for his travel and his wounds, to have such a
heavenly retyring place. For the Pope and his pontificalibus I will not deal
with, only I will dilate unto you what happened whiles I was in Rome.

So it fell out, tha^ it being a vehement hot summer when I was a soiourner
there, there entered such a hotspurd plague as has not been heard of: way it
was but a word and a blow, Lord have mercy upon us, and he was gone. Within
three quarters of a year in that one city there dyed of it a hundred thousand:
Look in Lanquets Chronicle and you shall find it. To smell of a nosegay, that
was poysond: and turn your nose to a house, that had the plague, it was all
one. The clouds like a number of cormorants, that keep their corn till it
stink and is mustie, kept in their stinking exhalations, till they had almost
stifled all Romes inhabitants. Physicians, greedines of gold made them greedy
of their destiny. They would come to visit those, with whose infirmities
their art had no affinity: and even as a man with a fee should be hired to
hang himself, so would they quietly go home and dye presently after they had
been with their patients. All day and all night long carre-men did nothing but
go up and down the streets with their carts and cry. Have you any dead to
bury, have you any dead to bury: and had many times out of one house their
whole loading: one grave was the sepulcher of seuen-score, one bed was the
altar whereon whole families were offered.

The walls were hoard and furd with the moist scorching steam of their
desolation. Even as before a gun is shot off, a stinking smoke funnels out,
and prepares the way for him, so before any gave up the ghost death araied in
a stinking smoke stopped his nostrils, and cramd it self full into his mouth,
that closed up ^is fellows eyes, to give him warning to prepare for his
funeral. Some did sitting at their meat, others as they were asking counsel
of the physician for their friends. I saw at the house where I was hosted, a
maid bring her master warm broth for to comfort him, and she sink down dead
her self ere he had half eat it up.

During this time of visitation, there was a Spaniard, one Esdras of Granado, a
notable Bandetto, authorized by ye pope, because he assisted him in some
murders. This villain colleagued with one Bartol a desperate Italian,
practiced to break into those rich men's houses in the night where the plague
had most rained, and if there were none but the mistres and maid left alive, to
ravish them both, and bring away all the wealth they could fasten on. In a
hundred chief citizens houses where the hand of God had bin, they put this
outrage in ure. Though the women so ravished cride out, none du^st come nere
them, for fear of catching their deaths by them, and some thought they cried
out only with the tyranny of the malady. Amongst the rest the house where I
lay he invaded, where all being snatched up by the sickness but the good wife
of the house, a noble and chaste matrone called Heraclide and her Zanie, and I
and my curtizan, he knocking at the door late in the night, ran unto the
matrone, and left me and my love to the mercy of his companion. Who finding me
in bed (as the time requird) ran at me full with his rapier, thinking I would
resist him, but as good luck was I escapt him and betook me to my pistol in
the window vncharged. He fearing it had been charged, threatened to run her
through if I once offered but to aim at him. Forth ye chamber he dragd her,
holding his rapier at her heart, whilst I still crid out, Save her, kill me, and
I Will ransom her with a thousand ducats: but lust prevailed, no prayers would
be heard. Into my chamber I was locked, and watchmen charged (as he made
semblance when there was none there) to knock me down with theit halberdes,
if I stirde but a foot down the stairs. So threw I my self pensive again
on my pallat, and dard all the devils in hell now I was alone to come and fight
with me one after another in defense of that detestable rape. I beat my head
against the walls and called them ba^ds, because they would see such a wrong
committed, and not fall upon him. To return to Heraclide below, whom the
vgliest of all blood suckers Esdras of Granado had under shrift. First he
assailed her with rough means, and slew her Zanie at her foot, that slept
before her in rescue. Then when al armed resist was put to flight, he assaied
her with honey speech, and promised her more jewels and gifts than he was
able to pilfer in an hundred years after. He discou^st unto her how he was
countenanced and borne out by the pope, and how many execrable murders with
impunitie he had executed on them that displeasde him. This is the eight score
house (quoth he) that has done homage unto me, and here I will prevail, or I
will be torn in pieces. Ah quoth Heraclide (with a heart renting sigh) art
thou ordaind to be a worse plague to me that ye plague it self? Have I escapt
the hands of God to fall into the hands of man? Hear me Jehovah, and be
merciful in ending my misery. Dispatch me incontinent dissolute homicide
deaths usurper. Here lies my husband stone cold on the dewie floor. If thou
be of more power than God, to strike me speedily, strike home, strike deep,
send me to heaven with my husband. Aie me, it is the spoil of my honor thou
seek in my souls troubled departure, thou art seem devil sent to tempt me.
Avoid from me satan, my soul is my saviors, to him I have bequeathed it,
from him can no man take it. Jesus, Jesus spare me undefiled for thy s^ouse,
Jesus, Jesus never fail those that put their trust in thee. With that she fell
in a sown, and her eyes in their closing seemed to spaune forth in their
outward sharp corners new created seed pearl, which the world before never
set eye on. Soon he rigorously revived her, and told her yt he had a charter
above scripture, she must yield, she should yield, see who durst remove her out
of his hands. Twixt life and death thus she faintly replied. How think thou,
is there a power above thy power, if there be, he is here present in
punishment, and on thee will take present punishment if thou persistest in thy
enterprise. In the time of security every man sins, but when death
substitutes one friend his special bailey to arrest another by infection, and
dispearseth his quiver into ten thousand hands at once, who is it but looks
about him? A man that has an inevitable huge stone hanging only by a hair
over his head, which he looks every Pater noster while to fall and pash him
in pieces, will not he be submissiuely sorrowful for his transgressions,
refrain himself from the least thought of folly, and purify his spirit with
contrition and penitence? Gods hand like a huge stone hangs ineuitably over thy
head: what is the plague, but death playing the provost marshall, to execute
all those that will not be called home by any other means. This my dear
knights body is a quiver of his arrows, which already are shot into thee
invisible. Even as the age of goats is known by the knots on their horns, so
think the anger of God apparently visioned or shown unto thee in the knitting
of my brows. A hundred have I buried out of my house, at all whose departures
I have been present: a hundreds infection is mixed with my breath, lo, now I
breath upon thee, a hundred deaths come upon thee. Repent betimes, imagine
there is a hell though not a heaven: that hell thy conscience is thoroughly
acquainted with, if thou have murdered half so many, as thou vnblushingly
braggest. As Moecenas in the latter end of his days was seven years without
sleep, so these seven weeks have I took no slumber any eyes have kept
continual watch against the devil my enemy: death I deemed my friend (friends
fly from us in adversity), death, the devil and all the ministering spirits of
temptation are watching about thee to entrap thy soul by my abuse to eternal
damnation. It is thy soul only thou may save by saving mine honor. Death
will have thy body infallibly for breaking into my house, that he had selected
for his private habitation. If thou ever camst of a woman, or hop'st to be
saved die the seed of a woman, spare a woman. Deares oppressed with dogs, when
they cannot take soil, run to men for succor: to whom should women in their
disconsolate and desperate estate run, but to men like the Dear for succor
and sanctuary. If thou be a man thou will succor me, but if thou be a dog
and a brute beast, thou will spoil me, defile me and tear me: either renounce
Gods image, or renounce the wicked mind that thou bear.

These words might have moved a compound heart of iron and adamant, but in his
heart they obtained no impression: for he sitting in his chair of state against
the door all the while that she pleaded, leaning his ouerhanging gloomie
ey-browes on the pommell of his unsheathed sword, he never looked up or gave
her a word: but when he perceived she expected his answer of grace or utter
perdition, he start up and took her currishly by the neck, and asked her how
long he should stay for her Ladyship. Thou telst me (quoth he) of the plague,
and the heavy hand of God, and thy hundred infected breaths in one: I tell thee
I have cast the dice an hundred times for the galleyes in Spain, and yet still
mist the ill chance. Our order of casting is this, If there be a general or
captain new come home from the wars, and has some four or five hundred
crowns overplus of the kings in his hand, and his soldiers al paid, he makes
proclamation, that whatsoever two resolute men will go to dice for it, and win
the bridle or lose the saddle, to such a place let them repair, and it shall
be ready for them. Thither go I and find another such needy squire resident.
The dice run, I win, he is undone. I winning have the crowns, he loosing is
carried to the galleys. This is our custom, which a hundred times and more
has paid me custom of crowns, when the poor fellows have gone to Gehenna,
had course bread and whipping there all their life after. Now think thou
that I who so often have escapd such a number of hellish dangers, only depending
on the turning of a few pricks, can be scare-bugd with the plague? what plague
can thou name worse than I have hat? whether diseases, imprisonment,
poverty, banishment, I have past through them all. My own mother gave I a box
of the care to, and brake her neck down a pair of stairs, because she would not
go in to a gentleman, when I had her: my sister I sold to an old Leno, to
make his best of her: any kinswoman that I have, knew I she were not a whore,
my self would make her one: thou art a whore, thou shall be a whore in spite
of religion or precise ceremonies.

Therewith he flew upon her, and threatened her with his sword, but it was not
that he meant to wound her with. He graspt her by the iuorie throat, and
shook her as a mastiffe would shake a young bear, swearing and staring he
would tear out her we^ and if she refused. Not content with that savage
constraint, he slipped his sacriligious hand from her lilly lawne skinned neck,
and inscarfte it in her long silver locks, which with struggling were vnrould.
Backward he dragd her, even as a man backward would pluck a tree down by the
twigs, and then like a traitor that is drawn to execution on a hurdle, he
traileth her up and down the chamber by those tender untwisted braids, and
setting his barbarous foot on her bare snowie breast, bad her yield or have
her wind stamped out. She crid, stamp, stiflle me in my hair, hang me up by it
on a beam, and so let me die rather than I should go to heaven with a beam
in my eye. No (quoth he) nor stamped, nor stifled, nor hanged, nor to heaven
shall thou go til I have had my will of thee, thy busy arms in these silken
fetters I Will infold. Dis^^issing her hair from his fingers, and pinnioning her
elbowes therwithal, she strugled, she wrested, but al was in vain. So struggling
and so resisting, her jewels did sweat, signifieng there was poison coming
toward her. On the hard boords he threw her, and used his knee as an iron ram
to beat open the two leaude gate of her chastity. Her husbands dead body he
made a pillow to his abomination. Couiecture the rest, my words stick fast in
the mire and are clean tired, would I had never undertook this tragical
tale. Whatsoever is borne is borne to have end. Thus ends my tale, his
boorish lust was glutted, his beastly desire satisfied, what in the house of
any worth was carriage-able, he put up and went his way.

Let not your sorrow die, you that have read the proeme and narratio^ of this
elegiacal history. Show you have quick wits in sharp conceit of compassion. A
woman that has viewd all her children sacrificed before her eyes, and after
the first was slain wipt the sword with her apron to prepare it for the clenly
murder of the second, and so on forward till came to the empiercing of the
seventeenth of her loins, will you not give her great allowance of anguish.
This woman, this matrone, this forsaken Heraclide, having buried fourteen
children in five days, whose eyes she howlingly closed, and caught many
wrinckles with funeral kisses: besides, having her husband within a day after
laid forth as a comfortless corse, a carrionly block, that could neither eat
with her, speak with her, nor weep with her, is she not to be borne withal
though her body swells with a tympanie of tears, though her speech be as
impatient as unhappy Hecubaes, though her head raues and her brain doates?
Devise with your selves that you see a corse rising from his heirce after he
is carried to Church, and such another suppose Heraclide to be, rising from
the couch of enforced adultery.

Her eyes were dim, her cheeks bloudlesse, her breath smelt earthie, her
countenance was ghastly. Up she rose after she was deflowred, but loath she
arose, as a reprobate soul rising to the day of judgment. Looking on the tone
side as she rose, she spide her husbands body lying under her head: Ah then
she bewailed as Cephalus when he had killed Procris unwittingly, or Oedipus when
ignorant he had slain his own father, and known his mother incestuously.
This was her subdued reasons discourse.

Have I lived to make my husbands body the beer to carry me to hell, had
filthy pleasure no other pillowe to lean upon but his spreaded limbs? On thy
flesh my fault shall be imprinted at the day of resurrection. O beauty, the
bait ordained to ensnare the irreligious: rich men are robbed for their wealth,
women are dishonested for being too fair. No blessing is beauty but a curse:
cursed be the time that ever I was begotten: cursed be the time that my mother
brought me forth to tempt. The serpent in paradise did no more, the serpent in
paradise is damned sempiternally: why should not I hold my self damned (if
predestinations opinions be true) that am predestinate to this horrible abuse.
The hog dies presently if he loses an eye: with the hog have I wallowed
in the mire, I have lost my eye of honesty, it is clean plucked out with a
strong hand of unchastity: what remains but I dye? Die I will, though life
be unwilling: no recompense is there for me to redeem my compelled offense,
but with a rigorous compelled death. Husband, I Will be thy wife in heaven: let
not thy pure deceasing spirit despise me when we meet, because I am
tyrannously polluted. The devil, the belier of our frayl^ie, and common
accuser of mankind, cannot accuse me though he would of unconstrained
submitting. If any guilt be mine, this is my fault, that I did not deforme my
face, ere it should so impiously allure. Having passioned thus a while, she
hastily ran and looked her self in her glass to see if her sin were not
written on her forhead: with looking she blushed though none looked upon her but
her own reflected image.

Then began she again. Heu quam difficile est crimen non prodere vultu; How
hard is it not to bewray a man's fault by his forhead. My self do but behold
my self, and yet I blush: then God beholding me, shall not I be ten t^^es
more ashamed? The Angels shall hiss at me, the Saints and Martyrs fly from
me: yea, God himself shall add to the devils damnation, because he suffered
such a wicked creature to come before him. Agamemnon thou were an infidel, yet
when thou wentst to the Trojan war, thou leftst a Musician at home with thy
wife, who by playing the foot Spondaeus till thy return, might keep her in
chastity. My husband going to war with the devil and his enticements when
he surrendered, left no musition with me but mourning and melancholy: had he
left any, as Aegistus killed Agamemnons musition ere he could be succesfull, so
surely would he have been killed ere this Aegistus surceased. My distressed heart
as the Heart when he loses his horns is astonished, and sorrowfully runs to
hide himself, so be thou afflicted and distressed, hide thy self under the
Almighties wings of mercy: sue, plead, entreat, grace is never denied to them
that ask. It may be denied, I may be a vessel ordained to dishonor. The only
repeal we have from Gods vndefinite chastisement, is to chastise our selves in
this world: and so I will, naught but death be my penance, gracious and
acceptable may it be: my hand and my knife shall manum^t me out of the horror
of mind I endure. Farewell life that have lent me nothing but sorrow: farewell
sin sowed flesh, that have more weeds than flowers, more woes than joys.

Point pierce, edge enwyden, I patiently afford thee a sheath: spur forth
my soul to mount poast to heaven. Jesus forgive me, Jesus receive me.

So thoroughly stabd fell she down, and knocked her head against her husbands
body: wherewith, he not having been ayred his full four and twenty hours,
start as out of a dream: whiles I through a crannie of my upper chamber
vnseeled, had beheld all this sad spectacle. Awaking, he rubd his head too and
fro, and wyping his eyes with his hand began to look about him. Feeling some
thing lie heavy on his breast, he turned it off, and getting upon his legs
lighted a candle.

Here begins my purgatory. For he good man coming into the hall with the
candle, and spying his wife with her hair about her ears defiled and
massacred, and his simple Zanie Capestrano run thorough, took a halberde in
his hand, and running from chamber to chamber to search who in his house was
likely to do it, at length found me lying on my bed, the door locked to me on
the outside, and my rapier vns^eathed on the window: where with he straight
coniectured it was I. And calling the neighbors hard by, said I had caused my
self to be locked into my chamber after that sort, sent away my curtizane
whom I called my wife, and made clean my rapier, because I would not be
suspected. Upon this was I laid in prison, should have been hanged, was
brought to the ladder, had made a ballet for my farewell in a readiness called
Wiltons wantonness, and yet for all that escaped dancing in a hempen circle. He
that has gone through many perils and returned safe from them, makes but a
merriment to dilate them. I had the knot under my ear, there was fair play,
the hangman had one halter, and another about my neck, which was fastened to
the gallows, the riding device was almost thrust home, and his foot on my
shoulder to press me down, when I made my saint-like confession as you have
heard before, that such and such men at such an hour brake into the house,
slew the Zanie, took my curtizan, locked me into my chamber, ravished Heraclide,
and finally how she flew her self.

Present at the execution was there a banished English Earl, who hearing that a
countreyman of his was to suffer for such a notable murder, came to hear his
confession, and see if he knew him. He had not heard me tell half of that I
have recited, but he craved audience, and desired the execution might be staid.

Not two days since it is Gentlemen and noble Romans (said he) since going to
be let blood in a barbars shop against the infection, all on a sudden in a
great tumult and vproare was there brought in one Bartoll an Italian grievously
wounded and bloody. I seeming to commiserate his harms, courteously questiond
him with what ill debtors he had met, or how or by what casualtie he came to be
so arraid. O quoth he long I have lived sworn brothers in sensuality with one
Esdras of Granado, five hundred rapes and murders have we committed betwixt
us. When our iniquities were grown to the height, and God had determined to
counter check our amity, we came to the house of Johannes de Imola (whom
this young gentleman has named) there did he justify al those rapes in manner
and form as the prisoner here has confessed. But lo an accident after, which
neither he nor this audience is privy too. Esdras of Granado not content to
have ravished the matrone Heraclide and robbed her, after he had betook him from
thence to his heels, light on his companion Bartol with his curtizan: whose
pleasing face he had scarce winkingly glaunc'd ^n, but he picked a quarrel
with Bartoll to have her from him. On this quarrel they ^ought, Bartoll was
wounded to the death, Esdras fled, and the fair dame left to go whither she
would. This Bartoll in the barbars shop freely acknowledged, as both the
barbar and his man, and other here present can amply depose. Deposed they
were, their oaths went for current, I was quit by proclamation, to the banished
Earl I came to render thanks: when thus he examind me and schoold me.

Countriman, tell me what is the occasion of thy straying so far out of
England to visit this strange Nation. If it be languages, thou may learn
them at home, naught but lasciuiousnes is to be learned here. Perhaps to be
better accounted of than other of thy condition, thou ambitiously undertake
this voyage: these insolent fancies are but Icarus feathers, whose wanton wax
melted against the sun, will betray thee into a sea of confusion. The first
traveler was Cayn, and he was called a vagabond runnagate on the face of the
earth. Travail like the travail wherein smithes put wild horses when they
shoo them, is good for nothing but to tame and bring men under. God had no
greater curse to lay upon the Israelites, than by leading them out of their
own country to live as slaves in a strange land. That which was their curse,
we Englishmen count our chief blessedness; he is no body that has not traueld:
we had rather live as slaves in another land, croutch and cap, and be servile
to every jealous Italians and proud Spaniards humor, where we may neither
speak look nor do any thing, but what pleases them: than live as freemen
and Lords in our own country. He that is a traveler must have the back of
an ass to bear all, a tung like the tail of a dog to flatter all, the mouth
of a hog to eat what is set before him, the ear of a merchant to hear all
and say nothing: and if this be not the highest step of thraldom, there is no
liberty or freedom. It is but a mild kind of subjection to be the servant of
one master at once, but when thou have a thousand thousand masters, as the
veriest botcher, tinker or cobbler freeborne will dominere over a forreiner, and
think to be his better or master in company: then shall thou find there is no
such hell, as to leave thy fathers house (thy natural habitation) to live in
the land of bondage. If thou do but lend half a look to a Romans or
Italians wife, thy porredge shall be prepared for thee, and cost thee nothing
but thy life. Chance some of them break a bitter jest on thee, and thou
retortst i^ seuerly, or seem discontented: go to thy chamber, and provide a
great banquet, for thou shall be sure to be visited with guests in a mask
the next night, when in kindness and courtship thy throat shall be cut, and the
doers return undiscovered. Nothing so long of memory as a dog, these Italians
are old dogs, and will carry an injury a whole age in memory: I have heard
of a box on the ear that has been revenged thirty year after, The
Neopolitane carries the bloudiest wreakfull mind, and is the most secret
flearing murderer. Whereupon it is grown to a common proverb, I Will give him the
Neapolitan shrug, when one means to play the villain, and makes no boast of
it.

The only precept that a traveler has most use of, and shall find most ease
in, is that of Epicharchus, Vigila and memor sis ne quid credas; Believe
nothing, trust no man: yet seem thou as thou swallowedst all, suspectedst
none, but were easy to be gulled by every one. Multi fallere docuerunt (as
Seneca says) dum timent falli; Many by showing their jealous suspect of
deceit, have made men seek more subtle means to deceive them. Alas, our
Englishmen are the plainest dealing souls that ever God put life in: they are
greedy of news, and love to be fed in their humors and hear themselves
flattered the best that may be. Even as Philemon a Comic Poet did with
extreme laughter at the conceit of seeing an Ass eat sygges: so have the
Italians no such sport, as to see poor English asses how soberly they swallow
Spanish figs devour any hook baited for them. He is not fit to travel, that
cannot with the Candians live on serpents, make nourishing food even of
poison. Rats and mice engender by licking one another, he must lick, he must
croutch, he must cogge, lie and prate, that either in the Court or a foreign
Country will engender and come to preferment. Be his feature what it will, if
he be fair spoken he wins friends: Non formosus erat, sed erat facundus
Ulysses; Ulysses the long traveler was not amiable, but eloquent. Some
allege, they travel to learn wit, but I am of this opinion, that as it is
not possible for any man to learn the Art of Memory, whereof Tully,
Quintillian, Seneca, and Hermannus Buschius have written so many books,
except he have a natural memory before: so is not possible for any man to
attain any great wit by travel, except he have the grounds of it rooted in
him before. That wit which is thereby to be perfected or made stayed, is nothing
but Experientia longa malorum; The experience of many evils the experience
that such a man lost his life by this folly, another by that: such a young
Gallant consumed his substance on such a Curtizan: these courses of revenge a
Merchant of Venice took against a Merchant of Ferrara: and this point of
justice was showed by the Duke upon the murderer. What is here but we may
read in books and a great deal more too, without stirring our feet out of a
warm study. Vobis alii ventorum praelia narrent, ( says Ovid)
Quasque Scilla infestat, quasue Charybdis aquas.
Let others tell you wonders of the wind,
How Scilla or Charybdis is enclinde.
-vos quod quisque loquetur
Credit- Believe you what they say, but never try.
So let others tell you strange accidents, treasons, poysonings, close
parkings in France, Spain and Italy: it is no harm for you to hear of them,
but come not near them. What is there in France to be learnd more than in
England, but falsehood in fellowship, perfect slouenrie, to love no man but for
my pleasure, to swear Ah parla mort Dieu when a man's hammes are scabd. For the
idle Traveler, (I mean not for the Soldier). I have known some that have
continued there by the space of half a dozen year, and when they come home,
they have hyd a little weerish lean face under a b^oad French hat, kept a
terrible coil with the dust in the street in their long cloakes of gray
paper, and spoke English strangely. Naught else have they profited by their
travel, save learnt to distinguish of the true Bordeaux Grape, and know a cup
of n^a^^ Gascoygne wine, from wine of Orleance: yea and peradventure this also,
to esteem of the pe^e as a pimple, to wear a vel^et patch on their face, and
walk melancholy with their arms folded.

From Spain what brings our Traveler? a scull ^round hat of the fashion of
an old deep porringer, a diminutiue Aldermans ruff (...) short strings like
the droppings of a mane nose, a close-bellied dublet coming down with a peake
behind as far as the crupper, and cut off before by the breast-boane like a
partlet or neckercher, a wide pair of gascoynes which vngatherd would make a
couple of women's ryding kyrtles, huge hangers that have half a Cow hyde in
them, a Rapyer that is lineally descended from half a dozen Dukes at the
least. Let his cloak be as long or as short as you will: if long, it is faced
with Turkey grogeran raueld: if short, it has a cape like a calves tung, and
is not so deep in his whole length, nor has so much cloth in it I will
justify, as only the standing cape of a Dutchmans cloak. I have not yet
touched all, for he has in either shoo as much taffaty for his tyings, as
would serve for an ancient: which serves him (if you will have the mystery of
it) of the own accord for a shoo-rag. A souldior and a braggart he is (that's
concluded) he ietteth strou^ing, dancing on his toes with his hands under his
sides. If you talk with him, he makes a dish-cloath of his own Country in
comparison of Spain; but if you urge him more particularly wherein it exceeds,
he can give no instance, but in Spain they have better bread than any we
have: when (poor hungry slaves) they may crumble it into water well enough and
make miso^s with it, for they have not a good morsel of meat except it be
salt pilchers to eat with it all the year long: and which is more, they are
poor beggars, and lie in foul straw every night.

Italy the paradise of the earth, and the Epi^ures heaven, how does it form
our young master? It makes him to kiss his hand like an ape, cringe his neck
like a starueling, and play at hey pass repasse come aloft when he salutes a
man. From thence he brings the art of atheism, the art of epicurising, the art
of whoring, the art of poisoning, the art of Sodomitrie. The only propable
good thing they have to keep us from utterly condemning it, is, that it makes
a man an excellent Courtier, a curious carpet knight: which is by
interpretation, a fine close leacher, a glorious hypocrite. It is now a privy
note amongst the better sort of men, when they would set a singular mark or
brand on a notorious villain, to say, he has been in Italy.

With the Dane and the Dutchman I will not encounter, for they are simple
honest men, that with Danaus daughters do nothing but fill bottomless tubs, and
will be drunk and snort in the midst of dinner: he hurts himself only that
goes thither, he cannot lightly be damnd, for the vintners, the brewers, the
malt-men and ale-wiues pray for him. Pitch and pay. they will pray all day:
score and borrow, they will wysh him much sorrow. But lightly a man is nere
the better for their prayers, for they commit al deadly sin for the most part
of them in mingling their drink, the vintners in the highest degree.

Why jest I in such a necessary perswasiue discourse? I am a banished exile from
my country, though nere linkt in consanguinitie to the best: an Earl borne by
birth, but a beggar now as thou see. These many years in Italy have I lived
an outlaw. A while I had a liberal pension of the Pope, but that lasted not,
for he continued not: one succeeded him in his chair, that cared neither for
Englishmen nor his own countrymen. Then was I driu'n to pick up my crumbs
amongst the Cardinals, to implore the benevolence and charity of all the Dukes
of Italy whereby I have since made a poor shift to live, but so live, as I
wish myself a thousand times dead. Cum patriam amisi, tunc me periisse putato.
When I was banished, think I caught my bane.
The sea is the native soil to fishes, take fishes from the sea, they take no
joy nor thrive, but perish straight. So likewise the birds removed from the
air (the abode whereto they were borne) the beasts from the earth, and I from
England. Can a lamb take delight to be suckled at the breasts of a she-wolfe? I
am a lamb nourisht with the milk of wolves, one that with the Ethiopians
inhabiting over against M^ro^, feed on nothing but scorpions: use is another
nature, yet ten times more contentiue, were nature restored to her kingdom
from whence she is excluded. Believe me, no air, no bread, no fire, no water
agree with a man, or does him any good out of his own country. Cold fruits
never prosper in a hot soil, nor hot in a cold. Let no man for any transitory
pleasure sell away the inheritance of breathing he has in the place where he
was born. Get thee home my young lad, lay thy bones peaceably in the sepulcher
of thy fathers, ware old in ouer-looking thy grounds, be at hand to close the
eyes of thy kindred. The devil and I am desperate, he of being restored to
heaven, I of being recalled home.

Here he held his peace and wept. I glad of any opportunity of a full point to
part from him, told him I took his counsel in worth, what lay in me to
requite in love should not be lacking. Some business that concerned me
highly called me away very hastily, but another time I hoped we should meet.
Uerie hardly he let me go, but I earnestly ouerpleading my occasions, at
length he dismissed me, told me where his lodging was, and charged me to
visit him without excuse very often.

Heeres a stir thought I to my self after I was set at liberty, that is
worse than an vpbrayding lesson after a britching: certainly if I had bethought
me like a rascal as I was, he should have had an aue marie of me for his
cynicke exhortation. God plagud me for deriding such a grave fatherly
aduertiser. List the worst throw of ill l^ckes. Tracing up and down the City
to seek my Curtizan till the evening began to grow well in age, it fortuned.
the Element as if it had drunk too much in the afternoon, powrde down so
profoundly, that I was forced to creep like one afraid of the Watch close under
the pen^ises, where the cellar door of a Jews house called Zadoch (over which
in my direct way I did pass) being vnbard on the inside, over head and
ears I fell into it as a man falls in a ship from the oreloope into the hold:
or as in an earthquake the ground should open, and a blind man come feeling
pad pad over the open Gulf with his staff, should stumble on sudden into
hell. Having worn out the anguish of my fall a little with wallowing up and
down, I cast up mine eyes to see under what Continent I was: and lo, (O
destenie) I saw my Curtizans kissing very lovingly with a prentise. My back
and my sides I had hurt with my fall, but now my head sweld and akt worse than
both. I was even gathering wind to come upon her with a full blast of
contumely, when the Jew (awakde with the noise of my fall) came bustling down
the stairs, and rays^ng his other servants, attached both the Curtizane and
me for breaking his house, and conspiring with his prentise to rob him.

It was then the law in Rome, that if any man had a fellon fallen into his
hands, either by breaking into his house, or robbing him by the high way, he
might choose whether he would make him his bondman, or hang him. Zadoch (as
all Jews are covetous) casting with himself he should have no benefit by
casting me off the ladder, had another policy in his head: he went to one
Doctor Zachary the popes physician, that was a Jew and his Countryman
likewise, and told him he had the finest bargain for him that might be. It
is not concealed from me (says he) that the time of your accustomed yearly
Anatomy is at hand, which it behooues you under forfeiture of the foundation
of your College very carefully to provide for. The infection is great, and
hardly will you get a sound body to deal upon: you are my Countryman,
therefore I come to you first. Be it known unto you, I have a young man at
home feign to me for my bondman, of the age of eighteen, of stature tall,
straight limm'd, of as clear a complexion as any painters fancy can
imagine: go too, you are an honest man, and one of the scattered Children of
Abraham, you shall have him for five hundred crowns. Let me see him quoth
Doctor Zachary, and I will give you as much as another. Home he sent for
me, pinniond and shackeld I was transported along the street: where passing
under Iulianaes the Marquis of Mantuaes wives window, that was a lusty Bona
Roba one of the popes concubines, as she had her casement half open, she looked
out and spide me. At the first sight she was enamored with my age and beardles
face, that had in it no ill sign of phislognomie fatal to fetiers: after me
she sent to know what I was, wherein I had offended, and whether I was going?
My conducts resolved them all. She having received this answer, with a
lustful collachrimation lamenting my Jewish Praemunire, that body and goods I
should light into the hands of such a cursed generation, invented the moanes of
my release.

But first I Will tell you what betided me after I was brought to Doctor
Zacharies. The purblinde Doctor put on his spectacles and looked upon me: and
when he had thoroughly viewd my face, he caused me to be stripped naked, to
feel and grope whether each lim were sound, and my skin net infected. Then he
pierst my arm to ses how my blood ran: which assayes and searchings ended,
he gave Zadoch his full price and sent him away, then locked me up in a dark
chamber till the day of anatomy.

O the cold sweating cares which I conceived after I knew I should be cut like
a French summer dublet. Me thought already the blood began to gush out at my
nose: if a flea on the arm had but bit me, I deemed the instrument had pricked
me. Well, well, I may scoff at a shrowde turn, but there is no such ready
way to make a man a true Christian, as to persuade himself he is taken up for
an anatomy. I Will depose I praid then more than I did in seven year before.
Not a drop of sweat trickeled down my breast and my sides, but I dreamd it
was a smooth edgde razor tenderly slicing down my breast and my sides. If any
knocked at door, I supposed it was the beadle of Surgeons Hall come for me. In
the night I dreamd of nothing but Phlebotomie, bloody fluxes, incarnatiues,
running ulcers. I durst not let out a wheale for fear through it I should
bleed to death. For meat in this distance I had plum-porredge of purgations
ministered me one after another to clarify my blood, that it should not lie
cloddered in the flesh. Nor did he it so much for clarifying physic, as to
save charges. Miserable is that mouse that lives in a Physicians house,
Tantalus lives not so hunger-starud in hell, as she does there. Not the very
crumbs that fall from his table, but Zachary sweepes together, and of them
mouldes up a Man. Of the ashie parings of his bread, he would make conserve
of chippings. Out of boanes after the meat was eaten off, be would alchumize
an oil, that he sold for a shilling a dram. His snot and spittle a hundred
times he has put o^e: to his Apothecarie for snow water. Any Spider he would
temper to perect Mithridate. His rheumatique eyes when he went in the wind, or
rose early in a morning, dropped as cool allom water as you would request. He
was dame Niggardize sole heir and executor.

A number of old books had he eaten with the moathes and worms, now all day
would not he study a dodkin, but pick those worms and moathes out of his
Library, and of their mixture make a preservative against the plague.

The licour out of his shoes he would wring^ to make a sacred balsan^um
against barrennes. Spare we him a line or two, and look back to Iuliana, who
conflicted in her thoughts about me very debatefully, adventured to send a
messenger to Doctor Zachary in her name, very boldly to beg me of him, and
if she might not beg me, to buy me with what sums of money so ever he would
ask. Zachary iewishly and churlishly withstood both her suits, and said if
there were no more Christians on the earth, he would thrust his incision knife
into his throate-boule immediately. Which reply she taking at his hands most
despitefully, thought to cross him over the shins with as sor^ an ouerwhart
blow yet ere a month to an end. The pope (I know not whether at her entreaty
or no) within two days after fell sick, Doctor Zachary was sent for to
minister unto him, who seeing a little danger in his water, gave him a gentle
confortatiue for the stomach, and desired those near about him to persuade his
holiness to take some rest, and he doubted not but he would be forthwith well.
Who should receive this mild physic of him but the concubine Iuliana his
utter enemy, she being not unprovided of strong poison at that instant, in
the popes outward chamber so mingled it, that when his grande sublimitie taster
came so relish it, he sunk down stark dead on the pauement. Herewith the
pope called Iuliana, and asked her what strong concocted broth she had brought
him. She kneeled down on her knees, and said it was such as Zachary the Jew
had delivered her with his own hands, and therefore if it misliked his holiness
she craved pardon. The Pope without further sifting into the matter, would
have had Zachary and all Jews in Rome put to death, but she hung about his
knees, and with crocodile tears desired him the sentence might be lenified,
and they be all but banished at most. For doctor Zachary quoth she, your ten
times ungrateful physician, since notwithstanding his treacherous intent, he
has much art, and many sovereign simples, oiles, gargarismes and sirups in
his closet and house that may stand your mightines in stead, I beg all his
goods only for your beatitudes preservation and good. This request at the
first was sealed with a kiss, and the popes edict without delay proclaimed
throughout Rome, namely, that all fore-skinne clippers whether male or female
belonging to the old Iuri^, should depart and anoyde upon pain of hanging
within twenty days after the date thereof.

Iuliana two days before the proclamation came out, sent her servants to
extend upon Zacharies territori^s, his goods, his mooueables, his chattels and
his servants: who performed their commission to the utmost title, and left him
not so much as master of an vrinall case or a candle box. It was about six a
clock in the evening, when those boot-halers entered: into my chamber they
rusht, when I sat leaning on my elbow, and my left hand under my side,
devising what a kind of death it might be to be let blood till a man dye. I
cold to mind the assertion of some Philosophers, who said the soul was
nothing but blood: then thought I, what a filthy thing were this, if I should
let my soul fall and break his neck into a basin. I had but a pimple rose
with heat in that part of the vein where they use to prick, and I fearfully
misdeemed it was my soul searching for passage. Fie upon it, a man's breath to
be let out a backe-doore, what a villainy it is? To dye bleeding is all one as
if a man should dye pissing. Good drink makes good blood, so that, piss is
nothing but blood under age. Seneca and Lucan were lobcockes to choose that
death of all other: a pigge or a hog or any edible brute beast a cook or a
butcher deals upon, dies bleeding. To dye with a prick, wherewith the
faintest hearted woman under heaven would not be killed, O God it is infamous.

In this meditation did they seize upon me, in my cloak they muffeld me that
no man might know me, nor I see which way I was carried. The first ground I
touched after I was out of Zacharies house, was the Countess Iulianaes chamber:
little did I surmise that fortune reserved me to so fair a death. I made no
other reckoning all the while they had me on their shoulders, but that I was
on horseback to heaven, and carried to Church on a a beer, excluded for ever
for drinking any more ale or beer. Iuliana scornfully questiond them thus (as
if I had fallen into her hands beyond expectation), what proper apple-squire is
this you bring so suspitiously into my chamber? what has he done? or where had
you him? They answered likewise a far of, that in one of Zacharies chambers
they found him close prisner, and thought themselves guilty of the breach of
her Ladyships commandment if they should have left him behind. O quoth she,
ye love to be double diligent, or thought peradventure that I being a lone
woman stood in need of a love. Bring you me a princockes beardlesse boy (I
know not whence he is, nor whether he would) to call my name in suspense? I
tell you, you have abused me, and I can hardly brook it at your hands. You
should have lead him to the Magistrate, no commission received you of me but
for his goods and his servants. They besought her to excuse their ouerweening
error, it proceeded from a zealous care of their duty, and no negligent
default. But why should not I conjecture the worst quoth she? I tell you
troth. I am half in a iealozie he is some fantastical amorous yonckster, who
to dishonor me has hyr'd you to this stratagem. It is a likely matter that
such a man as Zachary should make a prison of his house, and deal in matters
of state. By your leave sir gallant^ under lock and key shall you stay with me,
till I have inquired further of you, you shall be sifted thoroughly ere you and
I part. Go maid show him to the further chamber at the end of the gallerie
that looks into the garden: you my trim pandars I pray guard him thither as
you took pains to bring him hither. When you have so so done, see the doors
be made fast, and come your way. Here was a wily wench had her liripoop
without ^ook, she was not to seek in her knackes and shifts: such are all
women, not one of them but has a cloak for the rain, and can bleare her
husbands eyes as she list. Not too much of this madam Marquis at once: well
step a little back, and dilate what Zadoch the Jew did with my curtizan, after
he had sold me to Zachary. Of an ill tree I hope you are not so ill ^^ghted in
graffing to expect good fruit: he was a Jew, and entreated her like a Jew.
Under shadow of enforcing her to tell how much money she had of his prentice so
to be trained to his cellar, he stripped her, and scourgd her from top to toe
tantara. Day by day he disgested his meat with leading her the measures. A
diamond Delphinicall dry leachour it was.

The ballet of the whipper of late days here in England, was but a scoff in
comparison of him. All the colliers of Romford, who hold their corporation by
yarking the blind bear at Paris garden, were but bunglers to him, he had the
right agility of the lash there were none of them could make the cord come
aloft with a twange half like him. Mark the ending, mark the ending. The
tribe of Judah is adjudged from Rome to be trudging, they may no longer be
lodged there, all the Albumazers, Rabisacks, Gedeons, Tebiths, Benhadads,
Benrodans Zedechiahs. Halies of them were banquerouts and turned out of house
and home. Zachary came running to Zadochs in sack cloth and ashes presently
after his goods were confiscated and and told him how he was served, and what
decree was coming out against them all. Descriptions stand by, here is to be
expressed the fury of Lucifer when he was turned over heaven bar for a
wrangler. There is a toad fish, which taken out of the water swells more than
one would think his skin could hold, and bursts in his face that touches
him. So swelled Zadoch, and was ready to burst out of his skin, and shoot
his bowels like chaine-shot full at Zacharies face for bringing him such
balefull tidings, his eyes glared and burnt bliewe like brinistone and aqua
vitae set on fire in an egshell, his very nose lightened glow-wormes, his teeth
crasht and grated together, like the joints of a high building cracking and
rocking like a cradle, when as a tempest takes her full but against his broad
side. He swore, he cursed, and said, these be they that worship that crucifide
God of Nazareth, here is the fruits of their newfound gospel, sulphur and
gunpouder carry them all quick to Gehenna. I would spend my soul willingly, to
have this triple headed Pope with all his sin-absolued whoores, and
oile-greased priests borne with a black sant on the devils backs in
procession to the pit of perdition. Would I might sink presently into ye
earth, so I might blow up this Rome, this whore of Babylon into the air with
my breath. If I must be banished, if those heathen dogs will needs rob me of my
goods, I will poison their springs and conduit heads, whence they receive all
their water round about the city, I Will tire all the young children into my house
that I c^n get, and cutting their throats barrel them up in poudring beef
tubbes, and so send them to victual the popes galleyes. Ere the officers come
to extend, I Will bestow a hundred pound on a doale of bread, which I Will cause to
be kneaded with Scorpions oil that may kill more than the plague. I Will hire
them that make their wafers or sacramentarie gods to minge them after the same
sort, so in the zeal of their superstitious religion, shall they languish and
droup like carrion. If there be ever a blasphemous coniurer, that can call the
winds from their brazen caves, and make the clouds travel before their time,
I Will give him the other hundred pounds to disturb the heavens a whole week
together with thunder and lightning, if it be for nothing but to sour all the
wines in Rome, and turn them to vinegar. As long as they have either oil or
wine, this plague feeds but pinglingly upon them.

Zadoch, Zadoch said Doctor Zachary* (cutting him off) thou threatenest the
air, while^ we perish here on earth. It is the Coun^esse Iuliana the
Marquess of Mantuaes wife and no other, that has complotted our confusion.
Ask not how, but insist in my words, and assist in revenge.

As how, as how, said Zadoch, shrugging and shrubbing. More happy than the
Patriarchs were I, if crushed to death with the greatest torments Romes tyrants
have tried, there might be quintessenst out of me one quart of precious poison.
I have a leg with an issue, shall I cut it off, and from his fount of
corruption extract a venom worse than any serpents? If thou will, I Will go to
a house that is infected, where catching the plague, and having got a running
sore upon me, I Will come and deliver her a supplication, and breathe upon her. I
know my breath stinkes so already, that it is within half a degree of poison.
I Will pay her home if I perfect it with any more putrefaction.

No, no brother Zadoch answered Zachary, that is not the way. Can thou
provide me ere a bond^maide, endued with singular and divine qualified
beauty, whom as a present from our synagogue thou may commend unto her,
desiring her to be good and gracious unto us.

I have, I am for you quoth Zadoch: Diamante come forth. Heeres a wench (said
he) of as clear a skin as Susanna, she has not a wemme on her flesh from the
soale of the foot to the crown of the head: how think you master doctor,
will she not serve the turn?

She will, said Zachary: and therefore I Will tell you what charge I would have
committed to her. But I care not if I disclose it only to her. Maid, (if thou
be a maid) come hither to me, thou must be sent to the countess of
Mantuaes about a small piece of service, whereby being now a bond woman thou
shall purchase freedom, and gain a large dowry to thy marriage. I know thy
master loves thee derely though he will not let thee perceive so much, he
intends after he is dead to make thee his heir, for he has no children:
please him in that I shall instruct thee, and thou art made for ever. So it is,
that the pope is far out of liking with the countess of Mantua his
concubine, and has put his trust in me his physician to have her quietly and
charitably made away. Now I cannot intend it, for I have many cures in hand
which call upon me hourly: thou if thou be placed with her as her waiting
maid or cup bearer, may temper poison with her broth, her meat, her drink,
her oils, her sirrups, and never be bewraid. I will not say whether the pope
has heard of thee, and thou may come to be his lemman in her place, if thou
behave thy self wisely. What, have thou the heart to go thorough with it or
no? Diamante deliberating with her self in what hellish servitude she lived
with the Jew, and that she had no likelihood to be releast of it, but fall from
evil to worse if she omitted this opportunity, resigned her self over wholly
to be disposed and emploid as seemed best unto them. Thereupon, without further
consultation, her wardrop was richly rigd, her tongue smooth filled and new
edged on the whetstone, her drugs deliuerd her, and presented she was by Zadoch
her master to the countess, together with some other slight new-^angles, as
from the whole congregation, desiring her to stand their merciful mistress,
and solicit the Pope for them, that through one man's ignorant offense were
all generally in disgrace with him, and had incurred the cruel sentence of
loss of goods and of banishment.

Iuliana liking well the pretty round face of my black browd Diamante, gave the
Jew better countenance than otherwise she would have done, and told him for her
own part she was but a private woman, and could promise nothing confidently
of his holiness: for though he had suffered himself to be ouer-ruled by her in
some humors, yet in this that tutcht him so nerely, she knew not how he would
be enclind: but what lay in her either to pacify or persuade him they should
be sure of, and so craved his absence.

His back turned, she asked Diamante what country woman she was, what friends
she had, and how she fell into the hands of that Jew? She answered, that she
was a Magnificoes daughter of Venice, stolen when she was young from her friends,
and sold to this Jew for a bondwoman, who (quoth she) has used me so iewishly
and tyrannously, that for ever I must celebrate the memory of this day,
wherein I am delivered from his jurisdiction. Alas (quoth she deep sighing) why
did I enter into any mention of my own misusage? It will be thought that that
which I am now to reueal^, proceeds of malice not truth. Madam, your life is
sought by these Jews that sue to you. Blush not, nor be troubled in your
mind, for with warning I shall arm you against all their intentions. Thus and
thus (quoth she) said doctor Zachary unto me, this poison he delivered me.
Before I was called in to them, such and such consultation through the creuise of
the door fast locked did I hear betwixt them. Deny it if they can, I will
justify it: only I beseech you to be favorable Lady unto me, and let me not
fall again into the hands of those vipers.

Iuliana said little but thought unhappily, only she thankt her for detecting
it, and vowed though she were her bond woman to be a mother unto her. The
poison she took of her, and set it up charily on a shelfe in her closet,
thinking to keep it for some good purposes: as for example, when I was
consumed and worn to the bones through her abuse, she would give me but a dram
too much, and pop me into a privy. So she had served some of her paramours
ere that, and if God had not sen^ Diamante to be my redeemer, undoubtedly I had
drunk of the same cup.

In a leaf or two before was I locked up: here in this page ^he foresaid
goodwife Countess comes to me, she is no longer a judge but a client. How she
came, in what manner of attire, with what immodest and uncomely words she
courted me, if I should take upon me to enlarge, all modest ears would abhor
me. Some inconvenience she brought me too by her ^a^ loc-like behavior, of
which enough I can never repent ^e.

Let that be forgiu'n and forgotten, fleshly delight^ could not make her
slothful or slumbring in revenge against Zadoch She set men about him to
incense and egg him on in courses of coffeehouse, and other superuising
espialls, to plye follow and spur forward those suborning incensers. Both
which played their parts so, that Zadoch of his own nature violent, swore by the
arc of Iehoua to set the whole city on fire ere he went out of it. Zachary
after he had furnished the wench with the poison, and given her instructions to
go to the devil, durst not stay one hour for fear of disclosing, but fled
to the Duke of Burbon that after sacked Rome, and there practiced with his
bastardship all the mischief against the pope and Rome that envy could put
into his mind. Zadoch was left behind for the hangman. According to his oath,
he provided balls of wild fire in a readiness, and laid trains of gun-pouder
in a hundred several places of the city to blow it up, which he had set fire
too, as also bandiet his balls abroad, if his attendant spies had not taken him
with ye manner. To the straightest prison in Rome he was dragged, where from
top to toe he was clogd with ^etters and maracles. Iuliana informed the pope of
Zacharies and his practice, Zachary was sought for, but non est inuentus, he
was packi^g long before. Commandment was given, that Zadoch whom they had
under hand and s^ale of lock and key, should be executed with all the fiery
torments that could be found out.

I Will make short work, for I am sure I have wearied all my readers. To the
execution place was he brought, where first and foremost he was stripped, then on
a sharp ^ron stake fastened in the ground, had he his fundament pitched, which
stake ran up along into his body like a spit, under his arme-hoales two of
like sort, a great bon-fire they made round about him, where with his flesh
roasted not burnd: and ever as with the heat his skin blistered, the fire was
drawn ^side, and they basted him with a mixture of Aqua fortis, allam water,
and Mercury sublimatum, which smarted to the very soul of him, and searched him
^o the marrowe. Then did they scourge his back parts so blistered and basted,
with burning whips of red hot wire: his head they noynted over with pitch and
tar, and so enflamed it. To his privy members they tied streaming
fier-workes, the skin from the cr^st of his shoulder, as also from his
elbowes, his ^uckle bones, his knees, his ankles they plucked and gnawd off with
sparkling pincers: his breast and his belly with seal skins they grated over,
which as fast as they grated and rawed, one stood over and lau'd with smithes
cindry water and aqua vitae: his nails they half raised up, and then under
propt them with sharp pricks like a taylers shop window half open on a
holiday: every one of his fingers they rent up to the wrist: his toes they
brake off by the roots, and let them still hang by a little skin. In
conclusion, they had a small oil fire, such as men blow light bubbles of
glass with, and beginning at his feet, they let him lingringly burn up lin me
by limme, till his heart was consumed, and then he died. Triumph women, this was
the end of the whipping Jew, contrived by a woman, in revenge of two women, her
self and her maid.

I have told you or should tell you in what credit Diamante grew with her
mistres. Iuliana never dreamed but she was an authentical maid: she made her
the chief of her bed chamber, she appointed none but her to look into me, and
serve me of such necessaries as I lacked. You must suppose when we met there
was no small rejoicing on either part, much like the three Brothers that went
three several wa^es to seek their fortunes, and at the years end at those
three cross ways met again, and told one another how they sped: so alter we
had been long asunder seeking our fortunes, we con mented one to another most
kindly, what cross haps ^ad encountered us. Nere a six hours but the Count^sse
cloyd me with her company. It grew to this pass, that either I must find
out some miraculous means of escape, or drop away in a consumption, as one
pined for lack of meat: I was clean spent and done, there was no hope of me.

The year held on his course to domes day, when Saint Peter's day dawned. That
day is a day of supreme solemnity in in Rome, when the Ambassador of Spain
comes and presents a milk white iennet to the pope, that knaeles down upon
his own accord in token of obeisaunce and humility before him, and lets him
stride on his back as east as one strides over a block: with this iennet is
offered a rich purse of a yard length, full of Peter Pence. No music that
has the gift of utterance, but sounds all the while: coapes and costly
vestments deck the hoarsest and beggerliest singing man, not a clarke or
sexten is absent, no nor a mule nor a foote-cloth belonging to any cardinal,
but attends on the tail of the triumph. The pope himself is borne in his
pontificalibus thorough the Burgo (which is the chief street in Rome) to the
Ambassadors house to dinner, and thither resorts all the assembly: where if a
Poet should spend all his life time in describing a banquet, he could not feast
his auditors half so well with words, as he does his guests with iunkets.

To this feast Iuliana addressed her self like an Angel: in a littour of
green needle-worke wrought like an arbor, and open on every side was she
borne by four men, hidden under cloth rough plushed and wouen like eglantine
and wood-bine. At the four corners it was topt with four round crystal
cages of Nightingales. For foot men, on either side of her went four virgins
clad in lawne, with lutes in their hands playing. Next before her two and two
in order, a hundred pages in suits of white cipresse, and long horse-mens
coats of cloth of silver: who being all in white, advanced every one of them
her picture, enclosed in a white round screene of feathers, such as is carried
over great Princesses heads when they ride in summer, to keep them from the
heat of the sun. Before the^ went a foure-score head women she maintaind in
green gowns, scattring strowing herbs and flowers. After her followed the
blind, the halt and the lame sumptuously apparailed like Lords: and thus past
she on to Saint Peter's.

Interea quid agitur domi, how is it at home all this while. My curtizan is left
my keeper, the keys are committed unto her, she is mistres fac totum. Against
our countess we conspire, pack up all her jewels, plate, money that was
extant, and to the water side send them: to conclude, courageously rob her, and
run away. Quid non auri sacra fames? What defame will not gold salve. He
mistook himself that invented the proverb, Dimicandum est pro aris and
focis: for it should have been pro auro and fama: not for altares and fires we
must contend, but for gold and fame.

Oars nor wind could not stir nor blow faster, than we ^oyld out of Tiber;
a number of ^ood fellows would give size are and the dice that with as little
toil they could leave Tyburne behind them. Out of ken we were ere the
Countes^e came from the feast. When she returned and found her house not so
much pestred as it was wont, her chests her closets and her cupbords broke open
to take air, and that both I and my keeper was missing: O then she fared like
a frantic Barchinall, she stamped, she star'd, she beat her head against the
walls, scratcht her face, bit her fingers, and strewed all the chamber with her
hair. None of her servants durst stay in her ^^ght, but she beat them out in
heaps, and bad them go seek search they knew not where, and hang themselves,
and never look her in the face more, if they did not hunt us out. After her
fury had reasonably spent it self, her breast began to swell with the mother,
caused by her former fretting and chasing, and she grew very ill at ease.
Whereupon she knocked for one of her maids, and bad her run into her closet,
and fetch her a little glass that stood on the upper shelfe, wherein there was
spiritus vini. The maid went, and mistaking took the glass of poison which
Diamante had given her, and she kept in store for me. Coming with it as fast
as her legs could carry her, her mistres at her return was in a ^wound, and
lay for dead on the floor, whereat she shrikt out, and fell a rubbing and
chafing her very busily. When that would not serve, she took a keye and opened
her mouth, and having heard that spiritus vini was a thing of mighty
operation, able to call a man from death to life, she took the poison, and
verily thinking it to be spiritus vini (such as she was sent for) powrd a large
quantity of it into her throat, and iogd on her back to digest it. It
revived her with a merry vengeance, for it kilde her outright: only she
awakend and lift up her hands, but spoke nere a word. Then was the maid in her
grandames beans, and knew not what should become of her: I heard the Pope
took pity on her, and because her trespass was not voluntary but
chance-medly, he assigned her no other punishment but this, to drink out the
rest of the poison in the glass that was left, and so go scot-free. We
careless of these mischances, held on our flight, and saw no man come after
us but we thought had pursued us. A thief they say mistakes every bush for a
true man, the wind ratled not in any bush by the way as I rode, but I
straight drew my rapier. To Bolognia with a merry gale we posted, where we
lodged our selves in a blind street out of the way, and kept secret many
days: but when we perceived we saild in the haven, that the wind was laid,
and no alarm made after us, we boldly came abroad: and one day hearing of a
more desperate murdrer than Cayn that was to be executed, we followed the
multitude, and grutcht not to lend him our eyes at his last parting.

Who should it be but one Cutwolfe, a wearish dwar^ish writhen faced cobbler,
brother to Bartoll the Italian, that was confederate with Esdras of Granado,
and at that time stole away my curtizan* when he ravished Heraclide.

It is not so natural for me to epitomize his impiety, as to hear him in his
own person speak upon the wheel where he was to suffer.

Prepare your ears and your tears, for never till this thrust I any
tragical matter upon you. Strange and wonderful are Gods judgments, here
shine they in their glory. Chaste Heraclide, thy blood is laid up in heavens
treasury, not one drop of it was lost, but lent out to usury: water powered
forth sinkes down quietly into the earth, but blood spilt on the ground
sprinkles up to the firmament. Murder is widemouthd, and will not let God rest
till he grant revenge. Not only the blood of the slaughtred innocent but the
soul ascends to his throne, and there cries out and exclaimes for justice
and recompense. Guilties souls that live every hour subject to violence, and
with your despairing fears do much empaire Gods providence: fasten your eyes
on this spectacle that will add to your faith. Refer all your oppressions
afflictions and injuries to the even balanced eye of the Almighty, he it is,
that when your patience sleeps, will be most exceeding mindful of you.

This is but a gloss upon the text: thus Cutwolfe begins his insulting oration.

Men and people that have made holy-daie to behold my pained flesh toil on the
wheel. Expect not of me a whining penitent slave, that shall do nothing but
cry and say his prayers, and so be crushed in pieces. My body is little, but
my mind is as great as a Giants: the soul which is in me, is the very soul
of Julius Caesar by reuersion. My name is Cutwolfe, neither better nor worse by
occupation, than a poor cobbler of Verona, cobblers are men and kings are no
more. The occasion of my coming hither at this present, is to have a few of
my bones broken (as we are all borne to die) for being the death of the
Emperor of homicides Esdras of Granado. About two years since in the streets
of Rome he slew the only and eldest brother I had named Bartoll, in
quarrelling about a curtizan. The news brought to me as I was sitting in my
shop under a stall knocking in of tackes, I think I raisd up my bristles, sold
pritch-aule, sponge, blacking tub, and punching iron, bought me rapier and
pistol, and to go I went. Twenty months together I pursued him, from Rome to
Naples, from Naples to Caiete passing over the river, from Caiete to Syenna,
from Syenna to Florence, from Florence to Parma, from Parma to Pauia, from
Pauia to Syon, from Syon to Geneua, from Geneua back again toward Rome:
where in the way it was my chance to meet him in the nicke here at Bolognia, as
I will tell you how. I saw a great fray in the streets as I past along, and
many swords walking, whereupon drawing nearer, and enquiring who they were,
answer was returned me it was that notable Bandetto Esdras of Granado, O so I
was tickled in the spleen with that word, my heart hop^ and daunst, my elbowes
itcht, my fingers friskt, I will not what should become of my feet, nor knew
what I did for joy. The fray parted. I thought it not convenient to single him
out (being a sturdie knave) in the street, but to stay till I had got him at
more advantage. To his lodging I dogd him, lay at the door all night where he
entered, for fear he should give me the slip any way. Betimes in the morning
I rung the bell and craved to speak with him: up to his chamber door I was
brought, where knocking, he rose in his shirt and let me in, and when he was
entered, bad me lock the door and declare my arrant, and so he slipped to bed
again.

Marry this quoth I is my arrant. Thy name is Esdras of Granado, is it not?
Most treacherously thou (...) my brother Bartoll about two years ago in the
streets of Rome: his death am I come to revenge. In quest of thee ever since
above three thousand miles have I trauaild. I have begd to maintain me the
better part of the way, only because I would intermit no time from my pursuit
in going back for money. Now have I got thee naked in my power, die thou
shall, though my mother and my grandmother dying did entreat for thee. I have
promised the devil thy soul within this hour, break my word I will not, in
thy breast I intend to bury a bullet. Stir not, quinch not, make no noise:
for if thou do it will be worse for thee.

Quoth Esdras, what ever thou be at whose mercy I lie, spare me, and I will
give thee as much gold as thou will ask. Put me to any pains my life
reserved, and I willingly will sustain them: cut off my arms and legs, and
leave me as a lazer to some loathsome spittle, where I may but live a year to
pray and repent me. For thy brothers death the despair of mind that has ever
since haunted me, the guilty gnawing worm of conscience I feel may be
sufficient penance. Thou can not send me to such a hell, as already there
is in my heart. To dispatch me presently is no revenge, it will soon be
forgotten: let me dye a lingering death, it will be remembered a great deal
longer. A lingering death may avail my soul, but it is the illest of ills
that can befortune my body. For my souls health I beg my bodies torment: be
not thou a devil to torment my soul, and send me to eternal damnation. Thy
ouer-hanging sword hides heaven from my sight, I dare not look up, least I
embrace my deaths-wound unawares: I cannot pray to God, and plead to thee both
at once. Ay me, already I see my life buried in the wrinckles of thy brows:
say but I shall live, though thou meanest to kill me. Nothing confounds like to
sudden terror, it thrusts every sense out of office. Poison wrapped up in
sugared pills is but half a poison: the fear of deaths looks are more
terrible than his stroke. The whilst I view death, my faith is deaded: where
a man's fear is, there his heart is. Fear never engenders hope: how can I hope
that heavens father will save me from the hell everlasting, when he gives me
over to the hell of thy fury.

Heraclide* now think I on thy fears sown in the dust, (thy tears, that my
bloody mind made barraine). In revenge of thee, God hardens this man's heart
against me: yet I did not slaughter thee, though hundreds else my hand has
brought to the shambles. Gentle sir, learn of me what it is to clog your
conscience with murder, to have your dreams, your sleeps, your solitary
walks troubled and disquieted with murder. Your shaddowe by day will
affright you, you will not see a weapon vnsheathd, but immediately you will
imagine it is predestinate for your destruction.

This murder is a house divided within it self: it subornes a man's own soul
to inform against him: his soul (being his accuser) brings forth his two
eyes as witnesses against him: and the least eye witness is vnrefutable.
Pluck out my eyes if thou will, and deprive my traiterous soul of her two
best witnesses. Dig out my blasphemous tongue with thy dagger, both tongue
and eyes will I gladly forgo, to have a little more time to think on my
journey to heaven.

Defer a while thy resolution. I am not at peace with the w^rld, for even but
yesterdaye I sought, and in my surie threatened further vengeance: had I face
to face ask forgiveness, I should think half my sins were forgiven. A
hundred Devils haunt me daily for my horrible murders: the devils when I dye
will be loath to go to hell with me, for they desired of Christ he would not
send them to hell before their time: if they go not to hell, into thee they
will go, and hideously vex thee for turning them out of their habitation.
Wounds I contemn, life I prize light, it is another worlds tranquillity which
makes me so timorous: everlasting damnation, everlasting howling and
lamentation. It is not from death I request thee to deliver me, but from this
terror of torments eternity. Thy brothers body only I pierst unadvisedly,
his soul meant I no harm too at all: my body and soul both shall thou cast
away quite, if thou do at this instant what thou may. Spare me, spare me
I beseech thee: by thy own souls salvation I desire thee, seek not my souls
utter perdition: in destroying me, thou destroyest thy self and me. Eagerly I
replide after his long suppliant oration; Though I knew God would never have
mercy on me except I had mercy on thee, yet of thee no mercy would I have.
Revenge in our tragedies continually is raised from hell: of hell do I esteem
better than heaven, if it afford me revenge. There is no heaven but revenge. I
tell thee, I would not have undertook so much toil to gain heaven, as I have
done in pursuing thee for revenge. Divine revenge, of which (as of the ioies
above) there is no fulness or satietie. Look how my feet are blistered with
following thee from place to place. I have riuen my throat with ouerstraining
it to curse thee. I have grownd my teeth to powder with grating and grinding
them together for anger, when any has named thee. My tongue with vain
threats is bolne, and waxen too big for my mouth. My eyes have broken their
strings with staring and looking ghastly, as I stood devising how to frame or
set my countenance when I met thee. I have nere spent my strength in imaginary
acting on stone walls, what I determined to execute on thee. Entreat not, a
miracle may not repriue thee: villain, thus march I with my blade into thy
bowels.

Stay, stay exclaimed Esdras* and hear me but one word further. Though
neither for God nor man thou carest, but placest thy whole felicity in murder,
yet of thy felicity learn how to make a greater felicity. Respite me a
little from thy swords point, and set me about some execrable enterprise, that
may subvert the whole state of Christendom, and make all men's ears tingle
that hear of it. Command me to cut all my kindreds throats, to burn men
women and children in their beds in millions, by firing their Cities at
midnight. Be it Pope, Emperor or Turk that displeases thee, he shall not
breath on the earth. For thy sake will I swear and forswear, renounce my
baptism, and all the interest I have in any other sacrament. Only let me live
how miserable soever, be it in a dungeon amongst toades, serpents and adders,
or set up to the neck in dung. No pains I will refuse how ever proroged, to
have a little respite to purify my spirit: oh hear me, hear me, and thou
can not be hardened against me.

At this his importunity I paused a little, not as retyring from my wreakful
resolution, but going back to gather more forces of vengeance. With my self I
devised how to plague him double for his base mind. My thoughts traueld in
quest of some notable new Italionisme, whose murdrous platform might not
only extend on his body, but his soul also. The ground work of it was this.
That whereas he had promised for my sake to swear and forswear, and commit
Iulian-like violence on the highest seals of religion: if he would but thus
far satisfy me he should be dismissed from my fury. First and foremost he
should renounce God and his laws, and utterly disclaim the whole title or
interest he had in any covenant of salvation. Next he should curse him to his
face, as Job was willed by his wife, and write an absolute firm obligation of
his soul to the devil, without condition or exception. Thirdly and lastly
(having done this), he should pray to God fervently never to have mercy
upon him, or pardon him. Scarce had I propounded these articles unto him, but
he was beginning his blasphemous abiurations. I wonder the earth opened not and
swallowed us both, hearing the bold terms he blasted forth in contempt of
Christianity: Heaven has thundered when half less contumelies against it
have been uttered. Able they were to raise Saints and Martirs from their
graves, and pluck Christ himself from the right hand of his father. My ioints
trembled and quakt with attending them, my hair stood upright, and my heart was
turned wholly to fire. So affectionately and zealously did he give himself
over to infidelity, as if satan had gotten the upper hand of our high Maker.
The vein in his left hand that is derived from his heart with no faint blow he
pierst, and with the blood that flowd from it, writ a full obligation of his
soul to the devil: yea, more earnestly he praid unto God never to forgive it
his soul, than many Christians do to save their souls. These fearful
ceremonies brought to an end, I bad him open his mouth and gape wide. He did so
(as what will not slaves do for fear). Therewith made I no more adoo, but shot
him full into the throat with my pistol: no more spoke he after, so did I shoot
him that he might never speak after, or repent him. His body being dead lookd
as black as a toad: the devil presently branded it for his own. This is the
fault that has called me hither. No true Italian but will honor me for it.
Revenge is the glory of Arms, and the highest performance of valor: revenge
is whatsoever we call law or justice. The farther we wade in revenge, the
nerer come we to the throne of the Almighty. To his scepter it is properly
ascribed, his scepter he lends unto man, when he lets one man scourge another.
All true Italians imitate me, in revenging constantly, and dying valiantly.
Hangman to thy task, for I am ready for the utmost of thy rigor. Herewith all
the people (outragiously incensed) with one conjoined out-crye yelled mainely,
Away with him, away with him, Executioner torture him, tear him, or we will
tear thee in pieces if thou spare him.

The executioner needed no exhortation hereunto, for of his own nature was he
hackster good enough: old excellent he was at a bone-ache. At the first chop
with his wood-knife would he fish for a man's heart, and fetch it out as easily
as a plum from the bottom of a porredge pot. He would crack necks as fast
as a cook crackes eggs: a fiddler cannot turn his pin so soon, as he would
turn a man of the ladder. Bravely did he drum on this Cutwolfes bones, not
breaking them outright, but like a sadler knocking in of tackes, tarring on
them quaueringly with his hammer a great while together. No joint about him but
with a hatchet he had for the nonce, he dissoynted half, and then with boiling
lead souldred up the wounds from bleeding. His tongue he pulled out, least he
should blaspheme in his torment: venomous slinging worms he thrust into his
ears, to keep his head rauingly occupied: with cankers scruzed to pieces he
rubd his mouth and his gums. No l^m of his but was lingringly splinterd in
shiuers. In this horror left they him on the wheel as in hell: where yet
living, he might behold his flesh legacied amongst the souls of the air.
Unsearchable is the book of our destenies. One murder begets another: was
never yet bloodshed barrain from the beginning of the world to this day.
Mortifiedly abiected and danted was I with this trunculent tragedy of Cutwolfe
and Esdras. To such straight life did it thence forward incite me, that ere I
went out of Bolognia I married my curtizane, periormed many alms deeds; and
hasted so fast cut of the Sodom of Italy that within forty days I arrived at
the King of Englands Camp twixt Ardes and Guines in France: where he with
great triumphs met and entertained the Emperor and the French King, and
feasted many days. And so as my Story began with the King at Turnay and
Turwin, I think meet here to end it with the King at Ardes and Guines. All
the conclusiue Epilogue I will make is this; that if herein I have pleased any,
it shall animate me to more pains in this kind. Otherwise I will swear upon
an English Chronicle, never to be outlandish Chronicler more while I live.
Farewell as many as wish me well. June 27. 1593.

FINIS.

