THE ANSWER made by the Noble Lords the States, unto the Ambassador of
Polonia.

Imprinted at Amsterdam by Peter Geuaerts, dwelling in Lynbaeus Pat. Anno. 1597.

decorative design

LONDON. Imprinted by John Windet. 1597.

Sigismundus the third by the grace of God King of Polonia. Great prince of
Letawen, Duke of the Russians, Prussians, Massawes, Samayts and Liefland, and
King of Sweden and VVenden.
WOrthy, Honorable, noble, esteemed, famous, beloved and especial.
We being moved by many and true causes and especially by the consideration of
yt present estate of Christendom: Do send to you the Honorable Pawel Van
Dyialyn our Courtier. To the end you should courteously and willingly hear him
in that which on your own behalfes he is to propound. Which thing how be it
we assure our selves you will perform of your own accord, yet nevertheless we
earnestly require you thereunto, and do offer unto you every way our
Inclination and good will.

Given at Warsaw the 19. of May, Anno 1597 in the tenth year of our Reign in
Polonia, and in our fourth year in Sweden. Subscribed Sigismundus Rex.

The direction is. To the worthy Honorable Noble esteemed and famous the
States of the united Provinces in the Low Countries, our beloved and especial.
THE ANSWER made by the Noble Lords and States, unto the Ambassador of
Polonia.
THe States general of the united Provinces with all dutifulness, have given
ear unto the proposition made by the Honorable Pawle Van Dyialyn in ye name
of the most excellent and puissant King of Polonia and Sweden. And upon
communication had concerning the same with the most excellent Prince and
Council of estate: Have concluded to answer thereunto in brief. Viz. That
they very willingly do understand that his most excellent Majesty, so
graciously wishes all good from God, unto these united Provinces. And for the
same they in like manner by their prayer do wish unto the said most excellent
and puissant King, long life, faithful Council and prosperous success,
against the general enemy of him and of all Christendom.

And as for that which the said Honorable Lord Ambassador furthermore did
declare at large, touching the cruel wars of the Turk, howbeit the States
here before by their many evident signs and other witnesses have had
understanding thereof, yet his forces and the perilous dangers of Christendom
being now so manifestly represented before their eyes, do make them exceeding
much agrieued.

Also the States be wholly of the same opinion and meaning with the said most
excellent and puissant King. That if (all debate being set aside) the Kings and
Princes did conioyne their weapons and forces in one, (which in the deepest
dangers of Christendom hitherto yet never could be brought to pass.) That
then Christendom might lightly be freed from these mischiefs.

But it exceedingly grieueth the states: That the said most excellent King of
Polonia and Sweden is so preposterously incensed by the euill-willers of these
Countries. That his Majesty should think, that these wars which the said
States (being thereunto of necessity forced) do maintain. Be the cause that
the King of Spain conuerteth not his Soldiers and Treasures, for the
suppressing of the Turk and of ye other enemies of Christendom. For insomuch
as concerns the States, the cause why they maintain these lamentable wars
which already have continued so many years: Has been long since more then
sufficiently unto all Christendom known, neither think they it now to be
needful nor do mean to set down here in many words, what the power is of
Kings over or above their Subjects.

But do (Signify.) That these Low Countries (as publicly it is known) never
had any Kings but only Princes, as namely Dukes and Earls, who have been
tide and Liable unto Laws, certain, no less then the people and subjects.

Wherefore insomuch as the K. of Spain, these many years with intolerable
tyrany, has oppressed these Countries, contrary to their ancient laws and
priueledges, by his own oath confirmed. And has also without any just cause,
caused many hundred thousands of people to be destroyed, and kept in hold,
yea afterward (contrary to the laws of all Nations) executed the Messengers
of these countries that were men noble and of honor, sent over into Spain to
entreat for an end of his cruelties, to be made. And moreover afterward
without consent of the States, has brought in new Taxations never hard of
before, and banished out of the Country an innumerable multitude of people of
all manner of conditions and degrees. It is not to be wondered at, that (all
Pariens being overcome) in fine our God has furnished weapons, whereby under
conduct of the right puissant Regent the noble Prince of Orange: First Holland
and Seal^nd, and then afterward the other Provinces did rescue, or franchised
themselves, which they have taken in hand much latter then the continual
cruelties and tyranny of these Spaniards merited, and then the Princes and
States of any other Provinces would. Who would not for the shortest while
have suffered the hundredth part of those mischiefs and evils, which the
inhabitants of these provinces so many years since have endured?

And how be it that the States of their natural love toward their Lords,
have tried all things that might tend to the avoiding of wars, and in like
manner have intended all means for peace, not only by themselves, but also
that even the Emperor, the Queens Majesty of England, the King of France,
and also the Germain Princes have been mediators therein. Yet never the nearer
could the same be brought to pass. Which is the cause that they perceiving no
more hope of any lawful peace, and having to the grievous loss of the
Countries, learned that the king of Spain under the cloak of entreaty for
peace, did pretend to rent in sunder the union of the countries, and to
surprise the Towns, have after the destruction of many men in wars, and the
overthrow of many Towns, and after many manner of calamities suffered, been
constrained to betake them to some other Counsel.

And so what at all times has been free for all Nations, that they may cast
off from their necks the insupportable burdens yea of the Kings themselves,
as many examples can make manifest. The same ever has been permitted and free
for the free nation of the Low Dutch Countries, in proceeding to make a
lawful and necessary declaration, that the Lord of the country is fallen from
all his right, the which thing many years since has been not only permitted
and concluded, but also by Edict or Placat published. After the which many of
the Provinces condescended unto the Duke of Alenson brother to the King of
France to be their Lord, and did after his decease (as also theretofore) under
the government of the said right excellent Prince of Orange, against the
Spaniardes follow or prosecute the wars, and he being in villainous manner
after the president of barbarous nations (through public rewards propounded
by the Spaniardes) brought to his end traitorously not in public battle but
at home. Also the enemy they having recovered hope, that the affairs of these
Countries would not only come to lamentable commotion, but also fall to utter
ruin and decay: Yet the same notwithstanding these Provinces by the help of
God Almighty) on whom alone the States depend) have under conduct of his most
worthy son Prince Maurice been not only protected, but also with his years
increased, grown, and in their bounds enlarged.

Now in that concerns the King of Spain, and his intent and heart (which best
by his works may be known.) It is notorious that he intends nothing less,
then to war against the Turk, but that he under color of upholding the
Romish Religion, seeks to reign over all Christian Princes: For what else is
or ever has been the cause of his wars against the most excellent Queen of
England? What else has moved him to step into the French wars, and to seek
after the Kingdom of France? and to endeavor to withdraw or turn the
Dukedom of Guylik and cleave from their right Lords and successors, wherein
he few Months since amongst other his affairs tending to the same, has dealt
with the Emperor by the Admiral of Arragon? beside the subtle snares by him
wrought against those of Aken and Wesell, and more other Rijks estates and
places, (if truth may be spoken:) But only for to become over all things of
Christendom the universal Lord? And for to attain thereunto the only drift
of the king of Spain is, that he under external show of entreatie for peace
might bring these Countries under his power with oppression of their ancient
laws and priueledges, and set or place down the seat of his wars against
the Princes of all kingdoms there. Where he should find forces both by water
and land and also money in a readiness.

Which thing being by the Queens most excellent Majesty of England discretly
considered of, she as a defendor of true Religion many year since, is entered
into League with these Countries.

And where in respect hereof lately, also is made a League between the King of
France and the said Queen of England: The said united Provinces are also
accepted in and unto the same.

Whereupon the said Lord Ambassador may easily understand, how inconvenient it
is for the States in this constitution and shape of causes, to give admonition
of that which his Lordshippe does propound, either unto the foresaid Prince,
or to the particular States of the several Provinces aforesaid.

Especially considering that they are instructed by so manifold examples, that
the enemy intends or practices nothing but under the sweet name of entreaty
for peace, to cloak the afterclaps of war, and to entrappe them unwarily
with deceat: Of the which the States hope his most excellent Majesty will
earnestly take consideration and not so much account of his affinity with the
K. of Spain, but that he rather will awaken up and endeavor for the vantage and
welfare of whole Christendom.

And in that the Lord Ambassador made mention of the letters of the most
excellent King Steven his Majesty's predicessor. The same has been right
acceptable, declaring very honorably that Kings Council in the government of
his people and Subjects.

And for so much as the States mind in heart nothing more, then to satisfy
all Kings touching the causes of these wars and other their proceedings.
Therefore they diligently have answered the same letters to the end they
jointly might make manifest, how earnestly they always have endeavored to
continue the good will and love of the King of Poland toward these Countries.

In which earnest desire and will, they always will persevere toward his most
excellent Majesty, not doubting but that his Majesty will infringeably
uphold the mutable traffic and trade which cannot be impeached so long as
the common laws of all Nations in reason shall take place.

For the rest the said States do right humbly commend unto his most excellent
Majesty, the welfare and estate of these Provinces and will again most
earnestly endeavor, yt they may not only deserve his Majesty's good will but
also increase the same toward them.

The States also do beseech the said Honorable Lord Ambassador, earnestly to
signify the same unto his most excellent Majesty and lovingly to prefer
these Countries, on which kindness and service the states will have respect when
occasion shall so require.

Given in Sgrauen Hage the 22. of July. 1597.

