parallel ladders Essentia Dej
Omnipotentia Dej Iustitia Dej Sapientia Theorica Dej Sapientia practica Dej
Misericordia Dej Angeli Aer SOL. Luna. Stellae. Ignis Aqua Mundus Terra Anima
Hominis Homo

JACOB'S LADDER Consisting of fifteen Degrees or Ascents to the knowledge of
GOD by the Consideration of His Creatures and Attributes

1638.

LONDON.

Printed for Henry Seile and are to be sold at the Tigres-head against St.
Dunstans Church in fleetstreet.

Will: Marshall sculp^it.


To the Christian READER.
IT is the receivedopinion of all, that of all the creatures which GOD (the
Sovereign Creator) made from the beginning, ^one was created by him more noble
and excellent, (next to the Angels) then Man: and that for his sake all things
were made; as Heaven, Earth, Sea, and all that ^re in them; yea, that the
Angels themselves, and Principalities ^ere ordained to be subservient ^o him.

But Man, being so richly en^owed, and tied to his maker, in ^o greater bonds
then benefits and blessings, became rebellious and unthankful to his so liber
all Benefactor; and not duly understanding his dignity and excellency, nor
satisfied with such extraordinary favors, out of those things from which he
should have taken occasion to love GOD his Maker, extracted that matter which
produced his treason: and affecting no less then a Deity, rebelled, and brake
the commands of his Creator: for which he was justly expelled Paradise, and
deprived of that honor, which he formerly possessed, and is now compared to
the Beasts that perish. Psalm. 49. 20.


This was a woeful Metamorphosis; an unhappy change: from the best, to become
the worst o^ Creatures, and that so suddenly Nor was this the worst of hi^
misery; for by his fall, the whol^ mass of Mankind (his posterity) became so
corrupt, as tha^ (the Devil excepted) Man wa^ the most miserable of all other
creatures: by nature frail and weak; headlong in affections; tormented with
cares and anxieties; mad in desires; blind in understanding; weak in will,
corrupt in memory; obnoxious to all diseases, miseries, and troubles: and
lastly, liable to infernal punishment; and not without just cause: for he,
which became a companion with the Devil in sin, was worthily made his
associate in sufferings.

Now, Man being thus wretched and miserable, by incurring GODS high
displeasure; it pleased the same most good and gracious GOD, not perpetually to
look upon the injury done to his high Majesty, but to compassionate his
misery; and rather pitying his error, then desiring revenge; determined to
repair his woeful condition, and to reconcile him to himself. But what tongue
or pen is sufficient to express the manner of this atonement? Nay, who can
conceive, what it was, that wrought this reconciliation? Surely nothing but his
own meore compassion; and that by such a way, as may breed astonishment in the
most senseless heart.

By His Son, His only Son, CHRIST JESUS, GOD and Man brought he this great
work to pass; who made such a peace between the Creator and Man; such an
agreement or pacification, as that he not only pardoned the offense, but
received the delinquent to grace, making him one and the same with himself, by
the bond of love.

And as we are infinitely indebted for this high benefit in general; so are we
no less obliged to him for the manner of our Redemption, then for the
Redemption it self. For there were many ways, whereby he might have saved us,
without labor, without price: yet so wonderful was his bounty to us; so great
his goodness and love, that he would have it wrought by the infinite pains
and sorrows, (even to the loss of the dearest blood and life) of His only
Son; and that, by the shameful Death of the Cross; and all this (I say) for
the love of us, without benefit to himself. For as it is in Job. What
profits it thee, and what avayleth it me, if thou sinnest? Job. 35.
If thou sinnest, what can thou do unto him? If thou be righteous, what
give thou unto him? or what receives he at thy hands? that is, What
prejudice could GOD receive by our evil, or what benefit by our good? For he
is nothing the worse if men blaspheme him; nor the better if they praise him.
It was His love then to us, and nothing else, which repaired our miserable
condition.

This love therefore requires love again: the love of the Creator, the love of
the Creature. Certainly, in diverse respects we are bound infinitely to him.
For our Creation, for our Preservation, for our Redemption: and indeed for so
many inestimable blessings, as cannot be conceived, much less expressed. What
great matter then is required of us, when we are only enjoined to require this
love with love? We should and ought to imitate a fertile Field, or piece of
ground, which renders much more seed then it receives: but GOD help us poor
miserable creatures; if this were exacted of us, we should come far short of
this retribution. Why yet, if (for the infirmity of our natures while we live
in this pilgrimage) we cannot do that which we should; yet let u^ do what we
may Without question love him we may; nay love him we must, if ever we intend
to take the benefit of his Sons passion.

But thou wiltsay, how shall I love him that I know not? if I knew him, I would
love him with all my heart; with all the affections of my mind and soul:
Surely this is no difficult work. For GOD himself has made us capable of the
knowledge of him, and therefore he (knowing our capacity sufficient for that
act) has commanded our performance of it, and that by seeking him. No man can
come to the knowledge of anything, but by pains and labor; and the more
sublime that is, of which we are ignorant, the more pains, the more labor it
will cost, before the knowledge of it be attained. And certainly, GOD being
the most excellent object, the worthiest of all other, our knowledge, let us
not spare any pains, any travail, to possess our selves of it; that knowing,
we may love him; which is a duty chiefly expected from us, for all the
unvaluable benefits we have, and continually do receive from him.

Now, that in the search or seeking after this knowledge, Job 5. 14. 12. 25.
We grope not as blind men, of whom holy Job and the Prophet Esaias speak: nor
that we gaze not, (gazing being an Act Es. 59. 10.
so contrary to seeking, as that it was not only condemned by the Angels in
the Acts of the Apostles; Act. 1. 11
but forbidden by GOD himself; gazers being for the Ex. 19. 21
most part a sort of people, desirous only of new fangles and novelties, and
no settled searchers or seekers.) It will not be amiss, by prescribing some
rules of seeking, to take away filmes from the eyes of the former, and to
strengthen the sight of the other, that so they may be the better enabled to
proceed in their search.

But before we come to the directions, we will look a little into the
necessity of this duty; that we may understand that a seeking, and thereby a
knowing; and consequently a love and service of him, is necessarily required of
us.

That it is commanded as a 1.
special duty, appears by many places in holy writ, of which I will select a
few. Seek the LORD 1 Chro. 16. 11. 22. 19.
and his strength, seek his face continually, and Set your hearts and your
souls to seek the LORD your GOD. And GOD himself by the Prophet Amos, Seek
ye me and live. Am 5. 4. 6.


Secondly, it was ever the counsel of GODS Prophets 2.
and servants: as of King David to his Son, Know thou the 1 Chro. 28. 9.
GOD of thy Fathers, etc. If thou seek him, he will be found of thee. He
advises him to know him, by seeking him. The same King gives the same
counsel to his Princes; as also to his Quire and Churchmen, in the two
places before mentioned; to show, that neither Prince, Nobility, nor Clergy are
exempt from this duty.

Again, it has always bin the practice of Godly Princes 3.
and others. King Iehosaphat set himself to seek the LORD. 2 Chro. 20. 3.
King Hezekiah prayed for those that prepared their whole heart 30. 18.
to seek the LORD. King Josiah when he was yet a child, began to seek after
the GOD of David his Father. It was also the fame King David's practice. 34. 3.
For when GOD said Seek my race, he answers presently, Thy face LORD will Ps.
27. 9
I seek. And in another place, I have set GOD always before 16. 9
me.

And surely not without reason, 4.
was this duty either c^mmanded, counseled or practiced, for there is a
promise of reward annexed: we shall not lose our labor, but receive much good
in seeking to know him. In the Book of Deuteronomie, GOD promises not only
to be found of them that seek him; but to deliver them from misery, Deuteronomy. 4.
29. etc.
and heap blessings upon them. King David found by experience, that GOD never
failed them that seek him. And Ps. 9 10. 69. 33.
seek ye after GOD (says he) and your soul shall live. And GOD himself by
the Prophet Esaias. I said not in vain to the Esaias 45. 19.
seed of Jacob, Seek ye me. And lastly, (not to trouble you with many) The
LORD is good La. 3. 25.
to the soul that seeks him, says the Prophet Jeremy.

Lastly, it is the end for which Man was created. St. Paul, after 5.
he had beaten much upon the point, that a GOD was to be sought out, whom men
should worship, and had made it plain, by the creation of all things, who that
GOD was; came to the end Acts 17.
of Man's creation, which was to seek him; Man being created for that purpose
and end; adding, that it would be no great labor to find him, as being not
far from every one of us. He then which shall be negligent in this duty, is not
worthy of his creation, and deserves not to live; it being a most absurd and
undecent thing, for a Manto be ignorant of his Creator; having recerved from
him the gift of understanding, and made capable to know him. We see, that
Rivers naturally return to the Sea whence they come, and all things elso to
their first being: Wherefore then should not Man return in his thoughts and
desires to GOD, who-gave him his being? and why should his heart be as rest;
till be return to him? considering (as I said) that he made the understanding,
whereby he might know him; the memory, that he might ever be mindful of him;
and the will, ever to love him?

And now, since we have in some sort seen, that it is a duty enjoined by GOD
to seek him; that it has been the counsel and practice of many holy Kings
and Prophets; that we shall not lose our labor, but receive benefit by our
seeking: and lastly, that it is the only end for which we were created; let us
take a further view, how we may so seek, that we may find and know him. To the
due performance of which act, we must observe these cautions: 1 That we prepare
our hearts carefully and diligently to seek. 2 That we seek him in sincerity
and simplicity without hypocrisy. 3 That we be humble, and not curious
seekers. 4 That we seek him in Faith, without wavering. 5 That we be earnest
and zealous, and not cold or lukewarm seekers.


This careful preparation of the heart has ever been commended, 1.
as most necessary, before the undertaking of any pious act; and indeed is the
foundation, and first degree to this seeking. Iehosaphat prepared his heart 2
Chro. 19. 3. (...) 27, 6.
to seek the LORD, as you have seen. Iothan became mighty, because he
prepared his ways. And S. Ie^ome says, that purgandus est animus, ut
perspicere illam lucem valeat, a man shall never be able to see the clearenesse
and beauty of that light, if he first prepare not, nor fit himself
beforehand; if he seek him not in due 1 Chro. 15. 13.
order.

It was the Wisemans advice, to seek GOD in simplicity of 2. Sap. 1. 1. Mat.
5. 8.
heart, and it is the Pure in heart that shall see GOD. as our Savi^^r speaks
The Sun beams sh^ne brightest upon a clear glass; and in a clean heart the
beams of Divine grace shine most. The unclean shall not see Ephesians. 5. 5.
GOD, says the Apostle.

Saint Jerome calls the humble Man DEI Templum, the 3.
Temple or habitation of GOD. He shall not only see GOD, but GOD will abide
with him. GOD gives grace to the humble. I am. 4. 6.
And CHRIST himself, while he was conversant upon Earth, delighted not in
great or proud company, but chose fishermen to converse with: and the
Centurions non sum dignus, with the Publicans humble confession, pleased him
more, then all the proud vaunts of the Scribes and Pharisees. He desires not,
but abhorres to be looked on with curious and prying eyes: and therefore St.
Augustine writing against the Manichees says, and his counsel is, Compescat
se humana temeritas, and id quod non est non quaerat, ne illud quod est
inveniat* after the fearful example of Vzza. 1 Chro. 13. 9. 4. Eccle. 25. 11.


Faith is the beginning of cleaving to GOD, says the Son of Syrach. And
Fides humanae salutis initium, says St. Augustine: For by it we understand
what soever is necessary for us to know concerning GOD.

Now, that there is a GOD, some Deity, all people, even the Heathen, that had
their intellectualls, held as a maxim. He in the Psalm that said Ps. 14. 1.
there was no GOD, said it but in his heart; was not so impudent, as to speak
it out and yet for his thought only, had the brand of a fool. This Faith St.
Augustine says, Valet ad cognitionem DEI, non tanquam omnino incogniti, sed
quo cognoscatur manifestius: And, Si quis hic non ambulaverit per Fidem, non
perveniet ad speciem beatae visionis. By it, the children of light are
distinguished from those of darkness; and per ipsam discitur veritatis
scientia, et percipitur cognitio Divinitatis. By it, the knowledge of the truth
is learned, and of the Divinity perceived.

Lastly, zeal, love, and hearty 5.
affection is of all virtues the clearest sighted, and will see GOD soonest.
For it is the affection to a thing, that draws a man's desire to see it. And
yet, this virtue naturally depends upon the former, of Faith. For if Faith be
wavering, love and affection is soon cooled: Fall from the one, and fall from
the other quickly. For no Man can affect or love that, which he believes not to
be. But yet, this virtue is so necessary, as that without it, none can ever
attain to the sight of GOD. St. Augustine says, Quanto flagrantius DEUM
diligimus, tanto certius sereniusque videamus. We shall see GOD the surer, and
more perspicuously, by how much the greater our zeal, affection, and love is
to him.

And being thus prepared, and fitted with these qualities, we must seek him
(as the Prophet Esaias 55. 6.
counsaileth) while he may be found. We must do it in due time; that is,
while we are in this vale of misery: we must seek and apply our selves to see
and know him, as much and as soon as we may here, that we may see him face to
face to our comfort, as he is hereafter. Time is first either past, and that is
not; we cannot make use of that. Secondly, or to come; and that we know not
whether we shall have it to use or no, it is only in GODS power. Thirdly, or
it is present, and that we must lay hold of, and make use of it. Therefore, in
what condition, of what age soever thou art, seek the LORD, and that instantly.
And if thou shall take hold of this time, with this preparation; no doubt but
GOD Job. 33. 26.
will be favorable to thee, and thou shall see his face with joy. Thou shall
find him if thou seek him: (and the rather, if Ps. 63. 1.
thou do it early with David; or with King Josias, while thou art yet a
child;) and finding him, thou shall know him: and being come to the knowledge
of greatness and goodness, thou shall certainly love him; which is the chief
duty he requires of thee.

And now give me leave to offer to your view, a generation, Psa. 78. 9.
that have neither eyes, nor hearts aright; and with Esaias, Esaias 43. 8.
Let me bring forth the blind that have eyes; that is to say, such as have
their sight, yet wander like Jeremies blind Lam. 4. 14. Deuteronomy. 28. 29. Psalm.
135. 15.
men, and grope at noone day, with those in Deuteronomie, That have eyes and
see not, have understanding, but make not true use of it, for which GOD gave
it: but it is darkened (as St. Paul says) because of the hardness of their
heart. Among which I will set before you the chief: Wo^ldlings, Ambitious,
Selfe-lovers, Rebellious, Covetous and Idle: All which sorts of people, (as I
said before) have filmes before their eyes, that hinder their sight and seeking.

The love of this World in general, does so blind the eyes 1.
of men, that worldlings cannot distinguish between good and evil: they are
not able, have neither power, nor time to see the true GOD. For the World being
once fixed in their hearts, they cannot find out the things Eccles. 3. 11. 2
Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 6. 12.
which GOD made from the beginning: that is, they cannot think of their
Creator. And (as St. Paul speaks) The God of the World has blinded their
eyes, least the light of the glorious Gospel should shine to them: and
therefore in another place he calls it the darkness of the World. It was this
love 2 Timothy 4. 10.
of the World, that caused Demas to for sake St. Paul. And St. John affirms
plainly, that he which loves the World, 1 John 2. 15.
has not the love of GOD in him: and therefore neither can, nor desires to see
him.

Again, the World (as a false glass) deceives the sight: it is a very
hypocrite, promises fair; but believe it not; rather fear the reward of its
service: for breve est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat. It is impossible
to look to Heaven with one eye, and to the Earth with the other. It was the
dung of a Sparrow or Swallow, that deprived Tob. 2. 10. Phil. 3. 8.
Tobias of his sight, and the Apostle calls the things of the world, Terrena
stercora: and therefore, while we dote on this world, and the dung there of
falls upon our sight, we may be justly reputed blind, we grope for the Esaias 59.
10.
wall like the blind; and grope as if we had no eyes: we may apply that to our
selves which David did unto himself. The Ps. 38. 10
light of our eyes is gone from us: while we are in this estate, we shall never
see God.

The filme of preferment much darkens the sight, and the 2.
smoke of honor is so prejudicious to the eyes, that it hinders men from the
sight of their Creator: For though they carry their eyes loftily, yet look
they Esaias 5.
not so high as they should; the mist of ambition is so thick before their
eyes; and the Sunbeames of honor so dazles them, that in comparison of a true
and clear sight, these may also be justly reckoned among the blind.

Not much unlike to the Ambitious. 3.
is the Selfe-lover, proud and vainglorious: he is also blind; for his eves,
his sight is wholly reversed, and turned inward. The Pharisee lost his sight by
this vanity: and so did Nabuchadonozor, and the Angels their blessed vision.
The proud have not so much as a thought of GOD, much less a desire to see him:
but all their desire is to see themselves; and that so long, in the burning
glass of self conceit, that in the end they lose their sight.

And this disease of the eyes 4.
begets another worse then the former, namely Rebellion. For the proud (thinks
none better then himself,) presently with pharaoh says, Who is the Ier. 5. 23.
LORD? The vice of pride makes the heart rebellious, as Jeremy speaks: and
while a man is in rebellion, he never desires to see his Prince. It so hardens
the heart, that it can receive no impression of goodness; but their eyes are
as it were set in their heads, as it 1 Kings 14. 4.
is said of Ahia, in another case. They have eyes, but see not, as Jeremy
says, in the same verse 21.
Chapter: and as our Savior, seeing they shall see, and not Mat. 13. 14, 15.
perceive; because they have closed their eyes. And this is that blindness of
heart which the Apostle St Paul means. For Ephesians. 4. 18.
indeed, the cause of this blindness is (as of all other evils) the heart; it
being to the soul, as the eye to the body. For the eye is but as a conduit or
channel, through whose optiques, all good or bad desires pass to the heart.

Riches are as great an eyesore, as any of the former, for 5.
the eye of the covetous is ever fixed upon a wrong object: Avarus est caecus,
The covetous Man is blind, says St. Augustine; and therefore not without cause
did our Savior bid men to be ware of covetousness: Luke 12. 15.
For these terrena stercora, of riches, the mucke of the World, blind the eyes
even of the wise; they divert the eyes of the mind from seeing GOD. The
Prodigal having his por^ion, went from his Father. Place ^^ looking-glass
upward, and you shall see Heaven: but downward, and the Earth is in your sight.
^t is not wealth, but poverty which enlightens the understanding. David in his
prospe^ity said he should never be Ps. 30. 6.
^emoved: GOD did but turn ^way his face, and his sight ^egan to be cleared.

Lastly, the Idle person cannot, shall not see GOD, because 6.
^e takes no pains, labors not ^or this sight, he is as a dead ^an. David in
his idleness, ^^st the sight of GOD. For the ^yes of the slothful are also
^losed, they cannot see him. But ^f thou have a desire to see GOD, thou shall
find him, if thou seek him with all thine heart, and with all thy soul: that
is, fervently and diligently.

Thus have we a short survey of the blind: for all which I will pray with
Elisha, LORD open 2 Kings 6. 20. Ephesians. 1. 18
their eyes, and that the eyes of their understanding may be enlightened, and
advise them with the Prophet, Look ye^ blind, that ye may see; that Es. 42. 18
Number. 24 4.
when with Balaam, their eyes be opened, they may see the vision of the
Almighty.

And now that you have seen that to seek and know GOD the Creator, is every
man's duty; as being commanded, persuaded and patterned; and the it is the end,
for which man w^^ created: as also having a sho^^ direction set before you, for
preparation to this sight an^ search, together with some cautions, to avoid the
hinderance and lets to it; let us consider little, how far we may enter into
this search, by sufficient warrant, that we stare not upon the Sun, while we
become blind. For Noli altum saper^, sed time, was a good rule.

No man has seen GOD at any time (says St John, and 10. 1. 18. Exodus 33 20.
No man shall see GOD and live, says GOD himself: For you must know says St.
Augustine; that GOD cannot be expressed in words, nor comprehended in any man's
thought or knowledge: and his reason follows, how says he, could we proclaim
him immense and in comprehensible, if he could be included in the speech or
thought of any man? and it appears how admirable he is, by that, that he is
unutterable by all tongues, and incomprehensible within any thoughts. And
again, Because GOD is above all, it follows, that he must needs exceed the
capacity of men. Men, by the acuteness of the mind may reach high; but they
behold what GOD is, rather in opinion then definition. His fulness, none,
either with corporeal eyes, or with the mind it self, have at any time
apprehended.

If then we can neither see, nor know, nor apprehend him; to what purpose is
it, that we are so often commanded and advised to seek him? We must seek,
see, and know him i^ this parallel. As the Sun is only to be looked on, so
that it may be seen and no more; lest by beholding it too steadfastly, we see
less then we might: so GOD is to be known, so much as he permits thee to know
and understand of him, and no more. And how far, or short are we limited? how
far may we go in the lawful sight and knowledge of him? for though we take
never so much warrantable pains to know and see him, yet we shall but see him
in this 1 Cor. 13 12.
pilgrimage, through a glass darkly, as the Apostle speaks. It is true, yet
pains we must ^ake, and ways we must and may use to see him. For GOD has
given man understanding above all creatures, to the end, that he should both
see and know him in this vale of misery. And ^o hold you no longer in suspense,
I conceive, that the best and safest way to come to the sight and knowledge of
him, is by the consideration of his Creatures and Attributes. For in the first
place, it was David's practice, to muse upon all his Ps. 77. 5
works and the days of old, that is (as some Commentators have it) the six
days of the creation. And therefore they are justly taxed with the name of
vain, that are ignorant of GOD, and that could not out Sap. 13. 1.
of the good things that are seen, know him that is; neither considering the
works, did they acknowledge the worke-master. For by the greatness and beauty
of the Creature, proportionably the maker of them is seen. And St. Paul
affirms, that GODS 1 Cor. 9. 20.
eternal power and Godhead is understood by the things that are made: and St.
Augustine goes a little further, when he says, That to see the Creator by the
Creature; the Maker by his work; and the Architector of the world by the
World, is as much as Man can see concerning GOD. And as he may be seen in his
Creatures, so in his Attributes he is no less visible, no less admirable: for
if we well consider him (besides his infinite Essence) in his Power, Wisdom,
Mercy and Justice, (his principal Attributes) we may see and understand so
much of him, as may conduce to the knowledge of him in this life. And yet I
must confess, that what sight we have of him here, is but (as St. Paul
speaks in the place formerly quoted) per speculum 1 Cor. 13
in aenigmate, through a glass darkely, to that, which in the beatificall
vision we shall see of him, to our comfort most clearly; if by our lives here,
he shall hereafter think us worthy of that most blessed sight.

And thus having briefly showed the necessity of this duty, and how far; and
by what means we may wade to the attayning of the knowledge of the Creator:
give me leave to tender to your view, a more ample, devout and pious Treatise,
tending to that purpose, which I have turned into true Orthodoxe English,
though in a plain Dialect, which at the first I s^lely intended for my own
private use: but now (not doubting of your favorable acceptance for the
public good, as I hope. Commending it and you therefore to the blessing of
that Creator, (who so instruct us all in his knowledge here, that hereafter we
may (with comfort) see him face to face, and know him, as we are known.) I rest

Yours in CHRIST JESUS, H. I.

THE PREFACE to the ensuing TREATISE.
WE are often times admonished in holy Scripture, carefully to seek GOD: for
though Act. 17. 28.
he be not far from every one of us, seeing we live, move, and have our being
in him, as the Apostle speaks, yet are we far from him: and unless we
daily frame ascents in our hearts, and raise steps and greeces toward Heaven,
and seek him with much labor; we do but take our journey with the Prodigal,
into a Country far from our own, and from our Father, where we but feed
swine.

Now, briefly to unfold and resolve how these agree, that GOD i^ not far from
us, and yet we very far from him: We say, that GOD is not far from us,
because he daily sees us, all things being in his sight. He also thinks daily
of us, because he cares 1 Pet. 3. 7. Heb. 1. 3
for us: and he also daily touches us, as bearing all things by his mighty
Word. And again, we are far from GOD, because we neither do, nor can 1 Timothy
6. 16.
see him, dwelling in inaccessible light, and we are not able to think any
thing (of GOD) 2 Cor. 3. ^:
of our selves, as of our selves, much less to touch him, by any pious
affection, or to cleave to him; unless he take us up, and draw us after him,
by his Cant. 1. 3
power. Therefore when David had said, I have set GOD always before me, or in
my sight; he presently adds, for Ps. 16. 9.
he is on my right hand; or (as St. Jer^me) me suscepit dextratua. Neither are
we only in these three respects far from GOD, that we can neither see him,
nor easily think of him, nor join to him in affection: but we easily forget
him, scarce sounding forth his name, by praise or prayer: the reason is,
because we are entangled and taken up with temporal affairs, which compass
us round, and even overwhelme us.

This then is the cause, why the Holy Ghost in sacred writ, (as we said even
now) so often persuades and counsels us; to seek GOD. As, Seek ye after
GOD, and Ps. 69. 33
your soul shall live. And, Seek the LORD and his strength: Ps. 105. 4
seek his face evermore. And, The LORD is good to the Lam. 3. 25. Esaias 55. 6.
Sap. 1. 1.
soul that seeks him. And, Seek the LORD while he may be found, and Seek
the LORD in simplicity of heart. And, If thou shall seek the Deuteronomy. 4. 29.
LORD thy GOD, thou shall find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul.

No man, of what condition soever, is tied so to give himself up to the
affairs of the World, as not to refresh himself, with meat, drink and
sleep. And if the body require such refreshing, and repast; how much rather
should the soul desire food and sleep, (Prayer and contemplation) one being
the meat, and the other the sleep of the soul? and by these two, are ascents
framed in the heart, by which we are to see the GOD of GODS Ps. 84. 7.
in Sion, even as much as he may be seen, in this vale of tears.

Now there can be no plainer, or more easy way for us mortals to ascend to
GOD, then by the consideration of his works. For we cannot properly say, that
they ascended, which by the singular gift of GOD, were admitted by another way
into Paradise; and there to hear the secrets of GOD, 2 Cor. 12 4.
which are not lawful to be spoken or uttered: but only, that they were
rapt, as Saint Paul plainly confesses, in his own case.

But that it is possible for a man to ascend to the knowledge of GOD, and love
of his Creator, by his works, (that is by his creatures) the Book of
Wisdom, the Apostle Saint Paul, and reason Sap. 13. 5. To. 1. 20.
it self, sufficiently prove: seeing the efficient cause may be known by its
effects, as a Man by his picture or Image. And there is no doubt but that all
Created things be the works of GOD; and holy Scripture teaches us, that Man
and Angels be not only the works, but the images of GOD.

Being therefore provoked and stirred up, with these reasons; and having a
little ease and rest from other affairs, I have attempted to make a LADDER,
out of the Consideration of the Creatures; by which after a sort, GOD may be
ascended unto: And I have distinguished it into fifteen Staves or Steps,
after the similitude of the fifteen Degrees, by which men went up to SOLOMON'S
Temple; Eze. 40.
and of the fifteen Psalms of DAVID his Father, Ps. 120. etc.
usually called the Gradualls, or Psalms of Degrees.

THE FIRST DEGREE of our spiritual ascending to GOD, is by the Consideration
of MAN. DEGREE I.
WHosoever is desirous to erect his thoughts to Godward, must first begin with
the consideration of himself. For we are every one of us the creature and
image of GOD: and nothing is nearer to us then our selves. And therefore not
without cause said Moses, Attend tibi, Take heed to thy self. For whosoever
shall Deuteronomy. 4. 9.
strictly and narrowly look into himself, shall find that he is the very
compendium or abridgement of the whole World; and by this view with little
labor and difficulty he may ascend to the creator of all things.

And to this search, the resolution of these four ordinary and easy questions
will be necessary.

1 Who was Man's Creator. 2 Of what matter he was created. 3 What form was
given him? 4 To what end he was brought into the World?
First, if thou will examine diligently, who it was that made 1.
thy soul when it was not, thou shall find, that it was GOD and not thy
Parents. For whatsoever comes of the flesh is fleshly; and thy soul is a
spirit. Not Heaven, Earth, Sun or Stars, for they are corporeal; thy soul
incorporeall. Not Angels or Archangels, for thou were not made of any matter,
but merely of nothing: and none but GOD is able to make something of nothing.
He therefore, without help of any others, with his own hands, which are his
understanding and will, created thee. And though GOD used thy Parents to the
begetting of thy flesh, as laborers to a building; yet is he the chief
worke-man and creator, both of body and soul.

For if thy Parents had been the chief authors and makers of thee, they may as
well be able without skill in Anatomy to know all thy bones, nerves, veins,
muskles, and other things, which they are ignorant of: they might also be as
well able when thou art sick or lame, to cure thee, as to make thee: like a
clock-maker, who can take in pieces, and amend the watch or clock formerly
made by him.

But the joining of soul and body in so strong a tie, as that they become one
substance, is a work of such transcendence, that none can perform, but he,
who is of infinite power.

Therefore, this question is resolved, and we may and must confidently affirm,
that GOD is Man's creator, who only does wonderful things. And therefore Moses
inspired by the spirit of GOD, may seem to confirm this point, when he says
by way of question and answer: Is not he thy Father? he has made thee and
proportioned Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
thee. And Job likewise; Thy hands have made me and Job 10. 11.
fashioned me: and a little after, Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh,
and joined me together with bones and finewes. The Kingly Prophet also
acknowledges as much, Thy hands Ps. 119. 41.
have made me and fashioned me: and again, Thou have fashio^ed me behind and
before. To 139. 4.
these I may add that excel^ent speech of that heroical woman in the Book of
the Maccabees to her soun^s. I cannot tell how ye came into my 2 Mac. 7. 22, 23.
Womb, for I neither gave you breath nor life: it is not I that ^et in order
the members of ^our body; but doubtless the Creator of the World, which formed
the birth of man, and found out the beginning of all things. And upon this it
was, that CHRIST himself said, Call no man your Father upon the earth: for
there is but one, Mat. 23. 9.
your Father which is in Heaven: upon which Saint Augustine speaking of his
natural Son Adeodatus, said to GOD, Thou did make him well, for I had
nothing in that 9 Conf. 6
child, besides the fault.

Well then, If GOD be author both of body and soul, if he be thy Father and
preserver* if what thou have, thou receivest from him: if what thou hopest,
thou hopest from him: Why boastest thou not of such a Father? Why do thou not
love him with all thy heart? why do thou not contemn all things in respect
of him, but suffer thy self to be overswayed with vain desires and
delights? Lift up thine eyes to him, fear not what any mortal crea^ure can
do to thee. Say with David, I am thine, save me. Certainly, if thou would
but seriously consider, Ps. 119. 94.
how gracious GOD is to thee, in that he (who needs none of thy goods; neither
if thou perish, does he lose any thing; has his eye of providence still and
continually over thee; yea so loves, directs and cherishes thee, as if thou
were his greatest treasure, thou would be moved with these his extraordinary
favors, and put thy whole confidence in him: thou would fear him as thy
Lord, love him as thy Father; and loath those things which should divert thee
from his love.

The second quaere is, Of what 2.
matter was Man created? The resolution is easy, even of that which is most
vile and contemptible: and by how much the ^aser, the better occasion is
ministered to every one of us, to labor for that most precious and profitable
virtue of humility.

And doubtless the matter of which the prime part of Man (the soul) was made,
was nothing; and what can be imagined or thought to be of less esteem then
nothing?

Now what was the first material to the making of the body but menstruous
blood: a thing so loathsome, as that the eye flies the sight of it; the hand
the touching of it; and the mind abhorres to think of it.

Thirdly, the matter whereof the first Man Adam was made, 3.
was but red and barren earth, or dust or mud. Out of the earth wast thou
taken, (says GOD to Adam) because thou art dust, and to dust thou shall
return. Which Gen 3. 19.
caused Abraham (remembering the vile materials he was made of) to say to GOD,
I am but dust and ashes. 18. 27.


And yet we have not said all which may be spoken, concerning the vileness of
these materials. For the earth or dust it self, of which his body was
created, came not from any matter, but of nothing also. For in the beginning
GOD create^ heaven and earth, and surely he 1. 1.
created them not of any other heaven and earth, but even o^ nothing. So that
this proud thing Man, (whether you consider soul or body) coming from nothing,
in the end must be reduced to nothing. What then has he to boast of, but that
which he has received from GOD. Other things, as the works of artificers,
vessels of gold and the like, if they had sense might boast and expostulate
with their workmen in this manner. It is true, low to thee for my form, but
not for my materials; and that which I had of my self, before thou tookest me
in hand, is far more precious then that which I received from thee: But Man,
that has nothing of himself, and is altogether nothing of himself, can glory
in, nor of nothing. And therefore St. Paul says. What have thou 1 Cor. 4. 7.
that thou have not received? If thou have received it, why boastest thou as
though thou had not received it? and If any man Gal. 6. 3.
seem to himself that he is somewhat when he is nothing, he deceives
himself in his imagination. To which St. Cyprian agrees, Lib. 3. ad Quirinu^.
when he says we ought to boast of nothing, when there is nothing that we may
call ours.

But thou will say, men do many excellent things, for which they are worthily
commended; that according to the proverb, virtus laudata crescat, goodness
having due praise may increase. It is true. Men do many good works, for which
they may deservedly be praised, and of which they may boast; but with this
limitation, that they rejoice in the Lord, and not in themselves; as it is
written: 1 Cor. 1. 31. 2 Cor. 10. 17.
He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord.

For let me ask these questions. When a Man does any good work, of what
matter, by what power, by whose aid and direction does he it? surely o^ the
matter which GOD created: by that power and strength which GOD gave him: and
lastly by GODS direction and assistance, without which he could do no good
thing. For GOD does many good things in Man without Man: but Man does no good,
but that which GOD gives him power to do. And therefore, he vouchsafes to use
the Ministry and service of Man in doing good; which of himself he could do
without Man, that thereby he might acknowledge himself the greater debtor to
GOD, and not by growing proud to rob God of his honor.

Therefore, if thou be wise, in the good thou do, give to thy self the last
place; steal not Gods glory from him, neither in little or much: enter into
thine heart and consider well, that nothing of thine which is only, and all
that thou have, and all the World shall not be able to puff thee up. And
because this precious virtue of true humility was almost clean gone out of the
World, and was neither to be found in the Books of Philosophers, or in the
lives either of the Gentiles or Jews; it pleased the Mr. of Humility himself
to descend from Heaven, Who when he was in the form of God equal to the
Father, made Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8.
himself of no reputation; and took on him the form of a servant, and
humbled himself, etc. saying to mankind, Learn of Math. 11. 29.
me that am meek and lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest to your souls.
So that if thou perhaps art ashamed to imitate the humility of Men, be not
ashamed to follow the humility of Iam. 4. 6.
CHRIST, Who resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

The third question follows 3.
now to be answered: that is* What form was given to Man at his creation.
Surely by how much the viler the matter was of which he was made, by so much
the form is found to be the more excellent.

To omit the out ward shape of the body, (which yet may justly challenge
eminency above the shapes of all other creatures:) for this is not the
substantial, but the accidental form. The substantial form therefore of a
MAN, which makes him to be a MAN, and distinguishes him from other creatures,
is the immortal Soul, endued with reason and will, the Image of GOD; for so
we read, that GOD said when he would make Man, Let us make Man in our Image
according to Genesis 1. 26.
^ur likeness, and let him rule over the fish of the Sea, and over the foul
of Heaven, and over the ^easts, and over all the Earth; and over every thing
that creeps and moves on the Earth. Man therefore is the Image of GOD, not
in respect of his body, Io. 4. ^4.
but of his spirit: For GOD is a Spirit, not a body. And there is the Image of
GOD says St. Basil, Homil. in exam. 10.
where that is, which commands the other creatures. Now Man commands and rules
over the beasts, not by the members of his body, which are stronger in many
beasts then in Man; but by the mind, endued with reason and will: that is, not
by that which he has common and alike with them; but by that, by which he is
distinguished from them, and made like unto GOD.

Rowse thy self then, and frame thy self after thy pattern; and consider
that all the good thou receivest by this Image, consists in the likeness and
resemblance thou have to it* Thy pattern is GOD, whose beauty is infinite,
Light, in whom 1 Io. 1. 5.
there is no darkness; whose beauty the Sun and Moon admire. And that thou
may the more easily imitate thy pattern, on which thy whole perfection,
profit, honor, joy, rest, and indeed thy whole good depends: conceive the
beauty of GOD (thy pattern) to consist in wisdom and holiness. For as the
beauty of the body arises from the just proportion of the members, and
sweetness of the color; so in the spiritual substance, the pleasantness of
the color is the light of wisdom; the proportion of the members is sanctity
and righteousness: not any particular justice, but universal, which
conteyneth all other virtues; and therefore, that may be said to be the most
beautiful spirit, whose mind shines with the light of wisdom, and whose
will has the greatest measure of perfect righteousness. GOD then thy
pattern, is that Wisdom, and that Righteousness, and in respect thereof, is
beauty it self. And because, both these Attributes of GOD are specified in
Scripture under the name of sanctity; it is that the Angels in Esaias cry unto
him, Holy, Holy, Es. 6. 3.
Holy is the LORD GOD of Hosts: and GOD himself cries to his Images, Be holy,
for I Lev. 11. 4. 4
am holy: and our Savior in the Gospel, Be perfect, as your Mat. 5. 48.
Father which in Heaven is perfect.

Wherefore, if thou desire to be like thy pattern, thou must love Wisdom
and Righteousness above all things.

True Wisdom (which is one part of spiritual beauty) is to 1.
judge of all things according to the supreme cause: and the most high cause is
the divine will of GOD, or his Law which manifests his will to Man. If
therefore thou love Wisdom, thou must not lend thine ear to what the Law of
the flesh shall dictate; what thy senses shall judge to be good; what the World
shall approve of; what any Man shall insinuate to thee; but stop thine ears to
them, and mark only what the will of GOD thy LORD is, and account that most
profitable, and above all things to be desired, which shall be most conformable
to his will and Law. This is the wisdom of the Sap. 7. 10 11.
Saints, of which the wiseman wrote. I loved her above health and beauty, and
purposed to take her for my light: for her light cannot be quenched. All good
things therefore came to me with her.

The other part of this spiritual 2.
beauty is Righteousness, and this contains all virtues which adorn and
beau^ifie the will, the chief whereof is love, the mother of all graces; which
not only comprehends all the rest, as St. Augustine speaks; De na. et gra.
c. 70. Romans 13. 10.
but indeed as St. Paul affirms is the fulfilling of the Law; and on the
other side, He which keeps his word, (that 1 Io. 2. 5.
is his Law) in him is the love of GOD perfect indeed, as St. John. They
therefore which would be made like to the Divine pattern, must hearken to, and
obey this counsel, Be ye followers of GOD as dear children, and walk in
love. The Son is the image of his Father, and all the good which arises from
this image, (as is before said) is to become like to the pattern.

Oh, if thou would fully understand these things, and that being made like
unto GOD (by the beauty of true Wisdom and Righteousness) thou much please
him, what peace would thou enjoy? how joyful would thou be? how easily
would thou despise all the blandishments of this deceitful world? Again, if
thou would consider, how highly GOD will be displeased, when he shall see his
image wanting the light of wisdom, and the robe of Righteousness, to be
polluted, defiled and darkened; and that Man being placed in such honor, as to
be like to GOD, to Ps. 42. 20.
be now compared to the beasts that perish: certainly thou would be amazed,
and tremble; neither would thou be at rest, until by floods of tears
springing from bitter contrition, thou should wash away all thy spots and
steynes, and return to the likeness of thy most beautiful pattern.

But because in the mean time, (while thou walk away, and wandrest from
GOD; and that thou walk by Faith, 2 Cor. 5. 7.
and not by sight) thou continually want his aid and assistance, as well,
that thou may abide in that likeness which thou have, as that daily thou may
become more like, that is more beautiful and clearer: mourn heartily, and
pray to him, and say O holy Lord and most merciful, whom it has pleased to
make this my soul, thine Image; make perfect I beseech thee thy work:
increase my Wisdom, increase my Righteousness: hide my soul in the secret
place of thy Tabernacle, that it be not defiled with the mud of carnal
concupiscence, nor with the smoke of secular honor, nor the dust of earthly
thoughts.

The last quaere remains to be resolved, which is, Whereto, 4.
or for what, Man was brought into the World. The end of his Creation. This end
was no other, then GOD himself. But because there is a double end, Internal
or Inward, and External or Outward. We will consider them apart, briefly.

The Internal or Inward end is the perfect state or condition of any thing, to
which the same may attain: as for example, a Palace or any other structure is
then, and not till then accounted perfect and finished, when nothing is wanting
which is requisite to the building of it. So the inward end of a tree is the
perfect state thereof; and then it is said to have attained his end, when after
the full growth it bears fruit. A Man therefore, who is created to a most
high end, may then be said to have obtained his end, when his mind shall see
God as he is, and by seeing him shall know all things; his will shall most
ardently love and enjoy that chief good and happiness: and his body being
become immortal and impassible, shall live in perpetual peace and joy. And
because the essence of this final beatitude is the vision of GOD, by which we
(the Images of GOD) shall come to a perfect state, and perfect similitude with
our divine pattern: therefore it is that St John says, Now are we the Sons of
GOD, but yet it is 1 Io. 3. 2.
not made manifest what we shall be: and we know that when he shall be made
manifest, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

Oh! if thou could imagine, what this is, [that we shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is] how quickly would all the clouds of earthly desires be
dispersed? GOD is most blessed, and therefore most blessed, because he always
sees himself as he is, and enjoyes himself without intermission, from all
eternity, with a most clear sight, and ardent love. Which inestimable good he
would have thee partaker of also, with the holy Angels; and has created thee
to this most sublime and transcendent end: which these words signify, Enter
into the joy of thy Mat. 25. 21.
Lord, that is, be partaker of the joy which God himself enjoyes: and these of
our Savior. I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Luke 22. 29.
Father has appointed unto me, that you may eat and drink at my table in my
Kingdom, that is, I will make you partakers of my Kingdom, and of my royal
Table; that you may enjoy that honor, that power and that pleasure that I
enjoy, and that God my Father enjoyes. And who can conceive how great that
honor, power, pleasure and happiness may be? Certainly he that shall ascend
in his thoughts, and hope to this height of his end, will be ashamed to contend
for the earths possession, or to be tormented for the loss of temporal
things, or to rejoice for the gain of them.

The external or outward end of a thing is that, or he, for 2.
whose sake the thing is made, as the end of a Palace or house for the dweller,
the end of a Tree for the owner; and the end of Man only for the Lord his God.
For he made him, he made him of his own, he made him for himself; he
preserves, feeds and pays him his wages. Therefore most justly he commands, and
says, Thou shall worship the LORD only, and him only shall thouserve. Math.
4. 10.


But mark and observe diligently. Other things which are created for Man, are
pr^fitable for him, and not for themselves: Beasts ^abour for Man, not for
themselves: the fields, vines and orchards fill the barnes, cellars and
granaries of Men, ^ot of their own. Lastly, servants labor, sweat and are
weary, and the gain, pleasure and advantage redound to the Master, not to
themselves. But the LORD thy GOD, who wants nothing, will have Man to serve
him; and wills that the profit and reward be Man's, and not his own.

O LORD, good and gracious, Ps. 86. 5.
and of much mercy, who would not serve thee with his whole heart, if he but
once tasted the sweetness of thy service? What do thou command o LORD, to
thy servants? Thou bidst us to take thy yoke on us; and what Math. 11. 30.
is thy yoke, is it heavy? no: easy, and the burden light. Who would not most
willingly bear a yoke, which presses not, but cherishes; and a burden which
is not grievous, but refreshes? and therefore thou have added, not without
cause, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. And what is that yoke of thine
that brings not weariness, but rest? even only that first, and chiefest
Commandment, Thou shall love the LORD thy GOD with 22. 37.
all thine heart. What easier, sweeter, pleasanter injunction can there be,
then to love goodness, beauty and love, which wholly thou art O LORD my GOD?
Thy servant David judged aright, when he conceived, that thy Commandments were
more to be desired then gold, yea then much fine Ps. 19. 10.
gold; and sweeter then the honey and the honey comb, adding, that in keeping
them there was great reward. What is this O LORD, Do thou promise reward to
those which keep Commandments of this nature? yet so it is, and a most ample
reward, according to that of St. James, a Crown of life. And what may that be?
certainly a greater blessing then we can either imagine or desire: for so says
St. Paul, quoting a place in Esaias, The eye has not seen, Ia. 1. 12. 1 Cor. 2.
9. Es 64. 4.
the ear has not heard, nor has come into Man's heart, the things which GOD
has prepared for them that love him. Truly therefore may it be said, that in
keeping thy Commandments there is great reward.

And not only that great Commandment, but the rest, do make him good and
happy that keeps them. If thou be wise then, understand, that thou were
created to the glory of GOD and thine own eternal salvation; that this is
thine end, this the center of thy soul; and this ought to be the treasure of
thine heart. If thou shall attain to this end, thou shall be blessed; if thou
shall fall from thence, then miserable: and therefore think that truly good,
which brings thee to thine end; and that truly evil, which causes thee to
fall from thine end: prosperity and adversity, wealth and poverty, health and
sickness, honor and disgrace, life and death with a wise man, are neither to
be desired or avoided of themselves: but if they conduce to the glory of GOD
and thine own happiness, they are good, and to be sought after: if they
hinder either Gods honor, or thy salvation; they are evil and to be shunned.

DEGREE II. By the Consideration of the Greater WORLD.
THe first Degree of our ascent toward GOD, was raised out of the
consid^ration of Man, who is called the lesser World: now our intent is to
erect the second, out of the consideration of the great heap, which is called
the Greater World. Indeed St Gregory Nazianzen says, that GOD placed Orat. 2.
in Pasch.
Man as a Great World in a little, which is true, if we sever the Angels from
the World: for Man is greater then it, in virtue, though not in greatness,
capacity or mass: but if we comprehend the Angels within the World, as in this
tract we do; then Man is but the little in the great World. Therefore in this
great World which comprehends the universality of things; though many things be
wonderful and very considerable and remarkable; yet these I conceive most
worthy our admiration in it.

1 The Magnitude or Greatness of it. 2 The Multitude or Number of things
created in it. 3 The Variety of those things. 4 The force, virtue, and
efficacy of them. 5 The Beauty and Comlines of them.
It is without doubt, that the 1.
compass of the earth is very spacious; yea so great that the Son of Syrach
said of it, Who can measure the breadth of the Ecclus. 1. 2.
Earth, or the depth? This may be the better understood, if we consider how
many thousand years have passed since the Creation, and as yet the whole
superficies of it, (which he calls the breadth) is not known, notwithstanding
the many dangerous and costly voyages to discover it. Yet what is this heap or
mass of the Earth, if it be compared to the circuit and compass of the
highest Heaven: Astrologers say, like a point or prick to it, and true enough;
and that every Star in the firmament is greater then the Earth, (though for
the infinite distance they seem little to us) who can conceive the
spaciousness of Heaven, where so many thousands of Stars do shine? and
therefore if he asked with such admiration concerning the superfioies and depth
of the Earth, what would he have said of the outward superficie^ of Heaven, and
of the depth of the whole World; from the highest Heaven, to the botome of
Hell? And indeed, the corporeal heap or mass of this World is so great, as
the mind of Man can hardly imagine or conceive it.

Well then, if the World be so great, what is he which made it? Certainly he
is great, and there is no end of his greatness. The prophet Esaias speaks
metaphorically of him, when he says, That he measures the Es. 40. 12.
waters in the hollow of his hand, and meateth all the Heavens with a span. But
King Solomon more expressly and punctually, 2 Chr. 6. 18.
Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee; which is therefore
true, because if another or many more worlds were created, GOD would fill them
all, which we are not to understand, as that by his so fitting the world, part
of GOD would be in part of the world, and wholly in all the world: for GOD has
no parts, but is whole in all the world, and whole in every part of the world;
and therefore is everywhere present by his power and wisdom.

Wherefore, if thou be faithful to him, (whosoever be against thee) fear
nothing, for what should thou be afraid of, having so great a GOD to thy
Father and friend: but if thou by falling from him have made him thine enemy
and Judge, then thou have just cause to fear, and to give no rest to thine
eyes, till thou have by true repentance appeased him.

The next thing considerable 2.
in this Great World, is the multitude of things created in it, which are so
many, that who can tell them? Who can number the sands of the Sea, and the
Ecclus. 1. 2.
drops of rain, as it is in the place before cited. But to omit them, as the
least of things created. Within the earth how many mines are there of gold and
silver, of lead, brass, tin, and the like? what number of precious stones
and pearls. Above the earth, how many kinds, species, and individualls, of
herbs, fruits and plants? and how many parts in each of them? and how many
kinds, species and individualls of perfect and imperfect living creatures,
four footed beasts, creeping and flying creatures? In the Sea, how many kinds,
species, and individualls of fishes? who can number them? What shall we say of
the multitude of Mankind, of which it is written, He blesses them so Psa.
107. 38.
that they multiply exceedingly. Lastly, how many stars in Heaven, of which
it is said by GOD, Number the Stars if Ge. 15. 5.
thou can tell them; and which he parallels in another place 22. 7.
with the sands of the Sea. And how many Angels of whom Daniel writes,
Thousand thousands Dan. 7. 10.
ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before GOD. This
infinite number of things therefore created by one Almighty GOD, plainly
demonstrates, that in his divine essence are perfections altogether infinite.
For GOD would be known his creatures; and because not any one creature was
able to represent the infinite perfection of the Creator, therefore he
multiplied them, and gave to each kind of them some goodness or perfection,
that thereby Man might judge of the goodness and perfection of the Creator,
who comprehends infinite perfections, under the perfection of one most simple
essence, not altogether unlike a piece of gold, which contains the value of
many brass pieces of coin.

When therefore any thing which seems admirable shall come to thy mind, let it
be a Degree or Step to thee for the knowing of the perfection of thy Maker; who
without any comparison at all, is much greater, and more to be admired: so it
shall come to pass, that these created things (which as Wisdom teaches, are
stumbling blocks to the souls of Men, and Sap. 14. 10.
snares for the feet of the unwise) shall not deceive thee, nor deject, but
instruct thee, and make an ascent for thee to better things. Therefore, if thou
meet with gold, jewels, or the like, thou must say in thine heart, My GOD is
more precious, who has promised to give himself to me, if I contemn those
things. If thou admire the dignity of earthly Empires and honors, thou may
say in thine heart, how much more excellent is the Kingdom of Heaven, which
endures for ever; and which GOD who cannot lie, has promised to them that Tit.
1. 2.
love him? If pleasures and delights begin to tickle thy carnal sense, thou
may say in thine heart, much more delightful is the pleasure of the spirit,
then of the flesh; and of the mind, then the belly: the last whereof, the
mortal creature offers, but the former the GOD of all comfort gives, of
which whosoever tastes, may say with the Apostle, I am filled with comfort,
and am exceeding joyous in all my 2 Cor. 7. 4.
tribulation. Lastly, if any thing fair, new, unusual, great or wonderful,
be offered to thy view, and for thy acceptance, so thou will depart from thy
GOD; answer securely, there are many more good and fairer things (without
question) to be found in thy GOD: and therefore, it will not be safe or
profitable for thee, to change gold for copper coin; precious jewels for
brittle glass; great things for small, certain for doubtful; and everlasting
for those which be transitory.

But though the multitude of things created be admirable, and argues the
manifold perfection of one GOD; yet much more admirable is the variety of
things, which is seen in this multiplication, and does more easily bring us to
the knowledge of GOD.

For it is no hard, but an easy matter, with one seal to make many figures
alike; nor with one ^ast Letter, to Print many Letters: but to vary the forms
in infinite manner, as GOD did in the Creation; this is a work merely divine,
and most worthy our admiration. To omit the kinds and species of things, which
we plainly see to be very different, and of much variety. In the individualls
of herbs, plants, flowers, and fruits, what variety is there? their shapes,
colors, smells and tastes; do they not differ infinitely? Is not the like
seen in living creatures? But what shall I say of men? when in a numberless
army almost, not two men are to be found in all respects alike; and the like
may be said of the Stars, One Star differs from 1 Cor. 15. 41.
another in glory, says the Apostle.

Lift then up thy mind to GOD, in whom only are the reasons of all things, and
from whom (as from a fountain of infinite plenty and fertility) springs this
almost infinite variety. Worthily therefore does the same Apostle cry out, O
the Romans 11. 33.
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. But thou will
say, these things seem to be true: the good things created we see with our
eyes, touch with our hands, ^ast with our mouths; we possess and enjoy them
really. GOD we see not, touch, taste nor possess, and searce apprehend him in
our imagination, as a thing far remote from us: and therefore no mervaile, if
these things take us sooner, and with more delight then GOD: But if Faith have
any vigor, or be vig^lant in thee, thou can not deny, that after this life
(which flies away as a shadow) if thou continue in Faith, Hope and Charity,
thou shall see GOD himself truly and clearly as he is in himself, and shall
enjoy him far better, and more intimately, then thou now do these created
and transitory things: For hearken to Christ, who says, Blessed are the pure
Mat. 5. 8.
in heart, for they shall see GOD. Hear what St. Paul says, Now 1 Cor. 13 12.
we see through a glass darkly; but then face to face. And lastly, hear what
St. John says, We shall be like unto him, for we shall 1 10. 3. 2.
see him as he is.

Besides, I ask thee how much of the world, or of the things belonging to it
do thou enjoy? Certainly but a small portion or part of it, in comparison of
the magnitude before spoken of: and this also in short time, thou know not
how soon; will'st thou, nill'st thou, thou must leave and forgo. But GOD in
whom are all things thou shall enjoy 1 Cor. 15 28.
for ever: for GOD shall be all in all: He will be life, meat, apparel,
house, honor, riches, delights, and all things. To which we may add, that GOD
is so gracious and merciful, that in this time of thy pilgrimage, he forbiddes
thee not the comfort of his creatures, from which he is so far, as that he
created them all for thy service: but this he commands, that thou use them
moderately, soberly, and temperately, and that thou impart them to, and
communicate them with those which want; and that chearefully: and lastly, that
they rule not over thee, but thou over them. Lay these things together, and
bethink thy self, whether it will be better for thee in this life to be
contented with these created things, as much as shall be necessary for thy
sustentation; and in the other life to enjoy GOD the Creator, in whom are all
things: or in this life to so covet them, as never to be satisfied; and in the
other life to be bereft of all these temporalls, and those spiritual and
eternal also. Consider also, that GOD is not so far from those which love
him, as not to afford them great content and delights in this life, and those
greater, then the lovers of the world find in these created things: For it is
not written in vain, Delight in the LORD, and he shall give thee thy hearts
desire, and the Ps. 37. 4. 11.
meek spirited shall possess the earth, and shall be refreshed, etc. and the
Apostle, I am filled 2 Cor. 7. 4.
with comfort, etc. And the Psalmist again, In the multitude of sorrows that
were in my heart, Ps. 94. 19.
thy comforts o LORD have refreshed my soul. Of which two last cited places,
the meaning is not, that comfort arises out of tribulation, joy out of grief;
for thorns do not bring forth grapes, nor thistles figs: but Mat. 7. 16.
that GOD does Minister to those which love him, such pure and solid comforts
to assuage their troubles, as that temporal joys are not to be compared with
them. Therefore, let this be thy firm conclusion; be thus ever persuaded in
thy heart, That he which finds GOD, finds allthings, and he which loses
him, loses allthings.

It follows, that by the virtue and power of things created, and which GOD
has given to them: we ascend to the knowledge of the infinite power and virtue
of the Creator.

There is hardly any thing at all, which has not some extraordinary or
admirable virtue, power, or efficacy in it. The earth or stone, if it fall
from high, with what force and violence does it alight? what does it not crush
in pieces? what does it not break? what can resist the force of it? The holy
Spirit in the Revelation, when he would describe the fall of Babylon; says
thus, Then a mighty Angel took up a great stone, like Apoc. 18. 21.
a Millstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, With such violence shall that
great City be cast, and shall be found no more. The water, which flows gently
and pleasingly upon the face of the earth, if it be stirred in rivers or swift
streams; with what violence it overthrowes and destroys all it meets with;
not only Cottages, but Gates, and Walls and Bridges of stone, and what not?
The winds, which sometimes blow sweetly, being enraged, dash Ships against
Rocks; and turn up old and strong Oaks, and other Trees by the roots. What
shall we say of fire, a comfortable element, with what speed a little sparkle
of it increases, into so great a flame, as consumes and devoures whole Towns,
Cities and Forests, Behold says Saint James, how great a matter a little fire
kindles! Iam. 3. 5.


Again, how many virtues lie secret in herbs, and stones? In some beasts, what
strength appears; as in the Lion, Elephant, Bear, Horse and Bull. In others,
what wit and craft, as in the little Ant, Spider, the Be and the Fox? To say
nothing of the power of Angels, of the virtue of the Sun and Stars, which are
far from us: and look upon, and consider the wit of Man, whereby so many
Arts are invented; as that sometime it is a disputable question* whether art
should give place to nature, or nature to art.

Raise thy mind then again to GOD, and consider, how great power, efficacy
and virtue is in the Creator the LORD GOD, of whom the Scripture says most
truly. Moses in Exo. 15. 11*
his song, Who is like unto thee O LORD among the Gods? and King David, Who
only does great wonders: and Saint Ps. 136. 4
Paul, The blessed and only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, for
the Creatures 1 Timothy 6. 15.
have their power only from him, and that so long as he pleases. Who kept
Jonas in Ion. 2.
the Whales belly, so that neither the teeth of the Whale, nor the violence of
the water could do him any hurt, but GOD? Who shut the mouths of the hungry
lions from touching Daniel, but GOD? Who Dan. 5.
preserved the three Children in the fiery hot furnace, from the force of the
fire, but GOD? Who rebuked the raging Sea and the furious winds, but CHRIST who
is true GOD? Mark 4.
GOD it is, that has no power nor virtue from any; but his will is his power,
and a power that cannot be resisted; and he has infinite power, always has
it, and has it in all places; all the power of Man being compared with his, is
not small and little, but none at all: for so speaks the Prophet Esaias, All
nations before him are as nothing; and they Es. 40. 17
are counted to him less then nothing and vanity. Are not they then unwise,
who fearing the Creature, fear not the Almighty GOD? and that trust either in
their own or their friends strength, and not in GOD Almighty? If GOD To. 8. 31.
be on our side, who can be against us, and if GOD be against us, who can be on
our side?

Therefore, if thou be wise, Humble thy self under the 1 Pet. 5. 6.
mighty hand of GOD, cleave to him in true piety, and thou shall not need to
fear, what either Man, the Devil, or other creature can do against thee. If
perhaps thou have fallen from goodness, and have provoked thy GOD to anger,
give no rest to the temples of thy head, until thou have made thy peace again
Heb. 10. 31.
with him; for it is too fearful a thing, to fall into the hands of the
living GOD.

It remains, that we speak of the last consideration, which is the Beauty of
things created, of which King David said, Thou have made me glad Ps. 92. 4.
by thy works, and I will rejoice in the works of thine hands. And
certainly, as GOD made all things good, so are they all beautiful, if they be
rightly considered. But to omit some, consider we those, which by the judgment
and approbation of all men are beautiful. Without doubt, great is the beauty
of a green meadow, of an orchard well trimmed, of pleasant groves, of the sea
in a calm, of the air when it is clear; of fountains, rivers, cities, of
the bright Heaven, bedeckt with innumerable stars, like so many gemmes or
jewels. How are we taken with the beauty of flowers, and fruit-bearing trees,
with the various shapes of foure-footed beasts, with the flying and melody of
birds, and the playing of fishes? what shall we say of the beauty of the
Stars, of the Moon, and especially of the beams of the most clear and
resplendent Sun, which by his rising glads the universe? and lastly of Men and
Women, whose shape and beauty does breed the greatest delight? Many Ecclus 9. 8.
have perished by the beauty of Women. It has often happened that Men (otherwise
most prudent) have been taken with their beauty: and on the other side, many
grave matrons and honorable, to have been brought to that madness with the
love of Men's beauty, that they have neglected their estates, goods, children
and parents, their lives; nay I fear their everlasting happiness, for the
fond love of Men. The stories of David, Solomon and Sampson, are notorious in
holy Scripture, with others.

If then, such beauty be infused in the Creatures by GOD; how wonderful beauty
may we imagine to be in the Creator himself? no Man can give to another what
he has not to give: and if Men being delighted with the form of the Sun
and Stars, thought those lights of Heaven to be Gods, yet they should Sap.
13. 3.
have known how much more beautiful He is that made them; for the first
Author of beauty has made these things, says the Wiseman. How much this
beauty of GOD may be, is not only known certainly by this; that the beauty
of all the creatures, after a more eminent manner, is found to be as it were
gathered and compact together in him: but also hereby, that whereas he is
invisible to us, while we are in this Pilgrimage; and may be known only by
us, through Faith in the Scriptures, and in the glass of the Creatures: yet
many holy Men have been so enflamed with His love, that some of them have
withdrawn themselves into desert and solitary places, wholly to spend their
time in contemplating on this beauty: and others have willingly opposed their
lives to many dangers, to come to the sight of this excellent beauty. If then
this heavenly beauty (which as yet cannot perfectly be seen, but only
believed and hoped for) kindles such a zeal of desire; what will it do, when
the veyle shall be removed, and that he shall be seen as He is? No mervaile
then, if the Angels and blessed souls ever see the face of the Father without
yrkesomenesse or satietie, when GOD himself beholding his own beauty from
eternity, rests, and takes delight only in it.

Seek then after this beauty, desiring and longing earnestly after it night
and day, saying with the Kingly Prophet, My soul is athirst for God, Ps. 42. 2.
yea even for the living God, when shall I come to appear before the presence
of God? and with the Apostle, We are bold, and love 2 Cor. 5. 6.
rather to remove out of the body, and to dwell with the LORD. Neither need we
to fear, that we shall be defiled with the ardent love of this beauty: for
it perfects, not infects; sanctifies, but pollutes not the heart. But if thou
affectest and desire the sight of this increate beauty of thy Creator, thou
must do that which the same Apostle adds in the same place, strive to be
acceptable to him. If the beauty of GOD please thee, thy works must please
him: Ps. 116. 9.
and if thou will walk before GOD in the land of the living, thou must strive
to walk before him uprightly in this pilgrimage, and thou must keep Genesis 17.
1.
his Image undefiled from stains and spots.

DEGREE III. By the Consideration of the Earth.
WE have considered the corporal World in the Universe, now we will take a
view of the particular principal parts of it, that we may thereby come as
near as we can to the sight and contemplation of the Creator: and first we
will begin with the Earth.

This though it holds the meanest and lowest part, and seems to be less then
the other elements; yet in truth is not less, but excels all the other in
dignity and value.

We read in diverse places of Scripture, that GOD made Heaven and Earth, as the
principal parts of the World; the Heaven as a Palace for himself and the
Angels, the Earth as a Palace for Men, as it is in the Psalms, All the whole
Heavens are the LORDS, Psa. 115. 16.
the Earth has He given to the children of men. And for this cause it is, that
the Heaven abounds with glittering Stars, and the Earth with immense riches, of
mettalls, precious stones, herbs, trees, living creatures of many kinds;
whereas the water only is stored with fish, and the air and fire are poor
and almost empty elements. But to let these pass. The Earth has three
qualities, by the consideration of which, the mind if it be not asleep, may
with ease ascend to GOD.

First, the Earth is the surest 1.
foundation of the whole World, which it we wanted, we could neither walk,
rest, work, nor live. He has made the round Ps. 93. 2.
World so sure (says the Psalmist) that it cannot be moved; and again, He
has laid the foundations of the Earth, that 104. 5.
it should never be moved at any time.

Secondly, the Earth is as a good Nurse to Man and other 2.
creatures; it daily produces herbs, corn, fruit, grass, and other things of
that kind innumerable, for so GOD speaks, Behold, I have given unto you
every herb bearing seed, Ge. 1. 29.
which is upon all the Earth* and every tree wherein is the fruit of a tree
bearing seed, that shall be to you for meat.

Thirdly, it brings forth stones and timber to build, and 3.
mines of brass and iron for many uses; and gold and silver for money and
traffic.

The first property of the 1.
Earth, (in that it is a place in which our bodies may rest; whereas neither in
air, fire or water they cannot:) is an Emblem of the Creator, in whom only
the soul of Man may find a place of rest. Thou o Lord (says Saint Augustine)
have made us for thy self, and our hearts are not quiet until they rest in
thee.

If ever any, it was King Solomon that found rest in riches, Kingdom, command
and pleasures; he was possessed of a most large and peaceable Kingdom, for he
reigned over all Kingdoms from the river (Euphrates) to the land of the
Philistims; unto the border of Egypt, 1 Reg. 4. 21.
and they brought presents and served Solomon all the days of his life: he had
besides so great wealth that he had 40000. stalls 26.
of Horses for his Charriots, and 12000. Horsemen: besides 9. 28.
his Ships trading to Ophir brought such store of gold and precious stones,
that silver 10. ^^.
was nothing esteemed in his days, 27.
and was given by him as stones in Jerusalem. His pleasure also he took after
such an unlimited manner, that delighting in Women, he took to him 700. Wives
princesses, and 300. concubines. 11. 3.
And yet, hear what he says of himself, after he had reckoned up these
pleasures and many more, (as you may read at large in the Book of the
Preacher:) after he had well looked into them, behold all is vanity and
vexation of spirit, Ecc. 2. 11
and there is no profit under the Sun. Therefore you see, he found no true rest
either in his riches, honor, pleasures or wisdom; nor could he have found
any, had they been many more, because the mind of Man is immortal, and these
things are mortal, and of no continuance; nor it cannot be, that the mind
(capable of infinite good) should be satisfied with finite good: For as the
humane body cannot rest, either in the air, though it be large, or in the
water, though it be deep; because the earth, and not the water or air is its
center: so the mind of Man can never rest in ayrie honor, or watery riches,
(which are sordid pleasures,) but in GOD only, who is the true center of the
mind, and the only place of rest for it, and proper to it. How divinely and
wisely then, did his Father King David cry out, after he had gone into GODS
Sanctuary, Psalm. 73.
and understood the end of the wicked in their prosperity, Whom have I in
Heaven but thee, and there is none that I 24.
desire in earth in comparison of thee. GOD is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for 25.
ever.

Consider this then, and thou will confess, that GOD is the Rock upon which
thou most rest and rely; other things Ps. 18. 2.
are but vanity and vexation of spirit, which are not things in true
existence, but in false apparaence; they comfort not, but torment, being gotten
with labor, kept with fear, and lost with sorrow and grief.

Despise therefore, (if thou be wise) all tran^itory things, least they
snatch thee away with them; and set thy rest on GOD alone, cleave to him with
the bond of love, who remains the same for ever. Lift up thy heart to GOD in
Heaven, least it putrify in Earth. Learn true Wisdom, by the folly of many,
in whose persons the wiseman speaks, Therefore, we have erred from Sap. 5. 6.
the way of truth, and the light of righteousness has not shined unto us; and
the Sun of understanding rose not upon us. We have wearied our selves in the 7.
way of wickedness and destruction, and we have gone through dangerous ways;
but we have not known the way of the Lord. What has pride profited us? or
what profit has the pomp 8.
of riches brought us? All those things are passed away like a 9.
shadow, and as a Post that passes by.

Again, this foundation the 2.
Earth, is an Emblem of GOD in another respect, which CHRIST himself has
explained unto us in the Gospel, by his similitude, of a house built upon a
Rock, which (though Mat. 7. 24.
the rain fell upon it, the winds beat upon the side of it, and the floods
attempted to undermine it,) yet stood firm and unmovable; but the house built
upon the sand, could resist none of them, but fell. So the mansion of man's
soul, which consists of many virtues and graces, as of so many rooms and
chambers, if it be founded upon GOD as upon a Rock, thatis, if it steadfastly
believe him, if it put its whole trust and confidence in him; if it be rooted
and founded in the love of him; Ephesians. 3. 18. Romans 8. 35.
it may say with the Apostle, Who shall separate us from the love of CHRIST?
The soul so founded may be secure, because neither spiritual wickednesses,
Ephe. 6. 12.
which are above it, nor carnal concupiscences which are beneath it; nor
domestical enemies, our kinsmen and acquaintance which are about it, shall at
any time prevail against it. Great I confess are the forces and subtilties of
spiritual powers; but greater is the power, greater is the wisdom of the
Holy Spirit, which is ruler and president over the house which is built upon
GOD. Very much and earnestly does the flesh fight against the Spirit, and
concupiscences have overcome many strong Men: but the love of GOD easily
overcomes the love of the flesh; and the fear of the LORD, the fear of the
World, Lastly, Man's homebred enemies many times draw them by evil example and
conversation, to the perpetrating of sin: but the soul whose confidence is,
that it has GOD to Father and friend, easily shakes such friends off, and will
say with the Apostle, I am persuaded that neither life nor death, nor Angels,
nor Principalities no^ Powers, nor things present nor Romans 8. 38, 39.
things to come; nor any other creature, shall be able to separate me from the
love of GOD which is in CHRIST JEsus our LORD.

The second property of the Earth consists in this, that it is as a good nurse
to Men, and other living creatures, in bringing forth herbs, fruits, and other
sustenance in plentiful manner for their preservation. And this property ^eads
us to the Creator, who is the true Nurse: For it is not properly the Earth, but
GOD by the Earth, which produces these good things. For so the holy Spirit
speaks by the mouth of David, He Ps. 104. 14.
brings forth grass for the cuttell, and green herb for the service of
men; and a little after, These all wayt upon thee, that 27.
thou may give them meat in due season. When thou give 28.
it them they gather it; and when thou openest thine hand, they are filled with
good: and our Savior in the Gospel, Behold the fowls of the air, for Mat.
6. 26.
they sow not, neither reap, nor carry into the barnes, yet your Heavenly
Father feeds them: and the Apostle Saint Act. 14. 17.
Paul in the Acts, Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that
he did good, and gave us rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our
hearts with food and gladness. Yet is that true, which GOD commanded at Ge. 1.
11.
the Creation, Let the Earth bud forth the bud of the herb, that seedeth seed;
and the fruitful tree which bears fruit according to his kind: but it is by
the power and virtue which GOD has given it, and GOD himself by the Earth
producing, increasing and preserving these things. And for this cause it was,
that King David inviting all creatures to praise the LORD, among the rest,
calls upon fruitful trees to do the same: and that the three Children in
Daniel sang, All things that grow on the Earth, bless ye the LORD, praise Dan.
3. 76.
him and exalt him above all things for eve^*

Seeing then, that all things (after their manner) praise the LORD, with what
affection oughtst thou to bless and praise him; for all the benefits which
thou continually receivest? whose hand is continually open to manifest his
fatherly and most pure love to thee, never ceasing to do thee good from
Heaven, but continually providing in most plentiful manner for thee.

But all this is little in the sight of GOD thy LORD, for it is he which
causes that most noble root of love to sprout out and grow in thee. For Love
comes not of the World, but of GOD, as Saint 1 10. 4. 7.
John speaks: And out of love as out of a Divine and Heavenly plant, spring
the most fair and sweet smelling flowers of holy thoughts, the green leaves
of profitable words to salvation, and the fruit of good works by which GOD is
glorified, and our neighbors relieved.

Woe then to those, who like foolish beasts covet to be filled with the fruits
of the Earth, gather them greedily and hide them, never thinking of the Author
of them, nor praising him for them: whose souls are like to the Earth which
GOD cursed, bringing forth only thorns and thistles: for what do they think
upon, but only Fornication, Adultery, Homicide, Sacrilege, Thefts, Treasons
and the like? what do they speak but Blasphemies, Perjuries, Curses,
Contumelies, false Testimonies, Lies and the like, which they have learned of
their Father the Devil? And lastly, what fruit bring they forth, but those
poisonous fruits which (as we said) they continually think and speak of, even
the works of the flesh, Ga. 5. 19.
as they are called by the Apostle? These are the thorns which first of all
prick them that bring them forth, with most sharp and bitter pricks of fears
and cares: then they prick the fame of their neighbors, with most grievous
and irreparable loss.

But if thou be the garden of that Heavenly Husbandman, take heed that
thorns and briers be not found in thee, and above all things cherish the Tree
of love, and the Lilly of chastity, and the sweet Spikenard of humility: and
take heed, that it never creep into thee to think, that these virtues and
plants of grace be of thy self and not of GOD: neither attribute the
preservation and increase of the fruits of good works to thy self; but commit
them to him, and his care, placing all thy strength wholly in him.

The third and last property of the Earth is, that in the 3.
bowels of it are Mines of gold, silver, and precious stones, iron, brass, and
lead. Yet we must understand, that the Earth produces not these things of its
own power, but by GODS; which thing he himself affirms, by the mouth of the
Prophet Aggee, the Silver is mine, and the gold is mine says Agg. 2. 8.
the LORD of Hosts. O thou lover of mankind, has it thus pleased thy
goodness, not only to furnish Man with stones, timber, brass, iron, lead,
and other the like necessaries for the building of houses and ships; and all
other things expedient for his use, but to bestow upon him gold, silver, and
jewels for ornament also? And if thou give such things to Pilgrims on Earth,
often times thine enemies and blasphemers of thy holy name, what will thou bestow
upon thy beloved, who shall bless thee, and reign with thee in Heaven? Thou will not give them small pieces of gold or silver, nor a few jewels and
precious stones; but that City, of which Saint John speaks in the Revelation,
That the building of the Apoc. 21. 18.
wall of it was of Jasper, and the City was pure gold; the foundations of the
City wall were garnished with all manner of 19.
precious stones, and the twelve gates were twelve pearls. Yet 21.
we must not conceive, that this high City Jerusalem the Heavenly, was built
indeed of gold, silver, or pearls, as is described by Saint John; only we are
to know, that the holy Spirit uses these speeches for our understanding, that
apprehend not greater, nor better things. But without all doubt, much more
excellent shall that City be, which is the City of the Elect of GOD, and
^urpasse in glory all the Cities in this world; much more, then a golden City
adorned and beautified with Jewels does exceed any Country Town, made of mud
and straw.

Lift up then the eyes of thy mind to Heaven, and consider, of what value and
estimation the things of Heaven are; when as gold, silver and jewels, which
are here so much accounted of, are but as dust and straw compared with them:
and that these things are but corruptible, and they incorruptible and eternal.
But if thou would have them laid up for thee as treasures, and become
incorruptible in Heaven, send them by bills of exchange (as it were) by the
hands of the poor, and thou shall find and receive them there again. For the
truth cannot lie, which says, Give to the poor, and thou shall have Mat. 19.
21.
treasure in Heaven, and again, Give alms, make you bags which wax not
old, a treasure Luke 12. 33.
that can never fail in Heaven, where no thief comes, neither moth
corrupts.

O the unbelief of Men! deceitful and lying Man promises ten for a hundred,
besides the principal; and is believed and trusted; and GOD which cannot lie,
promises to repay one hundred for one, and eternal life to boot; and the
covetous wretch distrusteth, and chooses rather to hide his treasure, where
moth consumes, and thieves break through and steal, then to lay it up in
Heaven, where it is subject to no such casualties. But tell me o unhappy Man,
if these goods which thou have gotten with much labor, and have kept with no
less fear, be neither stolen by thieves, nor corrupted with moth or rust,
whose shall they be? not thine certainly. Experience teaches us, that the
wealth of the covetous come commonly to prodigal heirs, which consume them
with far more speed, then the covetous Fathers scraped them together; yet in
the mean time, the sin of covetousnes remains, and shall for ever, and the
worm of their conscience shall not die, and the fire (prepared for Es. 66. 24
Mar 9* 46
their reward) never goes out.

Therefore, let the folly of others be thy instruction, and give ear to thy
Lord and Master preaching to thee, Beware of covetousness, for though a Luke
12. 15.
Man have abundance, yet his life stands not in his riches. A covetous Man
gathers together, and keeps it, thinking long to possess it: but it happens
otherwise, as it did to the rich man, that filled his enlarged barnes in the
Gospel; and his wealth covetously heaped up, begat such a worm as never will
dye, and kindled such a fire as never will be quenched. O thou unhappy miser,
were thou so sollicitous to gather that, which should prepare a fire in Hell,
wherein thou must continually burn? Hearken to St. James, Go to you rich men,
weep and howl for your miseries that shall Iam. 5. 1,
come upon you. Your riches are corrupt, and your garments are 2,
moth eaten. Your gold and silver 3.
is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you; and shall
eat your flesh as it were fire; as if he should say, Because you were rich,
you accounted your selves happy, but indeed you are miserable; yea more
wretched then all poor men, and have great cause to weep and howl for the
great calamities which surely shall befall you: for the overplus of your riches
which you suffered to corrupt, rather then to bestow them on the poor, and
your supersluous garments, which you suffered the mothes to eat, rather then
to clothe the naked, shall rise up, and bear witness in the day of judgment
against you. And therefore, we will conclude with the Kingly Prophet, Happy are
Ps. 144. 15.
the people (say the unw^se) that are in such a case; that is, abounding with
all manner of wealth, when as indeed blessed are the people, (and they only
blessed) who have the LORD for their GOD.

DEGREE IV. By the Consideration of Water, especially of Rivers and Fountains.
AMongst the Elements of the World, Water challenges the second place; by
which also we may raise our thoughts a step higher to Godward. First, we will
consider Water in general, and afterward ^raw one special ascent O GOD, out
of Fountains and Rivers.

Water is moist and cold, and in these respects, has five properties. First to
wash and cleanse from spots. Secondly, to extinguish fire. Thirdly, to cool and
temper the heat of thirst-Fourthly, to join many and diverse things into one.
Fifthly and lastly, it ascends or rises, as high as it falls low. All these
are apparent resemblances or Emblems of GOD the Creator of an things.

Water washes and takes away corporal steines and spots; 1.
so does GOD spiritual, Wash me and I shall be whiter then snow, says King
David; for though Ps. 51. 7.
contrition, the Sacraments, the Priest, alms, and other works of piety, wash
out the spots or steines of the heart (sin) yet all these are but instruments
or dispositions, and the only author of this clensing is GOD, I even I (says
GOD by Esaias) am he that blotteth out thy transgressions Es. 43. 25
for mine own sake. And therefore the murmuring Pharisees, though they
believed not in CHRIST, but blasphemed him, yet were in the right, Luke 5. 21.
when they said, Who can for give sins but GOD only?

Besides, God does not only wash our sins, as water does spots, but will be
called water also: for so writes St. John. He 10. 7. 38.
that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters. But
this he spoke of the spirit which they that believed in him should receive: for
the holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified,
therefore the Holy Ghost (which also is God) is living water, and of this Water
Ezechiel Ezec. 36. 25
speaks, I will power clean water upon you, and you shall be clean from all
your filthiness. Now because this heavenly and uncreate water, far surpasses
the power of created water, you may observe 3. differences between them.

1 Created water washes away the spots or stains of corporal things: yet not
of it self, without the help of soap, or other means: but uncreate water
washes out all stains fully, as you see, in the place last before quoted.

2 Water created does seldom so cleanse, as to leave no signs or marks of a
spot; uncreate, does so wash, as that the thing washed, becomes much whiter and
fairer then before. Wash me, and I shall be Ps. 51. 7.
whiter then the snow, says David; and God himself by Esaias, If your sins be
as crimson, they Es. 1. 18.
shall be made white as snow, though they were red like scarlet, they shall be
as white as wool.

3 Lastly, Created water cleanses natural spots, that resist not, but yield
to the Washer. Uncreate, not only washes away voluntary spots, which cannot
be cleansed without the souls consent, but withal (such is the admirable
force and virtue of it) it sweetly enters into stony hearts, and therefore is
rejected of no hard hearts, because it works so in them, that they have no
power to oppose, as St. Augustine rightly says, Who can conceive in what Lib.
de pr. SS. cap. 8.
admirable manner thou, O Lord, inspirest faith into the hearts of unbeleevers,
humility into the hearts of the proud, and charity or love into the hearts of
thine enemies, etc. It is much that I should search into these thy secrets, and
I would rather have experience of the efficacy of thy grace, then search into
it. And because I know that this water is avotuntary and gracious rain sent by
thee upon thine inheritance, Ps. 68. 9.
as the Prophet David speaks: I humbly desire, that I may be found to be of
thine inheritance, and that it would please thee to descend into the earth of
my heart, least it continue as a land without water, barren and dry, as of it
self it is, so that it is not able of it self, to think a good thought.

The second property of created water, is to extinguish, or put out fire: and
this heavenly water, that is, the grace of the Holy Spirit, quenches the fire
of carnal concupiscence, after a wonderful manner. And to this quenching,
afflicting of the body by fasting and the like, do much avayle, as they are
instruments of grace only, and not otherwise, for of themselves they are
nothing avaylable. For love is the prince or principal of all affections and
perturbations of the mind, it rules over them all, and they all obey it only.
Love will not be forced, and if the way or passage be stopped to it one way, it
will break through another. It fears nothing, it overcomes all things, it
accounts nothing hard or impossible; lastly, love yields to nothing, but to a
love greater and more powerful then it self: and in this last case, carnal
love, whether it follow either the riches or pleasures of the world, if once
the water of the holy Spirit begin to distill into the heart of a man, it
presently wa^eth cold, and gives place to the love of God. Saint Augustine
testifies this, in his own case, who having accustomed himself to follow too
much his own lusts, yet when he began to taste of the grace of the Holy Spirit,
he cried out. How suddenly became it pleasant to me to want L. 9. Conf. c. 1.
the sweetness of toys, and that which before I was afraid to lose, now it was
pleasure to me to let go. Thou O Lord, the only true joy did cast these
from me, and entredst into me in their stead, being sweeter then all other
pleasure, although not to flesh and blood, etc.

Again, this created water qualifieth and asswageth thirst, and the uncreate
heavenly water, can only give an end to the manifold, grievous, and almost
infinite desires of man's heart. This Christ the Truth plainly teaches us, by
that speech of his to the Samaritane woman. Whosoever, (says he) drinks of
this water, shall thirst again: but whosoever shall drink of the water which
I shall give him, shall never thirst. Thus stands Io. 4. 13, 14
the case. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear Eccl. 1. 8.
filled with hearing, (as says the Preacher) whatsoever is offered to man,
cannot satisfy his desire, why? because he is capable of infinite good, and
all created things are circumscribed within certain limits. But he whch
begins to drink this heavenly water, in which all things are contained,
covets nor desires any thing more. But of this has been formely spoken, in
the rest of the mind in God alone, as its proper Center.

Fourthly, Water joins together, 4
and reduces into one, those things, which one could not imagine would have
been so united. As many graynes of wheat by the mixture of water, make one
loaf of bread; and of many parts of the earth by the same mixture, bricks and
tiles are made. But much easilier, and with a stronger tie or band, does the
water of the Holy Spirit bring to pass, that many men become one heart and one
soul, as it was with the Primitive Christians (in the Acts of the Apostles)
upon whom the holy Act. 4. 32.
Ghost descended. This unity Christ himself (going to his Father) commended
and foretold, when he said, I pray not for these alone, but for them also which
shall believe in me by their word, that they may be all one, as thou O Father
art in me, 10. 17. 20.
and I in thee, that they may be also one in us: and a little after, that they
may be one as we are one. I in them, and thou in 22. 23.
me, that they may be made perfect in one. To which unity the Apostle also
exhorts, endeavoring Ephesians. 43.
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one Body and
one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your 4.
vocation. O happy Union, which makes many men to be one Body of Christ, which
is governed by one Head, and to eat of one meat, and drink of one drink,
and to live with one 1 Cor. 10. 3. 4. 6. 17.
spirit, and being joined to God, to be made one spirit with him. What more can
be desired by a servant, then not only to be partaker of all the goods of his
Lord, but also by an indissoluble bond of love to be made one with him? And all
this the grace of the Holy Spirit brings to pass, as a living and quickening
water, when it is devoutly received into the heart, and there kept with
diligence and care.

Lastly, Water as^^nds and rises as high as it falls low, And 5
because the Holy Spirit descends into earth from the highest heaven, therefore
in that man into whose heart it is received, is made a well of water springing
to eternal life, as our Savior Io. 4. 14.
said to the Samaritane woman.

Wherefore, being thus instructed in the properties of this uncreate water, let
us thirst after it, and say with groans and sighs unutterable: Lord give us of
this water which may wash off all our stains, cool the heat of our
concupiscences, appease and qualify the thirst of our desires, may make us one
spirit with thee, and raise us to the height of thy eternal mansion.

It was not without cause, that the Son of God said, If ye then being evil
know to give good gifts to your children, how Luc 11. 13.
much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask
it? He says not, he will give you bread, or apparel, or wisdom, or love, or
the Kingdom of heaven, or eternal life; but he says, He will give the Holy
Spirit, because in it are contein^d all things. Cease not then to put God daily
in mind of his Sons promise, and say to him with earnest affection, and assured
hope of obteining, Holy Father, I power out my prayers unto thee, not trusting
in mine own righteousness, but in the promise of thine only begotten Son.
Make good therefore this promise of thy Son, who glorified thee upon earth,
Io. 17. 4. Phil. 2. 8.
and was obedient to thee unto death, even the death of the Cross, give to me
that ask thy good Spirit, give me the spirit of thy fear and love, that I thy
servant may fear nothing but offending thee, and may love nothing but thee,
and my neighbor for thee. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew Ps. 51.
10.
a right spirit within me: Cast me not away from thy presence, 11.
and take not thy Holy Spirit from me: Restore to me 12.
the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

We come now to the resemblance which rivers or fountains of water have with
God, and by it, the mind may be lift up to contemplate the wonderful and
excellent work of the Creator. For it is not without cause, that the Scripture
says that God is a Ps. 35. 9.
Well of life, a Eccl. 1. 5.
Fountain of Wisdom, Ier. 2. 13.
the Fountain of living waters. And that he is the very Fountain of being,
may be gathered out of his own words to Moses. I am that I am, and, I am Exo.
3. 14.
has sent me unto you. All which the Apostle seems to comprehend in this
speech. In him we Act. 17. 28.
live and move, and have our being. In him we live, as in a Fountain of life:
in him we move, as in a Founteine of wisdom, and in him we have our being,
as in the Founteine of being.

A Founteine of water here with us, has this property, that from it the
floods arise, and whenever they leave to flow, immediately they dry up: but
the Founteine it self depends not upon the floods, because it receives no
water from them, but not only has water in it self, but communicates with
others. This is a true resemblance of God, and an Emblem of the Godhead: for
God is the very Founteine of being; he receives no being from any thing, but
from him all things take their being, because the essence of God is to be, and
his existence is his essence: so that it cannot come to pass, and it were
blasphemy to think, that God was not, or will not be for ever. Other things
may be and not be for a time, because a being is not properly to their essence.
For example, it is of the essence of man that he be a reasonable creature, and
therefore he cannot be a man and not be a reasonable creature; and if it were
of the essence of man to be, it could not be otherwise, but that he must be
always: but because it is not of his essence to be, therefore he may be, and
not be. God therefore ^s the only Founteine of being, because in his essence
the act to be is always included. And these words signify so much, I am that
I am, that is, I am the thing to be, and receive not being from any, but have
it in my self: to me only it is proper, that essence to me should be to be;
and hence also it comes, that eternity and immortality is proper to him only,
as the Apostle speaks; To the King everlasting, immortal* etc* and, Who only
has immortality. 1 Timothy 1. 17. 6. 16.
All other things receive their being from God, so that unless they always
depend on him, and be preserved by a certain influence from him, they
presently leave to be, and therefore the Apostle says of him that he bears
up allthings by hi^ mighty Word, and unless he^ should always preserve an^
uphold the creatures, the^ could no longer subsist, or be. Heb. 1. 3.


Elevate thy mind then, an^ admire the goodness of God* who so lovingly and
carefully preserves and supports all things having no need of them; and no
less wonder at and imitate, the patience of thy Creator, who is so kind to the
unkind Luc 6. 35.
and evil, as to sustain and help those which blaspheme him, and preserve
those who deserve to be reduced to nothing; and be not unwilling to bear the
infirmities of thy brethren, nor to do good to thine enemies.

But the eminency of the 2
Fountain of being consists not in this property alone, that it receives its
being of another Fountain, and communicates that being with other things, for
the waters of Fountains and the waters of rivers with us, are of the same
kind, and although the waters of fountains receive not waters from other
fountains, yet have they a cause of their being, as vapors, and the vapors
have other causes, till we come to the first cause, which is God. But God is
not of the same kind with things created, but differs in an infinite distance
of dignity and excellency from them: and is truly and properly the Fountain of
being, because not only he takes not his being from another Fountain of
being, but is so far from that, as that he knows no other cause at all.
The fountain of created water (as is said) is derived, not from another water,
yet from another cause: the uncreate Fountain of being, has nothing
precedent, depends of nothing, wants nothing, nothing can hurt it, but all
things depend upon it, and he can with one nod destroy all things 2 Macc. 8.
created, as the Machabee speaks.

We may worthily admire this excellency, this beginning without beginning,
this cause without cause, infinite, unlimited and absolutely necessary;
whereas, all other things in comparison of this are but contingencies. And
therefore cleave ^o this alone, serve him only, delight in his love alone, and
despise all other things in re^pect of him: at the least, vex not thy self
with too much so^icitude about many matters, ^eeing this one thing is
necessa^y, and is all sufficient for thee and all other men: and let it be ^ne
chief care of thine, never ^o fall from his grace, and study to please him
only, ever, and every where.

3 Again, God is most truly 3
^alled the Fountain of life, because he lives and has life ^n himself,
yea and is life eternal it self, and all things that ^ive, receive life from
this Foun^aine, and that when he cea^eth to give them life, when he takes
away their breath, they die, and are turned again to Ps. 104. 29.
their dust, as the Prophet David speaks. To beget a thing like it self, is
the property of the living: now God begot a Son most like to himself, God
begat God, and the living, the living. For as the Father has life in
himself, so likewise has 10. 5. 26*
he given to the Son to have life in himself, as St. John testifies, and the
Father has life in himself, because he is the Fountain of life, and receives
no life from any other place, and gave his Son to have life in himself, the
same life which he has himself: and by this it is, that the Son is the
Fountain of life also, yet so, as the Fountain of life from the Fountain of
life, as he is God of God, light of light. Who can express, nay who can
conceive, what manner of life this life of God is? and what manner of Fountain
of life that is from whence all things which live, either in heaven or earth
suck small drops. The life known to us in this our banishment, is nothing else,
but an internal beginning of motion; for those things are said by us to live,
which after any sort move themselves: from whence it comes to pass, that the
warers in rivers, by a kind of similitude, are called living waters, because
they seem to move, and stir of themselves, and those in ponds and pooles, are
called dead, because they cannot move of themselves, nor are stirred, but by
winds, or some external force.

It is thy God then, which is only he, that most truly lives, and that is
the author and Fountain of life, which God himself does often beat and
inculcate to us, throughout the holy Scriptures. As I live, says the Lord: and
the Prophets N^mb. 14. 28.
often repeat this, The Lord lives. And God himself complains of his
people in Jeremy, They have forsaken Jer. 2. 13.
me, the Fountain of living waters. And yet he is not moved, either by
himself, or any other. I am the Lord (says he) and am not changed, and God is
Mal. 3. 6.
not as man, that he should lie, nor as the son of man, that he should be
changed. And if God Number. 23. 19.
begat a Son, he begat him without changing, or if he see, hear, speak,
love, pity, judge, all or any of these things he does without changing: and if
he create, preserve, (or on the contrary) destroy, dissolve, and again renew,
and alter, yet he works quietly and changes without motion. If you a ke how
he lives, if he move not, or how lives he not, if he be the author and
Fountain of life? it is easily answered. It is absolutely sufficient to life,
if a living thing act of it self, not being moved by another: but life, (as it
is for the most part in created things,) is an internal beginning of motion,
because things created, are imperfect, and want many things to perfect and
finish the actions of life. But God is infinite perfection, and needs nothing
without himself, because he works of himself, not moved by any other, as
needing no motion or change. Again, things created need change to beget and to
be begotten, because they beget without themselves, and things which generate
must be changed, from a not being, to a being. But God begets the Son within
himself, and produces the Holy Ghost within himself, neither need the Son
or the Holy Ghost to be changed from a not being, to a being, because they
receive that esse or being that ever was, and that not in time, but from
eternity. Again, things created want the motion of augmentation, because they
are borne imperfect: but God the Son, is borne most perfect, and God the Holy
Ghost is breathed and produced most perfect. Things created need alteration, as
diverse qualities, which they must necessarily get: but God wants nothing,
because he has the essence of infinite perfection. Things created need motion
to place, because they are not every where; but God is whole every where.
Again, things created want many things to cause them to see, hear, speak,
and work because though they have life, yet it is imperfect and deficient; but
God needs nothing without himself, to see and hear all things, to speak to
all, and to work in all. For he works all things in all, as having a life
most happy, and most plentiful, being life, and the Fountain of life. Take an
example in the act of seeing. A man, to cause him to see, wants a seeing power,
which is distinct from the soul, which properly lives: he wants an object,
that is some colored body placed without him: he wants the light of the
Sun, or some other enlightened body: he wants a medium, that is, some
perspicuous body; he wants a sensible species, as form, which may be conveyed
from the object to the eyes: he wants a corporal organ, that is, an eye
furnished with diverse humors, and fleshly tunicles: he wants sensitive
spirits, and optique nerves, by which those spirits may pass: he wants a
proportionable distance, and the application of power: you see, what a number
of little helps are wanting to men, and other creatures, to perform one
action of life. But God, who truly has all life in himself, wants nothing:
his infinite essence is unto him, power, object, species, light, and all other
things. Of, and by, and in himself, God sees all things which are, have been,
and shall be, and perfectly knows what might have been: and before the world
was made, God saw all things, neither is there any new thing added to his
knowledge or sight, by the creation of things.

Consider duly then, what thou shall be, when thou shall be partaker of that
life? what great thing does God command thee, when he bids thee despise this
frail and temporal life (altogether deficient and imperfect) for his sake,
that thereby, thou may enjoy that eternal life? And if he command thee
therein no hard task; how little and mean injunction is that, when he bids
thee give thy dead superfluities liberally to the poor; to abstain from
fleshly lusts and concupiscences, to forsake and renounce the Devil and his
tentations, and wholly to desire fervently, and with all the affections of thy
heart, to attain to that which is the only and true life?

But it is time now to ascend to the fountain of wisdom, by what means we
can. The Word of GOD most high, (or in Ecclus. 1. 5.
the highest as some translate it) is the fountain of wisdom, as it is in
Ecclesiasticus; and it may very truly be said in the highest, because the
fountain of wisdom most abundantly and plentifully flows in the holy
Angels and souls of the blessed, who inhabit in the highest habitations: but
to us, who live in this desert and pilgrimage, not wisdom, but a kind of
vapor or smell of wisdom is allotted.

Therefore look not after higher things then befits thee, search not too
narrowly into the Majesty of GOD, least thou be overwhelmed with his glory; but
admire his wisdom, of which the Apostle sp^aketh, Romans 16. 27.
To the only wise GOD: congratulate the blessed spirits, who drink out of the
fountain of wisdom; and though they comprehend not GOD, a thing only proper
to the fountain of wisdom, yet they behold the face of GOD without any
veyle; and (being enlightened with the brightness of his rays) judge most
rightly of all things, neither in that noonday light of wisdom, fear they
the darkness of errors, nor the obscurity of ignorance, nor mist of opinions.
Aspire to that happiness, and that thou may securely come to it, love the LORD
JESUS with all thine heart, in whom are all the treasures Col. 2. 3.
of the wisdom of GOD, for he has said in the Gospel, He that loves me,
shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, Io. 14. 21.
and show mine own self unto him: and what will he show, by showing himself,
but all the treasures of knowledge and wisdom of GOD which are in him?
Certainly, men are naturally desirous to know, and although fleshly
concupiscences do in this life in a sort lull this desire asleep, yet when
this body (which corrupts and burdens the soul) shall be laid aside, then the
fire of this desire shall wax fervent.

How great will thy happiness then be, when thy beloved CHRIST JESUS shall
impart to thee all the treasures of the knowledge and wisdom of GOD? But that
thou may not hereafter be frustrate of thy expectation, study and endeavor
to keep his Commandments. For he has said, He that keeps my
Commandments, John 14. 21.
is he that loves me, and He that loves me not, keeps not my words. In
the 24.
mean time, let that be thy wisdom, which holy Job describes. The fear of
the Lord Job 28. 28.
is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding, and what good soever
thou see in the creature, know that it flows from GOD the fountain of all
goodness.

DEGREE V. By the Consideration of the AIR.
THe Element of Air may serve as an excellent and notable Schoolmaster, if
the nature of it be well considered; not only to instruct us in natural
Philosophy, but to open to us the mysteries of Divinity, and to raise our minds
to GOD: for the benefits are diverse, which by Divine ordination, and
appointment, arise by the air to mankind.

First of all, Air while it serves for breathing, preserves the life of every
creature.

2. Again, it is so necessary for the use of the eyes, ears and tongue, that
if it be wanting, presently we become blind, deaf and dumb.

3. Lastly, it is so necessary for the motion of men, and all other living
creatures, that if it should be taken away, all motions, and consequently all
Arts and works would be at an end.

First, if men would consider that their souls have as much 1.
need of breathing as their bodies; many would be saved that now perish. The
body needs a continual breathing, because if the natural heat which inflames
and makes the heart as it were to boil, were not tempered and qualified by the
ministry and office of the lungs, drawing in cool air to eject the hot, the
life could not be preserved; which confirms the usual received opinion, that
to live and breath are one, and the same: for every thing that breathes,
lives, and that which leaves to breath, cease also to live. The soul in
like manner (which lives a spiritual life by GODS grace) needs a continual
breathing, which is done, by sending hot and fervent sighs by prayer to GOD,
and by receiving from him new grace, even that of the holy Spirit. And what
else indeed is the meaning of our Savior by this, that we ought always to
pray, and not to Luke 18. 1.
faint, but that we must ever sigh up to GOD, and receive his good spirit
down, that our spiritual life be not dissolved; which he seems to repeat,
when he says, Watch therefore Luke 21. 36.
and pray continually: and the Apostle, Pray without ceasing; to all which the
Apostle St. Peter agrees, saying, Be therefore 1 Pet. 4. 7
sober, and watching in prayer.

And verily, this is true sobriety and wisdom, that we which continually
need the help of GOD, should always make petition for the same. Our heavenly
Father (it is true) knows what we stand in need of, and is ever ready to
supply our wants in plentiful manner, especially those, which conduce to our
eternal happiness and salvation: yet His will is, to bestow them by the
instrument of prayer; we must pray for them, because it is more honorable for
him, and profitable for us, to give them to us as laborers and petitioners for
them, then as to sleepy and idle persons. Therefore, our most bountiful GOD
exhorts and urges us to this duty, saying, Ask and it shall be given to you,
Luke 11. 9.
seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you: for every one
that asks receives, 10.
and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened. And
what that is, that is chiefly to be asked, and that shall be given without doubt;
he declares a little after, If ye then which are evil can give 13.
good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give
the holy Spirit to them that desire him? Therefore, that which is in the first
place to be required, is the holy Spirit, by which we breath in GOD; and by
this breathing preserve our spiritual life; which holy David did, as appears
by that in the Psalms, I opened my mouth and drew in Psa. 119. 135.
my breath, that is, I opened my mouth by prayers, sighs and groans
unutterable, and I drew in the most comfortable breath of Gods spirit, which
cooled the heat of concupiscence, and confirmed me in every good work. This
being so, who can say that they live to GOD, who spend days, months and
years, and neither breath to, nor receive breath from him? It is an evident
sign of death, not to breath: and if to breath be to pray, then it is a sign
of death not to pray. Now the spiritual life by which the Children of GOD are
reputed to live chiefly, consists in love, Behold says St. John, what love the
Father has given unto us, that we should 1 Io. 3. 1.
be called, and be the sons of God. Now who is there that loves, and desires
not to see that which he loves? and who desires any thing, and asks not for
it of him, who he knows will give it him, if he make suit for it? Therefore,
he which prays not continually to see the face of GOD, desires not to see
him; he which desires not to see him, loves him not: he which loves him not,
lives not; whereupon it necessarily follows, that they are dead to GOD, though
they live to the world, who seriously devote not themselves to prayer. Nor is
it enough only to pray with the lips, to make us reputed amongst the living,
for prayer is rightly defined to be a lifting up of the mind to GOD, and not an
elevating of the voice into the air.

Therefore deceive not thy self, think not that thou live to GOD, if thou
earnestly breath not to him with all thine heart, night and day; and say not to
thy self, that thine other affairs will not give thee leave to spend thy time
in prayer and divine meditations: for the holy Apostles were much employed,
as well in their own affairs, as in the work of the LORD, and salvation of
souls, in so much as one of them said of himself, Besides the things which are
outward, I am combred daily, 2 Cor. 11 28.
and have the care of all Churches, etc. yet he (besides other recital of his
often prayers) writes to the Philippians, that his conversation was in Heaven,
Phil. 3. 20.
and that, because in the heat of his other employments, he was conversant in
Heaven, in his desire, nor ever was unmindfull of his beloved; otherwise, he
would never have said, I am crucified with Christ, but Gala. 2. 20.
I live: yet not I any more, but Christ lives in me.

The second property of the air is, that it is the medium or 2.
means by which the species or forms of colors are conveyed to our eyes,
and of sounds to our ears; and without which, we could neither see, hear nor
speak. For which, first we are to give thanks to Almighty GOD for giving such
an ornament and benefit to our nature: and secondly, we are to admire his
wisdom, in a work of such finenesse, subtlety and thinness.

1. In respect that the air of it self is a true body, and so great, that it
almost filles the universe; yet it can neither be seen nor felt for the
incredible subtilty of it. Antiquity admired the skill and subtilty of one
line, which Apelles drew with his pencill, and yet it was seen, and touched;
and in that regard, was by no means to be compared with the tenuity and
subtilty of this veyle, which compasses and touches all men, and yet is seen
of none.

2. But it increases our admiration, that being a most subtle and thin
body, yet when it is divided, it closes again with so great facility, as if
it had never been divided: when as but a Spiders web, being once broken, can
never be so cunningly amended, that the first breach may not be seen.

3. Lastly, that which is most worthy our admiration, and done or caused only
by the wisdom of GOD, that through one and the same part of the air, should
be mingled together innumerable several species of colors, as those in the
rainebow. He that shall place himself in a clear Mooneshine night, in some
open field, where he may behold at one time, stars in the heaven, fields in
the earth bedeckt with several sorts of flowers, together with houses, trees,
and many other beautiful ^ights; shall not be able to deny, but that the
several species of them are contained in that part of the air, which is near
unto him. But who well can understand this? who can conceive it? for how can it
be, that so thin and subtle a thing as the air should comprehend together
so great variety of shapes and forms? And what if it happen that at the same
time, and in the same place, he shall hear the melodious music of birds on
one side, from another diverse musical instruments, in another the silent
murmuring of falling waters; will it not follow, and that of necessity, that
all these sounds or species of sounds must be received together with those of
the colors before-named? and who brings these things to pass? are they not
wrought by the wisdom of thy Creator who only does wonderful things alone.

3. Again, there is yet another benefit which arises by this admirable
tenuity and thinness in the air, that it hinders not, but helps the motion
of all things, which pass from one place to another. We all know, with what
labor Ships or Boats are drawn through water, though it be of a liquid
quality or substance, and is easily divided and parted; For many times, neither
the winds, nor Oars, serve to make them pass, but they are many times forced
by the strength of Horses. And if at any time, upon some occasion, a way be to
be made through a hill or mountain, what labor, sweat and time it costs,
before a short cut be made? But through the air, horses run swiftly, birds
and arrows fly speedily, and men in exercising diverse offices, ascend,
descend, walk, run, move feet, arms, and hands, upwards and downwards,
every way; neither does the air (which is diffused in all places) any thing at
all hinder them, insomuch, as if it were not of a corporeal, but of a
spiritual substance and nature, nay indeed as if it were nothing at all.

Laftly, the air has a property, 3.
serving for the benefit of Man, that is, it changes it self into every
form, and suffers it self to be divided, and as it were broken asunder, to
comply to the service and use of Man, so that it seems to be given to him, as
a Master and instructor to him, in humility, patience and charity. But that
which should chiefly stir up and kindle in thee the love of thy Creator, is,
that the air does represent the great sweetness and gentleness of thy maker
to men: For do but recollect thy self, and seriously consider his goodness,
thou shall find, that thy GOD is ever present with his creatures, ever working
with them; and of such infinite gentleness, that he accommodates his working
to the several condition and nature of them all, as if he should say with the
Apostle, I am made all things to all men, that I might 1 Cor. 9. 22.
by all means save some: he works together with necessary works, that they
may work necessarily; with voluntary, that they may work voluntarily; with
those which are free in their working, that they may work freely. The fire he
moves, stirs and helps so, that it may ascend; the earth that it may tend
downward; the air that it may glide by declive and bending places; the air
that it may pass which way soever it be driven; stars that they may keep
always in a circular motion: herbs furittrees and plants, that they may bring
forth fruit, according to their natures; creatures upon earth, in the water and
the air, to do those things which are agreeable to their nature. And if the
goodness of GOD be so eminent in cooperating with his creatures, in the work
of nature, what may we think it to be in the works of grace? He has given
man free power of his will, but so, as that he will govern him by his command,
terrify him with destruction, and allure him by his bounty. He will have all
men saved, but so, as that he will also have them to be willing; and therefore
he sweetly prevents, excites, leads, and guides them in such manner, as is most
admirable. These are the means which the wisdom of GOD has found out for
the good of Man: of which, the Prophet Esaias speaks in these words, Praise the
LORD, call upon Es. 12 4.
his Name, declare his Works, (adinventiones ejus, say some) among the people.
And certainly, the wicked sometimes he terrifies exceedingly, sometimes
persuades them lovingly; sometime admonishes them mildly, and sometime
corrects them mercifully, as he in his wisdom thinks expedient and
agreeable to their conditions and inclinations. Observe how tenderly he dealt
with the first transgressor: Adam (says GOD) where art thou? his answer Genesis
3. 9. 10.
was, I heard thy voice in the Garden, and was afraid, because I was naked I
hid my self, the LORD replied with the like meekness, Who told thee that
thou wast naked, Have thou 11.
eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou should not eat? and
by this gentle correction or insinuation, Adam without doubt repented, as the
Scripture says. She (that is the Wisdom of GOD) preserved Sap. 10. 1.
the first Father of the World, that was formed, and kept him when he was
created alone, and brought him out of his offense. Observe again, how gently
and sweetly he (by his Angel in the Book of the Judges) rebuked and provoked
the people of Israel to repentance. What shall I say of the Prophets, who in
all their sermons (as we may call them) teach this, and beat upon this, that
GOD desires not the death Ezec. 18. 23.
of a sinner, but rather that he should return and live. They say (says GOD
by Jeremy) if a man put away his Wife and Ier. 3. 1.
she go from him, and become another man's, shall he return unto her again;
shall not the land be greatly polluted? But thou have played the harlot with
many lovers; Yet return again to me says the LORD. And by Ezechiel, Eze. 33.
10, 11.
Thus ye speak and say, If our transgressions and sins be upon us, and we
are consumed because of them, how should we then live? Say unto them, as I live
says the LORD, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn
from his way and live: turn you, turn you from your evil ways, for why will
ye die o ye house of Israel?

But to let pass the wicked, and consider how great GODS more then Fatherly
meekness and gentleness is to those that fear and hope in him. Holy David is
desirous to express it, Look how high the Heaven is in comparison of the
Earth, so Ps. 103. 11.
great is his mercy also toward them that fear him. And Like as a Father
pittyeth his own 13.
Children, so is the LORD merciful to them that fear him. And, The merciful
goodness of the LORD endures for ever 17.
and ever upon them that fear him. And in another Psalm, Taste and see how
gracious the LORD is, blessed is the man Ps. 34. 8.
that trusts in him, and again, 73. 1.
Truly GOD is loving unto Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart. And
again, GOD says by Esaias, Can a woman Es. 49. 15
forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb? though
they should forget, yet will not I forget thee: and Jeremy in his lamentations,
Lam. 3. 25.
The LORD is good to them that trust in him, and to the soul that seeks him.

Now if I would add what the Apostles testify of his Fatherly tenderness to
the Godly, I should never make an end. Take one place for all the rest, of St.
Paul, Blessed be GOD 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4.
even the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, the Father of mercies, and G^D of
all comfort, which comfort us in all our tribulation etc. he says not, that
GOD is our comfort (barely) but of all comfort; and not that he comfort us
in some, but in all our tribulation. And to end this point, take the words of
St. Prosper, Grace Li. 2. de voc. gent. c. 26.
(says he) exceeds all justification, by persuading in exhortations,
admonishing by examples, terrifying by dangers, provoking by miracles, giving
understanding, inspiring counsel, enlightening the heart, and endowing it with
affections of Faith, etc.

If then thy Creator be so loving and kind to his servants, and with such
incredible patience and meekness bears with sinners for their conversions,
comforting the just, that they may proceed and grow in righteousness, and
holiness; ought not thou to bear the infirmities of thy neighbor, to
gain all men to thy GOD? Consider with thy self to what sublimitie and
excellency the Apostle Ephesians. 5. 1.
exhorts thee, when he says, Be ye followers of GOD as dear Children. And
walk in 2.
love, even as CHRIST has loved us, etc. Imitate the Father, who causes the
Sun to arise upon the good and evil, and rayneth upon the just and unjust.
Imitate the Son, who having taking our humane nature for our good upon him,
spared not his own life to deliver us from the power of darkness and
everlasting perdition. Imitate the holy Ghost, who plentifully powers out, and
scatters his most plenteous gifts, that he may of carnal make us spiritual.

DEGREE VI. By the Consideration of FIRE.
THis Element is of so pure and noble a nature, as that GOD himself would be
called Fire, as both Moses and St. Paul testify, The LORD Deuteronomy. 4. 24. 5. 25.
Hebr. 12. 29.
thy GOD is a consuming Fire. And when GOD first appeared to Moses, he would be
seen in a bush burning, but not consuming with Fire: when also Exo. 3. 2.
GOD came to give the Law to his people, he appeared in the shape of fire, as
Moses relates it; Mount Sinai was all on smoke, because the LORD 19. 18.
came down upon it in fire. To resemble which mystery, when the new law was to
be published, the holy Ghost appeared to the Apostles in the shape of fiery
tongues. Lastly, they which Act. 2. 3.
in heaven are nearest to GOD, are called Seraphim, because they receive fervor
and heat from that most ardent and divine fire, more then the other Angels. It
will not therefore be hard or difficult for us, out of this element and the
nature and properties of it, to erect one greece, whereby we may ascend to GOD
by prayer and meditation; and less difficult will it be, with Elias to ascend
in a fiery Chariot, then to make a Ladder to rise up by, out of either earth,
water, or air. Let us therefore examine and consider the properties and
qualities of this element.

Fire is of that nature and quality, that it works diversely, and often times
contrarily in many things.

1. It quickly burns and consumes Wood, Straw and Stubble.

2. It purifieth and makes more beautiful gold and silver.

3. It changes Iron into contrary qualities, as of black, cold, hard and
heavy (the natural properties of it) it makes it clear, hot, soft and
light, insomuch as it will shine like a star, burn like fire, melt and be
liquid like water, and by the Artificer be moved and lifted easily. All these
things apparently agree and meet in GOD.

And first, Wood, Hay and Stubble, are by the Apostle compared with evil
works, which 1 Cor. 3. 12.
cannot endure the trial of Gods fire, for it is almost incredible how
hateful and displeasing all sins are to GOD, who is a most pure fire; with
what zeal he consumes and destroys them: first, by repentance, if the sinner
be in that state that he can repent; for by repentance all sins are purged:
and if the sinner be incapable of repentance, (as Devils, and men after this
life are) his wrath is kindled against them, For the ungodly and his Sap. 14. 9.
ungodliness are both hated alike of GOD, says the wiseman; and the Kingly
Prophet David confirms this saying, Thou hate all them that work vanity.
Ps. 5. 5.
How much and great this hatred is, the Devil can witness, who sinning once,
and being (as St. Gregory says) an Angel most noble and glorious, Morael. li.
32* c. 24.
and the Prince of the first order of Angels, and the most excellent creature
of GOD, yet was forthwith cast out of Heaven, and deprived of all honor and
grace, turned into a most deformed monster, and bound to eternal perdition.
Christ himself is a witness, who came from Heaven, to dissolve the works of
the Devil (sin) and therefore is styled the Lamb of GOD, which takes away
the sins of the World. Yet who is able to declare, nay to conceive, what and
how great things he suffered, to destroy the works of the Devil, and fully to
satisfy Gods justice? Who being in the form of GOD, Phil. 2. 6. 7.
took on him the form of a servant; and being rich was made poor for our
sakes, not having 2 Cor. 8. 9. Lu. 958. 1 Pet. 2. 23.
whereon to lay his head, was reviled, suffered, bare our sins in his body on
a tree, humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of
the Cross; was derided, spit upon, Phil. 2. 8.
scourged, crowned with thorns, crucified with all ignominy and grievous
torments, shedding his life and blood, and all these things to destroy the
Devils work, sin: Witness the Law of GOD, which forbids and punishes all
sin, leaving not unpunished so much as an idle word. And how do Mat. 12. 36.
we think he detesteth heinous sins, that cannot endure an idle word? For
the Law of the LORD is an undefiled Ps. 19. 7.
Law, without all spots, and what communion has light with darkness, 2 Cor.
6. 14.
or what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? Lastly, let Hell
it self be witness, which GOD has prepared for the wicked and sinners, which
refused to be washed with the blood of the undefiled Lamb: For it is but just,
that in whom sin always remains, punishment should be perpetual: now what
the punishment of hell shall be, is horrible and fearful to think: of which we
shall have occasion to speak more at large, in the last Degree.

Therefore, seeing that Gods hate to sin is so extreme, if thou love GOD
above all things, thou must also above all things detest sin: take heed thou
be not deceived by those, who either extenuate or excuse it; take heed that
thou deceive not thy self with false and ungrounded reasons; for if sin
either committed by thy self or others displease thee not, thou love not
GOD, and if thou love not GOD, thou shall perish everlastingly.

Again, if thou be not unthankful to Christ, how much do thou conceive thou
owe to his love? to his labors? his blood? his death? who washed thee from
thy sin, and reconciled thee to his Father: and shall it s^eme grievous to
thee hereafter to suffer any thing for him, either in his grace and favor, and
with his grace to resist sin, even to the loss of thy blood and life?
Lastly, if thou can not endure the fire everlasting in hell patiently,
neither ought thou patiently to endure sin, but flee from it as from a
Serpent; and let it be Ecclus. 21. 2.
thy resolution to join thy greatest hate to sin, with thy greatest love to
GOD.

But fire destroys not, but 2.
makes Gold, Silver and Jewels, more perfect and shining; because as S. Paul,
(in the place before cited) declares, that those mettalls signify good works
and perfect, which are allowed and aprov'd by the fire of Gods judgment, and
shall receive their reward. Those works GOD ratifies for good, because they
are his gifts, and St. Augustine says, he crowns his own gifts, whenever
Conc. 2. in Ps. 70.
he crowns our deserts; for they are performed by his command, and by his aid,
he bestowing power upon us, and enabling us to do them, and himself directing
us by the Law and rules which he has made and appointed. And indeed gold
denotes unto us the works of love and charity, and how is it possible, but the
works of love should exceedingly please GOD, who is love it self? Silver
signifies the works of wisdom, namely of those which instruct many men in
the way of righteousness. These also are very acceptable and pleasing to
Almighty GOD, according to the saying of the wisdom of GOD. He Mat. 5. 19
that shall observe and teach them, shall be called great in the Kingdom of
Heaven. Jewels and precious stones are the works of a chaste soul, of which
it is said in Ecclesiasticus, There is no weight to be compared to a Ecclus.
26. 15.
continent (or chaste) mind. And how this pure Virginity pleases GOD, we may
understand, by that which Esaias speaks of Eunuchs, upon which place Esa. 56. 5.
St. Augustine speaking, does so commend Virginity in men and 5.
women, that he made a long Oration upon it. And these be De S. Virginit. cc.
24. 25.
the three works to which are given great rewards, and to their possessors or
workers, namely Martyrs, Doctors and Virgins. To Martyrs for the excellency of
their love. Greater love then this has no man, when any man Io. 15. 13.
bestows his life sor his friends. To Doctors, for the eminency of their
wisdom, of whom Daniel says, They that turn many to righteousness shall
shine Dan. 12. 3
as the stars for ever and ever. To Virgins, for the inestimable and
incomparable worth of their purity, for whose sake the Virgin harpers in the
Revelation Apoc. 14. 3.
sung a new song, which none could sing but they, These 4,
are they which are not defiled with Women: for they are Virgins, these follow
the Lam^ whither soever he goes.

And not only the love of Martyrs, the wisdom of Doctors, or purity of
Virgins shall be tried in the fire of Gods judgment, and receive their full
reward: but all other good works also, so they be done in faith and love, and
shall be reputed among the golden vessels, and be tried by that fire, and receive
their reward: for to those also Christ shall say at the day of judgment, Come
ye Mat. 25. 34.
blessed of my Father, take the inheritance of the Kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the World, even to them which gave bread to the hungry,
drink to the thirsty, lodging to the stranger, apparel to the naked, and
comfort to the sick or captive. Nay our Savior has promised a reward to
those, who shall give but a cup Mat. 10. 42.
of cold water to any in the name of a disciple in love.

Thou may by this easily understand, what difference there is between one
work and another; and what is more foolish, more miserable, then in the same
place and time wherein (if thou be wise) thou may get gold, silver and
precious jewels, thou had rather, (and that with no small labor) gather dry
wood, straw and stubble. O that thou would be wi^e, and understand, and
provide for the last day, when all these things shall be examined and tried by
the fire of Gods judgment; when the former shall be commended and crowned, and
the latter burnt and turned into smoke and ashes. Why do thou now choose
that, which without all doubt will cause thee to repent that ever thou did
choose it? and why do thou not reject that, which with thy advantage thou
may now cast off; when a while hence thou shall without thy profit, nay to
thy great disadvantage be forced to condemn? If perhaps thou do not now
perceive this, because the veyl^ of things present hangs over thine eyes, so
that thou can not discern the pure and clear truth, pray then to God, and
with earnest affection with the blind man in the Gospel, say: Lord grant that
I may Luc. 18. 41.
see, that I may receive my sight; or with the Prophet David, Open mine eyes,
that I may see the Psalm. 118. 18.
wonderful things of thy Law. For certainly it is almost a miracle, that
works done in love, should become gold silver, and precious stones, and that
they which are not done in love, should be converted into dry and sear wood,
straw and stubble.

Now come we to consider the other property of fire. Hitherto 3.
we have only learned from the nature of that Element, what God works in
those which depart this world with good works* or end their days with evil*
Now by another similitude drawn from the same fire, we may understand what
God works with those whom he calls from sin to repentance.

A sinner is compared to Iron, which when it is far from the fire, is black,
cold, hard, and heavy: but being put into the fire; it is made clear, hot,
soft and light.

Every Sinner wants his inward light, and walks in 1
darkness, and in this respect may be well resembled to the blackness of
Iron: for though in the knowledge and commerce with men, he may seem to be
wise, and of great judgment; yet in discerning the true good and evil, he is
blind, and more miserable then any blind man. For a blind man sees nothing,
and therefore stirs not nor is moved without a guide: but a Sinner thinks
he sees that which he sees not, or takes one thing for another, and judges
good evil, and evil good, great to be little, and little to be great, long to
be short, and short to bell ong; and therefore is ever deceived in his choice.
And this is it which the Apostle speaks of in the idolatrous Gentiles: Having
Ephesians. 4. 18.
their understanding darkened through that ignorance that is in them, because of
the hardness of their heart. This is that also which our Savior in the
Gospel so often upbraideth the Math. 15. 14. 23 16. Lu. 6. 39.
Scribes and Pharisees withal, that they were blind leaders of the blind. The
Prophet Esaias also speaking to the Jews of his Esaias 42. 18.
time, says: Hear you deaf, and look ye blind, that ye may see. And a
little before in the same Chapter, (prophesying to them of the coming of
Christ, who should open the eyes of the blind, and speaking of the new
Testament 16.
in the person of God) says, I will bring the blind by a way that they knew
not, and lead them by paths that they have not known: I will make darkness
light before them, etc. Lastly, do not the wicked themselves confess as much
after this life, when pain shall begin to open their eyes, which sin had
closed? Therefore have we erred Sap. 5. 6.
from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness has not shined unto us,
and the Sun of understanding rose not upon us. Nor is it a wonder that they
should be blind, who are averse from God in will and mind: For God is light,
and in him is no darkness, 1 Io. 1. 5.
says St. John. Whereupon the same Apostle concludes, that He that says he
is in the light, 9.
and hates his brother, is in darkness. And a little after. He that 11.
hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness and knows not
whither he goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes.

Neither is it the only cause that sinners are in darkness, because they are
averse from God who is the light, but because also their own wickedness has
blinded them, as the Wiseman speaks. Sap. 2. 21.
For the passions of the mind, hatred, anger, envy and the like which are
comprehended under the name of malice, do so blind the mind, that they suffer
it not to perceive the truth; but are like colored glass, which makes white
to show like red, and the contrary; or like optique glasses which make great
things seem small, and small great, or those things are a far off to be
near, and they which are near, a far off.

Whatsoever thing a man loves fervently, he ever judges it to be most fair
and amiable, most beneficial and profitable, most excellent and necessary for
himself; and despises all other things in comparison of it. Again,
whatsoever he hates vehemently, he reputes it the most deformed, unprofitable,
evil and pernicious. But if once this black and foul iron be put into the
fire; that is, if a sinner begin to be turned from his sin and be converted
to God, (according to that of the Psalmist:) Then the Lord shall make his
darkness light, then he begins Ps. 18. 28.
by little and little, by degrees to be enlightened, and by that light to
perceive the truth, according 36. 9.
to that in the Psalm, in thy light shall we see light; then the false glass
of his passions being broken, and a true one looked upon (which is pure love)
he esteems eternal things great, and temporal small, and almost nothing,
as indeed they are: and perfectly perceives, that all beauty and forms of
things created are not to be compared at all with the light of truth and
wisdom which is in God, and is God: and therefore cries out with St.
Augustine; L. 10. conf. c. 77.
I have loved thee too late, O thou beauty, I have loved thee too late. And
because Christ says, You shall know the Io, 8. 32.
truth, and the truth shall make you free: he that is so enlightened, and
freed from the bonds and shackles of concupiscence, covetousnes, ambition, and
all other passions, by the light of truth, shall rejoice with the Prophet and
say; Thou have broken my bonds in sunder: I will offer to thee the sacrifice of
thankesgiving, and will call upon the name of the Lord. Ps. 116. 14.


Secondly, fire as it makes iron clear, which formerly was black; so of cold
it makes it hot; yea so scorching and burning, as that it seems to be fire
it self. Great is the Lord, and great is his power, that a man by nature cold,
fearful and timorous, not daring of himself to speak, much less to attempt
any hard or difficult design; yet being once heated with the fire of Love, he
can make him as bold as a Lion, who terrifies all others with his roaring, and
overcomes by his power, and that nothing shall seem difficult or hard to him;
insomuch as being kindled with this fire, he shall say with the Apostle; I can
do allthings through Christ Phil. 4. 13.
which strengthens me.

But let us speak of the two parts of the efficacy of this fire, severally;
namely, of the power of it in words and in deeds.

1 There are many (now adays, and ever were in the Church of God) Preachers
and teachers of great note; yet what is the reason that with so many of their
Sermons so few are converted? that so little alteration of manners and
conversation appears; for still the same vices, the same sins, the same
coldness and dissolute behavior continues. I can ascribe it to no other cause,
but that in these Sermons, though they be learned, fluent and elegant, there
wants the life, the fire and love, which only is of power and efficacy to
quicken, heat, and inflame the hearts of the Auditors.

I deny not, but there are many Preachers who can thunder as it were, and beat
the Pulpit; but they are like Gunnes charged with powder only, and can give a
crack as great as a piece of Ordinance; but fruitless, because they prefer
not the glory of God, and the salvation of souls before the applause of men.
Saint Peter was no Rhetorician, but knew only how to steer a Ship, and mend a
net, and to cast it abroad; but as soon as the Holy Ghost came upon him in the
shape of fiery tongues, and filled him with most ardent love, he began
presently, even in the midst of Jerusalem, to preach with such power and
efficacy, that at one Sermon of his many thousands were converted. Act. 2.


And yet we read not that he used much clamor or laying about with his body,
or banging the Pulpit: from whence then proceeded such moving of the Auditors,
from whence such gaining of souls? certainly by this, that the holy Preacher
was as a fire, and his Word burnt like a Lamp, as it is said in Ecclesiasticus
of Elias: his Ecclus. 48. 1.
words came from him as from a heart burning and sparkling with L^ve.

2. Again, this divine fire has as much efficacy in deeds as in words. God
had decreed to subject to himself the City of Rome (the head of the Empire)
by the preaching of the Apostle St. Peter, and to send abroad other of his
Apostles, some for the conversion of the Ethiopians; others of the Indians,
others to the S^ythians, and some to the Britains; and by them not only to
destroy the Idols of the World, but to erect and advance the Trophee of the
Cross, to alter the rites of the Gentiles, and to subvert the ^yrannicall
Kingdom of the Devil.

If any man should have fore^old these things to the Apo^tles, when they were
fishing in the Lake of Genesareth, or when (during the time of our Saviors
Passion) they lurked in corners, they would have been believed no more then
dreams or old wives fables: yet after a while, all these things came to pass,
and that by no other means, then the power of most ardent love, which the holy
Ghost kindled in their hearts: for as St. John speaks, Perfect 1 Ioh. 4. 18.
Love casts out sear; and again, Love suffers all things, 1 Cor. 13. 7.
hops all things, endures all things; thinks nothing impossible, but cries
with the Apostle, I am able to do all things Phil. 4. 13.
in him which strengthens me* So that we see, that by the endeavor of these
men, armed with Love only, Idolatry was expelled, the whole world with little
labor, and Churches of Christianity established every where, in al^ Kingdoms,
without the force of Armies, or warlike provision.

Thirdly, fire has this property, that it softens hard Iron, 3.
that it may be lengthned out into plates, and (being made thinue) fitted to
any form at the Artificers pleasure. It is true, that this is a great
efficacy of fire in iron: yet far greater is the power of GOD over the
obstinate and obdurate hearts of men. St. Bernard describes a hard heart thus,
That Li. 1. cap 2
is not only a hard heart (says he) which is not terribly afraid of it self,
because it is insensible: What then is a hard heart? That which is not cut with
compunction, nor mollified with devotion, nor moved with prayers; yields not to
threats, is hardened with scourges, is unthankful for benefits, unfaithful in
counsels, that neither fears GOD, nor reverenceth men. All these things were
verified in Phara^h, who the more he was plagued, the more he was hardened; and
the more Gods mercy appeared to him by removing the plagues, the more he was
animated to despise him.

But whenever it pleases GOD to kindle a sparkle of the true fire of His
love in a heart, though never so hard, presently it grows soft and melts
like wax, nor does it any way resist the power of it: but is of a stony become
a heart of flesh, and the breath of Gods spirit thawes the congealed snow
thereof into water. We have an example in the Gospel of that Luke 7.
woman, who being a notorious sinner in the City could not be persuaded, either
by the admonition of her brother, or the chiding of her sister; or the honor
of her family, or her own disgrace, to amend her life; yet one of the beams
of our Savior pierced so deep into her heart, and kindled a sparkle of his
divine love there, so that she was suddenly transformed as it were into
another woman, insomuch as she (being of a noble stock) was not ashamed at a
public feast to fall down at Christ's feet, and being wholly turned into
tears, of them made a bath for his feet, and with her own hair, (in stead of
Linen) wiped them, and moved with the vehemency of that love, kissed them,
and anointed them with a most costly ointment, signifying by these her acts of
Repentance, that from thenceforth she purposed wholly to devote her self to
his service; and therefore she worthily heard that comfortable speech of our
Savior, Many sins are forgiven her, for she loved Lu. 7. 47.
much. And these effects has the power of divine fire wrought, which no
hardness of heart can resist.

The last property of fire, is that it makes Iron light, which 4.
formerly was heavy. And it is the chief cause, that men which are not heated
and inflam^d with divine love, are heavy in heart: and to such the Kingly
Prophet thus speaks, after some translations: Vsquequo gravi cord, How long
will ye be Ps. 4. 2.
heavy in heart, loving vanity, and seeking after lies? and the Wiseman says,
the corruptible or S^p 9. 15.
earthly body weighs down the soul: And in Ecclesiasticus, A Ecclus. 40. 1.
heavy yoke is upon the sons of Adam. Which heavy yoke he afterward
explaines to be 5.
wrath, envy, fear, trouble, and unquietnes and the like, which are usually
styled the passions of the mind. These do so load and burden a man, that he
looks upon nothing but the earth, to which he cleaves, and can neither rise
to seek God, nor to run the way of his commandments. But as soon as this
divine fire begins to inflame the heart of man, those passions forthwith
decrease and are mortified, and that heavy burden is made light; so that he
is able to sa^ with the Apostle, Our conversation is in Heaven: Phil. 3. 20.
Ps. ^^9 32.
and with an enlarged heart to say with King David, I will run the way of thy
Commandments, when thou have set my heart at liberty. Certainly, after our
Luke ^^ 49.
Savior had said, I am come to put fire on the earth, w see, how light many
(...) became, by casting off the affections and desire of honor, flesh and
riches, insomuch as they cried with the spouse in the Canticles, Draw me: we
will run after thee. Cant. 1. 3


O blessed fire which enlightens but consumes not, and consumes the ill humor
only (if it consume) but kills not. Who will give me this correcting fire? 1.
that will take away the blackness of ignorance, and purge the darkness of my
conscience with the light of true wisdom. 2. That will change the coldness
of my sloth into the heat of devotion; and of my negligence into the fervencie
of love. 3. Which will never suffer my heart to be hardened, but keep it soft
with its heat, and make it obedient and dev^ut. 4. Which will lastly remove
and take away the heavy yoke of earthly cares, and will so lift up my heart
with the wings of contemplation, which nourishes and increases love; that I
may say with the Psalmist, Comfort the soul of thy servant, for unto thee o
Ps. 864.
LORD, do I lift up my soul.

DEGREE VII. By the Con^ideration of Heaven, that is, of the Sun, Moon and
Stars.
IT will be no hard task out of the consideration of Heaven to erect one step
for our ascent to GOD, for the Kingly Prophet has done it to our hands, The
Heavens Ps. 19. 1.
(says he) declare the glory of GOD, and the firmament shows his
handie-worke. Now, forasmuch as there are two times wherein we should ascend to
GOD by the wings of contemplation; namely, the day and night: of the former of
them, the same Prophet says in the same Psalm, In the Sun has he placed his
Tabernacle (according 5.
to some translations) or as others, In them has he set a Tabernacle for the
Sun, which comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices 6.
as a Giant to run his course His going forth is from the end of Heaven, and
runs about to the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from the heat
thereof. Of the latter he writes in another Psalm, I will consider the Heavens
the work of thy hands, the 8. 3.
Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained. We will begin with the first.

Of the Sun (which is seen 1.
by day) the Psalmist in the former mentioned place sets down four several
praises or commendations. 1. That it is the Tabernacle of GOD. 2. That it is
most beautiful. 3. That it ever runs most speedily, and without weariness.
4. That by enlightening and heating, it chiefly manifests its power. In regard
of all which qualities the Son of Syrach calls it A merveilous Ecclus. 43. 2.
vessel, the work of the most High

1. First therefore GOD the creator of all things (according to the old
translation of St. Jerome) has placed his Tabernacle in the Sun, as in a most
noble thing to reside in: that is, he has chosen the Sun among all corporeal
things, as a royal palace, or divine sanctuary to dwell in: for though GOD
fill Ier. 23. 24 2 Chr. 2. 6.
Heaven and Earth, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him; yet he is
said to dwell more there, where he has manifested the greatest signs of his
presence, by working wonders.

But because in the original it is said In them has he set a Tabernacle for
the Sun, that is in Heaven; we may gather out of this place in the P^alme,
another excellency of the Sun, not contradicting or opposing the former. The
Sun is a great thing, for whom GOD has prepared a large, fair and noble
palace: for as he would have heaven to be the palace of the Sun, wherein he
might freely walk and work; so he would have the Sun to be his own palace.
So, that as we may apprehend the greatness and excellency of the Sun by this,
that the heaven is its tabernacle; so may we conceive the greatness and
excellency of GOD, in that the Sun (an admirable vessel, and then which
nothing corporeal is more wonderful) is his tabernacle.

2. Secondly, the Psalmist (to denote unto us the great beauty of the Sun)
compares it to a Bridegroom going out of his chamber: for never do men desire
to set themselves forth in better manner, nor to seem more lovely and
beautiful, then when they are bridegroomes; as desirous to please the brides
eye more at that, then at any other time. But if we could fasten the sight of
our eyes upon the Sun, and were near unto it, and could behold it in the true
quantity and quality, we should not need the similitude of a bridegroom to
conceive the incredible beauty of it. Certainly, all the grace of the eyes
depends on the light, and without it all the beauty of colors vanishes and
loses the luster. Again, nothing is more fair then the light, and GOD
himself (who is beauty it self) would be called light. GOD is light (says
St. John) and in him is no darkness 1 Io. 1. 5.
at all. And among corporeal things nothing is more clear then the Sun, and
in that regard, nothing more fair and beautiful. Besides, if we will add
this, that the beauty of inferior things, especially of men, soon fades; but
the beauty of the Sun never decays, never decreaseth, but always makes all
things joyful with equal splendour: for if we observe it, upon the Sun rising,
all things seem in a manner to rejoice, men are merry, sweet winds blow,
flowers open, herbs increase, and birds refresh the air with their melodious
notes; and therefore it was the answer of old Tobias to the Angel who gave him
joy: What joy can I have (said he) that sit in darkness, and see not the
light of Heaven?

Consider then with thy self, and say, that if the created Sun does so comfort
every thing in his rising, what joy shall there be to pure souls when they
shall behold the uncreate Son, without comparison fairer and clearer; and that,
not for a time, but for ever? and what horror shall be to the wicked, when they
shall be condemned to everlasting darkness, where they shall neither behold
the beams of the uncreate or create Sun: and what joy shall it bring to that
soul to whom the Father of lights shall say, Enter into thy Mat. 25. 21.
Lords joy?

3. In the next place, King David sets forth and describes the admirable course
of the Sun, He rejoices as a Giant to run his course. Without doubt, a Giant
is strong, and if according to the greatness of his body he will stretch out
his paces, and run as swiftly as by his strength he may, he quickly will
pass over a great space of ground. And as before the Prophet to express the
Suns beauty, compared it to a Bridegroom; so to set forth the swiftness of his
course, he likens it to a Giant. But though he had not compared him to a strong
man, or a Giant, but to flying birds, arrows, winds or lightning, yet he had
fallen far short in that comparison, between it, and them, in this property
of swiftness: for if it be true which we see, that the Sun passes the circuit
of his O^be in 24 hours; and if the circuit of its Orb does infinitely exceed
the circuit of the Orb of the earth; and if the compass of the earth
comprehends 20000. miles, or thereabouts, all which are very true; then of
necessity it must follow, that every hour he runs many thousands of miles:
Nay what speak we of hours? I may say every quarter, and almost every minute;
for if a man do but observe the rising or setting of the Sun in an open
horizon, as it is at Sea, or in the plain of a champion Country, he may
perceive its whole body to ascend above the horizon, in less space then the
eight part of an hour, and yet the diameter or thickness of the body of the
Sun is much greater then the diameter of the Orb of the earth, and which
contains 7000. miles. And if we will add yet further, that the body of the
Sun which is moved so swiftly, is far greater then the heap or mass of the
whole earths Orb; and that the motion of this body so great, is so speedy
without intermission or weariness, and that this motion if GOD command it,
shall continue for ever; certainly if thou be not a stock or a block, thou
can not but wonder at the infinite power of thy creator: and therefore most
truly was it said to be a merveilous vessel, the work of the most High.

4. The last property of the Sun, that is the efficacy of the light and heat
of it, comes now to be considered, of which, the Prophet in the same Psalm
speaks, There is nothing hid from the heat of it. This one clear body
placed in the midst of the World, enlightens all Stars, all the air, all
Seas, and all the Earth; and by its vivifying heat makes all things, as
plants, corn, and trees to spring and sprout, and brings all ^ruit to
maturity and ripeness; it spreads and diffaseth its virtue and power also into
the earth, causing it to bring forth all kinds of metal. And therefore St.
James compares Ia. 1. 17.
GOD himself unto it, Every good gift (says he) and every perfect gift is
from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no
variableness nor shadow of changing. The Sun indeed is the Father of lights
corporal; but GOD of spiritual: But in three things there is difference
between GOD and the Sun.

1. The Sun to enlighten and heat the world, must of necessity have a
perpetual transmutation or charge from place to place: but GOD, because he is
whole every where, needs no such change, and therefore well said St. James,
with whom is no changing.

2. Again, the Sun (because he continually passes from place to place) makes
it day in one place, and night in another; to some it makes light, to others
dark at the same time. But GOD is never moved, he is ever present to all; and
therefore the same Apostle adds, with whom is no shadow of changing.

3. Lastly, which is greatest of all, from the Sun, the Father of corporal
lights are all the gifts which grow upon earth, but these gifts are neither
the best nor perfect, but rather small, temporal and frail, and not able to
make a man good; but being evil used, may turn to his destruction. But from
GOD the Father of lights spiritual, come all excellent and perfect gifts,
which make the possessor good and perfect, and which none can abuse; and which
bring them (which persevere in them) to the state of true happiness.

Seek then those good and perfect gifts which come from above from the Father
of lights, and when thou have found them, be sollicitous to keep them: and
there is no need to go far for them, the very nature of the Sun will
demonstrate them unto thee: for the Sun does all things with his light and
heat; and these two are the gifts of the Father of corporal lights: and the
good and perfect gifts which come down from the Father of lights, even GOD
himself, are the light of wisdom, and the ordinance of love. 1. The light of
wisdom which makes a man truly wise, and which no man can use amiss, and
brings us to the fountain of wisdom, situate in the heavenly Country, is
that, which teaches the contempt of temporal things, and to esteem highly of
spiritual: it teaches not to trust in 1 Timothy 6. 17.
uncertain riches, but in the living GOD. It teaches us, not to account this
exile of ours, as our Country, nor to love our pilgrimage, but to endure it:
Lastly, it teaches to live here in patience, being full of perils and
tentations; and to dye in desire, because Blessed are the dead Apoc. 14.
that dye in the LORD.

2. The Ordinance of true love what is it, but to love GOD without end, without
measure, he being the end of all our desires: to love other things in such
measure and mean, as will be sufficient to bring us to our end, that is
beatitude. Surely, there is not any man that in the cure of his body inverts
order so, that he loves his health but with an ordinary measure, and a bitter
potion without all measure, seeing, that he knows, that the first is the end,
and the latter but the means. How then comes it to pass, that so many that
would be accounted wise men, confine themselves to no moderation in heaping up
riches, in hunting after the pleasures of the flesh, and attayning to the
degrees of honor, as it these things were the end of man's heart: and are
contented to streighten themselves in loving GOD, and seeking after eternal
f^licity; as if these were but the means to the end, and not the end of all
means? without doubt, this is the cause, that they have the wisdom of this
world, and not that, which is from above, and comes from the Father of lights:
and that they have not ordinate love, nor that which is true love; but are full
of inordinate desires, which are not of the Father, but of the World.

Wherefore, while thou travailest from thy Country, and a^t among enemies,
which oppose true wisdom and love, and suggest craft for wisdom, and
inordinate desires for love; make thy moan, and bewail thy case to the Father
of lights, desiring him earnestly, to give thee these good and perfect gifts,
of true wisdom and regulated love, and to inflame thy hear^ with them; so,
that being fitted with them, thou may so run the ways of his
Commandments without stumbling, that thou may come to that Country, where
thou may drink of the pure fountain of wisdom, and live with the pure
milk of love.

2. I come now to the time of the night, wherein the heaven does frame and
erect one step for us to ascend to GOD by the Moon and Stars: for so
speaks David, I will consider the heavens, the work of thy fingers, the
Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained. If we could see heaven it
self, the Prophet had not said (by way of explication of that which he had set
down before) The Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained: and truly, if
our senses could pierce to heaven it self, or that we could find out the
nature and qualities of it, by any certain reason; without doubt, we should
have an excellent degree of ascent to GOD thereby.

We know, that there have been some, who out of the motion of the Stars, have
defined the nature of heaven to be a quintessence, simple, incorruptible, and
perpetually moving in its Orb: And that there are others, who will have heaven
to be the Element of fire that is not moved in its Orb, neither is
incorruptible, according to its parts: but it is not our intent to look after
these opinions, but to seek out the certain knowledge and Doctrine of Faith,
thereby to raise an ascent to GOD.

The Moon has two properties, which may fitly serve to this purpose. I The
first is, the nearer it approaches to the Sun, the more it shines and is
enlightened in its upper part toward heaven, being darkened at the same time in
the lower part of it toward the earth; and when it is wholly subject to the
Sun, and is in full conjunction with it, it is altogether light toward heaven,
and dark toward the earth. On the other side, when it is in opposition to the
Sun, it is seen clear of the earths inhabitants, and has no light in the
upper part toward heaven. This p^operty of the Moon, may be a good document
or example to us mortals, to make us sollicitous of our near conjunction to
the true Father of lights, GOD himself. The Moon signifies Man, and the Sun
GOD: when the Moon is in opposition to the Sun, then by the borrow^d light
from the Sun it only shines and looks toward earth, and after a sort turns
its back to heaven whereby it shows beautiful to the Inhabitants of the
earth, and most deformed to the Citizens of heaven: So every mortal that goes
far from GOD, (as the Prodigal which went into a far Country) abuses
that light of reason, which he received from the Father of lights, only to
respect the earth, and forgetting GOD, thinks only upon the earth, only
loves it, and is wholly taken up with desire of the goods thereof: for which,
by the children of this generation they are esteemed wife and happy; but by the
heavenly inhabitants they are accounted poor, naked, blind, deformed, wretched
and miserable. On the contrary, when the Moon is in conjunction with the Sun,
and is perfectly subject to it, it shines wholly on the upper part, respects
heaven only, turning its back to men, vanishing clean from their sight. So
is it with the wicked, when he begins to leave his wickedness, and by his full
conversion is become truly subject to GOD (the true Sun of the sou^e) in
humility, and is joined to him in love; then he fulfills that which the Apostle
warns, Col. 3. 1.
he seeks those things which are above, and savours of heavenly not earthly
things: and then is he despised by fools, and accounted by them as if he were
dead: but indeed he is dead to the World, and his life is hidden with Christ in
GOD, Col. 1. 3. 4.
and When Christ his life shall appear, then shall he also appear with him in
glory.

And this is the cause (as St. Augustine observes) why the Passover, as well in
the old Law, Epl. ad 1a. 19. c. 4. 46
as in the new, could not rightly be kept, but after the full Moon; that is,
when the Moon (which in the full is in opposition to the Sun) begins to return
to the conjunction with it; to show, that man in opposition to GOD by sin,
should begin to be converted to him, and to hasten to the union and grace of
GOD, by the merits of JESUS CHRIST.

Therefore, if thou find thy self (by the assistance of Gods grace) to be
subject to the Father of lights by true humility, and to be joined with him by
ardent love; do not imitate fools, who are changed as the Moon, but follow
the wise, who continue unchanged as the Sun. for the Moon as speedily as she
comes to the conjunction of the Sun, as speedily departs from it; but if thou
be wise, and have obtained grace, forsake it not, depart not from it, for
thou shall find nothing better in any place; neither do thou know, whether
if thou voluntarily leave it, thou shall have it again: For he that has
promised pardon to the repentant, and grace to converts, has not promised
longer life, nor the gift of repentance to thee. Therefore, in Gods name turn
thy back to the earth, and look upon thy Sun, rest in him, delight in him,
and continue in him; say with St. Peter, It is good Mat. 17. 4.
for us to be here, and with the blessed Martyr Ignatius, It is better for me
to live with Christ, then to be a King upon earth: and esteem not nor regard,
what they which savor of the earth think of thee, for it is not he which the
world condementh, but whom GOD commnedeth, that shall be approved in the end.

2. There is another custom of the Moon, which GOD also observes with his
elect. The Moon rules the night as the Ge. 1. 16. Ps. 136. 9
Sun does the day, as Moses and David speak, but the Sun enlightens the world
with his splend^r all the day; and the Moon shines sometime with a greater,
sometime with a lesser light, and sometimes not at all in the night. So GOD by
his perpetual brightness, illustrates the Sun, Angels and souls of the
blessed, to whom he is a perpetual day (for there shall be no Apoc. 21. 25.
night to them there) but in this night of our pilgrimage and banishment,
wherein we walk by Faith, and not by sight, and we 2 Cor. 5. 7.
apply our selves only to the Scriptures as unto a light that shines in a
dark place. GOD as 2 Pet. 1 19.
the Moon by courses visits us by enlightening our hearts, and sometime leaves
us in the darkness of desolation.

Yet ought we not to be too much afflicted, if at any time we enjoy not the
light of comfort, nor to be too much overjoyed, if after a time we be refreshed
with that comfortable light: for GOD in this night of the world does not carry
himself toward us as the Sun, but as the Moon: for he not only (in these
times) appears as in the full Moon of comfort, and sometime in the wayne of
discomfort to us imperfect creatures, but he has formerly done so too: St.
Paul a vessel of election, who was taken up into the 2 Cor. 12 4.
third Heaven, and heard words which cannot be spoken, which are not possible
for man to utter; yet he could say sometime, I am filled with comfort:
otherwhile 2 Co. 7. 4
he could complain and lament his case, I see another law in my members,
rebelling against Rom 7. ^3.
the law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the law of sin, which is in
my members. O wretched man that I am, who 24.
shall deliver me from this body of death? and again, We would not have you
ignorant of our affliction, 2 Cor. 1. 8.
how we were pressed out of measure passing strength, so that we doubted even
of life. And this is it which S. Chrysostom notes to us, that GOD usually
deals Hom. 8. in Mat.
thus with his Saints, suffering them neither to be always pressed with
tribulation, nor lifted up with pleasure; but to weave into their lives,
sometime adversity, and at other times prosperity, as it were with an admirable
variety. And so much for the Moon.

Now follow the Stars, as the other ornaments of heaven, of which, the Son of
Syrach (speaking) says, that they are the beauty of heaven, the glory of the
Stars, yet adds (as some translate it) GOD in the highest Ecclus. 43. 9. 10.
enlightening the World, and at whose commandment they stand in their order;
for whatsoever order, or comeliness is in the Stars, or in the Sun or Moon,
they have it wholly from the Father of lights; and neither is it the Sun by
day, or the Moon or Stars by night, which give light to the world, but it is
GOD who (dwelling in the highest) enlightens the World by the Sun, Moon and
Stars: for it is he, of whom it is said, When he Baruch* 3 33.
sends out light it goes, and when he calls it again it obeys him with
fear. And the Stars shine in their watch and 34.
rejoice. When he calls them, they say Here we be, and so with cheerfulness
they show light unto him that made them. In which words are expressed the
infinite power of GOD, who with such incredible dexterity and facility, in a
moment creates, adorneth, and sets to work so vast and beautiful bodies; for
vocare with us, is ^reare with GOD, for he calls those things which are not,
and by his calling makes them be that they are; and that the Stars should say
Here we be, is no more, then that they are ready to be and work, at the voice
of his command.

But this is most to be admired in the Stars, that whereas they are moved
most swiftly, and never give over that swift motion, and that some of them
run in their Orb more stoutly, others more speedily: yet still they observe
their own manner and proportion in time with one another, that thereby they may
make a sweet harmoniacall concent. And this is not a concent of voices or
sounds which may be heard by bodily ears, but of proportions in the motions of
the Stars, which is perceived by the ear^ of the heart: for all the Stars
of the firmament, with the same swiftness run about the whole compass of
heaven in 24. hours: but the seven Stars which we call planets, or wandering
Stars, are moved, some by swifter, some by slow^r motions.

Ascend then a little higher if thou can, and from the great splender of the
Sun, the beauty of the Moon, the multitud^ and variety of other lights, from
the admirable con^^^^ of the heavens, from the most pleasant and harmoniacall
courses of the Stars; gather and conceive what a delight and happiness it
will be, to see GOD above the heaven, that Sun which inhabiteth inaccessible
light, to behold the quire and orders of many thousands of Angels who garnish
the heaven of heavens in greater number, and shine more bright then all the
Stars, to see the souls of holy men, added to the Quire of Angels, and
mingled as planets with the Stars of the firmament: and how joyful a thing
it will be, to hear the songs of praises, and that ex^llent Allelu^a resounded
by musical voices in the streets of that City: and by that, it will come to
pass, that neither the beauty of heaven shall see me great to thee, and the
things which are under heaven, thou shall account small, and almost nothing at
all, and therefore to be (...) and d^spised.

DEGREE VIII. By the Consideration of the reasonable soul of MAN.
HItherto we have passed through things corporal to the ascent to GOD, and now
we have found, that the souls of men excel all corporal things in dignity,
between which and GOD, we meet with no medium, but the Hierarchies and orders
of Angels.

Man's soul has such a resemblance with GOD his Creator, that I know not,
whether a Man may ascend with more facility to the knowledge of GOD any other
way, then by the consideration of his own soul. And therefore man is
inexcusable, if he have not knowledge of him, seeing he may attain to it (Gods
grace assisting) without difficulty, by knowing his own soul.

First then, Man's soul is a spirit, 1.
for so do the holy Fathers expound those words in Genesis, And the LORD
formed Man of the dust of the ground, Genesis 2. 7.
and breathed into his nosthrils the breath of life, and Man became a living
soul, and that of Tobias, Command my spirit to be Tob. 3. 6.
taken from me; and that of the Preacher. Then shall the dust return Eccles.
12 7.
to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to GOD that gave it. For
although the word spirit agrees to the wind also, of which it is said in the
Gospel, Spiritus spirat ubi vult, The wind blows where it lists, and in the
Psalms, Spiritus procellarum (as S. Jerome,) Wind and storm (as our
translation) yet without doubt, that spirit (the wind) is a most thin body,
which for its great subtilty and raritie, does more imitate and resemble the
spiritual nature, then any other body. But the soul of man is properly a
spirit, not a body, neither is it produced or made of any matter, but is
immediately created by GOD.

And here begins the excellency of the soul, in the resemblance to GOD, for
GOD is a spirit as our Savior says, and they which worship him, must 10. 4.
24.
worship him in spirit and truth: But though GOD be a spirit, and man's soul be
a spirit also, yet GOD is a spirit uncreated and the Creator, and man's but a
spirit created, by which it follows, that there is a great disproportion
between the spirit, which is the soul, and the spirit which is GOD. And in
this respect, how greatly may the soul rejoice, that it is in the kind of a
spiritual substance, and so of a higher and more noble nature then heaven or
the Stars: and again, it should be the more humble and obedient to GOD,
because it was made of nothing, and of it self is nothing.

Again, the soul of man, because it is a simple spirit, is also 2.
immortal; for it has nothing in it, from whence it may be divided or
severed. And in this regard, how much may it boast above the souls of bruit
animals, which die with their bodies? and so behold and admire the great
excellency of the creator, who is not only immortal, but everlasting. For
the soul of man sometime was not, and came to a being by the only will of
GOD, and by the will of the same GOD may again be reduced to nothing, although
in it self it have no beginning of corruption: therefore truly said the Apostle
of GOD, Who only has immortality; for he only cannot be 2 Timothy 6. 16.
dissolved, neither by force, chance, or ought else, because it is his property
to be; he is life it self, and the fountain of being and life.

Thirdly, man's soul is endued with the light of understanding, 3.
for it is not only able to know and distinguish of colors, tastes, smells and
sounds, heat, cold, hard, soft, and other things of the like kind, which are
plain to the senses of the body: but is able to judge of substantialls, and of
things singular and universal, and knows not only things present, but can
conjecture at things to come; transcends the heavens, dives into the deep,
searches effects from causes, and from effects, has recourse to causes.
Lastly, by the eye of the mind, it comes to the knowledge of GOD himself,
which dwells in inaccessible light, and this is the light of which Saint John
speaks, This was the true light which enlightneth every man that Io. 1. 9. Ps.
4. 7. 32. 10.
comes into the World, which David calls the light of Gods countenance. Of the
light of the understanding the same Kingly Prophet says, Be ye not like to
horse and mule who have no understanding. Certainly this is a great privilege
and dignity of the soul, by which, man becomes like to GOD, and unlike the
beasts; and by this, a man may also conjecture of the excellent sublimity of
his cre^^^^: for though the soul of man be endued with this light of
understanding, yet GOD is the light and understanding. The so^l^ (as is said)
runs from causes to effects, and again from effects to causes, and thereby
hunts (as it were) with great labor, to attain this knowledge: but GOD with
one aspect, and at the first sight knows all things. The soul understands
those things which are, so that his knowledge depends upon things: GOD by his
understanding brings to pass, that things are, so that the existence or
being of things depends upon his knowledge. The soul does but conjecture of
things to come: GOD beholds all things past, and to come, as perspicuously and
plainly, as if they were present. The soul wants many things to exercise the
office of its understanding, as the object, form, fancy and the like: GOD
wants nothing, for essence it self is his, all things, even his own essence
is his understanding. Lastly, the soul (while it is in the body) neither sees
GOD, the Angels, nor it self, nor any substance, though corporeal, properly,
and is deceived in many things, is ignorant in many; of many things he has but
an opinion, and of few things the true knowledge: but GOD is ignorant of
nothing, thinks nothing, is never deceived, never erreth, All things are Heb.
4. 13.
naked and opened, etc. Therefore, if Man has such an opinion, and esteems
so much of his knowledge, as that (according to the Apostle) his knowledge
puff him up, how much ought he to admire 1 Cor. 8. 1.
the knowledge of his Creator, to whose, if man's be compared, it is no
knowledge, but ignorance.

There is also another kind of knowledge in the soul of Man, 4.
which consists not in speculation, but in action: from whence it comes that
there are so many Books of Philosophers which treat if vices and virtues: so
many Laws of Princes, Lawyers and others: so many institutions to acquire the
art of living well. In which appe^^eth man's admirable light of reason, by which
alone, he differs far from beasts in excellency: but all this is nothing to
the eternal Law, which is powerful in the mind of the Creator, from whence,
as from a most plentiful fountain all other Laws flow and are derived, for
there is one Law giver Ia. 4. 12.
and Judge which is GOD, as St. James tells us. He is Truth, Justice and
Wisdom, By whom Prove. 8. 15.
Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice. So that we shall never find out the
Art of living well and happily, till we come to the School of CHRIST, who is
the true and only Master, by whose word and example we shall learn that
righteousness which exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, yea
and of Philosophers too, whose end is love out of a 1 Timothy 1. 5.
pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of Faith unfeigned.

Again, the soul of Man has 5.
a third kind of knowledge, which consists in artificial manufactures: you
will say that other creatures have the like faculty, as the Spider in weaving
her web, Birds in making nests, and Bees honey and combs, and Foxes their deunes
for houses: but it may be answered, that these creatures by the instinct of
nature make them, and those they make, are but of one and the same fashion: but
man's soul endued with reason and judgment, invents many Arts, by which he
has dominion over other creatures, will they nill they; for neither do the
wings of a Bird help her, nor the depth of waters avail the fish, nor
s^rength profit the Lion or Bear; nor wildness preserve the Horse or M^le,
nor swiftness advantage the Heart and Goat; for we see, even little Children
catch Birds with nets, s^ares and lime-twigges; and Fishermen take Fish with
net ^ Hunters by wit and art take Lions and Bears, leading them about the
Country: Bores and Dear either taken with stalls, or slain with bows and
spears: Horses and M^les made gentle with the bit, and subject to the service
of Man. What shall I say of the Art of navigation, what light of wit shined in
the soul of Man, when he invented and taught great Ships and heavily ^aden to
cut the Seas; not only Boats and Galleys to run with ^ares, as it were with
feet, but great vessels to ^ly as it were through the vast Seas, with their
sails as with wings? What shall I further say of husbandry? who wonders not at
the several inventions of Man, if he seriously consider after what manner the
earth is tilled, vines dressed, orchards planted, gardens trimmed, ponds for
fish, aqueducts to service; gardens, fields and cities? What may be said of
architecture in stately Palaces, Temples, Cities, Towers, Amphitheaters,
Pyramides and Obeliskes? To omit the excellent Arts of painting and graving, by
which (as by another History) things are so expressed to the life, as though
they were not painted or graved, but living things indeed.

Leaving all other Arts, either for pleasure or necessity, let us give humble
and hearty thanks to GOD, that has made so great difference between the
nature of Man, and other living creatures: and withal, let us lift up the eyes
of our minds to the same GOD Creator of all things, in whom is the true
fountain of wit and invention; for from him flows whatsoever is derived to
our nature. And if we admire the wit of man, in that he has learned by
industry and art, to tame and have dominion over other creatures which want
reason, then let us admire the wisdom of GOD, to whom all things are obedient
and subject; not only things that have, but those which want life. And if it
seem so great a thing to us, that the wit of Man has found out the Arts of
navigation, tillage and architecture; why should it not rather seem greater to
us, that the wisdom of GOD has made the fabrique of the universe, the
heavens, ^^rth, sea, and all things in them, and by his power and providence
governs and preserves them all? Lastly, if we admire the Arts of painting
and graving after the life; why wonder we not at the art of the Creator, which
of the earth made a true and living Man, and of the rib of that Man, a true and
living Woman? especially, if we take this into our consideration, that the
things which are made by man cannot be done without Gods cooperating, and those
which GOD does, are done by his own power, without the help of any other.

Sixthly, man's soul is endued with free will, only common to 6.
him, with GOD and the Angels, and wherein he differs far from other things
created This is a great privilege and honor: yet the liberty and will of GOD
the Creator, so far transcends that of man's, that if they be compared
together, man's will is scarce a shadow of Gods. For first, the liberty even of
a regenerate Man's will is weak, and prone and facile to choose evil things,
and hurtful to him: the liberty of Gods will is most strong, that it cannot
fail, or incline at all, to that which is evil: for as it is the infir^ity of
a mortallbody, that it is subject to dye, and the soundness of a glorified
body that it cannot dye: so also it is the weakness of free will, to be in
subjection to sinning; and perfection or strength, not to be able to sin;
which will come to pass, when GOD, in our celestial Country shall confer
this power upon us by grace, which he always has by nature. Again, our
free will is free indeed, so that it can will, and not will, or to will and
nill; but it is not able to do what it wills: you may hear the Apopostle
lamenting his case, in this very point, I do not the good thing which I would;
but To. 7. 19.
the evil which I would not, that do I. And is not this every man's case? I
will and desire to pray attentively and seriously to GOD, and I command my
imagination not to wander, while I am at my prayers, nor to draw me to any
other cogitations, yet I cannot contain it in its duty; for while I am less
sollicitous of this, I find my self abused by my imagination, and instead of
praying, I fall into other thoughts. Again I will, not to covet, and not to be
angry without reason; and I command (by my will) the irascible and
concupiscible faculty which is in me, (and should be by right subject to
reason) to submit them selves wholly to reason, and not suffer themselves to be
seduced by any senses of the body: but I am oftentimes not obeyed, neither is
that done which I will, but what I will not. But that which is admirable, and
miserable, the mind commands the body, and presently it obeys; but the mind
commands it self, and is disobedient: from whence comes this merveilous thing
to pass (says conf. l. 8. c. 9.
St. Augustine) The mind commands that the hand move, and it does it with such
facility, that the distance between the execution and the command is hardly
perceived: and the mind is, and the hand is the body. The mind commands that
the mind would do somewhat, yet (though it be the same) it does it not: but it
wills not wholly, therefore commands not fully. It is not then a monster, but a
sickness of the mind, because it rises not wholly* levated or lifted up by
the truth, being over burdened before by custom. But the freedom of the will
of GOD is so joined to full and absolute power, as that it is said of it, He
does Ps. 115. 3.
whatsoever he will, and There is none that resist thy will. To. 9. 19.


Wherefore if thou be wise, boast not too much of the strength of thy
free will, until thou come to the glorions 8. 21.
liberty of the Sons of GOD, when the heavenly Physicion shall heal all
thine infirmities, and satisfy thee with good things. Ps. 103. 3 5.
In the mean time, pray daily and fervently, and say to GOD with the Prophet,
Thou have been my helper, forsake me not: 27. 11.
and speak to him, not out of custom, but heartily, again and again, Thou
art my helper and redeemer, O LORD make no 70. 6.
long tarrying.

Man's soul has also a rational 7.
will, which not only can desire good things present, particular and
corporal, such as are proper to beasts to covet; but also good things absent,
general and spiritual, which are demonstrated by faith or reason, and indeed,
GOD himself which is the chief and infinite good. And this is it, which makes
a Man capable of great virtues, especially of love, the chief of all other,
and the f^^^taine, from whence all good guists are derived, and which joyneth
Man to GOD, in so strong a tie, that GOD shall remain in him and he in GOD:
For GOD is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.
But if this be so 1 Io* 4. 16
great a happiness of the created will, how great will that happiness be, with
which the uncreated will is replenished? The will of God is only capable of
infinite love, where with the infinite goodness of God is worthy to be beloved
Neither does this will want virtues, nor has it need to be directed by the
understanding, for Gods will and understanding are both but one, as his
wisdom and love are one, and the same thing in him.

Besides: Man's soul is in 8.
a humane body; but far otherwise then the souls of bruire beasts are in
their bodies; for the souls of bruits are material, and extended through all
parts of their bodies, so that part of it is in part, and all in the whole
body. But Man's soul which is an indivisible spirit, is after an admirable
manner all in the whole, and all in every part of the body; and whereas it
fills the whole body, yet it occupies no special place in it; neither
increases it, as the body increases, but only begins to be, where formerly it
was not: and if a member of the body be cut off, or wither, the soul is not
lessened, or made dry by it, but leaves to be in that member, without any may
me, or impayring. This is a true mirror of Gods existencie, in things created:
for God is an indivisible spirit, yet fills the whole world and all the parts
of it, nor occupies it any one place alone; but is all in the whole world, and
all in every part of it: and when a new Creature is made, God begins to be in
it, and yet is not moved; and when any Creature perishes, or dies, God dies
not, but only, leaves to be there, and yet changes not his place. And
therefore in these things God and the soul of man agree; but God is much more
excellent then the soul; for the soul to be in a body to rule and stir it,
must of necessity have a form of a body made for it, and to be so joined to
it, that of the soul and body a man may be made: God needs not the form or
soul of a world, nor that of him and the world, one compounded substance
should be made; but of his own immensitie, he has this pre-eminence, to be
every where; of his indivisible unity to be all, every where; of his
omnipotence, to govern, move, and sustain all things. Again, the soul of
man, though it be said to be in the whole body, yet properly it is not; but in
the living or animate parts of it, and therefore is not in the humors, in the
hair, nails, dry or dead members: God absolutely is in all things, not only
corporal, but spiritual; nor can it be, that there should be any thing, in
which God is not. Lastly, it is not a soul, but in it is own body, and that a
straight and small one, wherein all the parts are tied together; for if any
part (as is said) be severed from the other, in that part the soul cannot be.
But God is all in this universe of things, though it be great, and the parts
thereof not tied or joined together, though they be near one another: and if
there were more worlds, God would be in them all: to which purpose it is said,
Heaven and 2 Chr. 6. 18.
the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee: for if there were other heavens
and another earth created, or more heavens and earths without number, God would
fill them all, and where he were not, nothing would be at all.

Again, man's soul has in it 9.
(though obscure) the Image of the most holy Trinity; as well in that it has a
fruitful memory, power to understand, and power to love; as also, because the
mind thereof (by understanding) forms a certain word, and from the mind and
word, proceeds love, because that which is known by the mind, and represented
by the word, is presently (as it is good) loved, and desired by the will. But
after a much higher and diviner manner, God the Father begets God the Word, and
the Father and the Word breath God the Holy Spirit, who is the living love, and
the living fountain of all chaste love. And in this respect, the mystery of the
Trinit^e transcends the natural means of knowing; nor can a learned
Philosopher come to the knowledge of this, without a supernatural light: for
the soul of man produces a word, and a love, which are not substances, but
accidents, and in that regard, are not Persons: but GOD the Father begets to
himself the Consubstantiall Word, and the Father and the Word breath the Holy
Spirit, consubstantiall likewise to them both, whereby it is, that the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are rightly and worthily called three Persons. The soul
of Man also produces a Word which is of no long continuance, and the will
brings forth a love, which lasts not long: but GOD the Father begets the
eternal Word, and the Father and Word breath the eternal Holy Spirit; nor can
GOD be without his Word and Spirit. Again Man's soul, by one word represents
but one thing, and therefore multiplyeth words, not only of the mind, but of
the mouth; and man's will must produce many acts of love, if it will love many
things: But GOD, by one Word speaks all true things, and with one act of
love, loves all good things.

10 Lastly, the soul of Man, while it is in the body, has this property, that
though it be not seen, heard, nor moved, and is hardly conceived to be in it,
and that leaving it, the body seems to want nothing it had before; yet it is
that which causes all good to the body, sense, motion, speech, subsistence,
beauty and strength: for what is the cause that while a man lives he sees,
hears, talks, walks, and is strong and beautiful? nothing, but because
he has a soul in him? and why cannot a man see, nor hear, nor speak, but
lies deformed, unprofitable, and unserviceable after he is dead; but that his
soul is departed from him, from whence all these benefits and good things were
derived to him? So thy GOD, whilst by his grace he lives in thee, causes thee
to see what faith shows thee, and to hear what GOD speaks to and in thee;
and to walk by the way of his commandments, to the heavenly Jerusalem; to
speak to him by prayer, and in holy exhortation to thy neighbor; to subsist,
by persevering in good works; to be strong in battle against thy invisible
enemies; and to be beautiful in the sight of God, and his Angels. But beware,
least the grace of GOD (the life of thy soul) depart not from thee: if it do,
thou will soon find the damage which the first death brings with it, from
whence thou shall be carried to the second, from which there is no resurrection.

If GOD would open the eyes of thy mind, that thou might seriously consider
and see the exceeding beauty and splendour of a soul acceptable to GOD, and
joined to him by true love, with how cheerful and loving countenance he
looks upon it, what place he prepares for it, what joys he has promised to
it, and with what desire the Angels and blessed spirits wait for it, thou
would never endure to have the beauty of it defiled with the least spot, and
if that should happen, thou would endeavor to wash it away (though little)
with rivers of tears. But, if by the same grace of GOD, the inward eyes might
be opened, that thou might behold how filthy a soul is that sins, what
an unsavory stench it sends forth, like a putrified body or carrion, and how
GOD and the holy Angels loathe to look upon it, although perhaps it inhabit a
comely and beautiful body: without doubt, thou thy self would also so
detest and abhor it, as that thou woulst never be brought to be such a one,
or remain long in that state or condition.

DEGREE IX. By the Consideration of Angels.
WE are now to come to the highest degree of ascending to GOD from those things
which may be taken from substances created: for there is no created substance
more sublime, then the Angelical, if we speak only of natural perfection,
and there are three things principally to be considered in them.

1. First according to the excellency of their nature. 2. Secondly in respect
of their sublimity of grace. 3. Lastly in regard of their offices.
Neither is it our purpose, to propound and handle the things which concern
them, by way of disputation, but to touch only those matters, which may help
us to the lifting up of our minds to GOD.

1. An Angel if we compare him to a reasonable and humane soul may fitly be
called a perfect soul, as the soul may be termed an unperfect Angel. For so
the Psalmist speaks of Man in respect of his soul. Thou have made him little
lower then the Angels. And indeed an Ps. 8 5.
Angel is an entire perfect spirit^^ll substance; and man's soul is but
(dimidiata) divided as it were into halfes, and unperfect: because as it is the
form of the body, it is part of man. So that an Angel is all spirit, and a
man, part spirit, part flesh: or partly an Angel, partly a beast: as if we
should say an Angel is all gold, and a man part gold, and part earth or clay.
By which, it follows, that an Angel is more like to GOD, then a man or his
soul, because GOD is a spirit, not a body, nor the shape of a body. Yet this
comparison makes not so much for the Angels, but that there is an infinite
distance of dignity in GOD above this sublimity of the Angels, for GOD is a
spirit uncreate, eternal, immense, only mighty, only wise, only good, only
the most high. Therefore if we worthily admire the Angelical nature, how much
more ought we the divine, which beyond all manner and measure surpasse^h the
dignity of the Angels.

2. And not only in nature or substance may an Angel be called a perfect man,
and man an unperfect Angel, but also in understanding and knowledge: for a man
or the soul of man, takes much pains in understanding things, because he must
use the office of his senses, and running from causes to effects, and from
effects to causes, before he can gain a little knowledge: from whence it is,
that he oftentimes sticks as doubtful, oftimes he is miserably deceived, and
seldom attaines to a sure and certain understanding. But an Angel at the
first sight beholds things, and at one time perceives the causes and the
effects, and dives not only into the accidents, but the substance, as well of
spiritual as corporal things. Therefore Man, while he is in this pilgrimage,
in as much as concerns understanding, is not only a little less, but a great
deal less then the Angels; and though he be very wise, and give himself to
the study of wisdom, yet compared to an Angel, he is but a child, or an
infant, or suckling. The Prophet therefore did us no wrong, when he said, Out
of the mouths of babes Ps. 8. 2.
and sucklings have thou ordained knowledge. You may hear wise King Solomon,
how he conceived of our knowledge with which we are so much puffed up, All
things are full of labor, Eccles. 1. 8.
(or hard) man cannot utter it, and again, He (meaning GOD) has set the world
in their heart, yet man cannot find out the work that GOD has wrought from
3. 11.
the beginning to the end. If then the things of the world be hard and
unutterable by man, and if man understand nothing of this visible world from
the beginning to the end; that is, he understand nothing perfectly, as not
being able to declare the nature properties, accidents, force, and the like
thereof, into how many errors would he run, if he should go about to search
after those things which are above heaven?

If thou be wise therefore follow the knowledge, which belongs to thy
salvation, and the wisdom of the Saints, which consists in the fear of GOD,
and keeping his Commandments; let prayer delight thee better then disputation,
and edifying charity, rather then swelling knowledge: for this is the way which
leads to life, even to the Kingdom of heaven, where we little ones shall be
made equal with the Angels, Mat. 18. 10.
who always behold the face of their Father which is in heaven. Luke 20. 36.


3. There is also a third thing, wherein man's soul is not only made a little,
but much less then the Angels; and that is their power and command over
bodies: for man's soul can only by the command of its will, stir and move
his own body, other bodies he cannot; and he moves his own too, but in an
ordinary progressive motion, upon the ground; he cannot walk upon the waters,
or raise it up to the air, and carry it whither he pleases: but the Angels by
the only force of the spirit, that is by the command of their wills, raise
heavy bodies upward, and carry them whither they will, as in the case of Abacuk
to Daniel. Again, one man cannot fight Dan. 14.
with an host, because he wants many hands, and weapons: but an Angel without
hands and weapons can fight with an army, and overcome and kill at one time
185000. as in the case of the Assyrian army. If then 2 Reg. 19 35.
an Angel can do these things, what can the LORD of Angels do? Certainly he
which made all things of nothing, can again reduce all things to nothing. A
man's mind also, by the Art of painting and graving, with labor and industry
can make men's counterfeits, and represent them so to the life, that they may be
thought to live and breath: the Angels, without labor, hands, or instruments
in a moment of time, can so apt and fit to themselves a body out of the
elements, that by wisemen it shall be conceived to be a humane body, that shall
walk, speak, eat, drink, be touched, felt, and washed. So Abraham prepared
meat for Genesis 18. 4. 5. 19. 2.
the Angels, and washed their feet, and his nephew Lot received Angels as
pilgrims into his house: and the Angel Raphael accompanied young Tobias many
days, walking, speaking, eating and drinking, as if he had been a true and
real man, yet he (being to leave him) said, I seemed to eat and drink with
you, but I did neither Tob. 12 19.
eat nor drink, but you did see a vision, and presently vanished out of their
sight. Certainly, it is a great and admirable power to assume a body
presently, which shall seem to differ noth^ng from a humane and living body,
and to dissolve it at pleasure as suddenly, so that no sign of it shall
remain. Now if the power of Angels be so great and wonderful, how great is
the power of the Creator of Angels, who has given this, and what power he
pleases? As the knowledge of Angels and men, being compared with the knowledge
of GOD is but ignorance; and as the righteousness of Angels and men compared
with the righteousness of GOD is unrighteousness; so all the power of Angels
and men compared with the power of GOD is weakness, and therefore GOD is
truly called only wise, only good, and To. 16. ult
only mighty.

4. Lastly, if we consider the place of Angels, and the place of men, we shall
find also in this respect, that man or the soul of man, is not only little
less, but much less the Angels. For GOD has given to the soul of man a
place in earth, but to the Angels a place in heaven, in his own Palace, All
the whole heavens are the Lords, Ps. 115. 16.
the earth has he given to the sons of men. Hence it is that our Mat. 24. 36.
Savior calls them the Angels of heaven, and in anoth^r place, Joy shall be in
heaven for Luke 15. 7. 10.
one sinner that converteth, and a little after, There is joy in the presence
of the Angels of GOD for one sinner that converteth. Again, GOD has so bound
the soul to the body, as that without the one, the other cannot move; but GOD
has not tied the Angels to any body, but has given them power to pass from
heaven to earth, and from the earth to heaven, whenever they will, and that
speedily: so that an Angel b^ the dignity of his nature being nearest to GOD;
by his subtility also after a sort imitateth the omnipresence of GOD. For GOD
is always every where, by the immensity of his nature, neither needs he
change of place, seeing he is every where: and an Angel by the swiftness of
his motion so easily passes from place to place, and exhibits his presence so
easily to all places, that in a manner he seems to be every where.

If then thou will give ear to the LORD of Angels, there will be no cause why
thou should envy the Angels, or their high place or swift motion, for not
only thy soul when it shall be loosened from thy body shall be equal with
them, but also when thy soul shall return to thy body, which Christ shall
fashion like to his glorious body; Phil. 3. 21
with that body thou shall possess heaven, as thy proper mansion; and that
body being made a spiritual body, it shall be there 1 Cor. 15 44.
continually without labor and weariness, where thy soul will and commands
it. Thy Lord God will not fail thee in Io. 14. 2. 3 17. 24.
his promise, In my Fathers house are many mansions, and I go to prepare a
place for you, and I will that they be with me where I am, etc. but where
Christ is, and what body he has we know, for we confess every day, and say,
the third day he arose from the dead, and ascended into heaven; and we know
also, that his body after his resurrection, used to enter to his Disciples, the
doors being shut, and Io. 20. 26 Luke 24. 36.
when he left them, it was not by walking away, but vanishing; that is, he
conveyed his body with so speedy motion, from place to place, as if he had
bin a spirit, and not a body.

But if thou aspire to that place, it is necessary that thou first conform thy
self to him here, thy body to the body of Christ's humility; and so it will
come to pass, that Christ will fashion thy body like to his glorious body.
Again, thou must follow his footsteps, for Christ suffered for you, leaving
you an 1 Pet. 2. 21.
e^sample that you should follow his steps; and what are they? St. Peter
answers in the next verses, That did no sin, neither was there any guile
found in his mouth. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not. These are the two steps to tract him by, from which
if thou errest, thou have lost thy way, and shall never come to thy Country. 1
Thou must do no evil, but suffer: and 2dly Thou must do good and expect none
here again, and (which is the sum of all) thou must love thy neighbor for
Gods sake, with the true and pure love of amity, and not of concupiscence;
freely, not for the retribution of man: being contented with Gods recompense,
which exceeds all proportion and measure.

2 We come now to speak of the dignity of Angels, according to grace: And in
this respect, it may be truly also said, that God made man little less and
more then little less, then the Angels. For, in the beginning, GOD so created
every Angel, that together with their nature he infused grace, as St.
Augustine L. 12. de Civ. Dei, 6* 9.
testifies, Sooneafter they which cleaved to GOD by love were crowned with
glory and blessedness, and they which rebelled and were reprobate, fell.
Therefore their pilgrimage must needs be short, and their mansion everlasting,
if we may call that short distance between their creaation and blessedness a
pilgrimage. We men in our creation received also grace with our nature; but it
was in our first parent, not in our selves, and therefore he falling, we all
fell: In whom all men have sinned, as St. Paul says, although by the Mediator
of GOD and Man, To. 5. 12.
CHRIST JESUS, we are reconciled to GOD; yet we are condemned to a long
banishment; and while we are in this body, we wander from God, for we walk by
Faith and not by sight: and that which much 2 Cor. 5. 7.
grieveth good men, and those who desire their Country, is, that in the mean
time, they live among most cruel enemies, and the danger is, that they may be
circumvented, and taken by them, and be deprived thereby of their possession.
Hence are these complaints, Heu mihi, quia incolatus meus prolongatus est, (as
St. Jeromes translation) and as others, Heu mihi, quia exulo in Mesech; they
are both to one purpose, Woe is me that my dwelling here is prolonged, or Woe
is me that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, (the Mes^kites were Arabian
Pagans desc^nd^d from Japhet) that is, Genesis 10. 2.
alas that I am forced to live so long among profane and wicked men. But
though in this regard men are less then the Angels, yet GOD of his goodness
has wonderfully comforted us, in that out of our kind, he has preferred one
to be above all Angels and Principalities, even CHRIST JESUS blessed for ever.
And men need not so much complain of their long living here, seeing that while
they are here, they may many times amend and repair their lapses and faults,
and by repentance, obtain remission of them.

It remains now that we speak of the offices of the Angels, 3.
which are five in number.

1. The first is, that they always sing praises and Hymns unto their Creator.
And that we may understand how great account GOD makes of this service, we
must consider, that the chiefest of the Angels are appointed to this office;
and these are the Seraphims, with whom, as chief chanters or Rectores chori
(as we may call them) the other Angels do bear their parts, of whom you may
hear the Prophet Esaias, I saw the LORD sitting upon Esa* 6. 1.
a high throne and lifted up, and the lower part thereof filled the Temple. The
Seraphims stood upon it, every one had six wings, 2.
with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with
twain he did fly. And one cried to another and said Holy, Holy, Holy is the 3.
LORD of hosts, the whole world is full of his glory. In which place, you hear
the name Seraphim, who are the chief of that high order; and you see that they
cover their face and feet, in token of reverence, as though they durst not
behold his face, and you see, that they continually fly, while they sing, to
signify their affection and desire, more and more to approach near to GOD,
which two qualities are necessary for those which desire to please GOD, while
they sing and chant his praises, to join love with reverence, and reverence
with love; which also the Prophet David expresses in saying, Serve the LORD
with fear, Ps. 2. 11.
and rejoice in him with trembling.

Hence we may learn, what honor GOD is worthy to receive from us, when the
Princes of heaven, who are always in his presence, and see his face
continually, dare not neglect their fear and reverence while they praise him;
neither for their high degree, nor for their long familiarity with him. And
what shall many of us (dust a^dashes) answer, when at the day of judgment, we
shall be reprooved for our drowsines, wandering thoughts, carelessenesse and
irreverence in his service? Learn therefore at the least, henceforth by so
great a pattern, to perform thy due praises, and to sing hymns unto thy GOD
with fear and trembling; with attention and vigilance, and with love and
desire.

2. Another office of the Angels (as some are of opinion) is to offer the
prayers of mortals to GOD, for so speaks the Angel Raphael to old Tobias,
Tob. 11. 12.
when thou did pray I did bring to memory your prayer before the holy one;
and afterward says, 15.
that he was one of the Angels which present the prayers of the Saints; and St.
John (as he testifies in his Revelation) saw an Angel standing before the Altar
Apoc. 8. 3.
with a golden censer, and much odors was given unto him, that he should offer
it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which is before the
throne of GOD.

And in this the almost incredible goodness and mercy of GOD is seen, for
being not contented, first by his Prophets, and afterward by his Son and his
Apostles to exhort us to pray and ask: but adds a promise of giving
whatsoever we shall require, Ask (says he) and it Luke 11. 9.
shall be given unto you; and again, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
name, he will give it Io. 16. 23.
you. And not contented with this promise, he adds, that he will give a
reward to petitioners: When thou prayest (says he) enter into thy chamber, and
Mat. 6. 6.
when thou have shut the door, pray unto the Father in secret, and thy Father
which sees in secret shall reward thee openly; a reward besides those things
which thou have prayed for. But neither contented with this argument of
Fatherly goodness, he has appointed Angels as it were of his privy chamber,
that should take care of the prayers of poor men, and offer them in his sight.

What earthly Prince was ever heard to promise reward to those which petitioned
him for favor or justice? and yet they are made of the same mould as other men
are, and subject to the same Prince of Princes, GOD.

3. A third office of the Angels is to be Gods Ambassadors or Messengers, to
signify his pleasure; but especially concerning the work of our redemption;
for so St. Paul speaks, H^b. 1. 14.
Are they not all (the Angels) ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister, for
their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation? And we see in diverse places of
the old Testament, Angels appearing to the Patriarchs and Prophets; Genesis 18.
Dan. 9.
declaring to them what GOD gave them in charge to reveal: as also in the new
we read, that the Angel Gabriel was sent, as a messenger to Zachary, and to
the blessed Virgin Luke 1. 2.
Mary, to the Shepherds, to Joseph: and (after the resurrection of our
Savior) to the Io. 20. Act. 1.
women at the Sepulcher: and (after his ascension) to all the Disciples. And
the reason why GOD (who is every where, and can easily speak by himself to
the hearts of men,) yet would send Angels, is, that men might understand, that
he has a spiritual care of humane things, and that all things are directed
and governed by him: for men are prone enough to persuade themselves, that
revelations are their reasons and counsels: but when they see or hear that
Angels are sent by him, and that those things come to pass which are foretold
by them, they cannot doubt but GOD has a providence over humane affairs, and
that those things which pertain to the eternal salvation of the elect, are
especially directed and disposed by him.

4. Their fourth office is, the protection of men, either of a particular or of
the multitude of men. For it pleased the divine goodness of GOD to commend the
infirmities of mortals to his most powerful servants, and to set them over
men as Schoolemasters or Tutors to children, as patrons to clients, shepherds
to sheep, physicians to the sick, defenders of orphans, and protectors of
those, who are not able to defend themselves. Of this protection and guard over
every one David witnesses, He shall give Ps. 91. 11.
his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways, and Christ the most
faithful witness, says, Take heed that ye despise not one of these little
ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven Mat. 18. 10.
their Angels always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.
Concerning protectors of Provinces and Kingdoms, Daniel testifies of Michael
Dan. 10.
the Angel, who is there called a Prince. Lastly, for protection of the Church,
take S. John for a witness, who mentions the Angel of the Church of Apoc.
2. and 3.
Ephesus, of Smyrna, and so of the rest.

Consider then, how careful GOD (who needs none of our goods) is over us his
poor servants. What could he have done to manifest his great love to us, and
has not? he has laden us with blessings, that we might abide in him: he has
compassed us with protectors that we might not fly from him: he has environed
us with keepers that we should not be snatched from him: what would he do for
us, if we were his treasure, as indeed he is ours.

Therefore, at the last, yield to his love, and being overcome with the love of
so great a lover, give thy self wholly to his service and will; let nothing
trouble thee which thou see; but think upon invisible things, and desire
them earnestly: For the things which a^e 2 Cor. 4. 18.
seen, are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal.

5. The last office of Angels is, to be Soldiers or Captains to execute Gods
vengeance upon Nations, and threats to people. They were Angels that burnt Genesis
19. 29.
the infamous Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, with fire and brimstone. They were
Angels that slew all the first borne of Egypt. It was an Angel that Exo. 12.
29.
slew 185000. Assyrians: and they shall be Angels that in the 2 Reg. 19 35. Mat.
13. 49. 50.
last day shall sever the bad from among the just, and shall cast them into a
furnace of fire.

Wherefore, let every good Man love his fellow Citizens, the holy Angels: let
wicked men tremble at the power of the Angels, being Ministers of the wrath of
Almighty GOD, out of whose hands, none can deliver them.

DEGREE X. By the Consideration of the Essence of GOD, by the similitude of his
Corporal greatness.
WE have ascended as high as we can by Created substances, and yet cannot
attain to that knowledge of GOD, to which by speculation we may come, even in
this valley of tears: It remains therefore, that we see, whether by such
dimensions of corporal quantities, as we know, we may ascend to the latitude,
longitude, height and depth of the invisible essence of GOD. For those things
are accounted great among the creatures, which have these four great
dimensions. And GOD in the Psalms, and other places of Scripture is called
great, and that of his greatness Ps. 47. 2.
there is no end.

Certainly, St. Bernard (a great contemplative man) of these dimensions made
himself degrees to know GOD, in the Book which he wrote to Pope Eugenius about
consideration. Neither was he the first finder out, or inventor of the degrees
of this kind, but learned this manner of ascending, from the Apostle, who
searched into the Ephesians. 3. 18
third heaven and to Paradise. For thus he says, That ye may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth and length, and depth and
height: for if a man shall duly consider with himself, he shall find, that
there is nothing full and solid without GOD, but all things are narrow,
straight, short, poor, empty or superficial: but that in GOD is true
latitude, his immensity; true longitude, his eternity; true height the
sublimity of his nature; true depth, his incomprehensibility, without bottom.
Again, true height, his omnipotence, true depth his infinite wisdom; true
latitude, his bowels full of mercy; true longitude his full and perfect justice.

But it will not be sufficient to touch these considerations lightly, if a man
would ascend and find what he looks for: but to comprehend these dimensions,
as the Apostle has set them down in the verse before quoted. And he it is,
that comprehends them, which seriously thinking on them, is fully persuaded,
that they are so in him indeed, and being so persuaded, sells all that he has,
to buy this knowledge. And the Apostle fitly adds [with all Saints] for only
the Saints comprehend it, or there is none that comprehends it as he ought; but
it will make him a Saint.

St. Augustine is not repugnant to that which has been Ep. 120. c. 6.
said, when in an Epistle to Honoratus he writes, that when the Apostle
describes these 4. dimensions, he describes or depicts the Cross of Christ.
The latitude in the transverse or cross piece, to which our Saviors hands
were fastened: the longitude, in the upright piece, to which his body adhered:
the sublimity in that piece above, or on the upper part of the Cross, whereon
the title was written: and the depth in that piece, which was fastened into the
ground: he does not I say oppose our intention but rather helps it. For the
Cross of Christ is the true way to obtain and comprehend these 4. dimensions:
for though the Cross of Christ to men's eyes seem straight, short, shallow,
and not high: yet in truth, Christ extended and stretched out his arms, from
East to West, and from North to South: that is, he spread his glory, far and
near, by the preaching of the Apostles; and erected the crown of his head to
the highest heaven, which (like a key) opened it to the Elect; and lastly
pierced down to the depth of hell, which he barred, and closed from the Elect
for ever.

We will begin from his Essence, and then proceed to his 1.
Attributes. The Essence of God may be truly called most broad, and is of the
greatest latitude in many respects.

1. First it is most broad in it self, and altogether immense, because it
comprehends and contains all the perfections of created things; as also of
those, which may be created, and so, endless without number. For, whatsoever
is, or shall be, or can be made, without doubt are contained in God after a more
excellent manner. Therefore other things are good with an addition, as a good
man, a good horse, a good house, good apparel and the like: But GOD is all
good. When Moses desired GOD to show him his glory, GOD answered, I will make
all good go before thee. Suppose a man had some one thing, which comprehended
all the objects of the senses in full perfection, so that he need not go out
of doors, either to see, hear, smell, taste, or touch any thing, having as
great delight and pleasure at home in that one thing, as any voluptuous man
could wish: were not this a very precious thing? but if this also contained in
it as much wealth as would satisfy a covetous man; were it not more precious?
or if this one thing besides pleasure and wealth brought with it as much honor
and dignity, as would content the most ambitious, would it not seem to exceed
all valuation? and lastly, if this were able to fill the desire, not only of
men, but of Angels, of what value would thou think it to be? Yet the goodness
of this one thing would come far short of the goodness of GOD, which is so
great, that it is able to satisfy and satiate the infinite desire, or rather
the infinite capacity of GOD himself.

Oh the admirable latitude of the perfection of the essence of GOD, which
contains such immensity of good things as is sufficient for the infinite
capacity which is in himself! for GOD cannot at any time go out of, or from
himself, because he has all good things in himself; and was as rich and
blessed before the creation, and will be after, because there is nothing which
GOD has made, but would not always be after a more transcendent manner in
himself.

Therefore consider what kind of good thou shall enjoy in thy Country, if thou
love God while thou art in the way: and from what good thou shall be excluded,
if thou love him not. For GOD offers himself to those which love him (and he
is the only good) and will say to the good and faithful servant, Enter into
the joy of thy LORD. Mat. 25* 23.


2. Again, GOD is immense in another manner, because he Ier. 23. 29.
fills all created things, altogether, Do not I fill heaven and earth says
the LORD? and if there were more worlds, he would fill them all; If I climb Ps.
139. 7
up to heaven (says David) thou art there, if I go down to hell, thou art
there also; that is, if I go above heaven, or beneath it, or about it, I shall
not be alone, because thou also art there; for I cannot be, if thou be not in
me, and thou sustainest me, who bear all things by thy Heb. 1. 3.
mighty word. Neither does God fill all bodies only with his immensitie, but
spirits, hearts and minds: For how could he search the hearts of men, if he
were not in their hearts? how could he hear their prayers, unless he had his
ears to our hearts? and how could the Prophet say, I will hearken what Ps. 85.
8.
the LORD GOD will say in me, if he moved not his mouth to the ears of our
hearts?

It is a happy soul which loves GOD, because he has always his beloved with
him, and cherishes him in his bosom, For he which dwells in love, dwells
in God, and God in 1 Io. 4.
him.

3. Neither does GOD only fill all things with his presence, but with his
glory also, For the Seraphims cry The Esaias 6. 4.
earth is full of his glory, and the Psalmist adds, O LORD our Ps. 8. 1.
Governor, how excellent is thy name in all the world: thou have set thy glory
above the heavens. As if he should say, not only thy name, fame and glory has
filled the whole earth with admiration; but it has ascended to heaven, and
above the heavens also. And the Son of Syrach, of the creation of the Sun
says, The work thereof is full Ecclus. 42. 16.
of the glory of the LORD, for there is no creature either in heaven or earth
which continually praises not GOD. And this is the cause why David in the
Psalms, and the three children Ps. 148.
in Daniel do exhort all creatures to bless and celebrate Dan. 3.
the praises of the Creator: not that they were ignorant, that most of the
creatures were of that nature, that they could not hear their exhortations;
but because they knew that all the works of GOD were good, and by their species
or beauties brought prai^e unto him; and therefore congratulated, and persuaded
them to continue, in doing that which rhey did.

And cortainely, if we had inward eyes, we might see that all the works of the
Lord were as so many censers, sending upward the sweet savor of his glory: and
if we had inward ears, we should hear a harmonicall concent (as it were) of
all kind of musical instruments sounding out his praises, and saying, It is he
that has made Ps. 90. 2.
us and not we our selves. And although the wicked many times speak evil of
GOD and blaspheme his name, yet they are compelled against their wills (in that
manner, that the work commends the workman) to praise him: for in them also
the power of GOD shines merveilously, by which he made them, and his wisdom
by which he governes them, and his goodness by which he preserves them, though
unthankful and evil, and his mercy and justice, by which he ordaines them,
either justly to punishment, or mercifully expects them to repentance. And
though many are so deaf here on earth, to hear the voices of the creatures
incessantly crying to GOD: yet there are a multitude of Angels and holy men,
who hearken unto, and are delighted with those praises, they themselves daily
chaunting out the same with hymns and songs.

Now the length of Gods divine Essence, is his Eternity, 2.
which, as it had no beginning of continuance, so neither shall it have end,
but shall remain the same without change or alteration. Thou art the same Ps.
102. 27.
(says David to GOD) and thy years shall not fail; and the Apostle calls him
The King everlasting, because he is not 1 Timothy 1. 17.
subject to time, but is above it, and governes all ages, and was before all
ages. Other things have their beginning and end, and never continue in one
state; nor have beginning without end, without alteration: but may at the will
of the Creator leave to be. And therefore eternity is only proper to GOD so,
as it can agree with no other creature in that measure: for never was Prince so
arrogant, to use eternity amongst his other titles, unless perhaps in another
sense, as Constantius did, who was styled Imperator aeternus, because he was
not Emperor for a time; but during life.

A man's soul may be reckoned among the creatures of both kinds; for it has a
body which began to be, when it was conceived and borne, and by degrees
increased to that stature, which was prefixed by GOD: and then again, it began
to decrease, and soon after leaves to be, by death: but it never stands in the
same state and condition in all respects, every hour being subject to
alteration. Of this body the Prophet speaks, by a similitude of grass, In the
morning it is green and Ps. 90. 6.
grows up, but in the evening it is cut down, dried up and withered. That
is, in its childhood it waxes reene as grass, soon after it passes to
youth: in the nooneday whereof it flourishes; and by and by passes to old
age, in the evening whereof it hangs the head, and is cut down, in death it
continues, in the grave it dries up, and returns to dust. By which we may
perceive how far the body differs from eternity. Now the soul was created in
time, being nothing before, and in this regard, is much unlike the Creator: but
being created, it shall have no end of continuance, which is common to it, with
the Creator. But for as much as it is subject to change while it lives in the
body, from sin to goodness, from virtue to vice; and in what state it shall be
found at the departure from the body, in the same it shall be judged, either to
reign eternally with GOD, or everlastingly to be tormented with the Devil:
nothing ought to be more careful to thee, then to fly sin, and follow that
which is good. Take heed therefore, that to the loss of body and soul thou
be not seduced by the enticements and allurements of the flesh; but erucifie
it, with the desires and concupiscences of it; that hereafter not only thy
soul may live in blessedness, but thy body may rise in glory: and remain
together in eternity with God.

But although the souls of the blessed, and of the holy Angels shall be
partakers of that most sublime and happy union with GOD, by his beatificall
vision and love; which union, not only shall have no end, but shall ever stand
firm and unmovable: yet the thoughts and affections may change and alter
diverse ways: and therefore they shall admire and behold above them the
eternity of God, in whom there shall be no change of mind, will or place, and
yet nothing shall be wanting to him, but shall possess all things ever, which he
might have gotten to himself by diverse alterations from eternity. Wherefore
to conclude this point, the length of Gods eternity is an infinite thing, and
no less proper and agreeable to him, then the breadth of his immensitie.

The height of Gods Essence 3.
comes next to our consideration, in respect whereof, it is said of GOD, Thou
only art the Ps. 83. 18.
most highest. And GOD is only the highest, by the dignity of his nature.

1. For things the more pure and more abstract from matter, are ever the more
noble and higher. This we see, first in corporal things; water is more higher
then earth, because more pure: and by the same reason, air is higher then
water, because more pure: and the fire then the air, and heaven then fire.
Again, we see it in spiritual things: the understanding is higher then sense,
because the sense has a corporal Organ, which the understanding needs not:
and the Angelicast understanding is higher then man's, because a man has need
of the office of imagination, and fantasies, which an Angel need not: and
among the Angels they are highest, who understand most things by fewest species.

GOD therefore, who only is pure act, and wants nothing without himself;
neither Organ, nor imagination, nor species; nor so much as the presence of any
object without himself: but his own Essence is all things to him, and can
have nothing, that he had not in act; and for him to have in act, is to be
always pure act, and uncompound: therefore (I say) is his nature the most
transcendent, highest and sublime, neither can it by any means be equaled;
He then which said, I will be like the most high Esaias 19. 19.
was suddenly thrust down to hell, and as our Savior says, I saw Satanfall
down from heaven Luke. 10 18.
like lightning.

2. Secondly, GOD is most high in another respect, because he is the 1 first
highest efficient; 2 exemplary; and 3 final cause of all things. 1. He is the
first highest efficient cause, because there is no created thing which has any
power of making, but that which it has received from GOD: but GOD has that
power from none. 2. Again, there is no cause, which can exercise its power,
unless it be moved by GOD: but GOD is moved of none.

3. Lastly, those are called higher causes amongst created things, upon which
particular causes depend, and which are universal, as the heavens and Angels
which move the heavens; but GOD made both heaven and Angels. And therefore, he
is the only first and most highest efficient cause. 2 He is also the first
exemplary cause, because he made all things according to the forms and idea's
which he has in himself. 3 Lastly, he is the first final cause, because he
created all things for himself; that is, to manifest his glory, as the wiseman
speaks. Pro. 16. 4.


But it is very properly said, that GOD is the most highest, Esaias 6. 1.
because he sits in the highest throne; I saw (says Esaias) the LORD sitting
upon a high throne. and lifted up. Now, because sitting or seats have two
uses, one for judicature, and the other for peaceable governing: we will
consider them apart.

1. GOD has the highest seat, because he is supreme Judge, for Abraham said
to GOD, Shall not the Judge of all Genesis 18 25. Ps. 82. 1.
the world do right? and David, He is a Judge among the Gods; that is, GOD
judges even Judges themselves, who in Scripture are called Gods: but St.
Iaemes most plainly, There is one Lawgiver and Judge, that Ia. 4. 12.
is, GOD is properly the only Lawgiver and Judge; and GOD is Judge himself
says David; again, GOD is the Ps. 50. 6. 75. 8.
Judge: and Esaias, The LORD is our Judge, the LORD is our Esaias 33. 23.
Lawgiver: he only gives Laws to all men, and receives of none; he judges all
men, and is judged of none.

2. Again, GOD is not only a Judge, but is also a King: and in this regard,
judges not as a Judge appointed by the King, but as King and chief Prince: of
which he is styled King of Kings, and a great King 1 Timothy 6. 15. Ps. 95. 3. 76.
12.
above all Gods, and he is terrible to the Kings of the earth, because, that
when he pleases he translateth Kingdoms and Empires from one Nation to
another; and when he pleases he takes away the spirit of Princes. 3 Lastly,
GOD is not only the supreme Judge and King, but is absolute Lord, which is the
greatest title of all. GOD is properly and truly styled LORD, for all things
serve him, and he none: and can if he will reduce all things to nothing,
because he made all things of nothing.

Consider then, what fear, what reverence is due by us worms of the earth to
him, who sits upon so high a seat, as that he has nothing above him, If I be
LORD (says Mal. 1, 6.
GOD by Malachie) where is my fear? And if those supreme Princes of heaven do
stand by him with such fear and trembling, what ought we to do who are
mortal, and frail, and dwell upon the earth with beasts? But this seems
strange that the highest GOD loves not creatures like to himself, that is,
high and sublime, but humble and poor: for so GOD speaks by the Prophet Esaias,
To him will I look, even to him Esaias 66. 2.
that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my words, and King
David, Though the LORD be high, yet has he Ps. 138. 6.
respect unto the lowly. And yet I will not say, but GOD loves high things,
and in this respect like to himself, so they be truly high, not which seem so
and are not; and therefore it is that GOD loves not the proud, who are lifted
and puffed up, and are not to be called sublime: but he loves the humble, and
those which tremble at his words, because that they, the more they abase and
deject themselves, are the more exalted by him; and they which are exalted by
him, are truly high. If a Man had seen, not only with the eyes of his body,
but of his heart, enlightened by GOD, the rich Glutton clothed in silk and
purple, sitting at a Table furnished with all kinds of delicates, many wayters
attending him; and withal had seen poor Lazarus half naked, full of sores
lying at the rich man's gate, desiring to be fitted with the crummes that fell
from his Table: ^ee had seen the rich man (whom the World accounted most
happy) to seem most abominable in Luke 16.
the sight of GOD and his Angels, and as vile as the mud and dung of the earth:
and poor Lazarus to seem noble and honorable: For the first (as hated by
GOD) was hurried by the Devils into hell; and the last (as beloved of GOD) was
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. But what do we speak of Lazarus?
None was ever in higher account with GOD, then our Lord Jesus Christ, even
according to his humanity: and yet none ever so humble, as he truly reported
of himself, Learn of Mat. 11. 29.
me that am meek and lowly in heart. For by how much the clearer his most holy
soul knew (above all others) the infinite height of the divinity, by so much
the more he knew the baseness of the creature, made of nothing: and therefore
while he was a creature above all others he became subject to GOD, and exalted
him: and therefore also is he exalted above all creatures by GOD. The like we
might say of the blessed Angels, and holy Saints; for there are none more
humble then they which are high in the heavens: because the nearer they are to
GOD, the more clearly they see and perceive, by how much the greatness of the
Creator is in distance from the exiguity of the creature.

Wherefore love humility, if thou desire to be exalted. Imitate the Lamb
without spot, and imitate the holy Saints and Angels; who as they excel in
height, excel in humility

And not only does GOD 2.
possess the highest seat, because he judges all men, but because he excells
all in quiet, and makes those to be quiet in whom he rests and fits. Gods
highest seat is his supreme rest: for although he governs the universe,
wherein are continual wars and conflicts of elements, men and beasts: yet he
governs peaceably and quietly: nor is there any thing that can disturb his
quiet, or his contemplation of himself, wherein consists his everlasting
delight. Gods proper seat is the blessed spirits, upon which it is said by the
Psalmist, He sits between the Ps. 99. 1. 1 Samuel 4. 4.
Cherubims; and in Samuel, the LORD of hosts who dwells between the
Cherubims: and GOD is said rather to dwell or sit between the Cherubims then
the Seraphims; because the Cherubims signify multitude of knowledge, and
Seraphim the heat of charity: now rest follows wisdom, and care and anxiety
accompany love and charity, unless it be joined with wisdom. Lastly, where
Esaias says Heaven is my seat, Esaias 66. 1
and David, The Lords throne is in heaven; and all the heaven of Ps. 11. 4.
115. 16.
heavens are the Lords: by the heaven of heavens are understood, the spiritual
heavens, the blessed spirits which dwell in the corporal heavens, as S.
Augustine Sermon. 23.
expounds that place; These heavens (says he) GOD causes to be quiet so
admirably, that this is the peace which passes all understanding. St. Bernard
compares it to a King, who Sermon. sup. Cantr.
being tired as it were with hearing of causes, retyres himself, and takes his
ease and quiet with his familiar servants. And therefore by this, we may
perceive, that GOD shows himself not a Judge or a Lord to the spirits of the
blessed, but a familiar friend. And certainly it is no small familiarity which
GOD shows to pure minds in this life: so that this saying is verified, My
delight is to be with the children of men. Pro. 8. 31


Hence it is that the Saints, though they sufferd pressures in the World, yet
in their hearts (where GOD is) they had peace; and therefore ever seemed
joyful and serene, and so were. For the Truth had told them, Your hearts shall
rejoice, and your joy shall no man take Io. 16. 22.
from you.

The fourth and last part of the greatness of Gods Essence, is the depth, and
this is manifold.

1. First, the divinity it self is most deep in him, because it is not
superficial or slight, but most full, most solid. The Deity is not a gilded
mass, which has only gold upon the superfici^s or outward part, and brass
or wood within: but as a whole mass of gold, great and immense: or rather as a
mine of gold, so deep, that by digging it can never be exhausted, nor the
bottom be discovered: so God of whose greatness there is no end, is
altogether so incomprehensible, that by a created mind it can never be so well
known, but that it may be ever more and more understood, and it is only God
himself which can comprehend this infinite depth, because he only has the
infinite power of understanding.

2. Again, God is deep in respect of place: for as he is most high, because he
presides and governs all things, and is above all, so is he most deep, because
he is under all things to uphold them, Bearing up all things by his mighty
word, says the Apostle. And Heb. 1. 3.
therefore he is as it were the foundation and roof of a building, In whom we
live and move Act. 17. 28.
and have our being. In that regard most truly said Solomon, The heavens and
the heavens of heavens 1 Reg. 8. 27.
are not able to contain thee; because God does rather contain the heavens,
and the things under heaven, as being above the heavens and beneath the earth.

3. Lastly, the profundity of God is his invisibility. For God is light, but
inaccessible, he is truth, but most inward, He made darkness his secret place
says David, Ps. 18. 11
and verily thou o God hidest thy self says Esaias. St. Augustine sometime
inquiring after GOD, Es. 45. 15. L. conf. c. 10. l. 10. c. 6.
sent his messengers (his eyes) from earth to heaven, and all things answered
them that they were not that he sought for, but it is he that has made us: and
not finding him by outward things, he took his search by inward; and soon
understood truly, that by them he might sooner approach to God; for he knew the
soul to be better then the body, and the inward sense to be far better then
the outward; and the understanding (which is more inward) to be better then the
inward sense: and thence gathered, that God who was more inward then the
understanding, was better then it: and that by all this, that we understand or
think, it was not God, but something less then God, because God is better
then we can understand or conceive.

Well then, if the soul be better then the body, to which the soul gives
life, because that is a body, and the soul a spirit: and if the eye of the
body cannot see the soul, because that is without, and this within: think also
that thy God is better then thy soul, because he gives it understanding, and
is as it were thy soul: and therefore thou can not see him, because he is a
spirit more high and sublime, and more inward then thou art, and that thou
(after a sort) stayest without, and he within, in his most secret and deep
retyring place. But shall thou never be admittted into that secret place? God
forbid, Blessed are the pure Mat. 5. 8.
in spirit, for they shall see GOD says our Savior, who cannot lie; and Now
we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face 1 Cor. 13. 12.
says one Apostle. And We know that when he shall appear, we shall 1 Io. 3. 2.
be like him; for we shall see him as he is, says another. And how great will
that joy be, when being admitted to that s^cret place we shall see and possess
that light, that shape, that beauty, even goodness it self? then it will
plainly appear, how vain and fading and like shadows these temporal things
were; and with which men (as drunken and besotted) neglected the true and
everlasting good things. But if thou truly thirstest after GOD, and If thy
tears have been thy meat Ps. 42. 3.
day and night, while they daily say unto thee where is thy GOD? be not slow
or slack to cleanse thy heart, with which thou must see GOD, nor be weary in
erecting these degrees in thine heart, until the GOD of Gods appear in Sion:
neither wax Ps. 84. 7.
cold in thy love to GOD and thy neighbor, nor love him only in word and
tongue, but in work and truth: for this is the way which leads to life.

DEGREE XI. By the Consideration Of the Greatness of GODS Power, by the
similitude of Corporeal greatness.
GReat is the LORD, and of his greatness is neither end nor measure. Neither
is he great only, because his height is his omnipotence, his depth unsearchable
wisdom; his breadth, mercy, spread and extended every where; and his length,
justice like an Iron rod: but also, because every one of these attributes are
great, in the magnitude of his infinite latitude, altitude, longitude and
profundity.

To begin with his power, or rather omnipotence.

This power of GOD has its latitude, which is so placed in him, as that it
extends and stretches it self to things altogether infinite.

1. First, it extends it self to all things which are created: for there is
nothing in the whole universe from the chiefest Angel to the poorest worm, and
from the highest heaven to the lowest abyss; which is not made by the power of
GOD. Allthings (says St. John) were Io. 1. 3. 10.
made by him, and without him was nothing made; and (a little after) The world
was made by him.

2. Again, it reaches to all things which shall be made for ever; for, as
without him nothing could have been made, so neither shall any thing be made
without him; Of him, and through him, and in him are all To. 11. 36.
things says the Apostle.

3. Thirdly, it stretches it self to all things that can be made, although
they never shall be: for so says the Angel, With GOD nothing shall be
impossible. Luke 1. 37. Mat. 19. 26.
And Christ himself said, With GOD all things are possible.

4. It also extends it self, to the dissolution and destruction of all things
made. For as God could destroy by the deluge all men and creatures upon the
face of the earth, except a few, reserved by himself in Noah's Arc: so will he
be able at the last day to destroy by fire, not only all men and living
creatures, but Trees, Cities and other things in the earth also* The day of the
LORD (says St. Peter) shall come as a thief in which the heavens shall pass^
away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with heate^ 2 Pet 3. 10.
the earth also and the works th^^ are therein shall be burnt up Great
(without doubt) is ^hi^ latitude of Gods power, which no man can sufficiently
admire, unless he could number the multitude of things, which God partly has,
partly will, and partly can make: but who can number such a multitude, but he
only, whose knowledge is infinite?

5. Again, the greatness of this power increases much, if we consider, how
great a work it is, in a moment to dissolve with great facility the things
which are made, or as Judas Maccabeus speaks, Vno nutu delere at a beck to
destroy the 2 Mac. 8. 18.
whole world. Let us then say with Moses, Who is like unto thee o LORD (in
fortibus) Exo. 15. 11.
among the Gods?

Now the longitude of Gods power is seen in this, that he 2.
cooperateth daily with those things he has made, neither is or shall be at any
time weary in cooperating; for this power of God can neither be diminished,
weakened nor broken by any means, being joined with true eternity, the divinity
being eternity.

1. Many men mervaile, how the Sun, Moon and Stars, for so long time have
continued their motions with such swiftness, and without intermission: and it
were a thing worth our admiration, but that we know, that they are carried by
Almighty GOD, Who bears all things by his mighty word. Heb. 1. 3.


2. Others wonder, how it comes to pass, that in hell, either the fire is not
consumed with burning so long; or that the bodies of the damned should not be
dissolved with so long burning. And this were not on^y to be thought
wonderful, but impossible also, were it not that he is eternal and omnipotent
that makes the fire so to burn always, that it shall never be extinguished,
and so keeps the bodies of the damned in that fire, as that they shall be ever
tormented and never consumed.

3. Lastly, others there are that wonder, that GOD should sustain and bear all
things, and without weariness support so great a weight almost infinite: It is
true, that a strong Man, a Horse, an Ox, or an Elephant can carry a great
weight; but it is for a small time only: but to carry so great a mass for
ever without weariness, passes the strength of all things created. And yet
they might well mervaile, if GOD had strength by weight and measure as things
created have: but inasmuch as the strength of GOD exceeds all measure, and that
he is wholly infinite, it is no mervaile at all, if an infinite strength bear
a great weight or mass without defatigation, although it be for an infinite
time. Let us hear again say with the holy Prophet, Who is like unto thee o
Lord among the Gods?

The next thing to be considered 3.
is, the height of Gods power, which is chiefly manifested in two things.

1. His omnipotency may be called most high, because he only made most high
things. Those things which are under the Moon, only GOD made in the first
creation, and they may by the act of creatures be begotten, changed and
corrupted; for the elements are changed by course according to their parts: and
of the earth are Herbs and Trees begotten: of animals, are animals increased
and propagated; fishes are borne in water, clouds and rain in the air and
comets in the fire. But the heaven and stars which are the highest bodies,
GOD only created, only preserves; neither can the creature have any act in
making, or changing' dissolving or preserving them I will consider the heavens
(says the Psasmist) even the work of thy fingers; the Moon and the Ps. 8. 3.
Stars which thou have ordained. For those transcendent works has the mo^^
highest reserved to himself, he began to lay the foundation, and he has
brought the fabrique to perfection. As also spiritual things, Angels and the
souls of men, which are the most noble and sublime works of all other, the
most high GOD by his power only has cr^ated, pr^serveth, and so will for
ever; neither has any creature* hand or part in making of them: nor though all
the creatures should join together, could they ^ither make or destroy one
Angel or one soul.

2. Secondly, the altitude of the divine power is most perspicuously seen in
Gods miracles, which (as St. Augustine says) are works beyond the Tract. 24.
in Joan.
ordinary course and order of nature, and do amaze men and Angels to behold:
as when at the command of Josue the Sun Ios. 10* 11.
and Moon (which are carried by most swift motion) stood still. And least we
should conceive that this happened by any chance, or that so unusual a thing
should be done by any mortal, the holy Ghost says, That the 14.
LORD heard the voice of a man. Neither indeed did Iosue properly speak to the
Sun and Moon, who he knew could not hear his command, but he spoke to the
LORD; as if he 12.
should say, by the commandment of the LORD, Sun stay thou in Gibeon, and thou
Moon in the valley of Ajalon. And the LORD heard the voice of a man that is,
he brought to pass that these great lights obeyed the voice of a man, for GOD
oftimes in Scripture is said to do those things, for whose Genesis 21. 12.
sake they are done; as in Genesis GOD said to Abraham, Now I know that thou
fear the Lord, the meaning of these words being, Now I have brought it to
pass, that it may be known, that thou truly fear the Lord. Such another
work (declaring the height of the divine power) was at the passion of our
Savior, when the Moon being in a great distance from the Sun with a most
swift course came to be in conjunction with it, and for three hours space,
made Mat. 27.
darkness on the earth; and after those three hours returned as swiftly to
the place from whence it came; all which St. Dionysius the Areopagite
testified, that he observed (in an Epistle to St. Polycarpus.) This, though it
were a miracle contrary to the former, yet no l^sse wonderful, seeing it is
alike new and unusual, for the Moon to stand still, as to exceed its bounds
beyond custom.

To omit the restoring sight to the blind and life to the dead, and many other
acts and miracles of the like nature, which GOD does and has done, by his
Prophets, Apostles, and faithful servants, all which cry, Who is like unto
thee o LORD among the Gods?

But I cannot let pass the most supreme and highest miracle, which GOD will
show in the last day, when all the dead shall rise again together, of which
many of their bodies have been reduced to ashes, and scattered, or consumed,
and devoured by beasts and changed into other bodies, (...) buried in fields
and gardens, and transformed into diverse herbs. Which of the Angels will not
be amazed, when in the twinkling of an eye, at the command of the Almighty so
many myriads of men shall resume their bodies, although they have bin buried,
scattered or devoured many ages before? This is therefore the altitude or
height of Gods omnipotence, in regard of which we may likewise say, Quis
similis tibi in fortibus Domine? Who is like unto thee o Lord among the Gods?

It remains that we speak of the depth of Gods power, 4.
which (as I conceive) consists in the means or manner he uses in making
things: for who can dive or wade into the means of making something of
nothing? they could never pierce into the depth of it, who resolved it for a
certain and true principle, that of nothing comes nothing. And we our selve^
believe, what we see not in this point; but we securely believe GOD, who
caennot lie: We believe I say, that the heaven and earth and all things in them
were created by GOD himself, when there was nothing before to make them of;
neither could it be truly said, that GOD made all things, if there had bin any
thing before, of which they had bin made: but how they could be so made, there
being nothing before to make them of, is a most deep abyss, which we can
neither search into, nor find out.

2. Again, as GOD made all things of nothing, so he made them also in nothing;
that is, without a space preceding, or a place where to bestow what he made,
which especially in corporal things can hardly be understood. Take away
distances, spaces of places (says St. Augustine) Epl. 57. ad Dardanu^.
from bodies, and they will be no where; and if they will be no where, they will
not be at all. Well then, if there were nothing, no place before GOD created
heaven and earth, where did GOD place heaven and earth? certainly in nothing
they could not be placed, and yet they were created, and were themselves a
place to themselves: because he so would and could, which can do all things,
although we cannot understand how they could be done. And to this GOD had an
eye, when holy Job (desirous to declare his omnipotence) said in the person of
GOD, Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations Job. 38. 4
of the earth, declare if thou have understanding. Who has laid out the
measures thereof, 5,
if thou know, or who has stretched the line over it? Whereupon are the
foundations thereof 6,
set, or who laid the corner stone thereof? And that we might understand that
these works of the Lord were most worthy of all praise, he adds in the next
verse, When the Stars of 7.
the morning praised me together, and all the children of GOD rejoiced, that
is, the holy Angels who were created at the same time with heaven and earth,
and are as it were spiritu^ll Stars, and most bright, and may be called the
children of GOD, as soon as they perceived the heavens and earth to proceed
from nothing, and placed in nothing, yet most surely founded upon their own
stability; they (I say) with wonderful astonishment, and joy magnified the
omnipotence of the Creator.

3. Nor is it less deep to be understood, that GOD by the only command of His
will should erect such immense heape^ or piles; for we know by exp^rience, that
in buildings without all comparison far less, what instruments, what
engines, what labor^rs, workmen need, who can then apprehend how it came to
pass, that by his only internal will, which went not out of the willer, so
many, immense and several works were performed? GOD said (that is with
himself, for the word of GOD is in GOD, and is GOD himself) by commanding and
expressing the command of his will, Let the heaven be made, and Genesis 1.
it was made; Let the earth be made, and it was made; Let the light, the Sun
and Stars be made; Let trees, creatures, Men and Angels be made, and all were
made: and add to this which has been said, that the same GOD, may if he will,
destroy with one be^ke, all these things, and the whole world, as we said
before, out of the Book of the Maccabees.

4. To these we may add one depth more, that all these things, so many, so
great, and composed of so many members and parts, were made by GOD in a moment.
With us, art and nature must have long time to bring any work to perfection;
we see seeds sown long before the herbs grow: trees ask often times many
years, to fasten the roots, to sprout, spread and bear fruit: the fruit of
the womb is long in the womb, and long in the nursing before it come to any
growth: to speak nothing of art, seeing it is so obvious to us, that
artificers must have much time to perfect any thing they take in hand. How
great then is the power of GOD, who sooner then a word can be spoken, can
perfect so great works?

It is not my purpose to dispute whether GOD in one moment absolved and
finished heaven, earth, and all things in them: or whether he spent six whole
days in the first creation of things; for this Treatise was intended for our
ascent to GOD, and not for dispute: but this is it which I affirm and admire,
that every thing should be made perfect by the omnipotent Creator in a moment:
and concerning the earth, the water, air and fire, no man doubts, but that
together with all the Angels they were created in a moment. Concerning the
firmament, and the dividing of waters, it is well known that they were all made
by the only power of the word speaking, Let Genesis 1. 6.
there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and that in a moment: for it
follows, that it was so done; upon which place, St. Chrysostom thus, He
only spoke, and the work followed; Hom. 4. in Genesis
and the same Author upon the words, Let the earth bud forth, etc. Who (says
he) will not be astonished to think how the Genesis 1. 11.
Word of GOD [Let the earth bud] adorneth the face of the earth with an
admirable embrodery of diverse flowers? you might suddenly have seen the earth,
deformed before and untilled and untrimmed, to contend with heaven in
comeliness and bravery: and upon the words [Let there Gen* 1 14.
be light] he says, He only spoke, and this admirable element was brought
forth, I say the Sun, and what if I added that the Moon and all the Stars
were made by the same word, and in the same moment by the same Creator? and
lastly upon these words, [Let the waters bring forth in 20.
abundance, etc.] he thus speaks, What tongue can be sufficient to set out
the praise and glory of the workman? For as he only said of the earth. [Let
the earth bud] and presently a plentiful variety and multiplicity of flowers
and herbs appeared: so by saying here, [Let the waters bring forth] so many
creeping things and fowls were created, as no speech can recount, Who
therefore is like unto thee o Lord, among the Gods?

By all this, thou may understand plainly, the great power of thy Creator,
who by his latitude extends himself to all things: by his longitude continues
always, and without weariness supports and governes all things: by his
altitude attaineth to the making of those things which seem to be, and are
impossible to all but himself: and by his depth and profundity does so make
all things, as that the manner and means of making them passes all created
understanding, considering that he makes them of nothing, into nothing, without
instruments, without time, only by his word and command, He spoke the word
(says the Psalmist) Ps. 148. 5.
and they were made; he commanded, and they were created. By this thou may
gather if thou be wise, how much it concerns thee, whether it were best to
have him thy angry enemy, or thy well pleased friend: For he can suddenly
bereave thee of all good, and load thee with all misery; nor is there any that
can deliver thee out of his hands: for who dares contend with him that is
omnipotent? If thou should (being naked) meet with an implacable enemy,
bending a sharp weapon against thee, what would thou do, but in trembling
and fearful manner prostrate thy self at his feet and implore his mercy? and
yet (he being a man) thou might perhaps escape him, by flight, or resistance,
or wresting the weapon from him: but what can thou do against an angry God?
from whom thou caust not flee, he being every where, nor resist him being
omnipotent; nor make delays seeing he does all in a moment and by his sole
command? and therefore not without cause did the Apostle say, Heb. 10. 31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living GOD. On the other
side, if thou make him thy friend, who more happier then thou? for he can if he
will, and he will (if he be thy friend) satisfy thee with all good things, and
deliver thee from all evil; and it is in thy power either to make him thy
friend or enemy while thou live here. GOD himself, and he by his Prophets,
and again, by his Son, and his Apostles in the Scriptures ever call, and
invite sinners to repentance, and the just to keep his Commandments, that so
he may have both sorts of men his friends, or rather dear children and heirs
of eternal salvation. Hear Ezechiel, As I live says the Lord God I desire
not the death Ezekiel. 33. 11.
of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn you, turn
you from your evillwaies, for why will ye die o ye houfe of Israel? and as
Ezechiel, so Esaias, Jeremy and the rest of the Prophets, being moved with the
same spirit, cry for the conversion of sinners. Hear the Son of GOD when he
began to preach, Amend your lives, for the Kingdom Mat. 4. 17
of God is at hand. Hear the Apostle St. Paul speaking of 2 Cor. 5. 20.
himself, and his fellow Apostles, We are Ambassadors for Christ; as though
God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that ye be
reconciled to God. What more clear? more comfortable? The Apostle in Christ's
name does beseech us to be reconciled to God, to have him our friend, not our
enemy. Who can doubt of Gods mercy, if he seriously return to him? he will
receive all converts, as the loving Father received the Luke 15.
prodigal Son. But when we are returned, and have found indulgence and favor,
what does he require of us? even to persevere as friends and children, and to
keep his Commandments, If thou will enter into life keep the Mat. 19. 17.
Commandments says our Savior. If thou will say, without the help of God
his Commandments cannot be kept, hear what St. Augustine says, speaking of
the hardest precept of all Aug, in ps. 56.
other; that is of laying our life down for our Brethren. GOD would not have
commanded us to do this, if he had thought it impossible to be done; and if
considering thy infirmity, thou faintest under a command, strengthen thy self
by example for example prevails much with thee; and he is present and ready
(who gave thee an example) to give thee aid. And 2 Cor. 13 1.
that in the mouth of two witnesses every word may stand; hear St. Leo, GOD is
justly Sermon. 16. de Pass. Dom.
earnest and instant by precept, because he forerunnes with his aid.

What then should thou fear safely to enter the way of of Gods
Commandments, when as he forerunnes, that by the powerful aid of his grace
makes the crooked straight, and Es. 40. 4.
the rough places plain. By this aid, the yoke of our Savior is Mat. 11. 30.
made easy and his burden light: and St. John says that his Commandments 1
Io. 5. 3.
are not grievous: But if they do seem grievous to thee, how much more
grievous are the torments of hell? and except thou be mad, I wish thee not so
bold as to try. But upon this think, and think again, and never forget, that
now is the time of mercy, hereafter of justice: if thou sin freely now, look
for grievous torments hereafter: Now a man may easily fall to an agreement with
GOD, and with the small labor of repentance, obtain much indulgence; and with
a little wrestling and striving, redeem himself from much weeping.

DEGREE XII. By the Consideration of the greatness of the Speculative or
Contemplative Wisdom of GOD, by the similitude of a Corporal greatness.
HE that will seriously consider the four mentioned dimensions, in the
wisdom of GOD, may easily understand how truly the Apostle spoke. R. o. 16, 27
that GOD is only wise.

To begin with the latitude. 1.


1 The wisdom of GOD is manifest and apparent to be the most broad and large
by this, in that he distinctly and perfectly knows all things in the
universe, from the highest Angel to the lowest worm: and not only their
entire substances, but also their parts, properties, virtues, accidents and
actions. And hence it is, that lob and David say, Thou numbrest my steps, and
The LORD looks Job. 14. 6 Ps. 33. 14
on the ways of men, and confidereth all my ways. Now if he numbreth and
considers every step, how much more the actions of the mind, good and bad?
and if he numbreth the hairs of our head as our Savior Mat. 10. 30.
speaks, how much more does he know all the members of our body, and the
virtues or qualities of the mind? and if he know the number of the sands of the
Sea, and the drops of rain, Ecclus. 1. 2.
as may be gathered out of the Book of Ecclesiasticus; how much more may we
believe, that his knowledge extends to the number of Stars and Angels? and if
he will bring to judgment all the idle words of Mat. 12. 36.
men (as our Savior tells us) no doubt, but he hears all the voices of men,
not only of their bodies, but of their minds, that is our thoughts and desires.

2. How great therefore and immense is this latitude of wisdom, which at one
time knows all things which are, have been, shall and may be? neither does
the mind Divine grow or become of less value by the variety of so many
several and inferior things, as somefoolish Philosophers held; and we might
suspect the same also, if GOD procured or got any knowledge from things as we
do: but in regard that he sees all things in his own essence, there is no
danger of becoming of less value: although it be far more noble to procure
knowledge like men, then to be altogether without it like bruit beasts; even as
it is better to be blind as any living creature may be, then without blindness,
not to be apt for sight, like stones: neither are the other members of the body
more noble then the eyes, because they cannot be blind, but the eyes are of the
greater estimation, as having a faculty to see, though they may be blind, as
St. Augustine. Li. 12. c. 1. de civ. dei.


Therefore thou ought to be very careful what thou do, what thou
speak, what thou think at all times, and in every place; inasmuch, as
thou can neither do, speak, nor think any thing which GOD sees, hears nor
marks not: for if thou dare not do or speak any thing, if thou perceivest
that thou should be seen or heard of men, though thou have a great desire
thereto, how dare thou think those things thou should not, GOD looking on
thee, and being angry with thee? Grant (says St. Augustine) no man see Epl.
109.
thee, what will thou do in respect of that supreme spectator from whom
nothing can be hid? and St. Basil (speaking to a Virgin Li. de virg
shut up alone in her chamber) says, Have a reverend respect of thy Spouse
present every where, and of his Father, and of the Holy Ghost, as also of the
innumerable multitude of the Holy Angels, for there are none of these who see
not all things. How blessed and happy should thou be then, if thou would
ever conceive thy self to be in this Theater, even in the deep silence and
darkness of the night? how godly and pious a life would thou lead, how
diligently would thou avoid all levity and extravagances? And this is it,
whereupon GOD spoke to Abraham saying, Walk before me and be perfect, that is,
think that thou art always Genesis 17. 1.
seen by me, and thou shall be perfect without doubt.

Again, the longitude of the divine wisdom appears in 2.
the knowl^dge of things to come: for GOD sees so perspicuously, as that he
saw all things from eternity to the day of judgment, and so forward to
eternity, then which longitude nothing can be conceived more; whereupon it is,
that King David said, Thou know my Ps. 139. 1
thoughts long before: and in Esaias, the LORD foretold the Es. 45.
reign of Cyrus (by name) 200, years before it came to pass. To this may be
added, the prediction in Daniel of the four Dan. 2. 11
Monarchies, and of the wars of Alexander the great, and (to omit others)
Christ our Savior Luke 19. 41.
deplored the destruction of Jerusalem many years before it happened. I omit
innumerable predictions of the Prophets, whereof their Books are full. But for
those which are called Astrologers or Divines, who would seem to be like Gods
Apes, they are to be had in derision: for it cannot be, that they can truly
foretell of future things, but by chance. For seeing the will of GOD is above
all necessary, contingent and free causes, and governes them, and can at his
pleasure hinder inferior causes, it is impossible that any should foretell any
thing certainly, but they to whom GOD reveals his will, as he did oftimes to
his Prophets. And if we duly consider and weigh the opinion which formerly
some had of the Devils, whom for their Oracles they accounted Gods, we shall
find, that though they pretended to foretell the events of future things, they
did, nor said any thing really, and that their deities were as false as their
divinations: for they told nothing plainly, but either what they were to do
themselves, or else they related by the swiftness of their nature what was
done afar off, and that with such speed, that it seemed as yet, or then not
done, to those which were afar off from the place, in which it came to pass:
or else, what they conjectured by their long experience would happen or be; as
many times mariners do of the winds; husbandmen of rain; and physicians of
diseases: but concerning those things wherein the Devils were questioned, and
were ignorant; they would answer with such circuits and equivocations, that
when they were false, they retorted the error upon the wrong interpreters of
them.

It is GOD therefore only, of whose wisdom there is no end, and it is he
that delivers true Oracles, and foretells truly of all future things,
contingent and free.

The next point to be considered, 3.
is the altitude of the divine wisdom, which is so high, that it exceeds all
sublimity of humane or Angelical wisdom. The height of this wisdom is
known by the excellency. 1 Of the object. 2 Of the power. 3 Of the species or
form. 4 Of the Act.

1. The object of Gods wisdom is not only natural, but proportionate with
the divine essence, which is so sublime, that it is not proportionate to the
understanding either of men or Angels: and therefore the highest Angels
themselves cannot come to the fight of GOD, unless they be lifted up by the
light of glory; and this is the cause why GOD in holy Scriptures is called
invisible, To the 1 Timothy 1. 17.
King everlasting (says St. Paul) immortal, invisible GOD: and the same
Apostle, that he dwells in light which none can 1 Timothy 6. 16
attain to.

2. The power which is an accident in us, is a divine substance in GOD; and in
this respect far more sublime and higher then in us.

3. The species is so much the higher, by how many the more things it
represents: and in this regard, the Angels are reputed to have higher
knowledge, by having the more universal and fewer species. How great then is
the height of Gods wisdom, that has no other species or form then his
essence, which is but one, and only enough and sufficient to GOD, to represent
and make known himself, and all things created, or to be created, or which
may be created?

4. Lastly, that wisdom or knowledge is accounted the more noble and higher;
which knows most things by fewest acts. But GOD at one only sight, (which is
ever most strong in him, and remains unchangeable in him) perfectly knows
himself, and all other things; and therefore the wisdom of GOD is to be
accounted the most noble and sublime.

Lift up thine eyes then, and consider, how much thy knowledge differs from
that of thy Creators: for thou, (although by many acts, and by running this and
that way) can not attain to the knowledge of any one thing perfectly; but
thy Creator beholds and sees all things and himself most clearly, and
distinctly, by one act alone. And yet, thou thy self (now lying in darkness)
by the wings of Faith and Love, may if thou will ascend so high, that after
the laying aside of this mortal body, being translated from glory to glory,
thou may see GOD the light 2 Cor. 3. Ps. 36. 9.
in Gods light, and being made like to GOD may at one view see GOD in
eternity, in himself, and thy self, and all created things, together in GOD,
Dial. l. 4. c. 33.
for says St. Gregory, What shall not he see which shall see him that sees
all things? and what pleasure, glory and plenty will there be then, when being
admitted to that inaccessible light, thou shall be partaker of all thy Masters
joys. The Queen of Saba, when she had heard Salomons wisdom, and had seen
the wise and orderly disposing of the servants of his house, was astonished,
and cried out, Happy are thy 1 Reg. 10 8.
men, happy are these thy servants which stand ever before thee, and hear thy
wisdom: and what comparison was there between Solomon's wisdom and the
wisdom of GOD, who is only wise, and is wisdom it self? and what was the
order of the servants of Solomon, compared with the orders of Gods Angels, of
which, thousands of thousands minister to him? certainly, if thou would but
apprehend and taste these things but a little, thou would relish nothing, thou
would weigh nothing, and there is nothing that thou would not willingly
suffer, to deserve well of him.

In the mean time therefore, humble thy self under the mighty hand of GOD,
that he may 1 Pet. 5. 6
exalt thee in the day of visitation: humble thy understanding to faith, that
thou may be exalted to the vision of GOD: humble thy will to the obedience of
his Commandments, that thou may be exalted to the glorious liberty of the
Sons of GOD; To. 8. 21.
and humble thy flesh with patience, labors and fasting, that GOD may exalt it
(glorified) to everlasting rest.

It remains, that we consider the depth of Gods wisdom, 4
which seems chiefly to consist in searching the reins and hearts, that is,
in knowing the thoughts and concupiscences of men, especially in things to
come. Man 1 Samuel 16 7.
looks upon the outward appearance (says GOD himself) but the LORD
beholds the heart, Ps. 139. 1 2.
and David says, Thou (Lord) understandest my thoughts long before, thou art
about my paths, and spiest out all my ways: and the Genesis 6. 5.
LORD saw that all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only
evil continually: and I the LORD search the Ier. 17. 10.
hearts and reins, and When JESUS saw their thoughts; and But he knew their
thoughts; and Mat. 9. 4. Luke 6. 8 Mark 2. 8.
Why reason you thus in your hearts? says our Savior. And therefore all the
thoughts and desires of men, although present, are so deep, that neither
Angels, Devils or Men, can enter into them: but far deeper are their future
desires and thoughts: and into these, Men nor Angels, as they cannot search
into, so neither can they find out the way, whereby GOD only knows them. And
this David seems to intimate, when he says, Such knowledge Ps. 139. 5
is too wonderful for me; that is, thy knowledge is so wonderful, that I know
not how thou attainest to it: and this he means concerning Gods knowledge of
thoughts and desires to come, as may easily be gathered by that which he said
in the first verse of this Psalm.

It may be objected, that God foresees these thoughts in his eternity, to whom
all things are present; or in the predetermination of his will: and if it be
so, then this knowledge is not so admirable: for we also may easily know, what
we intend to do, or what is present to us. But the Scripture plainly says,
that GOD searches the hearts and reins, and sees there, what a man either
desires or thinks, or what he shall hereafter desire or think. And this is
admirable to understand, how GOD, by searching the reins and hearts, should
see, what as yet is not there, and which depends upon the liberty of man's will,
whether it shall be there or no. Therefore, as it is proper to the height of Gods
power to make something of nothing, and to call those things which are not,
as well as the things which are, so is it proper to the depth of his wisdom,
by searching the reins and hearts, to see that, which as yet is not there, as
if it were already, and which without doubt shall be.

But because (as I said before) this Treatise is not for dispute, but to stir
and lift up the soul to God; let this which has bin said, incite thee to
awaken thee, and to lift up thy self, above thy self, and to consider that
Lam. 3. 40.
deep abyss of the wisdom of God, who searches the hearts, and the inward
parts of them, seeing many things there, which the heart it self sees not. O
blessed Peter, when thou said to our Savior [Though I should dye Mat. 26. 35.
with thee, I will in no case deny thee,] surely thou spakest not with a
double, but a sincere and right heart: neither did thou see that frailty,
which God did foresee in thy heart; when he said before the cock crow thou
shall 34.
deny me thrice: for that skillful Physician did see that infirmity in thy
heart, which thou did not perceive, and that proved true, which the Physician
foretold, not what the patient bragged of. But withal, give thanks to thy
Physician, who as he foresaw and foretold thy disease, so he infused the most
powerful medicine of repentance into thy soul, which suddenly cured the
disease. Oh thou good, gracious and most wise and omnipotent Physician, Cleanse
me from my secret sins. Ps. 19. 12.
How many are there that I do not bewail, nor wash away with tears, because
I see them not? Let thy grace assist me, by which thou searchest the reins and
hearts, and those evil concupiscences and evil works which I see not; I
beseech thee, which see them, to show unto me, and looking upon me with the
eyes of compassion, produce and bring out of me a fountain of tears, that while
I have time I may wash them out, by bewailing them, and thou may utterly put
them out of thy remembrance, by pardoning them; and that even for the merits of
Jesus Christ my Savior.

DEGREE XIII. By the Consideration of the Practical or operating Wisdom of
GOD.
THis Wisdom has also four dimensions. Breadth in creating all things.
Length in preservation. Height in the work of Redemption, and Depth in
providence and predestination.

We will begin with the Creation, In wisdom GOD made 1.
all things says the Psalmist; and Ps. 104. 24. Ecclus. 1. 10.
He has powered her out upon all his works says the Son of Syrach. So, that
as by the Creation of all things of nothing, we may know the power of the
workman: so by the admirable skill which we see in every thing we may admire
the wisdom of the Creator: for He has disposed all things in measure, number
and Sap. 11. 20.
weight, says the wiseman: and this is the savor wherewith GOD has seasoned
all things, that by the same we might learn how savory and well seasoned the
wisdom it self is; how to be loved and desired. All things created then,
have a certain measure, a certain number, and a certain weight; as well that
they might be distinguished from GOD, who has neither measure, as being
immense; nor number, as being one and simple in respect of his essence; nor
weight, because his estimate and price is above all estimation: as also, that
they might be good and beautiful, as Moses said most truly, And GOD saw all
that he had made, and lo it was very good. I All Genesis 1. 31.
things therefore have that measure which is necessary to obtain the ends for
which they were created; nor can there be any thing added to, or taken from
them, but that they will become deformed or unprofitable, and in that respect
less good. GOD made every thing (says the Preacher) beautiful in his time;
and a little after, to it no man can add, and from it none can diminish.
Therefore Eccles. 3. 11. 14.
GOD gave a large and most ample measure to the heaven, because it might
comprehend all inferior things within its circuit. To the air he gave less
then to heaven, yet more then to the earth and waters, which make one globe,
and are contained and compassed round with the air. He has given a great
measure of body to an Elephant, that he might carry great burdens, even Towers
filled with men. To a Horse less, being made only to carry one rider. The
Birds he made little, that they might make their nests in Trees and boughs.
Bees and Ants he created least of all, that the one might hide themselves in
the holes of hives, and the other in the earth.

2. The same may be said of number. GOD created but one Sun; because one was
enough to enlighten the earth and the day with his splendour: and but one Moon,
because one was sufficient to give light in the night: The Stars he would
have to be many, because when the Sun and Moon gave no light (as in their
conjunction) they should dispell the darkness of the night. Nor did he only
assign a necessary number to things in common, but appointed the number of
parts to every thing in particular so, that nothing might be added or taken
from them. He gave to man two eyes, two ears, two hands, two feet, one nose,
one mouth, one heart, and one head, whereby he became a most (...) creature:
invert but the order, and give to any man, but one eye, and two noses, one ear
and two mouths, one foot and two hearts and heads; and no creature would seem
more ugly, more deformed. 3 Lastly concerning weight, GOD gave to every thing
such an estimation as its nature required. Besides, under the name of weight
and esteem, we understand qualities: which make things good and precious. And
these three make all things perfect. 1 A number of parts, which is necessary,
that none be wanting. 2 A measure or apt proportion of parts. 3 Lastly
internal or external qualities, as pleasantness of color in the outward
superficies of the body, and virtue within, profitable or necessary for
several actions.

But it is a marveilous thing to consider, what power GOD has imparted to some
small creatures, that it may seem, he had a desire to manifest his power in
great, and his wisdom in small things. Who can conceive the strength and
force of a grain of mustardseed? which being the least of all seeds, and so
little that a man can hardly discern it, and yet from it grows so great a
Tree that the birds make their nests in it, as Mat. 13. 32.
our Savior speaks in the Gospel. Nor is this only proper to mustardseed,
but common to all other seeds; within the virtue whereof roots, bodies, boughs,
leaves, flowers and fruits of great trees lie hidden. Certainly if we had not
learned this by experience, we could hardly be persuaded, that out of so little
a seed, so great a mass of several things could ever have risen. Who would
conceive that in so diminutive creatures as the Ant, Gnat, and Flea, and others
the like, were feet so nimble, and that they had head, heart, external and
internal senses; and (after their manner) wisdom and judgment, though very
unperfect? Lastly, who could think or imagine, that in them, and other little
creatures, there should be so great power to pierce into living flesh, that not
only they become troublesome to men, but that Elephants and Lions should be
terrified by Gnats and Flies?

Great therefore is the Lord, and great is his wisdom, as in the greatest, so
in the least of things. If that great Prince of Physicians Galen, though a
heathen (admiring the workmanship In lib. de partib us.
of GOD) brake out into the praise of the Creator, what ought thou to do o
Christian, who beleevest, that he not only created the bodies of men and other
animals, but the Heaven, Stars, Angels, and immortal minds of men by his
wonderful wisdom?

Now the length of this practical 2.
wisdom appears in the preservation of things, as the latitude in the
creation: and indeed, the great and admirable wisdom of GOD is plainly seen
in the preservation and continuance of things created, especially of those,
which are corruptible.

1. And truly, first, if a man would consider, in what manner GOD nourishes
and increases herbs, plants, animals endued with life, and the bodies of men
themselves, to preserve them as long as may be, it would so astonish him, that
he could not sufficiently admire Gods wisdom herein: for by earth and water
he nourishes herbs and plants, and causes nutriment to pass from the roots
to the bodies, from the bodies to the boughs, from thence to the leaves and
fruit, in a most admirable manner: so also, by herbs and fruit, and the flesh
of creatures, he nourishes other creatures, and men themselves, and causes
the aliment and nutriment to disperse into all the inward and outward parts of
the body, with such facility and sweetness, that it may seem incredible. GOD
deals herein, as a skillful and loving Physician, that so prepares and fits
his drugges, as that they may be taken not only easily, but willingly too. Our
meats are without doubt medicines, which unless they be often taken, we cannot
subsist. And our loving and wise Physician GOD, first of all gives a good taste
and relish to our meats, that we may take them with delight: then he has given
us great variety that we should not loath it: Lastly, by diverse alterations in
the mouth, stomach, liver and heart, he converts the meat into so subtle and
thin a juice, that without any pain it passes through all the veins and
pores of the body, and to all the parts of the flesh, bones and nerves, whether
we sleep or wake, and without sense of it.

Philosophers admired the skill and art of nature when they saw and beheld
these things: but what cunning or art can there be in things inanimate and void
of sense and reason? It is not then the skill of nature, but the wisdom of of
the Creator, who made nature, and found out the means to do these things,
that we ought to admire: You may hear Christ (the wisdom of GOD) speaking in
the Gospel, Mat. 6. 28
Learn how the Lilies of the field do grow, they are not wearied, neither
spin, and a little after, If GOD so clothe the grass of the field, etc. so
that 30.
it is not the skill of nature, but GOD that makes the Lillies grow, and are
so clothed as with garments; so also the Apostle speaks of the nourishment and
increase of living things, Neither is he that planteth 1 Cor. 3. 7.
any thing, nor he that waters, but GOD that gives the increase. And if the
wisdom of GOD after so admirable a manner feeds, nourishes and preserves
the life of plants and creatures; consider (if thou can) how he feeds the
minds of Angels and men in the eternal life? for in earth here, we are
nourished with earthly food, yet prepared by the divine wisdom: but in heaven
his wisdom is meat and drink to those who live for ever. O thou thrice
blessed, if thou could inwardly understand, what this of the Apostle means,
That GOD shall be all in all; that GOD the 1 Cor. 15 28.
chief and infinite good, should be food, raiment, and life, and all things to
all the Saints, thou would then Ioath all present and momentany things, and
only relish and seek after those things which are above. But to proceed.

2. This also is miraculous, that GOD in the preserving and continuing of man's
life has given a continual and long motion of the least things without
weariness. Men have labored much and taken great pains in making a clock,
in which, the wheels by the force of weights run without intermission 24.
hours: what may we then think that the wisdom of GOD does, which causes the
nutritive power, to work in plants and creatures, in a perpetual motion while
they live? and that the lungs and arteryes should be moved in Man without
intermission, sometimes 70. years or more? for of necessity they must move
till death: and therefore they being necessarily to move in some men 80. or 90.
years, yea 900. before the flood: he that admires not this, and sees not the
wisdom of GOD hereby, and worships him not for it, certainly wants the light
of reason and wisdom.

3. Again, though the wisdom of GOD could have brought forth and preserved
Herbs and Trees for the sustentation of all things, without the labor of men,
and other creatures; and without the help of the office of the Sun and other
secondary causes: yet would he use the office of those causes, and the labor
of men and other creatures, because they should not consume their time in
idleness, but that all things should exercise their several faculties and
powers. Besides, GOD also would have some men to be rich, others poor, that
every man might have occasion to live godly, and be tied together in the bond
of love: that the rich might exercise mercy and liberality, the poor, patience
and humility: the rich should need the poor man's labor in tilling the ground,
feeding his cattle, and exercising several Arts necessary for all: the poor
should want the richmans money, to buy them food, apparel, and other
necessaries for the sustentation of his life: and yet the poor has no cause
to complain against the wisdom of GOD; for he who knows and loves all
things and men, gives unto every one, that which he foresees most profitable
to obtain everlasting life; as Physicians prescribe fasting to some patients,
and to open a vein: to others they tolerate, yea command flesh and wine to
make them merry, and revive their spirits. And certainly, there are many poor
men, which in the state of poverty intend those things which are necessary for
their salvation, who if they had bin rich would have perished eternally: and
though rich men may be saved, if they studied to be rich in good works, and
willingly impart with that, which they received from God, to communicate, and
not to hoord up: yet it cannot be denied, but that the safest and plainest way
to eternal life is by poverty rather then by abundance. Our heavenly Master
does not deceive us, when he says Verily I say unto you, that a Mat. 19. 23.
Luke 6. 20. 24.
rich man can hardly enter into the Kingdom of heaven, and again, Blessed be
ye poor, for yours is the Kingdom of GOD, and W^e unto you rich, for you have
received your consolation, nor does the Apostle deceive us, when he says, They
that will be 1 Timothy 6 9.
rich, fall into tentations and snares, and into many foolish and noy some
lusts, which dr^wne men in perdition and destruction: and that which Christ and
the Apostles taught in word, they confirmed by example. Our Savior said of
himself, The foxes have holes, Luke 9. 58.
and the birds of heaven have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to lay
his head; and the Apostle of himself and his fellow 1 Cor. 4. 11.
Apostles says, Unto this hour, we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked,
and are buffetted, and have no certain dwelling place: and it is not to be
doubted, but that the wisdom of GOD, and of his Son and the Disciples of
wisdom, chose the most plain and safe way to life eternal.

But because the number of Eccles. 2.
fools is infinite, few there are, that willingly choose this way, and most
men decline it as much as they may.

4. The last thing considerable in the length of the divine wisdom is, that
as GOD is eternal himself, so has he endued every thing with a most lively
instinct of defending and preserving their own lives, as long as they can. We
see, that when men are in danger of death, how they bestirre themselves, and
spare neither cost nor labor to preserve their lives. We see beasts, to save
theirlives, how they fight beyond their strength, with beasts far stronger
then themselves: we see a burning candle, when it is near extinguishing and
almost spent, how it will raise it self twice or thrice, and send forth a
great flame, as it were to wrestle with that which would put it out: we see
sometimes drops of rain or water to hang from a penthouse or a stone, and
reduce themselves into an orb, and as long as they can, to keep themselves
from loosening and perishing by dropping down. We see heavy things ascend,
and light against nature to descend, least there should be a vacuum, and that
being disjoined from other things they cannot subsist. But more wonderful it
is, that GOD has endued parents with such vehement affection in the
propagating of the like, and defending their issue, that may seem almost
incredible. We see the hen (a weak and infirm creature) to fight most eagerly
against Kites, Dogs and Foxes to preserve her chickens: but what pains and
labor do women willingly endure in bearing and breeding their infants, is
obvious to every one. And the cause of all this is, the connsaile of the
wisdom of GOD, who to cherish this propagation as a shadow of eternity, has
imprinted this most vehement and ardent love in all creatures, bruit and wild,
toward their issue: for whereas there are many creatures, to whose destruction
all men give their minds, either for private pleasure and profit, as Hares,
Bores, Hearts, Quarles, Partridges, Phesants, and all kinds of Fish: or for the
common good, as wolves, Foxes, Serpents, and many other noisome creatures: it
had not been, but that long ago many species of creatures had been utterly
destroyed, if the wisdom of GOD had not provided for their preservation by
this affection.

Now, if there be naturally such an inbred love in all living creatures toward
this short and careful life: what love ought we to have to the life eternal?
O the blindness and foolishness of mankind I all things labor beyond their
strength for this most short life, being but a shadow of eternity; and Man
endued with reason, vouchsafes not to labor (I will not say beyond his
strength) but with all his power for the true eternity of a most happy life:
all things by a natural instinct abhor the temporary death, and avoid and
shun it above all evil: and Man, reasonable Man, instructed by divine Faith,
neither fears nor shunnes eternal death, at least, not so much as he uses
to shun and fear temporary evils. Truly therefore was it said, The number
of fools is infinite; and most truly said the Truth it self, The gate is
straight and the way narrow that leads unto life, and few Mat. 7. 14
there be that find it.

The altitude of height or Gods 3.
practical wisdom is seen in the work of Redemption, I was not satisfied
(says St. Augustine) with thy wonderful sweetness, 9. Conf. 6.
when I considered the height of thy Counsel for the salvation of mankind. And
truly it was a most high Counsel, by the ignominy of the Cross to repair
all the losses, which the craft of the Devil by the offense of the first Man,
brought to mankind, and so to repair them, that the work repaired was far
more fair, then when it began to need reparation. Four especial evils
sprang up by the sin of the first Man.

1. The injury to GOD by the pride and disobedience of Adam. 2. The punishment
of him and allmankinde, namely the privation of Gods grace, and everlasting
blessedness. 3. The sorrow of the Angels, who were much displeased at the
injury done to GOD, and the misery which befell to men. 4. The joy of the
Devil and all malignant spirits, who rejoiced, that man was overcome and
destroyed by him.
All these evils the wisdom of GOD by the mystery of the Cross converted
into greater good. O happy offense which deserved such and so great a Redeemer!
Certainly, if any by his skill and labor should so amend a garment which by
some mischance came to be rent and torn, that it become more neat and
precious, we would say, it was a happy rent, which gave occasion to such an
amendment and bettering.

The first Man, by the craft and envy of the Devil being lifted and puffed up
with pride, affected a likeness to GOD, and being disobedient to his maker,
fell from his first happiness, for robbing GOD (after a fort) of the honor
due unto him. But the second Adam CHRIST JESUS who is the wisdom of GOD,
humbled Phil. 2.
himself, and became obedient unto death, and restored more honor to GOD then
the first Adam by his pride and disobedience took away: for Adam was a pure
Man, and if he had obeyed GOD, he had obeyed him in a most easy matter. And
what had it been to have abstained from the fruit of one forbidden tree, when
there was abundance of excellent trees besides? and therefore the sin was the
more heinous, by how much the easilier the command might have been obeyed,
being a matter of no labor or difficulty. But CHRIST was GOD and Man, and
humbled himself to obey his Father, in a thing of all things the greatest and
most laborious and painful, in the death of the Cross, full of pain and
ignominy.

Again, if we consider the eminency of the person, and the depth of his
humility and obedience, nothing can be imagined greater or more meritorious, or
more honorable to GOD, then that humble obedience of CHRIST: wherefore most
truly said He in the Gospel, I have glorified thee upon earth: 10. 17 4.
for he truly glorified GOD his Father with an unspeakable glory in the sight
of the Angels and spirits of the holy Prophets and others, who could take
notice of it: and if the Angels at Christ's nativity, in respect of the humility
of the Cratch, did sing Glory to GOD on high, with much greater exultation Luke
2. 14.
and joy did they sing the same song for the humility or the Cross. So that,
whereas if man had not sinned, he had only attained to be equal with the
Angels: now mankind has obtained by the redemption which is in CHRIST JEsus;
that one man being exalted above all the Angels, sits at the right hand of GOD,
and is become head and Lord of Angels and men; for so St. Peter writes of
CHRIST, He is gone into heaven, to whom the 1 Pet. 3. 22.
Angels and Powers, and might are subject: and St. Paul, Wherefore also GOD
has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name: That at the
Phil. 2. 9. 10.
name of JESUS should every knee bow, both of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth: So that the Son glorified the Father by the
humility of his passion, after an unspeakable manner, and the Father glorified
the Son after an unutterable manner also, by exalting him to his right hand;
which glorification resulted upon all mankind in such a manner, that whosoever
shall not acknowledge this great benefit, and give GOD thanks for it, may
justly be called most unthankful.

And as the holy Angels were much grieved at the fall of the first man, as for
a heavy affliction befallen their younger brother: so also are they taken and
affected with much joy and delight for the plentiful redemption of him by
JESUS CHRIST: for if there be joy in heaven with the Angels for one Luke 15. 7.
sinner repenting, how great may we believe their joy to be, when they saw,
that the justice of GOD was fully satisfied for mankind, by CHRIST the man, and
that by the key of his Cross, the Kingdom of heaven was opened to all
believers? Nor is it to be thought, that the holy Angels did take it
grievously, that the man CHRIST was exalted by GOD above them: for they have
neither spite or ^nvy in them, but are replete with all ardent and true love;
and Love is not puffed up, 1 Cor. 13
grieveth not at the good of others, but sympathizeth and rejoices together,
congratulateth no less for it, then if it were its own: for the Angels
understand, that this was a most just act of Gods, who does nothing but most
justly and wisely; and they also have their will so unseparably proportionable
and agreeable to the will of GOD, and tied with such an indissoluble knot of
love, that whatsoever is pleasing to GOD, is most acceptable to them.

But the Devil who for a time rejoiced for his victory over the first Man, was
much more sorrowful for the conquest of CHRIST the man, then he was joyful
before. For by the victory of CHRIST it is come to pass, that not only men,
such as Adam was, but also children and women shall insult and triumph over the
Devil. It had not been a disgrace for him to have been overcome by Adam in
Paradise, when he wanted ignorance and infirmity, and was armed with original
righteousness, which so subjected the inferior parts to reason, that he
could not have rebelled, if his mind had not been rebellious to GOD before:
but now to be subdued by a mortal man, a pilgrim, obnoxious and subject to
ignorance and concupiscence, is a disgrace in the highest degree: and yet by
the grace of Christ he is many times so overcome, as that diverse erect
trophies of chastity, patience, humility and love, not withstanding his fiery
darts of t^ntations and persecutions.

And here we are again to admire the altitude of the divine wisdom even
beyond admiration. 1 Timothy 6.
For GOD, foresaw that the contempt of riches, pleasures and honor, and the
like (which are snares of the Devil, and lead men captive to utter perdition)
was necessary to withstand the tentations of the Devil. What course did then
GOD take, that these pleasures and the like might grow bitter to men, and
chastity, poverty, humility, patience and contempt of the world might seem
pleasant and delightful? Why surely this, he came down himself from heaven,
and having taken the shape of a servant, and by his example made this bitter
but (wholesome) medicine so pleasant and sweet, that many men had rather fast
then feast, be poor then rich, delight in virginity rather then marriage, and
in martyrdom then pleasure; to obey rather then to command; to be despised
then to be magnified; to be humble then to be exalted: for who is there, that
truly considers GOD in the shape of a man, full of wisdom and grace, and who
can neither deceive nor be deceived, to be poor, humble, patient, chaste, and
(which is more wonderful) for the redemption of mankind, to be nailed to the
Cross, and to dye voluntarily, having shed his most precious blood
plentifully, even out of a most ardent love, but will be encouraged to imitate
his example?

And this was a high invention of the wisdom of GOD, though to the wise of
the World, and to carnal men, enemies to the Cross of CHRIST, it seem to be
foolishnes. But let us gather honey out of the rock, and ^yle out of the
hardest st^ne; that is, Wisdom out of foolishnes, the wisdom of GOD from
the foolishnes of the Cross. Search and examine diligently, who that is, that
hangs on the Cross, and why he should so hang, and we shall find it to be
the same, which sits between the Cherubims, yea at the right Ps. 99. 1.
Heb. 1.
hand of GOD: and we shall also find, that he hung not on the Cross for his
own faults, nor his own infirmity, nor by the power of others, but
voluntarily, out of his earnest desire to satisfy Gods justice for the sins
of the whole world; for the honor and glory of his Father, and for the
eternal salvation of all the elect: and (as the Apostle speaks) that he
might make unto himself a most glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle.
Lastly, for the love of us; for he loved us, and has given Ephesians. 5. 2.
himself for us, to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
to GOD. And when we shall have found all these to be true (as they are most
true) let us lift up our selves in our greatest and most intimate love to so
great a benefactor, and in imitation of him, begin ardently to thirst after
Gods glory, the salvation of the Gentiles, but chiefly the Churches beauty and
honor, and our own eternal salvation; let us begin to have a hate to
iniquity, and to love purity of heart, to partake of the Cross of Christ, to
glory in tribulations and troubles, that after this life, we may be made
partakers of the resurrection of the just to glory, and not to everlasting
punishment with the wicked.

The depth or profunditie of 1.
the practical wisdom of GOD consists in his providence, predestination
and judgments. Thy Ps. 39. 6.
judgments are like the great deep says the Psalmist.

1. First, that the providence of GOD is admirable, is gathered out of this,
that he rules all things immediately, and leads them to their ends, He cares
for all alike says the wiseman, Sap. 6. 7.
that is, his care is over all, nothing excepted, so that a sparrow Mat. 10. 29.
falls not to the ground without his providence, as our Savior speaks. He
that could number the multitude of things in the whole universe, might in some
measure see the profundity of his wisdom, governing and directing all and
every thing. A King may govern many Provinces by a general, but not a
particular providence, as having many and several subjects, and therefore has
(as is fit) many subordinate Ministers under him. But GOD so takes care for
singular as all, and for all as singular; The 30.
hairs of our heads are numbered by him, and his porvidence watches over us,
so that none of them perish; The young ravens also forsaken by the dammes, are
not forsaken by GOD.

How securely then may we rest in the bosom of such a Father, even in the
midst of darkness? among the months of Lions and Dragons, among innumerable
legions of spirits: if we adhere to him in sincere love, holy fear, a hope not
wavering, and faith not doubting.

Neither does his providence only reach to every thing, and things present,
but stretches from one end to another mightily, and disposes of all things
sweetly; and he is therefore styled King everlasting, because he has appointed
the order of all 1 Timothy 1. 17.
ages, together with the succession of Kingdoms for ever, from eternity; and
nothing can happen to him either new, or not foreseen by him: and indeed the
thoughts of mortal men are fearful, and our forecasts Sap 9. 14.
are uncertain, as the wiseman speaks, because we can give none but
uncertain conjectures of things to come: but GOD knows all future things with
no less certainty, then if they were past or present, and disposed in his
mind before the beginning of the world, both the orders and successions of
things: and therefore in our liturgy we truly say, GOD whose providence is
never deceived.

But because the reason of Gods providence is most secret, and his judgments
deep, it comes to pass, that many seeing much mischife committed among men,
and unpunished, they run headlong into this opinion, that humane things are
either not governed by Gods providence, or at least that all evils are
committed by the will of GOD; both which opinions are impious: but the later
the worse, as St. Augustine writes, But they run headlong into these L. 1.
de Ord. c. 1.
errors, who see only part of Gods providence, and see not the other part: and
whereas they ought to expect the issue and end of things, which shall be
manifested to all in the day of judgment, they are so bold, as rashly to
judge, and by that means fall into most grievous errors. And therefore the
Apostle cries out, Judge not before 1 Cor. 4. 5.
the time, until the LORD come, that will enlighten things that are hid in
darkness, and will make the counsels of the heart manifest. S. Augustine
illustrates this point by a similitude; If (says he) a man in a checkred
pavement shall see only one piece of it wrought, and (not knowing what the
form of it shall be) will dispraise the workman, because he only sees a
piece of it, and not the greatest part: whereas if he saw it finished he would
commend the work and the artificer, it would seem prepostrous: so many seeing
the wicked to flourish, and the just depressed and afflicted, and consider nor
know not what GOD reserves for the iniquity of the ungodly, or the patience of
the good, and thereupon break out into blasphemous speeches either with those
in Job, He Job 22. 14.
walks in the circle of heaven, and considers not our matters: or with them
in Malachie, Every one that does evil, is good Mal. 2. 17
in the sight of the LORD, and he delights in them. Another similitude in
this case, St. Augustine also uses, If a man either in the beginning or the
middle of a verse shall say that it is not good, he will be accounted a fool;
for he should tarry till all the fillables and feet of it be pronounced, before
he dispraise it: so they are very fools who dare to find fault with the
orderly providence of GOD, before the whole order of it be run out.

Wherefore if thou be wise, endeavor as much as thou can, that evil be not
committed, for this GOD commands thee: but leave to his judgment why he
permits evil; his judgment may be secret, it cannot be unjust.

2. But although the reason of the providence of GOD in governing humane things
be a deep abyss, yet the reason of eternal predestination and reprobation is
deeper by far. For why GOD should load many wicked men with temporal goods,
and suffer their sins to go unpunished in this life: and on the other side,
why he should suffer many innocents to be in want, and be unjustly vexed,
scourged and slain, we cannot find the cause in particulars or singulars: yet
in the general or universal we may probably assign some cause. For GOD
oftentimes makes the wicked abound with temporal goods, to reward some of
their moral works, not intended to give them life eternal: or to allure them
to rep^ntance, and to bring them to desire and hope for eternal benefits: and
sometimes punishes not their sins in this life, because he will sufficiently
punish them in hell: and suffers godly men to live in poverty, ignominy, and
diverse afflictions, as well to purge their lighter sins, in this world, as to
crown their goodworkes the more gloriously hereafter. But why GOD loved Mal.
1. 2. 3.
Jacob. and hated Esau before they had done either good or evil, who will
search after the reason? And this it was at which the Apostle wondered, that,
being twins, the sons of one Father and Mother, GOD should love the one by
predestination, To. 9. 11.
and hate the other by reprobation. And least any man should object, that GOD
foresaw the goodworkes of the one, and the evil of the other, the Apostle by
way of prevention says, that this was done, that the purpose of GOD might
remain according to election, and alleges or quoteth the words of GOD by
Moses, I will have mercy on Exo. 33. 19.
whom I will have mercy, etc.

3. Who also would not be astonished to consider, that Judas the traitor should
persevere so long in good works, and in the end of his life to fall and
perish: and that the thief, who all the time of his life should continue in
evil works, and in the end of his life to be converted, and flee from the
Cross into Paradise? But thou will say, Judas betrayed Christ, and the thief
confessed him. This is true, but could not Christ have looked upon Judas, as he
did upon Peter? and could he not infused that effectual grace into Judas,
which can be rejected by no hard heart? and could not Christ have given faith
and repentance to both the thieves, as to one, or have suffered both of them to
have died in their sins, as he did one of them? and who can give a reason why
GOD translated some, least wickedness should alter their understanding, as is
Sap. 4. 9.
said of Henoch; and not others, but suffers them to become evil of good men,
and to finish their days in wickedness. What shall we say of whole Countries,
whereof some are sooner, some later called to that faith, without which, none
can be saved? He that has not believed is already judged, says the Apostle;
and again, Whosoever To. 10* 13 14.
calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved: But how shall they call on him
in whom they have not beleeeved, etc? These are Gods highest secrets and most
deep, which he has placed in the abyss of his wisdom, which the Apostle
admires, but opens not, when he cries out, O the To. ii. 33.
depth both of the wisdom and knowledge of GOD how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his wayespast finding out! Who knew the mind of the LORD, or
To. 11. 34.
who was his counsailor? This only we may kn^w, that there is no iniquity with
GOD, and that in the last day there will be none but must confess and say,
Just art thou o LORD, Ps. 145. 17.
and just are thy judgments; and this use we may make of this secret, that no
wicked man despair, nor any good man presume of his salvation: and that good
men distrust not of any man's conversion, let them pray for all, and be
sollicitous of their salvation: and on the other side, let none though good and
holy, grow insolent, considering no man knows what to morrow may produce: but
let every man work^ his own salvation infeare and trembling. Phil. 2. 12


Now all these things considered, strive by good works to make thy vocation
and election 2 Pet. 1. 10.
sure, says St. Peter: and what these works are the Apostle St. John tells
us, Little children, 1 Io. 3. 18.
let us not love in word, neither in tongue only, but in deed and truth. It is
love, without which no man is saved, and with which, no man is condemned; and
love is showed by works: when any man, neither out of hope of temporal
retribution, or out of extraordinary and inordinate affection to the creature,
but in hearty and pure love to GOD and his neighbor, either gives alms
liberally to the poor, or forgives injuries to his enemies: and that not only
for a time, but he which endures to the end Mat. 10. 22.
shall be saved. Therefore the Apostle says, Give diligence, that is, be
earnest, anxious and sollicitous in the business or work of
eternallsalvation. And truly, if there be any probable argument of Gods
election, this is it, when a man being more sollicit^^s of his salvation then
of any other thing, cease not to pray to GOD for the gifts of true
repentance, true humility, perfect love and charity, and perseverance to the
end: and not only satisfied with prayer, but strives to seek the Kingdom of
heaven and the righteousness Mat. 6. 33.
thereof, and to find^ it with all his force and strength.

DEGREE XIIII. By the Consideration of the Mercy of GOD.
THe spirit of GOD in holy Scripture does wonderfully excel this mercy of His,
insomuch as he preferres it before all the rest of His works, for so says the
Psalmist, The LORD is loving unto every Ps. 145. 9.
man, and his Mercy is over all his works. We shall easily see the magnitude of
this divine attribute, if we diligently consider it, according to the 4. former
dimensions.

The latitude of Gods mercy 1.
consists in this, that GOD, and GOD alone can deliver us out of all our
miseries, and this he does, not for any benefit to himself, but out of the
love which he has and bears to all things created. It is true, that created
things can take away some miseries, as bread, hunger; drink, thirst; clothes,
nakedness, and knowledge, ignorance, and so of the rest: but no creature can
take away all miseries: besides there are some miseries, which are so much the
more grievous, by how much the more hidden and inward: and none can give ease
or remedy to these, but GOD only: such are the snares of the Devils, who are
many, most subtle, powerful, and ill affected to us: such also are the errors
and blindness of the mind, and of an erroneous conscience, which we see not
in our selves; so that oftimes we seem to be very well, touching the inward
man, when as indeed we are in a miserable plight and dangerous: and who can
deliver us from these maladies, but only the Almighty Physician? And therefore
when GOD heales us of these infirmities, and we have no feeling of the cure, we
never return him thanks, and so it may truly be said of us, that GOD is good
to the unthankful Luke 6. 35.
and evil: for we scarce know the least part of Gods benefits, neither give
him thanks for them with that devotion and humility we ought.

Again, created things not only take not away all miseries, but some few: and
those they take not away from all men, but from a few. It is GOD only that can
deliver all men from all miseries; and although he do not take all from all
men, yet there is no man, who participates not of some mercy of God, for as
King David says, The earth is full of the goodness of Ps. 35. 5.
the LORD; and as our Church in the Liturgy says, O GOD whose nature and
property is ever to have mercy, because it belongs to him to take away misery,
who wants misery, and to him only it appertains to free all men from all
misery, that only is free himself from all misery; and who is he, but only
GOD, who is pure act, and the chief good, and from whose essence proceeds all
blessedness.

O that thou could but attain by thy thoughts what a life is that of GOD thy
Father, which is elevated above all misery, and is pure and altogether
happiness it self; how would thou desire to be lodged in his breast, that it
might be said of thee, There shall no evil happen Ps. 91 10.
unto thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling.

But thou will say, If GOD can take away all miseries from all men, why does he
not so, being a Father of mercies, that is a most merciful Father? 2 Cor. 13
whence comes it, that so many miseries abound in mankind under the government
of a Father of mercies? why is it rather said, The earth is full of the mercy
of the LORD, then the earth is full of misery? It is true, that GOD can take
away these and all miseries, but he only removes those, which his wisdom
thinks fit to be taken away. And the wisdom of GOD thinks it not
expedient for men themselves, to take them all away, and that it is sometimes
mercy, not to remove misery, that a place may be prepared for greater mercy.

The Apostle prayed three 2 Cor 12. 8.
times to have the prieke of the flesh taken from him, but was not heard,
because Gods power might be shown in weakness. GOD took not away from
Lazarus Luke 16.
the misery of poverty and sores, that with the greater mercy he might be
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom: and where would there need the
work of mercy from the rich, if there were not poor, hungry, thirsty, naked,
sick, pilgrims and prisoners, upon whom they should be exercised? and if
there were no tentations of the Devil, where should be the reward for them
which withstand them? if labors and sorrows were not, where would be the
crown of patience? and if no persecutors, what would become of the crown of
Martyrdom? and therefore in this pilgrimage, both of these sayings may be true,
that the Earth is full of miseries, because even sins themselves are
miseries, and great ones; and the earth is full of the Mercy of the LORD,
because conversion of sinners, and many almost infinite spiritual and
temporal blessings of GOD, what are they, but continual and great mercies of
the LORD our Creator?

Let us then give thanks to our good GOD, for his mercies, in that, as our
tribulations increase in this our pilgrimage, so our comfort increases by his
mercy to us; Thy mercy reaches Ps. 36. 5.
to the heavens, says the Psalmist to GOD, because there shall be mercy
without misery; and because mercy shall take away all misery altogether.

Now the longitude or length 2.
of Gods mercy, is his long suffering or patience, which the Scripture uses to
join with mercy, as a part or species of it, for so speaks the Psalmist, The
LORD is full of compassion Ps. 103. 8. 145. 8.
and mercy, long suffering and of great goodness.

And indeed the long suffering or patience of our most merciful LORD is very
admirable, such as we cannot find either in masters toward their servants, or
in parents toward their children, though both sorts of them be men.

1. And first, GOD is long suffering toward sinners, expecting them with
incredible patience, sometimes from their childhood to the extremity of old
age, bearing the breaking of his Law, and the tearing of his name; and in the
mean time doing them good from heaven, giving them rain and fruitful Act.
14. 17.
seasons; replenishing them with food, and their hearts with gladness, as the
Apostle speaks. And where will you find among men, either a master, or a
parent so gentle and facile, who if he perceive himself to be slighted or
abused by his servant or son, and that they persevere long in this obstinacy,
at the last do not turn them out of dor^s? But the mercy of the LORD is not
overcome by the wickedness of men, but it deals patiently with them, not
desiring that any should perish, but all men to come to repentance* 2 Pet. 3. 9
and even making as though he saw not their sins because they Sap. 11. 23
should amend.

2. Again, his patience is seen more, in that many sinners by his grace are
drawn out of the lake of misery, and the mire of dregs, and of children of
darkness are made sons of light, and from the guilt of eternal death, to the
adoption of the sons of GOD, and called to the hope of the Kingdom of heaven:
and though they relapse often to their former filthiness and ingratitude, yet
are they not forsaken by the long suffering of GOD, but are lovingly expected
and invited to repentance: and if they shall heartily repent at any time, they
are received to a kiss of peace and atonement, and restored to former favor,
as the prodigallson was of a most merciful Father. It was not without cause,
that St. Peter (demanding of our Savior how often he should forgive his
brother sinning against him) was thus answered by him, I say not unto thee,
unto Mat. 18. 22.
seven times, but unto 70. times seven times, for he would have us do the
same, which he himself does in pardoning sinners. And he has set no bounds to
his reconciliation, but only the end of our life; for as long as we live, if
it be to 100. years or upward, yet we are received at any time before death
by a most loving Father, if (after many relapses) we seriously repent: there is
no repentance comes too late (if it be serious, and from a heart truly
contrite and humble) to receive mercy from GOD. But yet no man ought therefore
to abuse the lenity and goodness of GOD, and de^erre his repentance from day
to day, seeing no man knows* what hour or day the soul will leave the body,
and appear before the Tribunal of a most lust ludge: but rather all men
should be invited and allured to repentance, by this so great and incredible
goodness of GOD: For if GOD be so gracious toward sinners (often relapsing)
how great will his favor be to those, who after they have once tasted of it,
can never be drawn to be separated from it, notwithstanding any tentations
beating against them?

3. There is also another admirable patience and long suffering of GOD, which
he uses in tollerating the offenses of godly men: for GOD of his goodness
has made us of enemies, his friends, sons of servants, and heirs of his
Kingdom, being guilty of eternal death: and yet such is our ingratitude, that
we daily render evil for good: for if the Apostle said, In many things we
offend Ia. 3. 2.
all, what may we say? who stand in so far a distance from the Apostles
perfection? for we talk with GOD in our prayers, and presently we are
distracted by our imagination with other thoughts, and as it were turn our
backs to GOD: What Master would suffer his servants standing before him, and
speaking to him, to turn to his fellow servants, as it were in contempt of
him, and to talk with them? What shall I say of idle words? of vain thoughts?
of unfruitful works? of excess in diet, sleep, apparel and play? of our
negligence and loose carriage in our holy service to GOD? of our omission of
brotherly correction? and of innumerable other offenses wherein we daily
offend; and yet our GOD is good and gracious, and of great mercy Ps. 86. 5.
to all them that call upon him; he bears with this rudeness and incivility,
and (as I may so speak) this foolishness of his children, which certainly
men would not endure at the hands of men, for he knows whereof we are made,
and deals 103. 14.
with us, as a mother with her little child, whom she cherishes and
nourishes though perhaps it strike her. Yet though GOD bear with many of our
offenses here, because they do not so break the bonds of his love, as to
deprive us of the right of our inheritance: yet they shall not go unpunished
in the day of judgment, when we shall give an Mat. 12. 36.
account of every idle word, unless we shall in the mean time wash them away
by tears of repentance. But to end this point, GOD is merciful and long
suffering, he will not always Ps. 103. 9.
be chiding, neither keeps his anger for ever.

The height or altitude of Gods mercy comes next in order 3.
to be spoken of, which is taken from the cause moving him to be merciful,
which certainly is most high, and exalted above the heavens, according to that
in the Psalm, His mercy reaches Ps. 36. 5. 89. 2.
to the heavens; and Mercy shall be set up for ever, thy truth shall thou
establish in the heavens, which mercy of his differs from that of men, in
diverse respects.

1 Some men are merciful to other, because they stand in need of their help,
and this is the lowest Degree of mercy, because it reflects upon their own
profit and commodity, as to our Dogs, Horses, and other cattle.

2. Others are pitiful for co^sanguinity or friendship, because they are our
children, brethren, friends or familiars, to whom we extend our mercy: and this
is a Degree a little higher, and begins to have some reason or resemblance of
virtue.

3. Lastly, others are merciful, because they are their neighbors, and (in
that respect) men, created by the same GOD out of the same mould: and therefore
they make no difference whether they be friends or enemies, good or bad,
kindred or strangers: but pity all alike, whom they know to be created after
the image of GOD; and this is the highest Degree that mortals can reach unto.
But GOD has pity upon all things, because they are his creatures, and
especially upon men, because they are his images, and more specially yet, upon
good men, because they are his children, heirs of his Kingdom, and coheires
with his only begotten Son.

But if thou will demand, why GOD created the World? why he made man after his
own image? why he has justified the wicked, and made them heirs of his
Kingdom? nothing at all can be answered, but because he would; and if thou
ask why he would? nothing can be said, but because he is good: for goodness
diffuseth and communicates it self willingly. In heaven has he established
his mercy, and from Ps. 89.
his highest habitation, (from the heart of the Father) has it descended and
filled the earth, The earth is full of the mercy of the LORD, says the
Psalmist. Ps. 33. 5.
Therefore as he found matter enough in us to deserve punishment, so he found
enough in himself to have mercy upon us.

Lift up thy self then, and with the eyes of thy mind in that high fountain
of mercy, behold that purity, mixed with no intention of his own profit; and
when thou hear the Schoolmaster of all men persuading and saying, Be
merciful Luke 6. 36.
as your heavenly Father is merciful, strive as much as thou can, to have
not only compassion upon thy fellowservants, but be merciful to them with
that pure affection, which our heavenly Father pitties us. If thou remit an
injury to a detractor, or malicious accuser, do it heartily, committing the
offense to perpetual oblivion; for our Father forgets our offenses says
Ezechiel, and Look how wide the East is from the Eze. 18.
West, so far has he set our sins from us (says David) least they should
do us harm Ps. 103. 12.
any longer. If thou give alms to a poor man, understand that thou do
rather take then give, because he that gives to the poor lends upon Prove.
19. 17.
usury to the LORD, as Solomon says, and therefore give it humbly, and
reverently, not as an alms to a poor man, but as a present to a Prince. If
thou suffer any ill, to profit thy necessitous neighbor, consider how far
short thou come of thy Lord, who gave his life and blood to do thee good. So
it shall come to pass, that without hope of earthly reward, or any itch of
vain glory, and out of the pure and only love of GOD and thy neighbor, thou
shall be a good proficient in the School of mercy.

In the last place, the depth of 4.
Gods mercy comes to be considered, and as the height of it shines chiefly in
the cause, so the depth seems to be sought in the effects.

Therefore, that mercy which descends only to words, has little depth in it,
but may rather be called superficial: and that mercy is to be reputed more
deep, which relieveth and refreshes those which are in misery, not only with
comfortable words, but real deeds and benefits: and that the most deep of all
other, which helps those which are miserable, not only by speaking and
giving, but in suffering and coassisting in labors and sorrows. Now our GOD,
of whose mercy is neither number nor end, is by all these ways merciful to us.

1. For first, he has sent comfortable letters, (his holy Scriptures) to us
as it is said in the Book of the Maccabees, we have the holy books in 1 Mac.
12 9.
our hands for our comfort. And not only does GOD speak to us, and promise us
aid and protection by his letters, but by the sermons of preachers, who are
ambassadors to us for CHRIST in this pilgrimage. 2 Cor. 5. 20.
I will hearken (says David) what the LORD GOD will say concerning me, for he
shall speak peace unto his people, and Ps. 85. 8.
to his Saints, that they turn not again.

2. Again, the benefits we receive by Gods mercy in cu^ing our manifold
miseries as well temporal as spiritual are so many, as that they cannot be
numbered: for every where he crowns us with mercy and loving kindness, that
is, he compasses 103. 4.
us on every side, with the benefits of his mercy.

3. Thirdly, his mercy descended by the mystery of the Incarnation, to labors,
sorrow, hunger, thirst, ignominy, repr^^ches, stripes and wounds, to the
cross and death, to redeem us from all iniquity, and from everlasting death,
due to sin. C^n there be any abyss more (...) to which the mercy of God
could descend? yes, there is, for he did not this out of due debt, but of mere
grace: He Es. 53.
was offered because he would, says Esaias; for who compelled the Son of GOD
(who Phi. 2. 6. 7
thought it no robbery to be equal with GOD) to take on him the form of a
servant, to make himself poor for us, that ^ Cor. 8. 9.
we through his poverty might be made rich: and to humble himself Phil. 2. 8.
to death, even the death of the Cross, to quicken and exalt us? certainly it
was only his love that forced him, his only mercy compelled him. And yet
there is another thing more deep, a deeper degree: for in this work of our
salvation, he would have us communicate and participate in his glory and
honor. The Angels song seemed to be a fit division, Glory to GOD in the
highest, and peace in earth, the honor to GOD, the profit to men: but the
mercy of GOD would have all the profit to be ours, and the honor part his,
part ours.

4 Lastly, the mercy of GOD is most profound and deep toward men, especially
good men and fearing GOD, in regard that this mercy exceeds the affection of
Father or Mother, then which, upon earth we find none greater: Can a woman
forget her child (says the Prophet Esaias) and not have Es. 49. 15
compassion on the Son of her womb? though she should forget, yet will I not
forget thee, And the Psalmist, Like as a Father pittieth his own children, Ps.
103. 13.
even so is the LORD merciful to them that fear him. And least any should
say, that there may be parents found, whose love is sometime changed into
hatred, The merciful goodness 17.
of the LORD endures for ever and ever, upon them that fear him: and for the
continuance of this his mercy, the Apostle makes us secure, when he calls GOD
The Father of 2 Cor 13
mercies and GOD of all consolation: and therefore he is not only a Father of
them that fear him, but a most merciful Father, and most ready to comfort his
children: for he takes away and eases them of the miseries of their
afflictions and tribulations, which he judges fit to deliver them from, and
in that respect shows himself a Father of mercies: and in those miseries
which he thinks not expedient for them, to be taken away, he endueth them
with unspeakeable comfort, whereby they may bear them with ease: and in that
regard, he declares himself to be a GOD of all consolation. Now the Apostle
calls him the GOD of all consolation for two causes.

1. Because GOD knows how to comfort his in every kind of tribulation, which
certainly the world cannot do, because it oftimes understands not the cause
of the affliction: and therefore it was, that Job Job 16. 2.
called his friends miserable comforters, because they knew not the cause of
his disease, and misapplyed the cure. Or else sometimes the tribulation is so
great, that no humane comfort can assuage it: but GOD is a most wise and
omnipotent Physician, he can cure any disease; and therefore the Apostle
says, that he comfort 2 Cor. 1. 3
us in all our tribulation

2. Secondly, GOD is called GOD of all Consolation, because he knows how to
comfort us so plentifully, that it is better to suffer tribulation with such
comfort, then to want both: as in the case of Martyrdom. Therefore no mervaile
if the Apostle said I am filled with comfort, and am exceeding 2 Cor. 7. 4.
joyous in all our tribulation: and again, Which comfort us in all our
tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them 1. 4.
which are in affliction.

And what think thou of this so large, deep, daily, pure and immense mercy
of GOD, who needs none of our goods, and yet out of the abundance of his love,
is so sollicitous of his poor servants, as if all his good depended on them?
What thanks therefore will thou return to him? what can thou ever do, to
avoid the stain of ingratitude for such mercy? at the least endeavor as much
as thou can to please him. And because it is written, Be merciful as your
heavenly Father is merciful, and Luke 6. 36. Ecclus. 30. 23.
Love thine own soul: begin first carefully to find out the miseries of
thine own soul; for the miseries of the body are obvious enough, and there is
no need to admonish a man to pity his body: for if it want meat or drink
but one day, or sleep but one night, or by chance receive a wound, presently
we bewail the case of it, and seek remedy for it. But the soul may fast
whole weeks without food, or lie languishing with infirmities, or peradventure
lie dead, and no body looks after it, no body has compassion of it. Therefore
visit thy soul often, examine the several powers of it, whether they be well
or not, whether they profit in the knowledge and love of the true good: or on
the other side, whether it be ill affected with ignorance, or languish with
concupiscences of diverse kinds; whether the mind be blinded with malice, or
the will corrupted with the disease of hate or pride: and if thou find thy
soul in this evillstate, call unto GOD and say, Have mercy upon me o LORD, for
I am weak. Seek spiritual Physicians, Ps. 6. 2.
and use remedies in time. Then pity other poor souls, where of a number
perish, and yet CHRIST died for them. O if thou did but know and well weigh
the price of souls, that is, the precious blood of the Son of GOD; and withal
the exceeding great slaughter of them by the infernal wolves, and roaring
Lions, the Devils: certainly thou could not choose but with all thy heart
take compassion on them: and labor as well by prayer to GOD, as by all other
means to obtain their deliverance. Lastly, have compassion also upon the
corporal necessities of thy neighbor, and that not in word only, but in
works and truth, remembering always, that Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy. Mat. 5. 7.


DEGREE XV. By the Consideration of GODS Justice, compared with a Corporal
magnitude.
THe Justice of GOD in holy Scriptures is taken four ways.

1. For Universal Justice or Righteousness, which contains all virtues, and is
the same with sanctity or goodness, The Lord i^ righteous i^ all his ways,
and Ps. 145. 17.
holy in all his works.

2. Secondly, it is taken for Truth or faithfullnes, as in another Psalm, That
thou may be justified 51. 4.
in all thy sayings.

3. Thirdly, for d^stributive Justice, Justice in rewards, according to that of
St. Paul, A 2 Timothy 4. 8.
Crown of righteousness is laid up for me, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day.

4. For revenging Justice. Justice punishing offenses; as it is in another
Psalm, Upon the ungodly Ps. 11. 7.
he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, this shall be
their portion to drink.

The greatness therefore of this divine Justice will appear the better, if we
consider the latitude of universal Justice: the length of it, that is, his
truth and faithfulness; the height of it, in Gods distributing rewards in
heaven: the depth of it, in scourging the wicked with eterna^l punishments in
hell.

To begin with the latitude. 1.
That is said to be universal Justice or Righteousness in men, which
disposes a man to carry himself in all his dealings, according to all Laws:
and by that, has in him all virtues, as well theological as moral. But there
is one virtue above the rest, which contains all other virtues, and commands
and rules the acts of them, directing them to the last end, and this is called
love; which virtue, although in it self it be but particular, and but one of
the Theological virtues, yet it may be truly called universal, for it
disposes a man to behave himself well, both to God and toward his neighbor,
and thereby fulfilleth the whole Law; for so speaks the Apostle, Love does
not evil to his neighbor: To. 13. 10.
therefore is Love the fullfilling of the Law: and he that 8.
loves another, has fulfilled the Law. And therefore St. Angustine De na. et
gr^. 6* 70.
says, Love begun, is Righteousness begun: Love increased, is Righteousness
increased. Great Love is great Righteousness: perfect Love is perfect
Righteousness. Now in GOD are all virtues which presuppose no imperfection: and
instead of those which presuppose imperfection, there is some what far better
and more excellent: where by it is, that no goodness is wanting to him, but
rather ^o great and infinite goodness and holiness, as that he may be justly
styled, only good, only holy. And therefore it cannot be said that there is
faith in GOD (a ^heologicall virtue) Heb. 11. 1.
because (...) is the evidence of things which are not seen: but GOD sees all
things: neither may Hope be said to be in GOD, for hope is an expectation of
things to come, and that which is seen is not hope: but GOD expects To. 8. 24.
nothing, because he enjoys all things from eternity. Repentance for sin is
not in God, because God cannot sin. Humility is not in God, because this
virtue keeps a man back, least he vainly ascend above himself, and causes
him to keep his own station: but God has nothing above himself to ascend
unto, being the most high. But most ample love, and almost infinite and immense
is in God, for he loves himself with infinite love, because he only
perfectly knows infinite goodness, which is his own essence: he also loves
all his creatures, Thou love all things which are, and hate nothing that
Sap. 11, 24.
thou have made, says the Wiseman: for God knows by his wisdom to sever
evil from good, that is, defect from nature, even in Devils, and the worst of
men: and nature he loves, because he made it, defect he hates, because he
made it not. Lastly, love is so true in God, as that he would be called by that
name; God is love says St. John. But our love compared 1 10. 4. 16.
with his, is most straight and little. There are very many things which we
love not, because we know them not: many of those things also which we know, we
love not, because we easily discern not good from evil in them: and we love
not many good things well, and in that regard with true love, because we are
evil our selves, and rather lean to concupiscence, then to love. And we love
God but with an unperfect love; not only because we love him not so much as
his goodness deserves (to which measure or perfection of love, the Angels
themselves attain not) but also because we love him less then we should, and
less also then we might, if we would give our selves more carefully and
diligently to prayer and meditation. This verture of love is accompanied in GOD
with many other virtues, as with singular magnificence, liberality overflowing,
goodness, humanity, patience, long suffering, more then fatherly gentleness,
truth and faithfulness never failing, mercy filling heaven and earth, most
upright justice and impartial: lastly, most pure holiness, and so clear, that
the Stars are not clean in his sight, and the Cherubims Job 25. 5.
astonished at it, cry Holy, holy, Esa. 6. 3.
holy, Lord God of Sabbath.

Oh that thou would consider this seriously, with what fear and trembling
would thou perform thy prayers and praises to him? But to proceed to the
rest.

The longitude of the divine Justice consists in truth and 2.
faithfulness. Of his faithfulness we read in diverse places of Scriptures, Thy
faithfulness reaches Ps. 36. 5.
to the clouds says the Psalmist, and Faithfulness is the girdle of his reins,
says the Prophet Esaias. Great is thy faithfulness Es. 11. 5. La. 3. 23. 1 Cor. 1
9. 10. 13. 2 The. 3. 3 2 Timothy 2. 13. Heb. 10. 23. 110. 1. 9. Ps. 145. 17.
says Jeremy God is faithful says the Apostle in diverse places: He abide
the faithful, and He is faithful that promised. He is faithful and just
says St. John, and King David, God is righteous or faithful in all his ways:
that is, the promises of God pronounced by the mouths of his Prophets many
ages since, never shall, never were void, or of no effect, but are more sure
and stable then heaven and earth, for so says our Savior, Heaven and Earth
shall pass* Luke 21. 33.
but my words shall not pass: and It is more easy that Heaven and Earth
should pass away, then tha^ 16. 17.
one title of the Law should fall away; where our Savior understands by the
Law, the truth not only of his commandments but of his promises; for
whatsoever God has commanded, are either to be kept, or those to be punished
that break them: and what he has promised, are established with everlasting
stability: The word of our God shall stand for ever says the Prophet Esaias 40.
8. To. 3. 4. Heb. 6. 18.
Esaias; and the Apostle, God is true and every man a liar, and again, It is
impossible for God to lie; the reason of which speech is, because he can
neither be deceived, being wisdom, nor deceive being goodness, nor fail,
being omnipotence. But Men, although wise, good and mighty, may be deceived,
and deceive: because they neither know all things, nor can perform all things
which they can; for though they be good when they promise, a while after, they
may become evil, and not willing to perform their promises.

Wherefore if thou be wise, put thy confidence in God alone, cleave only to
him, and cast all thy care on him alone; Walk Mic. 6. 8.
humbly and carefully with God, and he will be careful of thee; take heed that
thou offend not his justice, and his mercy will ever protect thee, neither
shall thou need to fear what the Devil or man can do against thee.

The altitude or height of 3.
Gods Justice is seen in the retribution of the heavenly reward, which he as
supreme Judge has prepared for those which live well and godly; and we shall
soon know what the height of this Justice is. 1 If we compare the Judge God,
with men Judges. 2 If we compare reward with reward, that is, the reward which
God gives, with that which men usually give.

1. Men Judges, and Princes too, have many lets or hindera^ces from fully
rewarding those which serve them: For first either they cannot, for want of
sufficient means to reward every ones deserts: 2. Or either they know not the
merits of their followers, or cannot justly value them: 3. Or out of the
wickedness and covetousness of mind, or some other perverse affection, they
will not duly reward them which deserve: 4. or lastly, either they which
should give, or they which should receive their rewards, are prevented by death
from giving or taking: But God gives to all good men, not only according to
their desers, but above them; for what more mean desert can be imagined, then
to give a cup of cold water to a thirsty soul? Mat. 10. 43.
yet GOD has promised that this small work of mercy shall not loose its
reward: and the largeness of the reward S. Luke describes, Good measure,
pressed Luke 6. 38.
down, shaken together. 1 Nor is there any danger, that GOD will not be of
ability to perform with us, being Lord of all things, and can by a word
speaking increase and multiply all things infinitely. 2 Neither is it to be
feared, that GOD should be deceived in the number or value of our deserts,
being the most wise, and all things lying open to his eyes, and he searching
the reins and hear^s of his well doing servants, and understands, with what
mind, intent, fervor and diligence they have done any thing. 3 Neither may any
suspect, that GOD has any evil meaning to defraude his poor servants and
children of their just reward, being faithful in all his words. 4 Lastly, he
cannot dye, being immortal, and all things live to him, so that there is no
danger, that any shall be prevented or hindered by any means from receiving
their due rewards: and therefore in all these respects, it is most safe to
transact with GOD, as amost just Judge, and a dangerous and foolish thing, to
put any confidence in man, or to expect from them, any just recompense for our
pains and labor.

2. Let us now compare rewards with rewards, divine with humane, heavenly with
earthly; and I would demand what it is that men can retribute to those, who all
their lives long labor for them, breaking many nights sleep, and putting
their lives in danger for them? O the blindness of men! what can men repay,
but small, base, transi^^ry, and things of small continuance? But GOD gives,
great, sublime and eternal things, and yet those are much hunted after, and
these despised. St. Chrysostom Hom. 24. in Mat.
compares Palaces, Cities, and the Kingdoms of this world, which worldlings so
much admire, to those brittle fabriques, which children make of chalk or clay,
which being made by them with much labor, are derided by those of elder
growth, and are spoiled with the kick of a man's foot: and so are all those
great and stately Palaces, Towers, Castles and Kingdoms, but cotages of lome,
in respect of the celestial and eternal and derided by the Angels, and easily
subverted by our heavenly Father; whereby we may understand, that all earthly
things are altogether vain and transitory: which although there be but few,
who now consider it, yet all of us at the last day, shall fully understand how
little they have profited us: and St. Hilary confirms Comment* in 10. Mat.
this, when he says, The day of judgment will discover how vain, and how
little worth all these things have been.

But let us more narrowly look and consider, what manner of rewards Gods are,
which are so slighted of most men in respect of these petty earthly
recompenses. I First, in that heavenly Kingdom, there shall be all the good
things which may be desired; for they which shall inherit that Kingdom shall
be blessed: and blessedness is a perfect accumulation of all good things
heaped together. There shall be all the good things of the mind, Wisdom and
virtues: of the body, beauty, health and strength: external good, riches,
pleasure and honor. Lastly, all these shall be in full perfection and
eminency. For GOD who showed his power in the creation of the World of
nothing: and his wisdom in governing and providence: and his love and goodness
in the redemption of mankind, by the mystery of the incarnation and passion of
his Son: will then manifest the magnificence of his glory, and the munificence
of his bounty, in the distribution of rewards, prizes and crowns to those, who
have triumphed here over their enemy the Devil. And this wisdom shall not be
a speculation of the divinity in things created, but the very open vision of
the essence of God, the cause of all causes, and of himself the chief truth,
by which most resplendent sight, the souls of the Saints shall shine with so
clear a light, as that St. John speaking of that future glory says, We shall be
like 1 Io. 3. 2.
him, because we shall see him as he is. From this excellent wisdom shall
proceed love so ardent, as that adhering always to that chief good, it
neither will nor can beseparated from it. So that the whole soul, and all the
powers of it shall ever remain in this excellent state and condition. The body
shall shine Mat. 13. 48.
as the Sun, as our Savior speaks, and that shall be its beauty: the health
of it shall be immortality: the strength, impassibility: lastly the body, which
is now a creature, shall then be spiritual, that is, obedient to the command
of the spirit, so that it shall surpass the winds in agility, and pierce even
walls with its subtilty. The riches of it shall be, to want nothing, as also to
possess all things in and with God, for he shall make him ruler Mat. 24. 47.
over all his goods. What shall I say of pleasure? seeing it is said, They
shall be satisfied with the plenteousnes of thy house, Ps. 36. 8.
and thou shall give them drink of thy pleasures as out of theriver: now what
mind can conceive the delight of enjoying the chief happiness? of seeing
beauty it self? of tasting pleasure it self? of entering into the joy of our
Lord, that is, being made partakers of his pleasure, which makes him happy? Now
the honor and glory of the Saints exceeds all that can be spoken: for in the
Theater and view of the whole world, of all men and Angels, shall the Saints be
praised and crowned by GOD himself, which exceeds all honor, and shall be
placed in Christ's throne, as partakers, or partners of his Kingdom: for so we
read in the Revelation, To him that overcomes Apoc. 3. 21.
will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I overcame, and sit with my
Father in his throne. And if to all these we will add eternity as an
unspeakeable seasoning and relish to them, who then can conceive the greatness
of this heavenly happiness? and all this, which we cannot conceive by thought,
we shall find to be true, by possessing, if by our sober, just and godly life,
we shall attain to that blessed Country: for certainly, those good things
shall endure for ever, which the servants of GOD by his grace shall procure,
with a little labor here.

What say thou then? had thou rather please thy self with children, in
framing these little buildings of lome, then to strive to get possession of an
everlasting Kingdom? art thou better contented to delight thy self with the
pleasures of beasts, (which is horrible to think) then to enjoy the ineffable
joys which the Angels? GOD by his mercy forbid, rather pray to GOD, to give
thee his fear, and that the obedience of his Law may be more sweet unto thee
then the honey and the honey comb, and Ps. 19. 10
that crucifying the flesh with the concupiscences thereof, thou may aspire
to the spiritual and everlasting delights of his Paradise: and pray to him, to
give thee grace, to follow the steps of thy Savior Christ, who was meek and
lowly in heart, Who when he 1 Pet. 2. 23.
was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not; and that
he would give thee grace, to live soberly, justly Tit. 2. 12.
and piously in this present world, that thou may with some boldness expect
and wayt for that blessed hope, even the coming of the glory of the great GOD,
and of our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ.

It remains, that we consider the justice which GOD 4.
executes, in punishing sinners, in the (...) a^yss^ of hell: which if we will
do seriously, we shall understand that to be very true which the Apostle tells
us, It is a fearful thing to fall Heb. 10. 31.
into the hands of the living God. For to (follow the order which we held in
his rewarding justice) GOD the just Judge punishes the very least offenses,
such as every idle word, as we read in the Gospel, Of every Mat. 12. 36.
idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the day of
judgment. Now, there are many faults which men punish not, either because the
offenders make resistance, or escape by flight; or because they are ignorant of
the committing of them, and want sufficient proofs to convict the malefactors:
or because they are corrupted with bribes, or favor, so that they will not
punish them: or else they themselves are as wicked as the offenders, and so
connive at them: But GOD is omnipotent, so that no man can withstand him: and
is omnipresent, so that none can be hid from him, Whither shall I go (says
David) from Ps. 139. 6
thy spirit, or whither shall I go from thy presence? If I climb up into
heaven thou art there, if I go down to hell, thou art there also. Again, GOD
is most wise, and knows all things, even in the most secret and inward
corners of the heart: neither stands he in need of witnesses to prove the
faults of men, when their own consciences are instead of a thousand witnesses
to him. Lastly, no bribes nor favors can corrupt his justice, because he
needs none of our goods, nor fears our favor or displeasure. It remains
then, that there is no sin, neither great nor little, grievous nor light,
that can escape the revenging justice of GOD, unless it be washed away before
by repentance: for by how much the more plentiful his mercy is toward us now
in pardoning, by so much the more rigid and severe will his justice be after
this life in revenging. Of this time of repentance the Prophet Esaias speaks,
In an Es. 49. 8.
acceptable time I have heard thee, and in a day of salvation I have helped
thee, which the Apostle thus expounds, Behold now is the accepted time, behold
2 Cor. 6 2.
now the day of salvation. And of the other time, after this life, the Prophet
Zephaniah speaks Zeph. 1. 15.
thus, That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day of
destruction and desolation, a day of obscurity and darkness, a day of clouds
and blackness. And not only shall all sins be punished, but they shall be
punished with horrible torments, which will be so great, as scarce any man can
imagine: for as the eye has not seen, nor the ear has not heard, nor has
it entered into man's heart, 1 Cor. 9. 2.
what the LORD has prepared for them which love him: so likewise has not the
eye seen, nor the ear heard, nor has it entered into man's heart, what GOD has
prepared for them which hate him: for the miseries of sinners in hell shall be
great, (...), and pure, that is not tempered with any comfort, and (which
infinitely adds to their misery) they shall be for (...) shall I say be many,
beca^^e every power of the soul, and every sense of the body shall have their
several tormentors: weigh well the words of the chief Judges sentence in the
Gospel, (...) Mat. 25. 41.
from me ye cursed into everl^sti^^ fir^. [Depart] (says he) that is, separate
your selves from the society and company of the blessed, deprived for ever of
the vis^^n and sight of GOD, which is the chiefest and most essential
happiness, and the last end for which ye were created, [Ye cursed] that is,
hope not hence forth for any kind of blessi^^, for ye shall be deprived of all
spring or growth of grace, of all hope of salvation; the water of wisdom
shall no more rain upon you, nor the (...) of good inspiratio^^ the (...) of
heavenly light (...) no more shi^e upon you: (...) of repentance shall bud
(...) more in you, nor the (...) of (...), nor the fruit of good w^rkes shall
not grow in you, for the Sun of my favor shall rise no more upon you
hereafter: you shall not only want spiritual good things but corporal: nor
eternal only, but temporal: you shall enjoy neither riches, delights nor
solace, but ye shall be like the figgetree, which being cursed by me, dried up
immediately. Mat. 21. 19.
[Into fire] that is, into a f^^nace of burning and unquenchable fire, which
shall take hold of all your members, and torture them with unspeakable pains.
[Everlasting] that is, into a fire which needs no supply of fuel to make it
burn ever, but is kept burning at the appointment of the omnipotent GOD, that
as your sin will never be blotted out, so your punishment shall never be
ended: and therefore the Prophet Esaias most justly demands, Who shall dwell
Es. 33. 14.
with the devouring fire, who shall dwell with the everlasting burnings? as if
he should say, no man shall be able to bear them patiently; but though they be
impatient and desperate, bear them they shall, and he adds, Their w^rme shall
not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched, 66. 24.
which words our Savior diverse times repeats in S. Marks Gospel, for there
shall be added Mark 9. 44. 46. 48
to the t^rments of fire, the worm of conscience, and of remembrance of this
time, wherein the wicked might (with a little labor if they had been willing)
have escaped their punishment, and have enjoyed everlasting comfort.

And least any should imagine, that the damned by changing of place, may
receive any ease, hear what our Savior says, Bind him hand and foot, and
cast him into utter darkness: Mat. 22. 13.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Therefore, those miserable
creatures being bound hands and feet in everlasting bonds, shall lie for ever
deprived of the light of the Sun, Moon and Stars, boiling in the heat of
fire, weeping and mourning, and gnashing their teeth for madness and
desperation. And they which are cast into this horrible and disconsolate place,
shall not only suffer the intolerable pains of hell, but all kind of penury
and want, together with shame, ignominy and confusion; for in a moment of
time, they shall loose their possessions and riches, and be brought to such
want, that they shall beg with the glutton in the Gospel one drop of cold
water, and shall not obtain it. And these proud and high minded men, which in
this life were impatient of any injury, and preferred their honor before all
other things, shall in the presence of all men and Angels (a greater never was
or will be) see all their offen^^^ openly revealed, though they were committed
in darkness, or though they were hid in secret (...) of their hearts; for ^s
^he Apostle says, When the LORD shall come, who will lighten things that are
hid in darkness, and 1 Cor. 4. 5.
make the counsels of the heart manifest, and then shall every man have praise
of GOD: and without doubt, every wicked man shall (...) dispraise and
condemnation: and so great shall be the rebuke and confusion of wicked men in
that assembly, that St. Bernard is In ps. 33.
confident, that this will be the most grievous punishment of all others,
especially to hypocrites, and proud men, who accounted honor their GOD or Idol
in this World. But if these forementioned losses, pains and shame, might
either have an end, or some kind of comfort mingled with them, as the miseries
of this life have, they might in some sort be accounted more tolerable.

Now since it is without all doubt most certain, that as the happiness of the
blessed is to continue for ever, without mixture of misery, so the unhappiness
of the damned shall for ever be without any temper or mixture of comfort: they
must necessarily be accounted blind and foolish, that labor not with all their
might and strength to come to the Kingdom of heaven and heavenly blessedness,
through all tribulatious and perils, infamy and death, all which the Apostle
calls, but light and momentanie. 2 Cor. 4. 17.


And if any should happily mervaile, why a most merciful GOD has appointed so
sharp and lasting punishments for the sins of men which quickly pass away,
and seem not so grievous, let him hear St. Augustine, Conf l. 14. c. 15.
whosoever thinks this condemnation too much or too unjust, cannot measure how
great the iniquity was in sinning, when there was such a facility not to have
sinned: and again, Who can sufficiently declare, how great a sin it may be,
not to obey in an easy matter, and in the command of such a power, and so
great a punishment terrifying? this he speaks of Adams sin, but there is the
same reason for all sins: for if we will weigh with just balances, we shall
find that all sins and offenses are most grievous in three respects.

1. First, it is a fearful thing that the creature should not obey the
Creator, confidering the dignity of the Creator, is infinitely distant from the
baseness of the creature.

2. If the commands of the Creator were heavy and hard, yet the creature is
bound to obey them; but his Commandments 1 10. 5. 3.
are not grievous says St. John: and our Savior says, that his yoke is easy
and his burden light: Mat. 11. 30.
how great an offense is it then that the worms of the earth should not obey
their Creator in so easy a matter?

3. If GOD had not threatened sinners with the punishment of everlasting death,
man perhaps might have covered his sin with excuse: but since GOD, by his
Prophets and Apostles has so perspicuously denounced everlasting punishment
for sin, who can excuse the contumacie of offenders?

4. Lastly, if the faults of the damned were not eternal, we might mervaile,
why the punishment of sin should be everlasting. But, forasmuch as the
obstinacy of the damned is eternal, why do we mervaile, though their
punishment be eternal?

And this obstinate will in evil, which shall be common with the damned and
the Devils, this perverse and averse will from GOD, which will ever remain
immovable and firm with them, causes just and holy men to abhor sin more
then hell.

Edmer the English man writes thus of Anselme, My conscience L. de vit.
Anselmi.
bears me witness, I lie not, I have often heard him profess, that if he
should see on this side the horror of sin, and on that side the pain of
hell, and that of necessity he must be plunged in one of them: he had rather
choose hell then sin. Another thing he was wont to say, no less wonderful,
That he had rather be in hell pure from sin and innocent, then reign in
heaven defiled with the spot or stain of sin. If this holy man so spoke, and
thought, because (being enlightened by GOD) he knew, that the grievousnesse of
sin was greater then the pains of hell: how much more GOD, who searches the
wickedness, filthiness and perversitie of sin to the bottom, and will most
justly punish and judge it, to be most worthy of that punishment, which he has
appointed for it from eternity?

Therefore be not deceived, err not, be not like to those who profess
themselves to know Tit. 1. 16.
GOD, but deny him by their works: for many have says, but in habit, not in
act, like a sword hidden in a scabbard. If they would believe in act, and by
believing would seriously consider, that GOD is faithful 1 10. 1. 9.
and just, and without doubt has prepared grievous torments for the wicked,
never to have end, nor to be tempered or qualified with any comforts: it could
not be, that they should consume their time as they do, drinking iniquity like
water, that Job 15: 16.
is, so easily, so without fear, yea with much pleasure and delight, without
any reluctancie, as if there were a reward, not a punishment due to sins and
sinners.

But let us all believe most assuredly, and by believing seriously consider,
that GOD in 2 Cor. 1. 3.
this life is a Father of mercies, and ready to pardon the sins of all truly
penitent: and withal, that the same GOD after this life, will be altogether a
GOD of vengeance, and will Ps. 94. 1.
inflict that punishment upon unrepentant and obstinate sinners, which he has
prepared, and commanded to be preached and foretold by his Prophets and
Apostles, and left upon record in writing for the information of posterity.

For so it will come to pass, that by fear of intolerable pains, and the
hope of great rewards, (as lifted up by two wings) we shall securely pass and
escape the perils of this life, and come and attain to rest and life
eternal, and that through the merits of our Lord and only Savior Jesus
Christ, Amen.

The end of the Book.
A TABLE OF the Degrees, or Ascents to Godward.
1 BY the Consideration of Man, fol. 1. 2 By the Consideration of the Greater
World, fol. 29. 3 By the Consideration of the Earth, fol. 55. 4 By the
Consideration of Water, especially of Rivers and Fountains, fol. 77. 5 By the
Consideration of the Air, fol. 107. 6 By the Consideration of Fire, fol. 127.
7 By the Consideration of Heaven, the Sun, Moon and Stars, fol. 157. 8 By
the Consideration of the reasonable soul of Man. fo. 185. 9 By the
Consideration of Angels, fol. 213. 10 By the Consideration of the Essence of
GOD, fol. 239. 11 By the Consideration of the greatness of Gods power, f. 272.
12 By the Consideration of the greatness of the Speculative or Contemplative
Wisdom of GOD, fol. 297. 13 By the Consideration of the Practical or
Operating Wisdom of GOD, fol. 315. 14 By the Consideration of the Mercy of
GOD, fol. 358. 15 By the Consideration of GODS Justice, fol. 385.
FINIS.
July 31. 1637.
Perlegi librum hunc cui Titulus est (JACOBS LADDER) nec in eo quicquam reperio
quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur.

SA. BAKER.


