NEVVES OF THE NETHERLANDS. RELATING THE WHOLE STATE OF THOSE Countries at this
present.

printer's device of Felix Kingston, an oval featuring the two mountain summits
of Parnassus between a tree and two flowers, with the sun above (McKerrow 328)
PARNASSO ET APOLLINE DIGNA


AT LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Edward Merchant. 1615.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE PROSPERITY, STRENGTH, AND WISE Government of the united
Provinces of the Netherlands.
See how by wisdom Hollands house does flourish,
And trust not Leopards craft that war does nourish.

A Friend to his native Country. GOd save you Batauian gentlewoman, I am very
glad to see you thus triumphantly set in your throne of freedom, it seems the
world goes better with you now then it did in times past.


The Batauian gentlewoman. In deed (my good friend) it is true that it is
otherwise with me now then it was heretofore: for now (God bethanked) I am in
my first and pristinate state.


Friend. Is it better with you now (gentlewoman) then it was? and are you as
you said in your former ancient state? and how understand you that? I pray you
tell me.


Batauia. My good friend, mark the particulars, as I shall set them down
plainly unto you, and you shall easily understand it. I was long since, in
former time a free State; but after that, I fell into great slavery and
bondage, and now at this present I am restored again to my former liberty and
free state. For when my first founders came hither into this free country,
which as that time belonged not unto any man in particular, but only unto
those that first took possession thereof, and inhabited the same (according to
the Law of nature,) in this free place they built me this house, which was
called the Batauian government, and at this time the Holland Commonwealth,
wherein I placed my seat or Throne, called freedom or liberty.


Friend. Had you at the first no sovereign Governor, that had the chief
command over your house, and household?


Batauia. The government of my house was committed unto two States, chosen and
appointed out of mine own people and inhabitants; that is, the noblest and
honourablest men amongst them, and the best and greatest Citizens and
inhabitants of the same. These were the principal Commanders of my house and
household, who for the better government thereof, made certain customs and
laws for the strengthening of peace therein, and had a great care over the
same, for the preservation of the Commonwealth.

And in process of time, there was a principal person (as a King) chosen out
of those two States, who as the chiefest officer or high Steward, had the
principal command over it and the commonwealth.


Friend. Then your forefathers in time past were governed after a princely
manner by a chief Commander.


Batauia. Yea, Kings by name; as Veromerus, who was called the first Batauian
King, who notwithstanding was but the chief man, amongst the principal
persons of the Land, and had the first command, and chief authority thereof.

So were all the rest that succeeded him, Kings over my Batauian Land, but had
more authority to give their counsel and advice for the government thereof,
then power to command and rule over it. For the other Rulers and States that
were chosen out of the Nobility and Commons, had as much power or
superintendance over the King, as the King had over them, who with him together
ruled the Land. But the King had an upper command, or highest power permitted
him, but not by authority or power, of, or in himself: only in regard and
respect of his princely name he was obeyed, and his authority allowed with
great reverence and respect, and yet he himself nevertheless subject to the
Laws of the Land, as is ordinary in elective, not hereditarie Kings.


Friend. Hereby I perceive, that your house (called the Batauian Government)
from the very first original thereof was a free Commonwealth, and your
commonaltie, free people.


Batauia. We were never subject unto any foreign Nations, but only to our
elected Governor and States, together with the lawful and probable Laws,
made for the good government thereof, whereunto every man willingly submitted
himself. In this state we continued long time before the Roman Monarchy, and
were united unto the same, and by her lived in peace, although the Romans had
the sole command and government of the greatest part of the world, and yet they
were content to account of my forefathers, as their united friends;
acknowledging my house to be a free State, and calling my household servants the
Batauian commonaltie; and when they had any wars, and were aided by us
therein, they called us their fellows, and companions, (as Julius Caesar did,)
and which is more, esteemed us as their brethren, friends, and united
neighbors, in regard of the great aid and strength they found at our hands,
to help them in their need against their enemies.


Friend. Then the Romans had no imperial command over the Batauian Country,
when they were Monarchs of the world.


Batauia. No. For my forefathers of Baetauia (according to their ancient Laws)
were still governed by their own people, which continued above an hundred
years, during the Roman Monarchy, until such time as their friendship
turned into deceit, and extreme oppression, seeking to rob and spoil me and
my Land, with pretense to turn my freedom into slavery and bondage,
contemning our unity, and wholly forgetting the forepassed friendship and aid
by us formerly showed, and done unto them. For which cause my forefathers took
arms in hand, and began a lawful war, for the defense and safeguard of mine
honor and freedom, whereby the name of the Romans, in short time, was wholly
driven away, and clean rooted out, wherein personally they never had any
absolute authority nor government. For the which my Batauian people were so
much honored and esteemed of, that as then they were called and held to be the
authors of the freedom and liberty of our neighbors, and other Princes, who
likewise were under the subjection of the Romans: but I obtained my freedom
again, and after that continued long in my free state, and was governed by my
two states of the Land, until the savage Normans came and invaded us.


Friend. Was it then at that time that you began to be governed by Earls?


Batauia. I, but not as Sovereign Governors, but only chosen as chief
Commanders, to serve in stead of Judges, we subiecting our selves willingly
under their command, esteeming and holding them worthy to be our Protectors,
and to have the superintendance over our Batauian government, but had no power
(by authority) to alter the Laws and customs, nor to raise tolles, nor
impositions, without the consent and good will of the two States, but were
bound by oath to defend and maintain the Laws and privileges of the Land,
and to subject themselves thereunto.


Friend. Whereby it appears that never any Prince nor Earl had Sovereignty,
or chief power alone, over you and your house?


Batauia. No: for in the time of the Earls, there have been some of them that
by their bad government and life, became oppressors of the Laws and customs
of the Land, and for that cause their authority was misliked, and they put out
of their command. As it happened to the Lady Iacobe, Countess of Holland,
from whom because of her disorders, and wilfulness in her government, against
the privileges of the Land. The command over my house was taken away, and
transported unto Philip Duke of Burgundy, which Batauian government in
process of time, and by marriages, was changed and fell into the house of
Austria, and after that to Charles the first, Emperor of Rome, (who with the
good will and voices of all the States of my house) made over the Batauian
Principality unto his son Philip, certifying him of my privileges, and the
nature of my subjects addicted unto rest and freedom, with an earnest charge
and warning given him, to have a great regard and respect of the Batauian
Commonwealth, and to govern them with a mild and fatherly affection: for that
he esteemed the same to be the best branch of his Crown, which he with
Princely words and oaths promised to perform; but the contract being made,
and he having the authority in his hands, we straight found a great alteration
in our Batauian house; for that he being a Spaniard, both by birth and
conditions, a great Prince, and very powerful, and had the Sovereign command
over many Kingdoms, and Principalities, did not respect our Batauian liberty,
nor once esteemed our privileges, but contrary to his promise, brake his
Princely oath.


Friend. By this means your free State was turned into a bondage.


Batauia. That is true, by this means my troubles began. For in stead of
natural borne Princes to protect my house, I got strange outlandish wasters
and destroyers thereof, who therein made a fearful stur, with most strange and
great exactions, cruelties, and tyrannies over our lives and goods; to the end
he might procure the breaking of the ancient authority of my privileges, the
weakening of my laws, and the abolishing of my liberty: But I seeing the
beginning of my overthrow, the weak condition of my house, and the subversion
of my people, was compelled to seek means for the preservation of my maidenly
liberty, against those that sought to spoil and bereave me thereof; but
finding my self in a manner very weak, by reason that diverse of my principal
household servants fled from me, and that I was almost clean spoiled of my
household stuff, yea and my seat very near taken from under me, which I had so
long held and enjoyed from my ancestors, for that the feet thereof were almost
drawn and broken each from the other; whereby in a manner I sat so wagling,
that I could not devise how I should sit faster, by reason of my weak estate.
But taking courage, I made means unto my neighbors for aid; but where I
expected security and support, (ere I was aware) I had like to have been clean
spoiled: for by the aid that was sent me, my house, Court, and Throne, was
rather in worse case then it was before.

Whereupon my principal officers were by necessity compelled to seek to
marry me unto some one, that by his aid they might have means to help me
and themselves. But not long before I had had a good example set before mine
eyes, of another maid, one of my neighbors, who by her welwillers was
persuaded to Handt-werpe, that is, to betroth her self unto him that sought to
bring her to Val-loos, that is, to the destruction of her and all her people.

This made me (I say) to go to my cross neighbor, (who also was esteemed a
maid) to get some aid of her, to help to fasten my Seat, and thereby to
hold a fit place to sit in; for without that, they pretended to have broken
down my Batauian house, and to have made a bridge thereof at their pleasure, to
have gone over to my neighbors, thereby to obtain the like dominion and power
over them; and their meaning also was, upon the old foundations and ruins of
my Batauian house, to erect and build up a new Spanish regiment, and to take my
seat from me, and to turn it clean over, as if I had had no voice nor
command therein: which made some of my fugitive friends and welwillers to look
back, and to stir up my neighbors, who as then vpheld and maintained me in
my right, against those that thought to have thrust me clean out of it, and
by my overthrow to have overrun my neighbors, which was done by the
commandment of that Spanish Earl, who as a fatherly protector was placed over
me, according to his oath and promise to defend my maidenlike honor: but he
sought by strange ruffians to violate mine honor, to ruinate my house and
Court, (which notwithstanding was one of his fairest palaces) and also my
household servants, esteeming all as nothing; and which is more, sought to make
my people slaves, without once respecting my Batauian state, which is a
Democraticke government. By this means (I say) has he by his unspeakable
tyrannical government, and unlawful vsurparion, lost the rule and pretended
right (by my old customs and ancient privileges) that he had, by the aid and
help of my neighbors and friends that stood in doubt of further mischief to
come, aided by the power of the principal and chief Judge of Judges, who
after 40. years troubles, has redcuced and placed me in my former seat of
ancient freedom.


Friend. Gentlewoman, you have now showed me the state of your old freedom,
and withal of your troubles forepassed, whereof you say you are now freed. From
hence forth therefore show your maidenlike wisdom, by calling to remembrance
things past, wisely to consider of things present, and well to foresee that
which is to come, and which concerns you near. Therefore let not your
forepassed blows (by a deceitful bright sunne-shining time) so soon be
forgotten. For that many times after fair weather comes a storm, you do
well to sit at your door, to see whether it be clear weather abroad; for in
truth for these 40. years together you have endured many, and too many stormy
winds, mighty raines, hailes, thunders, lightnings, and fiery flames.


Batauia. Erasmus says very well and truly, that industrious labor makes a
man rich. So have I (by Gods help) and industrious labor, with defensive
war overcome and withstood the great force and power of my tyrannous enemy,
and such as have by him been overcome, and forced to flee their country, and
to live like strangers in other countries; I have with their wives, children,
and goods received into my house, and given them lodging therein. Whereby I got
both thanks and furtherance, which to him was a weakening and enfeebling, and
to me a strengthening and fortification, which happened most hereabouts. But he
fearing further mischief, (perceiving my fortunate proceedings,) was forced to
seek to me, (who at the first he contemned and esteemed of no account; yea in
a manner thought verily to be his own) to make peace with him, and to
acknowledge me to be a free State, without once pretending to have any right of
government over me, and so I once again got my long contentions (and almost
clean lost) freedom into my hands. By the acknowledging and agreement of my
enemies themselves, who judged it to be my lawful right, which in truth
happened and came to pass by an accusation of his own conscience, and a
compulsiue necessity, possessed with a desperate hope of never to overcome me.
These were the special things that moved him thereunto, and not because he
desired peace, nor for any good will that he bare unto the welfare of my
house, and household servants. Nevertheless, I have recovered mine ancient
freedom, and hope to continue in this my maidenlike state, by his aid and
powerful help that has seen my misery, and has evidently in the sight of
all the world helped and freed me from the Spanish yoke.


Friend. God be praised, thanked, and glorified therefore, and to him must you
pray, and in him firmly trust. But it is commonly said, that where there is no
care, there is no fear: for while that you are now free and in good estate,
you must be careful for your self and your household, and that in twofold
manner:

First, to look well about you, that you be not deceived nor overrun by
those from whom you have been delivered, and have freed your self from their
bondage, because they have done that they did upon mere necessity, and not for
any love they bare to you.

Secondly, that you must be provident to provide for that which is needful
and necessary for you in time of need, that in time of want you run not to
borrow corn of your neighbors to feed your geese withal: for a learned man
wrote not in vain, when he said, Happy is that Land, which in time of peace
thinks upon war. And another learned Philosopher teaches us, that a man
must not trust his reconciled enemy too much: therefore now you sit quietly and
freely in your house and possessions, it stands you upon to furnish your
house well with 4. most necessary things, wherein the whole, and all the state
thereof consists.

First, you must have true, trusty, and provident household servants, such as
seek not their own good, but the profit of the common State, and those that
will not lightly by themselves take any thing in hand, that may be burdensome
and hurtful to the Commonwealth, and the subjects thereof.

Secondly, fit household stuff, such as is honest, necessary, serviceable and
furtherly in a house, to be used for the service of the Commonwealth.

Thirdly, good provision of such things, as in such a house (as yours is) are
most necessary and convenient, as Chests, Warehouses, and sellers, well
furnished.

Fourthly, and lastly, you must specially be provided of that wherewith you
may do most, and which by men is most desired, for that thereby you may get
whatsoever you will, yea and almost as much as you will.

All this is needful for you to do, whereof you are to have a great care to
be provided, that against an assault, or a hard and bad time, you may help
your self, by your self.

Also it is convenient for the female kind (specially a free maid as you are,)
not to have too much conversation with strange men, specially with such as in
times past sought to violate your chastity; yet I doubt not of your good
behavior in any wise, because you have already withstood many assaults, and by
means of your honest mind and courage, have hitherto overcome all storms
whatsoever.


Batauia. My good friend, I am warned to be watchful, but I hope God will
preserve and defend both me and my household.

For the first, I have true and provident household servants, in my Batauian
dominion, (according to the ancient manner) first, an ouerseer of the house,
(called father of the Country,) then my two States, the noblest persons of the
Land, and the men of greatest account among the Commons, who have all the care,
and special charge of the state of my house, both in peace and war.
Secondly, I have convenient and profitable household stuff, as good counsel,
and upright dealing, wherewith my Batauian house is furnished, as with a
heavenly and bright shining light, thereby to behold things past, to mark
things present, and to foresee things to come. The other are as instruments in
needful and profitable things, to serve the state of the Land, (each one
according to his quality and condition) when time shall require. Thirdly, (God
be praised) my house is well provided, (and daily more and more shall be) of
that which shall serve for the Commonwealth, and such as my housholding
requires. First, my Chests and Wardrops are well furnished with apparel of
all sorts; that is, of good iron dublets, steel gloves, stiff shining
collars, with the appurtenances, all fair and well kept, that when I have need
of them they are ready at hand; my warehouses are well provided of fireage,
which is made of black wood coals, brimstone, and faltpeter, therewith easily
to set fire on my turfe, which are round, and as hard as iron, and great heavy
fiery arrows, wherewith to make a good fire against winter and hard frosts.
And for my sellars, I have yet a great many brass vessels therein, to welcome
such as come to visit me, honorably; and in diverse cages I have many old
geese, that when there is a fair, I may set some of them before my friends to
welcome them withal. Now for that wherewith I can do most, (which is money) I
have my united Commons, which are four faithful and trusty laborers; that
is, Husbandmen, Burgers of towns, Saylors, and Soldiers, (who at this time
for a while are at their rest, and live quietly.) These are all fast bound
together with the band of unity, and are they that at all times will make
provision for my Batauian house, and Hollands garden, whatsoever I shall want.
For my Husbandmen at this present are well provided of corn, and other
necessaries, and sell it as dear, almost, as they will or can, which also is
apparent by the decking of his wise and children with gold and silver which
they daily wear. The townsmen also build great and high houses, which within
are richly furnished with excellent fair household stuff and moueables; as
Tapistrie, silver, and guilt plate, and he himself, and his wife and
children, richly apparelled and smugd up in silk and velvet, laid on with gold
and silver lace, making great bankets; all which are signs of prosperity, and
are every one industrious to maintain themselves in good estate; some by
usury, others by trade at home, and some by merchandising, every man striving
not to be the least amongst the rest. The Sailor saileth far and wide for
strange merchandise; and if a rouer sets upon him at sea, he can play his part
so well, that he shall get nothing at his hands; and many times looks himself
for such a prize, so that it often falls out that he can sail with a
by-legger, better the^ he does when he saileth before the wind. But the
Soldier likes not of this sleepie calm weather, he rather desires to be
rustling in the field, to show himself a gallant. But the other three are very
rich, and have great means to help me, (I could not know it so well, but that
they by their superfluity makes it manifest to all men) for which cause I and
my household are bound to have a great care for them, and the Common wealth, for
that they without me, and I without them, would be a means to overthrow both
me and my house, and also the commonaltie, and every one of them in their
particular states would come to nothing. For if the band of unity should
break, or by contention become loose, it would be their destruction, and my
overthrow out of my Throne.


Friend. I would feign see the pales of your gardens, and the manner of
building about your house, or else of you hear the discourse of the whole
situation thereof, while you are now in a free state.


Batauia. My Holland garden is bordered about with a willow hedge or hurdle,
called Fidelity; at the entry whereof there is a style, over the which my
watchful (many eyed Lion) with his two forefeet stands looking, there to hold
sharp watch. Then within, before the style, and beninde the Lion, stands a
high Orange tree, with a young sprig or branch at the foot thereof, both
coming out of an old root of a tree that has been cut down: round about this
tree there is a root planted, called Gods blessing. In the middle of the garden
there stands an old high strong Piramides, called Privilege, closed about
with a medicinable graft, called Gods grace. This garden is made of, and filled
up with good Holland earth, out of the which the Spanish unfruitful power is
wholly rooted up; and therefore in, and round about it there grows Good will,
Good courage; Heart herb; Care seed: (Lady mark) also, Golden flowers,
Silver herbs, Lance herbs, Knights spurs, Horse-mens herb, Gun herb,
and much Honor and Commendation.


Friend. Is not your garden sometimes weeded and cleansed of weeds and hurtful
plants?


Batauia. Yea: sor we were wont in times past to be much troubled with great
quantities of weeds; as with Force herb, Death herb, Catching root, Fear
herb, Pine apples, Blood herb, Fire herb, Black herb, and Bitter gall
nuts. But necessity, and my household servants, appointed two officers to look
unto it, (which were Reason and Power) each of them, as their turns came, to
weed it; for if it were not for these weeders, sometimes there would some
weeds grow up in a nights space before the Sun rises; as Romish thistle, False
lilies Fox herb, Strife flowers, and After-hurt. For not many years since,
there grew a filthy herb in my garden, called the Devils Nay-thrid, and a
herb called Diuels-beet, which stanke all over the garden, being of such a
nature, that whosoever eat it, it made him envious, and contentious; for it is
of the kind of the seed of the apple whereof Eua and Adam ate in Paradise,
which then presently caused great contention between God and them, and so it
did now also; for whosoever did eat thereof, thought that they were as wise as
God, and knew all things, and for that cause thinking themselves to be wise in
their own conceits, they fell at strife with their neighbors; but reason
weeded out as much thereof as he could, and in stead thereof planted a root
called Part strife, which in time will grow to be a great herb, but the
devils Nay-thrid, ran almost clean through the whole garden, and has made the
Orange tree for certain years to stand still at a bay, and not to blossom,
which makes many here amongst us to long for some of his fruit, if it were to
be had; but the earth of my garden is so rich and fruitful, that if once a hot
Spanish sunshine should fall thereon, (after the which a Batauian stroke-raine
uses to follow) we should presently see the blossoms and fruit of the Orange
tree show forth themselves. Nevertheless we have Oranges for a pleasant sauce,
and a good savor daily in my kitchen, and also for a refreshing we have the
fair Orange lilie, and the Roselike thistle flower, which is placed properly
in several beds in my garden.


Friend. Now I have heard the manner of the situation of your garden: let me I
pray you hear from you, what kind of building you have in your house?


Batauia. The foundation of my house is named Unity: the principals thereof are
made of great straight timber, lined and daubed with good united Netherlandish
stones, the Hall thereof called the Batauian government, is beautified with
eight fair clear windows, and in the middle of them all stands one
specially, as a principal shield beautifying the same. The roof of the house
is covered over with fair shining shells, which cover is called Hardiness. The
entry or gate thereof is named Victory: the posts and top of it are covered
over with green herbs, in the middle whereof my seat stands, called
Freedom; made of firm ground wood: and above all the rest the sign of my
house is Emanuel. Now my friend, you have heard and understood the manner and
form of my house and garden, wherein at this present I have and hold my free
habitation; which, of almost a desperate lost inheritance, I have made free
again, more by honest means, and true and lawful right, then by forcible
craftiness, although my ill willers behind my back report and say, that I
deck my self with strange feathers, when as they notwithstanding lurk and
hide themselves under my wings; nevertheless I have striuen as much for their
freedoms, as I have done for mine own natural and good peoples liberty.


Friend. Gentletwoman, Do you perceive that which I see there, which is a
strange show, it seems to be a twin, or a body of two kinds, whereof the
one half before seems to laugh friendly upon you, with a sweet womanlike
face; and the other half behind, is armed with a cruel soldiers look, and
has a monstrous great beast by him, wherein I take no pleasure.


Batauia. This party has been here some few years since, and brought that
beast with him into our Batauian house; but what shall I do, seeing he looks
so smilingly upon me, whether it be in outward show, or in action, I will not
as yet quarrel with him and mistrust him, before he leaves laughing, and then
I will see, (and also ask him) what he means to do, that he comes here
into my garden with such a hinder part, and so fair and pleasant a forepart.


Friend. Do you not think that he can soon turn that laughing countenance
behind him from you, and place the bitter look before: It was wont to be the
Italian manner, and the Spanish custom: see you not that he has turned the
hinder part of his face toward a troop of soldiers, and the forepart toward
you; the while that he with outward flearing face looks on you: with the
hinder part he does expect your overthrow; therefore it is fit that the Lion
should take good heed unto him.


Batauia. But (my friend) do you know what manner of man this is, and do you
know the beast well? I have long time cast mine eyes thereon: let me hear what
your judgment is of him, seeing you show your self to be so careful for me.


Friend. The happiness of your state makes me so careful for you, but in my
judgment this man is one of the four sorts or kinds of Hermaphrodites, (which
are both men and women,) which is one of the worst kind of creatures that are
living upon the earth, if they may (without restraint) use and show forth their
nature. For they can suffer themselves to be dealt withal in nature of weak
and effeminate women, with fair shows, and sweet words to deceive withal;
and as a woman by nature is mild, they can bring their subtle practices, and
deceitful charms to pass, which if they effect not in two or three years,
they do it in 6. or 8. and sometimes in 10. or twelve.

Again, these Hermophrodites (when they list) can be like cruel and sturdie
men, and can as well by force as by craft bring many things to pass, for they
are without all measure wicked and hollow hearted.

Which for you (being a maid) is very dangerous, for thinking to see a
womanlike face, and to hear an effeminate voice, you should with the turning
of an hand fall into a snare, and be deflowred, whereby your most noble and
great fame should be overthrown, and your praise-worthie name clean defaced.

Batauia, this is my judgment, and a forewarning for you concerning this
person, and where you think this great sweet shining nosegay to be a Palm
branch, it is not so; for it is a branch of a herb called Munkes hood, a
venomous herb, which heretofore was rooted out of your garden, which he has
taken up again, therewith to bring you at length into a sound sleep.


Batauia. What think you of that monstrous beast, what beast, and of what
kind and nature is it?


Friend. That may well and easily be seen and judged by the speckled skin that
it has, which is like a Nay-ed or patcht Monks gown; and therefore I think
that it is naturally a Leopard, which is a greedy blood sucking beast,
begotten of a Lioness, by a Panther; and therefore it is called by a double
signifying name, a Leopard. This beast although it is brought forth by a she
Lion, yet it is most greedy and eruelly bent to seek the destruction of the
male Lion: but as it is bloodily minded, so it is subtle and crafty,
specially to entrap his greatest enemy the Lion, thereby to fall upon him and to
destroy him: to the which end he is skillful how to make double holes, one
above the other, which run both into one, being wide above, and narrow or
strait in the middle, whereinto he runs, to get the Lion (following him)
between them both, and so to entangle himself therein; in the mean time the
Leopard leapes out at the other hole, and falls upon the back of the Lion,
for by that means the Lion cannot use his strength against him; and so he
shows his deceitful nature and condition, which by subtlety he practices
and brings to pass.

And yet at other times he has showed other Leopards tricks upon the African
Apes, and West-Indian Monkeyes: for upon a time when he spied many of them
together, he made as though he had been dead, or asleep; in the mean time
the Apes and Monkeyes came without fear out of their holes, (thinking to be
free and out of doubt) and were very joyful, and played many apish toys one
with the other, not doubting any thing, nor once so much as dreaming of the
rising up again of their slumbring enemy, who like a Leopard lay lurking, and
seeing time fit and convenient, when those beasts were unarmed, and without
fear, he rose up out of his counterfeit slumber, and falling upon them,
devoured and tare in sunder the most part of them. This (Gentlewoman) serves
also for a warning to you: for not long since, I heard you say, that you yet
have many old geese for provision for your kitchen, whose cages you are to
look well to, lest this Leopard with crafty baytes and force comes not
suddenly and deuoureth them, as he has already devoured many Lions and
Monkeys, and the same would he do unto your own person also, if he had the
means according to his will.

I mean this leering suitor, who with a crafty dissembling manner of suite,
though not openly, seeking to get as near unto you as he can, as you may
perceive by his entry into Gulicke, and Cleaueland, and from thence to Mark,
and means not to leave so, until he has gotten something that may further
his pretense for the war, not by skirmishes, thereby to set forth your honor
the more (which he thinks before this time to have sufficiently tried) but
by long and continual policy in the end to lay hold upon you by force.

For he accounts you already to be his own, although nevertheless (of mere
necessity) he did acknowledge you to be a free State.

But as he knows the nature of diverse slaves whom he has under his
subjection, and perceiues well that he must not use them one like another, to
keep them in bondage, and to get more, he has therein a special watch upon
you, for the Angolish, Sentomish, and Guineian Moors, were with great cruelty
made his slaves, and with severity held in bondage. Whereas the Brasilian
Nation were by deceit and policy bereaved of their freedom, and made his, and
by compulsion holden slaves.

Now mark well Gentlewoman; at the first he sought to you, now he begins to
work otherwise: in time past he began it by cruel Alua, whereby he put you
into so great a fear, that he was forced to call back his executioner for
your people were so wild, that they from himself (as the author of the
execution) got a discharge of him, so that thereupon came a great Commander,
with a pardon for your obstinacy toward him, who ministered such Spanish figs
(called pardons) that thereby you were almost choked in the mier, and many of
you died. After him came Don John de Austria, to pacify you, who at first
seemed somewhat to incline to a peace, but in short time after he made an
vproare amongst you again. For that cause there was a strange present sent
(but yet for more furtherance to his intent.) which was an Italian Parmasan:
but perceiving that it was too sweet for your taste, and not liked of, he let
the Parmasan rot, and began to come upon you with a hasty Duch-Earust: but
because your Batauians are mild of nature, and can see far, he took no
pleasure in such Erust proceeding: then he sent a red shining Spiritual man,
that should make Albright, and clear, thinking to overcome your person, and
the Batauian government with his Claer Ingenious wit and behavior, which he
put in practice; but all in vain: after that he came with crafty Spinners,
(and now with leering Leopards) but the Spinners web was too weak to catch
you in: for that cause he spread another Nay-ed, or broad net, which he cast
over your head; but it is so loose and so wide, that you can see clearly
through it, unless that the show of the nosegay should make your head so
dissie, that by means of the venomous smell thereof, you should fall asleep,
and that is it which this leering Leopard looks for: to bring you first to the
Brasilian slavery, then to deal with you as with the Guineans; and lastly,
with the West-Indians. Therefore preserve your freedom, and also show that you
are free; let not others appoint your laws concerning that which touches you,
for the preservation of your house, and the defending of your next neighbors,
which concerns your self much, for which this Leopard has long leered
(Shipper look out.)


Batauia. My good friend, we are well acquainted in my house with the nature
and conditions of this Leopard, we have often heard his howling in our garden,
but yet we believe him not. To that end my many waking eied Lion stands before
the style and looks out; and this Leopard must not think that he is in
West India; for in stead of Monkeys, I would send great store of Grasshoppers
after him, which are easily to be sound in my garden; and I have nests, yea
whole regiments of swift flies, ( a fig for the Spanish flies) which nestle
under my Orange tree, which with their sharp pricking Augls, will so prick
and sting him through his speckled skin, that you shall hear him howl into
Spain, to call for help. But my water-fowles (that are very cunning in
swimming) would so well watch the coasts and havens there, that not one Leopard
(which are but Flutterers in the water) shall not dare to thrust their heads out
of their holds, for my water-fowles are very sharply set against the Leopards,
because at other times he has often taken their eggs out of their nests, and
pulled away many of their feathers, and has cut many of them short, sometimes
when they were wont with great danger to swim over the Spanish seas, into the
Spanish havens, which they yet remember well, and can better revenge themselves
then the Monkeys. For first my Grasshoppers for the most part of them, are old
Leapers, that have good skill to leap upon the water-sides, and the hard land,
as they in times past did upon Turenholt Heath, and Newport seastrand: but
since that time they have brought forth many young ones, who are well learned
and instructed by the old ones, and can match the flies well enough, who also
are old and well experienced; for they were wont in times past, lustily to fly
upon the Canary, and S. Thomas Sugar; and also upon the figs and reasons of
Calis malis, which was good meat for them; but my water-fowles are so swift in
flying, that their nimblenesse is known in East India, where they at other
times have lustily flowne upon their Nutmeg blossoms, and there left the smell
and savor of the Netherlands Mateliue, whereat they did not greatly rejoice;
yea they are so quick and strong in flight, that they fly up through strange
water and ways to Heemsche-kercke, there to hold the Iubile, and they bite so
sore, that there is no Spanish Nut but they will bite it in pieces, how hard
soever it be. In swimming also they are very crafty, and stout, specially upon
a Spanish fleeet, to be masters of it with a small power, whereby in Spain
they are called water-Diuels, (without once remembering that God is their Pilot)
And though this Leopard is a great enemy to the Lions, whereof he has deceived
and taken many, yet he has not found the means to be guile them all, as it
appears; for in my Batauian house, there stands or sits yet seven that
looks out at the window:

1 First, my Hollands rampant Lion:

Who although he does near leave climing still,
he is not so high as he would by hit will.
2 Next him the Zelands swimming Lion stands:

Who also has a head and lives thereby,
And for the Libard cares not a fly.
For although he has swome long time, he is not yet drowned, if occasion once
served he would make the Leopard dance upon the water, but it should be no
apish dance.

3 In a higher window there stands a Gelders Lion.

This holds a place just in the Libards way,
And when he thinks to pass, will make him stay.
4 In the window beneath him there are two Freeseland Lions ready to run;

Not for to run away out of his sight,
But t'hinder his pretense to his despite.
5 Then there is two other Lions, each of them in a window apart, whereof the
one,

Stands not in Over Isel to have a sight
Of leering Libard, but with him to fight.
6 In the other window is the Zutphen Lion:

Which if the Libard should begin to baul,
Would lustily with his claws upon him fall.
7 In a high window at the upper part of my house:

The lusty, strong, and valiant Vtrechts Knight,
Does watch, and has the Libard still in sight.
And in the upper part of my house:

The East Friesland quick sight Eagle looks about,
With His wings abroad to see how things fall out.
And how high soever he seems to sit, yet if the Leopard begins once to play
his part, he would soon fle upon his back: for it is most certain, that all of
them together, and every one of them particularly is well acquainted with the
blood-thirstinesse, cruelty, and craftiness of the Leopard; and have a regard
to what end he comes thus leering hereabout, every one of them thinking that he
leereth upon him; and therefore they all stand upon their guard, and would
rather willingly leap upon him, then suffer him to lay hold on them.


Friend. I am of the same opinion also, Gentlewoman, and I think that all your
four men, whom you term your trusty husband men, before you should be
thrown down, would rather for a time leave their tilling the land, seafaring
and merchandising, and set their wives on work for the upholding of your
person, and they themselves with the Soldiers, (whom they would soon raise
out of their sleep) would march against the Leopard, for the defense of your
Batauian government, and the keeping of the Hollands garden: yea, and before
that you for want of means, or by restraint should be forced to leave your
seat of freedom, your Commons would rather labor for you, till they sweat
blood, and yet too great toles and heavy burdens are cumbersome to laboring
men; but the love they bear to you, and the hope they have of their happiness
by your freedom, would make them forget the pains they take, for the
furtherance of the Commonwealth: but the Husbandmen, Seafaring men, and
Citizens, altogether with one consent, (to bring their purpose the better to
effect,) wish that the Soldier also were awake with them. For a common but
then seems a common ease, but an assured common rest and quietness is better,
although your men apply themselves to the time. For which cause, willing
laborers that are tied together in the bands of unity, deserve some
furtherance, and for that you are all their natural mother, it learnes every
one both great and small, to gether and apart, to show their good wills and
duties unto you in that respect.


Batauia. That is true, for my State is costly to bear all the charges that
are necessarily to be laid out, specially now I am set again in my free Seat;
therefore I would, if I could, bring it so to pass, that no man should have
any cause to find fault, thereby to make all man free in our garden.


Friend. Then it is requisite and very needful to have a good regard that the
Leopard makes no double holes for the Lion, that you need not stand in doubt at
what hole to watch for him, and also to look well to that double face, and to
have an eye to the troop of men that stands yonder, for it seems that they
are at a stand, and would be gone away: but me thinks rather that they
increase and seem to come nearer; and in the mean time this forepart gives
you a fair smiling countenance, and the hinder part is for their furtherance;
and therefore a far off they assemble speedily and hold together.


Batauia. Therefore we will commend the watch to our chief watchman Emanuel,
and commit the charge of our house to him, and altogether from henceforth will
be vigilant, and look well to the crafty fetches of the Leopard; for if I
were sure that he would leeringly come too near me, and that his face would
turn about, I would presently let my Lion loose to fly upon the Leopard, and
wake my Soldier, to beard that marshall face, who thinks that he that
slumbreth is fast asleep, but the noise would soon awake him.

Distrust and watch the enemy to withstand,
Concord and faithfulness in Town and Land,
Are weapons sure and strong:
But before all these things, upon him call,
And chiefly trust in him that can do all
By's power, and right thy wrong.
I.
BAtauian Virgin fair,
That sits in freedoms chair,
Victoriously and well:
Look to thy enemy,
That on thee casts his eye.
Beware of Libard fell.
II.
Where false love cannot win,
To hate thee they begin,
For when love waxes cold,
Then hatred for good will,
Makes them seek thee to kill.
Trust not the Libard bold.
III.
Sour sauce distasts sweet meat.
Craft the upper hand does get.
Reuonge breaks peaces laws.
The thing that is not straight won,
May chance in time be done.
Keep out the Libards claws.
IV.
He that first bragd of thee,
That thou his own should be,
But nothing thereby got.
After long war seems meek,
And makes show to seek
Thy love. Believe him not.
V.
Though he said thou should have,
Thy liberty, and gave
Consent to it in his need.
He seeks to spoil thee now,
If that he could tell how.
Of Libards wiles take heed.
VI.
Thy true love holds him back,
Thy trusty friends do make
Him fear, and therefore he,
Tintrap thee if he may
Does lurk. Wherefore I say,
Of him still wary be.
VII.
Fight in thy friends defense,
If he will not go thence
In time, since he does so,
Torment them, for thy sake,
Revenge their wrong, and make
Him out the field to go.
VIII.
Fair Hollands Princely Dame,
Maintain thy ancient fame,
Be not at his command:
Although to is his intent.
Do naught thou may repent.
Against Libard boldly stand.
Printed somewhere in the Batauian Land,
My name if you desire to understand:
It is, (as men me commonly do call,)
The Pleasant, Rich, and Famous Hollands Hall.

FINIS.

