A BRIEF CRONICLE, and perfect rehearsal of all the memorable actions happened
not only in the Low Countries, but also in Germany, Ita^y, France, Spain,
England, Turkey, and other Countries since the year of our Lord. 1500. to this
present year ^^^^

AT LONDON, Printed by ^ohn Wol^e

A BRIEF CHRONICLE AND perfect rehearsal of all the memorable actions
happened not only in the Low Countries, but also in Germany, Italy, France,
Spain, England, Turkey, and other Countries, since the year of our Lord 1500.
to this present year 1598.
25. day of the month of February, the Emperor Charles the fifth was borne in
the town of Gaunt in Flaunders, and in the same year about the beginning of
Summer in Germany, and Luke-land, there sell Crosses of ^i^ers colors ^u^ of
the (...) upon (...) c^^the^.

Germany, that the common speech among them was, that all those on whom the
bloody Crosses fell the year before should die, and at the same time there
fell such a Hail by Vitupord in Brabrant, as the like was never seen, for the
hail stones were as big as any Tennis ball.

Herderwicke was burnt in the space of three hours, so that there remained but
three or four houses, by the which fire there were smothered above 1500 men,
and all that was within the houses kurnt.

The same year there were 200. houses burnt in Gorcum, and at Belle in
Flaunders 500 houses.

Isabell Queen of Spain.

preparation, was made to bring king Phillip and his wife into Spain.

The same year when king Phillip was gone into Spain, the Gelders began
again to war upon Holland and Brabrant.

The same year about the 27. of September, died Phillip King of Spain, and
Granado presently after his Coronation.

Tienen was taken by those of Gelder, with the aid of certain Frenchmen,
which was done upon Saint Michaels day, and Turnholt spoiled.

8. of September there arrived two ships at Teruere in Zealand, that came fro
the Canaries, being the first ships that ever sailed out of Zealand into
Spain, or the Islands, they were laden with Canarie Sugars, the ships went to
Antwarpe, and there offered the Sugar to be sold for two blankes a pound, but
they could not sell it for so much.

The same year the Prince Charles with the Emperor Maximilian his
Grandfather, made his entrye into Gaunt.

Constantinople that continued for the space of 18 days, so that the walls of
the City, and all the houses upon the Sea side fell down, and the sea rose so
high that it flowed over the walls of the Town, and drowned above 14000. men.

Hans King of Denmark, and the Towns of Holland, zealand, and Frezeland,
against certain Towns lying upon the sea: as, Lubecke, Rostocke, and their
adherents, which continued for the space of two years.

Maximilian held a Parliament of the states of Germany at Ausberg, where there
was (...) man brought before him, that was so great that he eat a whole Calfe
and a Sheep raw at one meal, and yet was not suffized.



Henry the right King of England, landed at Callis with a great power of men,
and from thence entered into the frontiers of Flaunders, to make war against
the king of France, and at that time he took Turwin and Turney and built a
Castle in Turney.

Wittenberge in Saxony there was three Suns seen in the air, and in each
Sun a bloody sword, the eleauenth of the same month, ware three Moons
likewise seen.

The 7. of March, there were two rain bows seen in the air that stood back
to back.

The same year in Layden there was a Child borne without a head, with eyes
and mouth in the breast, the arms and hands sticking close by the sides, and
beneath it was round without legs or feet.

Loys the eleueuth King of France.

The same year upon satterday after candlemas day, Prince Charles entered into
Andwarpe, and the next day after he was invested Duke of Brabrant, and
received homage of all the 17 Provinces.

20. of October the order of the Golden Fleece was holden by Prince Charles at
Brussels, and Leenuerden was besieged by the Guelders.

Charles Duke of Austria went into Spain, there to be Crowned king.

The same year the Frost was so great at Anwarpe that they went on foot over
the River of Scheld, and people road with Horse, and wagons over the water
into Brabrant.

Charles was crowned King of Spain, within the town of Valedolet, and by
Vento about 1200. soldiers were slain, that were named the Black company,
the same year likewise there was an accord made between Brabrant and
Flanders, and Asperen was won from the Gelders.

12 of January died Maximilian the Emperor, Grandfather to Charles King of
Spain. The same year in the month of February Francis de Valois King of
France, bought the town of Tourney, of Henry king of England, for a great
sum of money.

The same year wheat was sold for 12. stiuers, and Rye for 9. stiuers the
quarter.

23. of October Charles King of Spain was elected Emperor, and at Acen in
Germany he received the Imperial Crown with great triumph.

The same year in the month of October there was three hundred houses burnt
in Romerswald.

Charles in presence of the King of Denmark, laid the first stone of the
foundation of the new quier of our Ladies church in Andwerpe, and spread the
mortar with a trowell.

The same year upon the 19. of November, there was 70. parishes in Holland
overflowed and drowned by force of the water that entered into the land, and in
the same month the Town of Turney was besieged by the Emperor, and upon
Saint Andrews day it was taken, since which time it has bin holden under the
king of Spaines subjection.

Rodes was won by the Turk, and while it was besieged, there rose a muteny
in Andwarpe, the people saying that the bakers were the cause of the dearth of
corn, which as then was very dear, the like did the women of Machelen and
Brussels against their Bakers.

The same year in the month of April, by Egmont in Holland there was a Fish
taken, being of 80. foot long, and in greatness correspondent, whereof they
made 160. barrels of Fish besides the in trailes.

The same year upon Palmesonsonday, at Konlen, there were 2. children borne
that cloue fast together, having two Heads, two Arms, and two feet, maiden
Children, but dead borne. Upon Saint Andrews day the same year a shippers wife
o^ Moerbeke baked a loaf of bread o^ pure wheat, and when she drew i^ out
of the Oven, it was as black as pitch.



The same year Rodes was again won from the Turks.

5. thousand houses burnt in the town of Troy in Champania.

Pauia, there rose great trouble in Germany for preaching of the Gospel by
Martin Luther.

The same year the Emperor Charles married the king of Portingales Daughter
in the Town of Civil in Spain.

25 of February happened the fearful and cruel battle before Pauia,
between the Emperor Charles and Francis king of France, wherein the king of
France was taken prisoner.

Phillip eldest son to Charles, the Emperor was borne at Valedolet in Spain.

The same year the city of Rome was besieged and taken by the Emperor
Charles, and the Pope taken prisoner, and in scaling the walls the Duke of
Burbon was slain.

6. of March 1500. Guelders and many Citizens of Vtrecht, robbed and spoiled
the Town of Hage in Holland.

This year the Island Peru was first found out.

The same year upon the first o^ June, the Bishop of Vtrecht took^ the town
of Vtrecht from the Guelders, slaying and imprisoning al^ the Captains and
soldiers, drowning two Prebends, and beheadin^ two Citizens.

Myllan.

The same year the Turk besieged Vienna with an Army of tw^ hundredth and
fifty thousand men.

The same year upon Michaelmas day in the Evening, there die^ many people of
the sweating sickness in Anwarpe.

Charles was crowned king of ^^^bardie, within the town of Bononia, where the
Emperor kissed the Popes foot.

The same year upon the twenty four of March, the first stone of the
foundation of the Court of Parliament at Machelen was laid, which before was
holden in the Palace.

The same year upon the fifth of November, four hundred and four Parishes
were drowned in the Low Countries.

Collen, where Ferdinand his Brother was crowned king of Romans.

The same year in the month of August, about Saint Laurence day, there was a
Comet or Blazing star seen in the Low Countries.

The same year and month, there was a fish taken upon the Sea side in
Holland, of sixty eight (...) long, (...), the (...) being thirteen foot
broad.

The same year there happened an Earthquake in Portingale, that continued for
the space of eight days, whereby 1050. houses within Lisbon fell down. This
earthquake happened sometimes seven or eight times a day, which made the
Citizens for fear to leave the town, and lie in the open fields.

Germany (being great with child) killed her husband in the night time, and
eat up his left side with the arm, the rest of the dead body she boiled and
kept it to eat.

The same year over the town of Munster in Westfalie, there was a man all
armed seen in the air.

Henry the eight king of England repudiated his wife Katherin, daughter of
Ferdinand king of Spain, and married his second wife called Anne of Bullen.

The same year Charles Duke of Guelderland, with five thousand men overthrew
the power of the Earl of East Freesland, being of fifteen thousand men.

The same year upon the sixth of October about twelve of the clock at night,
our Lady Church in Andwarp was burnt.

The same year the Town of Breda was increased and made greater, by Henry
Earl of Nassau, who likewise founded the Castle.

Holland and Zealand, called Anabaptists, that meant to pass through Harlame to
go to Munster but at black water they were taken and most of them burnt and
punished.

The same year upon Mary Magdalens day, there was more then one thousand
houses burnt in Breda.

The same year John van Layden, principal of the Anabaptists, with his
company took the Town of Munster, driving out the Bishop and all the
spiritualty: but being besieged by the Emperors troop, and constraind by
hunger, it was won from him. John Van Layden with his associates were
executed.

The same year, the town Cleruaus in France was spoiled with thunder, and in
three hours clean burnt.

The same year the town of Montalbon in France, was in three hours space
clean burnt and consumed with fire.

The same year the Anabaptists ran naked through the town of Amsterdam, and
made great uproar.

a great Army sailed into Africa: where he drove the Barbarians out of the
town of Tunis, and restored Muleasses to his kingdom again.

The same year a Gentleman being alive suncke into the earth, because he
would not sell corn to the poor people at a reasonable price.

This year Henry the eight King of England, in despite of the Pope (because
he would not consent to the deuorce of Queen Katherin) permitted Luthers
doctrine in England.

Delft was burned and consumed with fire in the space of three hours. The same
year died Erasmus of Roterdam.

Francis king of France with fifty thousand men took the town of Hedding,

The same year and month the Earl of Buren burnt the towns of Saint Paul
and Mutterell, and besieged Turwin.

Henry King of England, suppressed diverse Abbeys and Cloisters in England,
keeping all their lands to himself.

Isabell Queen of Spain, and Empress and Daughter to the king of Portingale
died at Toledo in Spain.

Spain, and at Gaunt he punished diverse rebels, and therein made a goodly
Castle.

The same year the Summer was so hot, that the River of Rhiin in some places
was dried up, so that men past over it on foot, the like did the River of
Seine in France, and the Figs in Flanders were as ripe upon the trees, as
if they had come out of Spain.

France.

The same year in the month of Iulie upon Saint James day, Martin Van Rosse,
with great number of soldiers came before Andwarpe, and thought to have
surpressed the town, he burnt all the Milles in Saint Willebordes field, and
from thence he went into Lukeland, where he was forced with shame to retire.

The same year the Emperors Soldiers took Deuentre and other towns from
the Duke of Guelder

The same year in Germany after a rain, there fell great numbers of
Grasshoppers, which did great hurt to the fruits of the earth.

Charles, made Phillip his Son King of Spain, and married him with Mary the
King of Portingales daughter.

The same year the Emperor came out of Spain and went into Guelderland,
where upon the eight of August he besieged Dueren, and willed them to yield it
unto him, but the towns men said that they feared not a Haddocke eater: which
not long after the Emperor made them dearly to rue, and at the same time
Amersford was taken by the Guelders.



Charles, eldest Son to Phillip king of Spain, was borne in Valedolet in
Spain.

Saxon, and the Lantgraue of Hessen.

The same year the Castle of Bla^kerhooke by Rammekens in Walcheren was made.

The same year upon the eight of August, a lightning falling in the town of
Mechelen, blew up a tower full of Gunpowder, and therewith slew at the least
1800. men, without any other hurt.

Saxon prisoner, and overthrew his army.

Brabant, bringing with him the Duke of Saxon, and Phillip Lantgraue of Hessen
prisoners.

Phillip king of Spain came out of Spain into the Low Countries, where he
was invested with the government thereof.

The same year about the thirteen of October, Phillip king of Spain made his
entry into Gaunt, and not long after into Anwarpe.

The same year the next day after whitsonday, Katherine Demedices was Crowned
Queen of France, within the town of Saint Dennis.

Africa from the Turks and Moors, and then the passage from Brussels was begun
to be dug.

The same year upon the twenty two of October, the Emperor besieged Metz.

This year the Lantgraue of Hessen was discharged of his imprisonment,

Turwin which they spoiled, and rased the walls to the ground.

The same year the Emperor took the town of Hedding.

Phillip king of Spain, went into England to marry Marie Queen of England.

Jane Queen of Spain, mother to ye Emperor Charles.

Phillip held his first feast of the order of the Golden Fleece in Andwarpe.

The same year upon the eighteen of February died Martin Luther.

The same year there was a Comet seen, that continued for the space of
fourteen days, betokening (as some judged) the wars which at that time
began in the low countries.

The same year peace was proclaimed between Phillip King of Spain, and Henry
king of France, and the same year upon the seventeenth of September, the
Emperor departed out of the Low Countries, to go into Spain.

have taken the town of Doway, but they failed of their purpose.

The same year Phillip King of Spain with an army of Neatherlanders, besieged
the town of Saint Quintins, where the greatest part of the nobility of France
came to raise the siege: but they were almost all taken and slain, and upon
the twenty five of August after the town was taken.

The same year was a great dearth: for at Andwarp Rye was sold for viii,
guilders, and wheat for xii. guilders the bushel.

Ferdinand King of Hungary and Bohemia was elected Emperor.

The same year the Frenchmen made a road into Flaunders, where they robbed and
burnt Dunkerke.

The same year upon the fifteenth day of Iulie, Dunkerke was won again from
the Frenchmen, and all that were found therein slain and murdered.

The same year upon the twenty one of September, the Emperor Charles died in
Spain, and upon the eighteen of October, about 28. days after the death of
the Emperor died Mary his Sister.

The same year upon the thirteen of December the Emperors Funeral was
celebrated within Brussels.

Cambraye between Phillip king of Spain, and the French king, and king Phillip
married the eldest Daughter of Henry King of France, and each of them
redeliuered such towns as they held by force.

The same year at the marriage of king Phillip with the French Kings daughter,
Henry king of France running at tilt, was by a splinter Monsieur Mongomries
Lance thr^^^ into the eye, whereof upon the twenty of July after he died.

The same year upon the twen^^^ nine of July, King Phillip celebrat^^ the
order of the Golden Fleece the town of Gaunt.

The same year the Duchess (...) Parma entered into the Neathe^lands for
regent thereof.

The same year the Scots began to profess the Religion, and to lea^^
Papistrie.

Phillip married Eliz^beth de Valois, daughter to Henry t^^ second king of
France in the tow^^ of Guarda la Iura in Spain.

The same year upon the twent^^ six of February, the first stone of t^^
foundation of the new town hou^^ of Andwarpe was laid.

Brussels.

The same year diverse Bishops were newly erected in certain towns in the
Neatherlands.

The same year the prince of Conde with diverse soldiers called Hugenets, took
certain towns in France: which he did, by reason of certain controversies
that happened among the Nobility, touching the observation of an edict of
peace, made in the behalf of the religion.

Guise in the name of Charles king of France, took the City of Roane, and
executed diverse of the Citizens.

Callis, there was seen in the air, two men armed, and all bloody to the
knees, each of them bearing a shield in his left hand, whereof the one had a
Cross, the other a Lion in it, and after them followed two women apparelled in
white.

The same year eight hundred houses were burnt within the town o^ Poperin in
Flaunders.

The same year there was so great a plague in England, that in London there
died eighteen hundred men i^ one week.

This year upon the seventeenth of May died John Calvin.

This year the River of Shield frose so hard, Andwarpe.

This year upon the fifth of April, Parma, requesting the moderation of all
placarts published touching Religion. Upon the fourth of July Religion began
openly to be preached in the Low Countries.

The same year upon the twenty of August Images in Andwarpe and other places
were thrown down.

This year those of the Religion, Oranges means they were pacified.

The one and twenty of April the Prince of Orange having had intelligence
what was determined in Spain touching the Low countries, and having advertised
the Earl of Egmont thereof, he went into Germany.

The twenty two of August ye Duke D'Alua with great triumph (although unworthy)
was received into Brussels.

The same year upon the ninth of September, the Earls of Fgmont and Horn
were committed to prison by the Duke of Alua, and kept in the Castle of Gaunt.

The seventeenth of October, the Castle of Andwarpe was begun to be made.

The last of December, the Duchess of Parma departed out of the Low
Countries, and presently after the Duke of Alua, imprisoned diverse of the
people that were of the Religion, and such as had borne arms.

This year in Easter Holidaies the Earl Lodwicke took the house of Weden in
Freeseland and Dam, in the which enterprise, the Earl of Arenberch and diverse
Spaniards were overthrown.

The first of Iulie the Duke of Alua caused the two Lords of Batenborch, and
sixteen gentlemen more to be beheaded.

The second of July the Duke of Alua sent his forces into Freesland against the
Earl Lodwicke that stayed for him, but because the Dutch Soldiers would not
fight, he was forced to save himself, and swam through the river of Embdze.

The fifth of Iulie the Duke of Alua caused the Earls of Egmont and Horn to be
beheaded in the town of Brussels.

The tenth of September, the Earl of Bueren was taken in Louen, and conveyed
into Spain.

In the month of October the Prince of Orange passed the River of the Mase at
Stochem with certain Dutch forces, but the Dutchmen when they should fight,
asking for money, were the cause that he could not fight with the enemy,
whervppon he went into France, to aid the Hugonots.

This year upon the thirteenth of march, Conde being taken prisoner, was
trayterouslie shot into the body by Montesquion.

This year upon the sixteenth of July, Alua published a general pardon within
the town of Andwarpe.

The twenty five of September, Anna of Austria took shipping in Zealand to
sail into Spain.

This month Ladron governor of Valencia, was by his Soldiers committed
Prisoner, because they would have the pay of nine companies of soldiers, the
money where of he had played at dice, which he promised them to satisfy, and to
the same end he got diverse of them to Andwarpe, where he committed and
executed at least two and forty of the principal mutiners.

This year Harmon Ruyter took the Castle of Loeuestein, Spaniardes not long
after took from him again, and hanged both him, and all his company.

In the month of December, the money that the Duke of Alua should have received
out of Spain was taken by the Queen of Englands ships and carrried into
England.

This year in the month of February, Alua sought to have a tribute of the
tenth penny, but he could not obtain it.

The first of April, the Brill was taken by Lumine, and not long after
Flushing and Enchuysen yielded to the Prince of Orange against the Duke of Alua.

The ninth of April, Bossu with certain Spaniards, desired to pass through
Roterdam, where traitorously he murdered diverse Burgers, and took in
Delfeshauen.

The twenty four of May, Earl Lodowicke took Bergen in Henegon, which the
Duke of Alua presently besieged, and took Bergen and Valechyn again.

In August the Prince of Conde with his army being at Duesborge passed over
the Rhein and took Ruermonde, and Lennen by composition, and Mechelen yielded
of it self, that done, he went to Bergen Henegon to help the Earl Lodowick,
but by reason of the great murder in France, he could no help his Brother,
and so passed through Mechelen into Holland.

The second of September, the Earl Lodowick by composition yielded the town
of Bergen to the Duke of Alua, upon condition that he should be conuaied
safely unto the borders of Germany, which was performed.

The second of October Mechelen was forcibly taken and spoiled, wherein many
Burgers were murthred, and women and maids deflowred, because they received
the Prince of Orange into the town.

The twenty of October Monsieur Dragon passed his men through the water at
Southberland toward Dergosen.

The thirteenth of November, the Spaniards took Zutphen, where they used the
Burgers very cruelly.

The twenty of November Don Frederick entered into Narden, where contrary to
his faith and promise he murdered diverse of the Burgers, and burnt the town.

Don Frederick came before Harlem.

The twenty three of April Sancy Dauila Captain of the castle in Andwarpe,
with a great army of ships, came before Flushing, where he and all his
ships were taken by the Flushinghers.

The thirteenth of Iulie, Harlem yielded to the Spaniards, committing
themselves to the Kings mercy, which they did for want of victuals.

The fourth of October the Castle of Ramekins in Zealand yielded to the Prince
of Orange, and not long after Gertrudenberg was taken by Poyet, Liefetenant to
the Prince.

The eight of October, the Spaniards besieged Alcmar, but by reason of the
water they were forced to leave it.

The twelfth of October, the Earl of Bossu with a great Navy of ships came
before Enchehusen: where he was taken, and sent prisoner to Horn.

In December the Duke of Alua went into Spain.

Spain sent Don Loys de requesentie (Commander of Saint Jacobs order, and of
the house of the Dukes of Cosa) into the Low Countries to be Governor, he
thought to have raised the Princes siege before Midleborow, but the twenty
four of January after, his me^ were ouerthrown at Bergen. The sixth of
February Monsieur Dragon Governor of Midleburge yielded up the town to the
Prince of Orange.

The fifth of April, the Commander published a general pardon within the
town of Brussels.

The twenty four of April, the Spaniards overthrew the Princes army at
Mokerheye, their General being Duke Christopher son to the Palsgraue of Rhein,
Earl Lodowicke, and Earl Henry of Nassawe, who were never found either dead
or a live.

The twenty six of April, the Spaniards in Andwarpe cried, fuere, fuere,
Viliacoes, because they would be paid.

The xxvj. of May, the Spaniardes came again before Leyden, and besieged it,
where before it they made 22. Bulwarks.

At the same time the Princes soldiers with certain ships came before
Andwarpe, and there took certain ships in the sight of the Commander.

The third of October, the town of Leyden was miraculously relieved, and the
siege raised by means of Captain Boyset with a Fleet of ships, that entered
into it bywater.

In December, an assemblye was holden at Breda, between the Commander and the
Prince and States of Holland and Zealand, to make a peace.

Bueren was by the Governor thereof delivered unto the Spaniards.

The same year Bomell was besieged the whole summer long.

The twelfth of Iulie, the Prince of Orange married Charlote daughter to
Monsieur de Monpensier within the town of Brill.

The twelfth of August Shoonehouen was by composition yielded to the enemy.

The twenty eight of August Old-water was forcibly taken by the Spaniards, and
many of the Burgers murdered.

The eight of September, the Spaniards besieged Were, and not long after it
yielded up.

The twenty eight of September the Spaniardes passed the waters at Saint
Anneslant, Duyuelant, and Phillipslant, where Boyset was slain, there they
took the fort of Bonnuene and besieged Zuriczee.

Krimpen.

The fifth of march the Commander died in Brussels.

In May the Spaniardes took Zuriczee, and not long after they left Zealand,
and went to Aelst, and took the town.

The twenty three of September, Monsieur de Hesse Governor of Brussels, and
the Lord- Glunes with the aid of the Burgers, took the principallest of the
states, being in council within Brussels.

The twenty of October the Spaniardes took Mastricke, by means of the Dutch
Soldiers that lay in it, wherein they robbed, spoiled, and murdered without
mercy.

The same day Don John de Austria, came to Lutzenburgh, and was sent by the
King of Spain to be Governor in the Low Countries.

The fourth of November, was the fury of Andwarpe, which was done by the
Spaniards, that issued out of the Castle into the town, wherein they slew about
9500. men Burgers, and Soldiers, 4000. drowned with the Earl of Ouersteine,
burnt six hundred houses, and ransomed the Burgers.

The eight of November, peace was made at Gaunt between the Prince, and the
States of Holland and Zealand, and the Spaniards.

The fifth of November, the town of Valencia, caused the Dutch Soldiers to
depart out of the town, and by appointment the Spaniardes delivered up the
Castle.

The ninth of November the Earl of Krulx Governor of Flanders, besieged the
Castle of Gaunt, which the Spaniards yielded by composition.

Vtrecht besieged the Castle, and compelled the Spaniards to yield it to Bossu.

The twenty seven of February, the peace agreed upon with Don John, was
proclaimed in Andwarpe.

The twenty of March the Spaniards went out of the Castle of Andwarpe, and the
Prince of Chima kept it.

Upon May day, Don John was with great honor received into Brussels.

The eleauenth of July, Don John went to Mechelen, where he sent for the Dutch
Captains of that town, and of the town and Castle of Andwarpe, and commanded
them to keep the towns for him. He sent likewise for the Prince of Chima, and
in his place sent Monsieur Tourlon, and from thence he went to Namen.

The second of July, between Safimghen, and Hefimghen, there was a Fish taken
of fifty right foot long, and forty foot thick.

The twenty nine of July, Don John took the Castle of Namen, which was the
cause of a new war.

The first of August, Tourlon was taken in the Castle of Andwarpe, and his
Soldiers driven out, who with the high Dutchmen took the new town, and there
insconsed themselves.

The twenty eight of August, Monsieur de Bours diliuered the castle unto the
Burgers that broke it down on the side that ioineth to the town.

The twenty eight of September. the Prince of Orange entered into Andwarpe, and
the 22. he road to Brussels, and the 24. he was chosen Governor.

The eighteen of October, those of Gaunt took the Duke of Aerschot prisoner,
to get their priueledges again.

The same time also they took the Bishops of Ipre, and of Brugges, the Lord of
Rassingen Campany, and the chief Baylie of Ipre and Cortricke.

The twenty one of November, Duke Mathias entered into the Low Countries to be
their Governor.

The seventh of December Don John with his soldiers, were proclaimed enemies
to the King.

Mathias was sworn Governor within the town of Brussels.

The last of January, the riters of Don John de Austria ouerthrewe the States
troops hard by Namen, and took Giblon, Leuuen, Aerschot, Tenen, Die, and
Sichem.

The eight of February, Amsterdam agreed with the States of Holland.

The twenty two of April, the pacification of Gaunt was published and sworn
in Andwarpe, and the Jesuits refusing to do it, were by ship sent out of the
town.

The twenty of Iulie the Dutch soldiers that lay in Camp, yielded up the
town that was besieged by the Earl of Rennenburg, that held it for the States.

The first of August, the Spaniardes set upon the States Soldiers by
Rymenant, Bossu being their beadle: where Don John lost many of his men.

The twenty four of September, certain Wallons mutined under pretense of their
pay, and by the help of Montigny made war upon Gaunt.

The same year the Gospel was openly preached throughout Brabant and
Flaunders.

The first of October, Don John de Austria, died of the plague, and in his
place entered the Prince of Parma.

The ninteenth of November, the Earl of Renuenburg had the town Deuenter
delivered unto him by composition

Parma took the Castle of Weert, and then came toward Andwarpe, and so to
Mastricht.

About the same time the Commissories of the States met at Kenlen, to entreat
of peace.

The twenty nine of July, the Spaniardes took Mastricht by assault, and entered
it by force.

The twenty of October Captain La Noue took Mien again, with the Castles of
Halewin and Waerwick.

Egmont took Cortright for the Spaniards.

In April Mechelen was taken again for the States, by Monsieur Temple.

The seventeen of July, the Spaniards took Delfe I Will, and Cowerden.

Steenwicke, was relieved by the Lord of Nieuenort, and Coronell Norris, where
many Spaniards were slain.

The twenty three of June, Breda by means of Fresin that lay prisoner in the
Castle was betrayed and delivered to the Spaniards.

The xviii. of August, the town of Cambray was delivered by the Duke of
Alenson, which the Prince of Parma had besieged.

The seventh of September Endhouen was taken, and not long after taken again
from the Spaniards.

The fourth of October, the Prince of Parma took Dornicke by composition,
after he had many times assalted it.

The twenty nine of October, Duke Mathias went out of the Low Countries.

Alenson by ship at riued in Andwarpe, and the twenty two of the same month,
he was sworn Governor of the Country of the States.

The eighteen of March the Prince of Conde was shot into the head within
the town of Andwarpe by one John Iauregni.

The ninteene of April the Prince of Parma besieged Andenard, and took it for
want of aid.

The twenty three of April Monsieour de Tion, Tempel, and Monsieour de la
Guard took Aelst.

The eleauenth of Iulie, Nicholas Zalcedo thought to have slain the Duke of
Alenson, but he was taken and brought to Paris, where upon the twenty two of
October, he was torn in pieces by four horses.

The second of August, the Scots that lay in Liere betrayed the town, and
delivered it to the Prince of Parma.

The fifteen of August the Duke Alenson was received into the town of Gaunt as
Earl of Flaunders.

The xxiii. of September, Lochem was delivered by the Earl of Hollocke, wherein
were three Earls.

The same month the Prince of Parma took Nieuenhouen.

Andwarpe, where the Duke Alenson under pretense of a muster meant to have
betrayed it, in the which enterprise he lost fifteen hundred Frenchmen,
besides hurt men and prisoners, and but 83. Burgers slain,

The thirteenth of February, the new Burse of Andwarpe was burnt.

In August the Spaniards took Dixmuyden, and in December they besieged Ipre.

The twenty four of October, the Spaniards took Sas by Gent.

The thirteenth of October, the baylie of Wast delivered the land of Wast to
the Spaniards, and they of Andwarpe cut the Diches.

Aelst was delivered to the Prince of Parma.

The twelfth of April the Prince of Parma took Ipre.

The tenth of Inn, the Prince of Parma besieged the sconce of Lillo, but he
was forced to leave it with shame.

The tenth of July, the Prince of Parma took Liefekins hook.

The same day the Prince of Orange was slain in Delf by one Balthazer Gerrats,
the same month the States lost Herentales.

The sixteen of August, Dermond was delivered to the Prince of Parma.

The twentic six of September, the town of Gaunt for want of victnals yielded
to the Prince of Parma.

Holocke took Hertogenbosh, but hec was forced to lean it again with some
loss of his men.

The same year upon Saint Matthews evening, the bridge by Calco was fully
finished.

The tenth of March, Brussels for want of victuals agreed with the Prince of
Parma.

The fourth of April the ships that were set on fire, and sent by them of
Andwarpe to fire the bridge, entered under it and did much hurt.

The same time the Hollanders, and Zealanders took in Liefskins hook, S. Annes
hook, and Venten.

The seauenteene of July, the town of Mechelen for want of victuals yielded to
the Prince of Parma.

The tenth of August an agreement was made between England and the Low
Countries.

The eleventh of August the Prince of Parma received the Golden Fleece at the
bridge of Calloo on Brabant side.

The twenty seven of August the Prince of Parma entered into Andwarpe.

The second of September the bridge was broken.

The ninth of November, the Diches of the Castle of Andwarpe were dug again.

Lecester came into Holland, and the sixth of February after was proclaimed
Governor.

The sixth of June the town of Grave by composition yielded to the Prince of
Parma.

The twenty nine of June he took Venlo likewise by composition.

The sixteen of July the Englishmen took Axel in Flaunders.

The seventeen of July the Prince of Parma besieged the town of Nuse, and the
xxvj. of the same, he took it by assault.

The tenth of December, at Limer a village lying by Tienen there rained blood
upon the Ise, in a gentleman's Orchard, and it fell so hot, that there with the
Ise hissed, as if one had thrust a pipe of Lead into it, and sunk at the least
a foot deep into the Ise.

Would by Bergen.

The same month the town of Deuenter was betrayed to the Spaniard, by Sir
Edward Stanley.

The fourth of July the town of Gelder was betrayed by a Scot called Patron.

The last of Iulie, Rye was sold in Andwarpe for twelne Guilders, and wheat
for fifteen guilders the quarter.

The ninth of August the town of Sluice yielded to the Prince of Parma, after
he had shot 16000 Cannon shot at the town.

The same year died Augustus Lantgraue of Saxon.

England.

Not long before that, the Earl of Lecester returned again into the low
Countries.

The same year happened the trouble before Medenblicke.

The same time the Lord of Buckhurst came into the Low Countries in the Queen
of Englands behalf.

The same year in June the Earl of Hollocke took the house of Loon, and the
Sconce of Enghelen in the water that goes to Bosch, where Houtepen was slain,
and died at Hertogenbushe.

The sixth of July there was conte^tion in Vtrecht between the Earl of
Newenare, and the Magistrates and Burgers.

About August and September, there was much talking of peace, whereupon the
Queen of England sent her Ambassadors out of England into Flanders, at the
request of the Prince of Parma, but it was all but treason.

The twenty six of October, at Layden were executed Jacques Valmar. Cosmo de
Pescarenges, and Nicholas Mauld, and some for the same cause banished out of
the town.

The twenty three of December, Shenk took Bon.

About this time the Prince of Parma prepared diverse ships and flat bottomed
boats, at Andwarpe, and at Dunkerke, which did little profit or aid to the
Spanish Fleet.

The xxvij. of February, 1588. a woman in Dort was delivered of iiij. men
children at a birth, that were all living and christened, their names being,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Samuel.

The tenth of March, Gertrudenberge fell in a muteny.

The xij. of April, the Earl of Lecester was discharged of his government by
open placart. About this time died the king of Denmark.

The twenty eight of April, a woman in Dort was delivered of three children
at one birth, and christened, Abraham, Sara and Susanna.

About the middle of May, the Prince of Parma thought to have put out of
Dunkerke with a great Fleet of Ships, but the Hollanders kept him in.

At the same time the Queen of England prepared her Navy in a readiness, and
made great preparation for the wars, although in the mean time a peace was
entreated of.

The thirteenth of May, a great Army of Spanish ships set out of Lisbon for
Gronie, whereof the like had never bin heard of, which was the Fleet that
meant to have done great hurt to England and the Low Countries, but God
mercifully delivered us out of their hands.

In July the muteny at Gertrudenberge was appeased.

The xiiij. of September the Earl of Lec ester died in England.

The same month Sir Thomas Candish an English Gentleman came out of Indie with
a ship laden with gold and silver, having sailed round about the world.

The vij. of October, there was great mutenie in Vtrecht, where Captain
Clarehagen was stabbed, but died not of that wound.

About this time the Prince of Parma besieged Bergen up Zome, and went from it
again, not without both loss and shame.

About this time Sir Martin Shenk made a Sconce above the town Bommell upon
Voorne.

The xix. of November, the Prince of Parma departed from Bergen upon Zone,
after he had besieged it for the space of six weeks.

The xxv. of September, Bon was delivered up to the Prince of Parma.

In October the Earl of Mansfelt besieged Watchtendour, and the xx. of
December, he agreed with the soldiers that they should issue out all armed,
with Ensigns displayed.

The thirteenth of December, the Duke of Guise was slain by the king of France,
which the Guisart meant to have done to him, and the next day the Cardinal of
Guise his Brother was likewise slain.

Gertrudenberge was besieged by the States, and long battered, but in the end
they left it off, and the Soldiers within it sold the town for fifteen
months pay unto the Prince of Parma, which they delivered upon the tenth of
April.

The thirteenth of April the Prince of Parma took the house of Lobben, but
within three days after he lost it again.

The seventeen of May, the Spaniard took the sconce of Deeueren by Heusden.

The twenty two of May, the Prince of Parma took the house of Hemart.

The twenty five of June he took the house of Blienbeeke.

The sixteen of July he took the houses of Proyen and Brakel, but now are
left again, and clean burnt with the Dorpe.

The fifteen of July the Prince of Parma besieged Heusden, and from thence he
went with shame enough into France.

The first of August, Henry the third King of France was murdered by a Friar.

The eleauenth of August, Sir Martin Shenke was drowned by Nimmegen, thinking
to have taken the town.

The twenty four of August, the enemy took the house of Heel in Bomelsweert.

Maurice took the town of Breda, by means of a ship of turfes wherein were
about 70. me^ their leader being Captain Argier of Lambrecht.

The xxvij. of September Hemert was yielded to Grave Maurice.

The third of October he likewise took the house of Heel.

The xxix, of October Steenberghen was yielded to the States.

The same year in the month of March, Grave Charles came before the Sconce of
Seuenbergen with a great force thinking to take it, but with shame and loss of
almost 1000 men, he was constrained to leave it.

Paris victuals were so dear, that it was compared to the destruction of
Jerusalem, for a townesman therein constrained by hunger, hung his wife and
children, which done he set a bill upon his own breast, wherein he wrote the
cause of that action, and then hanged himself, for at that time within the
town they eat Horses, Asses, Dogs, Cats, Rats, and Vine leaves, a pound of
butter was sold for two Crowns, and an Egg for twelve solx, and great
numbers died for hunger.

The same year upon the twenty six of May, Sutphen was besieged and
delivered into the hands of Grave Maurice.

The thirty one of May, Deuenter was besieged, and after it had received 3700
shot against it, they yielded it unto the States.

The twenty eight of June, Grave Maurice went before Delffile with three and
thirty great pieces, and the second of July it was yielded unto him.

The fifth of July, he came before the Sconce of Opslach, and with 160. shot
battered it, which was yielded to the States.

Upon the seventh of July the soldiers therein issuing disarmed.

The next day Grave Maurice went to the Sconce of Immentil, and after 36. shot
at the same, they yielded it unto him upon the eleauenth of July.

The twenty four of the same month five Cornets of horse of the Prince of
Parmas troops were overthrown in Betue, whereof one was the Prince of Parmas
Guard.

The twenty six and twenty seven of July, the Prince of Parma left the Sconce
of Knodseburg.

The xix. of September Grave Maurice desieged Hulst, which the xxv. of the same
month yielded unto him.

The xiiij. of October Kimmeghen was belieged, and th xxii. of the same month
yielded to Grave Maurice.

This year Steenwicke yielded unto Grave Maurice,

The xxjj. of September, Couerden yielded to the States.

This year upon the xxviij. of March, Maurice with a great power went to
besiege Gertrudenberge, and the vij. of April the enemy yielded up the
Steelhofes Sconce, by composition.

The xxiiij. of June, the Bulwark was taken by force by Captain Haen and
Buury, whereby the town was forced to yield to Grave Maurice, who let the
soldiers issue out with their arms, but no colors.

The xiiij. and xxj. of May, Grave Maurice with 120. companies of foot, and
xxvj. Cornets of horsemen departed from Swool to relieve Couerden, which had
bin besieged for the space of six months together, by the Earl Harman and
Verdugo, but hearing of the states forces, they left their forts, and departed,
and so the town was delivered.

The xxij. of July, Grave Maurice took the town of Gronning.

This year upon the xxviij. of March, Gorcum by a high water brake through,
and ran under the Papendrecht.

The xxiij. of July, they began to dig without the spuyport of Dort, to
enlarge the town.

The eleauenth of August four and forty Dunkerkers and Spaniards, were hanged
by Roterdam.

The 2 of September, Earl Phillip of Nassau passed at Ramsburg over the Lip
with five hundred men, where with other Earls he fought most valiantly with
Monsieur Dragons regiment, in which sight, the said Earl Phillip, and the young
Earl of Solmes were slain, yet Dragon lost thrice as many men as Grave
Maurice did.

This year the seauenteene of April Albertus Cardinal of Austria wan Callis
from the French King.

The thirty of Iulie, the Englishmen with certain Holland, and Zealands ships
by force took the town of Cadyz Malis in Spain, which they spoiled, pilled,
and burnt, bringing great treasure from thence.

The sixteen of July, there was a Comet or blazing star seen in the Low
Countries.

The seventeen of August the Cardinal took Hulst in Flanders by composition
after he had lost 6000. of his best soldiers before the town.

This year upon the twenty four of January, Maurice with six thousand men,
met the enemy at Tuelsheheyde by Turenhoult, where he set upon them, being a
great number, who being advertised of his coming fled away, whom he
followed, and having overtaken them, he slew of them to the number of two
thousand men, among the which, their General the Earl of Ferrara was one.

The eleauenth of March the town of Amyens in France was by treason delivered
to the Cardinal for the King of Spain.

The nineteen of August the town of Renisberg by composition was yielded to
the States.

The twenty four of August the Cammille Sconce yielded to Grave Maurice.

The second of September the town of Meurs yielded by composition unto Grave
Maurice.

FINIS.

