Pierce Penilesse HIS SVPPLICATION to the Devil.

Barbaria grandis habere nihil. Written by Tho. Nash, Gent.

LONDON, printed by Abell Ieffes, for I. B. 1592.

A private Epistle of the Author to the Printer.
Wherein his full meaning and purpose (in publishing this Book) is set forth.

FAith I am very sorry (Sir) I am thus unawares betrayed to infamy. You
write to me my book is hasting to the second impression: he that has once
broke the Ice of impudence* need not care how deep he wade in discredit. I
confess it to be a mere toy, not deserving any judicial man's view: If it have
found any friends, so it is, you know very well that it was abroad a fortnight
ere I knew of it, and uncorrected and unfinished, it has offered it self to
the open scorn of the world. Had you not been so forward in the republishing
of it, you should have had certain Epistles to Orators and Poets, to insert to
the later end; As namely, to the Ghost of Macheuill, of Tully, of Ovid, of
Roscius, of Pace the Duke of Norfolks Iester; and lastly, to the Ghost of
Robert Green, telling him, what a coil there is with pamphleting on him after
his death. These were prepared for Pierce Penilesse first setting forth, had
not the fear of infection detained me with my Lord in the Country.

Now this is that I would have you to do in this second edition; First, cut
off that long-tayld Title, and let me not in the forefront of my Book, make a
tedious Mountebanks Oration to the Reader, when in the whole there is nothing
praise-worthie.

I hear say there be obscure imitators, that go about to frame a second part
to it, and offer it to sell in Paul's Churchyard, and elsewhere, as from me.
Let me request you (as ever you will expect any favor at my hands) to get
some body to write an Epistle before it, ere you set it to sale again,
importing thus much; that if any such lewd devise intrude it self to their
hands, it is a coseanage and plain knavery of him that sels it to get money,
and that I have no manner of interest or acquaintance with it. Indeed if my
leisure were, such as I could wish, I might haps (half a year hence) write
the return of the Knight of the Post from he^, with the Devils answer to the
Supplication: but as for a second part of Pierce Penilesse, it is a most
ridiculous rogery.

Other news I am advertised of, that a scald triuial lying pamphlet, called
Greens groats-worth of wit is given out to be of my doing. God never have care
of my soul, but utterly renounce me, if the least word or syllable in it
proceeded from my pen, or if I were any way privy to the writing or printing
of it. I am grown at length to see into the vanity of the world more than ever
I did, and now I condemn my self for nothing so much, as playing the dolt in
Print. Outvpon it, it is odious, specially, in this moralizing age, wherein
every one seeks to show himself a Politician by mis-interpreting. In one place
of my Book Pierce Penilesse says, but to the Knight of the Post, I pray how
might I call you, and they say I meant one How, a Knave of that trade that I
never heard of before. The Anti quaries are offended without cause, thinking I
go about to detract from that excellent profession, when (God is my witness)
I reverence it as much as any of them all, and had no manner of allusion to
them that stumble at it. I hope they will give me leave to think there be fools
of that Art as well as of al other; but to say I utterly condemn it as an
unfruitful study, or seem to despise the excellent qualified parts of it,
is a most false and injurious surmise. There is nothing that if a man list he
may not wrest or pervert, I cannot forbid any to th^nke villainously, Sed
caveat emptor, Let the interpreter beware: for none ever hard me make
Allegories of an idle text. Write who will against me, but let him look his life
be without scandale: for if he touch me never so little, I Will be as good as the
Black Book to him and his kindred. Beggarly lies no beggarly wit but can
invent: who spurneth not at a dead dog? but I am of anothermettal, they shall
know that I live as their evil Angel, to haunt them world without end, if they
disquiet me without cause. Farewell, and let me hear from you as soon as it
is come forth. I am the Plagues prisoner in the Country as yet: if the
sickness cease before the t^irde impression. I will come and alter whatsoever
may be offensive to any man, and bring you the latter end.

Your friend, Tho. Nash.

Pierce Penilesse his Supplication to the Devil.
Having spent many years in studying how to live, and liu'de a long time
without money: having tired my youth with folly, and surfetted my mind with
vanity, I began at length to look back to repentance, and address my
endeavors to prosperity: But all in vain, I sat up late, and rose eraely,
contended with the cold, Dicite qui sapitis, cum hae^ quae scimus inertes: Sed
trepidas acies, and fera bella sequi.
and conuersed with scarcity: for all my labors turned to loss, my vulgar
Muse was despised and neglected, my pains not regarded or slightly rewarded,
and I my self (in prime of my best wit) laid open to poverty. Whereupon (in a
malecontent humor) I accused my fortune, raild on my patrones, bit my pen, rent
my papers, and ragde in all points like a mad man. In which agony tormenting my
self a long time, I grew by degrees to a milder discontent: and pausing a
while ever my standish, I resolved in verse to paint forth my passion: which
best agreeing with the vain of my unrest, Est aliquid fatale ^^^lum, per verba
leuare.
I began to complain in this sort.

Why is it damnation to despair and die,
When life is my true happiness disease?
My soul, my soul, thy safetye makes me fly
The faulty means, that might my pain appease.
Divines and dying men may talk of hell,
But in my heart, her several torments dwell.
Ah worthless Wit, to train me to this woe,
Deceitful Arts that nourish Discontent:
Ill thrive the Folly that bewitched me fo,
Vain thoughts adieu, for now I will repent.
And yet my wantes persuade me to proceed.
Since none takes pity of a Scollers need.
Forg^ie (...) God, although I curse my birth,
And ba^ the air, wherein I breath a Wretch:
Since Misery has daunted all my mirth,
And I am quite undone through promise-breach.
Oh friends, Polme occidistis (...).
no friends, that then ungently frown.
When changing Fortune casts us headlong down.
Without redress complains my careless verse,
And Mydas-cares relent not at my moan:
In some far Land will I my griefs rehearse,
Among them that will be moved when I shall groan.
England (adieu) the Soil that brought me forth,
A dieu unkind, where skill is nothing worth.
These Rymes thus abruptly set down, I tossed my imaginations a thousand ways
to see if I could find any means to relieve my estate: But all my thoughts
consorted to this conclusion, that the world was uncharitable, and I ordaind to
be miserable. Thereby I grew to consider how many base men that wanted those
parts which I had, euioyed content at will, and had wealth at command: I called
to mind a Cobbler, that was worth five hundred pound, an Hostler that had built
a goodly Inn and might dispende forty pound yearly by his Land, a Carre-man
in a lether pische, that had whipped out a thousand pound out of his borse tail:
and have I more wit than all these (thought I to my self) am I better borne?
am I better brought up? yea and better favored? and yet am I a beggar? What is
the cause? how am I crossed? or whence is this curse?

Even from hence, that men that should employ such as I am, are enamoured of
their own wits, and think what ever they do is excellent, though it be never
so scuruie: that Learning (of the ignorant) is rated after the value of the
ink and paper: and a Scriuener better paid for an obligation, than a Scholar
for the best Poem he can make; that * every gross braind Idiot is suffered to
come into print, Scribimus iuderi doct^que poequiata pas^^m.
who if he set forth a Pamphlet of the praise of Pudding-pricks, or write a
Treatise Tom Thumme, or the exployts of Untruss; it is bought up thick and
threefold, when better things lie dead. How then can we choose but be needy,
when there are so many Droans amongst us? or ever prove rich that toil a whole
year for fair looks. Gentle Sir Phillip Sidney, thou knewst what belongd to
a Scholar, thou knewst what pains, what toil, what travel conduct to
perfection: well could thou give every Virtue his encouragement, every Art his
due, every writer his desert: cause none more virtuous witty, or learned than
thy self.

But thou art dead in thy grave, and have left too few successors of thy glory,
Heurapiun^mala
too few to cherish the Sons of the Muses, or water those budding hopes with
their plenty, which thy bounty erst planted.

Believe me Gentlemen, for some cross mishapes have taught me experience, there
is not that strict observation of honor, which has been heretofore. Men of
great calling take it of merit, to have their names eternizde by Poets, and
whatsoever pamphlet or dedication encounters them, they put it up in their
fleeues, and scare give him thanks that presents it. Much better is it for
those golden Pens, to raise such ungrateful Peasants from the Dunghill of
obscurity, and make them equal in fame to the Worthies of old, when their
doting self-love shall challenge it of duty, and not only give them nothing
themselves, but impoue^ish libe^ality in others.

This is the lamentable condition of our Times, that men of Art must seek
alms of Cormorantes, and those that deserve best, be kept under by Dunces, who
count it a policy to keep them bare, because they should follow their books
the better: thinking belike, that as preferment has made themselves idle, that
were erst painful in meaner places, so it would likewise slacken the
endeavors of those Students that as yet strive to excel, in hope of
advancement. A good policy to suppress superfluous liberality. But had it
been practiced when they were promoted, the Yeomandry of the Realm had been
better to pass than it is, and one Droane should not have driven so many Bees
from their hony-combes.

I, I. we will give loosers leave to talk, it is no matter what Sicprobo and his
pennilesse companions prate, whilst we have the gold in our coffers: this is
it that will make a knave an honest man, and my neighbor Cramptons stripling a
better Gentleman than his Grandsier. O it is a trim thing, when Pride the son
goes before, and Shame the father follows after. Such presidents there are in
our Commonwealth a great many: not so much of them whom Learning and Industry
has exalted, (whom I prefer before Genus and proauos) as of Carterly
vpstarts, that outface Town and Country in their Ueluets, when Sir Rowland
Russet-coat their Dad, goes sagging every day in his round Gascoynes of whyce
cotton, and has much a do (poor pennie-father) to keep his unthrift elbowes
in reparations.

Marry happy are they (say I) that have such fathers to work for them whilst
they play, for where other men turn over many leaves to get bread and cheese
in their old age, and study twenty years to distill gold out of ink; our
young masters do nothing but devise how to spend and ask counsel of the
Wine and Capons, how they may quickliest consume their pat^imonies. As for me,
I live secure from all such perturbations: for (thanks be to God) I am vacuus
viator, and care not though I meet the Commissioners of Newmarket-heath at
high midnight, for any Crosses, Images, or Pictures that I carry about me more
than needs.

Than needs (quoth I) nay I would de ashamde of it, if Opus and Vsus were not
knocking at my door twenty times a week when I am not within; the more is
the pity, that such a frank Gentleman as I, should want: but since the dice
do run so untowardly on my side, I am partly provided of a remedy. For
whereas those that stand most on their honor, have shut up their purses, and
shifte us off with court-holie-bread: and on the other side, a number of
hypocritical hot-spurres, that have God always in their mouths, will give
nothing for Gods sake; I have clapped up a handsome S^pplication to the Devil,
and sent it by a good fellow, that I know will deliver it:

And because you may believe me the better, I care not if I acquaint you with
the circumstance.

I was infor^de of late days, that a certain blind Ketayler called the
Devil, used to lend money upon paw^es, or any thing, and would let one for a
need have a thousand pounds upon a Statute Merchant of his soul: or if a
man plide him thoroughly, would trust him upon a Bill of his hand without any
more circumstance. Besides, he was noted for a privy Benefactor to Tra^tors and
Patasites, and to advance fools and Asses far sooner than any, to be a greedy
pursuer of news, and so famous a Politician in purchasing, that Hell (which at
the beginning was but an obscure Uillage) is now become a huge City,
whereunto all Countries are tributary.

These manifest conjectures of Plentic, assembled in one commonplace of
ability; I determined to clawe Avarice by the elbowe, till his full belly gave
me a full hand, and let him blood with my pen (if it might be) in the
vein of liberality: and so (in short time) was this Paper-monster Pierce
Penilesse begotten.

But written and all, here lies the question; where shall I find this old
Ass, that I may deliver it. Mass that's true, they say the Lawyers have the
Devil and all; and it is like enough he is playing Ambodexter amongst them.
Fie, fie, the Devil a driuer in Westminster hall, it can never be.

Now I pray what do you imagine him to be? Perhaps you think it is not
possible he should be so grave. Oh then you are in an error, for he is as
formal as the best Scriuener of them all. Marry he does not use to wear a
nightcap, for his horns will not let him: and yet I know a hundred as well he
aded as he, that will make a jolly shift with a Court-cup on their crowns if
the weather be cold.

To proceed with my tale, to Westminster hall I went, and made a search of
Enquiry, from the black gown to the buckram bag, if there were any such
Sergeant, Bencher, Counselor, Attorney, or Pettifogger, as Signior Cornuto
Diabolo, with the good face. But they al (vnavoce) ^ffirmed, that he was not
there: marry whether he were at the Exchange or no, amongst the rich
Merchantes, that they could not tell: but it was likelier of the two, that I
should meet with him, or hear of him at the least in those quarters I faith,
and say you so quoth I, and I Will bestow a little labor more but I Will hunt him
out.

Without more circumstance, thither came I; and thrusting my self, as the
manner is, amongst the confusion of languages, I asked (as before) whether he
were there extant or no? But from one to another, Non noui Damonem was all the
answer I could get. At length (as Fortune served) I lighted upon on old
^^radling Usurer, clad in a dam ask cassocke edged with Fox sur, a pair of
trimke slops, sagging down like a Shoomakers wallet, and a short thrid-bare
gown on his backed faced which moatheaten budge, upon his he ad he wore a filt by
course biggin, and next it a garnish of night-caps, which a sage butten-cap, of
the form of a cow-sheard over spread very orderly: a fat chuffe it was
Iremember, with a gray beard cut short to the stumps, as though it were grimde,
and a huge woorme-eaten nose, like a cluster of grapes hanging downe-wardes. Of
him I demanded if he could tell me any tidings of the party I sought for.

By my troth quoth he stripling, (and then he cought) I saw him not lately, nor
know I certainly where he keeps: but thus much I heard by a Broker a friend
of mine, that has had some dealings with him in his time, that he is at home
sick of the gout and will not be spoken withal. under more than thou art able
to give, some two or three hundred angels at least, if thou have any suit to
him: and then parhapes hele strain courtesy with his legs in childe-bed, and
come forth and talk with thee: but otherwise, Non est domi, he is busy with
Mammon, and the prince of the North, how to build up his kingdom, or sending
his spirits abroad to undermine the maligners of his government.

I hearing of this cold comfort, took me leave of him very faintly, and like
a careless malecontent that knew not which way to turn, retired me to Paul's
to seek my dinner with Duke Humfrey: but when I came there, the old soldier
was not up: he is long a rising thought I, but that's all one: for he that has
no money in his purse, must go dine with sir John Best-betrust, at the sign of
the chalk and the Post.

Two hungry turns had I scarce fetched in this wast gallery, when I was
encountered by a neat pedantical fellow, in form of a Cittiz^n: who thrasting
himself abruptly into my company like an In^elligencer, began very earnestly
to question with me about the cau^ of my disco^tent, or what made me so sad,
that seemed too young to be acquainted with sorrow. I nothing nice to unfold my
estate to any whatsoever, discourst to him the whole circumstaunce of my care:
and what toil and pains I had took in searching for him that would not be
heard of. Why (...) (quoth he) had I been privy to your purpose before, I
could have easd you of this travel: for if it be the devil you seek for,
know I am his man. I pray sir how might I call you? A knight of the Post quoth
he, for so I am termed: a fellow that will swear you any thing for twelve
pe^ce, Non been conducti vendunt periuria testes.
but indeed I am a spirit in nature and essence, that take upon me this
human shame, only to set men together by the ears, and send souls by
millons to hell.

Now trust me a substantial trade, but when do you think you could send next
to your master? why every day* for there is not a cormorant that dies, or
Cutpurse that is hanged, but I dispatch letters by his soul to him, and to
all my friends in the Low-cuntries: wherefore, if you have any thing that you
would have transported: give it me, and I will see it delivered.

Yes marry have I (quoth I) a certain Supplication here unto your Master,
which you may peruse if it please you. With that he opened it, and read as
follows.

To the high and mighty Prince of Darkness, Donsell dell Lucifer, King of
Acheron, Stix and Phlegeton, Duke of Tartary, marquess of Conytus, and Lord
high Regent of Lymbo: his distressed Orator Pierce Penilesse, wishes increase
of damnation, and malediction eternal, Per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum.
MOst humbly sueth unto your sinfulnes, your singlesoald Orator Pierce
Penilesse: that whereas your impious excellence, has had the poor tennement
of his purse any time this half year for your dancing school, and he
(notwithstanding) has received no penny nor cross for farm, No i will be sworn
upon a book have I not
according to the usual manner it may please your graceless Majesty to
consider of him, and give order to your servant Avarice, he may be dispatched,
insomuch as no man here in London can have a dancing school without rent,
and his wit and knauerie cannot be maintained with nothing. Or if this be not
so plausible to your honorable infernalship, it might seem good to your
helhood, to make extent upon the souls of a number of uncharitable ^ormorants,
who having incurd the danger of a Praemunire, with meddling with matters that
properly concern your own person, deserve no longer to live (as men) amongst
men, but to be incorporated in the society of devils. By which means, the
mighty controller of fortune, and imperious subuerter of desteny, delicious
gold, the poor man's God and Idol of Princes (that looks pale and wanne
through long imprisonment, might at length be r^stored to his powrfull Monar
chie, and e^tsoon be set at liberty, to help his friends that have need of
him.

I know a great sort of good fellows that would venture far for his
freedom, * and a number of needy Lawyers, Idest, for the freedom of gold.
(who now mourn in threed-^are gowns for his thra^dome) that would go near
to poison his keepers with (...) La^^ne, ^that might procure his enlargement:
but inexora^le y^o^ detaines him in the dungeon of the (...)* so that now (our
c^eatur^) he can neither traffic wit) the Merce^^ and Tailers as he was
wont, nor dominere in Tauernes as he ought.

Famine, Lent, and dessolation, sit in Onyon skind iackets before the door of
his indurance, as a Chorus in the Tragedy of Hospitality, to tell hunger and
poverty there is no relief for them there? and in the inner part of this ugly
habitation, stands Greediness, The description of Greedines.
prepared to devour all that enter, attyred in a Capouch of written parchment,
buttond down before with Labels of wax, and lined with sheep fels for
warmenes: his Cappe furd with cats skins, after the Muscouie fashion, and all
to be tasse^d with Angle-hookes in stead of Aglets, ready to catch hold of all
those to whom he shows any humblenes: for his breeches they were made of the
lists of broad clothes, which he had by letters pattents assured him and his
heirs, to the utter overthrow of Bowcases and Cushin makers, and bumbasted
they were like Beerebarrels, with statute Merchants and forfeitures. But of al,
his shoes were the strangest, which being nothing else but a couple of crab
shells, were toothd at the tooes with two sharp six penny nails, that digd up
every dunghill they came by for gould, and snarld at the stones as he went in
the street, because they were so common for men, women and children to tread
upon, and he could not devise how to wrest an odd fine out of any of them.

Thus walks he up and down all his life time, with an iron crow in his hand
in steed of a staff, and a Sariants Mace in his mouth* (which night and day he
still gnawd upon) and either busies himself in setting silver lime twigs to
entangle young Gentlemen, and casting forth silken shraps to catch Woodcocks,
or in syuing of Muckhils and shop-dust, whereof he will boult a whole cartload
to gain a bowd Pin.

On the other side, Dame Niggardize his wife, in a sedge rug kirtle, The
description of dame Nigardize.
that had been a mat time out of mind, a course hempen rail about her
shoulders, borrowed of the one end of a hop-bag, an apron made of Almanackes
out of date (such as stand upon Screens, or on the backside of a door in a
Chandlers shop), and an old wives pudding pan on her head, thrumd with the
parings of her nails, sat barrelling up the droppings of her nose, in steed
of oil to saime wool withal, and would not adventure to spit without half a
dozen porrengers at her elbow.

The house (or rather the hell) where these two Earthwormes encaptiued this
beautiful Substance, was vaste, large, strong buildt, and well furnished, all
save the Kitchen: for that was no bigger then the Cooks room in a ship, with
a little court chimney, about the compass of a Parenthesis in proclamation
print: then judge you what diminutiue dishes came out of this douesneast. So
likewise of the Buttry, for whereas in houses of such stately foundation that
are builte to outward show so magnificent, every Office is answerable to the
Hall, which is principal, there the Buttry was no more but a blind Cole-house
under a pair of stairs, wherein (vprising and downelying) was but one single
single kilderkin of small beer, that would make a man with a carrouse of a
spoonefull, run through an Alphabet of faces. Nor vsd they any glasses or
cups (as other men) but only little farthing ounce boxes, whereof one of them
filled up with froath (in manner and form of an Alehouse) was a meals
allow^nce for the whole household. It were lamentable to tell what misery the
Rattes and Mise endured in this hard world, how when all supply of vittualls
failed them, they went a Boothaling one night to Sinior Greediness
bedchamber, where finding nothing but emp^ines and vastitie, they encountered
(after long inquisition) with a cod-peece, well dunged and manured with grease
(which my pinch fartpenie-father had retaind from his Bachelorship, until the
eating of these presents. Upon that they set* and with a courageous assault
rent it cleene away from the breeches, and then carried it in triumph like a
coffin on their shoulders betwixt them. The very spiders and dust-weauers,
that wont to set up their loomes in every window, decayed and undone through
the extreme dearth of the place, that afforded them no matter to work on)
were constrained to break against their wills, and go dwell in the country,
out of the reach of the broom and the wing: and generally, not aflea nor a
cricket that carried any brave mind, that would stay there after he had once
tasted the order of their fare. Only unfortunate gold (a predestinat slave to
drudges and fools) lives in endless bondage there amongst them, and may no way
be releast, except you send the rot half a year amongst his keepers, and so
make them away with a murrion one after another.

O, but a far greater enormity reigns in the heart of the Court: Pride the
peruerter of all Virtue, The (...) of pride.
sits appareled in the Merchants spoils, and ruin of young Citizens: and
scorn^th l^earning, that gave their vp-start Fathers, titles of gent^y.

All malcontent sits the greasy son of a Cloathier, and complains (like a
decayed Earl) of the ruin of ancient houses: whereas the Weauers loomes first
framed the web of his honor, The nature of an vp-start.
and the locks of wool that bushs and brambles have took for tou^e of
insolent sheep, that would needs strive for the wall of a firbush, have made
him of the tenths of their tar, a Squier of low degree? and of the collect^o^s
of their scatterings, a Justice Tam Martiquam Mercurio, of Peace and of Coram.
He will be humorous forsooth, and have a brood of fashions by himself.
Sometimes (because Love commonly wears the liuerey of Wit) he will be an
Inamorat^ Poeta, and sonnet a whole quire of paper in praise of Lady Swinsnout,
his yeolow faced Mistres, and wear a feather of her ^ain beaten fan for a
favor, like a fore-horse. Al Italionato is his talk, and his spade peake is as
sharp as if he had been a Pioner before the walls of Roan. He will despise
the barbarism of his own Country, and tell a whole Legend of lies of his
travails unto Constantinople. If he be challenged to fight, for his delatorye
excuse he objects, that it is not the custom of the Spaniard or the German,
to look back to every dog that barks. You shall see a dapper Jack, that has
been but over at Deep, wring his face round about, as a man would stir up a
mustard pot, and talk English through ye teeth like Jacques Scabd-hams, or
Monsieur Mingo de Moustrap: when (poor slave) he has but dipped his bread in
wild Boares grease, and come home again: or been bitten by the shins by a
wolf: and says, he has adventured upon the Barricadoes of Gurney or Guingan,
and fought with the young Guise hand to hand.

Some think to be counted rare Politicians and Statesmen, by being solitary:
as who would say, I am a wise man, a brave man, Secreta mea mihi: Frustra
sapit, qui sibi non sapit: The counte^^eit (...).
and there no man worthy of my company or friendship: when, although he goes
vngartred like a male content Cutpurs^e, and wears his hat over his eyes like
one of the cursed ^rue, yet (...) his stabing dagger, or his nittie love lock
keep him out of the legend of fantastical cockscombs. I pray ye good Meu^^^er
devil take some order, y^ the streets be not pestered with them so as they
are. Is it not a pitiful thing that a fellow that eats not a good meals meat
in a week, but beggereth his belly quite and clean, to make his back a
certain kind of brokerly Gentleman: and now and then (once or twice in a
Term) comes to the eighteen pence Ordenary, because he would be seen
amongst Caualiers and brave courtiers, living otherwise all the year long with
salt Butter and Holland cheese in his chamber, should take up a scornful
melancholy in his gate and countenance, and talk as though our commonwealth
were but a mockery of government, and our Maiestrates fools, who wronged him
in not looking into his deserts, not employing him in State matters, and that
if more regard were not had of him very shortly, the whole Realm should have a
miss of him and he would go (I mary would he) where he should be more
accounted of?

Is it not wonderful ill provided, I say, that this disdainful companion is
not made one of the fraternity of Fools, to talk before great States, with
some old moth eaten Politician, of mending high ways, and leading Armies into
France?

Ayoong Heir or Corkney, The prodigal young Master
that is his Mothers Darling, if h^e have playde the waste-good at the Innes of
the Court or about London, and that neither his Students pension, nor his
unthrifts credit will serve to maintain his Collidge of whores any longer,
falls in a quarrelling humor with his fortune, because she made him not King
of the Indies, and swears and stares after ten in the hundredth, that nere a
such Pesant as his Father or brother shall keep him under, he will to the sea
and tear the gold out of the Spaniards throats but he will have it, byrlady
when he comes there, poor soul he lies in brine in Balist, and is lamentable
sick of the scur^ies, his dainty fare is turned to a hungry feast of Dogs and
Cats, or Haberdine and poor John at the most, and which is lamentablest of
all, that without Mustard.

As a mad Ruffion on a time, being in danger of shipwreck by a tempest, and
seeing all other at their vows and prayers, that if it would please God of his
in^inite goodness, to deliver them out of that imminent danger, one would
abjure this sin where unto he was adicted: an other, make satisfaction for
that vyolence he had committed: he in a desperate jest, began thus to reco^cile
his soul to heaven.

O Lord, if it may seem good to thee to deliver me from this fear of untimely
death, I vow before thy Throne and all thy starry Host, never ^o eat
Haberdine more whilst I live. Well, so it fell out that the Sky cleared, and
the tempest ceased, and this careless wretch that made such a mockery of
prayer, ready to set foot a Land, cried out: not without Mustard good Lord*
not without Mustard: as though it had been the greatest torment in the world,
to have eaten Haberdine without Mustard. But this by the way, what penance can
be greater for Pride, than to let it swinge in his own halter? Dulce bellum in
expertis, there is no man loves the smooke of his own Country, that has not
been syngde in the flame of an other soil It is a pleasante thing over a full
pot, to read the fable of thirsty Tantalus: but a harder ma^ter ^o digest salt
mea^es at Sea, with stinking water.

An other misery of Pride it is, when men that have good parts, The pride of
the learned.
and bear the name of deep scholars: cannot be content to participate one
faith with all Christendom, but because they will get a name to their
vaineglory, they will set their self-love to study to invent new sects of
singularity, thinking to live when they are dead, by having sects called after
their names, as Donatists of Donatus Arrians of Arrius: and a number more new
faithfounders that have made England the exchange of Innouations, and almost
as much confusion of Religion in every Quarter, as there was of tongues at the
building of the Tower of Babell. Whence, a number that fetch the Articles of
their Belief out of Aristotle, and think of heaven and hell as the Heathen
Philosophers, take occasion to deride our Eccles^asticall State, and all
Ceremonies of Divine worship, as bugbeares ^^ar-crowes, because (like Herodes
soldiers) we divide Christ's garment amongst us in so many pieces, and of the
vesture of salvation make some of us Babies and apes coats, others straight
trusses and Devils breeches: some gally-gascoines or a shipmans hose like the
Anabaptists and adulterous Familists, others with the Martinist a hood with two
faces to hide their hypocrisy: and to conclude some like the Barrowists and
Green wodians, a garment full of the plague, which is not to be worn before it
be new washed.

Hence Atheists triumph and rejoice, and talk as profanely of the Bible, as
of Beuis of Hampton. I hear say there be Mathematitions abroad, that will
prove men before Adam, and they are harbored in high places, who will
maintain it to the death, that there are no devils.

It is a shame (senior Belzibub) that you should suffer your self thus to be
termed a bastard, The devil has children (as other men's) but few of them
know their own father.
or not approve to your predestinate children, not only that they have a
father, but that you are he that must own them. These are but the s^burbes of
the sin we have in hand: I must describe to you a large city, wholly
inhabited with this damnable enormitie.

In one place let me show you a base Artificer, that has no revenues to boast
on, but a Needle in his bosom; The pride of Artificers.
as brave as any Pensiouer or Noble man.

In an other corner, Mistress Minx a Merchants wife, that will eat no Cherries
forsooth, but when they are at twenty shillings a pound, The pride of Merchants
wives.
that looks as simperingly as if she were be smeard, and iets it as gingerly
as if she were dancing the Canaries: she is so finicall in her speech, as
though she spoke nothing but what she had first sewd ou^r before in her
Samplers, and the puling accent of her voice is like a famed treble, or ones
voice that interprets to the puppets. What should I tell how squeamish she is in
her diet, what toil she puts her poor servant unto, to make her looking
glasses in the pauement? how she will not go into the field to cowre on the
green grass, but she must have a Coatch for her conuoy: and spends half a
day in pranking her self if she be invited to any strange place? Is not this
the excess of pride signior Satan? Go too, you are unwise, if you make her
not a chief Saint in your Calender.

The next object that encounters my eyes, is some such obscure vpstart
gallants, The pride of pesants sprung up of nothing.
as without desert or service are raised from the plough, to be checkmate with
Princes: and these I can no better compare than to creatures that are bred Sine
coitu, as cricket^ in chimni^s, to which I resemble poor Scullians, that from
turning spit in the chimney corner, are on the sudden hoised up from the
Kitchen into the waiting chamber, or made Barons of the bieu^^, and Marquesses
of the Marybones: some by corrupt water, as g^ate, to which we may liken
Brewers, that by re^ayling ^ilthy Thames water, come in few years to be worth
forty or fifty thousand pound: others by dead wine, as little flying worms,
and so the Uintners in like case: others by slime as frogs, which may be
^lluded to Mother Bunches slimie ale, that has made her, and some other of her
fil-pot faculty so wealthy: others by dirt, as worms, and so I know many
gold-finers and bostlers come up: some by herbs, as cankers, and after the
fame sort our Apothecaries: others by ashes as Scarabes: and how else get our
Colliers the pence? Others from the putrified flesh of dead beasts, as Bees of
Bulls, and Butchers by fli-blown beef, waspes of horses, and Hackney-men by
selling their lame iades to hunts-men for carrion.

Yet am I not against it, Sparagus a flower that never grows but through a
man's dong.
that these men by their mechanical trades should come to be Sparage
Gentlemen, and chuff-headed Burghomasters: but that better places should be
possessed by coystrels, and the Cobblers crow for crying but Aue Coesar, be
more esteemed than rarer birds that have warbled sweeter notes unrewarded. B^t
it is no marvel: For as Hemlock fatteth Quails, and Henban^ Swine, which to
all other is poison: so some men's vices have power to advance them which would
subvert any else that should seek to climb by them: and it is enough in them
that they can pare their nails well to get them a living, when as the seven
liberal Sctences and a good leg, will scarce get a scholar a pair of shoos,
and a Canuas-dublet.

These whelps of the first Litter of Gentilitie, these Exhalations, drawn up
to the heaven of honor, from the dunghill of abject fortune, have long been on
horseback to come riding to your Diuelship: but I know not how like Saint
George they are always mounted, but never move. Here they outface Town and
country, and do nothing but bandie factions with their betters. Their big
limbs yield the Commonwealth no other service but idle sweat, and their
heads like rough he wen Gloabes, are fit for nothing but to be the blockhouses
of sleep. Raynold the Fox may well bear up his tail in the Lions den, but
when he comes abroad, he is afraid of every dog that barks. What Cur will
not bawle, and be ready to fly in a man's face, when he is set on by his
master, who if he be not by, to encourage him, he casts his tail betwixt
his legs, and steals away like a sheepbyter. Ulysses was a tall man under Ajax
shield: but by himself he would never adventure but in the night. Pride is
never built but upon some pillars: and let his supporters fail him never so
little, you shall find him very humble in the dust. Wit oftentimes stands in
stead of a chief arche to underprop it, in soldiers strength, in women
beauty.

Drudges, The base insinuating of drudges and their practice to aspyre.
that have no extraordinary gifts of body, nor of mind, filche themselves
into some Noble man's service, either by bribes or by flattery, and when they
are there, they so labor it with cap and knee, and plie it with privy
whisperings, that they wring themselves into his good opinion ere he be aware.
Then do they vaunt themselves over the common multitude, and are ^eadie to
outbraue any man that stands by himself. Their Lords authority is as a
rebater to bear up the Peacocks tail of their boasting, and any thing that is
said or done to the vnhandsoming of their ambition, is straight wrested to the
name of treson. Thus do weeds grow up whiles no man regards them, and the Ship
of Fools is arrived in the Haven of Felicity, whilst the scoutes of Envy
contemn the attempts of any such small Ba^kes.

But beware you that be great men's Favorites: let not a servile insinuating
slave creep betwixt your legs into credit with your Lords: for pesants that
come out of the cold of poverty, once cherisht in the bosom of prosperity,
will straight forget that ever there was a winter of want, or who gave them
room to warm them. The son of a churl cannot choose but prove ungrateful
like his Father. Trust not a villain that has been miserable, and is
suddenly grown happy. Virtue ascends by degrees of desert unto dignity:
gold and lust may lead a man a nearer way to promotion: but he that has
neither comeliness nor coin to commend him, undoubtedly strides over time by
stratagems, * if of a mole-hil he grows to a mountain in a moment. As by
carrying tales or playing the doutie Pandor.
This is that which I urge, there is no friendship to be had with him, that is
resolute to do or suffer any thing, rather than to endure the destiny whereto
he was borne: for he will not spare his own Father or Brother, to make
himself a Gentleman.

France, Italy, The pride of the Spaniard.
and Spain, are all full of these false hearted Machiuillions: but properly
Pride is the disease of the Spaniard, who is borne a Bragart in his mothers
womb: for if he be but 17 years old and has come to the place where a (...)
was tought (though half a year before) he then talks like one of the Giants
that made war against Heaven, and stands upon his honor as much, as if he
were one of Augustus Soldiers, of whom he first instituted the order of
Heralds: and let a man sooth him in his vain of kilcow vanity, you may
commau^d his heart out of his belly to make you a rasher on the coals, if you
will next your heart.

The Italian is a more cunning proud fellow, The pride of the Italian
that hides his humor far cleanlier, and indeed seems to take a pride in
humility, and will profer a stranger more courtesy than he means to
perform. He hates him deadly that takes him at his word: as for example, if
upon occasion of meeting, be request you to dinner or supper at his house, and
that at the first or second intre^tie you promise to be his guest, he will be
the mortalst enemy you have: but if you deny him, he will think you have
manners and good bringing up, and will love you as his brother: marry at the
third or fourth time you must not refuse him. Of all things he counts it a
mighty disgrace to have a man pass iustling by him in have on a narrow
causey, and ask him no ^eaue, which he never reuengeth with less then a s^ab.

The Frenchman (not altered from his own nature) is wholly compact of
deceiuable Courtship, The pride of the French man.
and for the most part, loves none but himself and his pleasure: yet though he
be the most Grand Signeur of them all, he will say, Avostre service and
commandemente Mounseur, to the meanest vassaile he meets. He thinks he does a
great favor to that gentleman or follower of his, to whom he talks sitting on
his close stool: and with that ^auour (I have heard) the queen mother wonted
to grace the Noble men of France: and a great man of their Nation coming in
time past over into England, and being here very honorably received, he in
requital of his admirable entertainment, on an evening going to the privy (as
it were to houour extraordinaryly our english Lords, appointed to attend him)
gave one the candle, another his girdle, and another the paper: but they (not
acquainted with this new kind of gracing) accompanying bim^^ ^he privy door,
set down the trash, and so left him: which ^e (considering what k^^dnes he
extended to the^ they in more than usual) took (...)

The most gross and senseless proud dolts (in a different kind from all
these) are the Danes: The pride of the dane
who stand so much upon their vnw^ldy burlibo and soldiery, that they account
of no man that has not a battle Axe at his girdle to hough dogs with, or
wears not a cocks feather in a red thrumd hat like a cau^lier: (...) you
know him not by any of these marks look on his fingers and you shall be sure to
fi^d half a (...) worth are pence a pe^ce.
briefly, he is the best fool bragart under heaven. For besides, nature has
left him a flaberkin face, like one of the four winds, and cheeks that sag
like a woman's dogs over his chin-bone, his apparel is so puffed up with bladders
of Taffarie, and his back like biefe stuffed with Partly, so drawn out with
Ribands and devises, and blisterd with light sarcenet bastings, that you would
think him nothing but a ^warme of Butterflies, if you saw him a far off. *
Thus walks he up and down in his Majesty, taking a yard of ground at every
step, and stamps on the earth so terrible as if he meant to knock up
a'spirite, when (foul drunken bezzle) if an Englishman set his little finger
to him, he falls like a hogs-trough that is set on one end. Therefore I am the
more ^ehement against them, because they are an arrogant Asse-headed people,
that naturally hate learning, and all them that love it: yea, and for they
would utterly root it out from among them, they ^aue withdrawn alrewards from
the Professors thereof. Not Barbary it self is half so barbarous as they are.
First, whereas the hope of honor makes a Souldior in England. By shopricks,
Deanries, Prebendaries, and other private dignities, animate our Divines to
such excelence. The civil Lawyers have their degrees and consistories of honor
by themselves, equal in place with Knights and Esquiers: the common Lawyers,
(suppose in the beginning they are but husband-mens sons) come in time to be
chief Fathers of the land, and many of them not the meanest of the Privy
Counsel.

There the soldier may fight himself out of his skin, and do more
exploites than he has doytes in his purse, No rewards amongst them for* desert.
before from a common mercenary, he come to be Corporal of the mould cheese: or
the Lieutenant get a Captainship. None but the son of a Corporal must be a
Corporal, nor any be Captain, but the lawful begotten of a C^ptaines body.
Bishoprics, Deancies, Prebendaries, why they know no such functi^ns: a sort of
ragged Ministers they have, of whom they count as basely, as water-bearers. If
any of their Noblemen refrain three hours in his life time from drinking, to
study the Laws, he may peth^ps heue a little more government put into his
hands than another: but ^th^rwise, Burgomasters and Gentlemen bear all the
swaye of both swords, spiritual and temporal. It is death there for any but
a husbandman to marry a husbandmans daughter, or a Gentleman's child to join
with any but the son of a Gentleman, marry this the King may well banish, but
he cannot put a Ge^tleman unto death in any cause whatsoever, which makes them
stand upon it so proudly as they do. For fashion sake some will put their
children to school, but they set them not to it till they are fourteen year
old: so that you shall see a great boy with a beard learn his ABC. and sit
weeping under the rod, when he is thirty years old.

I will not stand to infer, what a prejudice it is to the thrist of a
flourishing State, to poison the growth of glory, What it is to make men labor
without hope.
by giving it naught but the puddle water of penury to drink: to clippe the
wings of a high towering Faulcon, who, where as she wont in her feathered
youthfulness, to look with an amiable eye upon her gray breast, and her
speckled side sails, all sinnowed with silver quilles, and to drive whole
Armies of fearful foul before her to her masters Table: now she sits sadly
on the ground, picking of worms, mourning the cruelty of those
vngentleman-like idle hands, that dismembered the beauty of her t^ayne.

You all know, that man (insomuch as he is the Image of God) delights in
honor and worship, and all holy Writ warrantes that delight, so it be not
derogatory to any part of Gods own worship: now take away that delight,
abiscontented idleness ouertakes him. For his hire, any handycraft man, be he
Carpenter, Ioyner, or Painter, will ploddingly do his day labor: but to add
credit and fame to his workmanship, or to win a maistery to himself above
all other, he will make a further assay in his, trade, than ever hitherto he
did, he will have a thousand florishes which before he never thought upon, and
in one day rid more out of hand, than erst he did in ten: So in Arms, so
in Arts, if titles of fame and glory be proposed to forward minds, or that
sovereignty (whose sweetness they have not yet felt) be set in likely view for
them to sore too, they will make a ladder of cord of the links of of their
brains, but they will fasten their hands as well as their eyes, on the
imaginatiue bliss, which they already enjoy by admiration. Experience reproues
me for a fool, for dilating on so manifest a case.

The Da^es are bursten-bellied sots, that are to be confuted with nothing but
Tankards or quart pots, and Ovid might as well have read his verses to the
Getes that understood him not, as a man talk reason to them that have no ears
but their mouths nor sense but of that which they swallowe down their
throats. God so love me, as I love the quicke-witted Italians, and therefore
love them the more, because they mortally detest this surley swinish Generation.

I need not fetch colors from other countries to paint the ugly visage of
Pride, since herpicture is set forth in so many painted faces here at home.
What drugs, what sorceries, what oiles, what waters, what ointments, do our
curious Dames use to enlarge their withered beauties? Their lips are as
lauishly red, as if they used to kiss an ^okerman every morning, and their
cheeks sugercandied and cherry blushed so sweetly, after the color of a new
Lord Mayors posts, as if the pageant of their wedlock holiday were hard at
the door; so that if a Painter were to draw any of their Counterfets on
Table, he needs no more but wet his pencill, and dab it on their cheeks, and
he shall have vermillion and white enough to furnish out his work, though he
leave his tar-boxe at home behind him. Wise was that sin-washing Poet that made
the Ballet of Blue starch and poaking sticks, for indeed the lawne of
licentiousness has consumed all the wheat of hospitality. It is said
Laurence Lucifer, that you went up and down London crying then like a lantern
and candle man. I marvel no Laundrsse would give you the washing and
starching of your face for your labor, for God knows it is as black as the
black Prince.

It is suspected you have been a great Tobacco taker in your youth, which
causes it to come so to pass: but Dame Nature your nurse was partly in fault,
else she might have remedied it. She should have noynted your face ouernight
with Lac virginis, which baking upon it in bed till the morning, she might have
pild off the scale like the skiu of a custard, and making a posset of vergis
mixed with the oil of Tartary and Camphier, bathde it in it a quarter of an
hour, and you had been as fair as the flower of the frying pan. I warrant we
have old hacksters in this great Grandmother of Corporations, Madame
Troynouant, that have not backbited any of their neighbors with the tooth of
envy this twenty year, in the wrinckles of whose face, ye may hide false
dice, and play at cherry-pit in the dint of their cheeks, yet these aged
mothers of iniquity will have their defor^^^^es new plaistred over, and wear
nosegayes of yeolow hair on their furies foreheads, when age has written Hoe
God be here, on their bald burnt parchment pates. Pish, pish, what talk you of
old age or balde pates? men and women that have gone under the South pole, must
lay off their furde night-caps in spite of their teeth, and become yeomen of
the Uineger bottle: a close periwig hides all the sins of an old
whore-master, but Cucullus non facit Monachum: it is not their new bonnets will
keep them from the old boan-ach. Ware when a man's sins are written on his
ey-browes, and that there is not a hair breadth betwixt them and the falling
sickness. The times are dangerous: and this is an iron age, or rather no iron
age, for swords and bucklers go to pawn a pace in Long-Lane: but a tin
age; for tin and pewter are more esteemed than Latin. You that be wise
despise it, abhor it, neglect it; for what should a man care for gold that
cannot get it.

An A^tiquarie is an honest man, for he had rather scrape a piece of copper
out of the dirt, The commendation of Antiquaries. Laudamus veteres, sed nostris
vtimur annis.
than a crown out of Ploydens standish. I know many wise Gentlemen of this
mustie vocation, who out of love with the times wherein they live, fall a
retayling of Alexanders stirrops* because (in verity) there is not such a
strong piece of stretching leather made now adays, nor iron so well tempred
for any money. They will blow their nose in a box, and say it is the spettle
that Diogenes spet in ones face: who being inuit (...) dinner to his house,
that was neat and brave in all points as might be devised; and the grunting
Dog somewhat troubled with thertheume (by means of his long fasting and
staying for dinner more than wont) spet full in his Hostess face: and being
asked the reason of it, said; it was the foulest place he could spy out in all
his house. Let their Mistress (or some other woman) give them a feather of her
fan for her fau^ur, and if one ask them what it is? they make answer, a
plume of the Phoenix, wh^rof there is but one in all the whole world. A thousand
guegawes and toys have they in their chambers, which they heap up together
withinfinite expense, and are made believe of them that sell them, that they
are rare and precious things, when they have gathered them upon some dunghill,
or rakte them out of the kennell by chance. I know one sold an old rope with
four knots on it for four pound, in that he gave it out, it was the length
and breadth of Christ's Tomb. Let a Tinker take a piece of brass worth a half
penie, and set strange stamps on it, and I warrant he may make it more worth to
him of some fantastical fool, than all the kettels that ever be mended in his
life. This is the disease of our newfangled humorists, that know not what to
do with their wealth. It argues a very rusty wit, so to deate on worme-eaten
Elde.

OUt upon it, how long is Pride a dr^ssing her self? The complaint of Envy.
Envy awake for thou must appear before Nicalao Maleuolo great Muster master
of hell. Mark you this she mate, how smoothly he looks? The Poets were ill
advised, that famed him to be a lean gag toothd Beldam with hollow eyes, pale
cheeks, and snakie heir: for he is not only a man, but a jolly lusty old
Gentleman, that will wink, and laugh, and jest drily, as if he were the
honestest of a thousand: and I warrant you shall not hear a foul word come
from him in a year. I will not contradict it, but the Dog may worry a sheep in
the dark, and thrust his neck i^to the collar of clemency and pity when he
has don: as who should say, God forgive him, he was a sleep in the shambles,
when the innocent was done to death. But openly, Envy sets a civil fatherly
countenance upon it, and has not so much as a drop of blood in his face to
attaint him of murder. I thought it expedient in this my Supplication, to
place it next to Pride: for it is his adopted son. And hence comes it, that
proud men repine at others prosperity, and grieve that any should be great but
themselves Men's cuiusque, is est quisque: it is a Proverb that is as hoary as
Dutch-b^tter. If a man will go to the devil, he may go to the devil: there are
a thousand iugling tricks to be used at ^ey pass come aloft: and the world
has cords enough to trus up a calf that stands in ons way Envy is a Crocodile
that weeps when he kills, and fights with none but he feeds on. This is the
nature of this quick-sighted monster, he will endure any pains to endamage
another, waste his body with vnder-taking exploytes that would require ten
men's strengths, rather than any should get a penny but himself, bleare his
eyes to stand in his neighbors light; and to conclude, like Atlas vnder-proppe
heaven alone, rather than any should be in heaven that he likte not of, or
come unto heaven by any other means but by him.

You goodman wandrer about the world, how do ye spend your time, that you do
not rid us of these pestilent members? you are unworthy to have an office if
you can execute it no better. Behold another enemy of mankind besides thy
self exalted in the South, Philip of Spain, as g^ea an enemy to mankind as
the devil.
Philip of Spain, who not content to be the God of gold, and chiefest
commander of content that Europe affoords, but now he does nothing but thirst
after huma^e blood, when his foot is on the three should of the grave: and as a
Wolf being about to devour a horse, does balist his belly with earth, that
he may hang the heavier upon him, and then forcibly flies in his face, never
leaving his hold till he has eaten him up: so this woluish unnatural usurper,
being about to devour all Christendom by invasion, does cram his treasures
with Indian earth, to make his malice more forcible, and then flies in the
bosom of France and Belgia, never withdrawing his forces (as the Wolf his
fastening) till he has devoured their welfare, and made the war-wasted carcases
of both kingdoms a pray for his tyranny, Only poor England gives him bread
for his cake, and holds him out at the arms end. His Armadoes (y^ like a high
wood ouer-shadowed the shrubs of our low ships) fled from the breath of our
Cannons, as vapors before the Sun, or as the Elephant flies from the Ram, or
the Se a Whale from the noise of parched bones. The winds envying that the a^^e
should be dimmed with such a Chaos of wodden clouds, raised up high bulwarks of
bellowing waves, whence Death shot at their disordred Navy: and the Rocks with
their ouer-hanging jaws, eat up all the fragments of oak that they left. So
perished our foes, so the Heavens did fight for us. Praterit Hippomenes, reason
int spectacula plausu.

I do not doubt (Doctor Devil) but you were present in this action or passion
rather, and helped to bore holes in ships, to make them sink faster; and rence
out Galley-foistes with salt wa^^r, that stunke like fustie barrels wit their
Masters fear. It will be a good while hre you do as much for the King, as
you did for his subjects. I would have ye persuade an Army of goutie Usurers
to go to Sea upon a boon voyage: try if you can tempt Envy to embarke himself
in the ma^^ adventure, and leave troubling the stream, that Poets and good
fellows may drink, and Soldiers may sing Place^o, that have murmured so long
at the waters of strife.

But that will never be: for so long as Pride, Riot, and whoredom are the
companions of young Courtiers, they will always he hungry, and ready to bite
at every Dog that has a boane given him beside themselves. Jesus, what secret
grudge and rancor reigns amongst them, one being ready to despair of himself,
if he see the Prince but give his fellow a fair look: or to die for grief if
he be put down in bravery never so little. Yet this custom have our false
hearts fetched from other countries, that they will swear and protest love,
where they hate deadly, and smile on him most kindly, whose subversion in soul
they have vowed. Fraus sublimi regnat in dula T^^ rare to find a true friend in
Kings Palaces; Either thou must be so miserable, that thou fall into the hands
of scornful pity, or thou (...) not escape the sting of envy. In one thought
assemble the famous men of all ages, and tell me which of them all sat in the
sunshine of his sovereigns grace, or wext great of low beginnings, but he was
spiteblasted, heaued at, and ill spoken of: and that of those that bare them
most countenance. But were envy naught but words, it might seem to be only
women's sin: Murder, the companion of Enu^^.
but it has a lewd mate hanging on his s^eeue, called Murder, a stern
fellow, that (like a Spanyard in fight) aymeth all all at the heart: he has
more shapes than Proteus, and will shifte himself upon any occasion of
r^uengement, into a man's dish, his drink, his apparel, his ringes, his
stirrops, his (...).

O Italy, * the Academie of manslaughter, Italy, the storehouse of all
murderous inuenti^ns.
the sporting place of murder, the Apothe car^ shop of poison for all Nations:
how many kind of weapons have thou invented for malice? Suppose I (...) man's
(...) whose hust and yet lives, and cannot enjoy her for his iealong
ouer-looking: Physic, or rather the art of murder (as it may be used) will
lend one a Medicine which shall make him away, in the nature of that disease he
is most subject to, whether in the space of a year, a month half a year, or
what tract of time you will, more or less.

In Rome the Papal Chair is washed every five year at the ^urthest with this
oil of Aconitum. I pray God the King of Spain feasted not our holy father
Sextus, that was last, with such conserve of He^bane, for it was credibly
reported he loved him not, and this that is now, is a God made with his own
hands as it may appear by the Pasquil that was set up of him, The Pasqui that
was made upon the last Pope. As Cardinal Who^ s^y for example
in manner of a note, presently after his election. Sol, Re, Me, Fa, that is to
say: Solus Rex me facit; only the K. of Spain made me Pope. I am no
Chronicler from our own Country, but if probable suspicion might be heard
upon his oath, I think some men's souls would not be canonized for Martyrs,
that on the earth did sway it as Monarchs.

Is it your will and pleasure (noble Lants-graue of Lymbo) to let us have less
carousing to your health in poison, fewer under hand conspirings, or open
quarrels, executed only in words, as they are in the world now a days: and
if men will needs carouse, conspire, and quarrel, that they may make Ruffians
hall of Hell: and there, bandy balls of Brimstone at one another shead, and
not trouble our peaceable Paradise with their private but liburlies about
strumpets, where no weapon (as in Adams Paradise) should be named: but only
the Angel of providence stand with a fiery sword at the gate, to keep out our
enemies.

APerturbation of mind (like unto Envy) is Wrath, The complaint of Wrath, ^
branch of En^^^.
which looks far lower than the former: For whereas Envy cannot be said
to be, but in respect of our Superiors, Wrath respects no degrees nor
persons* but is equally armed against all that offend him. A hare-braind
little Dwarf it is, with a swarth visage, that has his heart at his tongues
end, if he becontraride, and will be sure to do no right nor take no wrong.
(...) are most angry.
If he be a Judge or a Justice, (as sometimes the Lion comes to give
sentence against the Lamb) then he swears by nothing but by Saint Tyborne, and
makes Newgate a Nowne Substantive, whereto all his other words are but
Adjectives. New gate, a common name for all prisons, as Homo is a common name
for a man or a woman.
Lightly he is an old man: (for those ^eares are most wayward and teatish)
yet be he never so old or so froward, since Avarice like-wise is a fellow vice
of those frail years, we must set one extreme to strive with another, and
alay the anger of oppression, by the sweet incense of a new purse of angels: or
the doting Planet may have such predominance in these wicked Elders of Israel,
that if you send your wife or some other female to plead for you, she may get
your pardon upon promise of better acquaintance. But whist, these are the
works of darkness and may not be talked of in the day time: Fury is a heat or
fire, and must be quenched with maids water.

Amongst other choleric wise Justices, A tale of a wise Justice.
he was one, that having a play presented before him and his Towne-ship, by
Tarlton and the rest of his fellows her Majesty's servants, and they were now
entering into their first merriment (as they call it) the people began
exceedingly to laugh, when Tarlton first peept out his head. Where at the
Justice not a little moved, and seeing with his beckes and nods he could not
make them cease, he went with his staff, and beat them round about
unmercifully on the bare pates, in that they being but Farmers and poor
country Hyndes would presume to laugh at the Queens men, and make no more
account of her cloth in his presence.

The causes conducting unto wrath are as diverse, The nature of the Irish man
as the actions of a man's life. Some will take on like a mad man, if they see a
pigge come to the ^able. Sotericus the Surgeon was choleric at the sight of
Sturg^on. The Irishman will draw his dagger, and be ready to kill and slay,
if one break wind in his company: and so some of our English men that are
Soldiers, if one give them the lie: but these are light matters, whereof
Pierce complains not.

Be aduertis^d Master Os foetidum, Bedle of the Blackesmithes, that Lawyers
cannot devise which way in the world to begg^, they are so troubled with
brabblements and suits every Term, of Yeomen and Gentlemen that fall out for
nothing.

If John a Nokes his hen do but leap into Elizabeth de Gappes close, she
will never leave to haunt her husband. ^ll be bring it to a Nisiprius. O^^
while, the Parson sueth the parishioner for bringing home his tithes: another
while, the Parishioner sueth the Parson for not taking away his Tithes in time.

I heard a tale of a Butcher, A merry tale of a Butcher and his Calu^^.
who driving two Calves over a Com-mon, that were coupled together by the
necks with an Oken With, in the way where they should pass, there lay a poor
lean Marewith a galde back, to whom they coming (as chance fell out) one of
one side, and the other of the other, smelling on her (as their manner is) the
midst of the With that was betwixt the^^ ^ecks, rubd her and grated her on the
sore back, that she started and rose up, and hung them both on her back as a
beam, which being but a rough plaster to her raw ulcer, she ran away with
them (as she were fran-tick) into the Fens, where the Butcher could not follow
them, and drownde both her self and them in a Quagmyre. Now the owner of the
Mare is in law with the Butcher for the loss of his Mare, and the Butcher
enter changabley endites him for his Calves. I pray ye Timothy Tempter, be an
Arbitrator be twixt them, and couple them both by the necks (as the Calves
were) and carry them to Hell on your back, and then I hope they will be quiet.

The chief spur unto wrath is Drunkenness, which as the touch of an Ashenbough,
causes a gidinesse in the Uipers head, and the Batte lightly struck with the
leaf of a Tree, loses his remembrance: so they being but lightly sprinkled
with the juice of the Hop, become senseless, and have their reason stroo^en
blind, as soon as ever the Cup scaleth the Fortress of their Nose. Then run
their words at random like a dog that has lost his master, and are up with
this man and that man, and generally inuay against al men: but those that keep
a wet corner for a friend, and will not think scorn to drink with a good
fellow and a Soldier: and so long do they practice this vain on their
Ale-bench, that when they are sober they cannot leave it. There be those that
get their living all the year long, by nothing but ^ayling. A tale of one Frye^
Cha^les, a foul mouthde knave.


Not Far from Chester, I knew an odd foul mouthde knave, called Charles
the Friar, that had a face so pa^boyled with men's spitting on it, and a b^cke
so often knighted in Bridewell, that it was impossible for any shame or
punishment, to terrif^e him from ill speaking, Noblemen he would liken to more
ugly things than himself: some to After my hearty commendations, with a dash
over the head: others, to gilded chines of beef, or a shoemaker sweating,
when he pulls on a shoo: another to an old verse in Cato, Ad consilium ne
accesseris antequam voceris: another, to a Spanish Codpisse: another, that his
face was not yet finished, with such like innumerable absurd illusions: yea,
what was he in the Court, but he had a comparison in stead of a Capta^e to put
him in. Upon a time being challenged at his own weapon in a private Chamber, by
a great personage, (railing I mean) he so far outstript him in vilanious
words, and ouerbandied him in bitter terms, that the name of sport could not
persuade him patience, nor contain his fury in any degrees of jest, but
needs he must wreake himself upon him: neither would a common revenge
suffice him, his displeasure was so infinite (and it may be common reuenges he
took before, as far as the whipcord would stretch, upon like prouokements)
wherefore he caused his men to take him, and brickt him up in a narrow chimney,
that was Neque mayor neque minor corpore locato, where he fed him for fifteen
days with dread an^ water through a hole, letting him sleep standing if he
would, for lie or sit he could not, and then he let him out to see if he could
learn to rule his tongue any better.

It is a disparagement to those that have any true spark of Gentilitie, to be
noted of the whole world so to delight in detracting, that they should keep a
venomous toothd Cur, and feed him with the crumbs that fall from their table, to
do nothing but bite every one by the shins that pass by. If they will needs
be merry, let them have a fool and not a knave to disport them, and seek some
other to b^stow their aliues on, than such an impudent beggar.

As there be those that rail at all men, so there be those that rail at all
Arts, as Cornelius Agrippa De vanitate scientiarum, and a Treatise that I have
se^ne in dispraise of learning, where he says, it is the corrupter of the
simple, the schoolemaister of (...), the storehouse of treachery, the reuiuer
of vices, and mother of cowardiz alleging many examples, how there was never
man egregiously evil, but he was a Scholar: that when the use of letters was
first invented, the Golden World ceased, Facinusque i^uasit mortales: how
study does effeminate a man, dim his sight, weaken his brai^e, and engender a
thousand diseases. Small learning would serve to confute so manifest a
scandale, and I^magine all men like my self so vnmoueablie resolved of the
excellency thereof, that (will not by the underpropping of confu^ation seem
to give the idle wi^ted a duer sarye so much encouragement, An inuecti^^
against enemies of Poe^rie.
as he should surmize his superficial arguments had shaken the foundation of
it: against which he could never have (...) his pen, if her self had not
helped him to hurt her self.

With the enemies of Poetry, Absit arrogantia, that this speech should
concern all divines, but such dunces as abridge men of their lawful liberty
and care not how unprepared they speak to their Auditorie. Such Sermons I
mean as our sectuaries preach in ditches and other Conuenticles when they
leap from the Cobblers stal to their pulpits.
I care not if I have about, and those are they that tear me our best Writers
but babbling Ballatmakers, holding them fantastical fools, that have wit, but
cannot tell how to use it, I my self have been so censured among some
dul-heade^ * Diuimes: who deem it no more cunning to write an exquisite Poem,
than to preach pure Calvin, or distill the justice of a Commentary in a quarter
S^rmon, Prove it when you will, you'slowe spirited Saturnists, that have
nothing but the pilfr^es of your pen, to pollish an exhor^ation withal: no
eloquence but Tautologies, to (...) the (...) of, your Auditorye unto you: no
invention but here is to be noted, I stoale this note out of Beza or
Marlorat: no wit to move, no passion to urge, but onelye^ an ordinary form
of preaching, blown up by use of often heating and speaking and you shall
find there goes more exquisite pains and purity of wit, to the writing of
one such (...) Poem as Rosamond, than to a hundred of your dunsticall * S^rmons.

Should we (as you) borrowe all out of others, and gather nothing of our
selves, our names should be baffuld on every Booke-sellers Stall, and not a
Chandlers Mustard-pot but would wipe his mouth with our wast paper. New
Herings, new, (...) must cry, every time we make our selves public, or else
we shall be (...) with a hundred new tytles of Idiotis^^e. Nor in Poetry an
Art, where of there is no use in a man's whole life, but to describe
discontented thoughts and yout^ full desires: for there is no study, but it
does illustrate and beauti^ie. How admirablie shine those Divines about the
common mediocritie, that have tasted the sweet springs of Pernassus?

Silver tongu'^ Smith whose well tuned style has made thy death the general
tears of the Muses, Encomium H. Smithi.
queintlie could thou devise heavenly Ditties to Apolloes Lute, and teach
stately verse to trip it as smoothly, as if Ovid and thou had but one soul*
Hence alone did it proceed, that thou were such a plausible pulpit man that
before thou entredst into the rough ways of Theology, thou refinedst,
preparedst, and purifidest thy mind with sweet Poetry. If a simple man's
censure may be admitted to speak in such an open Theater of opinions, I never
saw abundant reading better mixed with delight, or sentences which no man can
challenge of profane affectation, sounding more melodious to the ear or
piercing more deep to the heart.

To them that demand what fruits the Poets of our time bring forth, The
fruits of Poetry
or wherein they are able to prove themselves necessary to the state. Thus I
answer. First and for most, they have cleansed our language from barbarism
and made the vulgar sort here in London (which is the fountain whose rivers
flow round about England) to aspire to a richer purity of speech, than is
communicated with the Comminaltie of any Nation under ^eauen. The virtuous by
their praises they encourage to be more virtuous, to vicious men they are as
in^ernall hags to haunt their ghosts with eternal infamy after death. The
Soldier in hope to have his high deeds celebrated by their pens, despises a
whole Army of perils, and acts wonders exceeding all humane conjecture.
Those that care neither for God nor the devil, by their quills are keept in
awe. Multi famam (says one) pauci conscientiam verentur.

Let God see what he will, they would be loath to have the shame of the world.
P lin. l. b. 3.
What age will not praise immortal Sir Phillip Sidney, whom noble Salustius
(that thrice siguler french Poet) has famoused: together with Sir Nicholas
Bacon Lord keeper, and merry sir Thomas Moore, for the chief pillars of our
english speech. Not so much but Chaucers host, Baly in Southworke, and his wife
of Bath he keeps such a stir with in his Canterbury tales, shall be talked of
whilst the Bath is used, or there be ever a badhouse in Southwork. Gentles, it
is not your lay Chronigraphers that write of nothing but of Mayors and Sheriels
and the dear year, The disp^aise of (...) chronigraphers
and the great Frost, that can endowe your names with never dated glory: for
they want the wings of choice words to fly to heaven, which we have: they
cannot sweeten a discourse, or wrest admiration from men reading, as we can:
reporting the meanest accident. Poetry is the hunny of all flowers, the
quintessence of all Sciences, the Marrowe ^f Wit, and the very Phrase of
Angels: how much better is it then to have an eligant Lawier to plead ones
cause, than a s^utting Townsman that loses himself in his tale, and does
nothing but make legs: so much it is better for a Nobleman or Gentleman, to
have his honors story related, and his deeds emblazond by a Poet, than a
Citizen.

Alas poor latinlesse Authors, they are so simple they know not what they do;
They no sooner spy a new Ballad, and his name to it that compilde it: but they
put him in for one of the learned men of our time, I marvel how the
masterlesse men, that set up their bills in Paul's for services, and such as
pa^^e up their papers on every post, for Arithmetique and writing Schools,
escape eternity amongst them; I believe both they and the Knight Marshals men,
that nail up Mandates at the Court g^^, for annoying the Palace with filth or
making water, if they set their names to the writing, will shortly make up the
number of the learned men of our time, and be as famo^s as the rest. For my
part I do challenge no praise of learning to my self, yet have I worn a gown
in the University, and so has Caret tempus non habet moribus: but this I dare
presume that if any Mecoenas bind me to him by his bounty or extend some sound
liberality to me worth the speaking of, I will do him as much honor as any
Poet of my beardlesse years shall in England, Not that I am so confident what
I can do, but that I attribute so much to my thankful mind about others,
which I am persuaded would enable me to work miracles.

On the contrary side, if I be evil entreated, or sent away with a Flea in
mine ear, let him look that I will rail on him soundly: not for an hour or
a day, whiles the injury is fresh in my memory: but in soire elaborate
pollished Poem, which I will leave to the world when I am dead, to be aliuing
Image to all ages, of his beggarly parsimony and ignoble illiberalti^: and let
him not (whatsoever he be) measure the weight of my words by this book, where
I write Quic quid in buccam venerit, as fast as my hand can trot: but I have
terms (if I be vexed) laid in sleep in Aquafortis, I would tell you in what
book it is, but I am afraid it would make his book sell in his latter days,
which hitherto has lien dead and been a great loss to the Printer.
and Gunpowder, that shall rattle through the Skies and make an Earthquake in a
Pesants ears. Put case (since I am not yet out of the Theme of Wrath) that
some tired Jade belonging to the Press, whom I never wronged in my life; has
named me expressly in Print (as I will not do him) and accuse me of want of
learning, vpbraiding me for reviving in an epistle of mine the reverent memory
of Sir Thomas Moore, Sir John Cheek, Doctor Watson, Doctor Haddon, Doctor
Carre, Master Ascham, as if they were no meat but for his Master ships
mouth. or none but some such as the son of a ropemaker were worthy to mention
them. To show how I can rail, thus would I begin to rail on him. Thou that
had thy hood turned over thy ears when thou were a Bachelor, for abusing of
Aristotle, and setting him upon the School gates painted with Asses ears on
his head: is it any discredit for me, thou great babound, thou Pigmie Braggart,
thou Pamphleter of nothing but * Peants, Look at the Chandlers shop, or at the
Flaxwiues stall, if you see no tow nor Soap wrapped upon the title page of such
a Pamphlet, as Incerti Authoris Iopaean.
to be censured by thee, that have scorned the Prince of Philosophers; thou
that in thy Dialogues soldst Huny for a ha^peny, and the choycest Writers exant
for cues a pe^ce, that came to the Logic Schools when thou were a Freshman
and writst phrases, off with thy gown and untruss, for I mean to lash thee
mightily. Thou have a Brother have thou not, student in Almanackes, go too I Will
stand to it, fatherd one of thy bastards (a book I mean) which being of thy
begetting was set forth under his name.

Gentlemen, I am sure you have heard of a ridiculous Ass that many years
since sold liars by the great, and wrote an obsurd Astrologicall Discourse of
the terrible Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, wherein (as if he had ^ately
cast the Heavens water, or been at the anatomizing of the Skies intrailes ^n
Surgeons hall) he prophec^eth of such strange wonders to ensue from stars
destemperature, and the vnuseall a^ultrie of Planets, as none but he that is
Bawd to those celestial bodies, could ever discry. What expectation there was
of it both in town (...) co^ntry, ^he amaz^ment of those times may (...): and
the rather because he pawned his * ^redit upon it, in these express terms;
Which ^t home (...) was worth a dozen of halters at least, for if I be not
deceived his father was a Ropemaker.
If these things fall not out in every point as I have wrote, let me for ever
hereafter loose the credit of my Astronimie. Well so it happened, that he
happened not to be a man of his word; his Astronimie broke his day with his
creditors and Saturn and Jupiter proved honester men then all the World took^
them for: whereupon, the poor Prognosticator (...) ready to (...) himself
through with his Jacobs Staff, and east himself headlong from the top of a
Globe (as a mountain) and break his neck. The whole University hyst at him,
Tarlton at the Theator made jests of him, and Elderton consumd his ale-cr^mmed
nose to nothing, in bearbayting him with whole bundles of ballets. Would you in
likely reason guess it were possible for any shame-swolne ^oad to have the
spet-proofe face to out live this disgrace? It is deate brethren, Viuit imo
viuit, and which is more, he is a Uicar.

Poor Slave. I pity thee that thou had no more grace but to come in my way,
Why, could not you have sat quiet at home, and write Catechismes, but you must
be comparing me to Martin? and exclayme against me for reckoning up the high
Scholars or worthy memory? Jupiter ingeniis prabat sua numina vdium, says
Ovid. Seque celebrari qu^libet ore si^it. Which if it be so I hope I am
Aliquis, and those men quos honoris causa nominaui, are not great than gods,
Me thinks I see thee stand quiuering and quaking, and even now lift up thy
hands to heaven, as thanking God my choler is somewhat asswag'd: but thou art
deceived, for how ever I let fast my style a little to talk in reason with
thee that have none, I do not mean to let thee escape so.

Thou have wrongedone for my sake (whom for the name I must love) T. N. the
Master Butler of Pembrooke Hall, a far better Scholar than thy self (in my
judgment) and one that shows more discretion and government, in setting up a
sise of Bread, than thou in all thy whole book. Why man, think no scorn of
him for he has held thee up a hundred times, whiles the Deane has given thee
correction, and thou have ^apt and kneed him (when thou were hungry) for a
^hipping. But that's nothing, for had thou never been beholding to him, nor
holden up by him, he has a Beard that is a better Gentleman than (...) thy
whole body, and a grave countenance like Cato, able to make thee run out of t^y
wits for fear, if he look sternly upon thee. I have ^eade over thy Sheepi^h
discourse of the Lamb of GOD and his enemies, and entreated my patience to be
good to thee whilst I read: but for all that I could do with my self, (as I
am sure I may do as much as another man) I could not refrain, but bequeath it
to the Privy, leaf by leaf as I read it, it was so ugly, dorbellicall and
lumpish. Monstrous, monstrous, and palpable, not to be spoken of in a
Christian Congregation: thou have skumd over the Sthoolemen, and of the froth
of their folly, made a dish of divinity Brewesse, which the dogs will not
eat. His own words.
If the Printer have any great dealings with thee, he were best to get a
privilege betimes, Ad imprimendum solum, forbidding all other to sell waste
paper but himself, or else he will be in a woeful taking. The Lamb of God
make thee a wiser B^ll-weather then thou art, or else I doubt thou will be
driven to leave all and fall to thy fathers occu^ation, which is, to go and
make a rope to hang thyselfe. Neque enim Lex aequior vlla est, quam necis
artifices art periresu^: and so I leave thee till a better opportunity, to be
tormented world without end, of our Paets and Writers about London, whom thou
have called piperlye Make-playes and Make-hates: not doubting but he also whom
thou tearmest the vain Pap-hatcher, will have a flurt at thee (...) day: all
jointly driving thee to this issue, that thou shall be constrained to go to
the chief Beam of thy Be^^^ce, and there beginning a lamentable speech with
cur scripsi, cur perit, end with para^um praua decent, iuuat inconcessa
voluptas, and so which a trice, trusse up thy l^fe in the steing of thy
Sancebell. So be it, pray Pen, Incke and paper on their kuees, that they way
not be troubled with thee any more.

Redeo ad vos m^i Auditores, have I not a indifferent prittye vain in
Spurgalling an Ass? if you knew ^ow extemporall it were at this instant, and
with what have it is writ you would say so. But I would not have you think
that all this that is set down here, is in good earnest, for then you go by
S. Gyles, the wrong way to Westminster: but only to show how for a need I
could rail, if I were thoroughly fyred. So ho, Honiger Hammon, where are you
all this while. I cannot be (...) with you? Tell me what (...) you think of
the case, (...) subject to the sin of Wrath I write against or no, in (...)
my pen on this block. I know you would sam^ have it so, but it shall not
choose but be otherwise for this once. Come on let us ^urne over a new leaf,
and hear what Gluttony can say for her self, for Wrath has pet his poison,
and full pla^^^s do well after extreme purging.

THe Roman Emperors that succeeded Augus^us, The complaint of Glu^^ome
were exceedingly given to this horrible vice, where of some of them would feed
on nothing but the tongues of Phesan^s and Nightingales: other, would spend as
much at one banquet, as a kings revenues came to in a year, whose excess I
would decypher at large, but that a new Laureat has saved me the labor: who
for a man that stands upon pains and not wit, has performd as much as any
Story dresser may do, that sets a new English na^ on an old Latin Apoth^gs.
It is enough for me to li^ke dishes here at home, though I feed not mine eyes
at any of the Roman feas^s, Much good do it you Master Dives here in
London: for you are he my pen means to di^e withal. Miserere mei, what a
(...) churl it is? Why, he has a belly as big as the round (...) Cambridge, a
face as huge as the whole body of a base via^l, and legs that if they were
hollow, a man might keep a mill in either of them. Experto credo Roberto,
there is no mast like a Merchants table. Bona fide, it is a great misture, that
we have not men swine as well as beasts, for then we should have porke that
has no more bones than a pudding, and a site of bacon that you might lay under
your head in stead of a bolster. (...)


It is not for nothing, that other Countries whom we vpbraide with
Drunkenness, call us bursten-bellied Gluttons: for we make our greedy
^aunches powdring tubs of bee^e, and eat more meat at one meal* than the
Spaniard or Italian in a month* Good thrifty me^* they draw out adinner with
sallets, like a Swart^utters suit, and make Madona Nature their best Caterer.
We must have our Tables furnished like Poulters stalls, or as though we were to
victual Noah's Arc again (wherein there was al sorts of living creatures that
ever we^e) or else the good-wife will not open her mouth to bid one welcome. A
stranger that should come to one of our Magnificoes houses, when dinner were
set on the board, and he not yet set, would think the goodman of the house
were a Haberdasher of Wilde-sowle, or a Merchant venture^ of dainty meat,
that sels commodities of good cheer by the great, and has Factors in Arabia,
Turkey, Egypt, and Barbary, to provide him of strange Birds, Chiua Mustard,
and odd patterns to make Custards by.

Lord, what a coil have we with this Course and that course, remoouing this
dish higher, setting another lower, and taking away the third. A General
might in less space remove his Camp, than they stand disposing of their
gluttony. And where to tends all this gurmandise, but to give sleep gross
humors to feed on, to corrupt the brain, and make it unapt and unwieldy for
any thing.

The Roman Censors, if they lighted upon a fat corpulent man, they straight
took away his horse, and constrained him to go a foot: positiuely
concluding, his carcass was so puf^ up with gluttony or idleness. If we had
such horse-takers amongst us, and that surfit-swol^e Churles, who now ride on
their footcloathes, might be constrained to carry their flesh budgets from
place to place on foot, the price of be^^et and cloth would fall with their
belies, and the gentle craft (alias the red herrings kinsmen) get more and
drink less. Plenus venture nil agit libenter, and plures gula occidit
quamgladius. It is as desperate a piece of service, to sleep upon a full
stomach, as it is to serve in face of the bullet: a man is but his breath, and
that may as well be stopped by putting too much in his mouth at once, as running
on the mouth of the cannon. that is verefied of us, which Horace writes of an
outrageous eater in his time, Quicquid quaesierat ventr^ don a bat auaro,
Whatsoever he could rap or rend, he confiscated to his covetous gut. Nay, we
are such flesh-eating Saracens, that chaste fish may not content us, but we
delight in the murder of innocent mutton, in the vnpluming of pullerie, and
quartering of Calves and Oxen. A rare wit^^^ ie^t of Doctor Watson. Or rather
Belly-als, because all their mind is on their belly.
It is horrible and detestable, no godly Fishmonger that can digest it. R^port
(which our moderners clippe ^lundring Fame) puts me in memory of a notable
jest I heard long a go of Doctor Watson, very conducible to the reproof of
these ^^eshly minded Belials. He being at supper on a fasting or fish night at
least, with a great number of his friends and acquaintance, there chanced to be
in the company an outlandish Doctor, who when all other fell to such victuals
(agreeing to the time) as were before them, be out stripped them, and there being
one joint of flesh on the table for such as had weak stomachs, fell freshly
to it. After that hunger (half conquered) had restored him to the use of his
speech, for his excuse he said to his friend that brought him thither, Profecto
Domine, ego sum malissimus piscator, meaning by piscator, a Fishman: (which is
a liberty, as also malissimus, that outlandish men in their familiar talk to
challenge, at least use above us,) At tues bonissimus carnifex, quoth Doctor
Watson, retorting very merrily his own licentious figures upon him. So of us
may it be said we are Malissimipiscatores, but bonissimi carnifices. I would
English the jest for the edification of the temporalitie, but that it is not so
good in English as in Latin: and though it were as good, it would not convert
clubs and clowted shoone from the flesh pots of Egypt, to the Prouant of the
Lowecountries, for they had rather (with the Seruingman) put up a Supplication
to the Parliament house, that they might have a yard of pudding for a penie,
than desire (with the Baker) there might be three ounces of bread sold for a
half penie.

Alphonsus King Phillips Confessor, that came over with him to England, The
moderation of F^yer Alphonso, K. Philips Confessor.
was such a moderate man in his dye^, that he would feed but once a day, and
at that time he would feed so ^lenderly and sparingly, as scarce served to
keep life and soul together, one night importunately invited to a solemn
banquet, for fashion sake, he sat down among the rest, but by no entreatie
could be drawn to eat any thing: at length fruit being set on the board, he
reached an apple out of the dish, and put it in his pocket. which one marking,
that sat right over against him, asked him, Domine ^ur es solicitus in
crastinum? Sir, why are you careful for the morrow? Whereto he answered most
soberly, Imo hoc facio mi amice, vt ne sim solicitus in crastinum: No, I do it
my friend, that I may not be careful for the morrow: as though his appetite
were a whole day contented with so little as an apple, and that it were enough
to pay the morrowes tribute to Nature.

Rare and worthy to be registered to all posterities, The strange alteration of
the County Molines the Prince of Parmas Companion.
is the County Molines (sometime the Prince of Parmaes Companion) altered
course of life, who being a man that lived in as great pomp and delicacie, as
was possible for a man to do, and one that wanted nothing but a king^ome that
his heart could desire. Upon a day e^tering into a deep melancholy by
himself, he fell into a discoursiue consideration, what this world was, how
vain and transitory the pleasures thereof, and how many times he had offended
God by sur^etting, glut^ony, drunkenness, pride, whoredom and such like, and
how hard it was for him that lived in that prosperity that he did, not to be
entangled with those pleasures: whereupon he presently resolved twixt God and
his own conscience, to forsake it and al his allurements, and betake hime to
the seuerest form of life used in their state. And with that called all his
Soldiers and acquaintance together, and making known his intent unto them, he
distributed his living and possessions (which were infinite) amongst the
poorest of them: and having not left himself the worth of one farthing under
heaven, betook him to the most beggarly newere^^ed Order of the Friar
Capuch^^es. The^ Institution is, that they shall possess nothing whatsoever of
their own, more than the cloa^hes on their backs, continually go bare foot,
wear hair shirts, and lie upon the hard bords winter and summer time, they
m^st have no meat, nor ask any but what is given them voluntarily, nor must
they lay up from any meal to meal but give it to the poor, or else it is a
great penalty. In this severe humility lives this devout County, and has
do^e this tweluemonth submitting himself to all the base drudgery of the
house, as fetching water, making clean the rest of their chambers, insomuch as
he is the Junior of the Order. O what a notable rebuke were his honorable
Lowlines to succeeding pride, if this prostrate spirit of his were not the
servant of Superstition: or he misspent not his good works on a wrong Faith.

Let but our English belly-gods punish their pursie bodies with this strict
penance, and profess Capuchinisme but one month, and I Will be their pledge they
shall not grow so like dryfats as they do. O it will make them jolly long
winded to trot up and down the Dorter st^^^es, and the water-tankard will keep
under the insurrection of their shoulders, the h^ire shirt will chase whordome
out of their boanes, and the hard lodging on the boards take their flesh down
a button hole lower.

But if they might be iaduced to distribute all their goods amongst the poor,
it were to be hoped Saint Peter would let them dwell in the suburbs of heaven,
whereas other wise they must keep aloof at Pancredge, and not come neeer the
liberties by five leagues and above. It is your doing (Diotrephes Devil) that
these stal-^ed cormorants to damnation, The comp^aint of drunkenness.
must bung up all the wealth of the Land in their s^aphaunce bags, and poor
Scholars and Soldiers wander in back lanes, and the outshiftes of the City,
with never a rag to their backs: but our trust is, that by some intemperance
o^ other, Drinking supernag^lum, a devise of drinking new come out of France:
which is, after a man has turn^d up the bottom of the cup, to drop it on his
nail and make a pearl with that is left, which if it shed and he cannot make
stand on, by reason there is too much, he must drink again for his penance.
you will turn up their heels one of these years together, and provide them
of such unthrifts to their heirs, as shall spend in one week amongst good
fellows, what they got by extortion and opression from Gentlemen all their
life time.

FRom Glut^ony in meats, let me descend to superfluity in drink: a sin,
that ever since we have mixed our selves with the Low Countries, is counted
honorable: but before we knew their lingering wars, was held in that highest
degree of hatred that might be. Then if we had seen a man go wallowing in the
streets, or line sleeping under the board, we would have spet at him as a
toade, and called him foul drinken sw^e, and warnd al our friends out of his
company: now he is no body that cannot drink super ^agulum, carouse the
Hunters hoop, quaffe vpsey freze cross, with healthes, gloves, mumpes,
frolickes, and a thousand such dominiering inventions. He is reputed a pesaunt
and a ^oore that will not take his licour profoundly. And you shall hear a
Caualier of the first ^eather, a princockes that was but a Page the other day
in the Court, and now is all to be frenchi^ied in his Soldiers suit, stand
upon terms with Gods wounds you dishonor me sir, you do me the disgrace if
you do not pledge me as much as I drunk to you: and in the midst of his cups
stand vaunting his manhood: beginning every sentence, with when I first bore
Arms, when he never bare any thing but his Lords rapier after him in his life.
If he have been over and visited a town of Garrison as a trauailer or
passenger, he has as great experience as the greatest Commander and chief
Leader in England. A mighty deformer of men's manners and features, is this
unnecessary vice of all other. Let him be endued with never so many virtues,
and have as much goodly proportion and favor as nature can bestow upon a man:
yet if he be thirsty after his own destruction, and has no joy nor comfort,
but when he is drowning his soul in a gallon pot, that one beastly
imperfection, will utterly obscure all that is commendable in him: and all his
good qualities sink like lead down to the bottom of his carrowsing cups,
where they will lie like lees and dregs, dead and unregarded of any man.

Clim of the clough, thou that use to drink nothing but scalding lead and
sulpher in hell, thou art not so greedy of thy night gear. O, but thou have a
foul swallow, if it come once to carousing of humane blood, but that's but
seldom once in seven year, when there is a great execution, otherwise thou art
^ide at rack and manger, and drinkest nothing but the Aqua vitae of vengeance
all thy life time. The Prouer be gives it forth, thou art a knave, and
therefore I have more hope thou art some manner of good fellow: let me
entreat thee (since thou have other iniquities enough to circumuent us
withal) to wipe this sin ou^ of the catologue of thy subtilties; King Edgars
ordinance against dri^king
help to blast the U^^es that they may bear no more grapes, and sour the
wines in the cellers of Merchants storehouses, that our Contrymen may not
piss out all their wit and thrift against the walls. King Edgar, because
his subjects should not offend in swilling and bibbing, as they did, caused
certain yron-cups to be chained to every fountain and wells side, and at
every Uintners door, with iron pinnes in them, to stinte every man how much he
should drink: The wonderful abstinence of the Marquis of Pisana yet living.
and he that went beyond one of those pinnes forfeited a penny for every
draught. And if Stories were well searched, I believe hoopes in qua^t pots were
invented to that end, that every man should take his hoope, and no more. I
have heard it justified for a truth by great Personages, that the old
Marquess of Pisana (who yet lives) drinks not once in seven year: and I
have read of one Andron of Argos, that was so seldom thirsty, that he
travailed over the hot burning lands of Lybia, and never drank^. Then why
should ou^ cold Clime bring forth such ster^e throats. A^e we more thirsty
than Spain and Italy where the Suns force is doubled? The Germans and low
Dutch, me thinks should be continually keept moist with the foggie air and
stinking mistes that arise out of their fennie soil: but as their Country is
ouer-flowen with water, so are their heads always ouer-flowen with wine, and
in their bellies they have standing quag-mires and ^ogs of English beer. The
(...) laws amongst drunkar^s


One of their breed it was that writ the Book De Art bibendi: a worshipful
treatise, fit for none but Silenus and his Ass to set forth: besides that
volume, we have general rules and injunctions, as good as printed precepts, or
Statutes set down by Act of Pa^liament that go from drunkard to drunkard; as
still to keep your first man, not to leave any flocks in the bottom of the
cup, to knock the glass on your thumb when you have done, to have some
shooing horn to pull on your wine, as a rasher of the coals, or a red
herring, to stir it about with a candle send to make it taste better, and
not to hold your peace whiles the pot is stirring.

Nor have we one or two kind of drunkards only, The (...) drunkenness.
but eight kinds. The first is Ape drunk, and he leapes, and sings, and
hollowes, and daunceth for the heavens: the second is Lion drunk, and he
flings the pots about the house, calls his Hostess whore, breaks the glass
windows with his dagger, and is apt to quarrel with any man that speaks to
him: the third is Swine drunk, heavy, bumpish, and sleepie, and cries for a
little more drink, and a few more clothes: the fourth is Sheep drunk, wise
in his own conceit, when he cannot bring forth a right word, the fifth is
Mawdlen drunk, when a fellow will weep for kindness in the midst of his Ale,
and kiss you, saying; By God Captain I love thee, go thy ways thou do not
think so often of me as I do of thee, I would (if it pleased GOD) I could not
love thee so well as I do, and then he puts his finger in his eye, and cries:
the sixth is Martin drunk, when a man is drunk and drinks himself soberere
he s^irre: the seventh is Goat drunk, when in his drunkenness he has no mind
but on Lechery: the eighth is Fox drunk, when he is crafty drunk, as many
of the Dutch men be, will never bargain but when they are drunk. All these
species and more I have seen practiced in one Company at one sitting, when I
have been permitted toremaine sober amongst them, only to note their several
humors. He that plies any one of them hard, it will make him to write
admirable ve^^es, to have a deep casting head, though he were never so very
a Dunce before.

Gentlemen, The discommodities of drunkenness.
all you that will not have your brains twis^ sodden, your flesh rotten with
the Dropsy, that love not to go in greasy dublets, stockings out at the
heels, and wear alehouse daggers at your backs, forswear this slauering
bravery, that will make you have stinking breathes, and your bodies smell like
Brewers aprons: rather keep a snuff in the bottom of the glass to light you
to bed withal, than leave never an eye in your head to lead you over the
threshould. It will bring you in your old age to be companions with none but
Porters and Car men, to talk out of a Cage, railing as drunken men are wont, a
hundred boys wondering about them; and to die soda^^ly as Fol Long the Fencer
did, drinking Aqua vitae. From which (as all the rest) good Lord deliver Pierce
Penilesse.

THe nurse of this enormitie (as of all evils) is Idleness or sloth, The
complaint of Sloth.
which having no painful Province to set himself a work, runs headlong
with the (...) in his own hand into all lasciviousness and sensuality that
may be. Men when they are idle, and know not what to do, says one let us go
to the Stilliard and drink Rhenish wine. Nay, if a man knew where a good
whorhouse were says another, it were somewhat like. (...) says the third, let
us go to a di^cing-house or a bowling alley, and there we shall have some
sport for our money. To one of these three, (at hand quoth pick-purse) your
evil Angelship master mani-headed beast conducts them, Vbi quid agitur
betwixt you and their souls be it, for I am no Drawer, Box-keeper, or Pander,
to be privy to their sports. If I were to point Sloth, (as I am not seen in
the sweetening) by Saint John the Evangelist I swear, I would draw it like a
Stationer that I know, with his thumb under his girdle, who if a man come to
his stall and ask him for a book, never stirs his head, or looks upon him,
but stands stone still, and speaks not a word: only with his little finger
points backwards to his boy, who must be his interpreter, and so all the day
gaping like a dumb image he sits without motion, except at such times as he
goes to dinner or supper: for then he is as quick as other three, eating six
times every day. Videlicer, before he come out of his bed, then a se^
breakfast, then dinner, then afternoons nunchings, a supper and a reresupper.
If I would raunge abroad, and look in at sluggards key holes, I should find
a number lying a bed to save charges of ordinaries, in winter when they want
string, losing half a weeks Commons together, to keep them warm in the
linen. And hold you content, this Summer an vnder-meale of an afternoon long
does not amiss to exercise the eyes withal. Fat men and Farmers sons that
sweat much with eating hard cheese and drinking old wine, must have some
more ease than young boys that take their pleasure all day running up and
down.

Setting jesting a side, I hold it a great disputable question which is a more
evil man, of him that is an idle glutton at home, Which is ^etter of the (...)
glutton, or vagrant unthrift.
or a retchlesse unthrift abroad? The glutton at home does nothing but engender
diseases, pamper his flesh unto last, and is good for none but his own gut:
the unthrift abroad exercises his body at dancing school, fence school,
tennis, and all such recreations: the vintners, the victuallers, the dicing
houses, and who not, get by him. Suppose he lose a little now and then at play,
it teaches him wit: and how should a man know to eschew vices, if his own
experience did not acquaint him with their inconveniences? Omne ignotum pro
magnifico est: that villainy we have made no assaies in, we admire. Besides, my
vagrant Reueller haunts Plays, and sharpens his wits with frequenting the
company of Poets; he emboldens his blushing face by courting fair women on the
sudden, and look into all Estates, by conuersing with them in public places.
Now tell me whether of these two, the heavy headed gluttonous house dove, or
this lively wanton young Gallant, is like to prove the wiser man, and better
member in the Commonwealth. If my youth might not be thought partial, the
fine qualified Gentleman, although vnstaide, should carry it clean away from
the lazy clownish droane.

Sloth in Nobility, Courtiers, Scholars, or any men is the chiefest cause
that brings them in contempt. The effects of sloth.
For as industry and vnfatigable toil rayseth mean persons from obscure
houses to high thrones of authority: ^o Sloth and sluggish securitye causes
proud Lords to tumble from the towers of their starrie discents, and ^e crod
under foot of every inferior Be sonian. Is it the lofty treading of a
Galliard, or fine grace in telling of a love tale amongst Ladies, can make a
man reuerenst of the multitude? ^o, they care not for the false glistering of
gay garments, or insinuating courtesy of a carpet Peer: but they delight to
see him shine in armor, and oppose himself to honorable danger, to
participate a voluntary pen^rie with his Soldiers, and relieve part of their
wants out of his own purse. That is the course he that will be popular must
take, which if he neglect, and sit dallying at home, nor will be awakt by any
indignities out of his louedreame, but suffer every vpstart groom to def^e
him, set him at naught, and shake him by the beard vnreuengde, let him straight
take orders, and be a Churchman, and then his patience may pass for a virtue:
but otherwise, he shall be suspected of cowardice, and not car'^ for of any.
The only enemy to Sloth, is contention and emulation; The means to auo^de de
Sloth.
as to propose one man to my self, that is the only myrrour of out Age, and
strive to out-go him in virtue. But this strife must be so tempered, that we
fall not from the eagerness of praise, to the envying of their persons: for
then we leave running to the goal of glory, to spurue at a stone that lies
in our way; and so did Atlanto in the midst of her course, stoop to take up
the golden Apple that her enemy scattered in her way, and was out-runne by
Hippomenes. The contrary to this contention and emulation, is security,
peace, quiet, tra^quillitie, when we have no aduersa^^ to pry into our
actions, no malicious eye, whose pursuing our private behavior, might make us
more vigilant over our imperfections, than otherwise we would be.

That State or Kingdom that is in league with all the world, and has no
foreign sword to vere it, is not half to strong or confirmed to endure, as
that which lives every hour in fear o^ invasion. There is a certain waste of
the people for whom there (...) no use, but war: and these men must have
some employment (...) to cut them off: Nam si for as hostem non habent, domi
inueni^^t. If they have no service abroad, they will make mutinies at home. Or
if the affairs of the State be such, as cannot exhale all these corrupt
excrements, it is very expedient they have some light toys to busy their
heads withal, cast before them as bones to gnaw upon, which may keep them
from having leisure to intermeddle with higher matters.

To this effect, The defense of Plays.
the policy of Plays is very necessary, howsoever some shallow-braind
censures (not the deepest serchers into the secrets of government) mightily
oppugn them. For whereas the afternoon being idlest time of the day;
wherein men that are their own masters, (as Gentlemen of the Court, the Innes
of the Court, and the number of Captains and Soldiers about London) do wholly
bestow themselves upon pleasure, and that pleasure they divide (how virtuously
it skils not) either into gameing, following of harlots, drinking, or seeing a
Play: is it not then better (since of four extremes all the world cannot
keep them but they will choose one) that they should betake them to the least,
which is Plays? Nay, what if I prove Plays to be no extreme: but a rare
exercise of virtue? First, for the subject of them (for the most part) it is
borrowed out of our English Chronicles, wherein our forefathers valiant acts
(that have li^e long buried inrustie brass, and worme-eaten books) are
revived, and they themselves raised from the Grave of Oblivion, and brought to
plead their aged Honors in open presence: than which, what can be a sharper
reproof to these degenerate effeminate days of ours.

How would it have ioyed brave Talbot (the terror of the French) to think that
after he had line two hundred years in his Tomb, he should triumph again
on the Stage, and have his bones new embalmed with the tears of ten thousand
spectators at least, (at several times) who in the Tragedian that represents
his person, imagine they behold him fresh bleeding.

I will defend it against any Collian, or clubfisted Usurer of them all, there
is no immortality, can be given a man on earth like unto Plays. What talk I
to them of immortality, that are the only vnde^miners of Honor, and do
en^ie any man that is not sprung up by base Brokerie like themselves. They care
not if all the ancient houses were rooted out, so that like the Burgomasters
of the Low Countries they might share the government amongst them as State* and
be quarter-maisters of our Monarchy. All Arts to them are vanity: and if you
tell them what a glorious thing it is to have Henry the fifth represented on
the Stage leading the French King prisoner, and forcing both him and the
Dolphin to swear fealty. I, but (will they say) what do we get by it?
Respecting neither the right of Fame that is due to true Nobility deceased,
nor what hopes of eternity are to be proposed to aduentrous minds, to
encourage them forward, but only their execrable luker, and filthy
unquenchable avarice.

They know when they are dead they shall not be brought upon the Stage for any
goodness, but in a merriment of the Usurer and the Devil, or buying Arms of the
Herald, who gives them the Lion without tongue, tail, or tallents, because his
master whom he must serve is a Townesman, and a man of peace, and must not
keep any quarrelling beasts to annoy his honest neighbors.

In Plays, The use of Plays.
all co^sonages, all cunning drifts ouer-guylded with outward holiness, all
stratagems of war, all the cankerwormes that breed on the rust of peace, are
most lively anatomized: they show the ill success of treason, the fall of
hasty climbers, the wretched end of usurpers, the misery of civil
dissension, and how just God is evermore in punishing of murder. And to prove
every one of these allegations, could I propound the circumstances of this play
and that play, if I meant to handle this Theme otherwise than obiter. What
should I say more? they are sower pills of reprehension wrapped up in sweet
words. Whereas some P^titioners of the Counsel against them object, they
corrupt the youth of the City, The confutation of Citizens objections aga^^st
Players.
and withdraw Prentises from their work; they beartily wish they might be
troubled with none of their youth nor their prentises; for some of them (I
mean the ruder handicrafts servants) never came abroad, but they are in
danger of undoing: and as for corrupting them when they come, that's false; for
no Play they have, encourages any man to tumults or rebellion, but lays
before such the halter and the gallows; or praises or approoueth pride, lust,
whoredom, prodigality, or drunkenness, but beats them down utterly. As for
the hindrance of Trades and Traders of the City by them, that is an Article
foysted (...) by the Uintners, Alewiues, and Uictuallers, who surmise if there
were no Plays, they should have all the company that resort to them, lie
bowzing and beere-ba^hing in their houses every afternoon. Nor ^o, nor so,
good brother bottle-ale, for there are other places besides where money can
bestow it self: the sign of the smock will wipe your mouth clean; and yet I
have heard ye have made her a tenant to your tap-houses. But what shall he
do that has spent himself? where shall he haunt? Faith, when Dice, Lust,
and Drunkenness, and all have dealt upon him, if there be never a Play for
him to go too for his penny, he sits melancholy in his Chamber, devising
upon felony or treason, and how he may best exalt himself by mischief.

In Augustus time (who was the Patron of all witty sports) there happened a
great Fraie in Rome about a Player, insomuch as all the City was in an
uproar: whereupon, the Emperor (after the broyle was somewhat ouer-blowne)
calde the Player before him, and asked what was the reason that a man of his
quality, durst presume to make such a brawle about nothing. He smilinglye
replyde, It is good for thee O Caesar, that the peoples heads are troubled with
brawles and quarrels about us and our light matters: A Players witty answer
to Augustus.
for otherwise they would look into thee and thy matters. Read Lipsius or any
profane or Christian Politician, and you shall find him of this opinion. Out
Players are not as the players beyond sea, a sort of squirting baudie
Comedians, that have whores and common Curtizens to play women's parts, and
forbear no immodest speech, A comparison twixt our Plaier^ and the Players
beyond the Sea.
or unchaste action that may procure laughter, but our Scene is more statelye
furnished than ever it was in the time of Roscius, our representations
honorable, and full of gallant resolution, not consisting like theirs of
Pantaloun, a Whore, and a Zanie, but of Emperors, Rings and Princes: whose
true Tragedies ( Sophocleo cothu^no) they do vaunt.

Not Roscius nor Aesope those admyred tragedians that hau^ lived ever since
before Christ was borne, could ever perform more in action, The due
commendation of Ned Allen.
than famous Ned Allen. I must accuse our Poets of sloth and partiality that
they will not boast in large impressions what worthy men (above all Nations)
England affoords. Other Countries cannot have a Fiddler break a string, but
they will put it in print, and the old Romans in the writings they published,
thought scorn to use any but domestical examples of their own hom-bred
Actors, Scholars and Champions, and them they would extol to the third and
fourth Generation: Cobblers, Tinkers, Fencers, none escapt them, but they
mingled them all in one Eallimafrey of glory.

Here I have used a like Method, not of tying my self to mine own Country,
but by insisting in the experience of our time: and if I ever write any thing
in Latin,) as I hope one day I shall) not a man of any desert here amongst us,
but I will have up. Tarlton, Ned Allen, Knell, Bentlie, shall be made known to
France, Spain, and Italy: and not a part that they surmounted in, more than
other, but I will there note and set down, with the manner of their habites
and attire.

THe child of Sloth is Lechery, The seventh and last complaint of Lechery.
which I have plat't last in my order of handling: a sin that is able to make
a man wicked that should describe it; for it has more starting holes, than a
five has holes, more Clyents than Westminster Hall, more diseases than
Newgate. Call a Lee^e at Byshopsgate, and examine how every second house in
Shorditch is maintained: make a privy search in Southwarke, and tell me how
many Shee-Inmat^s you find: nay, go where you will in the Suburbs, and
bring me two Uirgins that have vowed Chastity, and I Will build a Nunnerie.

Westminster, Westminster, much maydenhead have thou to answer for at the day
of Judgment, thou had a Sanctuary in thee once, but have few Saints left in
thee now. Surgeons and Apothecaries, you know what I speak is true: for you
live (like Sumners) upon the sins of the people; tell me, is there any place
so lewd as this Lady London? not a Wench soever creepes out of the shell, but
she is of the Religion Some wives will sow Mandrake in their gardens, and
crosse-neighborhood with them is counted goodfellowship.

The Court I dare not touch, but surely there (as in the Heavens) be many
falling stars, and but one true Diana. Consuetudo peccandi, tollit sensum
peccati, Custom is a Law, and Lust holds it for a Law, to live without
Law. Lais that had so many Poets to her Lovers, could not always preserve
her beauty with their praises. Marble will wear away with much rain: Gold
will rust with moist keeping: and the richest garments are subject to Times
Moath-frets, Clitemnestra, that slew her husband to enjoy the Adulterer
Aegistus, and bathde her self in Milk every day to make her young again, had
a time when she was ashamed to view her self in a looking Glass, and her
body withered, her mind being green. The people pointed at her for a
murderer, young children howted at her as a strumpet: shame, misery,
sickness, beggary, is the best end of uncleanness.

Lais, Cleopatra, Helen, if our Clyme has any such, noble Lord warden of the
witches and iuglers, I commend them with the rest of our unclean siffers in
Shorditch, the Spittle, Southwarke, Westminster, and Turnbull street, to the
protection of your Portership: hoping you will speedily carry them to hell,
there to keep open house for all young Devils that come, and not let our air
be contaminated with their six-pennie damnation any longer.

Your Diuelships bounden execrator, Pierce Penilesse.


A supplication calst thou this. (quoth the knight of the post) it is the
maddest Supplication that ever I saw; me thinks thou have handled all the
seven deadly sins in it, and spared none that exceedes his limits in any of
them. It is well done to practice thy witt^, but (I believe) our Lord will cun
thee little thanks forit.

The worse for me (qouth I) if my destiny be such, to lose my labor every
where, but I mean to take my chance be it good or bad. Well, have thou any
more that thou would have me to do (quoth he?) Only one suit (quoth I)
which is this, that since opportunity so conveniently serves, you would
acquaint me with the state of your infernal regiment: and what that hell is,
where you Lord holds his throne; whether a world like this, which sprrites
like outlawes do inhabit, who being banishe from heaven, as they are from
their Country, envy that any shall be more happy than they: and therefore
seek all means possible that Wit or Art may invent, to make other men as
wret^^ed as themselves: or, whether it be place of horror, stench, and
darkness, where men see meat, but can get none, or are ever thirsty and
ready to sw^lt for drink, yet have not the power to taste the cool streams
that run hard at their feet: where (permut at a vicissitudine) one ghost
torments another by turns, and he that all his life time was a great
for^icator, has all the diseases of lust continually hanging upon him, and is
constrained (the more to augment his misery) to have congresse every hour with
hagges and old witches: and he that was a great drunkard here on earth, has
his penance assigned him, to carouse himself drunk with dishwash and Uineger,
and surfeit four times a day, with sower Ale and small Beer: as so of the
rest, as the usurer to swallow moulten gold, the glutton to eat nothing but
toades, and the Murderer to be still st^bd with daggers, but never die: or
whether (as some phartasticall refyners of philosophy will needs persuade us)
hell is nothing but error, and that none but fools and Idiotes and Machanicall
men that have no learning shall be damned: of these doubts if you will resolve
me, I shall think my self to have profited greatly by your company.

He hea^ing me so (...) in matters above humane capacity, entertained my
greedy humor with this answer. Poets and Philosophers that take a pride in
inuenting new opi^ians, have sought to renoume their wits, by hunting after
strange conceits of heaven and hell; all generally agreeing, that such places
there are, but how inhabited, by whom governed, or what betides them that are
transported to the one or other, not two of them iumpe moan tale. We that to
our terror and grief do know their dotage by our sufferings, rejoice to think
how these silly flies play with the fire that must burn them.

But leaving them to the Laborynth of their fond curiosity; shall I tell thee
in a word what Hellis? It is a place where the souls of intemperate men and
ill^^ers of all sorts, are detayned and imprisoned till the general
R^s^rrection, kept and possessed chiefly by spirits, who lie like Soldiers
in Garrison, ready to be sent about any service into the world, whenever
Lucifer their Lieftenaunt General pleases. For the scit^ation of it in
respect of heaven, I can no better compare it than to Callis and Dover: for as
a man standing upon Callis Sands may see men walking on Dover Clyffes, so
easily may you discern Heaven from the farthest part of hell, and behold the
melody and motions of the Angels and Spirits there resident, in such perfect
manner, as if you were amongst them; which how it works in the minds and
souls of them that have no power to apprehend such felicity, it is not for me
to intimate, because it is prejudicial to our Monarchy.

I would be sorry (quoth I) to importune you in any matter of secrecy: yet
this I desice, if it might be done without offense, that you would satisfy me
in full sore and according to truth, what the Devil is whom you serve? as
also how he began, and how far his power and authority extends?

Persie, believe me thou shriuest me very near in this latter demand, which
concer^eth us more deeply than the former, and may work us more damage than
thou art aware of: yet in hope thou wylt conceal what I tell thee, I will lay
open ou^ whole estate plainly and simply unto thee as it is: but first I will
begin with the opinions of former times, and so hasten forward to that
manifest verum that thou seek. Some men there be that building too much
upon reason, persuade themselves, that there are no Devils at all; but that
this word Demon, is such another moral of mischief, as the Poets Dame
Fortune is of mishap: for as under the fiction of this blind Goddess we aim
at the folly of Princes and great men in disposing of honors, that oftentimes
prefer fools and disgrace wise men, and alter their favors in turning of an
eye, as Fortune turns her wheel: so under the person of this old
Guathonicall companion called the Devil, we shroud all subtlety masking under
the name of simplicity, all painted holiness devouring widows houses, all gray
headed Foxes clad in sheep garments; so that the Devil (as they make it) is
only a pestilent humor in a man, of pleasure, profit, or policy, that
violently carries him away to vanicie, villainy, or monstrous hypocrisy: under
vanity I comprehend not only all vain Arts and studies whatsoever, but also
dishonorable prodigality, intemperate venery, and that hateful sin of
self-love, which is so common amongst us: under villainy I comprehend murder,
treason, theft, cousnage, cutthroat couetise, and such like: lastly, under
hypocrisy, all Mach^auilisme, puritanisme, and outward gloasing with a man's
enemy, and protesting friendship to him that I hate, and mean to harm: all
underhand cloaking of bad actions with Commonwealth pretenses: and finally
all Italionate conueyances, as to kill a man, and then mourn for him, quasi
ver^ it was not by my consent, to be a flaue to him that has injured me, and
kiss his fecte for opportunity of revenge, to be severe in punishing
offenders* that no^e might have the benefit of such means but my self, to
use men for my purpose and then cast them off, to seek his destruction that
knows my secrets: and such as I have employed in any murder or stratagem, to
set them privily together by the ears, to f^ab each other mutua^ly, for fear
of bewraying me: or if that fail, to hire them to humor one another in such
courses, as may bring them both to the gallows. These and a thousand more such
fleights has hypocrisy learned by travailing strange Countries. I will not
say she puts them in practice here in England, although there be a^ many false
brethren and crafty knaves here amongst us, as in any place: witness the poor
Miller of C^^bridge, that having no room for his hen-loft, but the Testor of
his bed, and it was not possible for any hungry Poultrers to come there, but
they must stand upon the one side of it, and so not steal them but with
great hazard; had in one night notwithstanding (when he and his wife were a
snorting) all the whole progeny of their Pullery taken away, and neither of
them heard any sturring: it is an odd trick, but what of that, we must not
stand upon it, for we have grauer matters in hand, then the stealing of
Hens. Hypocrisy I remember was our Text, which was one of the chief moral
Devils out late Doctors affirm to be most busy in these days, and busy it
is in truth more than any Be that I know: now you talk of a Be, I Will tell
you a tale of a Battle-dore.

The Bear on a time being chief Burgomaster of all the Beasts under the
Lion, began think with himself how he might surfeit in pleasure, or best
hus^and his Authority to enlarge his delight and contentment. With that he
began to prye and to smell through every corner of the Forest for pray, to
have a thousand imagynations with himself what dainty morsel he was master
of, and yet had not tasted: whole Herds of sheep had he devoured, and was
not satisfied? fat Oxen, Hayfers, Swine, Calves, and young Kiddes, were his
ordinary vyands: he longed for Horseflesh, and went presently to a me dowe,
where a fat Cammell was grazing, whom fearing to encounter with force because
he was a huge beast and well shod, he thought to betray under the color of
demanding homage, hoping that as he should stoop to do him truage, he might
seize upon his throat and stifle him before he should be able to recover
himself from his false embrace; but therein he was deceived: for coming unto
this stately Beast with this imperious message, in stead of doing homage unto
him, he li^ted up one of his hindmost heels, and stroke him such a blow on
the forehead that he overthrew him. Thereat not a little moved and enraged,
that he should be so dishonored his inferior as he thought, he consulted with
the Ape how he might be revenged.

The Ape abhorring him by nature, because he ouer-lookt him so Lordly, and was
by so many degrees greater than he was, advised him to dig a pit with his
paws right in the way where this big boand Gentleman should pass, that so
stumbling and falling in, he might lightly skip on his back, and bridle him,
and then he come (...) seize on him at his pleasure. No sooner was this
persuaded, than performed: for envy that is never idle, could not sleep in
his wrath, or ouer-slip the least opportunity, till he had leene the
confusion of his enemy. Alas goodly Creature, that thou might no longer
live. What avails thy gentleness, thy prowess, or the plentiful pasture,
wherein thou were fed: since malice triumphs over all thou commaundest? Well
may the Mule rise up in arms, and the Ass bray at the Authors of thy death:
yet shall their fury befatall to themselves, before it take hold on these
Traitors. What needs more words? the deuourer feeds on his captive, and is
gorged with blood. But as avarice and cruelue are evermore thirsty, so fared
it with this hungry Usurper: for having flesht his ambition with this
treacherous conquest, he past a long through a grove, where a Heard of Dear
wear a ranging: whom when he had steadfastly surueyed from the fattest to the
leanest, he singled out one of the fairest of the company, with whom he meant
to close up his stomach in stead of cheese: but because the Wood-men were ever
stirring thereabout, and it was not possible for one of his (...)* to commit
such outrage vndeseried, and that if he were espied, his life were in peril:
though not with the Lion, whose eyes he could blind as he list, yet with the
lesser sort of the brutish Comminaltie, whom no flattery might pacify.
Therefore he determined slily and privily to poison the strearme, where this
^olly Forrester wonted to drink; and as he determined, so he did: whereby it
fell out, that when the: Sun was ascended to his height, and all the (...)
Citizens of the Wo^d he took them to their Laire, this youthful Lord of the
Lawnds, all fainte and malecontent (as prophesying his near approaching mishap
by his languishing) with a lazy wallowing pace, ^^^ayed aside from the rest of
his fellowship, and betook him all carelessly to the corrupted fountain that
was prepared for his Funeral.

Ah, woe is me, this poison is pitiless. What need I say more, since you
know it is death with whom it encounters. And yet cannot all this expense of
life, set a period to insatiable Murder: but still it has some Anuile to
work upon, and ouser-casts all opposite prosperity, that may any way shadow
his glory.

Too long it were to rehearse all the practices of this sauadge blood-hunter,
how he assailed the Unicorne as he slept in his den, and tore the heart out of
his breast ere he could awake: how he made the lesser beasts lie in wait one
for the other, and the Crocodyle to coape with the Basiliske, that when they
had enterchangeably weakened each other, he might come and in suit over them
both as her list. But these were lesser matters, which daily use had worn out
of men's mouths, and he himself had so customablie practiced, that often
exercise had quite abrogated the opinion of sin, and impudency thoroughly
confirmed an undaunted defiance of virtue in his face. Yet newfangled lust,
that in time is weary of welfare, and will be as soon cloyed with too much
ease and delicacie, as Poverty with labor and scarcity, at length brought
him out of love with this greedy bestiall humor: and now he affected a
milder variety in his diet: he had bethought him what a pleasant thing it was
to eat nothing but honey another while, and what great store of it there was
in that Country.

Now did he cast in his head, that if he might bring the Husbandmen of the
soil in opinion, that they might bu^e honey cheaper, than being at such
charges in keeping of Bees, or that those Bees which they kept, were most of
them Drones, and what should such idle Drones do with such stately Hyues, or
lie sucking at such precious Honny-combes; that if they were took away from
them, and distributed equally abroad, they would relieve a great many of
painful laborers that had need of them, and would continually live
serviceable at their command, if they might enjoy such a benefit. Nay more,
let them give Waspes but only the wax, and dispose of the honey as they
think good, and they shall (...) and buzze a thousand times louder than they,
and have the bu^e fuller at the years end (with young ones I mean) than the
Bees are wont in ten year.

To broach this device, the Fox was addressed like a shepherds dog, and
promised to have his Pattent sealed, to be the Kings Poulterer for ever, if he
could bring it to pass. Faith, quoth he, and I Will put it in a venture, let it
hap how it will With that he grew in league with an old Camelion that could put
on all shapes, and ^mitate any color, as occasion served, and him he addressed
sometime like an Ape to make sport, and then like a Crocodile to weep, sometime
like a Serpent to sting, and by and by like a Spantell to fawn, that with
these sundry forms, (applyde to men's variable humors) he might persuade the
world he meant as he spoke, and only intended their good, when he thought
nothing l^sse. In this disguise, these two deceivers went up and down, and did
much harm under the habit of Simplicity, making the poor silly Swains
believe they were cunning Physicians, and well seen in all Cures, that they
could heal any malady, though never so dangerous, and restore a man to life
that had been dead two days* only by breathing upon him: above all things
they persuaded them, that the honny that their Bees brought forth, was
poisonous and corrupt, by reason that those flowers and herbs, out of which it
was gathered and exhaled, were subject to the infection of every Spider and
venomous Canker, and not a loathsome Toade (how detestable soever) but reposde
himself under their shadow, and lay sucking at their roots continually:
whereas in other Countries, no noisome or poisnous creature might live, by
reason of the imputed goodness of the Soil, or careful diligence of the
Gardners above ours, as for example, Scotland, Denmark, and some more pure
parts of the seauenteene Provinces.

These persuasions made the good honest Husbandmen to pause, and mistrust their
own wits very much, in nourishing such dangerous Animals, but * yet I know not
how antiquity and custom so ouer-rulde their fear, that none would resolve
to abandon them on the sudden, till they saw a further inconvenience: whereby
my two cunning Philosophers were driven to study Galen a new, and seek out
splenatiue simples, to purge their popular Patients of the opinion of their
old Traditions and Customs: which how they wrought with the most part that
had least wit, it were a world to tell. For now nothing was Canonical but what
they speak, no man would converse with his wife, but first asked their advise,
nor pare his nails, nor cut his beard, without their prescription: so senceles,
so wavering is the light unconstant multitude, that will dance after every
man's pipe; and sooner prefer a blind harper that can squeake out a new
horne-pipe, than Alcinous or Apolloes variety, that imitates the right
strains of the Doryan melody. I speak this to amplify the novel folly of
the hedlong vulgar, that making their eyes and ears vassailes to the
legerdemaine of these iugling Mountbanks, are presently drawn to contemn Art
and experience in comparison of the ignorance of a number of audatious idiots.
The Fox can tell a fair tale, and couers all his knauerie under conscience,
and the Camelion can address himself like an Angel whenever he is disposed
to work mischefe by miracles: but yet in the end their secret drifts are laid
open, and Linceus eyes that see through stone walls, have made a passage into
the close couerture of their hypocrisy.

For one day, as these two Deuisers were plotting by themselves how to drive
all the Bees from their Honny combs, by putting wormwood in their Hyues, and
strewing Henbane and Rue in every place where they resort: a Fly that past
by, and heard all their talk, stomaking the Fox of old, for that he had
murdered so many of his kindred with his flail-driuing tail, went presently and
buzd in Linceus ears the whole purport of their malice, who awaking his
hundred eyes at these unexpected tidings, began pursue them wheresoever they
went, and trace their intents as they proceeded into action, so that ere half
their baits were cast forth, they were apprehended and imprisoned, and all
their whole counsel detected. But long ere this, the Bear impatient of
delays and consumed with an inward grief in himself, that he might not have
his will of a fat Hind that outran him, he went into the woods all melancholy,
and there died for pure anger: leaving the Fox and the Camelion to the
destiny of their desert, and mercy of their Judges. How they escape I know
not, but some say they were hanged, and so we will leave them.

How likest thou of my tale friend Persie? Have I not described a right earthly
Devil unto thee, in the discourse of this bloody minded Bear? Or can thou
not attract the true image of hypocrisy, under the description of the Fox and
the Camelion?

Yes very well (quoth I) but I would gladly have you return to your first
subject, since you have moved doubts in my mind, which you have not yet
discust.

Of the sundry opinions of the Diuill thou meanest, and them that imagine him
to have no existence, of which sort are they that first invented the proverb,
Homo bomini Demon: meaning thereby, that that power which we call the Diuill,
and the ministering Spirits belonging to him and to his kingdom, are tales and
fables, and mere bugge bearers to scarre boys: and that there is no such
essence at all, but only it is a term of large content, describing the rancor,
grudg, and bad dealing of one man toward another: as namely, when one friend
talks with another subtly, and seeks to diue into his commodity, that he
may deprive him of it craftelie: when the son seeks the death of the father,
that he may be infeoffed in his wealth: and the stepdame goes about to make
away her son in-law, that her children may inherit: when brothers fall at
iarres for portions, and shall by open murder or privy conspiracy, attempt
the confusion of each other, only to join house to house, and unite two
Liuelihoods in one: when the servant shall rob his master, and Men put in trust
start away from their oaths and vows they care not how.

Iu such cases and many more, may one man be said to be a devil to another,
and this is the second opinion. The third is that of Plato, who not only
affirms that there are devils, but divided them into three sorts, every one
a degree of dignity above the other; the first are those, whose bodies are
compact of the purest airie Element, combined with such transparant threeds;
that neither they do partake so much fire as should make them visible to
sight, or have any such astinitie with the earth, as they are able to be pressed
or touched: and these he sets in the hiest incomprehensible degree of heaven.
The second, he makes these whom Apuleius does call reasonable creatures,
passive in mind and eternal in time, being those Apostata spirits that
rebelled with Beelzebub: whose bodies, before their fall, were bright and pure
all like to the former: but after their transgression, they were obscured with
a thick ayrie matter and ever after assigned to darkness, The third, he
attributes to those men, that by some divine knowledge or understanding,
seeming to aspire above mortality, are called Daemona, (that is) Gods: for
this word Demon contayueth either, and Homer in every place does use it, both
for that omnipotent power that was before al things, and the evil spirit that
leads men to error: so does Syrianus testify, that Plato was called Demon,
because he disp^ted of deep Common-welth matters, greatly auailable to the
benefit of his Country: and also Aristotle because he wrote at large of all
things subject to moving and sense. Then belike (quoth I) you make this word
Demon, a capeable name of Gods, of men and of devils, which is far distant
from the scope of my demand: for I do only inquire of the devil, as this
common appellation of the Devil, signifies a malignant spirit, enemy to
mankind, and a hater of God and all goodness. Those are the second kind said
he, usually termed detractors or accusers that are in knowledge infinite,
insomuch as by the quicknes of their wits, and agreeable mixtures of the
Elements, they so comprehend those seminary virtues to men unknown, that those
things which in course of time, or by growing degrees Nature of it self can
effect. They by their Art and skill in hastening the works of nature, can
contriue and compass in a moment, as the Magitians of Pharao, who whereas nature
not without some in terposition of time, and ordinary causes of conception
brings forth frogs, serpents, or any living shing else, they without all such
distance of space, or circumscription of season even in a thought as soon as
their K. commanded, covered the land of A^gypt with this monstrous increase. Of
the original of us spirits, the scripture most amply makes mention, name lie
that Lucifer (before his fall) an Archangel, was a clear body compact of the
p^rest, and brightest of the air; but after his fall, he was veiled with a
grosser substance, and took a new form of dark and thick air, which he
still reteineth. Neither did he only fall, when he strove with Michael, but
drew a number of Angels to his faction; who joint partakers of his proud
revolt, were likewise partakers of his punishmente, and all thrust out of
heaven together by one judgment: who ever since do nothing but wander about
the Earth, and tempt and enforce frail men to enterprise all wickedness that
may be, and commit most horrible and abominable things against God. Marue^^
not that I discover so much of our estate unto thee: for the scripture has
more than I mention, as S. Peter where he says that God spared not his Angels
that sinned. And in another place where he says, that they are bound with the
chains of darkness, and thrown headlong into hell: which is not meant of any
local place in the earth, or under the waters: for as Austin affirms, we do
inhabit the Region under the moon, and have the thick air assigned us as a
prison, from whence we may with small labor cast our nets where we list: yet
are we not so at our disposition but that we are still commanded by Lucifer
(although we are in number infinite) who retaining that pride wherewith he
arrogantlie affected the majesty of God, has still his ministering Angels
about him, whom he emploies in several charges, to seduce and deceive as him
seems best: as those spirits which the Latins call Iouios and
Antemeridianos, to speak out of Oracles, and make the people worship them as
gods, when they are nothing but deluding Devils that covet to have a false
Deity ascribed unto them, and draw men unto their love by wonders and
prodigies, that else would hate them deadly, if they knew their maleuolence
and envy. Such a monarchizing spirit it was, that said to Christ, If thou will
fall down and worship me, I will give thee all the kingdoms of the earth: and
such a spirit it was that possessed the Libian Sapho, and the Emperor Dioclesian,
who thought it the blessedest thing that might be, to be called God. For the
one being weary of humane honor, and inspired with a supernatural folly,
taught little bi^ds that were capable of speech, to pronounce distinctlie
Magnus Deus Sapho, that is to say A great God is Sapho: Which words when they
had learned readil^^ to caroll, and were perfect in their note, he let them
fly at randon, that so dispersing themselves every where, they might induce
the people to account of him as a God. The other was so arrogant, that he made
his subjects fall prostrate on their faces, and lifting up their hands to him
as to heaven, adore him as omnipotent.

The second kind of Devils which he most imploieth, are those Northern Marcij,
called the spirits of revenge, and the authors of massacres, and seedesmen of
mischief, for they have commission to incense men to rapines, sacrilege,
theft, mur^her, wrath, fury, and all manner of cruelties, and they command
certain of the Southern spirits (as slaves) to wait upon them, as also great
Arioch, that is termed the spirit of revenge.

These know how to dissociate the love of brethren, and to break wedlock bands
with such violence, that they may not be united, and are prodominant in (...)
other domisticall mu^inies: of whom if thou list to hear more, read the 39. of
Ecclesiasticus. The Prophet ^say makes (...) of another Spirit sent by God to
the Egyptians, to make them straie and wander out of the way, that is to say,
the Spirit of liing, which they call Bolychym. The Spirits that entice men to
gluttony and lust, are certain watery spirits of the West, and certain
Southern spirits as Nefrach and Ke^en, which for the most part prosecute
unlawful loves, and cherish all unnatural desires: they wander through lakes,
fish ponds and fennes, and ouerwhelme ships, cast boats upon ankers, and
drown men that are swimming: therefore are they counted the most pestilent,
trouble some, and guile full spirits that are: for by the help of Alrynach a
Spirit of the West, they will raise storms, cause earthquaks, whirlwinds,
rain, hail or snow in the clerest day that is: and if ever they appear to
any man, they come in women's apparel. The spirits of the air will mix
themselves with thunder and lightening, and so infect the Clime where they
raise any tempest, that suddenly great mortality shall ensue to the
inhabitants from the infectious vapors which arise from their motions: of such
S. John makes mention in the 9. of the Apocalips: their patron is Mereris,
who bears chief rule about the middle time of the day. The spirits of the
fire have their mansions under regions of the Moon, that whatsoever is
committed to their charge, they may there execute, as in their proper
consistory, from whense they cannot start. The spirits of the earth keep for
the most part in Forests and woods, and do hunters much noiance, and sometime
in the broad ^^eldes where they lead travelers out of the right way, or
fright men with deformed apparitio^s, or make them run mad through excessive
melancholy lik Ajax Telamonius, and so prove hurtful to themselves, and
dangerous to others: of this number the chief are Sauiaab and Achymael spi^its
of the cast, that have no power to do any great harm, by reason of ^he
inconstancy of their affections. The vnder-earth spirits, are such as lurk in
dens and little cauerns of the earth, and hollow creuises of mountains, that
they may diue into the bowels of the earth at their pleasure: these dig
metals, and watch treasures, which they continually transport from place to
place, that none should have use of them: they raise winds that vomit flames,
and shake the foundation of buildings, they dance in rounds in pleasant launds,
and green meadows, with noises of music and minstrelsie, and vanish away
when any comes near them: ^hey will take upon them any similitude but of a
woman, and terri^^e men in the likeness of dead men's ghostes in the night
time: and of this quality and condition the Necromancers hold Gaziel, Fegor,
and Anarazel, Southern spirits to be. Besides, there are yet remaining certain
li^ng spirits (who, although all be given to lie by nature) yet are they more
prone to that vice, than the rest, being named Pythonists, of whom Apollo
comes to be called Pytheus: they have a prince as well as other spirits, of
whom mention is made in the 3. book of kings, when he says he will be a lieng
spirit in the mouth of all Ahabs prophets: from which those spirits of
iniquity do little differ, which are called the vessels of wrath, that assist
Belial (whom they interpret a spirit without yoke or controuler) in all
damnable devises and inventions. Plato reports them to be such as first devised
cards and dice, and I am in the mind, that the Monk was of the same order,
that found out the use of Gunpouder, and the engines of war thereto belonging.
Those that write of these matters, call this Belial Chodar of the East, that
has all witches and coniurors spirits under his jurisdiction, and gives them
leave to help Iuglers in their tricks, and Simon Magus to do miracles;
always provided they bring a soul home to their Master for his hire. Yet are
not these all, for there are spirits called spies and tale carriers, ob^dient
to Ascaroth, whom the Greeks call Daimona, and S. John The accuser of the
brethren: also tempters, who for their interrupting us in all our good actions,
are called our evil Angels. Above all things they have the light and rejoice in
darkness, disquieting men maliciously in the night and sometimes hurt them by
pinching them or blasting them as they sleep but they are not so much to be
dreaded as other spirits, because if a man speak to them, they flee away and
will not abide. Such a spirit Plinius Secundus tells of, that used to haunt a
goodly house in Athens that Athenadorus hired; and such another Suctonius
describes to have long houered in Lamianus Garden where Caligula lay buried,
who for because he was only covered with a few clods, and vnreuentlie thrown
amongst the weeds, he meruelouslie disturbed the owners of the garden, and
would not let them rest in their beds, till by his Sisters returned from
banishment, he was taken up, and intoombed solemnlie. Pausanias avouches
(amongst other experiments) that a certain spirit called Zazilus does feed upon
dead men's corses, that are not deeply interred in the earth as they ought:
which to confirm, there is a inonderfull accident set down in the Danish
history of Asuitus and Asmundus, who being two famous friends (well known in
those parts) vowed one to another, that which of them two out lived the other,
should be buried alive with his friend that first died. In short spabe A
suitus fell sick and yielded to nature, Asmundus compelled by the oath of his
friendship, took none but his horse and his dog with him, and transported the
dead body into a vast cave under ^he earth, and there determined (having
victual^d himself for a long time) to finish his days in darkness, and never
depart from him that he loved so dearly. Thus shut up and enclosed in the
bowels of the earth, it hapened Eritus K. of Sweucland to pass that way with
his army not ^ull two months after, who coming to the toomb of Asuitus, and
suspecting it a place where tresure was hidden, caused his Pioners with their
spades and mattockes to dig it up: whereupon was discovered the loathsome body
of Asmundus, all to besmeared with dead men's filth, and his visage most ugly
and fearful; which imbrued with congeald blood, and ^aten and torn like a raw
ulcer, made him so gastlie to be hold, that all the beholders were afrighted He
seeing himself restord to light and so many amazed men stand about him,
resolved their uncertain perplexity in these terms. Why stand you astonished at
my unusual deformities? when no living man conuerseth with the dead, but is
thus disfigured. But other causes have effected this change in me: for I know
not what audacious spirit sent by Gorgon from the deep, has not only most
rauenously devoured my horse and my dog, but also has laid his hungry paws
upon me, and tering down my cheeks as you see, has like wise rent away one
of mine ears. Hense is it that my mangled shape seem so monstrous, and my
humane image obscured with gore in this wise. Yet escaped not this fell Harpie
from me unrevenged: for as he assailde me, I caught his head from his
shoulders, and sheashd my sword in his body. Have spirits their visible bodies
said I, that may be touched, wounded, or pierst? Believe me, I never heard that
in my life before this. Why quoth he, although in their proper essence they are
creatures incorporall, yet can they take on them the induments of any living
body what soever, and tranform themselves into all kind of shapes, whereby they
may more easily deceive our shallow wits and senses. So testifies Ba^lius
that they can put on a material form when they list. Socrates affirms that
his Damon did oftentimes talk with him, and that he saw him and felt him many
times. But Marcus Cherronesius (a wonderful discouerer of Devils) writes,
that those bodies which they assume, are distinguished by no difference of sex,
because they are simple, and the discernance of sex belongs to bodies compound:
yet are they flexible, motive, and apt for any configuration, but not all of
them alike: for the spirits of the Fire and Air have this power above the
rest. The spirits of the water have slow bodies resembling birds and women, of
which kind the Naiades and Nereieds are much celebrated amongst Poet.
Nevertheless, how ever they are restrained to their several similitudes, it
is certain that all of them desire no form or figure so much, as the
likeness of a man, and do think thems^lues in heaven, when they are infeoft
in that hue: wherefore I know no other reason but this, that man is the nearest
representation to God, insomuch as the scripture says, He made man after his
own likeness and image: and they affecting by reason of their pride, to be as
like God as they may, contend most seriously to shroud themselves under that
habit. But I pray ^ell me this* whether are th^re (as Porphirius holds) good
Spirits as well as evil. Naie certeinlie (quoth he) we are all evil, let
Porphirius, Proclus, Ap^leius, or the Platonists dispute to the contrary as
long as they will, which I will confirm to thy capacity by the names that are
every where given us in the Scripture, for the devil which is the Summum genus
to us all, is called Diabolus quafi deorsum ruens, that is to say falling
downward, as he that aspiring too high, was thrown from the top of felicity
to the lowest pit of despair: and satan, that is to say, an Adversary, who
for the corruption of his malice, opposes himself ever against God, who is
the chiefest good. In Job, Behemoth and Leuiathan, and in the 9. of the
Apocalips, Apolyon, that is to say, a Subuerter: because the foundation of
those virtues, which our high Maker has planted in our souls; he undermines
and subuerteth. A serpent for his poisoning, a Lion for his devouring: a
furnace, for that by his malice the Elect are tried, who are vessels of wrath
and salvation. In Esaias, a Siren, a Lamia, a Scrich-oule, an Estridge. In the
Psalms, an Adder, a Basiliske, a Dragon. And lastly, in the Gospel, Mammon,
Prince of this world, and the Governor of darkness: so that by the whole course
of condemning names that are given us, and no one instance of any favorable
title bestowed upon us, I positiuelie set down that all spirits are evil.
Now, whereas the Divines attribute unto us these good and evil spirits, the
good to guide us from evil, and the evil to draw us from goodness, they are
not called spirits but Angels, of which sort was Raphaell, the good Angel of
Tobias, who exilde the evil spirit Asmodius into the desert of Egypt, that he
might be the more secure from his temptation. Since we have entered thus far
into the devils common wealth. I beseech you certify me thus much, whether
have they power to hurt granted them from God, or from themselves; can they
hurt as much as they will. Not so quoth he, for although that devils be most
mighty spiries, yet can they not hurt but permissiuelie, or by some special
dispensation: as when a man is fal^ into the state of an outlaw, the Law
dispenses with them that kill him, and the Prince excludes him from the
protection of a subject, so, when a man is a relaps from GOD and his Laws, God
withdrawes his providence from watching over him, and authoriseth the devil as
his instrument, to assault him and torment him, so that whatsoever he does, is
Limitata potestate, as one says: insomuche as a hair cannot fall from our
heads, without the will of our heavenly Father. The Devil could not deceive
Achabs prophets til, he was licensed by God, nor exercise his tyranie over Job
till he had given him commission, nor enter into the heard of swine til Christ
bad them go. Therefore need you not fear the devil any whit as long as you
are in the favor of God, who raineth him so straight, that except he let him
loose he can do nothing. This man like proportion which I now retain, is but
a thing of suffrance granted unto me to plague such men as hunt after strife,
and are delighted with variance. It may be so very well, but whether have you
that skill to foretell things to come, that is ascribed unto you? We have
(quoth he) sometimes, not that we are privy to the eternal counsel of god,
but for that by the sense of our ayrie bodies we have a more refined faculty of
for seeing, than men possibly can have, that are chained to such heavy
earthly moulder; or else for that by the incomporable pernicitie of those
ayrie bodies, we not only out strip the swiftnes of men, beasts and birds,
whereby we may be able to attain to the knowledge of things sooner, than those
that by the dulnes of their earthly sense come a great way behind us. Hereunto
may we adioine our long experience in the course of things from the beginning of
the world, which men want and therefore cannot have that deep conjecture that
we have. Nor is our knowledge any more than conjecture: for prescience only
belongs to God, and that guess that we have, proceeds from the compared
disposition of heavenly and earth lie bodies, by whose long observed
temperature, we do divine many times, as it happens, and therefore do we
take upon us to prophecy, that we may purchase estimation to our names, and
bring men in admiration with that we do, and so be counted for Gods. The
miracles we work, are partly contrived by illusion, and partly assisted by
that supernatural skill we have in the experience of nature above all other
Creatures. But against these illusions of your subtletie and vain terrors
youinflict, what is our chief refuge? I shall be accounted a foolish Devil
anon, if I bewray the secrets of our kingdom, as I have begun: yet speak I no
more than learned Clerks have written, and as much as they have set down will
I show thee. Origin in his treatise against Celsus says, there is nothing
better for him that is vexed with spirits, then the naming of Jesus, the true
God, for he avouches, he has seen diverse driven out of men's bodies by that
means. Athanasius in his book De variis questionibus says, The presentest
remedy against the invasion of evil spirits, is the beginning of the 67.
Psalm, Exurgat Deus, and dissipentun inimici eius. Cyprian counsels men to
adjure spirits only by the name of the true God. Some hold that fire is a
preservative for this purpose, because when any spirit appears, the lights by
little and little, go out as it were of their own accord, and the tapers are by
degrees extinguished. Others by inuo^ating upon God, by the name of Vehiculum
ignis superioris, and often rehearsing the Articles of our faith. A third sort
are persuaded that the brandishing of swords is good for this purpose, because
Homer faineth, that Ulysses sacrificing to his mother, wafted his sword in the
air to chase the spirits from the blood of the sacrifice. And Sybylla
conducting Aeneas to hell begins her charms in this sort.

Procul, O procul, este prophani:
Tuque iu vande viam, vaginaque eripe ferrum.
Philostratus reports that he and his companions meeting that Devil which
Artistes entitle Apolonius as they came one night from banqueting, with such
terms as he is cursed in holy writ, they made him run away howling. Many in
this case extol perfume of Calamentum paeonia, Menta palma Christi, and
Appius. A number prefer the carrying of red Corrall about them, or of Arthemisia
hypericon, Ruta verbena: and to this effect many do use the iyngling of
keys, the sound of the harp, and the clashing of armor Some of old time put
great superstition in characters, curiously engraued in their Pentagonon, but
they are all vain, and will do no good, if they be otherwise used than as
signs of covenant between the devil and them. Nor do I affirm all the rest
to be infallible prescriptions, though sometime they have their use: but that
the only assured way to resist their attempts is prayer and faith, against
which all the devils in hell cannot prevail. Enough gentle spirit I will
importune thee no further, but commit this Supplication to thy care: which if
thou deliver accordingiie, thou shall at thy return have more of my custom:
for by that time I will have finished certain letters to diverse Orators and
Poets, disperced in your dominions. That as occation shall serve, but now I
must take leave of you, for it is Term time, and I have some business. A
Gentleman (a friend of mine that I never saw before) states for me, and is like
to be undone if I come not in to bear witness on his side: wherefore Bazilez
manus, till our next meeting.

GEntle Reader tandem aliquando, I am at leisure to talk to thee. I dare say,
thou have called me a hundred times dolt for this senseles discourse: it is no
matter, thou do but as I have done by a number in my days. For who can
abide a scuruie pedling Poet to pluck a man by the sleeue at every third step
in Paul's Churchyard, and when he comes in to seruey his wares, there is nothing
but purgations and vomits wrapped up in wast paper. It were very good the dog
whipper in Paul's would have a care of this in his unsavory visitation every
Saturday: for it is dangerous for such of the Queens liege people, as shall
take a view of them fasting.

Look to it you Booksellers and Stationers, and let not your shops be infected
with any such goose gyblets or stinking garbadge, as the Iygs of newsmongers,
and especially such of you as frequent Westminster hall, let them be
circumspect what dunghill papers they bring thither: for one bad pamphlet is
enough to raise a damp that may poison a whole Term, or at the least a number
of poor Clyents that have no money to prevent ill air by breaking their fasts
ere they come thither. Not a base Inck^dropper or scuruy plodder at Nouerint,
but nails his asses cares on every post and comes off with long Circumquaque
to the Gentleman Readers, yea the most excrementori^ dishlickers of learning
are grown so valiant in impudency, that now they set up their faces (like
Turks) of gray paper to be spet at for silver games in Finsburie fields. Whilst
I am thus talking, me thinks I hear one say, What a fop is this he entitles
his book A Supplication to the Devil, and does nothing but rail on idiots,
and tells a story of the nature of Spirits. Have patience good sir, and we will
come to you by and by. Is it my Title you find fault with? Why, have you not
seen a Town surnamed by the principal house in the town, or a Nobleman
derive his Baronrie from a little village where be has least I and? So fares
it by me in christning of my Book. But some will object, whereto tends this
discourse of devils, or how is it induced? For sooth, if thou will needs know
my reason, this it is. I bring Pierce Penilesse to question with the devil, as a
young nouice would talk with a great trauailer: who carrieng an Englishmans
appetite to enquire of news, will be sure to make what use of him he may, and
not leave any thing vnaskt, that he can resolve him of. If then the devil be
tedious in discoursing, impute it to Pierce Penilesse, that was importunate in
demanding; or if I have not made him so secret or subtle in his Art, as Devils
are wont, let that of Lactantius be mine excuse lib. 2. chap. 16. de Origenis
errore, where he says, the devils have no power to lie to a just manne and if
they adjure them by the majesty of the high God, they will not only confess
themselves to be Devils, but also tell their names as they are. Deus bone, what
a vain am I fallen into? what, an Epistle to the Readers in the end of thy
book? Out upon she for an arrent block, where learndst thou that wit? O
sir, hold your peace: a fellon never comes to his answer before the offense
be committed. Wherefore if I in the beginning of my Book should have come off
with a long Apology to excuse my self, it were all one, as if a thief going
to steal a horse, should devise by the way as he went, what to spoke when he
came at the gallows. Here is a cross way, and I think it good here to part.
Farewell, farewell, good Parenthesis, and commend me to Lady Uanitie thy
mistres. Now Pierce peniles if for a parting blow thou have ere a trick in thy
budget more then ordinary be not dainty of it, for a good Patron will pay
for all. I where is he? Promissis quilibet dives esse Potest. But cap and
thanks is all our Courtiers payment: wherefore I would counsel my friends to
be more considerate in their Dedications, and not cast away so many months
labor on a clown that knows not how to use a Scholar: for what reason have I
to bestow any wit on him, that will bestow none of his wealth upon me. Alas, it
is eas^e for a goodly tall fellow that shines in his silks, to come and out
face a poor simple Pedant in a thread bare cloak, and tell him his book is
pretty, but at this time be is not provided for him: marry about twoe or three
days hence if he come that way, his Page shall say be is not within, or else
he is so busy with my L, How-call-ye-him, and my L. What-call ye-him, that he
may not he spoken withal. These are the common courses of the world, which
every man priuatlie murmurs at but none dares openly vpbraid, because all
Artists for the most part are bafe minded and like the Indians, that have store
of gold and precious stones at command, yet are ignorant of their value, and
therefore let the Spaniards, the Englishmen, and every one load their ships
without molestation. So they enjoying and possessing the purity of knowledge
(a treasure far richer than the Indian Mines) let every proud Thraso be
partaker of their perfections, repaieng them no profit: and gylde himself with
the titles they give him, when he will scarce return them a good word for their
labor: give an Ape but a nut, and he will look your head for it; or a dog a
bone, and hele wag his tail: but give me one of my young Masters a book, and
he will put of his hat and blush, and so go his way: yes, now I remember me I
lie, for I know him that had thanks for three years work, and a gentleman
that bestowed much cost in refining of music, and had scarce Fiddlers wages
for his labor. We want an Aretine here among us, that might strip these golden
asses out of their gaie trappings, and after he had ridden them to death with
railing, leave them on the dunghill for carrion. But I will write to his ghost
by my carrier, and I hope hele repair his whip, and use it against our English
Peacockes, that painting themselves with church spoils, like mighty men's
sepulchers, have nothing but Atheism sch^sme, hypocrisy, and vainglory, like
rotten bones lie lurking within them. O how my soul abhors these buckram
giants, that having an outward face of honor set upon them by flaterrs and
parasites, have their inward thoughts stuffed with straw and feathers, if they
were narrowelie lifted. Far be it bright stars of Nobility, and glistring
attendants on the true Diana, that this my speech should be any way injurious
to your glorious magnif^cence: for in you live those sparks of Augustus
liberality, that never sent any away empty: and Science seauenfold throne
well nigh ruined by riot and avarice, is mightily supported by your plentiful
larges, which makes Poets to sing such goodly himnes of your praise, as no
envious posterity may forget. But from general fame, let me digres to my
private experience, and with a tongue unworthy to name a name of such worthiness,
affectionatelie emblason to the eyes that wonder, the matchless image of
Honor, and magnificent rewarder of virtue, Jove's Eagle-borne Ganimed, thrice
nolle Amyntas. In whose high spirit* such a Deity of wisdom appears, that if
Homer were to write his O dissea new (where under the person of Ulysses he
describes a singular man of perfection, in whom all ornaments both of peace
and war are assembled in the height of their excelence he need no other
instanc to augment his conceit, than the rare carriage of his honorable mind.
Many writers and good wits, are given to commend their patrons and
Benefactors* some for prowess, some for policy, others for the glory of
their Ancestrie and exceeding bounty and liberality: but if my unable pen
should ever enterprise such a continuate task of praise, I would embowell a
number of those wind puffed bladders, and disfurnish their baldpates of the
periwigs Poets have lent them, that so I might restore glory to his right
inheritance, and these stolen Titles to their true owners: which if it wo^ld so
fall out, (as time may work all things) the aspiring nettles with their
shadie tops shall no longer over dreep the best herbs, or keep them from the
smiling aspect of the Sunn, that live and thrive by his comfortable beams,
none but Desert should fit in Fames grace, none but Hector be remembered in the
chronicles of Prowess, none but thou most courteous Amyntas be the second
mystical argument of the knight of the Red-crosse.

Oh decus atque aeui gloria summa tui.
And here (heavenly Spencer) I am most highly to acuse thee of forgetfulness,
that in that honorable catalogue of our English Heroes, which insueth the
conclusion of thy famous Fairie Queen, thou would let so special a pillar
of Nobility pass unsaluted. The very thought of his far derived descent, and
extraordinary parts wherewith he astonieth the world, and draws all hearts to
his love, would have inspired thy forewearied Muse with new fury to proceed
to the next triumphs of thy stately Goddess, but as I in favor of so rare a
scholar, suppose with this counsel he refraind his mention in this first
part, that he might with full sail proceed to his due commendations in the
second. Of this occasion long since I happened to ^rame a sonnet which being
wholly intended to the reverence of this renoumed Lord, (to whom I owe all the
vtmoste powers of my love and duty) I meante here for variety of style to
insert.

Perusing yesternight with idle eyes,
The Fairy Singers stately tuned verse:
And viewing after Chap-mens wonted guise,
What strange contents the title did rehearse.
I straight leapt over to the latter end,
Where like the queint Comaedians of our time,
That when their Play is done do fall to ryme,
I found short lines, to sundry Nobles pend.
Whom he as special Mirrours singled fourth,
To be the Patrons of his Poetry;
I read them all, and reuerenc^t their worth,
Yet wondered he left out thy memory.
But therefore gest I he suppressed thy name,
Because few words might not co^prise thy fame.
Bear with me gentle Poet, though I conceive not aright of thy purpose, or be
too inquisitiue into the intent of thy oblivion: for how ever my conjecture may
miss the cushion, yet shall my speech savor of friendship, though it be not
alied to judgment.

Tantum hoc molior, in this short digression, to acquaint our countrymen that
live out of the Echo of the Court, with a common knowledge of his inualuable
virtues, and show my self thankful (in some part) for benefits received:
which since words may not counteruaile, that are the vsuail lip labor of
every idle discourser, I conclude with that of Ovid: Accipe per longos tibi
qui deseruiat annos,
Accipe qui pura nouit amare side.


And if my zeal and duty (though all to mean to please) may by any industry,
be reformed to your gracious liking, I submit the simplicity of my endeavors
to your service, which is, all my performance may profer, or my ability
perform.

Praebeat Alcinoi pomabenignus ager,
Officium pauper numeret studiumque fidemque.
And so I break off this endless argument of speech abruptly.

FINIS.

