THE IOVRNALL, OR Daily Register, CONTAINING A TRVE manifestation, and
Historical declaration of the voyage, accomplished by eight ships of
Amsterdam, under the conduct of Jacob Corneltszen Neck Admiral, and Wybrandt
van Warwick Vice Admiral, which sailed from Amsterdam the first day of March,
1598.

SHOWING THE COURSE THEY kept, and what other notable matters happened unto
them in the said voyage.

sailing scene

Imprinted at London for Cuthbert Burby and John Flasket: And are to be sold at
the Royal Exchange, and at the sign of the black bear in Paul's
Churchyard. 1601.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, MASTER Thomas Smith, Sheriff of the honorable City
of London, and Governor of the famous company of the English Merchants trading
to the East Indies, Sumatra, Iava, the Isles of the Malucos, Banda, and the
rich and mighty Kingdom of Chyna: and to the right Worshipful the Aldermen,
and the rest of the Committies and society of the said corporation. William
Walker wishes all prosperity and happy success.
RIght Worshipful, who so takes but a slight surueigh of the present state of
things, must needs be forced to acknowledge both the great and general
benefit likely to ensue of this your intended East Indie voyage, the success
proving answerable to these forward beginnings: and also the danger and loss
on your part, if it should (which God defend) fall out otherwise then well.

The benefit is most apparent, if we do but consider either the necessity of
the enterprise, or the gain depending thereon. That the searching of new
trades, and above all other, this to the East Indies, is more then necessary,
both the restraint of traffic in the King of Spaines dominions, and also the
vnder-rate of the Hollanders spices, in regard of those brought out of the
Indies by the way of Turkey, do too plainly demonstrate. Hereunto you may
add the venting of diverse natural commodities, which otherwise would lie
dead, and likewise the employment of tall and serviceable Ships, and the
increase of our Mariners knowledge in Navigations: the gain both to the
augmenting of her Majesty's Customs, and the enriching of all the Adventurers
cannot choose (as your selves best know) but prove in time extraordinary
Wherein, though I were silent, yet the Portugale Carracks, and within these few
years also the Ships of Holland, and Zealand do in a manner proclaim so much
to all the world.

The danger in attempting this action no man can doubt of: it being subject to
like difficulties and misaduentures with other honorable exploytes of the same
kind, and in that respect also far more commendable and praise-worthie: and
so the loss (if matters should miscarrie, which God forbid) cannot be little,
seeing the charges have been so great.

These considerations (right Worshipful) being seconded by the persuasion of
M. Richard Hacluyt, a man for his matchles industry in collecting the English
Voyages, most incomparably well deserving of this state, prevailed so much with
me, that being stirred up with the zeal of a true Patriot or well willer to my
native Country, I could not less do, then cast into your East Indie
treasury this poor myte, I mean my labor in translating this little
pamphlet, which contains matter so agreeable and pertinent to this your
present purpose.

For herein the Hollanders (who borrowed a great part of their light All these
Voyages, and sundry other important discourses of the East Indies, Pegu,
China, the Malucos, Philippinas and Iapan, are to be found in the second and
third volumes of M. Hakluyts English Voyages,
from us, namely out of the famous Voyages of Sir Francis Drake, Master Thomas
Candish, Master James Lancaster, Ralph Fitch, and Thomas Stephans, their
forerunners in those parts, and have had special assistance in their late
Nauigations by the means of Master John Dauies, Master Timothy Shotton, and
other skillful Pylots of our Nation) do in ample manner requite us with the
like: acquainting us with their Voyages, discoueries and dangers, both outward
and homeward; with their negotiation and traffic at Iava, the Malucos, and
other places, with the disposition of the natural inhabitance, and the slye
sullen practices of the Portugals, and likewise with the quantie and value of
Spices and other commodities which they brought home.

Here therefore your Captains, Masters, and Factors (notwithstanding they are
very sufficiently informed already) may in some sort be directed how to shape
their course to avoid many perrils, and to enjoy several kinds of
Merchandise for which you send them.

And albeit both your selves and they also, in regard of your deep insight
and experience in these matters, may seem not much to stand in need of this
my endeavor, yet remembering an old rule in law, that Superabundans cautela
non nocet: sure I was, that some good might come hereof, but harm none at all.

It may please you therefore (right Worshipful) to take it in kind part, if
not for the worthiness of the matter, yet for the sincere intent of him that
offers it, who in this, and in all other your worthy disseignes, wishes you
most prosperous success, and stands continually devoted to your service.

Your Worships most unfeignedly affected, WILLIAM WALKER.

THE IOVRNALL, OR daily Register, containing a true manifestation, and
Historical declaration of the voyage, accomplished by eight ships of
Amsterdam, under the conduct of Jacob Corneliszen Neck Admiral, and Wybrandt
van Warwick Vice Admiral, which sailed from Amsterdam the first day of March,
1598. showing what course they kept, and what other notable matters happened
unto them in the said voyage.
IN the name of God, Amen. In the year of our Lord 1598. the first day of
March, sundry worshipful Merchants and others, lovers of our countries
welfare, rigged and furnished six tall ships, with two Pinnases, to sail
unto the East Indies, whose names hereafter follow.

The first ship was called Mauritius, wherein Jacob Mauritius.
Corneliszen Neck of Amsterdam was Admiral, and Gouaert Lanszen master.

The second ship was called Amsterdam, wherein Wybrandt Amsterdam.
Warwick of Amsterdam was Vice Admiral, and Cornelis Ianszen Fortui^n was
master.

The third ship was called Holland, whereof was master Hollandia.
Simon Lamberts Mau.

The fourth ship was called Zealand, whereof was Zelandia.
master Claes Ianszen Melknap.

The fifth was called Gelderland, whose matter was John Gelderland.
Bruin.

The sixth ship Vtrecht, whereof was master John Martzen. Vtrecht


The seventh being the greater Pinnase, was called Vriesland, Freeslad
whose master was John Corneliszen.

The eight ship was the smaller Pinnase called Ouerysell, Ouer-Ysell.
wherein Simon Ianszen Hoen was master.

In these aforesaid eight ships were some 560. men, mustred the 9. day of March.

The 13. day of March we set sail, and departed from Amsterdam, and the nine
and twentieth day of the said Month, the great ships were towed over the
Pampus by three water ships.

The fourth of April the ship called Hollandia, came near unto the sand of
Encusen, where she was forced to cut down her foremast, by reason of the great
storm, and foul weather: and the two and twentieth day we came to the Texell,
where we remained eight days for a good wind to carry us thence.

The first day of May we set sail from the Texell, having Anno 1598. The. 1.
day of May we sailed from the Texell.
the wind at South east.

The third day we passed by Dover, where we spoke with certain ships of war,
and the fourth day we had sight of Wicht, Portland, and Beuiser.

The tenth day came a small ship of Enchusen, into our fleet in the Spanish
seas, which came from Aueren, and about two hours after, our smaller Pinnases
sailed after her with letters, and brought some ten thousand Oringes with her,
which were distributed among the ships: so that every man had eight Oringes.

The 11. day we were in the height of the Burlings, at which time 25. men in
the ship called Gelderland were christened.

The 15. day we had fight of the Isles of Madera and Sartes.

The 17. day before noone we were passed the Islands of Canaria, namely, Gomera
and the Palm.

The 23. day we passed by the salt Islands, to wit, the I Will of May and S. Iago.

The nine and twentieth day being in the height of fire degrees, we were
forced to strike our sails, by reason of tempests and foul weather, which
continued about two hours.

The first day of June we took a Torteyse, waying an A Torteyse take waying
143 pounds.
hundredth three and forty pounds.

The 5 day Gerrit Ianszen of Alkmar leapt over board, into the sea, out of the
great Pinnase.

The 6. day came a flying fish into the ship called Gelderland, which was very
strange unto us.

The 8. day we passed under the Equinoctial line with a fine fresh gale, and
then every mess had a can of wine allowed them.

The 25. day every mess had three cannes of wine allowed, The sho else of
Brasilia passed, for which was great joy among us.
for joy that we were passed the shoels of Brasilia, lying 18. degrees south
the Equinoctial line.

The 26. day the small Pinnase lost us, by reason of the mists: and the twenty
seventh day the Admiral sent out the Ship called Hollandia to seek the
said Pinnase.

The eight and twentieth day of the said Month in the morning, we sailed
toward the Island, and after we were approached near unto the shore, we
manned two boats, and rowed on land to seek for some refreshing.

The 29. day the ship Hollandia returned into the fleet with the small
Pinnase, at which time the first execution of justice was done aboard the ship
called Gilderland: at this place we saw mighty shoels of birds, as great as
Storkes.

The 24. of July we took the height of Cape de Bona Esperance, which lies 33.
degrees from the Equinoctial line.

The 27. of the said month, we saw driving on the water great long logges or
truncks of wood, whereof some were 20. or 25. fadome long: we saw also great
store of great birds, which is a very good mark of the Cape de Bona Esperance.

The 28. day of the said month, we fastened again our Cables to our Ankers:
the same night we had a great storm, so that we were forced to take in our
sails: and we saw the same night a Corpus sanctus in our maine The 29. of
Iulie, four of our ships lost our company, being in the height of C. Bona
Esperance. Every measure or mutskin is the eight part of a quart.
top mast, or a light burning as clear as a candle.

The 29 day, we lost the company of four of our ships, but between the 30.
and the 31. day in the night, three of them returned unto the fleet, so that
we wanted but one, which was Claes Ianszen Melknap of Horn.

The 31. of July in the morning, we had sight of Cape Bona Esperance.

The 2. day of August we drank our last Beer, and we began our first
allowance to drink water, four mutskins or measures every day, and three of
wine.

The 7. of August we had again a stout gale of wind at South east, so that
we were forced to strike our top masts.

The 8. day toward the evening it lightened and thundered mightily, so that we
were glad to take in our sails. The same night we lost our Admiral, the
Hollandia, and the small Pinnase, by means of the great thunder and lightning.

The 14. day our Committees and masters had been aboard the Vice Admiral, and
had diminished our allowance of wine, ordayning us one and a half mutskins or
measures of wine, and six of water for every mess.

The 15. of August, we saw a little place in the Sea, where the water seemed
to boil, as a kettle that seetheth on the fire: the water was of a berie gray
color, it extended the length of an arrow shot, and in breadth the length of a
ship: we sailed through it, but we perceived not any great strangeness
therein.

The 17. day justice was executed in our ship, for some offenses therein
committed.

The 18. day we met with a contrary wind, and we kept our course for the most
part South east: the same day we saw many Whales.

The 20 day we had store of rain, with thunder and lightning, at which time
the Vice Admiralles fore-top-mast was broken in three pieces: the same day the
wind changed, so that we held our course East Northeast, making good way.

The 22. day of the said month, the ship called the Zeland returned to our
fleet, which was about 25. days after she had been missing, so that now we
were five ships in company.

The 24. of August, the company of the Zealand fetched another mast out of the
Gelderland, to make another foremast, for she had lost her mast in the
foresaid storm, when she parted from us, and had been in great danger.

The same day we had sight of the land called Saint Laurence or Madagascar,
which gave great joy and comfort to all in our ships: and the 25. day we made
to the land, for we saw we could not pass the neck land of Madagascar,
therefore we ankered near unto the neck of the land, which was the first time
that we did cast any anchor, since we departed from the Texell.

The 26. day in the morning, we manned four boats, Four boats rowed to the
shore of Madagascar, and what happened unto them near the shore.
and rowed to the land, to see if we might there find any refreshing: and
coming near the shore, the beat of the Vtrecht was with the folk therein
ouerturned, and one of the quarter masters of the boat drowned, called John
Pamer of Amsterdam: and the same day we had a storm, so that we were forced to
depart thence, for our Vice Admiral, the Amsterdam, the Zealand, the great
Pinnase, and the ship of the deanerie and Chapter of Vtrecht lost every one of
them an anchor, but the Gelderland rode out the storm.

The 17. day of the said month in the morning, we wayed our anchor, and sailed
after the other ships, which were under sail in sight, having a fair wind, we
kept our course East South east, to reach the Cape of Saint Sebastian, and the
29. day in the morning we left the said Cape behind us.

The 30. day we passed the Cape de Julian, and were becalmed, the wind
contrary, and dark weather.

The 4. day of September, all the Merchants and Masters September.
went aboard the Vice Admiral, where it was amongst the^ debated, whether we
should put into the bay of Antongil, or direct our course toward Bantam: but
in the end it was concluded to keep our course.

The 5. day of September we were allowed again three mutskins of wine, and
four of water, without The I Will de Cerne, other wise called the Island Mauritius.
porrage, by reason of the scarcity of water: the same day we had also a good
wind, so that we held our course East, and East and by North.

The 17. day we had sight of an Island, called I Will de Cerne, which seemed to
be very hilly, so that we had good hope there to find fresh water, whereby
we were al greatly rejoiced, for our ships began to be vexed with the skuruie
disease. How they came to the land Mauritius, where they found a very fit and
fair haven, fresh water, and birds which they caught with their hands. The 20.
of Septe^ ber most of our people were on shore, where a Sermon was made in the
forenoon, and another in the afternoon.


The 18. day in the morning, we rowed with two boats toward the shore of
the Isle de Cerne to see if we might there find any fresh water, or relief of
victualles: and coming near the land, we rowed along the shore, but could
not find any open place conueuient for landing: whereupon our boat with the
Committees went aboard the Vice Admiral, where it was appointed that our boat
should row to another part of the Island, to search for some convenient place
of landing: whereupon (the boat manned with seven men, after they had rowed to
shore and made diligent search) found a very fair ciosed haven, where fifty
ships might lie, defended from all winds, and good ground for ankeridge:
toward the evening the boat returned, and came aboard the Vice Admiral,
bringing with them eight or nine great birds, and many small, which they had
taken with their hands: also they found there very fair and sweet water, that
came from the hills, which caused great joy in the ships among our people,
that they might have their bellies full of fresh water. This haven is the
fairest and fittest that a man may possibly find for refreshing. And the
nineteenth day we went further up into the Island, where we found passing good
ground to anchor and rode at, fourteen fadome clay ground.

The 20. day the most part of all the people went a shore, where they heard a
Sermon made by a Minister of the Vice-Admirals ship. It was now just four
months and twenty days, since we had set foot on any shore, and that day
we had double allowance of wine, for a remembrance of the Fair kept the same
day at Amsterdam: and the same day we did nothing (because it was Sunday) but
heard two Sermons in the morning and at afternoon, praising and giving heatlie
thanks unto Almighty God, that he had conducted us to this wished place of
refreshing, for if we had not found this place, many a man had not lived to
tell what he had seen, for the scuruie disease began mightily to vex our
people, and our water for the most part stunke, and was as black as kennell
water, and (as the Pilot affirmed) we were then 500. leagues from Bantam: we
named this Island Mauritius.

The 21. of the same month in the morning, our boat rowed to another place of
the Island, to see if they could find any inhabitants: in the end they came to
a fresh river which descended from the mountains, but they could not see any
people in the land. At this place we fetched our water: for a man may row in
with a boat, and with ease strike the same into the boat, so that it is a
maruailous commodious place to water. In this river our people took so great
quantity of foul, as they were all able to eat, for when we came near them,
they sat still, and could not fly from us, so that we with our hands might
easily take them: whereby we noted that the land was not inhabited.

The 23. day certain of our people went out with a small boat to fish with a
net, which the Vice Admiral had brought with him, for there was exceeding
great plenty of fish.

The 24. day certain were appointed to row with a long boat to the land, to
search if they could find any other hole or place to come forth, beside the
same which we had already passed, by reason that the wind was contrary, so
that we could not return the same way we came.

The 25. day some that had been sent abroad returned, but they found not any
people in the land: the same day all of us with great diligence carried water
aboard our ships.

The 27. day was another Sermon made so the common Another Sermon preached in
the land Mauritius.
Mariners on the land: and there was an Indian, one of those which was brought
into Holland in the last voyage from Madagascar, who willingly became a
Christian, and received Baptism, and was named Laurence. The same day the long
boat returned, but could find no depth for our shippee to pass out.

The 29. day, some of our people returned (which had been sent into the land)
without any desired news, but only that they had found a place where many
Cokartrees grew, bringing some of the nuttes with them, and we furnished our
selves with fresh water.

The 30. day some of our people went a shore to get Cokar-nuts, at which time
we had our first allowance of bread, to wit, every day one pound and a quarter.

The second day of October, we had a fair wind, and October. The second day of
October we sailed from the Island named by us Mauritius.
we set sail, but in the mouth of the haven we were becalmed, so that we
were forced to tow the ships out with out boats, but our Vice Admiral was
put back when the other ships were out: we sent our boat manned to help
him also out, but so soon as they were come aboard, it began to blow a little
gale, whereby the Vice Admiral got out, and then we directed our course
toward Bantam East, and East and by North.

The 17. day we made an end of our last butter, and the wind was very scant.

The 28. and 29. of October, the Sea was of a wonderful white color, so that
we imagined that we were near to some land, but we could not discrie any
land at all, and the same day in the morning we had the sun over our heads,
and this was the second time that the sun was right over us.

A description of the Island de Cerne, which was now named Mauritius, lying 21.
degrees to the South of the Equinoctial line.
THe Island de Cerne, named by the Hollanders Mauritius, lies 21. degrees to
the South of the Equinoctial line, and is in compass some six miles or
leagues, very little more or less.

Such as will sail into this Island, must bring the two highest hills into
one, leaving the six small Islands on the right hand, keeping tonne fadome
water. On the left side of us lay a small Island, which we named the Island of
Hem^ kerken, and the bay of the said Island of Cerne, we called after the name
of our Vice Admiral, The bay of Warwick: it has a very fair haven, where
fifty ships maylie, defended from all winds and weather.

This foresaid Island Mauritius is not inhabited, nor never was, by all that we
could judge, for many and often times we ran up into the country, and found
no people: but we judged by the tamenesse of the birds and fowls that it must
be an unfrequented place, by reason that men might take them plentifully with
their hands.

It is a very hie hilly land, so that for the most part it is covered with
clouds, and sometimes there passes such a smoke or mist over the land, that a
man can hardly see The situation and fertilicie of Cerne.
one another. For the most part it is all stony ground, not withstanding very
abundant of wild trees, which are there in innumerable sort, standing so
thick, that a man can hardly pass by them. These trees are as fair and even
wood, as may be found in any Country, as black as pitch, and as smoothe as a
bone: on the outside is a very thick green bark, and under the bark is
the black Eben, some with very fair read wood, and other some yellow as
wax, of which three sorts of wood, we brought a little from thence for a
proof, and is found to be excellent fair and good.

Also it has Palmites trees, whereby we were greatly Palmites trees.
refreshed, they grow like to the Cokar-trees, aloft in the top it carries
the branches thick and spreading: the same we cut down, and having taken
out the pith, did eat: we made sometimes sallads thereof, which strongly
purged and refreshed our bodies.

We landed in this Island almost all our people, and found the same to be very
good and healthsome, so that we erected there some tents and cabbins, wherein we
laid our sick and diseased, which we brought from our ships, and there
remained until they were recovered, which was in very short time: whereby we
noted, that this Island was of a sweet and wholesome air.

After we were all landed, we had a Sermon in the forenoone, and another in
the afternoon, thanking, and praising God, that he had brought us to a place
of so good refreshing for if we had not come to this place, many of us had not
lived to tell news, for the scuruie disease began mightily to reign among
our people, and our water for the most part stunke, and was as black as
kennell water: this happened just when in four months and twenty days before
we had not set footing upon any land.

Being now in the Isle Mauritius, we rowed with one of our boats to another
place of the land, to search what inhabitants we could find, but found none,
only we came to a fresh river, which fell from the mountains, where we took
in fresh water for our ships.

Some of our company went a fishing in a small Of the multitude of fish.
cock, with a net which the Vice Admiral had brought with him, and we found
that there was wonderful plenty of fish, so that at one draft we took near
two barrels and a half of fish, and could hardly draw the net, by reason of
the great number of fishes therein: and we took every day so great quantity
of fish, that we were not able to spend the same while it was fresh and sweet.
Here we took a Chorn-backe that was so big, that we, with the Mariners of our
ship, had sufficient to eat thereof at two meals.

Here are great numbers of Torteyses, which are so big, that 4 of us might
stand upon some one Torteyse, and yet it crept away with us, in the shelles or
shieldes whereof, ten of us have had room to sit.

This Island is very fruitful, and plentiful of fowls, The fertility of
Cerne.
as of Turtle Doves, whereof there are such plenty, that 3. of us have in one
afternoon taken 150. and if we had been able to carry them, we might have
taken more with our bare hands, and killed them with cudgels. There are also
great plenty of russet Parrets, and of other colors: there are also other
great fowls, as big as our Swans, having great heads, and upon their heads a
skin, as if they had caps on their heads: they have no wings at all, but in
place of wings, they have 3. or 4. black quils, and where their tail should
be, they have 4. or 5. small curled feathers, and their color is grayish. We
named these fowls Walghfowle (partly because they were tough in eating, how
long time soever they sod: yet the crop and breast were very good meat) but
specially because we could take store of Turtle Doves, which were more
delectable in taste.

There are yet other sorts of fowls good to be eaten, which are called Rabos
Forcados, because their tails are like in fashion to a taylers sheeres. These
fowls are so tame, that a man may take them with his hands as they sat on
their nest, and also kill them with staves and cudgels, insomuch that in the
space of one half hour, we could fill a boat with them: whereby we presumed
that there had never been any people in the Island, for the birds shunned no
man, yea, they scarcely would forbear to come and sit on our heads, and so
suffer themselves to be taken.

In this Island we did set up a Smithes sorge, where our Smith made and mended
some Iron works, and the Shipwrights made also a boat for the Vtricht, for
she had lost her boat before Saint Laurence Island.

In this Isle de Cerne before mentioned, we found about 300. pound weight of
wax, whereon stood Greek Letters. We found also a Netting, with a Capsten
bar, and a great Maineyard: whereby judged, that some ship had there suffered
wrack.

In this Island, our Vice Admiral caused a shield of wood to be made and
fastened to a tree, to the end that if any The Ad mirall nayleth a board or a
shield to a tree, and the reason thereof.
ships arrived at that place, they might perceive ye Christians had been there:
and thereupon was carved these words following, Christianos Reformados,
reformed Christians, with the arms of Holland, Zealand, and Amsterdam.

Also there is in this Island a very large plain, whereof our Vice Admiral
caused a garden to be made, and paled it round about, and after did sow and
plant al sorts of fruits, to prove if they would there grow and increase. Our
ships also left some Hens there, to prove whether they would there increase or
not. Sundry times we sent of our folk up into the Island, to understand if
there were any inhabitants on the further side of the Island: they were
sometimes 3. or 4. days out before they returned, but they neither saw nor
heard of any, no not of any 4. footed beasts.

A further and more particular declaration of the Island de Cerne, otherwise
called Mauritius, No. 1.
Mauritius, lying East Northeast.











serve for refreshing of such as should chance to come thither.



A repetition or more plain manifestation, of such things as we found and saw
in the Island Mauritius, and of such matters as we there did in the time of our
abode. No. 2.


the long boat ashore, to spy if there were any inhabitants in the Island, but
we found no creatures, except only great quantity of Turtle Doves, and other
birds, whereof we caught, and killed with cudgels, great numbers: for seeing
they had not been accustomed to be feared by any people there inhabiting, they
had no fear of us, but would sit still, suffering themselves to be killed
with staucs and cudgels. To be short, it is a plentiful land of fish and
foul, and so abundant, that in all our voyage we found not the like.



Rabos Forcados, for that their tails are in shape resembling a Taylers
sheeres: they were very tame, and little less then a fadome long, when they
were stretched out: their bills are long, their backs most part black, and
their breasts white: they eat flying fishes which they catch, and the guts
or garbell of other fish and foul, as we found by experience: for when we
cast abroad our garbell of such fish and foul as we had taken, yea of their
own kind, they would straight ways come and devour the same: their flesh
would not be sodden tender.



srutcheons or arms graven or cut thereon, so wit, the arms of Holland,
Zealand and Austerdam: to the end they may know that ships of Holland have
been at that place.

A) which we found to be an excellent remedy against the scuruie disease: it
is some three or four foot long, within very white, and has a sweet taste.
Some of our people ate the pith of 7. or 8. of these plants.





These are cottages made by us of trees and boughs,

At this place our Preacher made every Sunday two

In this place was a man Christened, borne in the Island of Madagascar, and
named Laurence, with one or two of our company which had not been christened.

Here we took so great abundance of fish, that it may

To the gentle Reader.
IT is to be understood (Gentle Reader) that all the eight ships kept
company, until they came near to the C. de Bona Esperance, where they were
parted and severed by tempests and foul weather, namely the eight day of
August, 1598. but these five ships kept together, to wit, the Amsterdam, the
Zealand, the Gelderland, the Vtrecht, and the great Pinnase called Freesland,
which happened to fall with the Island Mauritius, where we lay fourteen
days, without any knowledge what was become of the other three ships, the
Mauritius our Admiral, the Hollandia, and of the small Pinnase called the
Ouer-Ysel, which three ships came from the Island of Saint Marie, and from
thence sailed to Bantam. Of which three ships we will make some relation, and
of such matters as befell them in the Island of Saint Marie, at Bantam, and in
their return.

After that these three ships were parted and severed How 3. ships arrived at
the Isla^d S. Mary, and took the king thereof prisoner.
by storm and foul weather, from the company of the other ships, they were
driven under the Island of Saint Mary, where they took the King prisoner, and
afterward ransomed him for a Cow and a fat Calfe.

In this Island we found not any great matter, coming thither in a time out of
season, for the Orringes were but blossomed, and the Lemons very small, but we
found some Sugar Canes, Hens, and such like: And the people of the Country
came to us with two or three small Oringes. Here we saw a strange manner of The
manner which the India^s use to take whales.
hunting: there were certain Indians in a Canoas or boat, which had spied a
Whale at Sea, who with their boat made out to take her: and after they had
struck into her body an harping Iron, whereunto was fastened a long rope made
of the inner barks or peelings, next to the bodies of trees, the Whale finding
her self wounded, descended into the deep, and they viering the rope to the
whole length: not withstanding the Whale drew the boat after him as easily as
if it had been a straw: but the Indians assuring themselves upon their expert
swimming, feared not drowning, nor the ouerturning of their boat. Now after
they had thus continued a while, until the Whale had tired her self, and was
out of breath, they towed her to the shore, between wind and water, and
afterward at low water they hewed her in pieces, and every one of them took
as much as he desired. We might have taken thereof at our pleasures, but it
looked so greazie, and bacon like, that it went against our stomachs.
Afterward we sailed to the great bay of Antongil, where we filled our vessels
with water.

Our Indian, whose name was Madagascar, might have remained at this place, but
he excused himself, that he would rather go with us apparrelled, then remain
in a place naked where he was unknown. We went up the fresh river with our
long boat, to seek for fresh victuals, but the people of the Country made
signs unto us to return, for that there was nothing here to be had: yet we
rowed three leagues higher, but we sped according to the sayings of the
Indians. This scarcity was by reason that the Kings of the Island had war,
whereby all things were spoiled and wasted, insomuch that the inhabitants
themselves dyed with hunger and penury. One of their Kings was slain,
wherefore we stayed there but five days: but sailing from thence, we directed
our course toward Iaua, and with Gods help arrived at Bantam with all our
three ships as before, to wit, Mauritius our Admiral, whose master was
Gouert Ianssen, and Corneles Hermskerck, one of the Commitees, the ship
Hollandia, wherein Simon Lambertsen Mau was Master, S. Wte N^^ Committees, who
died before Bantam, in whose place was chosen John Ianson Smit. The third being
the small Pinnase called the Ouer-Ysil, whose Master was Simon Ianson, Arent
Hermanssen of Alkmer was Commissioner, and Jacob van Neck was Admiral and
chief Commander of the whole Navy, in the end we arrived with great
celeritie before Bantam, the 26. day of December, 1598.

As soon as we were come unto Bantam, we practiced How 3. ships procured the
friendship of those of Bantam, and what gifts they presented to the king
with all possible speed, to attain the friendship and good liking of these of
Bantam, to which end Hemskerck was sent before to the town, to offer them trade
and dealings in Merchandise (for they suspected we had been the same that had
been there the last year, and that kept themselves so long at sca, and that
we were Pirates and thieves, as the Portingales had heretofore persuaded them)
but we excused ourselves, and made sufficient answer, after we had sent
Abdol unto them, who was of that place, and brought thence the last year. The
said Abdol, having declared the good and friendly entertainment he had found
with us, together with the rarities and singularities which he had seen in our
Country, and that we had now many years maintained mortal wars against the
king of Spain and Portingall, we had favorable audience, and presented our
gifts unto the king being but a child: but the chief governor ^ephate, who
had ye kinglike authority, received our gifts in the kings name, in very
thankful manner: the gifts were a gilded cup, and certain pieces of velvet,
and other draped silks, with fair drinking glasses, and gilded looking
glasses; and withal were presented letters of credit, under the hand and
seal of the worthy Lords the States, and of his Excellency Grave Maurice,
which were with great reverence and creeping on their knees received. After
that all these matters were finished, we began to buy and sell with those of
Bantam, insomuch that the 4. day after, we began to lade, and before the end of
4. or 5. weeks the ships were almost laden.

Thus after we had remained there some four weeks, our other 5. ships came
sailing toward us in good safety, having none of their people, or but very few
sick. Then we put out our flags, ancients, and streamers, saluting each other
with our great ordinance in the best order.

Immediately after came certain of their Praus or boats aboard us, bringing
great plenty of Hens, eggs, Cokar-nuts, Bonouas, Sugar Canes, and Cakes of
Rise. This was eucrie day to do, changing and bartring with them for wrought
Tin: we had for a Tin spoone as much victuals as a man was able to eat in
seven days.

Abdol did us great hurt: for he had not only reported that there were five
ships to come after us, but also that there were more ships in rigging, to come
thither out of Zealand, which was cause, that whereas at the first we The
prices of pepper at Banta^
paid but 3. pieces of royals of eight for 55. pound of pepper, afterward
they raised it to 4. royals of eight: it was all royals of eight that they
sought for; wares were nothing so well esteemed as money. It was very strange
to us, to see how the people of Iaua would signify unto us, that there were
five ships to come, showing us 4. fingers and a thumb, which sign they made,
saying, Lyma Shepen, meaning thereby, that there were yet 5. of our ships to
come: for Lyma in their language signifies five.

Here the gentle Reader is to understand, yt besides the aforesaid three ships,
a fourth (namely the great Pinnase called the Vriesland, whereof Jacob
Cornelisson was master, and Wouter Willekens Commissioner, laded in this place
for Holland: all which four ships being fully laden, gave notice to all men of
the town, that they would depart homewardes, and that therefore all such as
they ought any money unto, should come and receive their payment.

Afterward (having made good provision of Rise and Anno 1599. the 11. of
January, 4. ships well laden, departed from Bantam toward Holland Diverse
Commodities.
water) they departed thence, and sailed until they came near unto Sumatra,
where they took in fresh water: for the water of Bantam is white, and after a
while grows full of maggettes. At this place they bartred knives, spoones,
looking glasses, bells and needels, for many things, and much fruit; as Millons,
Cucumbers, Onions, Garlic and some small store of Pepper, but excellent good.

Some few days before the departure from Bantam of these four ships, the
other four that had determined to seek their lading further, and to that end
to sail to the Islands of Moluccos, took leave of the said laden ships, and
the same night wherein they set sail to depart, they thundered such a peale of
ordinance, that it was heard over all the Island, and the whole town of Bantam
was up in arms, not knowing what the meaning thereof was: and thus these eight
ships parted from cath other.

The people of Bantam were very glad that they were gone: for every day they
would inquire of us when we would depart: and to hasten our departure, they
used all diligence to deliver us such wares as we had bought, for it was
nothing at all pleasant unto them, to see us lie there with eight ships
together.

The four ships aforesaid sailed from Sumatra, and came to the Island of S.
Helena, where they refreshed themselves eight dayesieng: there they found a
Church, wherein were some celles or boothes, with the Image of Saint Helena:
there was also an holy water vessel, with a sprinckle but we left all things
as we found them, with certain writings and memories of our being there.

The Island of Saint Helena (as John Huyghen writes) Description of the Isla^d
of Saint Helena.
abounds most plentifully with Kids, Coats, wild Swine, Phesants, or
Firid-hennes, Partridges, and Doves, but by means of much shooting and
hunting, used by all and sundry such ships as there arrive, they are so
wild and hard to be taken, that it was too too much pains and labor to us to
seek after them. The Goats after they were shot, would run from us to the
tops of the steepest Mountains, where it was impossible for us to come unto
them. Neither could we get so much fist, here as we gladly would have had, but
here we look in our fresh water, whereof we had sufficient store until we
came into Holland.

In this Island we left behind us Peter Gysbrechtsson, The cause why Peter
Gerbrantion was left in the Isla^d Saint Helena.
Boat-swane of the great Pinnase, because he had stricken his master or
shipper. We would willingly have begged his pardon, but after that the orders
and articles were read whereunto we were al sworn, we could not, but (for
examples sake) execute justice. Notwithstanding, her had thus much favor that
there was delivered unto him some portion of bread, oil, and Rise, fish hooks
and a piece with some quantity of gunne powder, and so we all took, our
leave, and committed him to God, hoping that he will preserve him from all ill,
and no doubt he shall come thence well enough, for as much as all ships which
sail to the East Indies, must touch at this place to water and refresh
themselves. As we departed thence, we saw afar off, a small ship, which
seemed to us, as near as we could guess, that it was a French man, directing
his course thitherward we hope that he is come into France in the same ship.

From this Island we sailed, and in short time, without any misaduenture,
arrived in the Texell the 19 day of July 1599. God be praised for it, to whom
we cannot give sufficient thanks for so good a voyage as we made: for since the
time that Holland was Holland, there never came thither ships so richly laden,
for they brought 400. last of Pepper, one hundredth last of Cloves, some store
of Paces, Nutmegs, and Sinnamum. To conclude, we finished this long voyage in
less then 15. months: for in seven months we sailed from the Texell to
Bantam, the time we lay still and were in lading, was 6. weeks, and in 6.
months we returned home to Holland from Bantam, in which time outward and
homward, we sailed 8000. leagues.

The Merchants and venturers of the ships went with all speed to the Texell,
to order all things aboard the said ships, and to refresh the Mariners. The
Committees, Cornelis Hemskerck, with Henrick Buyck, went with all speed to his
Prince-like Excellency, declaring unto him, not only these acceptable news of
the return of these ships from Bantam, but also delivered unto him letters,
together with rich presents from the king of Iaua.

The 27. day of July, the Admiral, with the ship Hollandia, 1599. 27. July.
came before the town of Amsterda^ with great noise of 8. trumpets: the town
bestowed wine on them for their welcome, and all the bells were rung for joy.
Gentle Reader, you have breefely heard the success of the 3. ships which lost
the company of the other five: hereafter shall follow the Navigations and
success of the other aforesaid five ships.



THe 1. of Nouem we met with another storm at sea, with November.
much rain, and mighty wind, whereby our Vice Admiral, the same night with the
great Pinnase, lost our company.

The third day the Vice Admiral with the Pinnase returned unto us: the same
day we saw many birds, and very much wood and trees driving on the water. The 13
same night dyed one of our folk in the ship of the Deanerie and Chapter of
Vtrecht, which was the first man that dyed in the fleet.

The 6. day of the said Month in the afternoon, there came near unto our
ship a spoute, which is a whirle wind that takes and carries the water up out
of the sea, which falling into a ship, will carry away all things that are
loose, and indaunger the ship: wherefore we took in our sails with all speed,
tearing least perhaps they might thereby receive some damage, and in striking
of the maine yard, our principal sayle-maker, called Ioost Janson of
Amsterdam, looking ouer-boord, to see if any part of the sail hung in the
water, suddenly (as he was putting his head over the ships side) the main
yard fell loose from the mast above, and smote the said Ioost Ianson on his
head stark dead, which was a great mischance, and he was the first man that
dyed this voyage in that ship.

The 7. day in the morning we cast the said Ioost Ianson ouer-boord.

The 9. day his goods were sold before the maine mast, which were well sold,
for that one Ryail of 8. was accounted for 8. Gildernes and a half.

The same day we were put to our first allowance of Oil, to wit, weekly two
Mutskins, which makes of our wine measure about half a pint.

The 12. day the Vice Admiral came aboard our ship to minister justice, which
was the first execution of justice that he did in these ships. The same day we
had sight of an Island, and were in the night come near to the land before we
wist thereof, for it was a very low land: then we discharged a piece to warn
the other ships thereof, and then wended and put roome-ward.

The 13 day we saw three other small Islands, whereupon the little Pinnase
sailed that evening before us, to see if we might sail on the farther side of
one of the Islands or not, but the water was too shallow, for there lay out a
great neck or corner of the Island, therefore we cast about to seaward, and
the same evening we cast our sounding lead in the first quarter, and had 20.
faddome, and casting the lead again, found but 15. faddome, the third time 11.
faddome, and the fourth time 9. faddome, insomuch that we were in great danger
of the sholes, but God prevented the same, for we held our ship turning, and
suddenly came into the deep, escaping the great danger we were in, to lose
our ship and our lives: for, doubting greatly that we should meet with great
storms and tempests between the Islands, we were drawn out of the right way,
and brought into this error.

The 15. day we had again shallowe water at 13. faddome, but we were out of
sight of any land, which was a great wonder to find such a shallow in the Sea
so far from any shore, for we could not see any land at all.

The same day, we had again a fair wind, so that we must hale in our
sheates, and set our course East and by South, and East Southeast: the same day
we shot a great Toonny, whereof there were in that place very many, wherewith
we made good cheer.

The 16. day of the said month in the morning, we had sight of another
Island, so that we let slip our sheates to sail beyond it. This Island
stretches to the South and North, and lies very low, and pleasantly to see
to: in the evening we were past this Island, and pulled in again our sheates:
we held our course most East and by South, and East Southeast.

The 22. day in the afternoon we had much rain with a stouts gale of wind,
so that we were constrained to take in our top-sailes, the same night it
lightened wonderfully.

The 24. day the Vice Admiral gave sign by putting out his streamer or
banderoll, that all the Pilots should come aboard him, to take counsel
together what course were best to be kept.

The 25. 26. and 27. days, we had very still and calm weather, but toward
the evening the wind came South southwest, and we held our course most East
southeast.

The 28. day in the morning the wind slacked, and we directed our course East,
and East, and by North: we turned by the wind, the weather being very fair,
in the night the wind came Westerly, so that we shaped our course East
southeast, and Southeast and by East.

The 30. day the Vice-Admirals preacher came aboard our ship, where he made
unto us a godly and learned Sermon.

The first day of December we had the wind fair, and December.
the same day we began first to eat of our smoaked or dried flesh, which
remained as yet very good and sweet.

The 2. 4. 5. 6. and 7. days we had calm and still weather, with variable
winds, and some while a pretty little gale, and sometimes small showers of
rain: this day we might behold squales and snakes driving in the water,
whereby we knew that we were near unto the land.

The 8. day we had also mutable winds with some small showers and gusts of
rain, with thunder, the weather being very still and calm, and toward the
evening it began to blow a fine sweet gale from the West northwest, so that we
haled in our sheates, and held our course East southeast: the same night a
flying fish came flying into our ship.

The 9. day it blew a fine gale, the wind westerly, and we held our course for
the most part East Southeast: about noonetide one of our company fell from the
spritsaile yard, and was drowned, for before we could hoyse out our boat, he
sunk: his name was Gerbrand Iacobszen of Alckmar, and a common mariner. There
fell another ouer-boord also, who was one of the under Shipwrights, and was
browned with the other. His name was Tymon Ianszen of Amsterdam; so that this
day we lost two of our company.

The same day also dyed one aboard the Vice Admiral, and one aboard the
Pinnase: Thus in this one day we lost four men in in our fleet of five ships.

The 10. day the wind continued fair, shaping our course most East Southeast,
the weather fair: at noone we took the height, and found we were eight
degrees to the South of the Equinoctial line.

The 12. 13. and 14. days continued fair weather, except new and then a
little missing rain, and the same day we saw multitudes of birds, and scum of
the sea, driving upon the water, which caused us to judge that we were not far
from the land.

The 21. day our Vice-Admirals boat came aboard us, at which time happened an
extreme storm of wind and rain, so that we were constrained to take in our
top sails: and because the storm continued long, it was thought good to take
in the Vice-Admirals boat aforesaid, fearing least our boat should have drawn
her under water: wherefore we cast about to Lee-ward, to take in the boat, but
in hoysing it over, the rope, which was fastened before to the boat, brake, and
therewith one of the quarter masters fell over board, but we help him presently
and saved his life.

The 25. day in the night, about three hours before daylight, we had a shrewd
gust of rain and wind, so that we were glad to take in our sails.

The 26. day in the morning we could see but 2. of our 15
ships, but in the evening we came again together, and with our fore-sailes
every one of us put loofe, fearing we should come too near the sholes, and
the Moon was so bark, that we could hardly discern the length of a ship from
us.

The 27. day in the morning we put out again all our satles to make more way,
having a fine full gale from the West Northwest with fair weather, and at
afternoon we saw an Island called the Isle de Gano, wherewith we were all
greatly comforted and rejoiced. The same night we had a very hard tempest with
contrary winds, which lasted two hours, and then the wind was again good,
and we shaped directly our course toward the maine land of Sumatra.

The 28. day in the morning we saw the main land 1598. The 28. December we
saw the maine land of Sumatra
of Sumatra, which is a very high Country declining with a point toward the
Strait.

All this day we sailed for the most part East Southeast toward the shore.

In the evening we spoke with our Pinnase, and demanded if they knew the
place: and the Master answered us that he knew the place very well: wherewith
we left off to demand any farther, but sailed forth Southeast and by East.

The 29. day in the morning we had a shrewd gust of rain and wind, with very
dark weather. In the evening the Pinnase cast about to Lee-ward, and stayed
for the ships to speak with us: whereupon we took in our We came into the
straight of Sunda.
sails, and ran with our fore-course only, to the end we might by daylight
be before the strayts.

The 30. day in the morning being come into the Straites of Sunda, in the
afternoon we discryed five small sail under the shore, but they came not
aboard us, by reason that the wind was very great, and blew a mighty storm:
we layled along the shore, to wit, the coast of Iaua.

The same day all the ships cleared all their ordinance, and in the evening we
cast our Ankers a good mile from Bantam, near unto two small Islands, for we
would not come before the town in the night time.

The 31. day we wayed our Ankers, and sailed toward We arrived at Bantam.
Bantam; in the way came a small boat of our other ships aboard us, with four
me^, declaring unto us that our Admiral, the Hollandia, and the small Pinnase
were at Bantam, almost fully laden, and that they had been there a month and
four days: with which good news we were all maruailously rejoiced, and in
the afternoon we came into the road with exceeding joy, where our said other
three ships lay, at which time were but fifteen of our men dead since our
coming from Holland.

Presently came many of the Country people aboard us, bringing us Hens,
Eggs, and many other sorts of fresh victuals and fruits, which seemed very
strange unto us.

The first day of January many commodities were January.
brought aboard us to barter and trucke, as Hens, Eggs, fruits, and such like.

The second and third days, their Prawes or boats continued to come aboard us
so abundantly with all kind of Merchandise, which they offered us in truck,
that we could hardly pass through them in our ships, some with Hens, some with
Bonanas, and some with garlic, and other fruits.

The 4. day the Admiral came aboard all the ships, giving order to separate
the fleet, namely, that the 4. laden The ships sever the^-selues.
ships should return homewards, and the other 4. should sail to the Islands
of Moluccas: the Vice Admiral in the ship called Amsterdam, was made Admiral,
and one of our Committees, Jacob Hemskerck Vice Admiral, in the Gelderland, of
these said four ships appointed to go to the Moluccas, and John Ianssen
Carel was appointed to be Vice Admiral in the Hollandia: in stead of Wybrandt
Warwick, Corneles Ianson Fortuiin, was appointed master in the great Pinnase,
John Cornelisson was appointed master in Melcknaps place, and Melcknap was put
master into the Amsterdam, and Woulter Willekins, Committees in the Vtrecht,
was placed in the great Pinnase, the Pilot of the Amsterda^ was shipped into
the great Pinnase, and the master of the said Pinnase was again appointed to
sail in the Amsterdam, which was Admiral of the fleet for the Moluccas.

The fifth, sixth, and seventh days, many Prawes or small boats continued to
come aboard us, offering us fresh victualles in trucke.

The eight day in the evening we hoysed our sails, and The 8. day of January
the 4. ships departed from Bantam toward the Islands of Moluccas.
departed from Bantam with our four ships, toward the Moluccas, to wit, the
new Admiral, Wybrandt van Warwick, the Vice Admiral, Jacob Hemskerck, the
Zealand, whereof John Cornelisson was master, and the Vtrecht, whereof John
Martssen was master or shipper.

The 11. day we ankered before a river lying between Bantam and Sakentra, and
is about some four leagues from Sakentra, two little Islands lying right over
against it, and five other Islands right before you, about some half league
from Sakentra.

The 12. day we made provision of water with all possible diligence, for two of
our ships were appointed to sail before, to make provision of fresh
victualles: by noone we had in all our water, and then we and Melcknap sailed
together away, and the next morning we cast our ankers before Sakentra, about a
league from the land.

The 13. day in the morning, the Sambander or governor came aboard us with one
of their Prawes, or little boats, demanding what we came for, because we
rode in that place with our ships. Our Vice Admiral made answer, that we
came to buy fresh victuals: with which answer they were well pleased, saying
there was enough of all things to be had, and offered us a present of a
certain fruit which they call Maugenus, which our Vice Admiral received,
remune rating him with a looking glass, and a couple of drinking-glasses of
small valewe. The afternoon following he departed again from whence he came,
with two of our Committees, to make provision of fresh victualles. The same
evening our Admiral with the Vtrecht came unto us.

The 14. day in the morning, one of our boats rowed ashore The king fendeth a
Bull unto the Admiral for a present.
to buy more fresh victualles, who returned aboard toward the evening,
bringing much good victualles unto the Admiral, with a Bull sent unto our
Admiral by the king, which was distributed among the four ships.

The 15. day in the morning, so ne of our boats were sent again to the shore
for more fresh victualles, who returned at noone, and after dinner we wayed
our ankers, and sailed from Iaketra.

The 16. day in the morning we let fall our ankers, because the weather was
very dark: for we could not pass the neck of the land, which there
stretches out, about some three leagues from Sakentra: at noone we sailed
thence, but toward the evening we cast out our Ankers again.

The seventeenth day we wayed our Ankers again, sailing, forward with a
Northwest wind, and very fair weather.

The 20. day of the said month we saw the Island called Lybock, and in the
afternoon we saw that it lay Eastward of Iaua, with three other small Islands:
all this day we had the wind Westerly, for the most part keeping our course
East, and East and by South.

The 21. day the Committees and Masters of the The 21. January 1599. we came
before the Island Tuban.
ships were commanded to come aboard the Admiral, where they sat together
in counsel. The same day we made with the land, and in the night we came
before a Town called Tuban.

The 22. day in the morning, two long boats were manned and sent to the shore,
with two of the Vnder-Committees, to see if they might there make any provision
of fresh victuals.

The same day in the evening, the long boats returned to the ships, bringing
with them a Portingall gentleman of the Country, which had renounced the
Christian religion, and taken upon him the religion of the Country.

This said Renegado spoke with our Admiral, saying we should at that place
have lading sufficient to our contentment, if we would slay there three or
four months.

The 23. day in the morning, a long boat with three cocke-boats rowed again
to the shore, to buy Rice and other victuals. The same day in the evening, we
saw many people assembling in every street with their weapons in very gallant
comely sort after their manner, having very many Gentlemen among them on
horseback, which could very well ride and manage their horses, in running,
Tourneis, breaking of lances, and hunting, which pastimes we saw the same
evening on their market place.

Tuban is a little Town, wherein is used a very large Description of Tuban.
trade of all kind of Merchandise, as of Silks, Lynnen, Chamblets, and many
garments, wherewith they clothe themselves, and of all other sorts of
commodities. At this place is plenty of fresh victualles to be had.

In this Town dwell many rich Gentlemen, using great trade in pepper, which
they send to other Towns from thence in ships, which they call Ionken: These
gentlemen are marvelous proud and stout, their apparel is like unto theirs of
Bantam, bragging with their daggers hanging at their sides. Also these
gentlemen have many slaves and servants, insomuch as they go not once out of
their doors, without x, or xx, persons following them, which wait with great
diligence and care.

The 24. day in the morning, two long boats rowed ashore to receive the king,
for he had promised to come aboard, to see our ships, to which end our
Vice Admiral went ashore with the said long boats, who was by the king
brought into his palace, showing him all his wives, women and maidens, and all
his horses, which were marvelous fair. At noone the Vice Admiral returned
aboard, the ships bringing the Kings son with him, for the King himself
would not come. In the evening we brought him again to the land, honoring
him with sixteen great shot out of the 4. ships, wherein he received great
pleasure and contentment.

The description of Tuban, which is a Town situated in the Island called Iaua
Mayor, where we arrived the 22. day of January, 1599. finding therein store
and great plenty of fresh victuals. No. 3.
THis Town of Tuban is a very fine place, or Town The situation of Tuba^, and
of the estate of the king and people there.
for trade in merchandise, walled round about, having gates of wood, made very
trim and gallant after their country fashion, the King is a Prince of great
power, and (as is there by the Inhabitants reported) he is the mightiest King
of all the country of Iaua, insomuch that when he goes into the field, he is
able to raise within the space of 24. hours, many thousand men, both on foot
and horseback. The King holds himself very maiestically, accompanied with
many Gentlemen of great state and quality, his Court is royal, and very
stately, worthy to be seen of strangers.

In this Town dwell very many Gentlemen, which are great dealers in buying and
selling of silks, Chamlets, Calikuthes, and of apparel which they use to
wear, and are there made in the Country. They have ships, which they name
in their language Ionken, these ships they lade with pepper, sending the same
to Baly, where they barter for slight or simple apparel made of Cotton Their
dealings in trade of merchandise.
cloth, or Callikuts, whereof great store are there made. And after they have
so made change of their pepper for these wares, they send the same to Banda,
Ternati, Phlippina and other adjoining Countries, rechanging that apparel for
Maces, Nutmegs, and Cloves, and having laden their ships with those
commodities, they return home. The common people for the most part get their
living with fishing, and bringing up of cattle, whereof they have great
plenty. They drive their cattle out in the morning, and in the evening they
fetch them in again. They go apparelled like unto those of Bantam, wearing a
cloth about their middles, their bodies upward being naked, and a dagger which
they call their Kriis at their side. Commonly the Gentlemen cast over their
bodies a mantle made of Camels hair, which they call a Pitguen, whereof, and
of their daggers they are not a little proud. Such as are of any calling or
countenance, have many servants and slaves, which wait on their masters at an
inch, so that if they go but out of their houses, ten or twelve of these slaves
follow them, and wheresoever they go, a small chest is carried after them
with beete leaves, which they eat with chalk or lyme and green Nuts, called
in their language Ladon, the same being so chawed until all the moisture be
out, they spit it out of their mouths.

A declaration of the manner of their Horses, and comely fashion used in decking
and trimming them, together with their order in Turneys and running with their
Lances, showed unto our Merchants the 23. day of January, to congratulate or
welcome them, which was by those people accomplished very gallantly.
THe Gentilitie of Tuban have great delight and pleasure Of their Horses, and
how they are trimmed.
in their Horses, for all such as are of any ability, will keep a horse,
wherein they take great pride. Their Horse are of a very small stature, their
legs are small, but they run very swiftly, using rich and costly Saddles made
of Velvet, and some of Spanish Leather, painted with grisly Dragons and
fearful Devils, for the most part gilded: the saddles are made like unto
ours, but with lower backs behind the seat. Their bridles are garnished with
precious stones, which are as white as Alablaster: the bits are also made very
fine and costly, with 2. bosses of silver, whereof some are white and some
gilded, according to the estate and degree of the master or owner of the horse:
some of those bosses are made of copper also, for the meaner sort of people.
They ride oftentimes out of the town, 3. or 4 in a company more or less,
bragging, outfacing, and bearding each other as they ride, run, or turn their
horses, striving who can best run the ring, spring, leap, cariere, manage,
force, and govern his horse, in the best and most gallant manner.

Their Spears or Lances are commonly of a very light wood, made round and
small which they use very finely and cunningly in all their Turnyes and warlike
exercises, chasing and running after each other with such fury, as if they had
to do with their enemies, or meant the matter in good earnest: when the one
comes near unto the other, the hindmost (which runs after the other)
declining or abasing his staff, passes forth before the other, then is he
followed by him that was before the foremost, who setting spurs to his horse,
and giving him the bridle, follows as fast as his horse can run, until he be
before him, and then the other follows him again, bidding each other the base
in this sort, until their The ma ner of running with their Lances on horsbacke.
horses be wearyed. This their manner of warlike exercise on horse back, we
saw: there the 23. day of January, 1599 accomplish to by many gallant
Gentlemen in the Market place, to honor and welcome our Merchants, who were
there present, made to the end we might see their bravery and cunning in
riding, whereat the king himself was present on horseback, whose apparel
was a mantle or Pytgin of velvet, cast over his vnder-garment, and a dagger
hanging by his side with a golden haft, having thereon the picture of a Devil.
They had great changing of horses: for as soon as one horse was wearied, a
fresh was presently brought, and the other led away: they showed themselves
very magnificent and stately in their riding, running, and chasing in this
their warlike pastime.

At this place we found great plenty of fresh victuals, as The fertility of
the Country. 1599. 24. January.
Oxen, Goats, Hens, Eggs, Fish, and other fruits, as Cokar-nuts, Lemons,
Bonanas, Maugas, and many other sorts, very good and wholesome to be eaten: also
we bought very good Rice here at a reasonable price, so that we found this
place very good and fit to make provision of fresh victuals.

The said twenty fourth day in the night we hoysed our sails, and departed
thence with two of our ships, namely the Zealand and the Vice Admiral, for the
Admiral and the Vtrecht remained there at Anchor, for they were to receive of
the King, Cattle and Rise, for certain wares which the King had bought of
them.

The 25. day at noonetide we sailed by Sydago, where Schellinger was murdered
in the first voyage: we passed forward along the coast, until we came under
the shore of Iaua, where we cast our ankers the same evening, (for we could not
reach the corner or neck of the land, which stretches from Madura) where we
sent out our boat to sound the depth, but returned the next morning to the
ships with small intelligence, by reason that there grew a great storm.

The 26. day, the Admiral and the Vtrecht came unto us, casting their Ankers
under the land of Iaua and Madura: for the water is very shallow before the
straight of Madura, insomuch that our Admiral sat all the night aground, not
receiving any hurt at all, for it was in that place a very soft clay ground.

The 27. day in the morning, we and Melcknap sailed The 27 day we ankered in
the straights of Madura, by reason of great tempests.
thence, but the Admiral and the Vtrecht stayed behind, for our Admiral
durst not venture over the shallowes, but afterward they sailed thence to the
East end of Madura, and anchored before a little town called Arosby, to buy
Rise and other fresh victualles.

The same day at noone we cast our Ankers between Madura, and the Land of
Iaua, to wit, in the straight of Madura, where a mighty stream runs, so
that we were forced to stay for the Tide: at afternoon we sailed thence, and
toward the evening let fall our Ankers before a little Town called Iortan,
where one of our Comittees went ashore with the long boat, to inquire for a
Pilot, to bring us unto the Islands of Moluccas, but returned the same evening
with a Lamb, which the King had bestowed on our Vice Admiral, not bringing any
Pilot with them, which was the principal cause of our coming thither, for
here at Iortan is the Road, where all the ships of Iaua lie.

The 28. day in the morning, we sent a long boat to the shore to buy Rice and
other necessaries, but they returned presently, bringing with them the
Sabander, and in the afternoon the Kings brother came aboard us, with a
Present, which he gave to our Vice Admiral.

The same day, some of our company spoke with a Dutchman that dwelled there in
the Country, exercising great trade in Pepper, Nutmegs and Cloves.

The 29. day our long boat went ashore again, and bought all provision of
fresh victuals.

The 30. day we sent again to land to buy Rice, and to enquire after a Pilot,
which we found: the same night came a boat aboard us with folk therein,
showing us, that near forty of our men of the Admirals ship and of the
Vtrecht were taken, and imprisoned in a very strong little Town of the
Country of Madura, called Arosbay.

The 31. day, the before mentioned Renegado of Tuban, The king of Tuban sends
a present to Grave Maurits.
came to us at Iortan, bringing from his King a very fair present to be
delivered unto his princely Excellency, which was a Kriis or dagger, and two
spears or lances made after their manner, very fair and costly: upon the
handle of the dagger was the kings own counterfeit or picture, made all of
pure gold, and set with precious stones, worth 500. Gildernes, or 50. pound
starling, and the blade of the dagger was indented and made after their fashion.

The first day of February we arrived before Madura, February.
anchoring near unto our Admiral, having with us the Renegado of Tuba^
aforesaid, who had promised to do his best, to procure liberty to our
imprisoned people, but found no good success, by reason that the King
demanded so great a ransom for the prisoners, whereby we were driven to
attempt by force to redeem our people, which fell not out to our best
contentment, notwithstanding I will breefely relate the same unto the courteous
Reader.

A true declaration of our attempt in the Island of Madura, before a little
Town called Mosbay, done by us for the releasement of our people (by force of
arms) that were there imprisoned, and of our ill success in the said attempt.
N o. 4.
THe Island Madura lies on the North side of Iaua Mayor, The situation of the
Island of Madura.
stretching out to the East end of Iaua; The Inhabitants are apparelled as the
people of Iaua: they are very industrious, and painful in all their actions.
On the West end of Madura is situated a small town named Arosbay, strongly
walled with gates and stages whereon they keep watch in the night, which are
very fit, and aptly placed to serve them at such times as they are visited by
their enemies. But to come to our purpose, and speak of our attempt, we will
leave to speak any further of the situation of Arosbay.

January 27. 1599. after we had anchored under the land of Iaua, we found a
mighty shallow or bank, which stretches out even unto the mouth of the
straight of Madura, and so runs forth to the land of Iaua. This bank in
some places is but six fadome deep, and in other places deeper or shallower as
it may fall out, by reason whereof we were constrained to part company (as
before is partly declared) concluding among our selves, that the Vice Admiral
(which was the Geldria, with the other ship called the Zelandia) should sail
to the straight of Madura, (lying between the Island of Iaua and Madura) to a
little town named Iortan, which is the place whereunto the Jauanars come with
their ships, attending there for a fair wind to go to the Islands of Moluccas.
At this place therefore we meant to take in a Pylot, to bring us to the Islands
of Moluccas: this was the only reason that brought us hither. In the mean
while our Admiral and the Vtrecht, sailed to the West and of Madura, where
they let fall their anchors before a small town called Arosbay, and sending
their long boat to the said town, to buy Rise and other victuals, the mariners
were no sooner landed, but they were all apprehended, unarmed, and taken
prisoners, the most part of them spoiled of their apparel, and other rags
given them to cover their bodies. The Admiral seeing that the said boat stayed
so long away, and returned not, sent a cocke-boat with three men to the shore,
to know the cause why the other stayed so long from the ships. These 3. men
were no sooner come to the shore, but they were also taken prisoners by the
inhabitants of the said town, and carried to their fellows. After that they
were thus dealt with, ye commitees which were taken in this sort among the
rest, obtained of the king license to send 3. of their company unto their
Admiral, to advertise him of this imprisonment, conditionally, that the said 3.
men should presently return to the town, after they had been aboard their
shipe: which was accordingly agreed and accomplished. After that the Admiral
understood of these proceedings, he sent a boat unto the Vice Admiral to
advertise him hereof. Who presently waying his anchors, drove down the stream
until he came before yt said town Arosbay, where the mariners were
imprisoned. Every day letters were sent to and fro, to come to some agreement
for ye liberty of our people: but yt K. demanded a great ransom, namely ye 2.
black pieces of ordinance which were in ye Admiral, some number of cloths, and
pieces of velvet, We 1000. rials of 8 This demand pleased the Admiral nothing
at all, answering, that if they would content themselves with money or wares,
he would with all his heart agree with them: but as touching the Ordinance by
the^ demanded, they belonged not unto him, neither had he any power or
authority over them* for they belonged unto his land, or state of whence he
was. This manner of parle continued in this sort five or six days, and every
day their demands were more unreasonable then other. In the end the Admiral
called all the Merchants and masters aboard him, counselling together what was
best to be done. Then they concluded to land some of their company, and with
force of arms to deliver the prisoners, (for we were advertised, that our men
were kept in the long boat wherewith they went ashore, as yet lying in the
haven before the gate, without bonds, fetters, or close prison) meaning
suddenly, and before they of the town should be able to prevent us, to deliver
our men: but we failed of our purpose.

The 5. day of February, after we had very well and in good order with 150.
men manned and armed three long boats, and three ship boats, we rowed to the
shore, where we found a great multitude of people before the town, among whom
were two Portingals, who came unto us with flags of peace or truce in their
hands, saying they would agree with us: which was nothing but deceit and
knauerie, for they assembled themselves very strongly within the town.
Whereupon some twenty of our Musketeers leapt on land, discharging their
muskets among the thickest, so that three or four of them fell down dead: and
running toward the place where the long boat lay with the prisoners, our
Vice Admiral called unto us to return into our own boat, and to bring her in
nearer unto the town, which we did: in the mean while the townsmen were come
out at another gate, meaning to enuiron us, and so to enclose us in the haven,
that we should not be able to return. We perceiving their intent, sent
presently two of our boats to the bome or bar, to keep the haven free for
our return: for if the enemy could have possessed the corner, it would have
returned to our great hurt. While we were thus in skirmish one with the other,
they had cleared their brass Bases, discharging them very terribly among us,
they had also many calieuers, and great store of Bows and arrows, wherewith
they shot among us, so that it seemed that arrows rained upon us: they thought
as soon as our powder was spent, to deal easily enough with us, but we
stayed not so long, by reason that the weather began to grow very
tempestuous, the water was much fallen, and besides we thought good no longer to
hazard our lives in vain, wherefore we retired to our boats, and pulling up
the dregs, rowed out of the haven toward our ships, for the wind began to rise
more and more: and being some shot off from the land, the Admirals boat with
36 men, and the boat of the Zealand with 13. men, were with the waves and
billows turned topsie-furuy and overthrown: we that were in the other boats
were not able to help them, for it was as much as we were able to do, to
preserve our own boats above water, so that many a man came to his end by this
mishap, some being drowned, and others killed by the wild people on the shore,
but some that happened to swim to the one side of the town, were saved by the
Renegado of Tuban, which stood by as the men came to land, and entreated for
their lives, persuading the people to take them prisoners: whereupon they were
suffered to come to the land: and kneeling on the ground, the people laid sand
on their heads, in token that their lives were saved, but so many as swoome to
the other side of the land, were put to the sword without mercy, Thus there
died 25. of our me^, to wit, 15. of ye Admirals, one of John Martssens ship,
and 9. of the Zeala^ds. The prisoners were the same evening led through the
town, and kept without the gates in a country house. The Trumpeter and the
Corporal were bound and fettered, the rest were bound together, and three of
them were shrewdly wounded, and those which we meant to have rescued, were
carried to other places, separated in two companies.

The 6. day they were removed from the place where 1599. the sixth of February.
they were kept, and on the way met all together, except 6. which were led to
another place, the rest were carried a mile into the Country, where they were
put into a cave under the ground, and kept with a strong guard: here the
Trumpeter and the Corporal were released of their bands and shackles.

The 7. day they were brought again out of the den, The Prisoners are brought
out of the den, and how it befell them afterward. The prisoners raniome made
for 2000. ryals of eight.
(the Trumpeter and the Corporal being led apart before the King) the said
Corporal was by the king demanded if he would stay and serve him, promising to
bestow on him 2. of his wives, and many other rewards. Whereunto the Corporal
answered, his desire was rather to live with his fellows aboard the ship,
hoping that his Captain would find means for his release, if it were possible.
The^ were they led again to their companion prisoners, and in the gate of the
town they met the rest of their company, being then 51. in number all
prisoners: from whence they were led al together to a little Islandlying on the
towne-ditch, hard by the town, where they were night and day guarded with a
strong watch.

The eight day we began again to parle about the prisoners ransom: and in
the end it was agreed to pay 2000. pieces of Rials of eight, in spice or in
wares at the Kings pleasure.

The 9. day eight of the Prisoners were sent aboard, and their ransom carried
a shore.

The 10. day were 12. delivered, and their ransom sent to the King, and this
continued the 11. and 12. unto the 13. day, until all the prisoners were
released.

The 14. day we had all our folk aboard, two except, whereof one was taken
with the rest. the other had in the night hid himself, which two willingly
remained behind, greatly to the disliking of our Admiral.

The same day the Vtrecht discharged three pieces of Ordinance, for joy that
our people were delivered, and having hoysed our sails, departed thence, and
the same evening came to the other ship: and sailing together in company, we
shaped our course East and by North, along the coast of Madura, having the wind
West South-west, at which time (our ships being under sail) our Master Jacob
Martssen dyed.

A brief repetition of the Island of Madura.
MAdura is a very fruitful land, having such plenty of Description of the
Isle of Madura.
Rise, that it spares and nourishes all the adjoining and bordering places
thereabouts. This grain or Rise grows there on a most fat fruitful clayey
ground, comparable to any ground in our ground, and is so plentifully watered,
that when the ground is plowed, the Oxen and plowmen go in the water half
knee deep or more, and the Rise like wise grows knee high in great
abundance, so that their neighbors cannot miss the help of this Island, but
it wants shipping, by reason of the sands or shallowes that stretch all along
the coast thereof. The people thereof live most by theeuerie and spoil of
others, taking with their small boats or prawes, all they can get at Sea, as well
from their neighbors, as from strangers, and yet their neighbors so robbed
and daily spoiled by them, dare not revenge themselves, for fear lest they
should shut up the passages, and not suffer any thing to be transported out of
their Country, whereby they should want means of sustentation and food:
neither is it an easy matter to hurt them, for that no shipping can come near
them.

Touching their weapons and use thereof, they are like unto the same of Iaua,
as well for Elephants, Horses, Pikes, Lances, and Targets: and besides, they
have the use of Curtelares and Daggers, with the Devils picture on them. The
Kings servants are all Gentlemen, having their Kruiislen or Daggers trimmed and
garnished with silver, but none else of the land may wear the like.

The 15 day we cast the dead Shipper aforesaid ouerboord, within sight of the
Clifts of little Iaua.

The 16. day the Admirals boat fetched the Vice Admiral aboard their ship, to
choose new officers for the Admiral, in place of those that were lost at
Madura: we held our course East and by North with a fine gale.

The 17. and 18. days we had sight of the Island Celebes, keeping our course
East, and East and by North.

The 19. day in the morning, we saw the Island Combayna, which lies some 18.
leagues from Celebes, and the same day we had sight of another Island called
Bouton, and stretches East South-east from Combayna some eight leagues.

The 20. day we sailed about the Island Bouton, A sandy bank not noted in the
Card.
where the Admiral called aboard him all the Masters and Committees, to advise
themselves in their affairs.

The 21. day in the morning, we were under the Island Cebesse, where we found
a shole, which appeared not unto us in the Card: we had sailed the same night
beyond it above the length of a shot with a great piece, before we perceived
the danger: wherefore we must acknowledge that the Almighty God preserved us.
This bank or shole is some two leagues long, stretching for the most part East
and West, and ought to be regarded and well noted: it lies between these two
Islands Bouton and Cebessa, almost in the midway: here we found that our
Compass drew again toward the North-east.

The 22. and 23. days, the weather was raynie, we holding our course
North-east toward Amboyna.

The 24. day the Vice Admiral came aboard the Admiral, to confer with him,
at which time the Commissioner of the Zealand was shipped into the Vtrecht, and
the Commissioner of the Vtrecht was placed in the Zealand. The same day died a
boy aboard our ship of the Bloody Flix, called Lieuen Rooeckessen, and was
keeper of the Masters Cabben: in the evening we threw him ouer-boord.

The 25. day we had sight of the Island Boora: in the 25. February, 1599. a
quartermaster fell from the top into the sea.
morning was a great gust of wind and rain, so that we were forced to take in
our top-sayles: at which time one of the Quarter Masters fell out of the top
into the Sea, but he chanced to hold fast by a small rope, whereby we haled
him again into the ship without any hurt at all, which was greatly to be
wondered at: for it blew so ^^out a gale, that we were hardly able to bear our
courses: the wind came about to the South-west, we held our course North-east
toward the next land in sight.

The 26. and 27. days, the weather being calm, we drove along the shore of
the Island of Blau, having now and then a small gale of wind, very variable.

The 28. day in the morning, we rowed aboard the Admiral to fetch the
Preacher: for there were two of our sailors, both young men, which desired to be
instructed by him in some points of the Sacrament of Baptism, and to be
baptized.

The first day of March we arrived near under the March.
Island of Blau, which lies on the East end of Boera: then might we behold
before us three other small Islands, the one called Atybotty, the second
Manipa, and the third Gyra: these little Islands lie before Amboyna.

The second day we sailed beyond Blau, and toward the evening came two Prawes
or little boats unto our Admiral, refusing to come into his ship, but kept
themselves behind, and lying by the Admirals boat: in the mean while the
Vice Admiral sent his boat aboard the Admiral, to know what news those
Prawes brought: but so soon as they marked that our long boat rowed toward
the Admiral, they presently rowed away in all haste toward the shore, we
holding our course directly toward Amboyna.

The third day in the morning, we came before the Straight of Amboyna, which
was very narrow, after we were entered into the mouth thereof, the weather fell
calm, so that we drove back again, by reason of the strong stream or
current.

About noone there came three Prawes or small boats aboard us from a little
town called Matel, lying on the Mountains of Amboyna, and in the evening we
came before a little town called Itou or Iton, situated in the Island of
Amboyna.

The description of the Island Amboyna, and the situation thereof, with the
weapons, behavior, and inclination of the people, of their going in their
apparel, and manner of their Galleys.
THis Island Amboyna lies near so the Islands of The situation of Amboyna.
Moluccas, about some 24. leagues from the Northwest side of Banda.

In this Island grows great plenty of Cloves, and great abundance of fruit,
as Oringes, Lemons, Citrons, Cokars, Bononas, Sugarcanes, and such like, which
things are to be had there maruallous cheap, for a man may have 80. Orringes
for a button, insomuch that here we found our selves wonderfully accomodated
with all kind of fresh victualles. The inhabitants are very simple people,
their apparel for the most part like to theirs of Banta, and so go likewise
all the people of the Islands of Moluccas, they live for the most part by the
trade of Cloves, near and hard in their dealings: their weapons are commonly
Pikes, the end armed with iron, in manner of a broad arrow head, or of an
harping iron, which they throw with great strength and assurance, insomuch that
they will hit the breadth of a dallar: they use also shields in their wars,
and Curtelaxes. The poorer sort of people commonly carry a great knife in
their hands, wherewith they do their work. They bake great Cakes of Rise,
with Sugar and dry Almonds, which they carry to the adjoining Islands to sell
or change for other wares. They use much Rise in making of great loaves of
bread, after the shape and fashion of a Sugar-loafe, which commonly they eat
as bread with other meats. They have also the use of Galleys, whereof they are
very proud, and boast not a little of them: they row them maruailous swiftly,
and are made after the shape and fashion of a Dragon: before is a Dragons head,
and at the stern it is shaped like unto a Dragons tail, hanged and decked
with flagges and pendons, as we our selves saw when we came first before
Amboyna, at what time the Admiral of the Seas there, came aboard us, with 3.
very rich and gallant Galleys, full of men, and well appointed, which they call
in their language Karkollen: they rowed about our ships with great joy and
mirth, singing, and playing upon Copper Basins, and long Droomes, which they
carry under one arm, and with one hand they played upon the Droome in accord
with the sound of the Basins, whereunto the slaves sung likewise in accord as
they rowed, which was very pleasant to hear. Every one of these Karkollen or
Galleys had 3. Bases, all which they discharged to honor and welcome us: we
discharged also all our Ordinance, to congratulate and answer their courtesy,
and then let fall our Ankers, keeping good watch all the night, for we
understood that they kept a watch all night on the shore, which we might
easily discern.

Afterward the Admiral came aboard us, demanding to what end we came
thither, and what we desired. Whereunto was answered, that we came in trade of
Merchandise, and to that end had brought with us all sorts of Merchandise: with
which answer he seemed to us to be glad, willing us to come aland, where he
would agree with us. The next day the Vice Admiral went ashore to accord and
conclude some great bargain, where he was in very friendly sort welcomed and
received, bringing him into a Tent made of their sails under a tree, where
they conferred with each other about trade and full lading of our ships.

Another description of the Island Amboyna, where we arrived with our four
ships the third day of March, 1599. Together with the manners and fashions used
by the people of the country. No. 5.






Pitgin with wide sleeves, which commonly he turns up upon his shoulders,
having a coat made of silk, most like to the fashion used by the Portingals.

Karkollen; they row them very swiftly, and are made after a marvelous Anno
1599. March. 4. great store of fruit brought aboard.
strange manner and fashion.

THe 4. day in ye morning, great store of al sorts of fruits were brought
aboard our ships to truck, as Oringes, Lemmons, Citrons, Cokars, Bononas, and
many others, which they sold us very good cheap: for, for one Cinne spoone we
had so great store of all sorts of fruits, that we knew not what to do there
with. They brought us also great plenty of their bread to be sold for money or
in change, the same was made with almondes and sugar, very medicinable for a
loose belly, wherewith our people were vexed. Toward the evening we removed
more Eastward off the Town, where our ships might have better rode, for we
lay first at 36. faddome, very ill ground, but now we rode at 50. faddome sandy
ground.

The 5. day the Admiral of the sea came aboard to view The Admiral of the sea
comes aboard our ships.
our ships, wondering not only at our great Ordinance, muskets and other
artillery, but also that we were so well provided of all other necessaries,
he was a very ready man with a piece, wherein he took most delight.

The 6. day in the morning the Vice Admiral with 3. of the Committees went
ashore, to confer with the Captain, and to know whether we could there be
provided of sufficient lading for our ships or no. After that they were
landed, they were met by the chief Lords of the Land, saluting and
reuerencing each other after their Country manner, showing themselves very glad
of our coming, and said that we should there have sufficient freight for two
of our ships, which we were very glad to hear: afterward, bringing the
Vice Admiral under a place of shadow from the Sun, they remained together
in conference near 3. hours. In the afternoon the Vice Admiral returned to
the ships, bringing with him the King of Ternates his brother, with many
gentlemen desirous to see our ships: and afterward, toward the evening they
returned to the shore, at what time we honored them with five great shot,
whereof two were laden with bullettes, for so they had desired of the Admiral.

The seventh day in the morning, they brought us great store of fruit aboard
our ships, offering the same in change.

The 8. day in the morning, our vnder-Co^mittees were sent ashore, to speak to
the Governor of the land for an house to lay in our wares, which was presently
granted, and to that end one appointed us.

The 9. day all the Committees and Masters were aboard the Admiral, where they
deliberated and conferred together, what ships should be chosen to seek their
lading at some other place, for we understood that here we should not find
sufficient freight for all our four ships.

The same day about noone Carpenters were sent aland, to repair and make fit
the house which was appointed us for our wares.

The 10. day Justice was executed in our ship the Gelderland. The same day
store of fruits was brought aboard our ships, and we were very earnest to
hasten the repairing of the house.

To the Reader.
THe Gentle Reader may please to understand, that the four ships (namely the
Amsterdam, the Vtrecht, the Zealand, and the Gelderland, arrived the third day
of March before Amboyna, where, perceiving that they should not find sufficient
lading for all the four ships, after consultation had, it was determined to
separate the ships, and to send 2. of them to Banda, namely the Zealand,
whereof John Cornelissen was Master, and the Gelderland, whereof John Bruiin
was Master. The eleventh day of March therefore, these said two Ships set
sail from Amboyna, leaving the other two Ships behind them, the which
remained there two months after: where leaving them, we will proceed with the
navigations of the other two toward Banda, declaring unto you the rich and
speedy lading which they there found, and afterward return to speak of the
navigations of those other two, to wit, of the Amsterdam, whereof Claes Ianssen
Melknap was master, and of the Vtrecht, whereof John Martssen was Master, who
also departed from Amboyna the 8. day of May toward the Islands of Moluccas.
Thus much I thought good to note unto the favorable Reader, that he might the
better read and understand the order, and whole discourse of this Voyage made
by the 8. ships, which sailed from Amsterdam the 13. day of March 1598. to
the East Indies.

THe 11. day of March at afternoon we parted from 1599. March 11.
our consorts at Amboyna toward Banda, but the Zealand lay still, by reason
that she could not weigh her anchor: wherefore we were feign to stay until the
ship was lighted: for in that place is very bad anchoring, and we imagined
that the Cable was wound about some stone: wherefore that night we turned to
and fro to have his company.

The 12. day in the morning, the Zealand with our 1599. March. 12.
ship the Gelderland, set sail together, but for that it was calm weather,
we could not make any way.

The 13. day about noone the Zealand came aground in the straight of Ceru,
near an Island called Ielau, where a mighty current runs, and the weather
very calm, so that the stream drove her upon the bank, which lies before
this little Island: but God blessed her, sending a fine gale, whereby she
presently got out an Anchor, and so wound her off. Thus with great joy and
comfort we sailed forth together. At after noone, two Praus or Boats came
aboard us, telling us that there lay a Portingale ship under the Island of
Noesau: which Island lies in the mouth of the straight of Cera, toward the
east end of Amboyna? the people whereof are Canibals, or deuourers of man's
flesh.

The. 14. day very calm, with a fine gale toward the evening from the
north-west, we holding our course southeast toward Banda: The same evening we
had sight of the Island Banda, lying from us south-east. In the night time we
came by an Island called Loel Setton, lying on the North-west end of Banda about
some 5. Leages. This little Island is not inhabited, neither dare any man A
strange tale, if it be true.
presume to come into it (as our Pylot reported, that was in our Ship.) The
people are wonderfully afeard thereof: for they are of opinion, that it is the
habitation of Satan, in so much that when they approach near unto this Island
with their shipping, they know not how to make haste enough to pass from or by
it: which we might easily perceive by our Pylot, who took a Boate-hooke in his
hand, placing himself before in ye Ship, where he stood drawing and pulling
the hook toward him, imagining that thereby we should the sooner leave the
land behind us: but after he was weary with pulling, he laid the hook before
over the Ships side, not suffering us to take the hook away before we were
passed this little Island: and when it was a little calm and still weather,
this pretty fellow went whistling with his mouth up and down the Ship,
meaning therewith to call and entice the Devil: whereby we saw that these
people were very weak of belief.

The 15. day we saw two Islands more, lying Southwest of Banda some leage and a
half: the one is called Polleway, and the other Polleruyn, which lie some
half a league distant from each other. At Noone came aboard us one of the
Praus full of people, from the Island Polleruyn: they are very nimble and lusty
men: they were apparrelled with a garment made of Cotton cloth: their weapons
were Pikes, which they throw with their hands. In the evening we let fall our
Anchor in ye River of Banda, The 15. day we came into the River of Banda,
but the Zealand stayed yet behind, by reason ye weather was so calm and
still. The same evening came many Boats aboard us, telling us that there had
been 2. Portingale Ships laden there, and that it was three Months since they
departed thence: and they brought with them great plenty of Nutmegs, Maces, and
Cloves: and said there was lading plenty to freight our Ships.

The 16. day about noone, the Sabander came abord to speak with the
Vice Admiral, at which instant Melcknap let fall his Anchor by us, at 14. fadome
sandy ground.

The. 17. day an other Sabander came aboard us from a little Town called
Ortattan: we offered to bestow on him a present, but he refused it, saying he
would the next day come again aboard us.

The. 18. day the Sabander came again aboard us, Agreement made with the
Sabander for liber tie of trade. A Baer is 100. li. of their weight.
with whom it was agreed freely to buy and sell, and to trade with all
Merchants at that place, paying 4. Baers of Maces for Anchorage and Toll, or
Custom, of our goods: promising us a Warehouse to lay our Merchandise in.
Toward the evening he returned to land, and we honored him with the ten
pieces of ordinance.

The. 19. day out two Committes went a shore with Carpenters to mend and
repair our Warehouse.

The. 20. day the great Turk of Bantam came aboard us, to speak with our
Admiral, saying, we should have store of Merchandise there to lade our Ships.

The. 23. day we began first to discharge and carry some goods a shore, into
the Town Ortattan.

The. 24. day we began first to buy and sell.

The. 25. day the Vice Admiral sailed to the other side We began to buy and
sell.
of the Island, meaning there to hire an house, because more resort of people
was on that side then else where: for there all the ^auaners dwell, which bring
yearly Merchandise thither, and are great dealers.

The. 26. day we began to trim and Kauke our ship, that we might be ready as
now and then to take in lading.

The. 27. day they began to buy and sell on the other side of the Island, in a
little Town called Nera.

The. 28. day we began first to rummege our hold, to take in lading as it came
aboard, receiving the same day Our first sales, buyings, and time that we began
to lade.
store of Nutmegs and Maces.

The. 29. and 30. days we were busy on all hands in buying and selling.

The 31. day the other Ship took in her first lading, to wit, Nutmegs.

The. 1. 2. and 3. days of April we were all very busy, and April.
occupied about the sale of our wares and buying co^modites.

The. 4. day we received letters from our Admiral lying before Amboyna,
aduertising us that there was little lading to be had there, by reason that the
Inhabitants had great wars with the Portingals, who finding themselves grieved
with our being there, sought to have our trade forbidden at that place, and
that our people should not there come a shore: for the Portingals had a little
Castle on the west side of Amboyna, wherewith they greatly annoyed the people
of the Country.

The. 5. day they of Nera took our waights from us, forbidding us to use our
trade any longer, until we had agreed with the Gentlemen, for they sought and
demanded to have some benevolence or reward bestow upon them, whereupon we shut
up our doors.

This, 6. day of April, we received the first goods aboard The. 6. day of March
1599. the waightes were taken from us by those of Nera,
our Ship from Ortattan, namely Nutmegs.

The. 7. day the Commissarie of the Zealand went ashore at Nera, where he
agreed with the Gentlemen to bestow on them 60. li, of Mace: whereupon, the
waights were again delivered unto us, with license to buy and sell, as dear
and as good cheap as we could.

The. 8. day we labored on all hands to discharge and land our commodities.

The. 14. day we sent our long Boat manned with 14. men to Amboyna, to
understand how all things went with our Admiral.

The 26. day the said long Boat returned from our Admiral, declaring that he
had not aboard the Ship above 5. Last of Cloves: but that he hoped very shortly
to have more.

The. 28. and. 29. days, we were very busy on shore in buying and selling,
and we began as well as our other Ship did, to buy of the ^auaners, Maces,
Nutmegs, The price of Nutmegs Cloves and Mace.
and Cloves: we bought the Baer of Mace for 60. pieces of Ryalls of eight, the
Baer of Cloves for 45. Ryals of eight, and the Baer of Nutmegs for 6. Ryals of
8: a Baer is 100. li. of Bandas weight: every pound is five pound and a quarter
of Hollands weight. These prises lasted not long, for they sought to enhaunce
their Spices. This month we labored daily in discharging and landing our
merchandise, battering the same for Nutmegs, Cloves and Mace: our goods was in
great estemation, and good request, going so fast from us, that we could hardly
serve the buyers, and so continued all day from morning to the evening,
waighing with two pair of balances as fast as we could weigh, insomuch that
sometimes in one day we received a Last of goods, and some days two Last: which
we thus wayed and received by small waightes.

From the first to the last day of May, we continued May.
these affairs, daily sending aboard and lading our Ships.

The. 8. day a great mighty Snake of II. foot long came creeping in at the
hance of the Zealand: which the company killed and did eat.

The. 5. of June they of Labbetacken came with four June.
Galleyes before Nera, skirmishing with the inhabitants of the said town of
Nera, where some men were slain and many hurt. Nowbeit that these two towns
lie so near together, that a man may go between them in an hour space, or
there abouts: they are mortal enemies to each other, not sparing one the other
upon any opportunity or advantage that they can take, keeping very strong
watch in the woods, and on the shores, where they wait for their enemies. They
use shields about some four foot long, with very heavy Sables or
Curtelaxes, the haftes or handels whereof are covered with tin, and are very
cunning and expert in the use of them. They have some Calyuers and Baesses of
brass, which they use in their Galleyes, and for defense of their towns: when
they go into the field against their enemies, every man carries with him two
Darts, or Iauellings, made of very hard wood, some fadome and a half long: in
casting whereof they are so perfect and exact as may be, yea, they throw them
with such force, that they slay their enemies therewith: and having spent their
darts, they draw their Sables: wherewith, and with their shields, they stoutly
encounter each other pel mel. They have also Caliuers as is aforesaid, but not
many. They make great account of Salads and head pieces: for if they get one of
them on their heads, they think themselves well defended from all perrills.

The same day was our Vice Admiral on the strand amongst them in the skirmidge.

The. 17. day in the morning they of Nera, Lontoer, They of Nera make a road
with their galleys upon their enemies, and of their success.
and Pollerbay, went out with their Galleys to a little Island called Wayter,
where they slew certain of the people, whose heads they hunge about their
Galleys in despite of those of Labbetacke, wherewith they returned to Nera
with great pride and glory, carrying their naked swords openly through the
streets imbrewed with the blood of their enemies. Some of these their enemies
heads they buried, wrapping them first with Callicute cloth, before they put
them into the earth.

The. 29. day, the Zealand took in her last lading of Mases and Nutmegges: on
which day, our workmen labored mightily on the House, which our Admiral
caused to be built for such as were appointed to remain there.

The first day of July, we also of the Gelderland took July.
in our last and full lading.

The. 2. day of July our vice Admiral went a shore The Admiral takes his
leave of the Sabander and Gentlemen.
to take his leave of the Sabanders and Gentlemen, and to desire their help
and favors to those that should there remain of our people, which they
promised to accomplish: so after the Admiral had bestowed on them sundry
gifts and rewards, he took his leave, and at after noone set sail, but
within a while after was forced to cast his Anchor, for that he saw not well
how to get out.

The description of the Island of Banda, (which lies 4. degrees and a half
Southward of the Aequinoctiall line) of their religion, aparrell, disposition,
and inclination: together with their weapons, and order of wars, used by them
against their enemies.
THe Island Banda, lying some 24. leages The Island Banda is some so leagues in
compass.
from Amboyna (brings forth great plenty of Maces and Nutmegges) and
contains some 5. leages. The people being at wars continually among them
selves are severed into three factions: the chief Town whereof, is called
Nera.

Among all the Islands of Moluccas, this Island yields the greatest quantity
of Nutmegges, insomuch that the people of I aua, Malacca, China, and many other
neighboring Islands, do here use and exercise very large trade in buying
and selling, bringing hither their goods and marchandizes from all places:
where, after they have stayed two or three months, and made sale in barter, or
otherwise, they return home in their shypping: using at their first coming,
to buy a Woman to do their business, and dress their victualles: but when
they have finished their affairs, and are ready to depart thence, they cast
off the said Woman to go where she will, until the next year, that they come
thither again.

The most part of the Inhabitants are commonly Heathens, of Mahomets religion
or belief, wherein they have so great devotion, that they will not go the
watch, or return from it, before they have made and poured out their prayers
and orizons in their Temples, which in their speech they call Musquita, always
washing their feet before they enter into their said Musquitas, (for commonly
they have great pots filled with water before their said Musquitas) wherewith
they cleanse and wash them selves: which done, they go into ye Church or temple,
where pouring out their prayers with cryings and howlinges, yea so loud, that a
man may hear them very easily above 20. houses from their Musquitas,
pronouncing these words for the most part two or three times: Stofferolla,
Stofferolla, Ascehad an la, Ascehad an la, Ill la, Ascehad an la, Ill lol la,
Ill lol la, Machumed die rossulla. And as they pronounce the last word, they
strike their face with their hand: in which cerrimonie, they have great
devotion. They use also other prayers, which they utter not with voice, but
mumble them and iumble them softly to themselves in a very strange manner: such
prayers ended, and having spread a matte on the earth, they stand thereon,
casting their eyes twice or thrice up toward the heavens, and then falling on
their knees, they lay their heads three or four times on the ground. This
ceremony they use often, both in their Musquitas, in their houses, and also
openly abroad.

The Inhabitants meet often times together in their Musquitas, bringing their
victuals with them: where they make good cheer, and feast one another. They
use the like feastinges often times in the Woods, assembling sometimes 100.
persons in a company, to make good cheer, and to be merry together: of such
assemblies they make great account, taking great delight, pleasure, and
contentment therein: and commonly such meetinges are used, when they will
confer together of common wealth matters, and such like, of some weight or
moment.

They make sharp wars one against an other, yea the towns lying scant a
mile or leage distant from each other, are divided. This enimitie has
continued long and many years in this Island, for that they of Lambetack (a
town situated some little leage from Nera, the principallest town of the whole
Island) heretofore cut down, or overthrew certain trees within the circut or
liberties of Nera: from hence I say, such mortal hate, and bloody wars has
so long since taken such deep root in the hearts of those people, that never
since they could be reconciled, but without all mercy, or sparing one another,
or keeping of any quarter, upon all advantages and stratagems, they murder and
kill one an other like Dogs, as we in the time of our being there, have often
and sundry times seen. In the night they keep very strong watch as well in
the woods, as within their towns, calling and crying one to an other all the
night long, to thend they should not fall a sleep.

Now when they mean to make any attempt, or to take any enterprise in hand,
commonly they come with their Galleys, which they row so swistly as a Ship
can sail with a reasonable gale of wind. These Galleys do great service:
neither are they altogether ignorant in the use of their Baesses, whereof every
Gallie has two of brass.

They use also Hand-gunnes, or Caleeuers, in their wars, with sundry other
instruments and weapons, as Sheeldes, with a great Sable, called in their
language Padaug, which they handle and use in very good sort, teaching their
children while they are young, to fight and play at fence. They have also Pikes
commonly in their wars, made of very hard wood, which they cast very certainly
and near, as we our selves have often times seen. They have also an other
kind of weapon most common and usual among them, the end is of Iron, made like
unto a small harping-yron, wherein they put a stick, fastening thereunto a
little thin coard, which they throw into the bodies of their enemies when
they come near together, and draw it to them again with the string: when they
go against their enemies, they set a murrion or head piece upon their head,
whereof they have good store among them, wearing in them commonly a Parradice
bird in stead of a feather, thinking themselves sure and safe enough when they
have such an helmet on their head. Some of the Gentlemen have Corslets or
harness, wherein they think they can take no hurt of their enemies.

Now when they enterprise any attempt with their Galleys, they make a most
hideous noise with crying, calling, hooping, hallowing, playing on Drums, and
Basin, as if they were all out of their wits: the Gentlemen (standing aloft
in the Gallie with their weapons in their hands) make many crooked leapes,
springing this way and that way: he which can spring best, thinks himself the
trimmest fellow, and is not a little proud thereof. On the sides of the Galleys
are stages of Canes, made to pass even with the water, whereon the slaves sit
to row, or rather skoope and shouell the water, for in stead of Oars they use
shouels made of wood, 2. or 3. sitting together, shouell up the water, and
casting the shouel over their heads, pour out the water over the side of the
Gallie: in doing whereof, they make a wonderful noise with singing, after
their manner: others sitting by them, which play upon Drums, and sometimes upon
Basins also. They are very subtle and The disposition and inclination of the
people.
stout men in their wars, seeking and visiting their enemies with great
courage and assurance, as we saw our selves at what time they of Labbetacke
came with four Galleys before Nera, even right before our lodging, offering
skirmish most bravely to each other on the land, wherein some were slain and
some hurt. This spited the inhabitants of Nera, who in revenge, taking the
opportunity of The attempt of the people of Nera against their enemies of
Waygar.
the time rowed out the next morning with 5. Galleys to a little Island named
Waygar (the people whereof kept watch that night in Labbetacke (for they are
confederats, and hold with those of Labbetacke) where they put to the sword
most of the people that were in the said Island, bringing their heads from
thence with them to Nera, fastened one by another to a rope, for their greater
glory and triumph, which they hold with all their pomp of flags, streamers,
banners, pennons, and banderels, shooting very lustily with their Baesses that
lay in their Galleys. They also brought with them a woman prisoner, which the
Sabander of the Island kept for his slave. They also brought an other woman with
them, but they cut her in the middle in two pieces with a Sable or Curtlar, in
so much that they lived most beastly with the people, whereby we might see that
they were a most bloody and tyranicall nation. But not contented that they had
thus butcherly prayed upon their neighbors, and murdered them, 5. or 6. days
after in despite of their enemies, they went up and down the streets
bragging, with their weapons yet red with the blood of their enemies, for in
such bloody actions they take a marvelous pride, especially that they had so
well effected this bloody stratagem: yet not withstanding this their mortal
hatred, they buried the heads of their slain enemies very honorably, the
order whereof was thus. After that they were with their Galleys returned, the
heads being orderly placed on a staff, fastened thereunto (as before is said)
with a rope, they are brought before the house of the Sabander or Governor,
and laid upon a great stone under a Tree, to the view of all the people, that
they might see how valiantly they had behaved themselves against their common
enemies: whence (after they had so lien the space of an hour) they were taken,
and wrapped in Callicute, or cloth made of Cotton, and laid in a platter, and
so carried to the place of burial: and being put into the earth, they burnt
great store of franckensence over the graves, according to the manner and
custom of the Country.

Furthermore, when a man dies, the women that are Their ceremonies used over
the dead.
alyed in friendship or kindred, weeping and lamenting, call and cry to the dead
corpse very loud, thinking with such calling and mourning that the Course shall
again receive life: but seeing that it remains dead, without mourning they
prepare are a great Banquet, inuiting all their friends, and such as
accompaned the dead corpse to the funeral, which is carried upon men's
shoulders, in such sort as is commonly used in our Country, but that they lay
a white piece of Callikute over the dead: then is the corpse followed to the
Grave first by the men, and the women after: the dead being laid into the
earth, they burn Frankensence one whole day and night thereouer, put into a
vessel for that purpose: and under a penthouse, or such like, which is made
over the grave, burns a Lamp al night* the next day in the morning after the
burial, come thither all the common people, Gentlemen, and others, making
their prayers over the Grave: which manner of ceremony they keep and observe
for many days. These things we saw and beheld with our eyes, and demanded of
them why they used such kind of ceremonies: They answered interogatiuely,
demanding of us if we did not the like when any died in our Country. We
demanded further, what they prayed over the dead* Their answer was, that the
dead might not rise again: which they steadfastly believe, supposing that if
they should not so pray over the Grave of the dead, he would again revive:
such is their lamentable misbeliefe. In this Island are many old folk, for
their great years very lusty and well disposed: for we How the women employ
them selves in their houses
have often times seen a man there of 130. years old, yea and many others of
great years. They live by the profit of their fruits, The women do there the
work and labor, while the men walk idely up and down the streets: they
never walk abroad with their husbands, but keep at home at their work and
business, as drying of Nutmegs, and shaleing the same: wherein, and in other
such like, they employ their time.

Hereafter follows the way of the Island of Banda, which lies about some 24.
leages from Amboyna. No. 6.
The signification of certain Pictures or Counterfaites, according to the
letters A. B. C. etc. as follows. No. 7.
SIgnifiyng the order used by the Admiral in his landing, to make agreement
with them for trade, where he was very gladly and friendly entertained with
great honor and reverence, bringing him into a Tent made of Sails, placed
under the trees, and fastened from one tree to an other: under which they sat.



Ternati his brother.











Hollanders with their Trumpets, appointed now and then to sound, wherein these
Nobles and the rest, took great pleasure and delight, woondring greatly
thereat.

A description how those of Banda use to make them selves terrible unto their
enemies, when they join in fight. No. 8.
COmmonly when the people of Banda enterprise any matter of warfare, they have
great assembles and meetinges: the reason, whereof is, the Island having 5. or
6. Towns, and (as I said before) being severed into three parts or factions,
deadly hate and malice each other.

Nera is the principallest Town of the Island, Labbetacke, Combeer, and Waeyer,
Towns of the same Island, join together in mortal hatred against the Nerans.
On the other part, Lontoor, lying on the other side of Nera, with two other
Islands lying some leage from Banda, called Polleuine, and Poelway) hold and
take part with the Nerans. Now when any of these confederats pretend any
attempt against those of Labbetacke they come with their Galleys to Nera, where
the people of Banda provide a Banquet, even against the instant that the
execution of their attempt is appointed, inuiting al their people thereunto,
and holding the same openly in the streets: and sitting side by side, there is
brought and laid before them a piece of a leaf of the Bonanas plant, for or
in stead of a trencher, with a piece of their bread (which they call Sago:)
then is set before every one a mess of sodden Rise in a dish or porrenger made
of the leaf of a tree, and therein a bit of flesh, whereunto they fall with
good appetite, like ravening beasts, casting the Rise with their fingers into
their mouths: in the mean season, and while they sit thus at their victuals,
commonly the Gentlemen with their weapons in their hands, come into the
streets where this good cheer is kept, dancing and fighting (as they dance)
one with an other, while their drums and basins, standing one against an
other, make them music: after the sound whereof they dance, and play at
fence, until they are weary: then are their weapons taken from them, and they
led thence to their houses, in whose place an other dauncer succeeds: and
thus continues as long as they are at their banquet.

No. 9.
The Galleys of Banda used by them in their wars, (called in their language
Caracora) are light and swift, neither are they inexpert to row them in very
good order. They make them commonly weak of timber, cut out of one piece for
the inner part of the Gallie: the outside is made of planckes, lyned upon the
joints, and bound together with roopes: and commonly the same roopes are
fastened thereunto with the lyninges, every lyning is some faddome one from
another: in the finishing whereof, the lyninges are so placed, that they lie
level upon every plancke, which are pinned in the inside of the Gallie on
both sides of the lyninges, for the strengthening and binding together of the
work: then they Rauke her with a certain substance made of the inner bark
or peeling of the Indian Nut-tree (which they call Clappus) after the same has
bin beaten with an hammer until it be like unto Towe. Pitch they hane none,
but instead thereof, they daube all the seames, chinkes, and joints, with
Lyme, tempered with some other substance, which lies so fast that the water
cannot wash it away.

A. Is a slave of Banda (which they call Leschar) coming from the Garden with
fruit, and wine of Palm, which they themselves drink.

B. A poor Woman coming from the wood with all kind of fruits, which the
carries to the Market to sell, having the same in a Mat made of Canes, which
they carry behind them, fastened for their ease to a hood on their heads,
hanging down at their backs.

No. 10.
Is the description of our House in Nera, wherein was our Warehouse to buy and
sell in, for money or in barter, showing how the people came to the same,
bringing their wares to be waighed. Their waightes are just and true, called
Katti in their language. One pound of their waightes makes five pound and a
quarter of our pounds. The Beam is made of wood which we received with the
waightes of the Sabander or Governor: after which weight, all others that they
use are made.

No. 11.
Goeytyen, of whom we bought much wares, and received great friendship.



Banda, as she goes in the streets with a woman slave (commonly) waighting on
her, which carries a Hatte for her. Mistress to keep her from Sun burning
when she puts off her tire.

No. 12.
Is a Map, showing the manner of their Foote-ball play, spurning the Ball one
to the other standing round, and one man in the middle: one of them smites the
Ball first to his fellow as high as a man is able to throw it. It is made of
Spanish Reed, interlaced one with another, of the fashion of a Sylera mundi,
being a great shame and reproach to him that misseth and hitteth not the Ball
with his foot when it comes to him, for then the rest and others standing by
mock him, and laugh him to scorn. This play is greatly esteemed among them:
sometimes they will spring and leap up, and hit the Ball as it reboundeth: and
sometimes turn them selves round about as the Ball reboundeth, and yet smite
the Ball to his fellow before it shall come to the ground.

No. 13.
When the Inhabitants of Banda go out in Warfare, they carry a Shield in one
hand and a Sabel in the other, which they call Padaug: and commonly they have
also a Spear or Pick, which they cast at their enemies: and after the same is
so cast, they use their Sables, which they hold with their hand behind the
Shield until they have discharged them selves of the Pick.

The. 5. day of July in the morning, we set sail and Anno. 1599 the 5. day of
July we set sail from Banda.
departed from Banda, discharging all our Ordinance for our farewell: which
they liked very well. About noone we were past Banda, and directed our course
North-west toward Amboyna, with a fair gale.

The. 4. day in the morning, we saw the Island Noeseleau, the Inhabitants
whereof are Canibals, or eaters of man's flesh: from thence we sailed to the
straight of Cera, but by reason of the storm that we then had, we were fallen
too low, missing the right channel or entrance, wherefore we turned up and
down, thinking to pass at the Western gappe of Amboyna, but the wind came
contrary, with very foul weather, raining, lightning, and thundering, so that
we were forced to take in our Sails.

The 6. day we shot off two pieces before the Western gap of Amboyna, to thend
that the Master and Committes of the Zealand should come a board to consult
together what was to be done, and it was thought best to set our course
toward Iaua, for we could not reach Amboyna, where our Admiral lay. We
sailed for the most part South, and South and by West.

The 7. day we had a fine gale from the South-east, holding our course all the
forenoone South South west: and at after noone we haled in our Sheates, and
held our course West South west, the weather fair.

The 8. and 9. days, we held our course West South west: at after noone we
took the height, and found 4. degrees and an half Southward of the line
Aequinoctial. the weather being very fair.

The 10. day we continued our course West South west: we had sight of the Island
Cebesse, and perceived that it was parted in 7. or 8. little parts or
portions, with a great neck or corner lying out 6. or 7. leages in length,
wherefore we durst not sail forwards that night.

The 11. day in the morning, we held our course West South west and South west
toward the Island Bouton. And at noone taking the height, found 6. degrees
about the midst of Bouton.

The 12. day in the morning we sailed beyond the Island Combayna. At noone we
took in our sails, and lay still until the last quarter before day, that we
might be before the straight of Celebes by day light, for in that place it is
narrow.

The 13. day in the evening we passed the straight of Celebes, and found that
there ran a mighty stream or current.

The 14. day in the morning it was calm, and at after noone it began to blow a
little gale.

The 15. and 16. days, we made a great way, holding our course most West, and
South west and by South: and sometimes West and by North. At after noone we saw
two small Islands, the one lying from us South South east, and the other South
South west.

The 17. day we took the height, finding 7. degrees lacking one quarter. At
noone we had sight of the East end of Madura, lying South west off us. We
held our course along the coast of Madura West, and West and by South.

The 18. day in the evening we were hard by the town of Arosbay, lying on the
West end of Madura: in which place, we lost our men outwardes bound, as is
before declared.

The 19. day we were against the land of Iuban and Sydaye, holding our course
West and by North: and at after noone North west, toward the high land of
Iapan.

The 20. day we saw the high land of Iapan. The same evening dyed one of our
Mariners, called Renier Reyneirszen vander Schellingh.

The 21. day we drove in the calm under the high land of Iapan.

The 25. day we held our course directly, for we knew not where we were.
Toward the evening we saw the Islands of Iaketra. And the same night we let
fall our Anchors.

The 26. day in the morning we set sail again, and had sight of the east
corner of Iaketra. And in the after noone we Anchored before Iaketra.

The 27. day our Boat rowed a shore to buy fresh victuals.

The 28. and 29. days we were busy to make provision of victualles, as Rice,
Hens, Coquers, and such like. The same day the King sent a young Steer to
our Vice Admiral.

The. 30. day our Boat went again a shore to buy Rice, for there were two
Ships come thither with Rice, which came in good season for us.

The 1. 2. and 3. days of August, we spent in buying August. 1599.
of fresh victualles. In the evening came to us from Bantam a long Boat from
the Ships of Zealand, the long Bark and the Sun, showing us that they had
lain at Bantam 4. months and an half, and now waighted for the next season or
harvest.

The 4. day the Admiral, with the Merchants, went a shore to speak with the
King. In the evening the Boat returned toward Bantam.

The. 5. day we made further provision of fresh victuals on the shore.

The. 6. day we sailed from Iaketra to the fresh River to take in water. About
noone we arrived, and let fall our Anchors before the said fresh River,
beginning the same day, and so continuing all night to bring water a board,
making all the haste we could to have in our water.

The. 8. day about noone, we sailed toward Bantam, casting our Anchors the
same night about some. 4. leages from Bantam.

The. 9. day in the morning, about. 10. of the clock we set sail again: in
the evening we let fall our Anchors before Bantam, where presently the Masters
and Marchantes of the aforesaid Bark, and of the Sun, came aboard us,
declaring that there were 36. of their men dead, so that they were hardly able
to sail their Ship.

The. 10. day our Comisares or Marchantes, went a shore to buy some Purselayne,
Dyshes and other things.

The. 14. day about noone, the Governor of Bantam came aboard us, accompanied
with some. 400. men, viewing our Ship, and offering great friendship, requiring
our Vice Admiral to go with him a land.

The 19. day we departed from Bantam, meeting with a sharp gust of wind and
rain, which continued some hour.

The 20. day in the morning we were past ye coast of Iaua, shaping our course
the most part of the day South-west. The same day our alowance of water was
again lessened: to wit, every day one Ran and a Mutskin of Arake: a Wine which
the wild people of the country use themselves to drink, making it with Rice,
and is a very strong Wine in taste.

The 22. day about noone it rained, thundered, and lightened, with so great a
wind, that we were forced to take in all our sails. This storm continued two
hours.

The 23. day it was very fair weather: we shaped our course as before, the
wind East South-east. About noone the Carpenter of our Ship died, called Peter
Lauwelssen of Harllem, which was the third man that died in our return
homewardes.

The 24. day in the night foul weather, the wind South South-east, keeping our
course most part West, and Southwest and by North, bearing only our
mayne-sayles.

The 25. 26. 27. 28. and 29. days, ill sailing weather, the wind South
South-east, in so much that it was as much as we could do to bear our
mayne-sayles.

The 31. day the weather began to be somewhat fairer, so that we might put out
our top-sayles.

The first day of September we took the height, and were September.
in 15. degrees lacking 3. quarters: at noone we sent our Boat aboard the
Zealand to fetch the Master and Pilot, to thend we might confer together what
course were best to be kept: their conclusion was to sail West South-west,
until we should come to 20. degrees, for the storm drove us far to the
Southward. We held our course West south-west, with a fine gale from the South
south east.

The 4. day in the night we had the wynd East south east, with fair weather,
shaping our course most South west, and by south, and haled in our sheats.

The 8. day we were in twenty degrees, holding our course west south west, the
wind being East south east with a fine gale: in the morning we cast a man over
board, who died of the bloody flixe, his name was Daniell Kogher of Hamborgh.
In the evening we shaped our course one point lower, running for the most part
west and by south, with a fine gale.

The 10 day we were in 21. degrees 14. minutes, keepeing our course for the
most part west and by south, the wind being South east.

The 14. day the wind was contrary, blowing from the South west with ill
weather, so that we were glad to take in our sails.

The 15. day in the morning, we sailed west north west, with variable winds,
and as we judged, we were under Tropico Capricorno

The 20. day we were in 26. degrees lacking 15. minutes, shaping our course
west and by south, with still weather, being 150. leagues from Saint Lawrence
as we gessed.

The 24. day the wind was contrary, blowing very hard from the North west, and
raynie weather.

The 26. day we had fairer weather, shaping our course most West and by south:
the same day we were in the height of 29. degrees 15 munites.

The 30. day we had 28. degrees and an half, holding our course North west,
and by west, the wind westerly: and we judged our selves to be 100. leagues off
Cape de Roman.

The first day of October the wind came fair toward the October.
evening, holding our course West and by south.

The 2. day the wind continued good, holding our course most West and by south:
the wind South east, with very fair weather.

The 5. day we were in 30. degrees and an half, shaping our course westerly,
the wind blowing from the South.

The 12. day we had the wind contrary, from the North north-west, with a great
tempest, so that we were forced to take in our topsailes, and to bear only
our maine sails.

The 14. day we were in 34. degrees and 20. minutes, keeping our course West
south-west, with ill weather, the wind blowing from the North west: here we saw
many Birds.

The 19. day a contrary wind out of the South-west, and West south west, with a
great gale.

The 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. and 25. days the weather was very still and calm,
with a South-east wind, keeping our course for the most part West and by North.

The 29. day it blew a mighty storm out of the North, and North-west, so that
we took in our sails: the same night it lightened and thundered mightily.

The 30. day we were in 33. degrees and an half, gessing that we were 150.
leagues off the Cape: and (as we judged) West, and West and by North from us:
toward noone the weather cleared up. We shaped our course most Northwest, and
by West, the wind being South-west, and West South-west.

The first day of November we continued our course November.
North-west, and North west and by North, the wind being Westerly and West
south west.

The 2. day still weather, but toward the evening blew a fine gale East
north-east, sailing most West and West and by North.

The 3. day continued a fair East and East north-east wind, holding our course
for the most part West, with a fine gale and clear weather, but toward the
Evening grew a great Storm, so that we were glad to take in our sails,
shaping our course West, the wind being North-east. In the night the wind came
again about to the West South-west, with a stout gale.

The 4. day we fardelt up our Maine-sayle, holding our course most North-west,
and North-west and by North, with a stout gale.

The 5. day we took a Turtle Dove, which came flying into our Ship: whereby we
presumed that we could not be far from land.

The 10. day at noone tide we saw the land of Ethiopia, in the height of 32.
degrees and a half, namely the neck land of Lahnera. Toward the evening the
wind came about to the Eastward: our course was South and by West, and South
South-west. In the night time our sprit sail was rent from the Yard.

The 11. day we shaped our crurse most part South South-west, with a contrary
wind from the East and East South-east, with dark weather. At this place was
great store of fish, whereof we caught some store. The same night was a rousing
storm from the East, and East South-east: we kept our course most South-west,
and South-west and by South.

The 12. day it continued very blustering weather. In the night we took the
height, and found 35. degrees, as we gessed 15. leagues from the land. The same
evening we sailed south-west, making hard way, the wind being at south-east.

The 13. day in the morning, the Zealand was as far behind us that we could
hardly discern her from our stern: whereupon we took in our Maine-sayle,
making way with our fore-sayle, keeping our course most South-west, with dark
weather, and a very ill wind blowing from the south east. And in the morning
after we had brook our fast, we shaped our course West south-west. At noone we
took the height, and found 36. degrees, and sailed West, judging the Cape de
Anguillos to be some 5. leages off us, West and by North.

The 15. day we had 37. degrees and 15. minutes, holding our course west south
west, the wind being west north-west.

The 16. day about none, the wind came about to the north-east: we sailed West
north west, with very fair weather: at after noone we had store of rain, with
lightning, and contrary and changable winds. In the evening it cleared
somewhat up, yet it blew very hard from the North east: we shaped our course
most West North-west, sailing only with our forecourse: about which time, many
of our people began to fall sick, in so much that at this present 22, men lay
sick. At noone we shaped our course Northwest, the wind being East South-east,
with a fine gale.

The 18. day we were in 37 degrees 15. minutes: our course north-west, gessing
the Cape Anguillos to lie northerly of us.

The 20. day we were in 34 degres and 22. minutes, holding our course North
west, the wind South east and at East, with a fine gale and clear weather. The
Cape de bona Esperance lying East and East by South off us some 28. leagues.

The 21. day, and so to the last day of this month, the wind continued
South-east, shaping our course most of the time North-west, making good way,
and having very fair weather.

The 30. day we were in 23 degrees and 15. minutes: at noone we passed the
Tropique of Capricorn. holding our course yet North west the wind being South
east.

The first day of December we had 22 degrees 20 minutes, the same day we had the
Sun again right over our heads. December


The 2. day we had 20. degrees and an half, continuing our course North west,
the wind South east: the same day we mounted and cleared our Ordnance.

The 6. day we were in 17. degrees and 8. minutes, and continued our course
North west.

The 7. day in the morning after breakfast, we had sight of the Island of S.
Helena, lying off us West North west: toward the evening we took in our
sails, letting the Ships drive, for we were not able to reach the Island this
day.

The 8. day about noone, we let fall our Anchors in the Road, at 30. fadome,
some two shot length from the shore: our Master, and under Comissarie,
presently rowed a shore to look for fresh Water. And the same evening, they
brought a board Goats and Hogs, which were caught on the land.

The 9. day we carried all our sick people to the shore, and afterward filled
fresh water: some of our people running up into the land to seek after
Cattle, brought some a board our Ships with them, which made our Mariners
very glad: but we found no Orenges, whereof we had most need, for those
that were trubled with the scuruie disease.

The 14. day out people raunging about to seek for Goats and Swyne, (as God
would) came to a very fair pleasant valley of Orange trees: whereof they
plucked some 4000. and brought them aboard, which meruelously refreshed and
cheered us all.

The 31. day we brought out sick again a board the Ships.

The first day of January, we departed from S. Helena Anno. 1600 First day of
January.
homewards, shapeing our course most, North-west, with a very fine gale blowing
from the South-east.

The 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. and 8. days we continued our course North west, with
fair and clear weather, the wind being South-east, and East South-east. Here
we saw many flying Fishes.

The 14. day we began to have small shewers of rain, the wind at South-east:
we continued our course North-west, making fair way.

The 18. day at noone, we crossed the Aequinoctiall line, with a fine
South-east gale. This day we saw plenty of Fish swimming called Dorados,
whereof we took some store.

The 22. day marvelous calm, with rain, lightning, and thunder.

The 23. 24. 25. 26. and 27. days, still weather, with some small showers, and
little gales of wind, now and then: the wind very mutable: in the mean while,
we made good cheer with Dorados, where of we caught plenty

The eight and twenty day continued still weather, until the first quarter in
the night, the wind coming to the East South-east, with a full gale, we held
out course North west.

The thirteth day in the morning the Moon has eclipsed, being in 5. degrees in
the foot of the Cross, we held our course North-west, the wind being at
North North-east.

The first day of February to the 5. day, we continued our February.
course West north-west, the wind being North and by East, with a fine gale in
our top sails: at what time we began first to have sight of the North Pole,
which we had not seen in long time before.

The 6. day at noone we had 8. degrees, we sailed North-west, the wind blowing
North north-east with a fine gale, running close by the wind: toward the
evening we held our course North north west, the wind being East and by North.

The 7. day we were in 9. degrees houlding our course North west, and North
west and by north, with a North east wind.

The 10. day we were in 12. degrees, continuing our course North west and by
north, the wind North east.

The 13. day we had 15. degrees, judging the I Will de Mayo 150. leagues east off
us.

The 14. day in the morning, the wind came again to the South east, and East
South east, but very calm weather, our course most Northerly.

The 22. day. 23. degrees and an half, judging our selves then under Tropuo
Cancri, holding our course North northwest.

The 25. day we saw great store of Saragassa, driving on the Seas, with a great
gale out of the North east: our course was North North west.

The 26. day, in 28. degrees, holding our course North North east, with a fine
gale. We judged the I Will of Palm 300. leagues East off us.

The 11. day of March 41. degrees, our course North east March.
and by East. In the evening the wind contrary, blowing from the North east,
with much rain and wind.

The 12. day the wind continued very high, so that we were faigne to take in
our top Sails, and the weather so dark, that we could not take the height.

The 13. day we took in our Sails, letting our Ships lie at hull, for it blew
a mighty storm from North east.

The 14. day some two hours before day, the tempest began to cease: we put
out our Sails, shaping our course North and by East, being in 42. degrees.

The 15. day blew again a very hard storm from the East South-east, so that
we sailed only with our courses, sailing North-east and by East.

The 16. day the storm continued, so that we were faigne to strike our top
Mastes, and run with our courses Southerly. The same day our alowance of wine
was lessened and made but two Mutskins for a mess.

The 24. day we were in 48. degrees, our course East North-east. The same
evening we sounded, but found no ground. We judged that we were too far
about the West.

The 25. day we were in 48. degrees and an half, shaping our course Easterly,
to the end we might reach the length of the Channel: for we were shot too far
Westward: the wind scant, in the evening we cast our Lead, but found no ground.

The 29. day mistie weather, so that the Zealand discharged a piece, supposing
they had seen land, but it was a bank of mist.

The 30. day in the evening, we had sight of England, supposing that we were
some 6. leagues from land. The same night blew a mighty storm out of the
North North-west. In the second watch of the night we saw two Ships, but we
spoke not with them.

The 31. day in the after noone, we turned Westward, the storm continuing very
hard. The same night we saw an other sail, but spoke not with them.

The second day of April the Zealand made a sign to us April.
to send our Boat aboard them, about some conference and counsel that was to
be taken, for their Bolt-sprite was broken, so that they could put no Sail
thereunto. At after noone the wind was again contrary.

The 3. day it blew a very stout gale from the North-east. Our alowance of
Oil was deminished to two Mutskins a day.

The 6. day we spoke with two Frenchmen: These were the first Ships we had
spoken with: the wind being Northeast.

The 10. day we spoke with a small Ship that came from Calis Malis, laden with
Wine, whereof we had two Pipes. The same was bound for Callice in France. The
Ship and Master were of Euckhusen, the Masters name was John Frantslen, but
the company were all Frenchmen.

The 11. day we passed by the Kaskets. The same morning Anno 1600 the 11. day
of April.
the small Ship aforesaid, parted from us.

The 12. day in the night, we lost the company of the Zealand by reason of the
mist.

The 13. day we heard nothing of her. In the night we ran Northward, taking in
our top-sayles, to thend we might come together agaiue.

The 14. day in the morning we were near to Fair Lee, having sight of a
Flecte of 30. Sail, but could understand nothing of the Zealand. About noone
we saw Dover Clifts, having a fine South west wind a long the coast of France.
The same night we left Dover behind us.

The 15. day in the morning we saw Callice and Dunckerk, where we met with a
Northerly wind, and at noone turned toward Dover Road: at what time the
Zealand came again to us, and the same evening we let fall our Anchors in
Dover Road.

The 16. day in the morning, the Boat rowed to the shore to buy some fresh
victualies, the Wind North North west, with a very hard gale.

The 20 day came a Post to us from London with Letters, which he delivered,
with other news to our Vice Admiral

Afterward, with great joy to all the Marchantes and Owners whom* it
concerns, were arrived (God be thanked) in safety in the Texel: where the
Nutmegs were unladen, and put into bags, and sent to Amsterdam, to the great
admiration and comfort of the people, where they were laid up in Warr-houses:
which with the other Spices, yielded a most pleasant sweet smell to all the
neighbors dwelling there aboutes. And it is most true, that these Nutmeg^es
were so fresh, that Dyle was pressed out of them: the like whereof were never
brought from Lysborne.

Having thus finished, and declared the ariuall of these two Ships in the
Texel, we will return to the other two, namely the Amsterdam, and the Vtrecht:
which (after they had lain two months at Amboyna, before Tuban, and could not
there find sufficient store of lading) sailed thence the 8. day of May toward
the Islands of Moluccas.
THe 13. day of March Anno 1599. March,
the two Ships lying before Tuban, there arrived three Ships of war from Iaua,
full of Soldiers, which were sent for by the Tubans, to aid them against the
Portingals, and to take a Castle, which they there held, committing daily
great outrage and mischief against those of Tuban, because we were suffered to
lie there. These Iauaners were received with great joy and triumph: who (after
their landing) fell to making of Boothes and Cottages, running over all the
land, clyming the Coquar trees, and gathering the fruits, to the great damage
and dissyking of all the people of Amboyna.

The 20. day some of us were a shore to kill foul with our Pieces, where we
killed green Pidgions as great as Duckes.

The 25. day John Cornelissen of Edam, died: who was the first man that was
buried there on the land.

The 29. day was a letter sent to the Vice Admiral lying at Banda.

The 30. day some lading in small quantetie, was brought aboard, for that they
could not agree on the prises.

The last day, the Admiral went ashore to agree about the price of wares, but
effected nothing.

The first day of April, Isack Henricksen of Rees died, and April.
was buried on the land.

The 2. day Gisbrecht Wolfertsen died also, and was buried on the land.

The 10. day the price of Cloves was agreed, viz. for 35. The price of Cloves.
pieces of Ryals of eight the Baer: the Baer waying 550 li.

The 12. day was agreement made for the price of head pieces, viz. 250. li. of
Cloves for every head piece of Murrion.

The 13. day we took in some Cloves.

The 19. day the long Boat returned from the Vice Admiral at Banda, (which is
some 28. leagues from Tuban) from whom we understood, that the said
Vice Admiral had taken into his Ship, some 30. Last of Nutmegs, and Maces, and
it was supposed, that at this time, he had in his full lading (for the Boat
had been 5. days on the way) and that the other Ship of Melcknap began to lade
also.

The 20. day the Portingales attempted to take a little Town in the Island of
Amboyna, not effecting any thing, but that they killed two men: for the people
of the Island assembling, made head against them in the aid of the town: in
which company 4. of our Mariners went in the Boat with the King of Ternates
his Brother, which seemed strange unto them, and as a mirracle, that the
Hollanders would take their parts in their wars, as enemies to the King of
Spain and Portingall. May.


The 2. day of May John Martsen, a Wallon and our Trumpeter, died, and was
buried on the land.

The 8. day we bartered for some small quantity of Cloves, of which commodity
was no great store in this Island to be had, but wonderful plenty of Rice,
insomuch that for a looking glass of a blancke, or of a penny of sterling
money, we had fifteen or sixteen pound of Rice, and so accordingly after the
same rate for all other wares. In the end, we set sail and departed thence
toward the Island Moluccas carrying with us a Gentleman belonging to the King,
who gave himself out to be the Kings brother, but it was not so. This
gentleman told us that the Kings father of Amboyna had in his life time 70.
married Wives, besides his other concubines, and that the King now living, had
40. married wives, besides his other women or concubines.

The 14. day, died Albert Petersen, in John Martsens ship.

The 16. day, in the night we crossed the Line, having sight the next morning
of the Island Ternate and Tidore.

The 22. day toward the evening we let fall our anchors Anno 1599. The 22. of
May.
under the Island of Ternate, and rode at fifteen fathom.

The 25. day, dyed one Jacob a Flemming, and was buried on the land.

The 28. day, the King of Ternate came aboard us, but The King of Ternate
comes aboard.
not into our ships, desiring our Admiral to come into his gallie, which the
Admiral did, between whom was long conference by interpreters, so that we
supposed he would have come into our ships, but he would by no means:
excusing himself, first that the ladder had no convenient covering, although
there was a piece of woollen cloth cast over it, then it was too late for him,
and it was now time for him to go to his prayers, for said he, the Sun is
now very low.

The 29. day, the King came the second time to us In what triumphant manner the
King came the second time.
with 32. galleys; marvelously well trimmed and appointed with some hundred
bases of brass, rowing in triumphant manner thrice about ourships, with great
noise of singing, drums and copper basins. In the mean while, we made our
selves ready with our ordenance, muskets, pikes, and other artillery, placing
some of our men aloft, and other some beneath, to make resistance if need had
been, and that if they had offered us any violence: but in the end there came
none near our ships, but only the Kings galley, who sent into our ship one of
his Captains to confer with our Admiral by an interpreter, but the King
himself would not come aboorde.

Toward the evening, the King returned with two galleys only, the one wherein
the King was not, had a boat, or one of their Praus, and rowing a good way
from our ships, the King in the mean while boorded us with his gallie, and
being come into our ship, desired (after salutations, and some other speeches
with our Admiral) that our Gunner might make a shot at the Praw or boat,
which the other gallie had brought, and was now a drift a good way from the
said gallie, to see how near he could shoot with the great piece, which was
accordingly accomplished, and a very fair shot made, to the great contentment
and liking of the King, perceiving well that if the shot had been made at one
of the great galleys, it would have pierced and run through the same.

The 29. day, toward the evening, Raynard Reinerdson dyed, and was the same
night buried on the land.

The 30. day, the King came again unto us with one The King comes secretly
aboard unknown to us.
gallie in very simple sort, to see how we would behave our selves, giving us
to understand that the King would come aboorde us, who was in a little boat in
person, to wed by the said gallie unknown to us, supposing that he would come
afterward, and coming close to our ship, went into the gallie, demanding for
many strange things, too long to here repeated.

The last day, was a spirit in John Martsens Cabin about midnight, making such
a rumbling and iumbling, that all that were in the Cabin ran out in great fear.

The 2. day of June, all our principal officers were June.
with the King on land, with certain presents which they delivered unto him,
reporting at their return, that Presents carried to the King.
there were some store of Cloves to be had, and that the next day, some should
be sent aboard us, to see what commodities we had, and to make price with us,
to the end we might trucke with them for some of theirs.

The 3. day, some of the people accordingly came aboard us to see our wares,
but we could not agree upon any barter, but for ready money they offered their
baer for 120. pieces of Royalls of 8. but we would not make no offer upon so
high a price.

The 10. day our diet was shortened, to wit, every day once flesh or fish, and
the other three meals Ryce.

The 11. day, our Merchants went a shore, thinking to speak with the King,
but could not, by reason that it was their Sabbath day.

The 12. day, our people went again a shore, carrying with them some
merchandise: the same evening the King came aboard us, but not into our ship,
but desired to have a gilded Musket, which was freely given him: but as we A
gilded Musket given to the King.
understood, his answer was, it should be paid for in his tole or custom,
rated at two baers and an half, taking the tenth penny of his tole.

The 18. day, we received the first Cloves aboorde, The first Cloves brought
aboard, and 600. viols of glass, sold for one baer of Cloves. Three Orkins is
a penny sterling. Iulie. The price of Cloves.
namely some two baers, and every day more or less, for which, we bartered for
the most part viols of glass of an orkin the piece, and had in trucke one baer
of Cloves for 600. of those viols.

The last day, our diet was again diminished of flesh and fish, and were
appointed weekly but twice flesh, and as often fish.

The 9. day, the price was agreed of Cloves for money, viz. the baer for 54.
pieces of Royals of 8. the baer waying 620. pound.

The 11. day, the people of Ternate made an attempt upon a village in the Isle
of Tydore, from whence they brought swords and shieldes (as trophes) whereon
hung the ears of their slain enemies, which they presented unto their King,
with a woman of Portugal, whom they afterward sold for a slave.

The 24. day, they of Ternate made another sallie upon the said Island of
Tydore, returning with five heads and some prisoners, whereof they killed one
as he came on land, and cut off the head of another, who was a stranger, and
came in trade of merchandise to Tydore.

The 25. day, the King of Ternate came aboard our ship, The King comes aboard
the Admiral.
viewing the same in every corner, and desired our Admiral that he would leave
some of his people there with him, and so going up and down the ship, all that
he saw liked him well, and coming into the Cooke-roome took up the bellows,
which he desired to be given him, and as he stood, blew with the bellows into
his mouth as if he had not been well in his wits.

The 28. day, the King came again aboard, so earnestly viewing the same in all
parts and places, as if he had meant to buie the ship, but his chief intent was
to have some of our people to abide with him, but there were none that would
harken unto his persuasions.

The 29. day, came a Praw or small boat from Banda, signifying unto us, that
our two ships there, were almost laden, yet we could not understand the
certainty of them, for it was six weeks since they came from Banda.

The 4. of August we received some further portion of August.
lading aboard our ship, preparing our selves to depart from this place.

The 5. day, the Admiral went a shore to speak with the King, who lay in his
galley near the shore.

The 6. day, the Admiral went again to the land with store of Merchandise to
bestow on the King.

The 12. day, the Merchants with all their merchandise came aboard, to the end
we might depart thence homeward.

The 13. day, the King came aboorde us, where he barganed in trucke for 250.
baers of Cloves, to be delivered the next growth or harvest.

The 14. 15. and 16. days, the King and Admiral agreed that five men and a
boy should remain there, with whom he left great store of commodities, and
some portion of money, to buy and ingrosse all the Cloves against the coming
of the next ships, their names that were so appointed to remain there, were
Franck Verdoes, The names of those that were left in the Island of Ternate for
trade.
cosen german to the Skoute or Sheriff, William Verdoes of Amsterdam, Dirick
Floritssen of Harlam, Jacob Lambertsson of Amsterdam, John Iansson of Grol,
Cornelis Adriausson of Leyden, and the boy, Hendrick Iansson of Amsterdam.

A description of the Isle of Ternate, lying 28. leagues from Banda.
IN the Island Ternate, is small store of victuals to be had, and is without
any kind of cattle, except some very few Goats, and some small store of
Hens, and but little fish. There grows no Rice, neither any kind of grain
to make bread, but they make the same of trees, which being cut down and
cloven, they take an hammer made of a thick reed, wherewith they beat the
same cloven wood, which yields a certain dust, like unto sawe-dust (which
they call in their language Sagge) where of they make their bread, which is
very white, and the loves four square, of the breadth or bigness of the palm
of a man's hand, wherewith they use their principal trade, for whatsoever they
buy or sell, is all with this bread. There are plenty of Coquars, and Bonanas
trees, with some Lemon and Orange trees, but merueilous quantity of Cloves, so
that it is very poor and scant of victuals. The people are kind and good of
nature, but of beggarly condition, even the King himself and all his
gentlemen, as well as the common sort: nevertheless, they hate theeuerie, in
so much that not a thief can there escape the rope. It happened while we were
there, that a boy of 11. or 12. years old had stolen a leaf or two of
Tabaco, wherewith he was taken, and led through the streets with his hands
bound behind him, after whom followed all the boys of the town mocking him,
and crying in their language a thief, a thief. They are great enemies of the
Portingals, for right over against this Island, lies another Island called
Tydore, planted with Portingals, they hold no quarter with each other, but
kill one another like dogs, as it happened at our being there, the 20. day of
Iulie, 1599. at what time they of Ternate went out to the Island Tidore, where
they on a sudden set upon a village, slew three of the inhabitance, and brought
away 43. prisoners: among whom was a young man of 21. years old, son to the
King of Tydores brother, who (after he had been brought to the Kings presence,
and some speeches used between them) was lead out of the palace with a rope
about his neck unto the sea side, where he was commanded to wash his hands:
the young man stooping so to do, one that stood bebinde him, smote him on the
back with his Sable that he fell to the ground, and presently another man
lent him another blow, wherewith his liver and lungs hung out of his body.
Having in this dispitefull sort showed their merciles hearts, the body was
towed into the sea, at the stern of a Praw or small boat, and so suffered to
drive away. Their chief weapons are pikes of reeds, which they cast at their
enemies with their hands merueilous right and strongly: they use also great
broad swords and long shieldes, which seem to be made of some boorde, four
foot long. Some of them use Muskets and hand-guns, but in very small number,
for of themselves they have none, but such as they get from the Portugales. At
such times as the Sun or Moon are eclipsed, they make great sorrow and
lamentation, supposing that their King (or some other of their chief men)
shall dye (as we our selves saw the sixth of August, about eight of the clock
in the evening, the Moon then being eclypsed) the people kept such a howling,
praying, crying, and mourning in most hideous wise, with smiting upon drums
and copper pans, as was most strange to behold. Wherefore we demanded of
them the cause why they cried and mourned in such sort, they answered us, that
the Moon was eclipsed, and that therefore their King, or some of his blood
should dye. The eclipse passed, and seeing that the King nor any of his blood
is dead, they make great joy: and the next day hold as it were a procession:
those that go foremost carry in their hands Purcelane dishes, followed with
others bearing Pikes, Halberds, Muskets and Gunnes, after whom three Lamps are
carried, made after the manner as they painte in our country a bunsh of grapes
of the land of Promise, then follows a boy appareled in kingly apparel,
before whom is borne a gilded fan, then follow many women, as well young as
old finely decked after their manner: all this is done for joy that no man is
dead. We told them that there were men in our country, that know, and can
tell long before when any eclipse shall be of the Sun or Moon, which they
thought to be impossible, and wondered thereat, as if it were a miracle.

A declaration of the Cards and figures of the Island of Ternate hereafter
following, according to the numbers and letters.
No. 14.
IS the Island of Ternate, where we arrived the 22. day of May, 1599. with two
ships.

A. Is the Island Tidore inhabited with Portugales, between whom is mortal
enimitie.

B. Is an Island not inhabited, lying between both the other Islands, but
nearest unto Tidore.

C. Is a River where we fetched our fresh water out of a Well, in a village.

D. Is the Kings Galley or Karkol, trimmed most bravely, and coming from
Ternate with 31. other galleys in company, with a most terrible noise of
singing, crying, and playing on drums and copper basins, rowing their galleys
with wooden shouels in stead of oars, two and two sitting together,
flourishing or casting the same (as they row) over their heads, and so power
out the water over the side of the galley, rowing in this sort about our ships.

E. The place where they row into, one before another, and there lie side by
side.

No. 15.
IS the town of Gammelamme, lying in the Island Ternate, where we traded, the
howsen whereof are made of a thick Reed or Cane, cloven and interlaced one in
the other.

A. Is our two ships coming under sail before the Town.

B. Is a galley that came aboorde us, which after they had demanded of whence
we were, and received our answer, bad us in very hearty manner welcome, and
were marvelous glad of our coming thither.

C. Is a galley appointed for the wars.

D. Is a stake, whereupon stood the head of one of their enemies, which they
had fastened with a rope, put into the mouth of the head, and coming out under
the chinne.

E. Is their market place, where they keep their markets under a tree, to
shadow them from the heat of the Sun.

F. Is their Temple or Musquita.

G. Is the Kings Court or Palace, built of stone.

H. Is a little house standing before the Palace, where an iron cast piece of
ordenance lies, the which Captain Drake, by force of ill weather was
compelled to cast ouerboorde, and afterward taken up by these people.

I. Is the house which the King gave unto those of our nation, which we left
behind us.

K. Is the house wherein we used our trade.

L. Is a Cloister, called S. Paul, built in times past by the Portugales.

M. Is a stone house built by the Portugales.

N. Is the house wherein the Kings Interpreter dwells, and is of Chyna,
speaking good Portugale.

O. Is a Tower or Steeple whereon lay a Brass piece.

P. Is an uninhabited Island lying between Ternate and Tydore.

Q. Is the Island Tydore, kept by Portugales, who are great enemies to those of
Ternate.

R. The hole or gappe where all the ships must pass, for all along by the
town, it is full of rocks and shoels, at which rocks, the people with their
boats catch fish when the water is low, which they find in little plashes or
puddles of water between the rocks.

S. Is a boat of pleasure.

T. Is their manner of fishing for great fish: first, they catch some small
fish with a little casting net, then setting a long cane right an end in the
foreparte of the boat, in the end whereof they make a hoale, through which is
put a long rope or cord, and in the end of the cord is fastened a
fishehooke, with a leaf over it, that thereby the line may drine with the
wind, then one that sits behind casts out his small fish toward the
hook, which they keep hanging close above the water, whereby they deceive the
great fish, and so with the book take them. Also they use certain baskets
which they lay in the water, so that they sink to the ground, and having so
line one tide, they look over the boats side, to see if any fish be in the
baskets or not, wherein if they perceive any fish, one of them tumbles over
boorde, and diuing into the water, brings up the basket, and so take out the
fish. Here might be objected by some, how it might be possible that they
should see and discern 15. 16. or 17. fathom deep whether there were any
fish in the baskets or not, let this sufflie for answer, that the water is
there so clear, that a man may out of the ship see the anchors very plainly
as they lie in the water, and easily behold multitudes of fishes swimming, yea
in the very bottom of the sea, as manifestly as if it were but a foot deep.

V. Is a Merchants ship of Ternate, which goes from one Island to another,
laden with Rice, Sagge and spices.

No. 16.
THe King of Ternate going to the Temple to offer sacrifice, before whom goes
a young boy with a sword on his shoulder, carrying a book in the other hand,
then follow a certain number of the Kings men of war, after whom comes
one bearing a Franckensence-pot or vessel, and is followed by the King, over
whose head is borne a Tyresol or canopie, then come others of his soldiers or
men of war, with their Ensign displayed, being now come before the Musquita
or Temple, they wash their hands and feet (to which end certain water-pots
full of fair water are prepared) that done, they enter into their said
Musquites, where they spread a white cloth on the ground, and falling on
their knees, knitting their hands together, do often lay their faces on the
ground, mumbling certain words or prayers to themselves. In the said
Musquites is placed a pulpit, hanged with a white cloth: and in steed of a
clock, there hangs a kind of Drum, whereupon they smite with a great
stricke. They have also a bell hanging in their Musquita, but without a
clapper, whereon they smite at such time as any rumor or other stir is in
hand, at what time every man, rich and poor, must come out of his house, some
with Pikes, some with Sables and shieldes, some with Muskets, and some with
gunnes: but of these are not many so armed. To conclude, their order is such,
that it would make a man laugh to see them.

No. 17.
THe King of Ternate his galley, having stages on either side made of Spanish
reeds or canes, manned with slaves that row, sitting two and two together,
and so made, that the outer parts are passed even with the water, and that some
may sit within the galley and row, having a sheaffe of arrows lying by them.
In steed of oars they use shouels, casting the water from them along by their
sides. Aloft sit certain men knocking upon Drums and basins, and is
appointed with seven brass Bases, with certain pikes standing right an end,
which are much longer than any used in our Countries. Also, on the galley is
placed a bedstead wrought all over and gilded, whereon was hanged the breast
and back parts of the Kings armor, with his helmet, all covered with red
velvet, and on the bed was spread a very fine wrought couerlet, whereon
sometimes the King sits, and sometimes lies, always shaking his leg as
if he had the Palsy, and having one by him with a fan, fanning over his
face. The King was a very thick and corpulent man, well set, having a great
head, and all his members correspondent: he is a mighty Prince, having under
his obedience threescore and ten Islands, and is meruailouslie honored and
feared of all his subjects.

No. 18.
ARe fencers of the Moluckish Islands, called in their language Bakeleyers,
wearing an headpeece, beautified with a Paradise bird instead of a feather.
When they meet to fight or fence one with another, they stand always upon one
leg, thereby being the read^er to leap and spring forward or backward. Now
when the one leapeth in toward the other, the same springs a good way
backwarde, always resting himself but upon one foot, and thus they spring
forward and backward with such agillitie and nimblenes, that it is a thing very
pleasant to behold, Their apparel is a Pytigen, made of Callicute cloth, with
breeches of the same, or some other stuff of silk, cut upon very fair white,
and made after the fashion of the Spanish breech.

The women of Moluccas going abroad, and having their heads covered from the
Sun with Callicute cloth their garments are made of Callicute, drawn out
with sundry and diverse colors. When they fetch their water, they use a very
thick cane, some fathom and an half long, wherein they put or lade the water
with a dish, and so carry it home on their shoulders.

The 19. day, we set sail from Ternade, to shorten our voyage.

The 21. day, we crossed the Line, near unto an Island called Macha, and is
one of the Islands of Molucca.

The 22. day, was our last ordenarie flesh day, remaining only but for two or
three seethings, insomuch as all our victuals was spent, except a little oil
and dry bread which was full of worms, and some small store of Rice and
water, and were allowed but one Mutskin of wine daily.

The 30. day, we had sight of the Isle of Oba, sailing to the Northwarde
thereof, the same is a very great Island.

The 6. day, we came to the west end of Oba, to the Anno 1599. the 6. of
September.
westwarde whereof lie so many Islands, that it is hardly possible to tell
them, and full of sholes, which greatly amassed us. These Islands lie some two
leagues and an half, to the west of the Line.

The 10. day, a chief waying some seven pound, was The price of an Hollands
cheese aboard the ship.
sold for 12. Gilderns 10. Styuers, which is five and twenty shilliugs
sterling.

The 11. day, we let fall our anchors under an Island, lying to the westwarde
of Oba, where many other Islands are, but we knew not their names, for in the
Pylots Cards were found but two Islands in the place where all these Islands
are, this place is excellent good for anchoredge, where we had 16. 17. 18. 19.
20. 21. 22. and 23. fathom, fair sandy ground, the next morning we set
sail again.

The 12. day, we let fall our anchors again under the same Island, by reason
that John Martsson sailed from our company, to seek way between the Islands,
but the next day came again to us, for the Admiral discharged a piece to the
end he should return.

The 13. day, John Martsson returned to us, and then we sailed thence together,
but toward noone we cast out our anchors again, for that John Martsson could
not keep us company, by reason of a great tempest that then blew, but toward
the evening he came to us, and then sailed thence together, but could not go
far, by reason of the shoels, wherefore we cast out our anchors again, and
rode at 9. 10. 12. and 15. fathom.

The 14. day, we hoysed up our sails, and went thence, but at afternoon let
fall our anchors again, at what time came a boat or Praw from the land unto
us, telling us that the Island was called Bankore, and the other next was
Sabobe, and warning us of the great number of shoels in that place, and
moreover showed us that to shun them, we must sail to the aforesaid Island
Sabobe, where we might provide our selves of water and other fresh victuals.
Their King as he said, dwelled behind Sabobe, in an Island called Mithare:
these Islands lie in two degrees southward the Line.

The 16. day, we sailed thence toward the Islands The 16. day, we were
compassed with Islands.
from whence we came, at afternoon we let fall our anchors again, and within
an hour after set sail again, and in the evening cast out our anchors
again, then some of our Sailors went up to the maine top Mast, from whence
they discried, and told some thirty Islands lying round about us, within the
compass of fourteen or fifteen leagues, but by no means we could get out
of them.

The 17. day in the morning, we hoysed up sails again with a South Southeast
wind, shaping our course South Southwest, and Southwest and by South to
seawards, whereby (with Gods help and providence) we got clear of the
Islands, sailing through a very narrow channel or gappe, leaving the neck of
the land that lay out, on our star boorde side, where we found a little narrow
place to get out, for on our larboorde lay three little Islands, where many
shoels were to the southward, and as far as we could discern, we might see a
fire, and at afternoon we saw another great fire in the open Seaes some four
leagues from land, which we left on our starboord, having a very fine gale of
wind.

The 18. day in the morning, we saw again high land, which stretched out a
great length.

The 22. day, we came near to this aforesaid land, meaning to sail about that
way to the Eastward, but for want of wind could not: in conclusion, we agreed
to shape our course along the coast Eastward, and to go about to the Westward,
and so put forth our foresailes.

The 23. day, John Martsson discharged a piece, being very near aground,
having but two fathom and a half water, and was feign to towe the ship with
their boat from the shoels (the weather being very clear and fair, as God
would) and afterward came aboard us, declaring that he had seen six boats,
but not spoken with any of them, neither could he learn what Island that the
same was, our Pylots supposed it to be Boere.

The same night John Martsson came agrounde, but wound himself off with a bow
anchor, but lost a planke of his ship, some fathom and an half long, howbeit,
the ship (God be praised) remained tight, it was an uncertain or uneven
ground: for having cast his lead, and finding 40. fathom, before they could
cast out the lead again, the ship sat fast aground, but being now off, we ran
East Southeast of that place.

The 25. day, John Martssons folk were a shore, where They go ashore at
Tabocke.
they spoke with some of the people, who told them that the land was called
Taboke, and that there was plenty of Rice, Goats, and Hens. This is a very
great Land, for by all judgment, we had sailed some 30. leagues along the
coast thereof, and now at last were come where was abundance of sholes, and yet
could see no end of the land, insomuch that we were constrained to return the
same way we came. The land lies so bending with corners, that it cannot be
well described, except it were explained corner by corner. The first day of
October 1599.


The first day of October was allowed a kan of Wine to every mess, for toye
that we had reached the East end of Tabocke, where we found many other small
Islands.

The same night John Martsson drove a ground on the East end of the said
Island, the weather being very calm, the ship sat before aground, having
behind twenty fathom water, whereupon they cast out their bow anchor behind
at the gallerie, and so in winding her off, she swayed to the sholeward, but
wound her off again with the Capsten, and pulling up their anchor, they found
the same to be broken, for the shanke was in two pieces, but they got them up
into their ship, by reason that the Buy rope was twisted about the Cable.

The 2. 3. and 4. days we lay at hull, about some two degrees Southward of the
Line, by reason of extreme wind, and tempestious weather, the Sun being for
the most part over our heads.

The 5. day, Solomon Dirikson of Harlyng dyed, who was a quarter Master, and
before had been the Stowers mate.

The 6. day, our last Rice was spent, in so much that the Cook dressed us no
more victuals, our feeding was then bread and water, with one Mutskin of Wine,
and A Mutskin is the eight part of a quarte.
one of Honey every day to a mess.

The 9. day, our allowance of bread was increased, so that we had some five
pound of bread allowed for five days, this day we made an end of our fish.

The 10. day, was a kanne of Wine allowed to every mess, because there was
nothing else to eat but dry bread.

The 11. day, William Hermanson Klock of Alckmer, was appointed quarter Master
in place of Solomon Dirickson, so that he was both quarter Master and Corporal.

The 12. day, Wouter Egbertsson of Breewolt was appointed Gunner.

The 16. day, our allowance was appointed to be five pounds and one half of
bread for seven days.

The 17. day, we saw two Ioncken or boats, but spoke not with them, being
then at the East end of Botton, and having five degrees and six minutes: now
we knew where we were, for outward bound toward Amboyna, we were by the same
Island, and had five degrees.

To the East of this Island Botton, lie three other Islands, from whence many
corners and shoels stretch to seaward toward the South-east. In sailing toward
Amboyna, the said three Islands must be left on the starboord, and so running
forward out by Botton, there lie other two Islands to the Northward, which must
be left on the larboorde, sailing forth between both, this is to be well
observed, by reason of the sholes in that place stretching from those three
Islands.

The 20. day, we passed through the straight, between Anno (...) the 20. of
October
Selebes and the Soles, where two Islands lie right in the midst of the gap,
between which we ran, they lie a good league one from the other: it seemed
that there was a fire in one of them, we might see boats pass from one Island
to another. This gappe lies from Bantam some 30. leagues, and as we returned
homewards, we left many Islands on our starboorde, which lie in 5. degrees and
50. minutes.

The 21. day, we had 5. degrees and 50. minutes to the Southward of Selebes,
sailing through the straight. This land stretches for the most part West and
by North, and East and by South, here we made an end of our last smoked
flesh, and every mess had a kan of Wine.

The 22. day, we passed by the Island Selebes, which stretches West and by
North, and East and by South: from the straight it is some 20. leagues long
Westward, with low ground lying before it, and thereon very hye and hilly
ground, as it were doubled or indented, the South end whereof lies in 5.
degrees and 50. minutes, and as a man passes from the West end forward in
coming toward it, sailing some eight or ten leagues along by it, there
appears a round high hill like unto a cock of haie in the fields, seeming
to lie far off from the rest outward: but approaching near thereunto, it
lies plainly far within the Land, the ground before it being very low,
and stretching at least two degrees through the Line on the North side, so that
it is about some eight degrees long South and North.

The 23. day, we sailed over a shallow of six fathom deep, wending West and
by South, in five degrees and six and fifty minutes, about some eyghteene
leagues from the Land, the wind being Southeast, at what time we had sight of
a small Island from our Maine top, lying to the Northwarde of us.

The same evening we sailed over the shallowe, at 12. 13. 14. and 15. fathomes,
which continued three glasses, wending West, and West and by North.

The 24. day at noone, we had a dish of Rice and a Kan of Wine, being the first
day since the 30. of August, that we sailed without view of Land.

The 25. day, half the night time, we sailed again over the shallowes, the
wind West, and West and by North, at some twenty fathomes depth, and as we
gessed we were about 90. leagues from the west end of Selebes.

The 29. day, we saw the Land of* Madura, as we guessed, where we had been
imprisoned, having forty and fifty fathom with claye ground.

The last day we were again allowed a dish of Rice, Anno 1599. the 29. of
October we saw Mednra
seeing every day Land, but could not have any certain knowledge what Land it
was.

The 2 day of November, we had sight of the length of the maine Land of Madura,
to the Northwards whereof lies the Island Laybock, some 18. leagues distant. We
ran between them, having sight of land every day.

The 5. day we left the Island Carman Iava behind us, lying some 20. leagues
from Laybock, most East and West a sunder, finding sometimes 30. 35. 40. 45.
and 50. fathom depth, all good clay ground.

The 9. day we passed by another Island, where eight or ten trees stand in the
water a little from the Island, lying some 20. leagues from Karmen Iava, most
West and by North, and East and by South from each other, where we sailed about
by the North.

The 13. day, we came before Saketra, where we made some provision of Rice, and
were (God be thanked) delivered of our former penury and hunger: here we
heard that the Vizadmirall was departed from Bantam, about three months past.

The 16. day, we sailed from Saketra, anchoring the same day before the fresh
River, where we furnished our selves with water, the Chinans brought unto us
Aracca and Rice in most plentiful sort, which we bought for some five pence
the pound.

The 17. day, we sailed thence toward Bantam, where two Dutch ships lay. The
18. day we spoke with them, they were the Long bark, and the Sun, which had
line eight months and ten days before Bantam, (and were departed from
thence in the night time, not refreshing themselves) where they had so nearly
bartered all; that in the end (for want of money) they trucked also the
whistles from about their necks, and yet had not effected any great matter,
for both the ships had but 60. last of Pepper and Cloves together, and farther
were weakened 55. men.

The 19. day we arrived before Bantam, where we We arrived before Bantam. The
price of Pepper, Maces, and Cloves.
were much made of: John Martsson having taken in his first Pepper but the
fifth of this month, and bought the same by the bag, every bag waying
fifty pound, for the which they paid four pieces of Ryals of 8. and an
half, but at the last four Ryals of 8. for a bag. The Maces and Cloves are
bought by the Baer, waying 500 pound, the Maces for 80. and the Cloves for 65.
pieces of Ryals of 8.

The 15. of January 1600, our Admiral went a shore to the Magistrates of
Bantam, bestowing on them sundry presents and gifts, and dealt with them
about farther trade, wherein they agreed very well, with thanks and due
salutations on both parts, which done, he took his leave after he had given
the boat unto the Gouerner of Bantam, wherein he came ashore, hanged with
Skarlet cloth, and appointed with two murdering pieces, but those people have
small knowledge how to use the same.

The 20. day we brought all our Merchants aboorde, having almost sold all
their wares.

The 21. day, one of our Merchants went again ashore, with a small parcel of
Velvet, and returned Velvet.
with twenty bags of Pepper, made of the said Velvet.

The description of Bantam.
THE manners and policy used in Bantam are very strange, for when a man dies,
leaving behind him any goods, whether he have children or none, the King
seazeth upon the widow, children, and goods, appropriating all to himself:
making the Mother his slave: and if a man of China desire to buy the Mother or
daughter, he sells them, and if afterward they chance to have children
between them, it happens to her again as it did after her first husbands
death, if the King do understand of any goods left by the deceased: such as
have any wealth, have no other means to prevent this mischief, but only to
marry their children while they are young, whereby they may inherit their
Parents goods: wherefore they are married when they are but twelve or thirteen
years of age and younger, if they be of very rich Parents: and (which is more
strange) sometimes such rich children have two or three Wives, according as
they abound in wealth, and this is done to prevent the King of the possessions
of their goods after they are dead.

In their trade and traffike, they are marvelous theeuish, both the people of
China and lava, in so much that they let not to help themselves with false
waights, falsefying and mingling their Pepper with black sand and small
stones, to make it weigh heavy: they are also false of their word or promise,
and given to manslaughter: for if it so chance that two fight, and the one
kills the other, he which lives (knowing that he must dye) will stab and
kill every one where he can or may, sparing netther man, woman, nor child, no
not the children sucking the Mothers breast, so long until he be overcome by
force and multitude of people: then is he brought before the Governor, who
pronounces sentence upon him, and after such judgment given, he is thrust
into the breast with a dagger, that he falls to the ground: but it chances
seldom that such an one is apprehended alsue, for commonly they are slain
before they be taken.

The 21. day of January, we set sail from Bantam toward Holland, but at
afternoon we lay still by reason of the calm, yet toward the evening we
hoysed up our sails again.

The 26. day, we were put to our allowance, to wit, every day six Mutskins of
Atack, at which time we were not passed the Islands of Iava.

The 28. day, we were in the height of 8. degrees, the evening still and calm,
the wind Westerlie.

The 3. day of February, we had the wind at Southwest, so that we sailed
Southeast, and South Southeast with a fine gale.

The 4. day of February we were in the height of 10. degrees, and could not
sail higher then South and by East, and South Southeast, with a reasonable
gale, the wind being Westerlie.

The 12. day, our chief Barber (master Christopher an Easterling) dyed.

The 14. day, the Sun passed over our heads in the height of 13. degrees and
12. minutes.

The 16. day, our Corporal John Peerson, being an Englishman borne, dyed in
John Martssons ship.

The 26. day we were in the height of 19. degrees with a fine gale, shaping our
course for the most part West Southwest with a full gale.

The 27. day a flying fish flew into the Amsterdam at the hause.

The 3. day of March we were in the height of 23. degrees 50. minutes, we
sailed with a forewinde according to our hearts desire.

The 16. day we were in the height of 35. degrees, holding our course West and
by North.

The 18. day was a Mutskin of Aracks bestowed on the most of the chief
officers, to the number of sixteen persons, after the second watch according
to the Admirals direction, the wind being then Northerly, so that we could not
sail nearer than West Northwest.

The 19. day the common Mariners made request to have one Mutskin of Arack in
the night, as the officers had, which was denied, except they would content
themselves with one less of their allowance in the day, and drink the same in
the night, so that the officers had sour Mutskins, and the rest three at every
meal, the wind as before.

The 22. day in the night, we had the wind again at Southest with a fine
gale, setting out course Northwest and West Northwest.

The 23. day John Jacob son of Medenblick dyed in the Amsterdam.

The 26. day we had the wind contrary at West Northwest, which blew very
hard.

The 29. day in the night the wind came fair again from the North, and then
we kept our course West and by North, and West Northwest: all these days the
wind was so variable, as it might possible be in our own country, and (as
the Pilots said) we were two hundred leagues Estwards of Capo de Bonna
Esperance.

The first day of April we turned by the wind, having a storm from the West.

The second day (being Easter day) we were allowed to our Easter eggs a dish
of small beans, with a dish of dried fish, and a kan of Sack, in liew of
Arack.

The third day John Ianson of Ossenbrugh Cooper in the ship of John Martssen
dyed.

The 6. day of the said month, the wind was again fair at Northest: but it
lasted not long, for here the winds are marvelous variable, with very many
durable storms.

The 13. day we had sight of land about some 70. leagues Estward of the Cape,
in the height of 34. degrees and an half, and found ground at 80. fathomes, or
thereabouts, being yet as we gessed five leagues from the land, we turned
again by the wind, being West Southwest with a storm.

The 17. day we had the wind fair again at Est Southest, the Pilots held a
parley, and judged the Capo de bonna Esperance to be from us 68. leagues
Northwest and by West.

The 19. day the wind was contrary from the West.

The 22. day we were in the height of 37. degrees and 40. minutes, we wended
to pass the Cape, and then for the most part we sailed North Northwest, and
Northwest and by North.

The 24. day we saw land again: wherefore we put someward, yet we could not
sail higher than South and by West.

The 25. day we had again fair weather, the wind first South; afterward
Southest, and so Esterly.

The 27. day, we were in the height of 34. degrees and 40. minutes Westward of
the Cape, and (as the Pilots said) 16. leagues from the land, the wind as
before.

The first day of May we had a fine gale from the South, and were in 32.
degrees.

The 9. day of the said month we were in the height of 22. degrees five
minutes, we saw every day Trombus or Reeds driving, which (as men report)
drive near about the Cape, the wind Northwest.

The sixteenth day about noone we had sight of the Island of S. Helena,
wherewith we were all greatly comforted.

The 17. day in the morning we had sight of a Carrack near unto the land,
being the Admiral of the Portugals Fleet, sailing into the road of S.
Helena, where lay at anchor three other Carracks, whereby we were forced to
put into the old Road, which is the first valley that you come unto after you
are passed the Northwest corner, or neck of the land, and the Road where the
Carracks lay is the third valley beyond the said neck of the land, so that we
lay within Sakar or Minion shot of each other: we sent unto them four men to
parley with them, but I cannot write what communication passed. The same
evening came another Carrack making toward the Road, sailing about the
Northwest neck hard under the shore, insomuch that she came so near unto us,
that they haled us, and demanded of whence we were: and understanding that we
were Hollanders, seeking to refresh our selves in that place, (refusing the
land) they cast about, and directed their course Northwest to seaward.

The 18. day four of our men went up into the land at S. Helena, it is a very
high hilly land, beautified and enriched with very fair and pleasant valleys,
with great abundance of Goats, and some store of Swine: we meant to provide
our selves there of fresh water, but the Portugales would not suffer us, so
that we were without hope to make any provision of water at this place: for
they had ordained a strong watch on the shore, which was the only cause that
we could not here refresh our selves.

The 21. being A scention day, we sailed thence (with God his help)
homewards, and being under sail, we descried another Carrack making toward
the Road, which was the sixth Carrack that we had now seen, we directed our
course Northwest and by West.

Furthermore, touching the Island of S. Helena, the same is a very fruitful and
an healthsome land, with such incredible multitude of fish in the Road, that
it may seem a thing hardly to be believed, the most part Mackerell, and some
other small fishes, as Breames, and other sorts which have great eyes like unto
Haddocks, but their bodies more flat.

The 25. of the same month we were in thirteen degrees, with a Northest
wind, but it lasted not long before it turned again to the Southest, and so
it continued for the most part after we were past the Cape.

The 30. day in the morning we had sight of the Island called Ascension, which
lies eight degrees Southward the Line, and the same evening we cast our
anchors near to the shore thereof.

The same night we set men ashore to take view of the place, and the next
morning we sent more of our people to search and view all places, but found no
fresh water, no not so much as one draft. This Island is full of stony rocks
and holes, like unto the sinders of Sea-coales which are thoroughly burnt: we
saw some Swine also in this Island, not without great marvel how they could
there live, for there is neither tree, leaf, nor grass, and that much more
is, a man is not able to describe the badnes and barrennes of the ground: but a
man may there with endgets hill plenty of Seamewes, although some store of
people remained there for a time. Also we took there some Tortesses, whereof
we brought four aboard our ships, which were so great, that some of them were
esteemed to weigh four hundred pound. There was also some reasonable store of
fish to be taken.

The last day of May in the evening we wayed our anchors, hoysed our sails,
and departed from the Island Ascension, with God his help, sailing homewards
with a fine gale from the Southest, shaping our course Northwest and by West.

In the end, after great pains, travail, and sickness, which we specially
suffered for want of fresh water, these two ships arrived in the Texell, and
afterward being discharged of our lading, we came with great comfort to
Amsterdam, to the incredible joy of the owners and Merchants (as may well be
thought) seeing now all the eight ships were with great profit safely returned
to to their wished home, which had been sent out the first day of March 1598.
in company to the Islands of the East Indes. The Almighty God be blessed and
praised therefore, who with his mighty hand governed and brought us home
through the fearful waves, and raging gulfes of the Sea.

Some words of the Malish speech, which language is used throughout the East
Indies, as French is in our Country, wherewith a man may travel over all the
Land. The Portugals speech is apt and profitable in these Islands, for there
are many Interpreters which speak Portugal.
ALtogether Samoanga
Ask it Minta
Ashamed Malon
Any thing Bacabaren
Alas. Saya
BKing it again Combaly
a Bull Carboo
a Brother Addollaley
a Beard Tganga
a Boane Backy
Better Parma
Blood Darna
to let Blood Bewangdarner
Books Kytab
to Buy Bilby
Baked or burnt stones Batta
Black Ita
Bags Corni
a Boy Catsion
to Burn Baccar
a Bat that flies Lavo
a Bird Borron
Beastinesse Cheehoo
a Billet Cayo
a Boat Prau
the Belly Penot
Behold Doduer
a Borer Alforees.
COme hither Maree
to cut off Pang
a Crab Horra
Charge the piece Sombo bedyl
Cloves Syncke
a Cyuet Cat Gatto d'algalia
Calamus Dirimguo
Copper Tambagle
Custom or use Esteedat
Choose Damare
a Cap Nasse
a Child Buda
a Curtesan or wooer Cemoeda
a Cast piece Bedyl
the Cough Capello.
DEath Mattu
two Days past Balmarys d'aula
Ducks Bebe
a Dog Hanghee
I Desire it not Tyeda mau
to Demand Betaugia
to Dye Bantaren
Dishes Pyennig
the Day. Arys.
Eggs Teloor
to Eat Makan
Eyes Martye
Ears Talynga
Eye brows Alys
Early. Pagy
FOlly Bengo
Found Botonuum
Fair Upon
Fear Tacat
Fish Ican
Farther off Bapa
Friendship Pondarra
Forehead Batock
Fingers Iaryiary
Forget Lampa
to Fight Baccalayo
Flesh Lalyer
to Forgive Ampo
a Foot Goumo
my Father Beta babpa
a Friend Maety pooty
Fire. Apy.
GVnpowder Ooby
a Goat Camby
God be with you Tyngal
Guts Perot
Go Pegy
Go we Mary
Given Berny
Green Ise
Great Basaer
Glass Lora
Good Bayck
not Good Tyeda bayck
Gold Mas
Good morrow Tabea
Go a way Tachghy
to Gain Menang
Galingal Lancuas
Ginger Alia
Green herbs. Dyngin.
He Itowen
the Hye priest Cadda
How much Batapa
Here Chyny
How do you Bygimana
the Heart Aly
to Help Toulong
Hair of the head Ramboret
the Hand Tanga
the Head Kokodang
Heavy Brat
How sell you that Barappeitu
a Hen Ayam
an House Roema
I have it not Tyetada
I Have it Ada
a Hog or swine Saby
Hard wax. Caiu Lacca.
I Thank you Teymacache
I am sick Byte secata
I Manyte
Ink Mangsy
Is there Beeff
an Interpretor Iorbissa
It is much Soeda
Is out Pacasuyra.
Keep good watch. Tage
a Knife. Pieson
to Kill. Benue
Keep silence. Dyem
Know. Kiunal
a King. Rutgee.
Leave Sone
Lead Tyma
a Lamp Palyta
Light Arynga
to Live Lagaua
Lie down Baryng
Leave off Ganga
Let it alone Iangemast
Lyme Capyer
a Lord Queay
a Looking glass Sarmi
a Lawnce or pike Tomba
Lips Lambbyder
to Leave freely Lepas
to leese Ilan
Little. Selykit.
Merciful Caruguanler
a Merchant Fetor
to Make Bretoun
to Morrow Ysouck
a Man Orang
Money Sarfy
to Marry Barwin
a Master or Lord Queay
the Manner of the Country Negry
Mustard seed Saiani
Many or much. Banghe.
NO Tieda
the Night Malam
News Yrotdon
Near Gyla
a Naiel or spike Koko
a Needle Naroen
Nutmegs Palla
Nuttes Calappey
the Neck. Goulon.
Oil Nuagia
Ours Quitabota
Old Tua
an Olephant Catgha
an Ore Saby
Out of that Padyni
Out of the way. Lalau.
Poor Backeyen
a Pearcer or borer Alforces
to Pay Chyny
Put up Passai
Pens Calamp
Paper Cartas
Pepper Lada
Pearle-mother Neffa
Pinnes Caluenetten
long Pompions Iacca
a Pillow. Bantel.
RIce Bras
to Reach Dusta
to Rise up Bangs
Rye Balacca
a Ring Chynsyn
a Rope. Taly.
SMall Citghel
Synamon Caiumains
Sad Chynta
Skarlet Faccalata miera
to Swear Sempa
Sweet Manys
the Sabbath day Ionmahet
Salute Baesart
Sister Addeparapas
the Shoulders Baon
Salt Matary
Silver Peca
Sick Sabyt
I am sick Byte secata
Should Tehylacca
Steel Negle
a Sword Padang
Sheeres Goethieng
a Shield Salwacke
Strike Pockul
a Smith Goeda
Small Kytchyl
Spicerie Oberbedyl
Strong Cras
a Ship Capal
Silver Salacha
a Stone Batu
Salt Garram
to Sell Iou wall
a Sweetcheart Nay moeda
a Swine or hog Saby.
TAke away Ambel
There Sana
to Think Engat
They Dya
I Thank you Tarrima casse
Teeth Anton
Tongue Ilat
Tarry a little Nanthy
Tamaryndis. Aassa.
Vinegar Tsuyka
an Uncle Mana
to understand Taven
Use, or custom Esteedat
I understand it not. Tyeda tau
WIthout Blou waer
to Work Kareya
to War Backelay
a Woman Paranpoan
a Wooer Cemoeda
Where Dymana
to Win Menang
Warm Penas
Woe, or alas Saya
We Dep
a Water-pot Land
Where is it Manaoden
Water Eyer
Well Sousa
What say you Abbacatta
Wood of Aloes. Garro.
YEasterday Balmary
You Pakanera
the Year Tauwn
Young Monda
Ice Dalan.

Some Iauanish words.
PEpper Syhang
Mace Massa
Nutmegs Palla
Cloves Syancke
Water Eyer
Water Baya
Silver Salorcka
Pieces of 8. Serpy
Casses, or Cassia Petys
Fish Ivack
A Dagger. Cryssen
A Ship Capella
There is too little. Courang
A great piece of Ordnance Bedyl besar
A Gun or Piece Bytsyl
To eat Mackan
Paper Cartaes
Wine Arac
A Hog Sieleng
An Ox Alomba
Christians Vrangy
Strangers. Oranleyo.

Counting in the Molucas tongue.
One Satu
Two Dua
Three Tyga
Four Enpat
Five Lyma
Six Nam
Seven Toufiou
Eight Delappan
Nine Sambalan
Ten Sapolo
Eleven Sabalas
Twelve Duo balas
Thirteen Tyga balas
Fourteen Enpat balas
Fifteen Lyma balas
Sixteen Nane balas
Seventeen Toufiou balas
Eyghteene Delappan balas
Nineteen Sambalan balas
Twenty Dua pola
One and twenty Dua pola satu
Two and twenty Dua pola dua
Three and twenty Dua pola tyga
Four and twenty Dua pola en pat
Five and twenty. Dua pola lyma.



FINIS.

