A memorable Epitaph, made upon the lamentable complaint of the people of
England, for the death of the right honorable Sir Frauncis Walsingham Knight:
principal Secretary of Estate, Chauncellor of her Majesty's Court for the
Duchy of Lankaster, and one of her highness most honorable privy Council.
Who deceassed at his house in London on the 7. day of April last past. Anno.
Dom. 1590.
WHo mournes not for the present loss that England does sustain?
Who has not cause this doleful day, with tears for to complain?
And wail the grievous want of him, who was a special stay,
And perfect pillar to the state of England every way.
I mean Sir Frauncis Walsingham, a Knight of great account,
Whose wisdom in a Common wealth, most men did sure surmount.
Of honorable place he was, beloved of Prince and Peers,
And found most trusty to the state of England many years.
His life too great a loss, if Prince with gold might it redress,
His life so dear as none but may with blubbring tears confess,
That England by his death has lost a jewel of such store,
As in the service of his place, the like God send us more.
His want is great and grievous too, this no man can deny,
When Prince and people wail his loss with many a weeping eye.
The noble Lords of English soil: and chief of Englands Peers,
Lament the death of this good Knight, and shed forth trickling tears.
The states of Scotland and of France, of Holland and the rest
Of the united Provinces, with sorrow have expressed:
Gone is the chief of worthy Knights in whom did wisdom flow,
Gone is Sir Frauncis Walsingham the scourge of Englands foe.
Gone is the man that doubtless was a proppe to Englands state.
Who pitied every strangers suit that came unto his gate.
Gone is the Knight that careful was, all suits to end with speed,
As did pertain to the relief of those that stood in need.
Gone is the man that watchful was for safety of this land,
To keep the Queen and Realm in peace, and treason to withstand,
Gone is the Knight that did reward all men of each degree,
That trauel'd ought for Englands good, so good a Knight was he.
Gone is the man that careful was our quiet to procure,
For grave advise and counsel good, we found him firm and sure,
The people to of English soil lament with inward grief,
And say he was the cheifest stay and staff of their relief.
They bid farewell unto this Knight who tendered each man's case,
Found free from briberie to his end: few such will come in place.
A perfect zeal to honor good in him did alwaie rest,
And true Religion to advance his love he still expressed.
He hated all Idolatours and popish Traitors too,
He rooted out such wicked weeds as much as he might do.
To sincere Preachers of Gods word, he was a special stay,
And in his house he maintainde such, to preach Gods word each day.
Deceit he banished from his house, fraud lodg'de not in his mind,
The marks of true and Christian life, in him each one did find.
His judgment floode with justice still, where as his doom was set,
His will was still, each man he had, should pay his utmost debt.
To prison he would none commit, but just cause he would see,
And what he did was always done in perfect charity.
Which makes each man to wring his hands, and sighe with inward moan,
And says in anguish of their mind, Our cheifest stay is gone.
Farewell Sir Frauncis Walsingham, that usury sore did hate,
That still did good to rich and poor that came unto thy gate.
Farewell the comfort of the poor, that to them alms did give,
Farewell the stay to Soldiers good, while he on earth did live.
Farewell the comfort of the Court, and Londons daily friend,
Farewell to thee that for the poor thy Letters far would send.
Farewell the suitor for the poor, that seldom let thee rest,
Farewell the friend to fatherless and widows sore oppressed.
Farewell the care for Countries good, when Corn was prisde so hie,
Farewell the Knight that succourd'st those that then were like to die.
Farewell and thousand times farewell thou good and worthy Knight,
That in the cause of poor and rich, full many a wrong did right.
Farewell thou good and freendly Kinght to Scholars poor and bare,
Of Cambridge and of Oxford to, of whom thou had great care,
Farewell all suitors say, he showed himself most kind,
He courteously would take their plaints and tell them soon his mind.
His Lady wailes, his Daughter weeps, his kins-folke sighing sits,
His Servants wail and wring their hands as folk besides their wits.
The rich do miss him every day, the poor shall want him still,
And many wish him now alive if that it were Gods will.
But tears suffiseth not at all, let us assured stand,
His soul is plaste in heaven with Christ, which sits on Gods right hand,
He lived well, and well he died, he made a godly end,
For to Almighty God his soul with zeal he did commend.
God grant her highness still may have such careful members store,
That she may live and reign in peace, in England evermore.
And grant that his well gouernd life, a Loadstone still may be,
To such as shall from time to time serve in such high degree.
Grant Lord that they may zealous be the Gospel to defend,
And shun for to be covetous, even till their lives do end.
Then shall her highness live in joy, and England shall be free,
From Turk, from Pope, from sword, from fire, and force of enemy.
FINIS.
Tho. Nelson.

Printed for William Wright.


