The Answer Of the Lords the Estates general of the united Provinces of the
Lowe-Countries, to the Letter of the Archduke of Austria, hereafter inserted.

Together With the proposition done in the name of the said Archduke to the
forenamed States, by Otto Hartius, and Jeronimus Coomans, learned in the Laws.

Also, the extract of certain Letters, written out of the Camp before Groaning.

Printed first at Middelburgh, by Richard Schilders, Printer to the Estates of
the Land and Earldom of Zealand. 1594.

LONDON, Printed by John Wolf.

The Answer of the general Estates of the united Provinces of the Low
Countries, to the Letter of the Archduke of Austria.
THE general Estates of the united Low Countries, in the assembly of their
people, have opened and redd the Letter of the most excellent Prince Ernestus,
Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy. etc. closed and sealed with the Seal
of his Highness, dated in Brussels, the six day of this present Month of May:
received the twelfth of the same Month, by the hands of Master Otto Hartius,
and Ieronimus Coomans, learned in the Laws: at whose insinuation, done the
next day after, to say the xiij. day: have the 16. day of the said Month, in
the assembly of their aforesaid people, delivered up in writing, as appears
by the clauses in the aforesaid Letter inserted. And after due examination of
the afore-saide writing and Letter, (to the end they might open to his Highness
their good intent and meaning,) have declared, and by these presents do
declare, that since the time that their people (for urgent occasions and very
necessity,) were constrained to put themselves in Armor, for the behoof of
the freedom of the Low Countries, with the privileges and jurisdiction of the
same in general, and of the Provinces, people, Cities, and Indwellers of the
same in particular: and for repulsing of the Spanish tyranny, and lordly
government, over the consciences, bodies and goods, of the Inhabitants of the
said Low Countries, their wives and children: their meaning and intent always
was, and yet is, to maintain the same (with the help of GOD) against the
Spaniards and their adherents.

With this steadfast hope, that almighty God through his gracious goodness and
blessing, shall further the same their upright meaning and good intent, which
the longer, the more is not only found to be for their own Low Countries, but
also touches the estate of all their neighbors, Kings, Princes, and
Commonwealths. Like as their people have found also (through the power of Gods
mighty hand,) that he has not only blessed their means and pretenses, but
also has moved the hearts of Kings and Princes their Neighbors, to the
upholding and maintenance of their aforesaid needeful and upright intents.
Whereof their people do attribute the praise only to God, trusting in the
unalterable power of his godly Majesty, expecting at his hands and goodness a
laudable issue and end of heavy wars: having sure confidence that their
people of the Low Countries in general, shall be united, and brought into their
old estate and prosperity. The which they more earnestly do desire, in that
they have well proved and tried, and besides that, do yet very well remember
the commodities, quietness, and pleasantnes of peace, rest, and unity: but also
contrariwise, have found and felt the incommodities, disquietnes, and
unfruitfulness of wars. But like as his Highness declares in the said letter,
and professes his good will and affection, and thanketh al those, that are
uprightly affectioned to the unity and prosperity of the Low Countries: so
have they and their people also great cause to complain before God and all the
world, over them, which yet under the pretense of peace, do seek and
practice the spilling of innocent blood of Christians, and to further the ruin
and utter decay of the Low Countries, whereunto the Spanish counsel (who now in
all respects do find themselves sore offended with these Countries) will work
more extremely then before: using thereto such horrible shameful, and
unlawful proceedings, as heretofore has not been heard or thought on.

And much more is the utter ruin and decay of these Countries to be looked
for, in this respect that it is well known to all the world, into what
extremity they are come, and how their cases do stand. Namely the destruction
of innocent blood by the Hangmans hand, of many thousand innocent and
guiltless people, as well men as weomen of all qualities, amongst which have
been some of the principallest Lords of the land. The violation of the
principallest freedoms, privileges, and jurisdictions of the Low Countries,
and Cities, as well in general as particular, many murders, burnings,
violation, erations, concussions, and other enormities and execrable deeds,
after very many remonstrations, supplications, with sending of certain of the
Neitherlandish Lords into Spain, as namely amongst others the Marqu^s of
Bergen, and the Lord of Monteng^y, who there were ill dealt withal, and used
against the law of Nations.

Also the intercession of great Potentates, done in vain, to the end that the
Low Countries, the people, Cities and good Inhabitants themselves, might be
suffered to enjoy their laudable freedoms privileges and jurisdictions: and
the tyranny of the Spanish nation and their adhearents over their consciences,
bodies and goods, might be cast of, which has brought their people to these
aforesaid extreamities. And therefore it may please his Highness to understand
that the States before named, have with good insight and pondering, proceeded,
as they do now show themselves, toward the welfare of these Countries and
inhabitants thereof, like as in times past, and in like cases is already
passed.

And that their people canont believe, much less be assured any ways, of any
alteration of the Spanish humors, which heretofore have been more apparent,
and part of them promised, with great loss and damage to these Countries. For
in the beginning of these wars, the outrage of the Spaniardes was so great,
that all were put to death, which came into their power.

And to use such like law, for so laudable a matter, as the conservation of
their native Country, against foreign tyranny, either with their counsel or
deeds, that not only their plain Countries were wasted: but also many
principal Cities with murdering, robbing burning, and other horrible,
execrable and unnatural dealing, even whilst such matters were entreated of,
and let the people of these Countries be assured, that no other thing is to be
looked for at the Spaniards hands, which in the end will not turn to the utter
shame, ruin, and ouer-throwe of these Inhabitants.

There began the blood thirsty Counsel to change, and their humors, to alter
in appearance: but in such sort that the people marked that it would fall out
hard with them to come with any force: and therefore have had many parleys and
conferences. And the first entreatement of peace began in Anno. 1574. which the
Estates of Holland and Zealand (using their old honest and simple manner) were
moved to seek redress of their griefs, by writings remonstrations and
others. The fruit and effect of this entreaty, was perfectly perceived and
seen in Brabant, by the first ouer-fall of the City of Antwerpe, named by the
Spaniards in their Histories, Fuere Villacos: and in Hollande and Zeland, with
their strong and second besieging of the City of Leiden, which
notwithstanding through the grace of God, the trustines of her Confederates,
and their own goodness: were preserved from the power of the enemy. Yea, with
such an extraordinary terror to the Spaniards which lay before the City, were
by the mighty hand of God so daunted in their courages, that they ran
confusedly out of Holland, and shortly after did mean to overthrow the goodly
City of Vtricht, as they and others of the Spanish nation, had done the same
year, in the former City of Antwerpe.

This first deceitful entrety of peace, coming to this effect and ended, the
second was taken in hand, at the intercession of the most high and mighty
Emperor Maximilian, his Highness Father, in Anno, 1575. within the City of
Breda. How little the same entreatie was meant on the Spaniardes side, toward
the welfare and prosperity of the Low Countries, the clear testimonies do
bring with them: and the fruits thereof was no other thing, but more
preparation of wars then before. So that shortly after, there followed the
ouer-fall of the Cities of Bueren, Leerdam, Oudewater, Schoonhouen, Bommeney,
and the besieging of the City of Sirikzea: whereby has proceeded, what the
Spaniards and their adherents, have done, with their robbing, murdering, and
other horrible deeds. Yea, the ouerfall of Cities, on their parts, have
been in such heinous manner, that no man could longer suffer or abide the
same, but have proclaimed them enemies of the Low Countries.

Whereupon followed the union and confederacy at Gaunt, in November, Anno.
1576. betwixt the Netherlandish Provinces, and for the conservation of the
welfare of the same, their freedoms and Laws: is well known to every one,
how untruly the same union and confederacy was accepted on the Spanish side,
and what deceit and enmity was mingled amongst it. The Letters of Estoued, the
violation used by Don John, the express declaration, from the Spanish
Counsel, brought over by the Baron of Selles, and published in Mecklin, the
several dealings at Louen, the sending of sundry Ambassadors of diverse
Potentates: have given sufficient testimony thereof, in Anno 1577. and 1588.
How deceitful, shameful, hurtful and grievous, the issue of the entreaty of
peace was, begun at Cullen with such great solemnity, is well known to every
one. Also that during the same, not only the Provinces of Haynault and
Arthois, with sundry other principal Cities, were seduced to this particular
tractation: but also all outward force used toward the City of Maistricht.
And many privy and naughty practices put in use in other Provinces, and
amongst the people of the same, to move the same to tollerations, to their
utter ruin and undoing.

With what practice afterward, were the Cities of Flaunders brought to
tractation, and what brave prohemes were there done, and what excellent end it
had, is manifested by the acts thereof. To what intent was the entreaty of
peace in Anno 1587. and 1588. What deceit and force lay hid underneath the
same: the Spanish Armada (come over during the same entreaty and overcome by
Gods mighty hand) has made manifest. To what intent afterward in Anno 1591.
was the Emperors Majesty occasioned anew, to take the affairs of the
Low Countries into his hands, the Leaguers do testify, which from time to
time, are sent out of the Lowe-Countries against the French King. Whereby it is
made more manifest, that the Spaniards will and meaning is, with their
adherents, to be always in wars and Armor, using the pretext of furthering of
Romish religion. But to speak the truth, for their pretended general
domination and tyranny, which they would establish over all Christendom: and
to rob and spoil all Kings, Princes, Lands and Commonwealths, of their due
rights and prerogatives. Like as of late was practiced against the Queen of
England, by sending over that proud and mighty Armada, in Anno 1588. And the
triumph before the victory, openly sung and put forth in print, is manifested.
And likewise the wars and business in France since the same year, namely in
the beginning of the next year after, about the translation of the Crown of
France, not only the King now present, and all the Princes of the blood, but
generally all Frenchmen, are so entreated of the Spaniards (under the name of
Infant,) because of the Spanish Counsel and suffrence, by the Duke of Ferris,
and other Spanish Ministers, neither is there any trial, but by the Parliament
of Paris, and others revolted from the League, by arrest of other
iustifications put forth in print, is made manifest.

And as good regard is to be taken, to the complot made in Scotland, in Anno
1592. with many of the principal Lords there. That twenty thousand Spanish
soldiers should have been sent and received into Scotland, which in the year
past, is wonderful come to light (for which some were punished with death.)
And it is not to be believed, yt the same was builded upon any other
foundation, or otherwise dealt withal, then practiced with the Bishoppricks of
Collen and Strasburg, the Dukedomes of Gulick, Cleue and Berg, and the
imperial City of Aichen, which not only diverse and sundry intercepted
letters, but also the deeds themselves do manifestly declare. Finally, what
agreement was there pretended with the greatest Princes of Italy? how were
they busied in seeking to bring Holland, and Zealand under them? (wherewith all
the united Provinces were also meant.) To the end that therein they might make
their Sedem belli, fast and sure against all Christendom. Yea, in such sort,
that men would rather the Turk should be let in, and a great part of
Christendom: then these wars, and men of wars, prepared and destenied to
the destruction of the Low Countries, and the people thereof.

And to sumne up the matter, how the Emperors Majesty and the Princes of
Germany have been dealt withal (only to the furthering of the said spanish
government,) appears evidently by the letters signed by the the King of
Spain, whereof a translation is hereby inserted (the original set apart)
which letters do mention also, the points propounded by his Highness: to wit,
that the meaning of the Spanish counsel is not (through his Highness) for any
good meaning of Christendom: much less to bring the Low Countries, to rest
and quietness. In that it appears, that the Earl of Fuentes, Don William of
Saint Clement, and Stephen di Narro, (al three spaniards) are appointed for his
principal Counselors for matters touching the Low Countries, that the same
strangers should rule his Highness, how the Lords of Neitherland are to be
trusted, the Low Countries to be ruled, and the united Provinces to be brought
under subjection. The Estates do not doubt, but his Highness has well
understood, that through the practice and procurement of the aforesaid Earl of
Fuentes, and Stephen di Narra, not long ago Doctor Lopez, Physician to the
Queens Majesty of England, was promised fifty thousand Crounes to poison her
Majesty. And that the same Doctor Lopez, Emanuell Jews Tinaco, and Stephen
Ferrera de Saua (all companions of the aforesaid murtherish feate) were taken
in England and judged to death. That through the practice and procurement of
the said Fuentes and di Narra: Emanuell Andraga took on him to poison ye
French King with a Nosegay of flowers or Roses, so tempred with powder, that
the very smell thereof should poisen him to death. We omit the matter (and what
thereby will fall out) of Michael Remichon, (otherwise naming himself Triuiere)
a Priest of Namour, yt was sent two months ago from Brussels disguised in the
apparel of a soldier, into the united Provinces. Who has confessed, that he
and certain other murderers, with fair promises and money, were sent forth
to murder the most excellent Prince, Morris borne Prince of Orrenge, and
Earl of Nassow.

Yea, that his Princely Highness youngest Son, (being only ten years
old,) and lying in the University of Leiden at School be not taken from
thence, as his eldest Brother the Earl of Buren, against all right, freedom
and privileges of the Country, and all laws of Nations, was violently
carried out of Louen, looking daily to be murdered. Like as the said Spanish
counsel through their murtherish acts, did kill the Prince of Orrenge his
Highness father. Out of which his Highness, and every one without any gainsaying,
may well understand, by what people, and by what means, the good Inhabitants
of the Low Countries have been deceived, and how little the Estates have
forgotten the same. Being occasioned to say as much now of this aforesaid
entreaty of peace of the Spaniards, and to judge with like affection thereof,
as of these matters rehearsed. Yea, now such horrible and shameful matters do
come to light against the Realms of France, England, and these Countries: as
never the like was before. So that the humors of the Spanish counsel are
altered, for any goodness toward these Countries, neither is there any
appearance that the same should be furthered, seeing that they are now most
highly offended.

Or that these Countries (whereunto they pretend such right) should be better
dealt withal, then the Kingdoms of France, England, and Scotland, whose
subjects are in like authority and like dignity. For which causes, the
foresaid Estates, in respect of their duty and oath, are bound and forced, to
take better heed and regard, to the crafty practices of the aforesaid
Counsel. Especially the united Provinces, for such horrible pretended murder
of the King of France, and Queen of England, with the appearance of wars
since his Highness coming into the Lowe-Countries, begun and continued against
the Crown and estate of France.

And yet are not against it, but that all former pretexts ceasing, do take the
motion so near their hearts, as the good allience, friendship and Communalty of
the matter requires. And all is, that a man might well believe, that his
Highness has a misliking of such murdering and diuilish acts* yet
notwithstanding greater heed is to be taken, to the purpose of the ill will,
meaning and intent of the King of Spain, and Spanish counsel, of whom his
Highness has his Commission and authority (who also at all times may revoke
the same, and put another in his place) against which no man can assure him,
with any condition. Whereby the aforesaid general Estates, cannot perceive
that they should reap any fruit or profit by the aforesaid entreaty of
peace, either within the said united Provinces, or without the same, with the
Queens Majesty of England, (with whom in such matters and others they stand
fast in confedracy,) nor yet with the French King, and other Potentates,
Princes and Common wealths of these Countries the whole Christian cause, their
friends and alliances. But do mean to have their refuge unto almighty God, at
whose mighty hand and goodness, they look for a laudable issue of their
righteous cause, (as they have always pondered, and yet do consider, how
alterable worldly matters are) expecting not only the welfare of the united
Provinces: but also of the Neitherlandish Provinces to the furthering of his
glory and holy word.

Thus ended and resolved in the assembly of the Lords Estates general, in
Earls Hagh. the 27. of May. Anno. 1594.
Ernestus, by the grace of God Archduke of Austria, etc. Knight of the Order,
Lieutenant, Governor, and General Captain.
Honorable, Noble, Worshipful etc. The inward natural love and affection,
which we bear to the rest, and welfare of the Low Countries, and the
misliking which we have long had of discord and misery wherein they are: is
the principal cause that has moved us to take upon us the government
thereof, with steadfast hope that almighty God would give us his grace, that we
might release you from these heavy and civil wars, which now have lasted so
long, to the great grief, oppression, and hinderance of the said Countries,
and of all Christendom. For if men will consider in what estate and
prosperity they were in times past, when they were in peace and unity, under
due obedience of the house of Burgundy and Austria, and the good rules and
orders kept the same time, in points of justice, policy and other orders of
wars, whereby the aforesaid Countries were increased and renowned throughout
all Kingdoms and Countries.

Also the great riches which was so abundant there, by means of the dealings,
aliences, confederacies, navigations and Traffic, which they had to Portingall,
Spain and India: we are sure that there is no man of understanding, that is
not sorry with his whole heart, for so great and pitiful alteration of the
said Countries, in the time of six and twenty years or vpwadrs, with the
manifold oppressions, exactions and greeuances, which the poor common people
in that time, have suffered, and in sundry places thereof, yet presently is
suffered. And that do also wish, that with the first, some good end and
tolerable means might be wrought, to bring the said Countries, into their
former estates common tranquillity, due obedience and agreement. Whereunto also
we do employ all our thoughts, and with the same pretense and meaning are come
hither, leaving the company of the Emperors Majesty our Sovereign Lord and
Brother, and others our Brethren and Kinsfolks, our native Country, and the
government of so many Kingdoms and Countries, committed unto us, with
departing from other things, not needful here to be repeated: to the end we
might find you ready to come to our good meaning and intent. And although we
doubt not, but that all the same is well known to your people, as well by
common report as otherwise, and by them accepted, as we heartily desire the
safety, rest and welfare of you, and those which come after you: yet
notwithstanding, we have thought it necessary and convenient, to let your
people know and understand the same by these presents: as well to abandon all
suspicion, as to the more nearer revealing of our foresaid goodness and upright
inclination toward you, and those which might look for the same at our
hands. Forasmuch then, as the matter toucheh you so near: you, your people, and
those which are under you, should set before your eyes, the luck, fortune and
welfare, which thereby might come and redound to your native Country, so
pitifully oppressed and spoiled through these long lasting wars. And so far
forth as the good luck which you had this last year (as matters of war be
sickle and inconstant) should make any to forget the foresaid evils and
mischiefs, and not to think upon those which might chance and fall out, and
thereby seem to assure themselves ten fold, without any accepting of this good
occasion: shall it not then be needful to think on examples and things
passed, which teaches that in short time such great alteration may happen:
that oftentimes that is soon lost, which shortly before has been gotten with
great labor, honor and reputation. Wherefore we do pray you both heartily and
earnestly, that you will altogether take good counsel therein, deeply
weighing and pondring all things, and you your selves offer us such laudable
and honest conditions of peace, that by means thereof it may be perceived, the
sooner the better, that you be not such, as seek to lengthen or prolong the
wars, which brings so many kinds of oppressions to the Communally, as is
well known to all men: but that thereby the same might be brought to some
perfect end, sure rest and quietness.

And for our parts, we will show you with our deeds, that no deceit or craft is
hid therein, not seeking any thing else, then a true steadfast peace: which, and
all that we do, is with good earnest, and simplicity, to the furthering of the
Common wealth. Wherein if you show your good will: Then shall you show what
you esteem and think of us, and desire to be in time of need, as is best
known to you your selves. Like as the bringers hereof Master Otto Hartius and
Ieronimus Coomans learned in the laws, shall declare, being thereto appointed
by us, with proffering of our good will toward you. Praying almighty God. etc.

From Brussels the fifth of May, Anno. 1594. Underneath stood, Yours to command
Ernestus.
The superscription was,

To the Honorable, the Estates of Gelderland, Holand, Zealand; Freesland,
Vtricht, Ouer-Jsell, and others, assembled at Earls Hagh in Holand.



The proposition done by Otto Hartius, and Jeronimus Coomans, learned in the
Laws: to the Lords the general Estates of the united Nether-landish Provinces.
My Lords,
AS we lately had gotten Pasport of the Lords of ye Counsel of the Estates,
that we might come into these united Provinces, for the dispatching of our
business and particular matter, (for which we yield the said Lords friendly
thanks, and those which put to their helping hands for furthering of the same,)
with offering the like to be done, and to be sorrowed for on our side, for
those which shall need to go from hence: and the same being brought to the
knowledge of his Highness, the Archduke of Austria Ernestus, he has thought
good to send us, that we should in his name salute you, proffering you all
good: and to declare unto you, yt the principal cause which moved him to send
us into these Countries, was the singular love and affection which he has
always borne to the welfare and quietness of the same. And that he hops, that
God of his grace will send such means, that through him, the same may be
united again in good peace and tranquillity, as it was before the beginning of
these civil troubles: toward the which, and to understand his good will and
meaning the better, he has charged and commanded us, to recite unto your
Worships, the Letters which we delivered the twelfth day of this Month of May.
Hoping yt your Worshippes shall thereby clearly perceive his will and meaning
is, to settle a sure peace and long during unity in these Countries, and that
the indwellers thereof may be pacified, to their contentment.

And although the same in the year past, proved to be in vain, and also
when any entreaty of peace, or accord is agreed upon, straightwayes through
misconstruing thereof: they fall into new enmity and wars, (through whose
occasion and doing, is not at this time to be ripped up, and God grant it be
not hereafter neither.) So that if your Worships should be conceived with any
mistrust of suspicion, or moved with any misliking, to deny such reasonable
conference, especially, because that lately matters have fallen out, according
to the will and pleasure of your Worshippes yet does his Highness hope, that the
same shall not rest or depend upon any temporal and alterable prosperity,
whereby this present occasion should cease, or come to none effect. For which
all honest people, and lovers of the whole Lands, peace and unity: should
desire and wish your worships to set the same before your eyes.

First, that all worldly matters, have their hours, times and seasons. And
like as there is a time of diffidence: thereafter may well come and follow a
season of confidence. That all men together ought to trust unto, and to look
to the security of himself and his successors.

Secondly, there never rose up in any Country, so great wars tumults or
discord, either publicly or perticularly, but it was lastly ended and laid
down, more with entreaties and conditions, then with force of Arms. For war
is of such unhappy fruitfulnes, that it brings out, a beard to one, and a
foot to another.

Thirdly, that it never went well or prospered with any Prince, estate or
Common wealth, which refused or denied a laudable proffer of entreaty of peace.
Touching which, we had rather have the examples of our time, and remembrance
thereof, to pass untouched: then by repeating or reauealing thereof, to
remember the faults of them or others. For if your Worships at this time should
be moved or detracted, with any kind of diffidence or mistrust, or thinking
to refer the same till another time: yet, we hope you will respect the time
and season, and how the sam^ is put to the arbitriment of your Worships and of
other persons, to say, with his Highness sprung out of the house of Austria,
whose upright dealing, understanding, virtue and honor, well beseems such a
Prince. Whereby only may be understood, that seven or eight one after another
of the same house have come to be Emperors, not by succession, which is given
as well to evil as good Princes: but by the voices and free election of the
Electors, and Common-estates of the Empire, commonly grounded on princely
virtue and constancy, in word and deed, of him that is elected.

Like as not long ago, appeared in the person of Maximilian the second, Father
to his Highness, who for his moderation and goodness, might have been accounted
for a special selected instrument of the Common wealth, for reforming of
discords and controversies of religion, to hold up in balance, and to lay
down: Such as the like of him has not been in times past: or likely to
follow.

And following the footesteps of the same, has by us sent the original letter
to your Worships, which we doubt not is received by your Worships with such
friendly and good affection, as we do hold assuredly the same to be written
without enemity.

We pray therefore and earnestly request you: that your Worshippes, will duly
ponder the contents of the same, with such an answer, that his Highness and all
honest people, may the sooner the better, have cause to conceive some good hope
of their long desired peace, which they look to have through your worships
wisdom and providence. With humble petition, that if your Worships
repre-senting this honorable assembly, or any one in particular, should find
himself agreeued, with any difficulty, in any words, points or understanding
of the aforesaid writing of his Highness: we are ready at all times to explane
the same if we may stand you in any steed.

Also we hope that our interpreting thereof, shall be to your Worships
contentment. Which in effect is contained in the force of the clauses of the
said letter of Credent, and stands upon our persons. Friendly praying you to
accept thereof in good part.

And note withal by the way, (with your Worships leave,) ^^at by the
confession and declaration of certain persons which are taken and examined:
his Highness is empreached, that he should have pretended the death of Earl
Morris of Nassow, through the means of the same persons, or otherwise, as
likewise should have been done to the Earl of Barlaymont. Being an absurd and
impudent delation, because they never came, or ever passed from his Highness, in
the least respect, or from his house or stock, from which in times past,
neither such infamous deeds have proceeded, nor with Gods help shall proceed.

We are here in the name of his Highness, to enquire the truth of the matter,
praying your Worshippes that the prisoners may be safely kept, and sent with
some Comissary to Antwerp or Brussels, with writing to his Highness that they at
certain time and place, be sent back again, or else to be transported to
Breda, being under the jurisdiction of this government, to the said Earl of
Barlaymont, who for this purpose shall be accompained with a Comissary in the
name of his Highness, and appear there in person, to examine them upon such
circumstances and perticulers, as shall be advised, and found needful to be
examined of. With due pasport to be given. Or else if it please your Worships to
advise some other expedient means, that the truth may be discovered, which
surely should redound to the vnburthening and excusing of his Highness: and
your Worships shall thereby attain great honor for your good justice, as in
such case the like has not been thought of, or of any other particular
consideration, which the prisoners should say and declare, or else not
publishing the same, to the prejudice of any man, or contemning any good
meaning of his Highness. etc. Propounded and done in the assembly of the Lords
the general Estates, the sixteenth of May. Anno 1594. in Earls Hagh. And
subscribed by us Otto Hartius, and Ieronimus Coomans.

FINIS.

