Strange News, Of the intercepting certain Letters, and a Conuoy of Verses,
as they were going Privily to victual the Low Countries.

Vnda impellitur vnda.

By Tho. Nashe Gentleman.

Printed at London by John Danter, dwelling in Hosier-Lane near Holburne
Conduit, 1592.

To the most copious Carminist of our time, and famous persecutor of Priscian,
his very friend Master Apis lapis: Tho. Nash wishes new strings to his old
tawnie Purse, and all honorable increase of acquaintance in the Cellar.
GEntle M. William, that learned writer Rhenish wine and Sugar, in the first
book of his Comment upon Red-noses has this saying: veterem ferendo iniuriam
inuitas nouam, which is as much in English, as one Cup of nipitaty pulls on
another. In moist consideration whereof as also in zealous regard of that high
countenance you show unto Scholars, I am bold in stead of new Wine, to
carowse to you a cup of news: which if your worship (according to your
wonted Chaucerisme) shall accept in good part, I Will be your daily Orator to pray
that, that pure sanguine complexion of yours may never be famisht with
potte-lucke, that you may taste till your last gasp, and live to see the
confusion of both your special enemies, Small Beer and Grammar rules.

It is not unknown to report, what a famous potle-pot Patron you have been to
old Poets in your days, and how many pounds you have spent (and as it were
thrown into the fire) upon the dirt of wisdom, called Alcumie: Yea* you are
such an infinite Mecaenas to learned men, that there is not that morsel of
meat they can carue you, but you will eat for their sakes and accept very
thankefully. Think not though under correction of your boone-companionship, I
am disposd to be a little pleasant, I condemn you of any immoderation either
in eating or drinking, for I know your government and carriage to be every
way Canonical. Verily, verily all poor Scholars acknowledge you as their
patron, prouiditore, and supporter, for there cannot a threedbare Cloak sooner
peep forth, but you strait press it to be an outbrother of your bounty,
three decayed Students you kept attending upon you a long time.

Shall I presume to dilate of the gravity of your round cap and your dudgion
dagger? It is thught they will make you be called upon shortly to be Alderman of
the Stilliard. And that's well remembered, I heard say when this last Term was
removed to Hartford, you fell into a great study and care by your self, to
what place the Stilliard should be removed: I promise you truly it was a
deep meditation, and such as might well have beseemed Eldertons parliament of
noses to have sit upon.

A Tavern in London, only upon the motion mourned al in black, and forbear
to girt her temples with iuie, because the grandame of good fellowship was like
to depart from among them. And I wonder very much, that you sampsownd not your
self into a consumption with the profound cogitation of it.

Diu viuas in amore iocisque, whatsoever you do, beware of keeping diet. Sloth
is a sin, and one sin (as one poison) must be expelled with another. What
can he do better that has nothing to do, than fall a drinking to keep him from
idleness?

Fah, me thinks my ieasts begin already to smell of the ^aske, with talking so
much of this liquid prouinder.

In earnest thus; There is a Doctor and his Fart, that have kept a foul
stinking stir in Paul's Churchyard; I cry him mercy I sl^undered him, he is
scarce a Doctor ^^ll he has done his Acts: this dodipoule, this didopper, this
professed poetical braggart, has raild upon me with out w^t or art, in
certain four penniworth of Letters, and three farthing-worth of Sonnets; now
do I mean to present him and Shakerley to the Queens foole-taker for
coatch-horses: for two that draw more equally in one Oratoriall yoke of
vainglory there is not under heaven.

What say you Master Apis lapis, will you with your eloquence and credit
shield me from carpers? Have you any odd shreds of Latin to make this
letter-mungera cockscombe of?

It stands you in hand to arm your self against him; for he speaks against
Connicatchers, and you are a Connicatcher, as Connicatching is divided into
three parts; the Verser, the Setter, and the Barnacle.

A Setter I am sure you are not; for you are no Musi^ian: nor a Barnacle; for
you never were of the order of the Barnardines: but the Verser I cannot acquit
you of; for M. Vaux of Lambeth brings in sore evidence of a breakefast you
won of him one morning at an unlawful game called riming. What lies not in you
to amend play the Doctor and defend.

A fellow that I am to talk with by and by being told that his Father was a
Rope-maker, excused the matter after this sort; And has never saint had
reprobate to his Father? They are his own words, he cannot go from them.
You see here he makes a Reprobate and a Ropemaker, voces conuertibiles. Go
too, take example by him to wash out dirt with ink, and run up to the knees in
the channel, if you be once wet shod. You are amongst grave Doctors, and men
of judgment in both Laws every day, I pray ask them the question in my
absence, whether such a man as I have described this Epistler to be, one that
has a good handsome picker deuant, and a pretty leg to study the Civil Law
with, that has made many proper rimes of the old cut in his days, and
deserved infinitely of the state by extolling himself and his two brothers in
every book he writes: whether (I say) such a famous pillar of the Press,
now in the fourteenth or fifteenth year of the reign of his Rhetorike, giving
money to have this his illiterat Pamphlet of Letters printed (whereas others
have money given them to suffer them selves to come in Print) it is not to be
counted as flat simonie, and be liable to one and the same penalty.

I tell you, I mean to trounce him after twenty in the hundred and have about
with him with two staves and a pike for this gear.

If he get any thing by the bargain, let what soever I write hence-forward
be condemned to wrappe bumbast in.

Carouse to me good luck* for I am resolutely bent; the best blood of the
brothers shall pledge me in vinegar. O would thou had a quaffing boule, which
like Gawens scull should contain a pecke, that thou might swappe off a
hearty draught to the success of this voyage.

By what soever thy visage holds most precious I beseech thee, by John Dauies
soul, and the blew Bore in the Spittle I conjure thee, to draw out thy purse,
and give me nothing for the dedication of my Pamphlet.

Thou art a good fellow I know, and had rather spend ieasts than money. Let
it be the task of thy best terms, to safeconduct this book through the
enemies country.

Proceed to cherish thy surpassing carminicall art of memory with full
cups (as thou do) let Chaucer be new scourd against the day of battle,
and Terence come but in now and then with the snuff of a sentence, and Dictum
pu^a, We Will strike it as dead as a door nail; Haud teruntij estimo, We have
cattes meat and dogs meat enough for these mungrels. Howeuer I write
merrily, I love and admire thy pleasant witty humor, which no care or cross
can make vnconuersable. Still be constant to thy content, love poetry, hate
pedantisme. Vade, vale, cave ne titubes, mandataque frangas.

Thine entirely, Tho. Nashe.

To the Gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen, the strong faith you have conceived, that I would do works of
supererrogation in answering the Doctor, has made me break my day with
other important business I had, and stand darting of quils a while like the
Porpentine.

I know there want not welwillers to my disgrace, who say my only Muse is
contention; and other, that with Tiberius Caesar pretending to see in the
dark, talk of strange obiectes by them discovered in the night, when in truth
they are nothing else but the glimmering of their eyes.

I will not hold the candle to the Devil, unmask my holiday Muse to envy;
but if any such deep insighted detracter, will challenge me to whatsoever
quiet adventure of Art wherein he thinks me least conversant, he shall find
that I am Tam Mercurio quam Marti, a Scholar in some thing else but contention.

If idle wits will needs tie knottes on smooth bulrushes with their tongues,
faith the world might think I had little to attend, if I should go about to
^nloose them with my pen.

I cannot tell how it comes to pass but in these ill cide days of ours, every
man delights with Ixion to beget children of clouds, dig for Pearls in
dunghils, and wrest oil out of iron.

Poor Pierce Pennilesse, have they turned to a coniuring book, for there is
not that line in it, with which they do not seek to raise up a Ghost, and
like the hog that conuerts the sixth part of his meat into bristels, so have
they converted six parts of my book into bitterness.

Aretine in a Commedie of his, wittily complains that vpstart Commenters,
with their Annotations and gloses, had extorted that sense and Moral out of
Petrarch, which if Petrarch were alive a hundred Strappadoes might not make him
confess or subscribe too; So may I complain that rash heads, vpstart
Interpreters, have extorted and rakte that vnreuerent meaning out of my lines,
which a thousand deaths cannot make me ere grant that I dreamd off.

To them that are abused by their own jealous collections and no determined
trespass of mine, this advice by the way of example will I give.

One coming to Doctor Perne on a time, and telling him he was miserably
raild on such a day in a Sermon at Saint Mary's in Cambridge, I but quoth he
(in his puling manner of speaking) did he name me, did he name me, I warrant
you go and ask him, and he will say he meant not me; So they that are
vngroundedly offended at any thing in Pierce Pennilesse, first let them look
if I did name them; if not, but the matter hangs in suspense, let them send
to me for my exposition, and not buy it at the second hand, and I do not
doubt but they will be thoroughly satisfied.

He that wraps himself in earth like the Fox, to catch birds, may haps have
a heavy cart go over him before he be aware, and break his back.

A number of Apes may get the glowworme in the night, and think to kindle fire
with it, because it glisters so, but God wot they are beguiled it proves in
the end to be but fools fire, the poor worm alone with their blowing is
warmed, they starud for cold whiles their wood is untouched. Who but a Foppe
will labor to anatomize a Fly? Fables were free for any bondsman to speak in
old time, as Aesope for an instance, their allusion was not restrained to any
particular humor of spite, but generally applied to a general vice. Now a man
may not talk of a dog, but it is surmised he aims at him that gives the dog
in his Crest, he cannot name straw, but he must pluck a wheat sheaffe in
pieces, Iutelligendo faciunt vt nihil intelligant.

What ever they be that thus persecute Art (as the Alcumists are said to
persecute Nature) I would wish them to rebate the edge of their wit, and not
grind their colors so hard, having found that which is black, let them not
with our forenamed Gold-falsifiers, seek for a substance that is blacker than
black; or angle for frogs in a clear fountain.

From the admonition of these discourteous misconsterers. I come to The kilcow
champion of the three brethren; he forsooth will be the first that shall give
Pierce Penilesse a non placet.

It is not enough that he bepist his credit about twelve years ago, with
Three proper and witty familiar letters, but still he must be running on the
letter, and abusing the Queens English without pity or mercy.

Be it known unto you (Christian Readers) this man is a forestaller of the
market of fame, an ingrosser of glory, a mount bancke of strange words, a
mere merchant of babies and conny-skins.

Hold up thy hand G. H. thou art here indi^ed for an incrocher upon the
fee-simple of the Latin, an enemy to Carriers, as one that takes their
occupation out of their hands and do nothing but transport letters up and
down in thy own commendation, a conspiratour and practiser to make Printers
rich, by making thy self ridiculous, a manifest briber of Bookesellers and
Stationers, to help thee to sell away thy books (whose impression thou paidst
for) that thou may have money to go home to Trinity Hall to discharge thy
commons.

I say no more but Lord have mercy upon thee, for thou art fallen into his
hands that will plague thee.

Gentlemen, will you be instructed in the quarrel that has causd him lay
about him with his pen and inckehorne so courageously. About two years since
(a fatal time to familiar Epistles) a certain Theological gimpanado, a demie
divine, no higher than a Tailors pressing iron, brother to this huge
booke-beare, that writes himself One of the Emperor Justinians Courtiers,
took upon him to set his foot to mine, and ouer-crow me with comparatiue
terms. I protest I never turned up any cowsheard to look for this scarabe
fly. I had no conceit as then of discovering a breed of fools in the three
brothers books: marry when I beheld ordinance planted on edge of the pulpit
against me, and that there was no remedy but the blind Vicar would needs let
fly at me with his Churchdore keys, and curse me with bell, book and candle,
because in my Alphabet of Idiots I had ouer-skipt the Hs, what could I do but
draw upon him with my pen, and defend my self with it and a paper buckler
as well as I might.

Say I am as very a Turk as he that three years ago ran upon ropes, if
ever I speld either his or any of his kindreds name in reproach, before he
barkt against me as one of the enemies of the Lamb of God, and fetched
allusions out of the Buttery to debase me.

Here begins the fray. I vpbraid godly predication with his wicked
conversation, I squirt ink into his decayed eyes with iniquity to mend their
diseased sight, that they may a little better descend into my schollership and
learning. The Ecclesiastical dun^ instead of recovery waxes stark blind
thereby (as a preservative to some, is poison to others) he gets an old
Fencer his brother to be reuengd on me for my Phi^icke; who flourishing about
my ears with his two hand sword of Oratory and Poetry, peradventure shakes
some of the rust of it on my shoulders, but otherwise strikes me not but with
the shadow of it, which is no more than a flappe with the false scabberd of
contumely: whether am I in this case to arm my self against his intent of
injury, or sit still with my finger in my mouth, in hope to be one of
simplicities martyrs.

A quest of honorable minded Caualiers go upon it, and if they shall find by
the Law of arms or of ale, that I being first prouokt, am to be inioynde to
the peace, or be sworn true servant to cowardice and patience, when wrong
presses me to the wars; then will I bind my self prentise to a Cobbler, and
fresh underlay all those writings of mine that have trodde awrie.

Be advertised (gentle audience) that the Doctors proceedings have thrust upon
me this sowterly Metaphor, who first contriuing his confutation in a short
Pamphlet of six leaves like a pair of summer pumps: afterward (winter growing
on) clapped a pair of double soales on it like a good husband, added eight
sheets more, and pricked those sheets or soales as full of the hob-nayles of
reprehension as they could stick.

It is not those his new clowted startopsiwis, that shall carry him out of the
dirt.

Sweet Gentlemen, be but indifferent, and you shall see me desperate. Here
lies my hatte, and there my cloak, to which I resemble my two Epistles, being
the upper garments of my book, as the other of my body: Saint Fame for me,
and thus I run upon him.

Tho. Nashe.

The four Letters Confuted.
GAbriel and not only Gabriel, but Gabrielissime Gabriel, no Angel but
ANGELOS, id est, Nuntius, a Fawneguest Messenger twixt Master Bird and Master
Demetrius: Behold, here stands he that will make it good on thy four Letters
body, that thou art a filthy vain fool. Thy book I commend; as very well
printed: and like wondrous well, because all men dislike it.

I agree with thee that there are in it some matters of Note, for there are a
great many barefoote rimes in it that go as iumpe as a Fiddle with every
ballet-maker's note: and if according to their manner you had tuned them over
the head it had been nere the worse, for by that means you might have had
your name chaunted in every corner of the street, then the which there can be
nothing more melodiouslie addoulce to your divine Entelechy. O they would have
trowld often bravely to the tune of O man in Desperation, and like Marenzos
Madrigals, the mournful note naturally have affected the miserable Dittie.

Do you know your own misbegotten bodgery Entelechy and addoulce. With
these two Hermophrodite phrases, being half Latin and half English, have thou
pulled out the very guts of the inkehome.

Letters.

To all courteous minds that will vouchsase the reading.

Comment.

In their absence this be delivered to Megge Curtis in Shorditch to stop
mustard pots with.

The particular Contents.

L. A Praeface to courteous minds.

C. As much to say, as Proface, much good do it you would it were better for
you.

L. A Letter to M. Emanuel Demetrius, with a sonnet there to annexed.

C. That is, as it were a purgation upon a vomit, buskins upon pantophles.

L. A Letter to M. Bird.

C. Or little matter wrapped up in many words.

L. A Letter to every favorable and indifferent Reader.

C. Id est, An exhortation to all Readers, that they shall read nothing but
his works.

L. Another letter to the same extorted after the rest.

C. By interpretation, a Letter whereof his invention had a hard stool, and
yet it was for his ease, though not for his honesty: and so forth, as the Text
shall direct you at large.

Here begins the first Epistle and first Book of Orator Gabriell to the
Catilinaries or Philippicks.
Wherein is diuulged, that venum is venum and will ininfect, that that which is
done, cannot (de facto) be undone, that favor is a courteous Reader, and G.H.
your thankful debtor.

A Comment upon the Text.
THe learned Orator in this Epistle takes precise order he will not be too
eloquent and yet it shall be (L,) as well for enditing unworthy to be
published, as for publishing unworthy to be endited.

C. He had many adversaries in those times that he wrote, amongst the which
Cloth-breeches and Veluet-breeches (his fathers poverty, and his own pride
were none of the meanest.)

After them start up one Pierce Pennilesse, and he likewise was a stumbling
block in his way. (Penury not long tarries after pride; pray all the ropes in
Saffron Walden that I do not prophecy,) Amen, Amen, quoth M. Bird and M.
Demetrius.

He forbeares to speak much in this place of the one or the other, because
his letters are more forvvard to accuse them than their own books to condemn
them; yet for a touch by the way, he talks that Green is no liuerey for this
winter, it is pitifully blasted and faded in every meade by the strong breath
of his barbarism.

He has a twitch at Pierce Pe^nilesse too, at the parting style, and terms
him the Devils Orator by profession, and his Dames Poet by practice: wherein
me thinks (the surreuerence of his works no^ impaired) he h^th ve^ie highly
ouershotte himself: for no more is Pierce Pennilesse to be called the Devils
Orator for making a Supplication to the Devil, than he is to be held for a
Rhethoritian, for setting forth Gabrielis Scuruei Rhetor, wherein he thought
to have knocked out the brains of poor Tullies Orator, but in verity did
nothing else but gather a flaunting unsavory fore-horse no^egay out of his well
furnished garland.

The aduanceme^t of the Devils Oratorship, which he ascribes to Pierce
Pennilesse, me thinks had been a fit place for his Doctorship, when he mist
the Oratorship of the University, of which in the sequel of his book he most
slanderously complains. Doctor Perne, Green, no dead man he spares.

What he should subaudi by his Dames Poet, I scarce apprehend, except this,
that Pierce his Father was Dame Laws. Poet, and writ many goodly stories of
her in An Almond for Parrat.

Those that will take a Lecture in our Orators letters, must not read, excuse,
commend, credit or believe any approved truth in Pierce Pennilesse,
especially if it be any thing that vpbraideth the great Baboune brother.

He will stop the beginning, id est, when he has come behind a man and
broke his head, seek to bind him to the good a bearing, or else the end were
like to prove pernitio us and perilous to his confusion.

Somewhat he mutters of defamation and just commendation, and what a hell it
is for him that has built his heaven in vainglory, to be pulled by the
sleeue, and bid Respice funem, look back to his Fathers house; but I
ouerslippe it as frivolous, because all the world knows him better than he
knows himself, and though he play the Pharisie never so in iustifiyng his
own innocence, there is none will believe him.

Let this be spoken once for all, as I have a soul to save, till this day in
all my life with tongue nor pen did I ever in the least word or tittle
derogate from the Doctor. If his brother (without any former provocation on my
part God is my witness) rayld on me grossly, expressly namde me, compard me
to Martin, indeuord to take from me all estimation of Art or wit, have I
not cause to bestirre me?

Gabriell, I will bestirre me for all like an Alehouse Knight thou crau'st of
Justice to do thee reason; as for impudency and calumny, I return them in thy
face, that in one book of ten sheets of paper, have published above two
hundred lies.

Had they been witty lies, or merry lies, they would never have grieved me:
but palpable lies, damned lies, lies as big as one of the Guardes chynes of
beef, who can abide?

I Will make thee of my counsel, because I love thee (not:) when I was in
Cambridge and but a child, I was indifferently persuaded of thee: me thought
by thy apparel and thy gate thou should have been a fine fellow: Little did
I suspect that thou were brother to Io. Paean (whom in wardly I always grudgd
at for writing against Aristotle) or any of the (...) of Hemp hall, but a
Caualier of a clean contrary house, now thou have quite spoi^d thy self, from
the foot to the head I can tell how thou art fashioned.

Teterrime frater, and not fraterrime frater, may thou very woefully
exclaim, for in helping him thou have cracked thy credit through the ring, made
thy infamy current as far as the Queens coin goes.

But it may be thou have a sider cloak for this quarrel, thou will object thy
Father was abusd, and that made thee write. What by me, or Grieve, or both?

If by Green and not me, thou should have written against Green and not
me. If by both, I will answer for both, but not by both, therefore I will
answer but for one.

Give an instance if thou can for thy life, wherein in any leaf of Pierce
Penilesse I had so much as half a sillables relation to thee, or offered one
jot of indignity to thy Father, more than naming the greatest dignity he
has, when for variety of Epithites I calde thy brother the son of a
Ropemaker.

We shall have a good son of you anon, if you be ashamd of your fathers
occupation: ah thou will nere thrive, that art beholding to a trade, and can
not abide to hear of it.

Thou do live by the gallows, and would not have a shoe to put on thy foot
if thy father had no traffike with the hangman. Had I a Ropemaker to my father,
and some body had cast it in my teeth, I would forthwith have writ in praise
of Ropemakers, and proved it by sound sillogistry to be one of the 7. liberal
sciences.

Somewhat I am privy to the cause of Greenes inueighing against the three
brothers. Thy hot-spirited brother Richard (a notable ruffian with his pen)
having first took upon him in his blundring Persiual to play the Jack of both
sides twixt Martin and us, and snarld privily at Pap-hatchet, Pasquill, and
others, that opposde themselves against the open slander of that mighty
platformer of Atheism, presently after dribbed forth another fools bolt, a
book I should say, which he christened The Lamb of God.

That book was a learned book, a labourd book; for three year before he put
it in print, he had preached it all without book.

I my self have some of it in a book of Setmons that my Tutor at Cambridge
made me gather every Sunday. Then being very young, I counted it the abiectest
and frothiest form of Divinity that came in that place. Now more confirmed in
age and Art, I confirm my ill opinion of it.

Neither do I urge this as if it were a heinous thing for a man to put sermons
in print after he preached them, but observe the proud humor of the pert
Didimus, that thinks nothing he speaks but deserves to be put in print, and
speaks not that sentence in the Pulpit, which before he rough hewes not over
with his pen. Besides, I tax him for turning an old coat (like a Broker)
and selling it for a new.

These and a thousand more imperfections might have been buried with his
books in the bottom of a drie-fatte, and there slept quietly amongst the
shauings of the Press, if in his Epistle he had not been so arrogantly
censoriall.

Not me alone did he revile and dare to the combat, but g^ickt at Pap-hatchet
once more, and mistermed all our other Poets and writers about London, piperly
make-pla^es and make-bates.

Hence Green, being chief agent for the company (for he writ more than
four other, how well I will not say: but Sat cito, si sat been) took occasion
to canuaze him a little ^in his Cloth-breeches and Velvet breeches, and because
by some probable collections he gest the elder brothers hand was in it, he
coupled them both in one yoke and to fulfill the proverb Tria sunt omnia
thrust in the third brother who made a perfect parriall of Pamphleters.

About some seven or eight lines it was which has plucked on an inuectiue of
so many leaves. Had he lived Gabriel, and thou should so vnarteficially and
odiously libeld against him as thou have done, he would have made thee an
example of ignominy to all ages that are to come, and driven thee to eat thy
own book butterd, as I saw him make an Apparriter once in a Tauern eat his
Citation wax and all, very handsomely served twixt two dishes.

Out upon thee for an arrant dog-killer, strike a man when he is dead, So
Hares may pull dead Lions by the beards.
Memorandum, I borrowed this sentence out of a Play. The Theater Poets hall,
has many more such proverbs to persecute thee with, because thou have so
scornefully derided their profession, and despitefully maligned honest sports.

Before I vnbowell the lean Carcass of thy book any further, I Will drink one
cup of lambswooll, to the Lamb of God and his enemies.

In the first four leaves of it I have singled out these Godly and fruitful
observations.

Noble Lord I do it even upon former premises, not for any future
consequents.

My book is not worthy of so honorable specialitie as your Patronage.

I will not prosecute it with Theological peculiars, but from the mouth of the
sword I speak, etc.

The hearts of the wicked pant, their spirits fail them, they may well call
for butter out of a Lordly dish.

You that be gentle Readers do you not laugh at this Lawiers english of
former premises and future consequents*

O finica^l^tie your Patronages speciallitie, but if he prosecute it with
Theological peculiars, we must needs thrust him inter oues and boues, and
reliqua pecora campi.

From the mouth of the sword I speak it, that butter out of a Lordly dish is
but lewd diet for the Pulpit.

But this is not half the littour of inckehornisme, that those four pages
have pigd. I must tell you of the Octonarium of Ramus, the Sesquiamus of
Phrigius, the Carthusianisme of Gulielmus Rikel, of Annals Diaries,
Chronologies and Tropologicall schoolmen, The Abetilis of the Aethiopians or
Pret^ioannans, of Gulielmus minatensis, and S. Jerome all^gorized and Ab dias,
Lyra, Gryson, Porta, Pantaleon.

All which he reckons up to make the world believe he has read much but
alleges nothing out of them: Nor I think on my conscience ever read or knew
what they mean, but as he has stole them by the wholesale out of some
Booksellers Catalogue, or a table of Tractats.

Here are some of his profounde Annotations, Jacob took Leah for his bed
fellow in the dark by night in steed of Rachell, whereby I learn to buy my
wife candle to go to bed withal, and admit her not by dark but by light.

Jacob was deceived by Labans words: ergo, Obligations are better than bills,
and we must believe no man except he will wax and multiply in words, and call
ink and parchment to witness.

Jacob laid pilled rods with white strakes in the watring places of the
sheep, whereby I note that in carnal mixture the senses are opened.

Judge you that be the Fathers of the Church whether this be fit matter to
edify or no.

It was not for nothing brother Richard that Green told you you kissed your
Parishioners wives with holy kisses, for you that will talk of opening the
senses by carnal mixture (the very act of lechery) in a Theological Treatise,
and in the Pulpit, I am afraid in a priuater place you will practice as much
as you speak. Homines raro nisi male locuti male faciunt. Olet hircum, olet
hircum, any modest ear would abhor to hear it.

Farewell unclean Vicar, and God make thee an honest man, for thou art too
baudy for me to deal withal.

It follows in the Text.

To my very good friend Master Emanuell Demetrius.

This Letter of M. Bird to M. Demetrius, should seem by all reference or
collation of styles, to be a Letter which M. Birds secretary Doctor Gabriell
indicted for him in his own praise, and got him to set hand to when he had
done. Or rather it is no letter, but a certificate (such as Rogues have) from
the head men of the Parish where he was borne, that Gabriel is an excellent
general Scholar, and his Father of good behavior.

We will not believe it except we see the Town seal set to it: but say we
should believe it, what does it make for thee? Have the Townsmen of Saffron
Waldon ever heard thee preach, that they should commend thee for an excellent
general scholar? or (because thou professest thy self a Ciuilian* have thou
solicited any of their causes in the bawdy Courts therabouts. If not, go your
ways a dolt as you came, Master Birds Letter shall not repriue you from the
ladder.

But Veluet-breeches and Cloth-breeches (by the judgment of the best man of
none of the least towns in Essex) is a fantastical and fond Dialogue, and one
of the most licentious intolerable inuectiues that ever he read.

Why?

In it is abused an ancient neighbor of his.

How is he abused?

Instead of his name, he is called by the craft he gets his living with.

He has borne office in Walden above twenty year since ( hoc est had the
keeping of the Town stock, alias the stocks) Ergo he is no Rope-maker.

He has maintaind f^ure sons at Caembridge: Ergo Green is a lewd fellow to
say he gets his living backward.

Three of his sons universally ridiculouslie reputed of (for inamoratos on
their own works) in both Universities and the whole Realm. The fourth is
shrunk in the wetting, or else the Print should have heard of him.

One of the three (whom the Quip entitles the Physician) returning sick from
Norwitch to Linne in Iulie last, was past writing any more Almanackes, before
Green ere imagined God had thought so well of him to take him to him.

Liuor post quiescat. Mother Livers of Newington is a better fortune tellers
than he was a Physician.

A Dash through the dudgen Sonnet against Green.
Put up thy smiter O gentle Peter,
Author and halter make but ill meeter.
I scorn to answer thy misshapen rhyme,
Blocks have called scholars bayards ere this time.
I would trot a false gallop through the rest of his ragged Verses, but that if
I should retort his rhyme dogrell aright, I must make my verses (as he does his)
run hobling like a Brewers Cart upon the stones, and observe no length in their
feet* which were absurdum per absurdius, to infect my vain with his imitation.

The Analasis of the whole is this: an old mechanical meeter-munger would
feign rail if he had any wit. If Green were dogge-sicke and brain-sicke,
sure he (poor secular Satirist) is dolt-sicke and brainlesse that with the
toothlesse gums of his Poetry so betuggeth a dead man.

But I cannot be induced to be^eue a grave man of his sort should be ere so
rauingly bent: when all co^s to all, shortest vowels and longest mutes will
bewray it to be a web of your own loomes M. Gabriel* you mute forth many
such phrases in the course of your book, which I will point at as I pass by.

I will not rob you of your due commendation in any thing: in this Sonnet you
have counterfeited the style of the old Vice in the Morrals, as right up and
down as may be.

Let. Green the Conny catcher of this dream the author,
For his dainty devise deserves the hau^er.

Vice. Hey nan a non sir, soft let me make water,
Whip it to go, I Will kiss my masters daughter.
Tum diddy, tum da, falangtedo diddle,
Sol la me fa sol, conatus in fiddle.

I am afraid your Doctors fart will fall out to be a fatal foyst to your
breeches, if we follow you at the hard heels as we have begun.

Thou shall not breath a whit, trip and go, turn over a new leaf.

Master Bird in the absence of M. Demetrius. Perge porro. I found his wife
courteous, barlady sir but that is suspicious.

A woman is well helped up that does you any courtesy in the absence of her
husband, when you cannot keep it to yourselfe, but you must blab it in print.

If it were any other but Mistress Demetrius (whom I have heard to be a modest
sober woman, and endued with many virtues) I would play upon it a little more.
In regard that she is so, I forbear; and crave pardon in that I have spoken
so much.

Yet would I have her understand, how well the general scholar her guest has
rewarded her for his kind entertainment, by bringing her name in question in
print.

M. Bird and Demetrius, I know neither of you by sight, but this I Will say,
being of that wealth you are, you had better have spent a great deal of money,
than come in the mouth of this base companion.

What reason have I (seeing your names subscribed as his bolsterer, in a
matter of defame that concerns me) but to go through s^itch with you as well
as him.

He thinks to ouer-beare us as poor beggars with the great ostentation of your
rich acquaintance.

Let all Noblemen take heed how they give this Thraso the least beck or
countenance, for if they bestow but hal^e a glaunce on him, hele straight put
it very solemnly in print, and make it ten times more than it is.

I Will tell you a merry jest.

The time was when this Timothy Tiptoes made a Latin Oration to her Majesty.
Her Highness as she is unto all her subjects most gracious: so to scholars she
is more loving and affable than any Prince under heaven. In which respect, of
her own virtue and not his desert, it pleased her so to humble the height of
her judgment, as to grace him a little whiles he was pronouncing, by these or
such like terms. It Is a good pretty fellow, a looks like an Italian, and
after he had concluded, to call him to kiss her royal hand. Herevppon he
goes home to his study all intraunced, and writes a whole volume of Verses;
first De vultu Itali, of the countenance of the Italian; and then De osculo
manus, of his kissing the Queens hand. Which two Latin Poems he published in
a book of his called Aedes Valdinenses, proclaiming thereby (as it were to
England, France, Italy and Spain, what favor he was in with her Majesty.

I dismiss this Parenthesis, and come to his next business, which indeed is
his first business: for till Green awakte him out of his self admiring
contemplation, he had nothing to do, but walk under the Ewe tree at Trinity
hall, and say: What may I call this tree, an Ewe tree O bonny Ewe tree,
Needs to thy boughs will bow this knee, and va^le my bonneto,
Or make verses of weathercocks on the top of steeples, as he did once of the
weathercocke of Alhallows in Cambridge: O thou weathercocke that stands on the
top of the Church of Alhallows,
Come thy ways down if thou dare for thy crown and take the wall on us.


O Heathenish and Pagan Hexamiters, come thy ways down from thy Doctourship,
and learn thy Primer of Poetry over again, for certainly thy pen is in state
of a Reprobate with all men of judgment and reckoning.

Come thy ways down from thy Doctourship said I? Erraui demens thou never
wentst up to it yet.

Fie on hypocrisy and Dissimulation, that men should make themselves better
than they are.

Alas a Gods will thou art but a plain moth eaten Master of Art, and never
pollutedst thy self with any plaster of Doctourship.

List Paul's Churchyard (the peruser of every man's works and Exchange of all
Authors) you are a many of you honest fellows, and favor men of wit.

So it is that a good Gown and a well pruned pair of moustachios, having
studied sixteen year to make thirteen ill english Hexameters, came to the
University Court regentium and non to sue for a commission to carry two faces
in a hoode, they not using to deny honor to any man that deserved it, bad him
perform all the Schollerlike ceremonies and disputatiue right appertaining
thereto, and he should be installed.

Noli me tangere, he likt none of that.

A stripling that has an indifferent pretty stock, of reputation abroad in
the world already, and some credit amongst his neighbors as he thinks,
would be loath to ieoperd all at one throw at the dice.

If he should have disputed for his degree, descended in arenam and puluerem
Philosophicum, and have been foild. Aih me quoth Wit in lamentable sort, what
should have become of him, he might have been shot through ere he were aware
with a Sillogisme.

No point, Ergo, it were wisely done of goodman Boores son if he should go
to the wars for honor and return with a wodden leg, when he may buy a
Captaineship at home better cheap.

Pumps and Pantofles because they were well blackt and glistered jolly freshly
on it, being rubd over with ink, had their grace at length to be Doctor Ea
lege, that they should do their acts (that is, perform more than they were
able)

Cursed be the time that ever there were any obligations made with conditions,
Vnde habeas quaerit nemo sed oportet habere, How Dorbell comes to be Doctor
none asks, but Doctor he must be to make him right worshipful.

Acts are but idle words, and the Scripture says, we must give account for
every idle word.

Pumps and Pantofles swear they will iet away with a clear conscience at the
day of judgment, and therefore do no Acts, give no offense with idle words,
only like a Hawk let fly at a Partridge, that turns the tail and betakes
her to a walnut-tree, so to Oxford they trudge having their grace ad
disputandum, and there are confirmed in the same degree they took at Cambridge:
which is as if a Prentise here in London, as soon as he is enrould, should
run to some such Town as Ipswich, and there crave to have his Freedom
confirmd as of London, which in truth is no Freedom because he has not
served out his prentiship.

Trust me not for a dodkin, if there be not all the Doctourship he has, yet
will the insolent inkehorne worm write himself Right worshipful of the
Laws, and personate this man and that man, calling him my good friend Master
Doctor at every word.

Doctor or no Doctor Green surfeted not of Pickled hearing but of an
exceeding fear of his Familiar Epistles.

He offered in his extremest want twenty shillings to the Printer to leave
out the matter of the three brothers.

Haud facile credo, I am sure the Printer being of that honesty that I take
him for, will not affirm it.

Marry this I must say, there was a learned Doctor of Physic (to whom Green
in his sickness sent for counsel) that having read over the book of Velvet
breeches and Clothbreeches, and laughing merrily at the three brothers legend,
wild Green in any case either to mittigate it or leave it out: Not for any
extraordinary account he made of the fraternity of fools, but for one of
them was proceeded in the same faculty of Physic he professed, and willingly
he would have none of that excellent calling ill spoken off.

This was the cause of the altring of it, the fear of his Physicians
displeasure, not any fear else.

I keep your conscious mind with all other odd ends of your half faced
english till the full conclusion of my book, where in an honorable Index they
shall be placed according to their degree and segnioritie.

We are to vex you mightily for plucking Elderton out of the ashes of his Ale,
and not letting him enjoy his nappie muse of ballad making to himself, but now
when he is as dead as dead beer, you must be finding fault with the brewing
of his meeters.

Hough Thomas Delone, Phillip Stubs, Robert Armin, etc. Your father Elderton is
abused. Revenge, revenge on course paper and want of matter, that has most
sacriligiously contaminated the divine spirit and quintessence of a penny a
quart.

Helter skelter, fear no colors, course him, trounce him, one cup of perfect
bonauenture licour will inspire you with more wit and Schollership than he
has thrust into his whole packet of Letters.

You that be lookers on perhaps imagine I talk like a merry man, and not in
good earnest when I say that Eldertons ghost and Gabriel are at such ods: but
then you know nothing, for there has been monstrous emulation twixt Elderton
and him time out of mind. Yea, they were riuals in riming four year before
the great frost. He expressly writ against him, 1580. In his short but sharp
and learned judgment of Earthquakes.

Broom boys, and cornecutters, (or whatsoever trade is more contemptible)
come not in his way, stand forty foot from the execution place of his fury,
for else in the full tide of his standish he will carry your occupations
handsmooth out of town before him, besmeare them, drown them, down the river
they go Privily to the I Will of Dogs with his Pamphlets.

O it is a pestilent libeller against beggars, he means shortly to set forth
a book called his Paraphrase upon Paris Garden, wherein he will so tamper with
the interpreter of the Puppits, and betouse Harry of Tame and great Ned, that
Titius shall not vpbraid Caius with every thing and nothing, nor Zoylus any
more flurt Homer, nor Thersites fling at Agamemnon.

Holla, holla, holla, flurt, fling, what reasty Rhetoric have we here?
certes, certes brother hoddy doddy, your pen is a coult by cocks body.

As touching the liberty of Orators and Poets, I will confer with thee
somewhat gravely, although thou be a goose-cappe and have no judgment.

A liberty they have thou say, but no liberty without bounds, no license
without limitation.

Jesus what mister wonders do thou tell us? every thing has an end, and a
pudding has two.

That liberty Poets of late in their inuectiues have exceeded, they have borne
their sword up, where it is not lawful for a poynado that is but the page of
prowess to intermeddle.

Thou bringst in Mother Hubbard for an instance. Go no further, but here
confess thy self a flat nodgscombe before all this congregation; for thou
have dealt by thy friend as homely as thou did by thy father.

Who publicly accusde or of late brought Mother Hubbard into question, that
thou should by rehearsal rekindle against him the sparks of displeasure
that were quenched?

Forgot he the pure sanguine of his Fairy Queen say thou?

A pure sanguine sot art thou, that in vainglory to have Spencer known for
thy friend, and that thou have some interest in him, censerest him worse than
his deadliest enemy would do.

If any man were undeservedly touched in it, thou have revived his disgrace that
was so touched in it, by renaming it, when it was worn out of al men's mouths and
minds.

Besides, whereas before I thought it a made matter of some malicious
moralizers against him, and no substance of slander in truth, now when thou
(that proclaimest thy self the only familiar of his bosom, and therefore
should know his secrets) gives it out in print that he ouershotte himself
therein; it cannot choose but be suspected to be so indeed.

Immortal Spencer, no frailty has thy fame, but the imputation of this
Idiots friendship: upon an unspotted Pegasus should thy gorgeous attired Fayrie
Queen ride triumphant through all reports dominions, but that this mud-born
bubble, this bile on the browe of the University, this bladder of pride new
blown, challenges some interest in her prosperity.

Of pitch who has any use at all, shall be abusd by it in the end.

High grass that florisheth for a season on the house top, fades before the
harvest calls for it, and may well make a fair show, but has no sweetness
in it. Such is this Ass in present, this gross painted image of pride, who
would feign counterfeite a good wit, but scornful pity his best patron,
knows it becomes him as ill, as an unwieldy Elephant to imitate a whelpe in his
wantonness.

I wot not how it falls out, but his invention is ouer-weapond; he has some
good words, but he cannot writhe them and toss them to and fro nimbly, or so
bring them about, that he may make one straight thrust at his enemies face.

Coldly and dully idem per idem who cannot indite? but with life and spirit to
limne deadnes it self, Hoc est Oratoris proprium.

L. Inuectiues by favor have been too bold, and Satires by usurpation too
presumptuous. What pleasure brings this to the reader? Jack of the Falcon in
Cambridge can say as much and give no reason for it.

But I can prompt you with a demonstration wherein Inuectiues have been too
bold. Do you remember what you writ in your Item for Earthquakes, of double
faced Iani, changeable Cameleons, Aspen leaves painted sheathes, and
sepulchers, Asses in Lions skins, dunghill cocks slipperie eeles, dormise,
etc. Besides your testimonial of Doctor Perne, wherein it pleased you of your
singular liberality and bounty to bestow upon this beautiful Encomium: A
busy and dizzie head, a brazen fore head, a leaden brain, a wodden wit, a
copper face, a stony breast, a factious and eluish heart, a founder of
novelties, a confounder of his own and his friends good gifts, a morning
booke-worme, an afternoon malt-worme, a right Iugler, as full of his
sleightes, wiles fetches, casts of legerdemaine, toys to mock Apes wiehall,
odd shifts and knauish practices as his skin can hold.

Notwithstanding all this, you defy cut and longtaile, that can accuse you of
any scandalous part either in word or deed.

Tully, Horace, Archilochus, Aristophanes, Lucian, Julian, Aretine, go for no
payment with you, their declamatory styles brought to the grand test of your
judgment, are found counterfeit, they are a venomous and viperous brood of
railers, because they have brought in a new kind of a quick fight, which your
decrepite slow-mouing capacity cannot fadge with.

Tush, tush, you take the grave peake upon you too much, who would think you
could so easily shake off your old friends? Did not you in the forty one
Page line 2. of your Epistles to Collin Clout use this speech?

Extra iocum, I like your Dreams passing well: and the rather because they
savor of that singular extraordinary vain and invention which I ever fancied
most* and in a manner admired only in Lucian, Petrarch, Aretine, Pasquil.

Dic sodes (god a mercy on Dicke Sothis sou^e, for he was a better dauncer
than thou art an enditer, and with his legs he made some Music, there is
none in thy letters) answer me briefly I say to the point, have I varied one
vowell from thy original text in this allegation. If not, I cannot see how the
Doctors may well be reconcild, one while to commend a man because his
writings savor of that singular extraordinary vain, which he only admired
in Lucian, Petrarch, Aretine, Pasquil: and then in another book afterward to
come and call those singular extraordinary admired men, a venomous and
viperous brood of railers.

The auncienter sort of Poets and Orators shall plead their own worthiness.

Tullie never ouerreached himself in railing so much as in flattery. His
Phillippicks (sound Physic applide to a body that could not digest it) are
the things that especially commended him to this art-thriuing age of ours, and
had not these been, he would certainly have been sentenced by a general
verdit of histories, for a timorous time-pleaser.

Who cannot draw a curtain before a deformed picture. Plautus personated no
Parasite, but he made him a slave or a bondsman.

Fawning and croutching are the natural gestures of fear, and if it be a
virtue for a vassaile to lick a man's shoes with his tongue, sure it is but
borrowed from the dogs, and so is biting too, if it be accompanied with over
loud barking, or in such wise as it cannot pinch but it must break the flesh
and draw blood.

Horace, Perseus, Iuuenall, my poor judgment lends you plentiful allowance
of applause: yet had you with the Phrigian melody, that stirs men up to
battle and fury, mixed the Dorian tune that favors mirth and pleasure, your
vnsugred pi^les (howeuer excellently medicinable) would not have been so harsh
in the swallowing. So likewise Archilochus, thou like the preachers to the
Curtizans in Room, that expound to them all Law and no Gospel, art all gall
and no spleen. Hence came it to pass, that with the mere effect of thy
incensed Iambickes thou mad^st a man run and hang himself that had angerd
thee.

Thee I embrace Aristophanes, not so much for thy Comoedie of the clowd which
thou wrotst against philosophers, as for in all other thy inventions thou
interfusest delight with reprehension.

Lucian, Julian, Aretine, all three admirably blessed in the abundant gifts of
art and nature: yet Religion which you sought to ruinate, has ruinated your
good names, and the opposing of your eyes against the bright sun, has causd
the world condemn your sight in all other things. I protest were you ought
else but abominable Atheistes, I would obstinately defend you, only because
Laureate Gabriell articles against you.

This I will justify against any Dromidote Ergonist whatsoever, there is no
other vnlasciuious use or end of poetry, but to infamize vice, and magnify
virtue, and that if they assemble all the examples of versefounders from Homer
to Hugh Copland, they shall not find any of them but has encountered with the
general abuses of his times.

Whatsoever harpeth not of one these two strings of praise and reproof, is as
it were a Dirige in pricksong without any dittie set to it, that happily may
tickle the ear, but never edifies.

In the Roman commonwealths it was lawful for Poets to reprove that
enormitie in the highest chairs of authority, which none else durst touch,
always the sacred Majesty of their Augustus kept inuiolate: for that was a
Plannet exalted above their Hexameter horizon, and it was capital to them in
the highest degree to dispute of his setting and rising, or search
inquisitiuely into his predominance and influence.

The secrets of God must not be searched into. Kings are Gods on earth, their
actions must not be sounded by their subjects.

Seneca Neroes Tutor, found his death in no verse but Octauia. Imperious Lucan
sprinkled but one drop of blood on his imperial chair, and perished by him
also.

Ovid once saw Augustus in a place where he would not have been seen, he was
exilde presently to those countries no happy man hears of.

Long might he in a blind Metamorphosis have played upon all the wenches in
Room, and registered their privy scapes, vpbrayded in hospitality with the
fable of Licaon: alluded to some Ambodexter Lawyer under the story of Battus:
have described a noted unthrift, whose substance hawks and hounds have
devoured, in the tale of Acteon, that was eaten up by his own dogs: mocked
Alcumistes with Midas: picturde inamaratos under Narcissas: and shrouded a
picked effeminate Carpet Knight under the fictionate person of Hermophroditus;
with a thousand more such vnexileable ouer-thwart merrimentes, if lust had not
led him beyond the prospect of his birth, or he seen a meaner man sinning
than an Emperor.

Sancta Maria ora pro nobis, how has my pen lost it self in a croude of Poets.

Gaffer Iobbernoule, once more well ouer-taken, how do thou, how do thou?
hold up thy head man, take no care, though Green be dead, yet I may live to
do thee good.

But by the means of his death thou art deprived of the remedy in law, which
thou intendedst to have had against him for calling thy Father Ropemaker Mas
that's true, what Action will it bear? Nihil pro nihilo, none in law, what it
will do upon the stage^ cannot tell; for there a man may make action besides
his part, when he has nothing at all to say: and if there, it is but a
clownish action that it will bear: for what can be made of a Ropemaker more
than a Clown. Will Kempe, I mistrust it will fall to thy lot for a merriment
one of these days.

In short terms thus I demur upon thy long Kentish-tayld declaration against
Green.

He inherited more virtues than vices, a jolly long red peake like the spire
of a steeple he cherisht continually without cutting, where^t a man might hang
a Jewel, it was so sharp and pendant.

Why should art answer for the infirmities of manners? He had his faults, and
thou thy follyes.

Debt and deadly sin who is not subject to? with any notorious crime I never
knew him tainted; (and yet tainting is no infamous surgerie for him that, has
been in so many hot skirmishes).

A good f^llowe he was, and would have drunk with thee for more angels then
the Lord thou libeldst on, gave thee in Christ's College, and in one year he
pist as much against the walls, as thou and thy two brothers spent in three.

In a night and a day would he have yarkt up a Pamphlet as well as in seven
year, and glad was that Printer that might be so blessed to pay him dear for
the very dregs of his wit.

He made no account of winning credit by his works, as thou do, that do
no good works, but thinks to be famosed by a strong faith of thy own
worthiness, his only care was to have a spel in his purse to conjure up a good
cup of wine with at all times.

For the lousy circumstance of his poverty before his death, and sending that
miserable writ to his wife, it cannot be but thou lie learned Gabriell.

I and one of my fellows Will. Monox (Have thou never heard of him and his
great dagger?) were in company with him a month before he died, at that fatal
banquet of Rhenish wine and pickled hearing, (if thou will needs have it so)
and then the inventory of his apparel came to more than three shillings
(though thou say the contrary.) I know a Broker in a spruce leather ierkin
with a great number of gold Rings on his fingers, and a bunch of keys at his
girdle, shall give you thirty shillings for the doublet alone, if you can help
him to it. Hark in your ear, he had a very fair Cloak with sleeves, of a
grave goose ^urd green, it would ^erue you as fine as may be: No more words
if you be wise play the good husband and listen after it, you may buy it ten
shillings better cheap than it cost him. By S. Silver it is good to be
circumspect in casting for the world, there is a great many ropes go to ten
shillings. If you want a greasy pair of silk stockings also to show your self
in at the Court, they are there to be had too amongst his moueables. Frustra
fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora: It is policy to take a rich
penniworth whiles it is offered.

Alas even his fellow writer that proper young man, almost scorns to cope with
thee thou art such a crow trodden Ass: do thou in some respects wish him
well and spare his name? in some respects so does he wish thee as well? ( hoc
est, to be as well known for a fool as my Lord Wells) and promises by me to
talk very sparingly of thy praise. For thy name, he will not stoop to pluck
it out of the mire, and put it in his mouth.

By this blessed cup of sack which I now hold in my hand, and drink to the
health of all Christen souls in, thou art a puissant Epitapher.

Yea? thy Muses foot of the twelues; old long Meg of Westminster? Then I trow
thou will stride over Greenes grave and not stumble: If you do, we shall come
to your taking up.

Letter.
Here lies the man whom Mistress Isam cround with bays,
She, she that ioyd to hear her Nightingales sweet lays.
Comment.
Here Mistress Isam Gabriel floutes thy bays,
Scratch out his eyes that printeth thy dispraise.
She, she will scratch, and like a scritching night-owle come and make a dismal
noise under thy chamber window for deriding her so dunstically. A big fat
lusty wench it is, that has an arm like an Amazon, and will bang thee
abhominationly if ever she catch thee in her quarters. It is not your Poet
Garish, and your forehorse of the parish that shall redeem you from her
fingers, but she will make actual proof of you, according as you desire of
God in the under following lines.

The next week Master Bird (if his inke-pot have a clear current) he will
have at you with a cap-case full of French occur^ences, that is, shape you a
mess of news out of the second course of his conceit, as his brother is said
out of the fabulous abundance of his brain to have invented the news out of
Calabria, ( John Doletas prophecy of flying dragons, commets, Earthquakes, and
inundations.)

I am sure it is not yet worn out of men's scorn, for every Miller made a
comment of it, and not an oyster wife but mocked it.

When that fly-boat of Frenchery is once launcht, your trenchor attendant
Gamaliel Hobgoblin intends to tickle up a Treatise of the barley kurnell which
you set in your garden, out of which ther^ sprung (as you avouched (twelve
several ears of corn at one time.

Redoubted Parma was never so matched if he kindle the match of his meeterdome,
and let d^iue at him with a volley of verses. Let not his principality trust
too much to it, because his name is Latin for a shield; for Poet Hobbinoll
having a gallant wit and a brazen pen, will honorably bethink him, and even
ambitiously frame his style to a noble emulation of Liuie, Homer, and the
diuinest spirits of all ages, as he has done to the emulation of Tullie
heretofore, when he compiled a Pamphlet, called Ciceranis Consolatio ad
Dolobellam, and published it as a new part of Tull^e, which had bin hid in a
Wall a thousand and odd years and was found out by him before it ever found
being.

The circumstance was this; going down the water at Cambridge one summer
evening, and asking certain questions of the Echo at Barnewell wall (as the
manner is passing by) holding her very narrowly to the point, she revealed
unto him what a treasure she had hidden amongst her stones; namely, this new
part of Gabrielis Ciceronis consolatio ad Dolobellam: and though she was very
loath to disclose it, yet because she knew not how soon God might call her;
videlicet, how suddenly she might fall; to discharge her conscience before
her death, she would deliver it up as freely unto him as ever it was hers,
come and dig for it he should have it. Never more glad was she in her
life, that since she must needs surrender it to the light, she had chaunst
upon such a Cardinal Corrigidore of incongruitie, and Tullies next and
immediate successor under Garre, to whose careful repolishing she might
commit it.

Keep it quoth she?

No, if it were a book of gold it is THINE, read it, new print it, dedicate
it from thy gallery at Trinity Hall to whom thou will.

Whether he used a spade or a mattocke for the vnburying of it I know not,
but extant it is, and of a hundred I have heard that it is his.

O Gabriell, if thou have any manhood in thy starcht peake, look upon me and
weep not.

From this day forward shall a whole army of boys come wondering about thee as
thou go in the street and cry kulleloo, kulleloo, with whup hoo, there goes
the Ape of Tully: uh he he, steal Tully, steal Tully, away with the Ass in
the Lions skin.

Nay but in sadness, is it not a sinful thing for a Scholar and a Christian
to turn Tully? a Turk would never do it.

Be counsaild in thy calamity, write no more Consola^ios ad Dolabellam, but
Consolatio ad Doctore^ Gabrielem; thy self comfort thy self, and earn to make
a virtue of contempt.

Ad ruentem parietem ne inclina, is a Proverb which would have prevented all
this, if thou could have sufferd thy self to have been directed by it: for
first and foremost had not thou stepped forrh to underprop the ruinous wall of
thy brothers reputation, I had never meddled with thee; if thou had not leand
too much to an old wall, when thou pluckst Tullie out of a wall, the damnation
of this Jest had bin yet unbegotten.

He that has born sail in two tempests of shame, makes a sport of
shippe-wracke of good name ever after.

The wall of the welfare of France that is started from her King, her true
foundation, thy writings (more wretched than France) would feign cleave unto
if they could tell how, and count it a felicity to have the opportunity of so
heroical an argument.

God help Alexander if he have no other Poet to emblazon his atchieuements
but Cherillus.

High resolved Earl of Essex and virtuous Sir John Norris Englands champions,
envied tranquilities confidence, unworthy are your adventures Iliades to be
reported by such a ragged reed, as the iarring Pipe of this Batillus. The
Portugals and Frenchmens fear will lend your Honors richer ornaments, than his
low-flighted affection (fortunes summer follower) can frame them.

The seal that I set to your virtues be silence; the argument of praise is
vnauthorized in any man's mouth but old age.

When the better part of youths feruence is boyld away, and that the showers
of many sorrows have seasond our green heads with experience, with the
wither-fac'd weather-beaten Mariner, that talks quaking and shudderingly of a
storm that he has newly toyld through, our words will be written in our
visage

Even as the sun, so no science shines in his complete glory till it be
ready to decline.

These be the conclusions that gray hairs prune and cut down the prosperity
of young years with as fast as it aspires, but let the sear Oak look
himself in the glass of truth, and he shall find that Methusalems blessing is
imbecillitie bestowed on any creature but the Fox, who never is a right Fox
till he be ripe for the dunghill.

If my style hold on this sober Mules pace but a sheet or two further, I
shall have a long beard like an Irish mantle drop out of my mouth before I be
aware.

Marry God ^orfend, for at no hand can I endure to have my cheeks muffled up in
furre like a Muscouian, or wear any of this Welsh freeze on my face.

O it is a miserable thing to dress hair like towe twixt a man's teeth, when
one cannot drink but he must thrust a great sponge into the cup, and so
cleanse his cool porridge as it were through a strayner ere it comes to his
lips.

This second Epistle I have said prettily well too, I think we were best begin
THIRDLY WHEREAS, for fear a volume steal upon us unlooked for.

The Arrainment and Execution of the third Letter.
To every Reader favorably or indifferently affected.
TEXT stand to the Bar. Peace there below.

Albeit for these twelve or thirteen years no man has been more loath or
more scrupulous than my self etc.

The body of me he begins like a proclamation: suffices it we know you
your mind though you say no more.

Is not this your drift? you would have the world suppose you were vrgde to
that which proceeded of your own good nature: like some that will seem to be
entreated to take a high place of preferment upon them, which privily before
they have prayde and paid for, and put all their strength to clymbe up to.

You would foist in non causam pro causa, have it thought your flight from your
old companions obscurity and silence was only with Aeneas to carry your
Father on your back through the fire of slander, and by that shift with a
false plea of patience unjustly driven from his kingdom, filch away the hearts
of the Queens liege people.

The back of those creple excuses I have broke in the beginning o^ my book,
if you have any new inf^ingement to destitute the indictment of forgerie that
I bring against you, so it is.

Here enters Argumentum a testimonio humano, like Tamberlaine drawn in a
Cha^iot by four Kings.
I THAT IN MY YOVTH FLATTERD NOT MY SELF WITH THE EXCEEDING COMMENDATION OF
THE GREATEST SCHOLAR IN THE WORLD, etc.

Ille ego qui quondam gracili modulatus auena.
Ah neighborhood, neighborhood, dead and buried a^t thou with Robinhood, a
poor creature here is feign to commend himself, for want of friends to
speak for him.

Not the least, but the greatest Scholars in the WORLD, have not only but
exceedingly fed him fat in his humor of Braggadochio Glorioso.

Yea Spencer him has often Homer tearmd,
And Mounsier Bodkin vowed as much as he:
Yet cares not Nashe for him a half penny.
Lamentable, lamentable, that an indifferent untoward civil Lawyer, who has
read Plutarch Devtilitate capienda ab inimicis, and can talk of Titius and
Semprouius, should be no more set by, but SET BY, thrust aside, while his
betters carry the breadth of the street before them.

Misery will humble the haughtiest heart in the world: Habemus reum confuente^,
he confesses himself a sinner in insufficiency, yet for all that the
adue^si^ie of universal obloquy has laid a heavy hand on him, still he
retains (like conceald land) some part of his proud mind in a beggars purse,
scorneth to say Fortune my foe, or ask a good word for Gods sake of any man.

In the plainness of his puffed up nature, he will defy any man that dare
accuse him of that he is.

Why* why, infractissime PISTLEPRAGMOS, though you were young in years, fresh
in courage, green in experience, and ouer-weaning in conceit (we will refuse
nothing that you give us) when you privately wrote the letters, that afterward
(by no other but your self) were publicly diuulged; yet when the bladder is
burst that held you up swimming in self love, you must not be discontented
though you sink.

I have touched the ulcer of your Oratourship, in requiting the nickname of The
Devils Orator. An Ulcer you may well christen it, as an ulcer is a swelling,
for it was a swelling of ambition, no modest petition of any merit of yours
that did crave it.

The old Fox Doctor Perne thoroughly discovered you for a young Foppe, or
else half a word of our high Chauncelors commendation had stood with him
inviolable as an Act of Parliament.

Great men in writing to those they are acquainted with, have privy
watch-words of denial, even in the highest degree of praising; they have many
followers, whose dutiful service must not be disgraced with a bitter repulse
in any suite though unlawful.

It may be some of these long deseruers of his followers labourd him for thee,
he like Argus having eyes that pierce into all estates, saw thee when thou
were unseen of thy self, and knowing thee to be unworthy of any place of
worth, would not discountenance his men in so small a matter, but writ for thee
very vehemently outwardly, when the soul of his letter (into which thy
shallowe brain could not descend) included thy utter mislike.

Young blood is hot, youth hasty, ingenuitie open, abuse impatient, choler
stomachous, temptations busy. In a word, the Gentleman was vexed, and cut his
bridle for very anger.

The tickling and stirring inuectiue vain, the puffing and swelling Satiricall
spirit came upon him, as it came on Coppinger and Arthington, when they mounted
into the pease-cart in Cheape-side and preached: needs he must cast up
certain crude humors of English Hexameter Verses that lay upon his stomach,
a Nobleman stood in his way as he was vomiting, and from top to toe he all to
berayd him with Tuscanisme.

The Map of Cambridge lay not far off when he was in the depth of his
drudgery, some part of the excrements of his angerfell upon it: poor Doctor
Pernes picture stood in a corner of that Map, and by the misdemeanour of his
mouth it was clean defaced.

Signior Immerito (so called, because he was and is his friend undeservedly)
was counterfeitly brought in to play a part in that his Interlude of Epistles
that was hist at, thinking his very name (as the name of Ned Allen on the
common stage) was able to make an ill matter good.

I durst on my credit undertake, Spencer was no way privy to the committing of
them to the print. Committing I may well call it, for in my opinion G. H.
should not have reapt so much discredit by being committed to New gate, as by
committing that misbeleeuing prose to the Press.

I have usually seen uncircumcised doltage have the porch of his Pa^im
pilfries very hugely pestred with praises. Hay gee (Gentlemen) comes in with
his Plowmans whistle in praise of Peter Scurfe the penne-man, and Turlery
ginkes in a light foot Iigge libels in commendation of little wit very
loftily: but for an Author to renounce his Christendom to write in his own
commendation, to refuse the name which his Godfathers and Godmothers gave him
in his baptism, and call himself a welwiller to both the writers, when he is
the only writer himself; with what face do you think he can answer it at
the day of judgment? Est in te facies sunt apti lusibus anni, Gabriell, thou
can play at fast and loose as well as any man in England.

I will not lie or backbite thee as thou have done me, but are not these thy
words to the courteous Buyer.

Show me or Immerito two English letters in print, in all points equal to
these, both for the matter it self, and also for the manner of handling, and
say we never saw good English in our lives.

Again, I esteem them for two of the rarest and finest treaties, as well for
ingenuous devising, as significant uttering, and cleanly conueying of his
matter, that ever I read in this tongue, and I bartily thank God for bestowing
upon us such proper and able men with their pen.

You must conceit he was in his chamber-fellowe welwillers cloak when he spoke
this, the white-liuerd slave was modest, and had not the heart to say so much in
his own person, but he must put on the vizard of an indiscreet friend.

It is not worth the rehearsal, he scribled it in jest for exercise of his
speech and style, etc. and it was the sinister hap of those unfortunate letters
to be derided and scoft at throughout the whole realm.

The sharpest part of them were read over at Counsel Table, and he referd over
to the Fleet to bear his old verse-fellow noble M. Valanger company.

There was no remedy for it but melancholy patience.

A recantation he was glad to make by way of articles or positions, which he
moderates with a milder name of an apology, and that recantation purchased his
liberty. Wherefore in grateful lieu of the benefit he received by it (
although he has hitherto unworthily suppressed it) yet he means to take occasion
by this extraordinary provocation to publish it, with not so few as forty such
Academicall exercises, and sundry other politic discourses.

And I deem he will be as good as his word, for ever yet it has been his
wont, if he writ but a letter to any friend of his, in the way of thanks for
the pot of butter, ga^mon of bacon, or cheese that he sent him, straight to
give coppies of it abroad in the world, and propound it to young gentlemen he
came in company with, as a more necessary and refined method of familiar
Epistles than the English tongue has hitherto been privy to.

Lord that men should be so maliciously bent to frame a matter of some thing,
he takes a pleasurable delight to behave himself so that he may be laughed at,
how would you prate and insult if you knew as much by him, as he knows by
himself.

Nashe do thy worst, the three brothers bid a Fico for thee, discommend thou
them never so much, they will palpably praise, and so consequently dispraise
themselves more in one book they set forth, than thou can disparage them in
ten: yea, rather than fail, Master Bird shall leave coppying out letters of
news, and meeter it mischieuously in maintenance of their scurri^itiship and
ruditie.

Three to one par ma foy is odds, not one of them writes an Almanacke, but he
reckons up all his brothers.

Be it spoken here in private; Musa Richardetti fatrizat sat been pretty: The
Muse of dappert Dickie does sing as sweet as a cricket.

Nostimanum and stilum Gabriel? it is thine own verse in Aedes Valdinenses, all
save the inserting of pretty in stead of certe for rimes sake.

Had Physician John lived, or not did a little before Dog-dayes, a sinode of
Pispots would have concluded, that Pierce Pennilesse should be confounded
without repriue.

The Spaniards called their inuasiue fleet against England the Navy invincible,
yet it was overcome. Low shrubbes have outliu'd high Cedars, one true man is
stronger than two thieves, Gabriell and Richard I proclaim open wars with
you: March on, Iocus, Ludus, Lepos, my valiant men at arms, and forage the
frontiers of his Fantasticallitie, as you have begun.

Tubalcan alias Tuball, first founder of Farriers Hall, here is a great
complaint made, that vtriusque Academiae Robertus Green has mocked thee,
because he said, that as thou were the first inuenter of Music, so Gabriell
Howliglasse was the first inuenter of English Hexameter verses. Quid respondes?
can thou brook it yea or no? Is it any treason to thy well tuned hammers to
say they begat so renowned a child as Music? Neither thy hammers nor thou I
know if they were put to their book oaths will ever say it.

The Hexamiter verse I grant to be a Gentleman of an ancient house (so is
many an english beggar) yet this Clyme of ours he cannot thrive in; our speech
is too craggy for him to set his plough in, he goes twitching and hopping in
our language like a man running upon quagmiers up the hill in one Syllable and
down the dale in another, retaining no part of that stately smooth gate, which
he vaunts himself with amongst the Greeks and Latins.

Homer, and Virgil, two valorous Authors, yet were they never knighted, they
wrote in Hexameter verses: Ergo, Chaucer, and Spencer the Homer and Virgil of
England, were far ouerseene that they wrote not all their Poems in Hexamiter
verses also.

In many Countries velvet and Satin is a commoner wear than cloth amongst us,
Ergo we must leave wearing of cloth, and go every one in velvet and satin,
because other Countries use so.

The Text will not bear it good Gilgilis Hobberdehoy.

Our english tongue is nothing too good, but too bad to imitate the Greek and
Latin.

Master Stannyhurst (though otherwise learned) trod a foul lumbring boystrous
wallowing measures in his translation of Virgil. He had never been praisd by
Gabriel for his labor, if therein he had not bin so famously absurd.

Green for dispraising his practice in that kind, Is the Green Master of
the black Art, the Founder of ugly oaths, the father of misbegotten
Infortunatus, the Scriuener of Crossebiters, the Patriark of Shifters, etc.

The Monarch of Crossebiters, the wretched fellow Prince of Beggars, Emperor
of Shifters, he had called him before, but like a drunke^ man that remembers not
in the morning what he speaks ouernight, still he fetches Metaphors from
Conny-catchers, and does nothing but torment us with tautologies.

Why thou arrant butter whore, thou cotqueane, and scrattop of scoldes, will thou never leave afflicting a dead Carcass, continually read the rethorick
lecture of Ramme-Allie? a wispe, a wispe, a wispe, rippe, rippe you kitchen
stuff wrangler.

Were thou put in the Fleet for pamphleting? Bedlem were a meeter place for
thee. Be not ashamd of your promotion, they did you honor that said you were
Fleete-bound, for men of honor have sailde in that Fleet.

VVast paper made thee betake thy self to Limbo Patrum, had it been a book
that had been vendible, yet, the opproby had been the less, but for
Chandlers merchandise to be so massacred; for sheets that serve for nothing but
to wrappe the excrements of huswiuerie in, Proh Deum, what a spite is it. I
have seen your name cut with a knife in a wall of the Fleet I: when I went
to visit a friend of mine there. Let Master Butler of Cambridge his
testimonial end this controversy, who at that time that thy joys were in the
Fleeting, and thou crying for the Lords sake out at an iron window, in a lane
not far from Ludgate hill, questiond some of his companions very
inquisitiuelie that were newly come from London, what novelties they brought
home with them, amongst the rest he broke into this Hexamiter interrogatory
very abruptly.

But ah what news do you hear of that good Gabriel huffe snuff^,
Known to the world for a fool, and clapped in the Fleet for a Rimer.
Is It true Gibraltar, have I found you, It was not without foundation that you
burst into that magnifical insultation, I THAT IN MY YOVTH FLATTERD NOT MY
SELF, etc. for M. Butler for a Physician being none of the least Scholars,
has commended you exceedingly for a fool and a Rimer. He that threatened to
conjure up Martins wit, has written some thing too in your praise in
Pap-hatchet, for all you accuse him to have courtly incenst the Earl of
Oxford against you. Mark him well, he is but a little fellow, but he has
one of the best wits in England. Should he take thee in hand again (as he
flies from such inferior concertation) I prophecy that there would more
gentle Readers die of a merry mortality engendered by the eternal jests he
would maule theee with, than there have done of this last infection. I my self
that enjoy but a mite of wit in comparison of his tale^t, in pure affection to
my native country, make my style carry a press sail, am fain to cut off half
the stream of thy sport-breeding confusion, for fear it should cause a
general hicket throughout England. Green I can spare thy revenge no more
room in this book, thou have Phisitio^ John with thee, cope thou with him and
let me alone with the Ciuilian and Divine, whom if I live I will so incessantly
haunt, that to avoid the hot chase of my fiery quill, they shall be constraind
to ensconse themselves in an old Vrinall case that their brother left behind
him. Yet ere I bid thee good night, receive some notes as touching his
phisicallity deceased. He had his grace to be Doctor ere he died. As time may
work all things. In Norfolk where he practiced he was reputed a proper
toward man at a medecin for the toothake, and one of the skilfullest
Physicians in casting the heavens water that ever came there.

How well beloved of the chiefest Gentlemen (and Gentlewomen especially) in
that shire, it is incredible to be spoken. Astra petit disertus, he is gone
to heaven to write more Astrologicall discourses, his brothers live to inherit
his old gowns, and remember his notable sayings, amongst the which this was
one: Vale Galene, farewell mine own dear Gabriell: Valete humanae arts,
heart and good will, but never a ragge of money. Tunc tua res agitur paries cum
proximus ardet.
Cloth-breeches house is burnt, and the flame goes a feasting to Pierce
Pennilesse house next.

Never til now, Gregory Habberdine, went thy four letters up Newgate, up
Holburne, up Tiburne, to hanging.

Gentlemen, by that which has been already laid open, I do not doubt but you
are vnwaueringly resolved, this indigested Chaos of Doctourship, and greedy
pothunter after applause, is an apparent Publican and sinner, a self-love
surfetted sot, a broken-winded galdbacke Jade, that has borne up his head in
his time, but now is quite foundred and tired, a scholar in nothing but the
scum of schollership, a stale soker at Tullies Offices, the droane of droanes,
and master drumble-bee of non proficients. What has he wrote but has had a
woeful end? When did he dispute but he duld all his auditorie? his Poetry
more spiritlesse than small beer, his Oratory Arts bastard, not able to make a
man rauishingly weep, that has an Onion at his eye. In Latin like a louse he
has many legs, many locks fleeced from Tullie to carry away and cloth a
little body of matter, but yet he moves but slowly, is apparaild very poorly.

In English, ice is not so cold, yet on the ice of ignorance will he slide. No
wise man pity him that perishes so wilfully.

Judge the world, judge the highest Courts of appeal from the miscarried
worlds judgment (Cambridge and Oxford) wherein I have trespassed in Pierce
Pennilesse, that he should talk of gnashing of teeth, young Phaetons, young
Icari, young Chorebi, young Babingtons.

Never was I in earnest til thus he twitted me with the comparison of a
traitor.

Babington, high was thy birth, I a bondslaue of fortune in comparison of thee,
thy fall greater than Phaetons, thy offense as heinous as Iudasses. May never
more such foul seeds of offense be sown in so fair a shape, may they be
marked always to mischief that mean as thou did. The branches of thy
stock remains yet vnblasted with any disobedience. God forbid that our
forheades should for ever be blotted with our forefathers misdemeanors. Die
ill deeds with your ungracious ill dooers, the living have no portion with the
dead, hell once paid his due, heaven gates are open to succeeding posterity.

Prate of Pierce Pennilesse and his paltrie as long as thou will, I will play
at put-pinne with thee for all that thou art worth, but of thy betters get
thee a better discoursing pen before thou descantes of.

L. Greenes inwardest companion pinched with want, vexed with discredit,
tormented with other men's felicity, and ouer-whelmed with his own misery, in
a rauing and frantike mood, most desperately exhibiteth a Supplication to the
Devil.

C. Herein thou think thou have won the spurs from all writers, but God and
Dame Fiction knows thou art far wide of thy aim; for neither was I Greenes
companion any more than for a carowse or two, nor pincht with any
vngentleman-like want, when I invented Pierce Pennilesse.

Pauper non est cui rerum suppetit vsus: only the discontented meditation of
learning generally now a days little valued, and her professors set at naught
and dishartened, caused me to handle that plaintiff subject more seriously.

Vexed with discredit (Gabriel) I never was as thou have been ever since
Familiarit as peperit contemptu^, thy familiar epistles brought thee in
contempt.

Though I have been pinched with want (as who is not at one time or another
Pierce Penilesse) yet my muse never wept for want of maintenance as thine did
in Musarum lachrimae, that was miserably flouted at in M. Winkfields Comoedie
of Pedantius in Trinity College.

How am I tormented with other men's felicity, otherwise tha^ saying, I know a
Cobbler that was worth five hundred pound, an hostler that had built a goodly
Inn, and might dispend forty pound yearly by his land, a Carman that had
whipped a thousand pound out of his horse tail; if I had likewise reckond up a
ropemaker, that by tormenting of hemp, and going backward (which the Devil
would nere do) had turned as many Mill sixpences over the thumb, as kept three
of his sons at Cambridge a long time, and that which is more, three proud
sons, that when they met the hangman (their Fathers best chapman) would
scarce put of their hats to him, why then thou should have had some color of
quarrel, thy accusation might justly have enterd his title pro aris and focis,
whereas now it is frivolous and forcelesse.

The sharpest wits I perceive have none of the best memories, if they had, thou
would nere have touched me with tormenting my self with other men's
felicity; for how did thou torment thy self with other men's felicity, when
in the 28. Page of thy first tome of Epistles thou exclaimst that in no age so
little was so much made of, nothing aduaunst to be something, Numbers made of
Ciphars, that is by interpretation, all those that were aduaunst either in the
Court or commonwealth at that time, had little to commend them, nothing in
account worthy preferment, but were mere meacocks and Ciphars in comparison of
thy excellent outcast self that liu'dst at Cambridge vnmounted.

Hang thee, hang thee, thou common coosener of courteous readers, thou gross
shifter for shitten tapsterly jests, have I imitated Tarltons play of the
seven deadly sins in my plot of Pierce Penilesse? whom have thou not
imitated then in the course of thy book? thou have borrowed above twenty
phrases and epithites from me, which in sober sadness thou makst use of as
thy own, when thou would exhort more effectual.

Is it lawful but for one preacher to preach of the ten commandments? has
none writ of the five senses but Aristotle? was sin so utterly abolished with
Tarltons play of the seven deadly sins, that there could be nothing said supra
of that argument?

Can thou exemplify unto me (thou impotent moate-catching carper) one
minnum of the particular device of his play that I purloind? There be many men
of one name that are nothing a kindred. Is there any further distribution of
sins, not shadowed under these 7. large spreading branches of iniquity, on
which a man may work, and not tread on Tarletons heels. If not, what blemish
is it to Pierce Pennilesse to begin where the Stage does end, to build virtue
a Church on that foundation that the Devil built his Chapel.

Gabriell, if there be any wit or industry in thee, now I will dare it to
the uttermost: write of what thou will, in what language thou will, and I will
confute it and answer it. Take truths part, and I will prove truth to be no
truth, marching out of thy du^gvoiding mouth.

Divinity I except, which admits no dalliance: but in any other art or
profession, of which I am not yet free, and thou shall challenge me to try
maistries in, I Will bind my self Prentise too* and study thoroughly, though it
never stand me in any other stead while I live but to make one reply, only
because I will have the last word of thee.

I would count it the greatest punishment that In speech could lay upon me, to
be bound to study the Danish tongue, which is able to make any Englishman have
the mumpes in his mouth, that shall but plunge through one full point of it,
yet the Danish tongue, or any Turks, or hogs, or dogs tongue whatsoever would I
learn rather than be put down by such a ribauldry Don Diego as thou art.

Heigh drawer, fill us a fresh quart of newfound phrases, since Gabriell says
we borrow all our eloquence from Tauerns: but let it be of the mighty Bordeaux
grape, pure vino de monte I conjure thee, by the same token that the Devils
dancing school in the bottom of a man's purse that is empty, has been a
gray-beard Proverb two hundred years before Tarlton was borne: Ergo no
gramercy Dicke Tarlton. But the sum of sums is this, I drink to you M.
Gabriell, on that condition, that you shall not excruciate your brain to be
conceited and have no wit.

Since we are here on our prating bench in a close room, and that there is
none in company but you my approved good friends four Letters and certain
Sonnets your Pages; I will rehearse unto you some part of the Method of my
demeanor in Pierce Pennilesse.

First, insomuch as the principal scope of it is a most lively anatomy of
sin, the devil is made special superuisor of it, to him it is dedicated, as
if a man should compile a curious examined discovery of whoredom, and
dedicate it to the quarter Masters of Bridewell, because they are best able to
punish it.

Wherefore as there is no fire without some smoke; no complaint without some
precedent cause of aggreeuance; I introduce in a discontented Scholar under
the person of Pierce Pennilesse, tragicallie exclaiming upon his partial-eid
fortune, that kept an Alms box of compassion in store for every one but
himself. He tells how he tossed his imagination like a a dog in a blanket,
searched every corner of the house of Charity to see if he could light on any
that would set a new nappe of an old threedbare Cloak: but like him that
having a letter to deliver to a Scottish Lord, when he came to his house to
enquire for him found no body at home but an ape that sat in the Porch and
made mops and mows at him; so he delivering his vnperusde papers to Powles
Churchyard, the first that took them up was the Ape Gabriel, who made mops and
mows at them, beslauering the outside of them a little, but could not enter
into the contents, which was an ase beyond his understanding.

With the first and second leaf he plays very preti^ie, and in ordinary
terms of extenuating, verdits Pierce Pennilesse for a Grammar School wit;
says his Margin is as deeply learnd as Fauste praecor gelida, that his Muse
sobbeth and groneth very piteously, bids him not cast himself headlong into
the horrible gulf of desperation, comes over him that he is a creature of
wonderful hope as his own inspired courage divinely suggesteth, wills him to
inchaunt some magnificent Mecenas to honor himself in honoring him, with a
hundred such grace wanting Ironies cut out against the woll, that would
ieopard the best joint of Poetica licentia to procure laughter, when there
crinckled crabbed countenance (the very resemblance of a sodden dogs face)
has sworn it would never consent thereunto.

Not the most exquisite thing that is, but the Counsel Table Ass Richard
Clarke, may so Carte^ly deride.

Every Milke-maide can gird, with Is It true? How say you lo? who would have
thought it? Good Bear bite not? A man is a man though he has but a hose on
his head.

No such light payment Gabriel have thou at my hands; I tell thee where, when,
and how thou shewdst thy self a Dunsiuall.

Only external defects thou casts in my dish, nothing internal in thee, but
I prove that it is altogether excrementall.

A few Elegeicall verses of mine thou pluckest in pieces most ruthfullie, and
quotes them against me as aduantageable, together with some dismembered Margin
notes, but all is ink cast away, you recover no costs and charges. With one
minutes study I Will destroy more, than thou art able to build in ten days.

Squeise thy heart into thy inkehorne, and it shall but congeal into clodderd
garbage of confutatio^, thy soul has no effects of a soul, thou can not
sprinkle it into a sentence, and make every line leap like a cup of neat wine
new powered out, as an Orator must do that lies aright in wait for men's
affections.

Whom have thou won to hate me by light crawling over my Text like a
Cankerworme.

Some superficial slime of poison have thou driueld from thy pen in thy shallow
footed sliding through my Supplication, which one pen full of ^epurified ink
will excessiuelie wash out. Shall I inform thee (that vnfruitfullie endeuorst
to inform authority against me) why I infixed those Poetical latin marge^t
notes to some few pages in the beginning of Pierce Pennilesse? I did it to
explain to such expected spiefaul^s as thou art, that it was no uncouth
abhorrencie from the custom of former writers, for a man openly to bewail his
undeserved ill destenie.

In the uncasing of thy brother Richard, I calculated the Nativity of the
Astrologicall Discourse, I apparentlie suggested what a lewd ^iece of Prophecy
it was, I registered the infinite scorn that the whole Realm intertaind it
with, the A dages that ran upon it, Tarltons and Eldertons nigrum THETA set to
it, yet will thou that art the son and heir to shameless impudence, the
vnlineall usurper of judgment from all his true owners, the HOYDEN and
pointing stock recreation of Trinity hall, Vanitas vanitatis and ^mnia
vanitas, inuest that in the highest throne of Art and Schollership, which
ascrutinie of so many millions of well discerning condemnations has concluded
^o be viler, than newesmungrie, and that which is vilest of all, no less vile
than thy Epistles.

Most voices, most voices, most voices; who is on my side who? Whether is the
Astrologicall Discourse a better book than Pierce Pennilesse? Gabriel
hangtelow says it is, I am the Defendant* and deny it, and yet I do not
ouercull my own works: His assetrion he countermures thus.

Pierce Pennilesse is a man better acquainted with the Devils of hell, than the
Stars of Heaven: Ergo, the Astrologicall Discourse is better than the
notorious diabolical discourse of Pierce Pennilesse.

Once again I deny his Argument to be of lawful age* Pierce Pennilesse is a
better Starmunger than a Diuelmunger, which needs no other FOR to corroberate
it but this, that my yea, at all times is as good as his nay.

How is the Supplication a diabolical Discourse, otherwise than as it entreats
of the diverse natures and properties of Devils and spirits; in that far fetched
sense may the famous defensatiu^ against supposed Prophecies; and the
Discovery of Witchcraft be called notorious Diabolical discourses, as well as
the Supplication, for they also entreat of the illusions and sundry
operations of spirits: Likewise may I say that those his four Letters now on
their trial are four notorious lousy Discourses, because they lyingly
discourse little else save Greenes lousy estate before his death.

M. Churchyard our old quarrel is renewed when nothing else can be fastened on
me, this Letter leapper vpbraideth me with crying you mercy, I cannot tell,
but I think you will have a saying to him for it. There Is no reason that such a
one as he should presume to intermeddle in your matters, it cannot be done with
any intent but to stir me up to write against you a fresh, which nothing
under heaven shall draw me to do. I love you unfeignedly, and admire your aged
Muse, that may well be grandmother to our grand-eloquentest Poets at this
present.

Sanctum and venerabile vetus omne Poema.
Shores wife is young, though you be stepped in yeare^, in her shall you live when
you are dead.

For that unadvised in dammagement I have done you heretofore, I Will be your
champion hence forward against any that dare write against you. Only as ever
you would light upon a good cup of old sack when you are most dry, pocket
not up this sly abuse at a rakehell rampalions hands, one that when an injury
is deep buried in the grave of oblivion, shall seek to dig it up again,
recall that into men's memories which was consumed and forgotten.

Whoreson Ninihammer, that wilt assault a man and have no stronger weapons.

The Italian says, a man must not take knowledge of injury till he be able to
revenge it.

Nay but in plain good fellowship, art thou so innocent and vnconceiuing, that
thou should ere hope to dash me quite out of request by telling me of the
Counter, and my hostess Penia.

I yield that I have dealt upon spare commodities of wine and ^apons in my
days, I have sung George Gascoignes Counter-tenor; what then? VVi^t thou
peremptorily define that it is a place where no honest man, or Gentleman of
credit ever came?

Hear what I say, a Gentleman is never thoroughly entered into credit till he
has been there; and that Poet or nouice, be he what he will, ought to
suspect his wit, and remain half in a doubt that it is not authentical, till
it has been seen and allowd in unthrifts consistory.

Grande doloris ingenium. Let fools dwell in no stronger houses than their
Fathers built them, but I protest I should never have writ passion well, or
been a piece of a Poet, if I had not arrived in those quarters.

Trace the gallantest youths and brauest reuellers about Town in all the
bypath of their expense, and you shall infallibly find, that once in their
life time they have visited that melancholy habitation.

Come come, if you will go to the sound truth of it, there is no place of the
earth like it to make a man wise.

Cambridge and Oxford may stand under the elbowe of it.

I vow if I had a son, I would sooner send him to one of the Counters to
learn law, than to the Innes of Court or Chauncery.

My hostess Penia, that's a bugges word, I pry thee what Morrall have thou
under it? I will depose if thou will that till now I never heard of any such
English name.

There is a certain thing called christian verity, and another hight common
sense, and a third cleapt humility, they are more requisite and necessary for
thee, than modesty or discretion for me and my companions, of which would
thou should understand, we are so well provided, that we can lend thee and
thy brother Richard a great deal, and yet keep more than we shall have need
of for ourselves.

VVilt thou be so hardy and iron-visaged, to gainsay that thy brother Vicars
Batchlours hood was not turned over his ears for abusing of Aristotle, I know
thou have more grace than so, thou do not contradict it flatly, but slubbers
it over faintly, and comes to recapitulate not confute some of the phrases I
used in the vnhandsoming of his diuinitiship.

I my self in the same order of disgracing thou singles them forth will have
them up again, and see if thou or any man can absurdifie the worst of them.

I say, and will make it good, that in the Astrologicall discourse thy brother
(as if he had lately cast the heavens water, or been at the anatomizing of
the skies intrailes in Surgeons hall) prophesies of such ^trange wonders to
ensue from the stars distemperature, and the unusual adultery of plannets,
as none but ^ee that is bawd to those celestial bodies could ever des^ry.

This too I will ratify for truthable and legible English, that his Astronomy
broke his day with his creditors, and Saturn and Jupiter proved honester men
than all the world took them for.

That the whole University hist at him, Tarlton at the Theater made ieastes of
him, and Elderton consumed his ale cramined nose to nothing, in heare-^ai^ing
him with whole bundels of Ballads.

All this he barely repeates without any disprouement or denudation at all, as
if it were so lame in it self, that it would adnihilate it self with the
onel^e rehearsal of it.

For the gentilitie of the Nashes (though it might seem a humor borrowed from
thee to brag of it) yet some of us who never sought into it ^il of late, can
prove the extancy of our ancestors before there was ever a ropemaker in
England. We can vaunt larger petigrees than patrimonies, yet of such
extrinsecall things common to ten thousand calves and oxen, would not I
willingly vaunt, only it has pleased M* Printer both in this book and Pierce
Pennilesse, to inuaile a vain title to my name, which I care not for, without
my consent or priuitie I here avouch.

But on the gentilitie of T. N. his beard, the master Butler of Pembroke hall,
still I will stand to the death; for it is the very prince Elector of peaks, a
beard that I cannot be persuaded but was the Emperor Dionisius his, surnamed
the Tyrant, when he playde the schoolemaister in Corinth.

Gabriell, thou have a pretty polwigge sparrows tail peake, yet may thou not
compare with his: thy Father, for all by thy own confession he makes hairs,
had never the art to twilt up such a grim triangle of hair as that.

Be not offended honest T. N. that I am thus bold with thee, for I affect thee
for the names sake as much as any one man can do another, and know thee to be a
sine fellow, and fit to discharge a far higher calling than that wherein thou
live.

What more stuff lurketh behind in this letter to be distributed into
shop-dust?

Pierce Pennilesse is as childish and garish a book as ever came in print;
when he talks of the sheepish discourse of the Lamb of God and his enemies, he
says, it is monstrous and absurd, and not to be sufferd in a Christian
congregation; that Richard has scumd over the schoolmen, and of the froth of
their folly made a dish of Divinity brewesse which the Dog's would not eat.

If he said so (as he did) and can prove it (as he has done) by Saint
Lubecke then The Lamb of God is as childish and garish stuff as ever came in
print indeed.

I but how does Pierce Pennilesse expiate the coinquination of these objections.

Richard, whom (because he is his brother, he therefore censures more curious
and rigorous, in calling him M. H. than he would have done otherwise) red the
Philosophy Lecture in Cambridge with good liking and singular commendation,
when A perse a was not so much as Idoneus auditor ciuilis scientiae, Ergo, the
Lamb of God bears a better Fleece than he gives out it does.

A perse a is improoued nothing since, excepting his old Flores Poetarum, and
Tarletons surmounting rethorique, with a little euphuisme and Greenesse enough.

Gabriel reports him to the fauourablest opinion of those that know A perse a
his Prefaces, rimes, and the very timpanie of his Tarltonizing wit his
Supplication to the Devil.

Quiet your selves a little my Masters, and you shall see me dispearse all
those clouds well enough. That Richard red the Philosophy Lecture at
Cambridge, I do not withstand, but how?

Very Lentenlie and scantly, (far be it we should slander him so much as
his brother Richard has done, to say he read it with good liking and
singularity.) Credit me, any that has but a little refuse Colloquium
Latin, to interseame a Lecture with, and can say but Quapropter vos mei
auditores may read with equivalent commendation and liking.

I remember him woondrous well. In the chief pomp of that his false praise, I
both heard him and heard what was the universal slender valuation of him.

There was eloquent Master Knox, (a man whose loss all good learning can
never sufficiently deplore) it was he and one Master Jones of Trinity College,
that in my time with more special approbation conuerst in those Readings.

Since I have heard of two rare young men M. Meriton and another, that in
supplying that place of succession have surmounted all former mediocritie, and
won themselves an everlasting good name in the University.

These thou should have memoriz'd if any, but thou art given to speak well
of none but thy self and thy two brothers.

Thrice fruitful S. John's, how many hundred perfecter Scholars than the three
brothers have thou nursed at thy paps, that yet have not shakte off obscurity?

Mellifluous PLAYFERE one of the chief props of our aged, and auntientest, and
absolutest Universities present flourishing. Where do thy supereminent gifts
shine to themselves, that the Court cannot be acquainted with them.

Few such men speak out of Fames highest Pulpits, though out of her highest
Pulpits speak the purest of all speakers.

Let me add one word, and let it not be thought derogatorie to any, I cannot
bethink me of two in England in all things comparable to him for his time.
Seldom have I beheld so pregnant a pleasant wit coupled with a memory of
such huge incomprehensible receipt, deep reading and delight better mixed than
in his Sermons.

Sed quorsum haec, how do these digressions link in with our Subiectum circa
quod?

Flaunting Richard and his Philosophy Lecture, was under our fingers even now,
howsoever we have lost him. Hold the candle, and you shall see me cast a
figure for him extempore: Oh hoh, I have found him without any further
seeking. Give me your ears Io Paean, God save them they are long ones.

Now between you and me declare as if you were at shrift, whether you be not a
superlatiue block for all you readd the Philosophy Lecture at Cambridge:
Briefly, briefly, let me not stand all day about you.

His conscience accuses him, he is stroke stark dumb, only by signs he
craves to be admitted in forma pauperis that we should let him pass for a
pore fellow, and he will sell his birthright in learning with Esau for a mess
of porrige.

Cura leaves loquuntur, he has but a little cure to look too. Maiores stupent,
more living would make him study more.

For this once we dispense with you because you look so penitentlie on it, but
let not me catch you selling any more such twice sodden sawdust divinity as
the Lamb of God and his enemies, for if I do, I Will make a dearth of paper in
Pater-noster-rowe (such as was not this seven year) only with writing
against thee.

A perse a can do it, tempt not his clemency too much. A perse a?

Passion of God how came I by that name; my godfather Gabriel gave it me, and
I must not refuse it. Nor if you were privy whence it came would you hold it
worthy to be refused, for before I had the reuersion of it he bestowed it on
a Noble man, whose new fashiond apparel, and Tuscanish gestures, cringing
sidenecke, eyes glancing, fisnomie smerking, having described to the full, he
concludes with this verse, Every inch A perse a his terms and braueries in
print.

Hold you your peace Nashe: that was before you were Idoneus auditor ciuilis
scientiae. It may be so, for thou were a Libeller before I was borne. Yet
under correction be it spoken, I have come to the schools and purged rheum
many a time, when your brother was Philosophy Lecturer, he wanted no supplosus
pedu^ to spend away his hour that I could help him with.

What since I am improued, you partly have proved to your cost, and may do
more at large if God send us more leisure.

As for Flores Poetarum, they are flowers that yet I never smelt too. I Will pawn
my hand to a halfepenny I have readd more good Poets thorough, than thou ever
hardst off.

The flowers of your Four Letters it may be I have ouerlookt more narrowly,
and done my best deuoire to assemble them together into patheticall posie,
which I will here present to Master Orator Edge for a New years gift, leaving
them to his wordie discretion to be censured whether they be current in
inkehornisme or no.

Conscious mind: canicular tales: egregious an argument: when as egregious is
never used in english but in the extreme ill part. Ingenuitie: Iouiall mind:
valarous Authors: inckehorne adventures: inckehorne pads: putatiue opinions:
putatiue artists: energeticall persuasions: Rascallitie: materiallitie:
artificiallitie, Fantasticallitie: divine Entelechy: loud Mentery: deceitful
perfidy: addicted to Theory: the worlds great Incendiarie: sire^ized furies:
sovereignty immense: abundant Cauteles: cautelous and aduentrous: cordial
liquor: Catilinaries and Phillipicks: perfunctorie discourses: David's sweetness
olimpique: The Idee high and deep Abisse of excellence: The only Unicorn of
the Muses: the Aretinish mountain of huge exaggerations: The gracious law of
Amnesty: amicable terms: amicable end: Effectuate: addoulce his melody: Magy
polimechany: extensiuely emploid: precious Traynment: Nouellets: Notorietie
negotiation: mechanician.

Nor are these all, for every third line has some of this ouer-rackt
absonisme. Nor do I altogether scum off all these as the new engendered foam of
the English, but allow some of them for a need to fill up a verse; as
Traynment, and one or two words more, which the liberty of prose might well
have spared. In a verse, when a word of three sillables cannot thrust in but
sidelings, to joint him even, we are oftentimes feign to borrowe some lesser
quarry of elocution from the Latin, always retaining this for a principle,
that a leake of indesinence as a leake in a ship, must needly be stopped, with
what matter soever.

Chaucers authority I am certain shall be alleadgd against me for a many of
these balductums. Had Chaueer lived to this age, I am verily persuaded he
would have discarded the tone half of the harsher sort of them,

They were the Oouse which ouerflowing barbarism, withdrawn to her Scottish
Northren channel, had left behind her. Art like young grass in the spring of
Chaucers flourishing, was glad to peep up through any slime of corruption, to
be beholding to she cared not whom for apparaile, travailing in those cold
countries. There is no reason that she a banished Queen into this barraine
soil, having monarchizd it so long amongst the Greeks and Romans, should
(although wars fury had humbled her to some extremity) still be constrained
when she has recouerd her state, to wear the robes of adversity, iet it in
her old rags, when she is wedded to new prosperity.

Vtere moribus praeteritis, says Caius Caesar in Aulus Gellius, loquere verbis
praesentibus.

Thou art mine enemy Gabriell, and that which is more, a contemptible
underfoot enemy, or else I would teach thy old Trewantship the true use of
words, as also how more inclinable verse is than prose to dance after the
horrizonant pipe of inueterate antiquity.

It is no matter, since thou have brought godly instruction out of love with
thee, use thy own destruction, reign sole Emperor of inkehornisme, I wish
unto thee all superabundant increase of the singular gifts of absurdity, and
vaineglory: from this time forth for ever, ever, ever, evermore may thou be
canonized as the Nun parreille of impious epistles, the short shredder out of
sunday sentences without lime, as Quintillian termed Seneca all lime, and no
sand; all matter, and no circumstance; the factor for the Fairies, and night
Vrchins, in supplanting and setting aside the true children of the English, and
suborning inkehorne changlings in their stead, the galimafrier of all styles
in one standish, as imitating every one, and having no separate form of
writing of thy own; and to conclude, the only feather-driuer of phrases, and
putter of a good word to it when thou have once got it, that is betwixt this
and the Alps. So be it world without end. Chroniclers hear my prayers.
Good Master Stowe be not unmindful of him.

That's well remembered, now I talk of Chroniclers, I found the Astrologicall
discourse the other night in the Chronicle. Gabriell will outface us it is a
work of such deep art and judgment, when it is expressly past under record
for a coosening prognostication. The words are these, though somewhat
abreuiated; for he makes a long circumlocution of it.

In the year 1583. by means of an Astrologicall discourse upon the great and
notable conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, the common sort of people were
almost driu'n out of their wits, and knew not what to do: but when no such
thing happened, they fell to their former security, and condemned the discourse
of extreme madness and folly.

Ipsissima sunt Aristotelis verba, they are the very words of John Tell-troth
in the 1357. folio of the last edition of the great Chronicle of England.

Mehercule quidem, if it be so taken up, Pierce P^nnilesse may well cast his
cappe after it for ever ouertaking it. But some thing even now Gabriell thou
were girding against my praefaces and rimes, and the timpanie of my
Tarltonizing wit.

Well these be your words, praefaces and rimes, let me study a little
praefaces and rimes. Minime vero; si ^is nego. I never printed rhyme in my life
but those verses in the beginning of Pierce Pennilesse, though you have set
forth, The stories quaint of many a doutie fly,
That read a lecture to the ventrous elfe.
And so forth as follows in chambling row.

Praefaces two, or a pair of Epistles I will receive into the protection of my
parentage, out of both which, suck out one solaecisme or misshapen English word
if thou can for thy guts.

Wherein have I borrowed from Green or Tarlton, that I should thank them for
alI I have? Is my style like Greenes, or my ieasts like Tarltons? Do I talk of
any counterfeit birds, or herbs, or stones, or rake up any newfound poetry
from under the walls of Troy? If I do, trip me with it; but I do not,
therefore I Will be so saucy as trip you with the grand lie. Ware stumbling of
whetstones in the dark there my masters*

This I will proudly boast (yet am I nothing a kindred to the three brothers)
that the vain which I have (be it a median vain, or a mad man) is of my
own begetting, and ca^s no man father in England but my self, neither
Euphues, nor Tarlton, nor Green.

Not Tarlton nor Green but have been contented to let my simple judgment
ouerrule them in some matters of wit. Euphues I readd when I was a little ape
in Cambridge, and then I thought it was Ipse ille, it may be excellent good
still for ought I know, for I looked not on it this ten year: but to imitate it
I abhor, otherwise than it imitates Plutarch, Ovid, and the choicest Latin
Authors.

If you be aduisde I took shortest vowels and long^st mutes in the beginning
of my book as suspicious of being accessarie to the making of a Sonnet whereto
Master Christopher Birds name is set, there I said that you mute forth many
such phrases in the course of your book which I would point at as I past by:
Here I am as good as my word, for I note that thou being afraid of beraying
thy self with writing, would feign be a mute, when it is too late to
repent. Again, thou reuiest on us and say, that mutes are coursed and vowels
haunted. Thou art no mute, yet shall thou be haunted and coursed to the full. I
will never leave thee as long as I am able to lift a pen.

Whether I seek to be counted a terrible bulbegger or no, I Will bait thee
worse than a bull so that the thou shall desire some body on thy knees to help
thee with letters of commendation to Bull the hangman, that he may dispatch
thee out of the way before more affliction come upon thee.

All the inuectiue and satericall spirits shall then be thy familiars, as the
furies in hell are the familiars of sinful ghosts to follow them and torment
them without intermission: thou shall be double girt with girds, and scoft at
till those that stand by do nothing but cough with laughing.

Thou say I profess the art of railing, thou shall not say so in vain, for
if there be any art or depth in it, more than Aretine or Agrippa have
discovered or diu'd into, look that I will sound it and search it to the
uttermost, but ere I have done with thee i will leave thee the miserablest
creature that the sun ever saw.

There is no kind of peaceable pleasure in poetry, but I can draw equally in
the same yoke with the haughtiest of those foule-mouthd backbiters, that say I
can do nothing but rail.

I have written in all sorts of humors privately I am persuaded, more than any
young man of my age in England.

The weather is cold, and I am w^arie with confuting, the remainder of the
cold contents of this Epistle be these.

He enuiously endeavors since he cannot revenge himself to incense men of high
calling against me, and would enforce it into their opinions, that whatsoever is
spoken in Pierce Pennilesse, concerning Pesants, Clownes and hipocriticall
hot-spurs, Midasses, Buckram Giants, and the mighty Prince of darkness is
meant of them, let him prove it, or bring the man to my face to whom I ever
made any undutiful exposition of it, I am to be my own interpreter in this
first case. I say in Pierce Pennilesse I have set down nothing but that which
I have had my president for, in foreign writers, nor had I the least allusion
to any man set above me in in degree, but only glanc'st at vice generally.

The tale of the Bear and the Fox, how ever it may set fools heads a work a
far off, yet I had no concealed end in it, but in the one, to describe the
right nature of a bloudthirsty tyrant, whose indefinite appetite all the
pleasures in the earth have no power to bound in goodness, but he must seek a
new felicity in variety of cruelty, and destroying all other men's
prosperity; for the other, to figure an hypocrite: Let it be Martin if you
will, or some old dog that bites sorer than he, who secretly goes and
seduceth country Swains.

Makes them believe that that honny which their bees brought forth was
poisonous and corrupt.

That they may buy honny cheaper than by being at such charges in keeping of
bees.

That it is not necessary they should have such stately hiues or lie sucking at
such precious honnicombs.

If this (which is nothing else but to swim with the stream) be to tell tales
as shrewdly as mother Hubbard, it should seem mother Hubbard is no great
shrewe, howeuer thou treading on her heels so often, she may be tempted
beyond her ten commandments.

A little before this the foresaid fanaticall Phobetor, geremumble,
tirleriwhisco, or what you will, called forth the biggest gunshot of my thundering
terms steept in Aqua fortis and gunpowder to come and try them selves on his
paper Target.

But that it is no credit Galpogas to discharge a Cannon against a lowse, thou
should not call in vain, thou should hear Tom a Lincoln roar with a
witness, woe worth the da^e and the year when thou hear him. I feareblast
thee now but with the wind of my weapon. With the wast of my words, I lay
wast all the feeble fortifications of thy wit. Show me the Universities hand
and seal that thou art a Doctor sealed and delivered in the presence of a
whole Commensement, and I Will present thee with my whole artillery store of
eloquence.

A bots on thee for me for a lumpish leaden heeld letter dawber, my style with
treading in thy clammie steps is grown as heavy gated, as if it were bound to
an Aldermans pace, with the irons at Newgate called the widows Alms.

Ere I was chained to thee thus by the neck, I was as light as the Poet
Accius, who was so low and so slender that he was feign to put lead into his
shoes for fear the wind should blow him into another Country.

Those that catch Leopards set cups of wine before them; those that will win
liking and grace of the readers, must set before them continually that which
shall cheer them, and revive them.

Gabriell, thou have not done so, thou can not do so, therefore rhy works
neither have, nor can any way hinder me, nor benefit the Printer.

Even in the packing up of my book a hot ague has me by the back. Maugre
sickness worst, a lean arm put out of the bed shall grind and pash every
crum of thy book into pin-dust.

The next piece of service thou do against Pierce Pennilesse, is the naming
of him woeful pouerett^, and pleasant supposing thou puldst him by the ragged
sleene: Then matchest thou thy self to Ulysses, and him to Irus, Irrita sunt
haec omnia: it is a sleeuelesse jest, I have besliu'd thee already for it, it
touches the body and not the mind. Besides I was never altogether Peter
Poueretto, utterly thrown down, desperately separated from all means of
releeuing my self, since I knew how to separate a knave from an honest man, or
throw my cloak over my nose, when I salied by the Counters.

The ragged cognizance on the sleeue, I may say to thee, carried meat in the
mouth when time was, do not dispraise it yet, for it has many high partakers.
Qua sequuntur huiusmodi sunt.

Thou turmoilst thy piamater, to prove base births better than the offspring of
many discents, because thou art a mushrumpe sprung up in one night, a seely
mouse begotten on a moulehill, that would feign perch thy self on the
mountains, when thy legs are too short to overcome such a long journey of
glory.

My margent note, Meritis expendite causam, thou would rather than any thing
wrest to an enditment of arrogance, and so branch me into thy tiptoe stock. I
cannot see how thou can compass it: For though I bad them weigh the cause by
deserts, yet I did not assume too much to my own deserts, when I expostulated,
why Cobblers, Hostlers, and Carmen should be worth so much, and so much, and I a
scholar and a good fellow a beggar. How thou have arrogated to thy self more
than Lucifer, or any Miles glori^sus in the world would do, I have already
noted at large in his due place and order. If thou bestowst any courtesy on
me, and I do not requite it, then call me cut, and say I was brought up at
Hoggenorton where pigges play on the Organs.

Were thou well acquainted with me, thou should perceive that I am very
frank where I take, and send away none empty-handed that give me but half an
ill word.

It is a good sign of grace in thee, that thou confessest thou have offenses
enough of thy own to answer, though thou be not chargd with thy Fathers.
Once in thy life thou speakst true yet, I believe thee, and pity thee. God
make thee a good man, for thou have been a wild youth hitherto.

Thy Hexameter verses, or thy hue and cry after a person as clear as
Crystal, I do not so deeply commend, for all Master Spencer long since
imbrast it with an ouer-louing sonnet.

Why should friends dissemble one with another, they are very ugly and
artlesse. You will never leave your old tricks of drawing M. Spencer into
every pybald thing you do. If ever he praisd thee, it was because he had picked
a fine vain fool out of thee, and he would keep thee still a foot by
flattring thee, til such time as he had brought thee into that extreme love
with thy self, that thou should run mad with the conceit, and so be scorned
of all men.

Yet yet Gabriell, are not we set non plus, thy roister doisterdome has not
dashed us out of countenance. If any man use boistrous horse play, or be
beholding to Carters Logique, it is thy self; for with none but clownish and
roynish ieasts do thou rush upon us, and keepst such a flurting and a
flinging in every leaf, as if thou were the only reasty jade in a country.

Skolding thou say is the language of shrewes* railing the style of
rakehels; what concludst thou from thence? Do I scold? do I rail?

Scolding and railing is loud miscalling and reuiling one another without wit,
speaking every thing a man knows by his neighbor, though it be never so
contrary to all humanity and good manners, and would make the standers by
almost perbrake to hear it. Such is thy in^ectiue against Green, where thou
talkst of his lowsines, his sur^e^ing, his begge^ie, and the mother of
Infortunatus infirmities. If I scold, if I rail, I do but cum ratione
insanire, Tully, Ovid, all the old Poets, Agrippa, Aretine, and the rest are
all scolds and railers, and by thy conclusion flat shrewes and rakehe^s: for I
do no more than their examples do warrant me.

The intoxicate spirit of grisly Euridice, I can toss over as lightly to thee,
as thou have pu^t it to me. My heart is praeoccupated with better spirits,
which have left her no house-roome: thou have no spirit as it should appear
by thy writing, intertaine her and the spirit of the buttery out of hand, or
thou will be beaten hand-smooth out of Bucklars bury.

When I parted with thy brother in Pierce Penilesse, I left him to be
tormented world without end of our Poets and writers about London, for calling
them piperly make-playes and makebates, not doubting but they would drive him
to this issue, that he should be constrained to go to the chief beam of his
benefice, and there beginning a lamentable speech with cur scripfi^cur pery,
end with Prauum praua decent, iuuat inconcessae voluptas, and so with a trice
trusse up his life in the string of his sance-bell. Now here thou thankst God
thou a^t not so uncharitably bent to put so much wit in a speech, like a Parson
in Lancashire that kneeld down on his knees in a zealous passion, and very
heartily thankt God he never knew what that vile Antichristian Romish Popish
Latin meant. Did I exhort ink and paper to pray that they might not be
troubled with him any more? Ink and paper if they be true Protestants will
pray, that they may not be contaminated any more with such abomination of
desolation, as the three brothers Apocripha pamphleting.

After all this foul weather ensues a calm dilatement of others too forward
harmefulnes, and thy own backward irefulnesse; that's dispatched, the court has
found it otherwise.

Then thou go about to bribe me to give over this quarrel, and say if I
will hold my peace, thou will bestow more complements of rare amplifications
upon me, than ever thou bestowdst on Sir Philip Sidney, and gentle Master
Spencer.

Thou flatterst me, and praisest me.

To make me a small seeming amends for the injuries thou have done me, thou
reckonst me up amongst the dear lovers and professed sons of the Muses,
Edmund Spencer, Abraham France, Thomas Watson, Samuel Daniell.

With a hundred blessings and many prayers thou intreatst me to love thee.

Content thy self, I will not.

Thou protests it was not my person thou mislikt (I am afraid thou will make
me thy Ingle) but my fierce running at Parson Richard, excusest me by my
youth, and promisest to cancel thy impertinent Pamphlet.

It were good hanging thee now thou art in such a good mind; yet for all this,
a dog will be a dog, and return to his vomit do what a man can, thou must
have one squibbe more at the Devils Orator, and his Dames Poet, or thy pen is
not in clean life. I will permit thee to say what thou will, to vnderlie (as
thou desir'st) the verdit of Fame her self, so I may lie above thee. LIE above
thee, tell greater lies than thou do no man is able.

Thus O heavenly Muse I thank thee for thou have given me the patience to
travel through the tedious wilderness of this Gomorian Epistle. Not Hercules
when he cleansed the stables of Aegeas, undertook such a stinking unsavory
exploit. By thy assistaunce through a whole region of golden lanes have I
iourneied, and now am safely arrived at not speedily dispatched but hastily
bungled up as you see. Grant that all such slow dispatchers and hasty
bunglers, may have a long time of reproach to repent them in, and not come
abroad to corrupt the air, and impostumate men's ears with their pan-pudding
prose any more. So be it, say all English people after me, that have ears to
hear or eyes to read.

Feci, feci, feci, had I my health, now I had leisure to be merry, for I have
almost washed my hands of the Doctor.

His own regenerate verses of the jolly Fly, and Gibeline and Gwelph some
peradventure may expect that I should answer. So I would if there were any
thing in them which I had not answered before, but there is nothing; if there
were, having driven his sword to his head, I respect not what he can do with
his dagger. Only I will look upon the last Sonnet of M. Spencers to the right
worshipful Master G.H. Doctor of the laws: or it may so fall out that I
will not look upon it too, because (Gabriell) though I vehemently suspect it
to be of thy own doing, it is popt forth under M. Spencers name, and his
name is able to sanctify any thing though falsely ascribed to it.

The fourth letter of our Orators to the same favorable or indifferent reader,
was a letter which this many a long summers day I dare ieopard my maydenhead
had line hidden in his deske, for it is a shipmans hose that will serve any man
as well as Green or me.

To make short, in it as forty times before, he brides it and simpers it out a
cry, No forsooth God dild you he would not that he would: None so desirous
of quiet as he good old man, who with a pure intent of peace, first put fire
to the flame that has hedgde him in.

He has prevented Master Bunnie of the second part of his treatise of
Pacification, for like some crafty ringleader of rebellion, when he has
stirred up a dangerous commotion, and finds by the too late examination of his
forevnexamined defects in himself, that so sweet a root will hardly effect
correspondent fruits strait in policy to get his pardon, he strikes sail to
that tempest of sedition, and is thrice as earnest in preaching pacification,
obedience, and submission: so Gabriel when he has stird up against me what
tumults he can in Stationers Shops, and left the quiver of his envy not an
arrow vndrawne out, he finds by the audit of his ill consumed defectes that he
is not of force enough to hold out, wherefore in policy to avoid further
arrearages of infamy he tires the text of reconciliation out of breath, and
hops by the intercession of a cup of white wine and sugar, to be made
friends with his fellow writers.

It cannot choose but he must of necessity be a very sore fellow, that is so
familiar with white wine and sugar, for white wine in a manner is good for
nothing but to wash sores in, and smudge up withered beauty with. Well for all
he would have Pierce make no wars on him, he makes wars on Pierce
Pennilesse, he be beggereth him again in this epistle very bountifully he
says that Lords must take heed how they Lord it in his presence.

That the Ass is the only Author he alleges. That Green is an Ass in
print, and he a calfe in print.

That they are both chiefetaines in licentiousness, and truth can s^ie the
abominable villainies of such base shifting companions, good for nothing but to
cast away themselves, spoil their adherents, etc.

For my beggerie let that travel the countries, I have said more for it than
a richer man would have done, but that I take upon me to Lord it over great
Lords thou art a most lewd tungd lurden to say it.

Must they take heed how they Lord it in my presence, what must they do then
in thy presence, That sitting liks a looker on
Of this worlds stage, do note with critique pen,
Thy sharp dislikes of each condition*
Ne fawnest for the favor of the great,
Ne fear foolish reprehension,
But freely do of what thee list entreat,
Like a great Lord of peerless liberty,
Lifting the good up to high honors seat,
And the evil damning evermore to die,
For life and death is in thy doom full writing.


Whereas thou say the Ass in a manner is the only Author I allege, I must
know how you define an Ass before I can tell how to answer you; for Cornelius
Agrippa makes all the Philosophers, Orators, and Poets that ever were Asses:
and if so you understand that I allege no Author but the Ass; for all
Authors are Asses, why I am for you; if otherwise, thou art worse than a Cumane
Ass to leap before thou lookst, and condemn a man without cause.

What Authors do thou allege in thy book, not two, but any Grammar
Scholar might have alleadgd?

There is not three kernels of more than common learning in all thy Four
Letters. Common learning? not common sense in some places.

Of force I must grant that Green came oftener in print than men of judgment
allowed off, but nevertheless he was a dainty slave to content the tail of a
Term, and ^^usfe Serving men's pockets.

An Ass Gabriel it is hard thou should name him: for calling me Calfe it
breaks no square, but if I be a calfe it is in comparison of such an Ox as
thy self.

The chiefetaines of licentiousnes, and truth can say the abominable villainies
of such base shifting companions, good for nothing, etc. I am of the mind we
shall not digest this neither.

Answer me succincte and expedite, what one period any way leaning to
licentiousnes, can thou produce in Pierce Pennilesse?

I talk of a great matter when I tell thee of a period, for I know two
several periods or full points in this last epistle, at least forty lines
long a piece.

For the order of my life it is as civil as a civil orange, I lurk in no
corners but converse in a house of credit as well governed as any College,
where there be more rare quallified men, and selected good Scholars than in
any Noblemans house that I know in England.

If I had committed such abominable villainies, or were a base shifting
companion, it stood not with my Lords honor to keep me, but if thou have
said it and can not prove it, what slandrous dishonor have thou done him, to
give it out that he keeps the committers of abominable villainies and base
shifting companions, when they are far honester than thy self.

If I were by thee I would pluck thee by the beard, and spit in thy face, but
I would dare thee and urge thee beyond all excuse to disclose and prove for
thy heart blood what villainy or base shifting by me thou can, I defy all
the world in that respect.

Because thou use at Cambridge to shift for thy Friday at night suppers, and
cosen poor victuallers and pie-wiues of Doctors cheese and puddinges, thou
think me one of the same religion too.

What Green was, let some other answer for him as much as I have done, I had
no tuition over him, he might have writ another Galataeo of manners, for his
manners every time I came in his company, I saw no such base shifting or
abominable villainy by him. Something there was which I have heard not seen,
that he had not that regard to his credit in which had been requisite he
should.

What a Calimunco am I to plead for him, as though I were as near him as his
own skin. A thousand there be that have more reason to speak in his
behalf than I, who since I first knew him about town have been two years
together and not seen him.

But I Will do as much for any man, especially for a dead man that cannot speak
for himself. Let us hear how we are good for nothing but to cast away our
selves, spoil our adherents, pray on our favorers, dishonor our Patrons.
Have I ever took any likely course of casting away my self?

Whom can thou name that kept me company and reapt any discommoditie by me,
I can name di^ers good Gentlemen that have been my adherents and favorers a
long time. Let them report how I have spoilde them, or praid on them, or put
them to one penny detriment since I first consorted with the^.

Have an eye to the maine-chaunce, for no sooner shall they understand what
thou have said by me of them, but they will go near to have thee about the
ears for this gear one after another.

My Patrons or any that bind me to them by the least good turn, there is no
man in England that is or shall (for my small power) be more thankful unto
than I. Never was I unthankful unto any, no not to those of whom for deeds
I received nothing but unperformed deed promising words. It is an honor to be
accusde and not conuinst.

One of these months I shall challenge martyrdom to my self, and writ large
stories of the persecution of tongues. Troth I am as like to persecute as be
persecuted. Let him take up his Cross and bless himself that crosses me,
for I will cross shinnes with him though every sentence of his were a
thousand tons of discourses, as Gabriel says every sentence of his is a
discourse. Quods, quods give me my Text pen again, for I have a little more
Text to lance.

The secretaries of art and nature, if it were not for frivolous contentions,
might bestead the commo^-welth with many puissant engines. As for example,
Bacons brazen nose, Architas wodden dove* dancing bals, fire breathing gourdes,
artificial flies to hang in the air by themselves, an egshell that shall run
up to the top of a spear.

Archimides made a heaven of brass, but we have nothing to do with old brass
and iron.

Appollonius Regimontanus did many pretty iugling tricks, but we had rather
drink out of a g^asse than a Judge, use a little brittle wit of our own, than
borrow any mirac^e metal of Devils.

Amongst all other stratagems and puissant engines what say you to Mates Pumpe
in Cheapeside, to pumpe over mutton and porridge into France: this cold
weather our soldiers c^n tell you have need of it, and poor field mi^e they
have almost got the colicke and stone with earing of prouant.

Consider of it well, for it is better than all Bacons, Architas, Archimedes,
Appollonius or Regiomontanus devices: for Gabriell that professes all these,
with all their help cannot make the bias bowl at Saffron Walden run down the
hill, when it is thrown down with the hardest hand that may be, but it will
turn up the hill again in spite of a man's teeth, and that which is worst,
give no reason for it.

The Parrat and the Peacock have leisure to revive and repolish their expired
works, you speak like a friend, well listen to you when you have repolished
and expired your perfected degree. A Demi Doctor, what a shame is it?

Because your books do call for a little more drink and a few more clothes
when they are gone to bed, that is, when they lie dead, you think ours should
do so too. No, no, we do not use to clappe a coat over a ierkin, or thrust any
of the children of our brain into their mothers womb again, and beget them a
new after they are once borne. If it be a horn book at his first conception*
let it be a horn book still, and turn not cat in the pan, convert the
Pater noster to a Primer, when it has begd it self out at the elbowes up and
down the country.

Thou did thou knewst not what in eeking this thy short-wasted Pamphlet, iwis
as thou say of thy self, Thou art an old tr^^ant, fitter to play the dumb
dog with some ancients, than the hissing snake.

Who be those an^ient dumbed dogs? we shall have you a Martinist when all comes
to al^, because you cannot thrive with the Civil Law, and that you may marry
her for any thing you are a kindred to her, therefore you will compare Whitegift
and Cartwright, white and black together, name the highest governors of the
Church without giving them any reverence or titles of honor, embrace any
religion which will be even with the profession that favors not you.

There is no bai^e or maine prise for it, but we must have you in the first
peeping forth of the spring, preaching out of a Pu^pit in the woods: you have
put on wolves raiment already, seduced many simple people under the habit of a
sheep in Wolfes p^i^t. If you protest and lie any more, it is not your ending
here like a sermon, that will make you be reputed for a saint.

Readers, a decayed student lately shipwrackt with Si vales been est, having
four Lightors of Letters, clean cast away on the rocks called the Bishop and
his Clarks, desires you all to pray for him, and he will recommend you all to
God in the next sermon he penneth for his brother Richard.

He has a mind to pay every man his own, though he has sustained great
loss in figh^, that which he cannot effect he beseeches ^he Lord to
accomplish, and even to work a miracle upon the deaf.

Lord if it be thy will, let him be an Ass still. Gentlemen, I have no more to
say to the Doctor, dispose of the victory as you please, shortly I will
present you wi^h some thing that shall be better than nothing, only give me a
gentle hire for my durtie day labor, and I am your bounden Orator forever.

Sonnetto.
Were there no wars, poor men should have no peace,
Incessant vvarres with waspes and droanes I cry:
He that begins, often knows not how to cease,
They have begun, I Will follow till I die.
I Will hear no truce, wrong gets no grave in me,
Abuse pell mell encounter with abuse:
Write he again, I Will write eternally.
Who feeds revenge has found an endless Muse.
If death ere made his black dart of a pen,
My pen his special Baily shall becum:
Somewhat I Will be reputed of among men,
By striking of this duns or dead or dum,
Awaite the world the Tragedy of wrath,
What next I paint shall trea^ no common path.
Aut nunquam tents aut perfice. Tho. Nashe.

Observations for the Readers of this book.
Item whatsoever for the most part is here in this book in change of letter,
is our adversaries own Text, and vnvaried words, either in this his convicted
Four Letters, or some other fustie treatise, set forth by him heretofore.

Then that I am wrested and utterly divorced from my own invention, and
constrained still still, before I am warm tirany one vain, to start away
suddenly, and follow him in his vanity.

Finally, Printers have many false stiches which are thus to be drawn up.

In the second page of C. for Baboune brother, read Baboune his brother. In
the 7. for allegorized and Abdias. read allegorized Abdias. in the 8. for set
hand, read set his hand. idem for headmen, read headman. in the first of D.
for Liuor post quiescat, read Liuor post fata quiescat. in the 5. for plaster
of Doctourship, read plais^rie or dawbing of Doctourship* in the 7. for
insolent inckehorne worm, read insolent incke worm, in the 2. of E. for Ass
in present, read Ass in presenti in the 3. for bestow upon, read bestow upon
him in the 5. for effect, read efficacy. in the 4. of F. for virtuous Sir John
Norris, read victorious Sir John Norris. in the 5. page of H. for I introduce
in a discontented Scholar, read I introduce a discontented Scholar. in the 8.
for^ is assentrion, read His assertion. in the 5. of I. for very company,
read v^^ie timpanie* in the 5. page of K. for in this first case, read first
in this case.

FINIS.

