MAN'S ACTIVE OBEDIENCE, OR THE POWER OF GODLINESS, especially in the
Commandment of the Gospel, which requires faith in every Christian: OR A
TREATISE OF FAITH, WORTHILY CALLED PRECIOVS faith, as being in it self a most
rare jewel of joy, and peerless Pearl, that excels in worth the highest
price.

Wherein is plainly declared what faith in Christ is, what properly is the
object of it, what is the special operation of faith, by which it may be
discerned; and the work about which it is principally employed, the subject
wherein it is placed; what things are needful to the making it up, what to the
being, and what to the wel-being of it; with the differences that are between
true believers and fained in all of them, and the uses thereof.

By Master WILLIAM NEGVS, lately Minister of Gods Word at Lee in Essex.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Nathaniel Newbery, and are to be sold
at his shop under S. Peter's Church in Cornehill, and in (...)-head Alley, at
the sign of the Star. 1619

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, SIR THOMAS SMITH, KNIGHT, GOVERNOR of the worthy
Companies of Merchants, traffiqueing in the East Indies, Moscouia, etc.
increase of grace, and all good things here, and fullness of glory hereafter.
RIght Worshipful, it was a preposterous custom of the Pharisees to sound a
trumpet when they did their alms, as if the act could not be known, unless
all the world were summoned to take notice: nay, that God which bids us give
alms in secret, can find a time both to eclipse the glory of that action,
published with so loud an alarm, and also to make the praise of well-doing
break forth as the light, though before never so much hidden; and that not
only at that day when the Lord shall come, who will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and then shall every man have praise of God 1. Cor. 4. 5.
; but even in this life often, the good works of some are manifest beforehand,
to their praise among me^. 1. King. 18. 13.
Was it not told my Lord (says that Noble Courtier) how I hid an hundred men
of the Lords Prophets by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water?
Yes Obadiah; thou could not do it so privily, but Eliah knows it, and many
more too, even all Gods people, which shall therefore for ever call thee
blessed. Renowned Sir, as God has given you a large portion in this worlds
good, so (which is no less a gift 2. Cor. 8. 1.
) have you an heart enlarged to communicate to the necessities of others. Your
bounty extends to many (as I am credibly informed); one I can speak of, much
obliged to your Worship in this kind, even mine own self, who for some years
have had a liberal allowance from you. A work though not done by stealth as
was Obadiahs (for God be thanked it is now no treason to feed the Prophets, or
the sonns of the Prophets), yet not so known as might be wished deeds of that
nature were to the better provoking of this cold age: but God has at length
provided you an Obadiahs reward, a public commendation for a private good
desert, occasion being offered me to bear witness of your charity before
all the Church, even as many as to whom this book shall come. Which I mention
as to testify my true thankfulness, which smothers not a benefit when it
ought to be spoken of, so to show the world my warrant for presuming to
dedicate the ensuing Treatise to a personage so eminent, so taken up with
public affairs. But besides this, the good affection and respect you bare to
the Author while he lived, makes me hope you will be as forward to patronage
his Work, as you have been found willing to be helpefull to his son. And
indeed (Right Worshipful) the work for the subject matter of it is such, as
may worthily challenge all readiness in you to countenance it: it treates
chiefly of faith, that royal grace, the Elects peculiar, so pleasing to God,
so contended for by the Saints, which to defend is the highest honor of
Princes, to live by the chief glory of Christians. But why go I about to
show the worth of that, which none can know but those that have it? Oh! those
that have tasted how good the Lord is, whose souls are sweetly refreshed with
that peace that passes all understanding, ravished with those toys
unspeakable and glorious, who are strong to overcome the evil one, the world,
themselves, have power to work righteousness, obtain promises, yea, to do
all things through Christ that strengthens them (and all this can believers
do); such best know what faith is, and how much they owe to God the Author,
and the instruments it pleases him to use in this blessed Work. Amongst other
helps this Treatise may be one to all that list to use it; penned by one, who
(to say no more) himself living by faith, and feeling in his own experience
the saving effects of that heavenly gift, knew what he said when he entitled
it, A Jewel of toy, and peerless pearl. The earthen vessel which brought
this pearl is now broken; broken do I say? or rather made whole for ever,
cast anew in the mold of immortality, and filled with that glory whereunto it
was prepared. Had it pleased God to have spared him longer, my comfort had been
the greater, and this work perfecter: yet such as it is, to Gods people it was
intended, and from them I for my part durst not detain it. It was no child's
part in Micah to steal that silver, which his mother Judge. 17.
had dedicated to the Lord, (she pretended) though indeed to an idolatrous
use; much less were it warrantable for me any way to seek to keep back,
what my Father bequeathed to the Church, to so good an end. And this I say,
though but a mite, yet if cast into the Lords Treasury, when God accepts it,
no good man will disdain it: though but a few barley loaves, yet it is good
they should be distributed, when through Christ's blessing thousands may be fed
thereby. If any man shall think the Treatise might be spared, because of the
commonnesse of the subject, faith and repentance being the ordinary theames of
men's Sermons and writings, I wish him to consider, whither the Israelites did
well to be angry, when rising in the morning they found Mannah fallen again
about their tents, of which before they had had such plenty. Well, John 6. 32.
33
Moses gave them not that bread from heaven, but God the Father gives us the
true bread from heaven; for the bread of God is he that comes down from
heaven, and gives life to the World, the same is received by faith, that bred
by the Word; and this, how soever through Gods unspeakable mercy to this
Nation, the Press and Pulpit so much sound with it, is a blessing to be
embraced with all thankfulness, not loathed for the commonnes. But if this
suffice not, let him answer Christ's interrogatorie; When the Son of man
comes, shall he find faith on the earth? If no faith, surely as little
repentance? Shall then Gods Seeds men withdraw their hand, because much has
been sown already, when as so little comes up? Nay verily, so many as truly
believe on the name 1. John 5. 13.
of the Son of God, will acknowledge they still need Saint John should write
unto them, that they may believe on the name of the Son of God: as for the
world that abides in unbelief, the truth of God where it shines most clearly,
shall have that effect which Christ foretold the Spirit of Truth, the blessed
Comforter should have at his coming, even to convince it of sin, because John
16. 19.
they believed not on him.

Neither, I hope, will the manner of handling used by the Author, and the kind
of phrase far from affectation, or the entising words of man's wisdom, I hope
(I say) this will not offend any, who are content their faith should stand not
in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.

But I return to you (most worthy Knight) to you principally I offer this
Treatise, this field (if so I may call it) wherein the Pearl of faith is
discovered. It is not for me to teach you how you are to account thereof; your
wisdom cannot but approve that high estimation, the Merchant in the Gospel had
of the Pearl. This only I wish, that as you abound in outward treasures, so
you may be rich in the faith, and consequently heir of the kingdom which God
has promised to them that love him. And certainly if that be true, that
faith works by love, then are you not without witness, being well reported of
for your love to the truth, and such as walk in the truth. Only go on
(honored Sir) to deserve well, and hear well of the Church of God. If thus
you shall be content with those 24 Elders (Apoc. 4.) to cast your earthly
dignity at the feet of the Lamb, improouing all to his behoof, to the
advancing his glory, and countenancing Religion; If with that worthy King
David, in way of thankfulness to the Lord, who has done so great things for
you, you shall reflect your goodness upon his Saints, those excellent on
earth, this shall lift you up in true honor and reputation among men in this
world, and be found to your immortal praise and glory in the day of the Lord
Jesus: yea, upon you shall come the blessing of those, who bless all such in
the name of the Lord as are friends to Sion, and seek the peace of Jerusalem.
To this I from my heart say Amen, and the Lord out of Sion bless your Worship,
and grant you to see the good of Jerusalem all the days of your life. So for
ever stands bound to pray, and

in what he may to be serviceable to your Worship, JONATHAN NEOVS.

THE PREFACE TO THE Christian Reader.
TO prevent that prejudice, whereby the regard and benefit of many good books
is much hindered; we have thought good to premit somewhat touching the Author,
the treatise it self, and the reasons why it is committed Act. 18. 24.
Apollos) an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, instructed in the way
of the Lord, and fervent in the spirit, and spoke and taught diligently the
things of the Lord: a man of indefatigable pains, both in his private studies
and exercises; and also in the public work of his Ministry; to the great
benefit of the Church of God, over which the holy Ghost had made him an
ouer-seer: and finally he was a judicious and pious Divine, well seen and
practiced, especially in these points of faith and repentance, whereof he has
here written. So that the quality of the Author does deservedly commend the
treatise, as also the nature of the treatise may well commend the Author; with
whom in the birth thereof it fared as with Genesis 35. 11.
Rachel, who died in travel: whereupon though this abortiue orphan may, in
regard of the parent thereof, well brook the name The son of my sorrow.
Benoni; yet for our due esteem and use thereof it may fitly by us be called
The son of my right hand.
Benjamin. The reasons moving this our Author to write any thing for public
use, as one of us has observed them from his own mouth, was first, for that
he being restrained from benefiting the Church by the ordinary course of his
ministry, he was both willing and desirous to be serviceable and helpful to
the same, in what he might, by this way and mean. Secondly, he seeing the
people generally both pestered with many needless idle vain pamphlets, and
multitudes of fabulous historical discourses; and also much encombred with
manifold polemicall divinity tractats, of curious and litigious points,
tending rather to contention and division, then to godly edifying, and that
many good and necessary books were more framed to give satisfaction to the
learned, then to edify the simple: therefore, that he might in a subseruient
manner endeavor to supply the preteritions of the latter sort of books, and
to help to iussle the former rotten rapsodies out of place; he thought it
expedient, that treatises of such necessary matter, concerning the eternal
salvation of all, handled in so plain a manner, that the meanest may
understand, should also be obtruded upon the readers, at the least if it were
but to interrupt and hinder somewhat the reading of such books as be either
hurtful or unprofitable.

Thirdly, that he might leave in special to that people and Lee.
congregation, to whom he was a careful Minister, a particular remembrancer to
bring to their minds some chief points of his former doctrine, taught amongst
them; which upon their second meditations thereof, they might the more affect
and regard; and also to bequeath some note of his good affection to his loving
friends and well deserving acquaintance; this treatise did he entend and fit
for them, often to peruse and well to respect as the last farewell and
loue-token of their dear friend.

Secondly, for the treatise it self; though it be imperfect

The method and phrase of this discourse is indeed plain and familiar, fitted
of purpose for the capacity of the meaner sort of people; for whose good
especially it was intended. For though the simpler sort cannot understand even
plain things in an artificial method, briefly expressed in proper and quaint
terms of eloquence and art; yet people of better understanding can easily
conceive profound things unfolded but in an ordinary phrase of speech, and
vulgar order: it being far easier for the stronger to yield and condescend to
the weaker, then for the weaker to ascend, in things beyond the reach of their
power, to the stronger: so that the same spiritual food is so diversely to be
dressed, that to the one it may be strong meat, and to the other milk. In
regard of the which plainness, with the euidencie of truth, this treatise is
the more to be esteemed; for that without all colored masking, the naked truth
is therein simply pronounded; with the pure beauty whereof al are to be
enamoured: and seeing herein the Author has more regarded the spiritual good
of others, then to gain any worldly respect to himself; it is not the less,
but the more remarkable and worthy of esteem.

Thirdly, to come to the causes of publishing hereof, that which was committed
to my trust, for the use and benefit of others, who both earnestly expected,
and often flagitated the same from me as their own, what or how ever it were.
Secondly, that the Authors diligent endeavor and true intent not only while he
lived, but also after his death, to edify the Church of God might be evident
to all, for the help and encouragement of others in all good courses: whereupon
I have surrendered this orphan unto the natural elder-brother of the same
parent, by him to be sent abroad. The learnednes of the age is so far from
being any just discouragement, that it is rather to be an encouragement to
publish such necessary treatises, so long as they are orthodoxe for matter,
though they do want some ornaments of garnishing, proceeding not from want of
power in the Author, but of opportunity in time; seeing that then there shall
not want sufficient and equal Judges, both by the common law of verity, and
also by the Chancerie of charity, who will plead for equity* for never true
knowledge, but ignorance is an enemy to truth. The diversity and multitude of
several treatises upon one subject, (so long as none of them is so absolu^ly
perfect, but that somewhat may be supplied by others thereunto, neither is any
of them so universally fit for all persons, times and places, but that
according to diversity of circumstances they may be various) is no bar to
exclude others of the same nature: for so long as they do all agree in the
same substance of truth, though they do differ in the manner of the frame,
phrase, and application of the same, according to the variety and
multiplicitie of the graces of Gods spirit in the Authors, and the diverse
dispositions, manners, and opinions of several people, in sundry places and
ages, to whom they do write, thereby an vnanimious and vnde^iable testimony
is publicly given to the truth; and the Church and people of God still built
up in goodness. And further, though there were sufficient already written, if
men would carefully use it, and therewithal be content; yet seeing that old
books, like old garments, are in time neglected and despised; and the new
coueted and read rather for the nou^ltie of the edition, then for any newness
of matter contained in them; it is not amiss so to renew books of the same
things, for the spreading and continuing of the truth, even as they say by new
Phenixes rising out of the ashes of the old, their kind is still propagated.
But blessed be God we do dwell in the land of Goshen, having the two great
lights of preaching and printing, as the Sun and Moon to direct and comfort
us, in the servile Egypt of this world: therefore while we have the light, oh
how careful should we be as the children of light to walk in the light, that
at the last we may reign with God for ever, who dwells in light, which
cannot be approached unto; which the Father of mercies grant unto us. Amen.

STEVEN EGERTON. JOHN SYME.

THE PRINCIPAL HEADS and Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. Of the knowledge of God and our selves in general. page 1 CHAP. II.
Of the Christians practice according to his knowledge of God and his works. 5
CHAP. III. The Christians practice according to the knowledge of himself, and
his own duty: and herein first of the legal Commandments. 13 CHAP. IIII.
The Evangelical commandment, with the Christians practice and use made
thereof: wherein there is the definition of faith, with the proper object and
special operations thereof. 20 CHAP. V. The manner of the knowledge of Christ,
with the persuasion that is necessary to faith. 25 CHAP. VI. The use that is
to be made of this, that God has given the commandments both of the Law and
Gospel, for the attaining of eternal life. 39 CHAP. VII. How men may be
mistaken in this point of their believing, with the use thereof. 53 CHAP. VIII.
How faith is discerned, and the true being thereof made manifest, both to the
believer himself, and to others. 73 CHAP. IX. What remedy there is for the
weak in faith: And withal, the excellency of faith is declared, with the
practice or use to be made thereon. 86 CHAP. X. Two things propounded: first,
the differences between saving and sauelesse faith, and how far a reprobate
may go in faith. Secondly, the notes and properties of true and precious
faith: and here the maine difference is entreated of. 95 CHAP. XI. Of the
special differences in the principal graces appertaining to faith: and first,
of the first grace, which is knowledge, with the use that is to be made of the
difference herein. 104 CHAP. XII. The second difference, which is in their
laying hold of Christ for salvation. 124 CHAP. XIII. Of the third difference,
which is in the difference of their assurance to be saved: wherein is entreated
of the want of feeling of true faith, or of the former or present comfort
thereof. 137 CHAP. XIIII. Further differences between hypocrites and sound
believers, in their assurance to be saved: and first in the whole building
thereof; as also of the builders themselves. 153 CHAP. XV. The different uses
they make of their persuasion. 162 CHAP. XVI. How easy it is to get a false
persuasion, but difficult to attain sound assurance of salvation: which is
another difference between them. 164 CHAP. XVII. Of another special
difference, which is, that the misbeleeuer is free from the assaults of Satan,
wherewith the true Christian is always troubled. 167 CHAP. XVIII. The fourth
maine difference between them is seen in their joy: where the soundnes and
stabilitie of the joy of true believers, with the contrary of Temporizors is
declared. 172 CHAP. XIX. Hypocrites differ from sound believers in all the
dimensions of joy: whereof the first is, the height both from whence it
comes, and to which it reaches to. 178 CHAP. XX. Of the second dimension of
joy wherein they differ, which is the depth of a dejected and disconsolate
estate. 187 CHAP. XXI. The difference of their joy in the third dimension or
breadth of it, and how it is straightened or extended in them. 194 CHAP. XXII. Of
the lets of true joy, and first of sin: and how the Lord raises thence
matter of rejoicing to believers. 203 CHAP. XXIII. Of the second hindrance of
joy, in Gods hiding his face, and how that is made an occasion of rejoicing
unto a true and sound believer. 215 CHAP. XXIIII. Of the third let of true joy,
which is the cross; and how their joy is augmented, through the much good that
comes thereby. 219 CHAP. XXV. The difference of joy in the last dimension, or
the longitude thereof; and how the joy of sound believers is permanent and
enduring; the joy of hypocrites transitotorie and fained. 240 CHAP. XXVI. The
fifth maine difference between sound believers and counterfeits is, in their
repentance; and how far hypocrites may proceed therein. 259 CHAP. XXVII. The
description of Repentance that is unto life; with the kinds of it: And how
true believers and hypocrites differ in them; as also in the whole body and
frame of Repentance. 264 CHAP. XXVIII. How they differ in all the parts of
Repentance severally considered: and first in their sorrow for sin, and the
effects of it: where also is showed the necessity of sorrow in repentance. 269
CHAP. XXIX. The diversity of sorrow, with the objects about which they are
conversant. 276 CHAP. XXX. How they differ also in the effects which either do
bring forth, and in the causes of either. 281 CHAP. XXXI. How the sorrow of
true believers and hypocrites differs in that which is caused by either. 287
CHAP. XXXII. Of the seven attendants on godly sorrow, in the heart of every
true convert and unfeigned believer. 292 CHAP. XXXIII. How sorrow for sin
causes confession of sin, according to the diverse kinds of it, and of the
differences to be seen in men therein. 306 CHAP. XXXIIII. Of Satisfaction, and
the diverse kinds thereof: with the differences between true believers and
Hypocrites therein. 328
The end of the Contents.
MAN'S ACTIVE OBEDIENCE, OR THE POWER OF GODLINESS, especially in the
commandment of the Gospel, which requires faith of every Christian.
CHAP. I.
Of the knowledge of God and our selves in general.



LEt me (I pray you) in the beginning of this our conference here shortly
declared, what we are to propound for our chiefest end in this present
discourse: and then show me therewithal, wherein the full and whole duty of
every true Christian does summarily consist.

Ans. The maine and chief end should be, our better learning how to fear God,
and keep his commandments: Eccles. 12. 13.
for this ought to be the whole of every man's chief endeauours, and best
employments; whose duties all, if they be summed up together, may well be
reduced unto these two heads, of Knowledge, and of Practice.

Q. May not one of these be thought sufficient to show what a man's duty is,
that you name both?

A. Both are necessary to express all that is required: (...), Mark. 5. 12
quasi (...), skillful or knowing.
for knowledge without practice makes men no better then devils; who know more
then we do, but do not as they know: and practice without knowledge, makes
Psalm 49 20 and 73 22 and 32. 9. Job 35. 11. Psalm. 147. 15. Isal 48. 13. Psalm.
148. 8.
men differ little from brute beasts, yea, from the insensible creatures, who
in their kind are more obedient; for the fire and hail, the snow and vapor,
and stormy wind, they do his will, though they know not what they do.

Q. What things are necessary for us to know?

A. God and our selves, his works and our duties. All the tongues of Men and
Angels are not able to utter so significant a word, as should fully express
what God is.


Q. What are we to know concerning God?

A. We are to know what God is in himself, and what he is to us.

Q. What are we to know, as touching what God is in himself?

A. We are taught out of the Scriptures, that he is a Exodus 3. 14. and 11. 7.
1. Tim. 6. 16. Job 37. 23. Acts 17. 28. 1. Cor. 86.
divine essence of unspeakable majesty and glory; who has his being of
himself, and does give life and being to all things else that are; who is so
high and excellent, omnipotent, eternal and infinite, as to the greatest
understanding of the wisest and best of al his creatures, he is in glorious God
good without quality, great without quantity, infinite without place, and
everlasting without time.
majesty most incomprehensible; and yet he has made himself known to his
creatures, to be only one God over all, distinct in three persons, the Father
our Creator, the Son our Redeemer, and the holy Ghost our Comfortor,
instructor and guider in all our ways.

Q. What are we to know that God is to us?

A. That God in the second Person in the Trinity, is Matthew 28. 19. Mat. 1. 23.
1. Tim. 3. 16. Heb. 1. 3. Col. 1. 15. Ioh. 14. 7. and 1. 18. Exodus 23 21. Gal.
4. 5, 6. and 1. 4.
so reconciled unto us in him, he is become God with us, even God manifested in
the flesh, and made known unto us in the face of Christ Jesus; who being the
brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, he that has
seen and known him, has seen and known the Father; yea, in and by him
knows God also to be his Father, through the operation of the holy Ghost.

Q. What are we to know touching the works of God?

A. Generally that they are perfect and holy, all done Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Eccles. 3.
14. Psalm. 145. 17. Psalm. 33. 4. and 111. 8. Psalm. 111. 3. Psalm 92. 5. Psalm.
139. 14. Job 9. 10. Psalm. 104. 24.
in truth and equity, that they are most honorable and glorious; yea, that
marvelous are his works, and that in wisdom he has made them all.

Particularly, that they are either secret, and hidden from all other
creatures, and only known to himself alone; or openly manifest and revealed
in the world, and so appertaining to us to take knowledge of them.

Q. What manner of works are those, which you do call the secret and hidden
works of God, known to himself alone?

A. Such as was his eternal decree and purpose with Ephesians. 1. 11. Psalm. 33.
11. and Romans 11. 34. Romans 9. 11. 22 23. 1. Pet. 2. 8. Acts 4. 28. Acts 17. 31.
Mark. 13. 32. Mat. 24. 36.
himself before all beginnings, of making the whole world in the beginning,
and of determining all that he should make, to such several ends as he had
appointed.

Such also, as is the appointment of time for the end of the world, and for
the bringing all to judgment, the day and hour whereof is not known to the
Angels; no, nor to the Son of man himself.

Q. What are the revealed works of God, manifested and made known in the
world, which it behooves us to regard, and to take knowledge of?

A. The works both of the creation of all things, out Heb. 11. 3. Isai. 44.
24. and 42. 5. Acts 17. 24. Genesis 1. 31. Luke 19. 10. Romans 3. 23, 24. 25. 2.
Cor. 5. 19. Colos. 1. 20. Ioh. 5. 17. Eccles. 3. 11. Prou. 16. 4.
of nothing made good in the beginning; as also the works of daily governing,
ordering and disposing al things once made (whether they keep their goodness
they were first made in, or have lost it, and are fallen from the same), so as
yet out of all by his infinite wisdom, he never fails to bring honor, and
gain glory to his name.

Q. What are we to know touching our selves?

A. We are to know what we were, and what we now are.

Q. What is to be known touching what we were?

A. We are to know, that we were once happy creatures, Eccles. 7. 29. o^. 31.
made good in the beginning; yea, excelling in goodness many other creatures
that were also made good; for we were made after the image of God: and so were
no other Genesis 1. 27.
creatures upon earth beside.

Q. What is to be known of our selves, touching what we now are?

A. Two things in that respect are to be considered of us, namely, what we now
are by nature, and what we are by grace.

Q. What is that we now are by nature?

A. That having lost our happiness by the fall of Adam, Romans 3 23. Job. 14. 1.
2. Ephesians. 2. 3.
we are become most miserable, and are all by nature the children of wrath one
as well as another.

Q. What may we know, that we are now by grace?

A. That being justified freely by the grace of God, Romans 3. 24.
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus our Lord, power is now given
unto us by him, to become the sons John, 1. 12. Romans 8. 17.
of God; yea, heirs and fellow-heires with him of life and glory.

Q. So much of the knowledge of our selves; come now to show, what we are to
know to be our duties, and wherein they do consist.

A. Our duties do consist, in performing due obedience 1. Sam. 15. 22. Ier. 7.
23.
to Gods holy will in all things.

Q. What kind of obedience is it, which God requires as our hands?

A. Both active, in readily doing all that he has commanded Deuteronomy. 6. 24. 25.
and 10. 12. 13. Apoc. 3. 10. Mark, 8. 34. Luke, 21. 19.
to be done; and passive, in patiently suffering and enduring all that he has
appointed to be abidden.

Q. What is it that God has commanded us to do?

A. He has commanded us to keep his precepts diligently; and those are either
Legal precepts, commanding Psalm. 119. 4. Exodus 20. 23. ^^. John, 3. 23. Mark,
1. 15.
us to fulfill the righteousness of the Law; or Evangelical, commanding us to
believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and to embrace and believe the
promises of the Gospel.

Q. What is it that God has appointed us contentedly and patiently to suffer?

A. Whatsoever either by his own hand immediately shall be laid upon us, or
through his providence and sufferance Psalm. 39. 9. Leuit. 10. 3. Job 2. 10. 1.
King. 12. 24. 1. Cor. 11. 32. Job 37. 13. 1. Pet. 4. 12. Heb. 5. 8.
by any other means shall befall unto us, either for our chastisement, or our
trial; and that we learn obedience by all that we so do suffer.

CHAP. II.
Of the Christians practice, according to his knowledge of God and his works.



SO much touching the knowledge in general, which is required at the hands of
every one; come now to the practice, and declare what ought to be the practice
of every good Christian?

A. The daily practice of a Christian ought to be (according The mind being
lightened in knowledge, is not to rest in the sweetness of contemplation alone,
but join practice therewithal.
to his knowledge) so to labor to glorify God in all things; not knowing
alone what is meet, but doing as he knows, that he may be blessed in his
deed.

Q. How is such practice termed in the Scriptures?

A. It is called the power of godliness: for all that otherwise is held but in
knowledge only, as it is floating and swimming in the brain may end in bare
speech, and rest James 1. 5. 2. Tim. 3. 5.
in a naked show or form of godliness; which being idle and weak for want of
strength of grace to carry it further, the life for all that may be left
unreformed; as in the 2. Tim. 3. 2. 3. 4.
examples instanced in by the Apostle, is manifest to be seen: but when
practice is joined with knowledge, then James 1. 4.
(as Saint James speaks of patience) godliness has her perfect work, and
powerfully breaks out to manifest it self as well in the life outwardly, as
in the heart within.

Q. What kind of practice do you meant it to be, which you would have a
Christian to join with his knowledge, thereby the better to glorify God?

A. Both the labor of the mind by holy meditation inwardly had of that that he
knows; and the travel of the body in works and actions outwardly, performed
according to the same.

Q. How far must this practice be extended?

A. So far as a man's knowledge does reach unto: for it is but the making use
of knowledge, which otherwise would be fruitless and unprofitable.

Q. Show this more particularly in those several points of knowledge, which
you have set down to be needful for every Christian, to have his mind rightly
to be informed in: and first, what practice or use you would have to be made
Romans 1. 21. Psalm. 89. 7. Psalm. 68. 35. Psalm. 96. 9. Exodus 15. 11. Job 11. 7.
Psalm. ^6. 8, 10. Job 9. 4, 5. Psalm. 77. 13. Ezeck. 43. 2. Psalm. 89. 6. Isaiah
57. 15. Psalm. 8. 1. Job. 37. 23. and 13. 11. Job 26. 14. Psalm. 76. 7. Psalm. 66.
5. 7. Psalm. 18. 31. Psalm. 103. 17. Psalm. 103. 8. Exodus 34. 6. Psalm. 86. 15.
Psalm. 99 9. Isai. 41. ^4. 29. Deuteronomy. 32. 17. Psalm. 97. 7. and 13. 6. Isaiah 6.
3. Tit. 1. 16. 1. Ti^. 3. 16. 2. Cor. 5. 19. Romans 9. 5.
of that knowledge we are to have of God, that we know what he is in himself,
which is the first point that is mentioned.

A. That when we so know God, we then do glorify him as God; trembling
before his fearful Majesty; wondering at his great Omnipotency; astonished
with his infinite Glory; ravished with his incomparable Excellency; awed with
his dreadful Power; comforted with his endless Love; cheared with his
abounding Mercy; and falling low down before the throne of his glory (all
false gods, and lying vanities of the Heathen being vile in our eyes), to say,
He is holy, he is holy, he is holy, the Lord of Hosts, the earth is full of
his glory. And as thus in our minds to worship him, and with our words to
praise him; so to take heed, that in our deeds we do not deny him.

Q. What use are we to make of that knowledge we ought to have of God,
whereby we may know what he is to us?

A. Thereby we are occasioned seriously to consider of, and daily to seek
better to understand that great mystery of godliness, which concerns the
work of our redemption, that is by Christ Jesus; how God was in Christ,
reconciling the world to himself: not imputing their trespasses unto them; and
how Christ being God over all blessed for ever, became also man, to suffer what
was due for man's transgression; that being both God and Man, he might make a
perfect satisfaction unto 1. Tim. 2. 5. 6.
God for man. And being sealed and sent of the Father, to be the
attonement-maker between the two parties Ioh. 6. 27. and 5. 30.
at variance, who were God and man, he might first get them inseparably joined
together in himself. And these two Natures to be set at one: and by a happy
union, to meet together in his own person; and then in the body of his flesh
through death, and by the Coloss. 1. 20. 21. 22.
blood of his Cross, to set all things at peace in heaven and in earth; so
reconciling man to God, as he might be presented holy and unblameable, and
unreprovable in his sight. And thus was he made unto us Jesus; that is, a
full and perfect Savior, to save us from our sins; Mat. 1. 21. Acts 2. 36.
Heb. 5. 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Luke 4. 18, 21. Matthew. 17. 5. Dan. 7. 14. 27. Zach.
9. 9. Luke 1. 32, 33.
God having for the same purpose first made him Christ, that is, anointed him
with the holy Ghost, and with power to be a Priest, Prophet, and King, to
purchase, publish and apply salvation for, and unto all that should believe in
his name.

Q. What practice or use of the knowledge of the works of God in general, are
we to make?

A. The same or like to that which is contained in the Song of Moses, the
servant of the Lord; and in the Song of the Lamb, sung by those victorious
Conquerors, that had the Harpes of God in their hands; the ditty whereof Apoc.
15. 3.
was this, Great and marvelous are thy works Lord God Almighty: just and
true are thy ways, thou King of Saints! Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among
the Gods? who is Exodus 15. 11.
like thee? glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders! And in
considering the great works of God in general, to say with David, the sweet
singer of Israel; O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom Psalm. 104.
24.
have thou made them all; the earth is full of thy riches? Blessed be the Lord
God, the God of Israel, who Psalm. 72. 18. 19.
only does wondrous things, and blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let
the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen and Amen.

Q. Go on to show the like of the works of God more particularly, according
as you have distinguished them. And first touching those works which you call
the secret works of God: what is the practice or use we are to make of our
knowledge we have, that there be such?

A. First, because they belong not to us, but unto ye Lord God himself alone;
that therefore in all reverence we leave Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
them unto him, and never dare presume to pry into the Lords secrets, nor
desire to understand above that which is meet; but keep our selves within the
lists and bounds Romans 12. 3.
which God has set to rank and rail us in this way, under as great a penalty
as ever he set bounds to the children of Israel at the giving of the Law;
which they were Exodus 19. 12. 21
not to pass, in any desire they had to gaze and see that, which the Lord
would not have showed; as in the example of the men of Bethshemesh, prying into
the Arc, 1. Sam. 6. 19.
which was not lawful for them to do, may appear: accounting it a point of
our best wisdom, and deepest knowledge; yea a very learned ignorance, not to
know that which the Lord sees not good to reveal: yet so, as we always do
honor, in the works of God, that which we do not understand. And when we
perceive the judgments of God to be as a great deep that cannot Psalm. 36 6.
Eccles. 8. 17. and 11. 5. Psalm. 77. 19.
be sounded, his ways to be past finding out, and that his footsteps cannot
be known; that we then do stand and wonder at that we cannot comprehend; and
with the Apostle cry out, Oh the depth of the riches Romans 11. 33.
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! to the end that God may have the
greater honor thereby.

Q. What is the use we are to make, and practice of the knowledge we have, that
there be other works of God that are openly manifested and revealed in the
world?

A. We are to remember (as Elihu speaks to Job), that we do magnify his
works which men do behold. And seeing the revealed works of God are things
Job 36. 24.
that do belong to us, and to our children for ever; that Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Deuteronomy.
6. 7. 20. Psalm. 78. 5. 6. 7.
we therefore do both labor and learn to know them our selves; and that we
likewise do teach them to our The Lords works (like the curtains of Solomon)
have their beauty within; we had need hold our eyes near them, and put our
heads (as it were) within them, to consider them aright. Expos. in Psalm.
children, and show to the generation to come, the praises of the Lord; his
strength, and his wonderful works that he has done, that they may make them
known to their children; and the children which yet are not borne may arise
and declare them to their children, that all may set their hope in God, and not
forget the works which he has wrought. The works of God (says the Psalmist)
are honorable and glorious, to be sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein: they are as scaling ladders, that are set up for us every where to
climb up by them, the better to see God: and as books opened* in which we may
learn better to know them; the dumb 111. 3. Psalm. 111. 2. 3. Psalm. 28. 5. Job
12. 7. 8. 9.
beasts, if they be asked, will teach man; the fowls of the heaven will tell
him; the earth will show him; and the fishes of the sea will declare unto him,
that the mighty God has made them all.

Q. Touching the work of the Creation, which is the first work of this kind
wrought by God in the beginning: what use and practice are we to make of the
knowledge thereof?

A. That seeing it is the Lord that has made us, and Psalm. 100. 3. Romans 11. 36.
not we our selves; and that of him, through him, and for him, both we, and all
things else have had our being; we therefore endeavor by our selves, and by
all things else, to bring glory to his name; that so the Lord may Psalm. 104. 31.
rejoice in his works: Often praying that prayer of David, Thy hands (O God)
have made me and fashioned Psalm. 119. 73.
me; give me understanding therefore that I may learn thy Commandments.
Besides, when we look upon the heavens, the work of Gods fingers, the Moon
and the Psalm. 8. 3.
stars which he has ordained; and know, that by the word of the Lord the
heavens were made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. When
we behold how the Lord has sown and garnished the heavens Psalm 33. 6.
with stars above, and gloriously covered the earth with flowers, fruits, and
all living creatures here below; Job 26. 13.
we who are set in this world (as upon a stage) to behold these things, and
admire the eternal power and Godhead, the goodness, and greatness, and
wisdom that is infinite, of him that did so make them; which Paul says to be
the invisible things of him, but by the creation Romans 1. 20.
are clearly to be seen. And that as those that are astonished with this his
work full of wonders, we do cry out with the Psalmist, to the praise of him
that has done them: O Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the Psalm. 8. ^.
earth! among the gods there is none like thee, O Lord, there is none that can
do like thy works. Psalm. 86. 8.


Q. What use may be made of the knowledge of the work of the redemption of
mankind, and of the restoring of all things by the Messiah and Savior of the
world?

A. Thereby as the manifold wisdom of God is manifested and made known to
Angels, and to men: so the exceeding greatness of the power of Gods might,
Ephesians. 3. 10. Luke 1. 49. ^1. 69.
and riches of his grace and goodness, especially to mankind, is clearly
revealed, and ought freely to be acknowledged: Ephesians. 1. 19. Ephesians. 2. 7.
that was able and willing, not only to make all things good out of nothing in
the first Creation; but to restore that which was now become evil, and
therefore worse then nothing, to a better perfection then it ever had in the
first beginning: a work of greater difficulty then was the former. God, to
make the first world, spoke the word, and it was made; he commanded, and it
Psalm. 33. 9.
stood fast: but the same Lord, to restore the second, spoke many things, did
marvelous things, and suffered unworthy things, even things most heavy and
grievous. In regard whereof (this being done especially for man's salvation) we
may cry out with the Psalmist, Lord, what Psalm. 144. 3.
is man that thou take such knowledge of him, and the son of man that thou
make such account of him? and (as Job speaks) that thou should thus
magnify him, Job 7. 17.
and thus set thine heart upon him? and in respect of the Lord cry out, How
great is his goodness, and how great is the beauty of his works toward us!
Oh happy the redeemed! who is like unto them? a people that are thus saved of
the Lord*

The knowledge also of our redemption should be as a double bond unto us to
bind us in duty unto him, that 1. Cor. 6. 19. 20 Luke 1. 74. 75. Tit. 2. 14.
has so loved and saved us by so great a deliverance, to serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives: who having been our
Creator, is also become hereby our Recreator; that has twice given us our
lives, once out of nothing, and the second time out of woeful destruction and
most deadly damnation.

Lastly, seeing we are bought with so great a price, we August.
are not to make our selves so vile, and so little worth, as to sell our selves
for a morsel of bread, or a piece of silver, Ezech. 13. 19. Heb. 12. 16.
to become slaves unto Satan, and servants unto sin.

Q. There is yet another work of God, his daily governing, ordering, and
disposing all things by his providence: what use may the knowledge thereof be
put unto by us?

A. This may glad the hearts of all creatures in general, Mat. 28. 18. Ioh. 5.
17. 22. Ephesians. 1. 20. 21. 22.
but especially of the redeemed: to know that the Lord that saved them is the
ruler of the world; who sitting in heaven does whatsoever he will; that his is
the Psalm. 1 15. 3. Psalm. 22. 8. Ezech. 33. 11. Job 7. 20. Psalm. 36. 6.
power, and his is the might, and that the kingdom and the dominion is his:
who as he has made all things, and given them life and being; so does he not
delight in, nor desire the death of any; but is said to be the preserver of
men: yea, vouchsafes to let it be known to all, that it is he that saves
both man and beast. For this cause the Psalm. 97. 1. and 98. 7. 8. 9.
Psalmist wills all the earth to be glad of it: yea not so much but the
insensible creatures are called upon to be affected with it: the sea is willed
to roar, the floods to clap their hands, and the hills to be joyful
together. For since the Lord is king, all may reckon upon it, that he will
judge the world with righteousness, and the people with equity. This also may
put courage and boldness into the hearts Psalm. 27. 1.
of all Gods faithful servants, not to fear what all their enemies together,
the greatest, mightiest, and proudest enemies that they have are able to do
against them: no not what Satan himself, the very prince of darkness, nor all
the power of hell can do against them, since all these have no power at all,
but as it is given them; and so Ioh. 19. 11.
given them, as it is limited according to the good pleasure of his will: at
his word they are sent forth, at his word they are called in again; he rules
over their greatest rage, and makes their maddest furic to turn to his own
Psalm. 76. 10.
praise: without him none of them all can lift up hand or foot in all the
world, but through the greatness of his power they are all made subject unto
him, and for the glory of his Majesty they all tremble and fear before him:
Psalm. 66. 3.
if he will give quietness, none of them all can make trouble; yea, such is
the Sovereignty and superior command Job 34. 29.
^e has over them, as that for the safety of Gods people, out of the hands of
them all, every faithful servant of God may come and pray before him; as does
the Church in the Psalm, Thou art my king, O God, command deliverances Psalm.
44. 4.
for Jacob.

The knowledge also of this may quiet our minds in the greatest stirs that
may happen in the world, and the most disordered confusions that can be seen
to fall out among men; and cause us with patience, and in silence, to sit us
down, waiting till we have seen the issue of them, and what may be the end
which God (who rules by his power for ever, and stilleth the noise of the
seas, the Psalm. 66. 7. and 65. 7.
noise of their waves, and the tumult of the people) will bring unto them: who
in his infinite wisdom knows well how to make all things beautiful in
time; yea out of the fowlest facts, the vilest and shamefullest deeds that are
done by men: so does the Lords work appear beautiful to his servants, and
the beauty of the Lord does so shine out unto them, as they are not only made
glad in seeing his works, but to triumph in the works of his Psalm. 92. 4.
hands, which they see him to have wrought before them.

Lastly, the knowledge of this, that the Lord who is high above all nations,
does yet humble himself to behold, to care for* and to order the things that
are done in Psalm. 113. 3. 5. 6.
heaven and (...) this should cause us to fear before the Lord, in whose hands
are our lives, and in whose sight are all our ways; so to rest in, and be well
contented with whatsoever in our whole life time, in any sort shall happen, as
knowing that it is his hand that does Job 1. 21.
guide every thing.

CHAP. III.
The Christians practice, according to the knowledge of himself and his own
duty; and herein first of the legal Commandments.



SO much of the practice and use we are to make of the knowledge of God
himself, and of his works: come now to show the like uses that we are to make
of the knowledge of ourselves, and of our own duties. And first touching
ourselves: what may this serve us instead to know, that we were once made so
happy creatures, and so excelling in goodness?

A. For so much as it is the Lord that so made us happy, and not we our
selves; all the excellency of that our estate serves but to declare him to
be most excellent, that first set us in it, and of whom we had it. For if the
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament show his Psalm. 19. 1.
handy work, which yet are but a part of the great world made by God of
nothing; man who is a creature so fearfully Ingens miraculum homa.
and wonderfully made, and so curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the
earth, as he is alone a little world Psalm. 139. 14. 1^
Our souls and bodies are shops of his most notable works, when.
in himself, and an abstract or model of the universal; how cannot the glory
of God much more shine bright out of him; and the praise of his workmanship,
his wisdom, his goodness, and his greatness be more abundantly in are
wrought wonders, and things never enough admired. The Lord did mouid and
fashion man, a living image of his Deity.
showed forth by a creature made so glorious, as had the very character and
image of God his own glory put upon it, which the other never had.

Beside, the glory of our first creation being so great (who as touching our
bodily substance, were but creatures raised out of the dust; and as touching
our souls, made something out of nothing, though a divine substance indeed
Genesis 1. 7.
of an excellent and happy condition) puts us in hope that these vile bodies of
ours, though they must return again to their dust, and are to be laid down
again with dishonor in the grave* yet shall be raised up again the second
time to the fruition of a better perfection of glory in Gods kingdom, and be
made like the glorious body of the Son of God, by the mighty power of him
Phil. 3. 21.
that once did so make them: and that these sinful souls of ours, though now
they be so laden, pestered, and poisoned with abundant corruption, as we know
not of any goodness at all that can be found in them, shall by the same power
not only be freed from all this load and Romans 7. 18.
burden of corruption; but recover again the first, if not a fuller purity,
and greater perfection then they ever had, and be clothed upon again with a
more enduring glory, 2. Cor. 5. 4.
that will never fade.

Lastly, the knowledge hereof serves to stop the mouth of every man from
complaining against God that made him, for that he is now so lamentably sallen;
seeing God made him upright, but himself has sought out that invention that
has caused this woeful ruin. Eccles. 7. 29.


Q. And what use are we to make of the knowledge of our miserable estate, into
which we that were once so happy, are now so plunged by the fall of Adam, as
that we all by nature are become the children of wrath, one as well as another?

A. By this we are taught to acknowledge that thing, which (by our lamentable
experience) we have now learned, and found to be most true; namely, that no
Job 4. 18. 1. Sam. 2. 9.
creature, how glorious soever it be, is able to sustain and uphold it self,
if the hand of the Creator be once withdrawn.

This serves also to overthrow our pride, to cast down Romans 3. 27. Ioh. 3. 3.
6.
all our glory and confidence in our selves, all boasting of our stock and
blood in nature, how nobly soever we be borne; since all are shut up under
this condemnation, to stand under the wrath of God by nature; and are become
Ephesians. 2. 3.
by sin the basest and vilest of all other creatures, excepting the devils.

Lastly, the knowledge hereof thus humbling and ouerwhelming us with shame,
should stir up in us such a misliking of our selves, as should cause us never
to be Romans 7. 24. ^5
quiet, till we might hear of some remedy; and set us a work, to seek out
by all means, and with all diligence, for our full recovery.

Q. What use may the knowledge of this be put unto by us, that after the loss
of so great a happiness bestowed upon us in the first creation, and the
throwing us down under so great a degree of misery through Adams
transgression; as to be made by nature the very children of wrath, that can
look to inherit nothing but eternal destruction: we should yet so be restored
by grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, as power should be
given unto us to become the sons of God; yea heirs, and fellow-heires with
him of life and glory?

A. All this may worth^ly hold our minds in the continual admiration of this
wonderful work of him, whose name is called wonderful, even God our Savior;
that Isa. 9. 6.
has made this happy change for us: who in his infinite wisdom has found
out the way, to bring us the greatest gain, out of that most beauie loss; and
to improve that our falling, to a better rising, and more sure standing for us
then before; and out of the bottom and depth of that greatest and most woeful
misery into which we were thrown, to raise us up to a higher height and
degree of glory, and of advancement in royal dignity, then Ephesians. 2. 6.
ever man had bestowed upon him in the time of his first innocence: for by
means thereof, he has taken occasion to unite us more nearely to himself,
then we were before; our Nature in Christ being taken into the fellowship of
the Godhead, and personally joined to the divine Nature 1. John 1. 3. Mat^h.
1. 23. 1. Tim. 3. 16.
of the Son of God himself: a degree of dignity above that ever any of the
Angels were lifted up unto, or (for ought that can be known) ever shall be.

Besides, we beholding, and with reverence wondering 1. John. 3. 1.
at, what love of God this should be, that we who are children of wrath by
nature, should now be thus called the sons of God: this great alteration and
happy change of our estate, should cause us to be affected, like as were the
people at their deliverance out of their captivity, when their mouth was
filled with laughter, and their tongue with Psalm. 126. 1. 2. 3. and 16. 9.
Isa^. 49. 13.
joy: this should cause our hearts to be glad, and our tongues to rejoice, the
very heavens to sing for this, the earth to be joyful, the mountains also to
break forth into singing; yea, all people in consideration hereof, may be
called to clap their hands for joy of this so great salvation, and to sing
aloud unto God with a joyful voice; to sing praises to God, to sing praises;
yea, to call forth to the singing Psalm. 47. 1. 6. 7.
praises of every one that has understanding; seeing the Angels themselves,
who had not the like cause that we have, welcomed the birth and coming of
the Savior into the world, with their heavenly sweet melody, and Luke 2. 13.
songs of great rejoicing.

Lastly, the consideration of this love of God passing all knowledge, and of
this bounty and goodness of Christ in our redemption, which is so great, as
the Angels themselves cannot cease wondering, and marueiling at the 1. Pet. 1.
12.
same, ought to move and constrain us to duty; and cause us to offer up our
selves, our souls and bodies, as living sacrifices Romans 12. 1.
unto him by our daily serving of him; that our whole life may be a reciprocal
loving of him. And that as we are called the sons of God, who look to
inherit with Christ in glory, we show the naturalnesse of that our sonne-ship
to God our Father (after the manner that the only begotten Son of God himself
did, in whom the Father Mal. 1. 6.
was always well pleased), by our constant loving, fearing, and honoring of
him; and for yielding obedience unto him, that the same mind may be found to
be in us, which was in Christ Jesus, who humbled himself, and Phil. 2. 5 6 8.
became obedient to his Father unto the death, even to the death of the Cross.

Q. Proceed now to show, what use we are to make, as well of the knowledge of
our duties which we are to perform, as you have done of the knowledge of our
selves in the several estat^s, where in we now either are, or formerly have
been: and for so much as you have showed, that our duties in general do
consist, in p^rforming due obedience to God his holy will in all things,
declare what use is to be made by us of the knowledge hereof?

A. This should set us aworke, first, with all earnestnes Romans 12 2.
and diligence, to inquire, prove, and find out, what that good, that
acceptable, and perfect will of God is in all things, 1. These. 4. 1.
that so we may know how to walk and please him. Secondly, to the end this
known will of God may be the better For a man to obey God, the way is to
command his unruly appe^i^es; and to command them, is for a man to be master of
him^^lfe; and for ^^e to be master of himself, is ^he most soue^^ig^e
princi^alitie.
obeyed by us, and fulfilled in all things; that we learn and labor daily to
deny our selves, breaking our selves of our own wills, that Gods will may
the better be done; and taking our selves from our selves, give up and present
our selves, our souls and our bodies, a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable
unto God; which is our reasonable serving of God; no more remaining our own,
much less abiding to become the servants of men.

Q. Seeing the will of God (which we are to obey unto) is either in requiring
us to do that he has commanded, or to endure and suffer that which he has
appointed; show first 1. Cor. 6. 19. 20.
what ought to be the use we are to make of our knowing it to be our duti^, to
observe all that God does command us, both in the affirmati^e and negative
commandments which he has given?

A. This should cause us with all readiness and forwardness Psalm* 119. 60.
and 40. 8.
simply to obey, and fully and wholly to do, whatsoever we can learn God
commands us to do; and to forbear to do, whatsoever we can learn he has
forbidden, without any further demurring upon the point, or consulting with
flesh and blood; without asking any Gal. 1. 16.
question either of our own hearts, or of any others else concerning the same.
And that whether we can see into the reason of that which is commanded, or
cannot sound to the depth or bottom of the same, even when such a thing is
commanded, as is both against nature of man, and promise of God, as was that
given to Abraham; as knowing, Genesis 22. 3. 10. 1. Kin. 20. 35. 36 Leuit. 15. 37.
that the commandment of the Lord requiring it at our hands, is reason great
enough to cause us to obey (his will being the rule of all righteousness), and
that commandment of God shall evermore be our sufficient warrant, for
whatsoever after that manner we shall attempt.

Q. Come more particularly to the consideration of such duties as God has
commanded unto us in his Word. And first, seeing God does command us to fulfill
all the righteousness which is set done in his Law, annexing both promises
and threatenings, the better to have it performed by us; show what is the use
that may be made of the knowledge hereof.

A. The knowledge of this serves most pregnantly, first, to urge us, and call
upon us, not to content our selves with serving God by halues, doing something,
and leaving the rest undone; or doing many things with Herod, Mark. 6. 20.
though not all things, not yet many times the chiefest things that should be
done: but that we knowing how it is written concerning us, in the volume of
Gods book, that we are to do all his will: we answer out of the willingness
Psalm. 40. 7. ^.
and ready obedience of our hearts with him, that was a man after Gods own
heart, My God I am contented to do it; or, I delight to do thy will, Oh my
God. For which cause, we are with him to get the Law of God into Psalm. 119. 6.
our hearts, having respect not to some only, but to all the commandments of
the Law, and to all the contents of those commandments; so striving hard after
perfection, and indeauouring with all our might, to fulfill the whole
righteousness which God does require at our hands; whilst we make conscience of
al our ways, and of doing one duty as well as another, and shunning all sin
alike; avoiding one evil as well as another, as those that desire to walk
worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in Coloss. 1. 10.
every good work.

Secondly, the knowledge of this, that God requires at our hands such absolute
and perfect obedience, to be performed by us unto the whole Law, which he has
given us as a most perfect rule of fulfilling all righteousness, it being the
very staple of all justice and Legal worship required; calls to our
remembrance, what was the happiness of that first estate of ours, wherein we
were set before Adams fall; and what was the measure of holiness and
righteousness, wherewith we then were endued, and according whereunto we were
made after Gods image; even such, as answers to the greatest perfection of
holiness and righteousness, which this perfect Law of liberty can exact, and
require at our hands in the greatest rigor that it has. It calls well to
our remembrance, what was the strength and power of grace that we then had in
us; whereby we were perfectly able to do the whole will of God, and keep all
this Law, without feeling any of the commandments grievous or burdensome to
us. For doubtless God would never require the performance and fulfilling of
all the righteousness of this Law at the hands of man, as he now does
(especially under so great a penalty of the transgression thereof); unless he
had first given power and ability unto man, sufficiently and well to perform
and fulfill the same.

3. Further, the knowledge of so great a degree of righteousness, and
perfection of obedience to be required at our hands, as is contained in this
Law, and therein commanded unto us (we knowing by all experience our great
inability to be any way answering thereunto, it being now become unto us a
thing wholly impossible in regard of the weakness that is in our flesh): this
may Romans 8. 3.
serve much to humble us, and cast us down with sorrow and grief, to bewail
the misery of our present estate, into which we are now fallen; as upon whom
most heavily does lie the guilt of the breaking of the whole Law, we being
found transgressors of all the Commandments; and for whom all the punishment,
that is threatened for such transgression, does daily abide; and at all times
justly may be feared, lest it should be executed to our utter destruction, and
everlasting confusion, if pardon and forgiveness be not had.

4. Lastly, the knowledge of all that is thus required at our hands, joined
with our own knowledge by daily experience, how little, yea, how nothing at
all is performed by us, as ought to be done of us (we knowing withal, what
is the danger of every transgression) should make us restless, until we
might know how to be discharged; and how, and by whom to have all this
righteousness fulfilled for us, and all our sins and transgressions clearly
remitted, and for ever pardoned and forgiven unto us; the Law so being our
Schoolmaster to bring us unto Gal. 3. 24.
Christ.

CHAP. IIII.
The Evangelical Commandment, with the Christians practice and use made
thereof; wherein there is the definition of faith, with the proper object and
special operations thereof.



YOu mentioned other commandments which are enjoined by God unto us to
observe, beside these Legal precepts, which do respect the fulfilling of the
righteousness of the law: namely evangelical, whereby we are commanded to
believe on the name of Jesus Christ the son of God (promise being made to all
that believe in him that they shall have life everlasting); show what may be
the good use and practice that we are to make of the knowledge hereof.

A. Before we come to that, it will not be amiss, first briefly to consider,
what faith in Christ is, and what properly is the object of it; what is the
special operation of faith by which it may be discerned, and the work about
which it is principally employed, and the subject wherein it is placed. What
things are needful to the making it up, what to the being, and what to the
well being and perfecting of it. Then will we consider what uses may be made of
the knowledge of this, that God has thus commanded us to believe.

Q. Show then first of all, what is true faith in Christ?

A. Faith is a true and saving knowledge of Christ, Faith.
which causes us to lay hold and rely upon him alone for salvation, with a
comfortable persuasion of the favor and love of God toward us in and through
him.

Q. What is the proper object of true faith, and what is the operation of it,
and work about which this faith is specially employed?

A. Faith has for her object the most pure and always 1. Pet. 1. 21.
being truth, which is God himself and Christ our Savior, who is the way, the
truth, and the life: the holy Ioh. 14. 1. 16.
Scriptures also and promises of the Gospel, which is the word of truth, are
the proper objects which faith has Act. 24. 14. Mark 1. 15.
respect to, and is the ground it setleth upon. Therefore is the word called
the word of faith: the special operation Romans 10 8.
and working of it is to let the souls and hearts of those men, in whom it is
placed, to know and to feel that they are now brought near unto God, and have
fellowship Ephesians. 2. 12. 13.
with him, who were but strangers before and far off by reason of their
sin; that is, to settle and stablish our minds in a comfortable persuasion
of Gods favor and toward us in and through Christ Jesus: and that by him,
Gods heart for ever is so won unto us, as nothing shall be able more to
separate us from his love. It quieteth Romans 8. 38.
and cheareth the heart with undoubted assurance, that whatsoever was the odds
and enmity that was between God and us before, by means of our sins; yet
Coloss. 1. 21.
so are we now received into favor, and so is all agreed and set thorough
between God and us, that we are at Romans 5. 1. Luke 2. 14.
peace with God, and God with us. They that have great ventures abroad are
always thinking of them, how they may be got safely home, they give much for
assurance, they cannot sleep till that be done, their minds are ever so
running upon them. Of all adventures there are none like to the adventure that
we bear of our selves, our souls and our bodies, while we live in this most
perilous and dangerous world, that they be got well home, and be brought to
eternal safety in the end. Now faith secureth our hearts herein, and gives
us good assurance that we shall never perish, but have in the end everlasting
John 3. 16.
life with God in Christ Jesus. Faith sets the heart at peace, and secureth
the conscience: it gives better and more strong assurance then any bond of the
best Merchant, though made in Statute-merchant: nay, then can do the bond or
assurance of any Prince, though they should lay their Crowns in pawn, or be
bound in the forfeiture of their kingdoms. For faith has Gods truth laid in
pawn for the making good the assurance: and God has bound himself in the
forfeiture of his truth (which he will not lose for the whole world, and is
unto Gods majesty of greater weight and regard, then is the state of a
kingdom to any Prince), that he will be accounted no more a God of truth if
he fail in his promise. This gives us boldness for the present to enter in
before God, even into the holiest of holy places; and to Heb. 10. 19. Heb. 4.
16.
come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need. But for so much as all this could never have
been effected or brought to pass for us, otherwise then that by the hand of
some meet Mediator this atonement might be made, and peace might be wrought
for us thus to reconcile us unto God. And seeing that neither in heaven nor in
earth there could any other be heard of or found, that ever could be fit and
able to undertake, and thoroughly and perfectly to go through with this so
great a work of reconciling the world unto God; but he alone whom the Father
had sealed, who is Christ the Lord, who is our Ephesians. 2. 14. Isai 9. 6.
peace, even the Prince of peace. Therefore the work of faith is, before it
can thus justify us and set us at peace with God, to seek and find out
Christ for us, and to get the true and saving knowledge of him: yea to seize
and lay such hold upon him, as we may apprehend him, and embrance him for our
own; appropriating and after a sort engrossing him for our selves, that so
causing us to rejoice with the joy of Gods people in his fruition, and to Psalm.
106. 5.
glory with Gods inheritance. And with the Spouse in the Canticles (we once
truly believing with the heart) imboldening us in most joyful and gladsome
manner to profess with the mouth, as does she in that place, My Cantic. 2. 16.
and 7. 10.
beloved is mine, and I am his, and his desire is unto me. That thus having
found and apprehended Christ, embracing and holding him in the arms of our
faith, as our blessed Advocate and attonement-maker unto God; we may so come
before the Lord and treat with him for our peace, as did old Simeon (when he
had Christ in his arms, and Luke 2. 28. 29. 30.
his eyes did see his salvation) desire the Lord then to let him depart in
peace. Yea we may then with less fear and much more comfortable boldness
show our selves in Gods presence, and appear in his sight; then could Hester
(though never so well beloved of the King) adventure Hest. 5. 2.
to go in before Ahashuerosh, who did kindly accept of her, when he held out
the golden scepter unto her. Yea far more warrantably and safely may we
(bearing Christ with us in the arms of our faith) approach and come near to
the throne of the greatest majesty of him that is the highest Lord and
Sovereign ruler of the world (who has prepared his throne for judgment, and
shall judge the world in righteousness), reckoning upon Psalm. 97. 8. 9.
a more kind welcome and gracious acceptance at his hands, then ever durst
the Patriarchs Jacobs sons, show themselves before Joseph then Lord of Egypt,
though they did carry their younger brother Benjamin in their Gen 43. 15. 16.
30.
hands; at the sight of whom the heart of Joseph yearned within him, and his
eyes burst out a weeping, that he could not forbear any longer, but manifest
himself and show his brotherly affection unto them, and falling upon their
necks, kissed and embraced them, forgetting and Genesis 45. 2. 3. 14 15.
forgiving all the iniu^ie and wrong that ever before they had done unto him.
Thus, yea far more then thus, yea far above all that can be uttered,
conceived or comprehended, is that love of God in Christ, which he bears to
Ephesians. 3. 19.
all the faithful; and wherewith he stands most kindly and fatherly affected
to his redeemed, in and through Christ Jesus: as to accept of their persons,
and be delighted Ephesians. 1. 6. Cantic. 2. 14. Isai. 63. 7. 9. Ierem. 31. 20. Hosea
11. 8. 9. John 16. 23.
with their presence; so to be most affectionatly moved toward them in all
fatherly kindness and compassion that he has of them; as also to hear al
their prayers; and to deny them nothing which they shall ask, when they come
to the Father in the name of his Son. Yea so is the heart of God the Father
won to al, that truly do believe in Jesus Christ his Son, as though Christ
Jesus Ioh 16. 26. 27.
himself should seem not to pray for them, yet would he deny the^ nothing.
Nay so does it please him to vnbowel himself, and to open and manifest the
love of his heart which he bears to his children, that as touching their good
and concerning them, he says after a sort, they may Isai. 45, 10.
command him. By all which it may appear, before we can warrantably believe
in God, as reckoning upon his favor and love to find mercy at his hands, for
the pardon of our sins, and our own gracious acceptance with him: or for
the receiving any blessing from him, or any righteousness as from the God of
our salvation; we Psalm. 24* 5.
must first get the knowledge of Christ Jesus, and by faith seek to apprehend
him: that being first ingrafted into Christ Jesus by faith, and admitted to a
holy union and communion ^ith the Son, we may have fellowship with the
Father, and so be brought to God by him: according Ioh. 14* 6.
as he is said to be perfectly able to save all that do Heb. 7. 25.
come to God by him. And this is that which Peter speaks of, when he says,
that the faithful do by Christ believe in God; who raised him up from the
dead, and 1. Pet. 1. 21.
gave him glory, that their faith and hope might be in God.

CHAP. V.
The manner of knowledge of Christ, with the persuasion that is necessary to
faith.



WHat manner of knowledge is that, which is necessary for us to have of Christ
Jesus, that so we may the better believe in him?

A. Not a confused or a general knowledge Knowledge of Christ.
of Christ alone; not a bare speculatiue knowledge of him, and of the mystery
of salvation by him, which is the best knowledge that the most have of Christ;
which is yet but idle and unfruitful, and avails Mat. 7. 21. Luke 6. 46.
nothing to salvation. But a clear and distinct knowledge of the mystery of
salvation in Christ Jesus, as the same is revealed in the Gospel; whereby we
may know assuredly that it is he, and he only, whom the Father has sealed
and sent into the world, that the world by him might be saved: who (being
foreordained to this great 1. Pet. 1. 20.
and blessed work of man's redemption and saving the world, before the very
foundation of the world it self was laid, and promised to the Fathers, as God
spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since Luke 1. 70.
the world began) was sent of God; when the fullness of time was come; though
being his own Son, to become Galath. 4. 4.
also the Son of man, and to be made of a woman. And as concerning the flesh,
to descend of the Fathers; though from all eternity in himself, he is God over
all, blessed Romans 9. 5.
for ever. A person truly that has no peer; most admirable and wonderful,
who is the only Phoenix in the world, that has no fellow: even as the work
was great and difficult; yea very admirable, and wholly impossible by any other
ever to have been effected, about which he was to be employed: which was, the
redeeming of the world, and reconciling of man to God. This will better
appear, if we consider, first, that God himself was the party that was
wronged; man was the party that had offended: God was to be satisfied; man
stood in need to be saved: necessary it was that there should come satisfaction
to God for man; that man being saved, Gods justice might not be lost. Now the
infinite Majesty of God being wronged, there could be no satisfaction made
sufficient, by any that were but finite: none therefore could thus satisfy but
God, as none ought to satisfy but man. For which cause our Savior Christ
Jesus was the only meet person, that was to be employed about this work,
which unto all others was wholly impossible: who being God, became also man,
and took our nature upon him; that as he was man he might offer the sacrifice;
and as he was God he might make it precious, and confer worthiness and
dignity unto it, that it might every way be sufficient: that so by that one
sacrifice Heb. 9. 26. 28.
of himself once offered (that being a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
unto God), he might satisfy God Ephesians. 5. 2. Heb. 5. 9.
for man, and become the author of eternal salvation to all them that will
obey him.

Secondly, and as we are to know, that in person he was right wonderful, and
in work no less powerful; yea most singular, most glorious and excellent: so
are we to know that the offices were most high and honorable, unto which he
was assigned; and which he bare upon him for the accomplishment of the same: as
being anointed of God to those offices of greatest dignity and respect, both
before God and man, of being our high Priest, King, and Prophet; by whom we
might be reconciled unto God, delivered from the hands of our enemies, ruled by
his laws, guided by his teaching, and showed the path and way of life, that so
in the end we might be saved by Psalm. 16. 11.
him. A high Priest indeed, but made, not after the law of a carnal
commandment, in a policy that was perishable, Heb. 7. 16.
but after the power of an endless life, in the promise of a dignity that
should be everlasting. A King of greatest Apoc. 1. 5. and 17. 14. Heb. 12. 27.
28. 1. Tim. 1. 17. Luke 1. 33.
Majesty and glory, but not such a one as ever may be deposed or put out of
his throne; not such a one whose kingdom can ever be shaken; but who is a
King everlasting and immortal, and of whose kingdom and government there
shall never be end. A Prophet mighty indeed, and in word; doing such works as
no other Luke 24. 19. Ioh. 15. 24. Ioh. 7. 46.
man did; and speaking such words as never man spoke: who was anointed to that
holy function, as well as others; but yet with the oil of gladness above all
his fellows. Who received not the Spirit by measure as Psalm. 45. 7.
do others; for it pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should dwell,
of whose fullness we have all received, Ioh. 3. 34. Colos. 1. 19. Ioh. 1. 16.
Mat. 17. 5. Isa. 42. 4.
even grace for grace: him are we willed to hear, and the Isles are to wait
for his law. Now we are to pray without ceasing, that the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of glory, would give unto us the Spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the true knowledge of him, making daily more and more manifest
this great mystery of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 17.
which in other ages was not made known to the sons Ephesians. 3. 5.
of men, as it is now revealed by the Spirit, that we may after this manner
both know and acknowledge him.

Q. Beside the true knowledge of Christ, in the description you made of faith,
you said there must be a laying hold of Christ, with a persuasion that God will
be favorable to us, in and through him?

A. Indeed that laying hold of Christ is most necessary To lay held on Christ.
to be joined with our knowledge, and in no case may be wanting: for therein is
the maine difference found to be, consisting between true justifying and
saving faith, 2. Pet. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 1.
which is called precious faith, or the faith of Gods elect; from such a faith
as men may have, and yet perish with it: which is very unsound, and but
temporary, when it is at the best, either false or feigned, or but the faith of
the history, to believe that which the Gospel sets down touching Christ
Jesus the Savior of mankind: which is the common faith, and (as I may say)
every bodies faith: yea no better then the devils faith; for they believe all
this, and yet shall never be saved; they get no comfort Iam. 2. 19.
by it, but are made to tremble, and to be more tormented for it.

This laying hold of Christ, that we may rest upon him to make him our own,
and to get our part of salvation out of him, is the chiefest work about which
true justifying and saving faith is to be occupied, and most busily to be
employed: which is no other then a placing of our affiance, and reposing our
whole trust and confidence in Christ for salvation. We first knowing and
apprehending him to be given us of God, to the end that we Ioh. 3. 16.
so believing in him, should never perish but be saved by him. These two we
must have to be joined together, for the making up of that faith that must save
us, to know Christ, and to believe, that is, to lay hold of, and apply to our
comfort, that which we know of Christ, as relying and resting upon the same.
We believe and know (says Ioh. 6. 69.
Peter to our Savior, that thou art Christ the Son of the living God: we are
with the Spouse in the Canticles, first to seek the knowledge of Christ, to
seek his acquaintance, Cant. 1. 27.
and more familiarly to know him daily: and therefore to entreat him, as does
she, that he will show himself unto us, According as elsewhere he does
promise himself, that he will so do to all that do love Ioh. 14. 21.
him. And when we have once found him, we are, with her, to lay sure hold of
him, and not to let him go, till we Canti^. 3. 1. 4.
have brought him to the best rooms and chambers of our hearts, there to have
him resident, and evermore dwelling in our hearts by faith. Christ by his death
and Ephesians. 3. 17.
suffering has prepared medecin to cure our deadly disease: he has given his
flesh to be broken, and his blood to be shead, to make a plaster and a bath to
heal and to supple the stiff and stark wounds of our souls, which have been
made by our sins. Medicines will do no good if they be not applied:
plasters will heal no wounds, if they be not taken hold on by the hand, and
laid upon the sores. So is it with all that Christ has done for us, if it be
not laid hold upon and applied by us for our own benefit.

There is indeed a different laying hold of Christ, according to the differing
degrees of faith, that are found to be among them that do believe: according
to the free dispensation of this grace given out unto every one by him that is
the author and finisher of the faith of all the Heb. 12. 1.
elect of God; who best knows what is the meetest and fittest portion for
every one to receive. To some is given a greater, to some a lesser measure of
it: some there be that are strong, others that are but weak in faith: as some
1. Cor. 3. 1.
are but babes in Christ, when others are come nearer to the measure of the
fullness of Christ: and yet all true believers; Ephesians 4. 13.
Faith, though it be not perfect, so it be true: though it be feeble like a
young borne babe, and that sore diseased too, is sufficient for salvation.
Faith does not save because it is a perfect virtue, but because it apprehends a
perfect object.
having faith in the truth of it alike, though not in the measure and degree of
the strength of it alike; and therefore all shall undoubtedly, and most
assuredly in the end be saved alike; for the least measure of saving faith does
give title to men to all the merciful promises of God: the weakest shall as
certainly and as soon be saved as the strongest; because it is not by the
measure, but by the manner and kind of faith (it being precious faith, and
faith not fained) whereby men are saved. Yea more, because men are not saved by
faith at all (otherwise then after a figurative manner of speaking), but by the
object of faith, and that which faith lays hold upon, which is Christ Jesus
alone, in whom our life and salvation 1. Ioh. 5. 11. Colos. 3. 4.
is wholly abiding. Now Christ (who is our life) may be laid hold upon,
according to the differing strength that is in the hands of them that do
apprehend him. Those that are younglings and babes in Christ, cannot lay so
strong hold of Christ, as those that are ancient, and men grown in Christ; but
though they hold him not so strongly, yet may they hold him as truly as do the
other. A child that eats the meat which is put into the hand that holds
that meat, holds it as truly, and is nourished by it as soundly, and as
certainly, as a strong man or a Giant that does the like: though there is great
difference for the strong manner of holding of that which both do eat, and
are in like manner nourished by.

Q. But what is to be done of them, who as touching their own feeling seem to
have no manner of strength to lay any hold of Christ, yet indeed do: only
they know that he is the alone Savior of mankind, and do desire that they
(with others) might have part in that salvation which he has purchased?

A. If they cannot with Simeon, take Christ in their arms, and as Mary did in
her womb; yet they conceive How feeling of faith may be attained.
him in their hearts, until Christ be formed in them (as the Apostle
speaks); there to hold him, as dwelling in their Luke 2. 28. Luke 1. 31.
Galath. 4. 19. Ephesians. 3. 17. Mat. 11. 12.
hearts by faith.

Secondly, if they cannot as violent persons press strongly upon him; and as
those that will have no nay, but be saved in spite of the devils teeth, offer
violence unto Christ, by plucking him unto them, and pulling life and salvation
with a strong hand out of him. If they cannot as strong men, set fast hand upon
him, and take a full gripe of him: as did Paul by his full persuasion: and
Abraham, Romans 8. 38.
the father of the faithful, a grown man in the strength of his faith: who
staggered not at the promise of Romans 4. 20. 21.
God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, and so gave glory to God. Yet
let them, with the poor bashful woman in the Gospel, that was sick of the
disease of a Mat. 9. 20.
bloody issue, who durst not for shame come before him; come yet creeping
behind him, and see if by any means possible they may get unto him, stretching
out their hand, though it be a weak and shaking hand; and (as I may say) a
short hand, so as they have much ado to reach unto Christ.

Thirdly, and though they cannot take hold of Christ, yet if in any sort they
can join themselves unto him, so as they can but truly touch him: such is his
virtue, and so full of grace is he, that the least touch of him will draw life
and virtue out of him to save their souls. If they Luke 8. 46.
fear to press to him, and cannot come to touch him; yet let them see if they
can at the least touch privily the hem of his garment: let them go to his
ordinances, his Word, and his Sacraments; they are his covering, and (as I may
say) a kind of garment, under which he is hidden, and in which he may be found;
that by those ordinances of his, and out of them they may draw virtue from him;
and feel the powerful operation of his Spirit thereby working such grace in
their hearts, as may cause them more steadfastly to believe, and to have (at the
length) much joy and peace in their so believing. Let them take hold of the
skirt of some Jew, going to some worthy servant Zach. 8. 23.
of Christ, and holy man, in whom Christ his virtue does shine out; that he
may carry them, and by his prayers commend them to a merciful Lord: for by
such (many times) the Lord puts forth his power, and gives help to others.
The servant was made to live for the faith of the master, who was the
Centurion; and the Luke 7. 9. 10. Matthew. 9. 2.
poor palsie-man helped, when Christ saw the faith of them that brought him.

If they cannot for weakness come to touch Christ, yet as the young children
were brought unto Christ; so Mark. 10. 13. 16
let them as babes in Christ Jesus, be brought unto him, that he may touch
them: if he do but put his hands upon them, he will undoubtedly bless them: if
they cannot feel in their hearts with comfort, that they apprehend him, yet
let them desire to be comprehended of him: thence shall they be sure to fetch
comfort for their sure stay: for therein especially stands all their safety.
If they can neither use their hands to touch him and lay hold upon him
themselves, nor their feet to come unto him, though creeping as upon hands and
feet together; but are forced to he still as poor creeples, so maimed and
broken even from the womb, by the fall they took in Adams first
transgression, as all the joints of their souls are utterly loosened; and all
the powers and parts of mind and of members are stricken so quite out of frame,
as they can neither stir hand nor foot to help themselves any way herein,
nor can be helped by any other to be thus brought unto him: yet as Peter and
John willed the poor creeple (lying at the beautiful gate of the Temple) to
look upon them (when he desired to receive some Act. 3. 4.
comfort from them); so let them look unto Christ, and fix their eyes wholly
and only upon him (in whose name, and by whose only power, that poor creeple
was made strong, and had perfect soundness given unto him in the sight of all
men); let them so cast their eye upon Christ, and look unto him, and to none
but to him, to be helped and saved by him (though it were but with a squint
eye, that has much weakness and lamenesse in it, as well as the other parts
that are all out of frame), and this shall fetch help and procure healing and
safety to be bestowed upon them. We know, that but the looking upon the brazen
serpent in the wilderness by the wounded Israelite, Numb. 21. 9.
though he could not come at him to touch him, was enough for his curing. And
we may perceive how much such a casting of an eye and looking after Christ,
does affect that our blessed Savior, and wo^^e upon him, by that which he
speaks to the Spouse in the Canticles: Thou have ravished my heart, my sister,
my Spouse; Cantic. 4. 9.
thou have ravished my heart with one of thine eyes. We know Enery true
believer has two eyes; one, the Eagle-eye of faith, whereby he sees him that
is invisible, and makes present that which is not scene: another, the eye of
hope, whereby he wishly looks for what says believes.
there is nothing that will more, or sooner move a tenderhearted mother to
bestirre her self to help her child in the weakness thereof; then when it
is so much decayed in strength, as it can neither stiree hand to reach unto
her, nor utter voice to speak to be helped by her, but always looks
wishfully upon her, and follows her with the eye which way soever she goes.
This was the course that Iehoshaphat took, when he was ouer-matched of his
enemies, having no power to with-stand them, neither knowing what to do, he
cried unto the Lord, and said, there is no might in us to stand against this
great multitude, neither know we what to do, only our eyes 2. Chron. 20. 12
Psalm. 121. 1. and 123. 1. 2.
are unto thee, O Lord! Thus did the servants of God lift up their eyes unto
the hills, from whence their help did come; professing that their eyes should
wait upon the Lord, till he had mercy upon them, even as the eyes of the
servants did look to the hands of their masters. And no more then this does
the Lord himself require from all the ends of the earth, that they might be
saved by him, Isai. 45. 22.
then that they do look unto him. This looking upon Christ, is a kind of
laying hold upon him, and of uniting our selves unto him. We know the eye can
as well apprehend and fasten hold upon the object that it sees, as the ear
can do upon the Word that it hears, or the hand lay hold upon the thing that
it touches. When a word is spoken to the ear, the ear catches hold upon the
sound that is uttered; and at the same time the mind apprehends that which is
meant thereby, and so both the ear and the mind do lay hold of one and the
same speech at one instant together. In like manner, when any thing is looked
upon by the eye, the object that is looked upon, is in the eye that does see
it; and at the same time in the mind and understanding, that does discern that
which is seen; and so the same object is both in the eye, and in the mind at
one and the same instant apprehended together; the eye by looking on a thing,
becomes one with it after a manner: to look then to Christ, is after a fort
to lay hold of him; and such a kind of looking to him, as causes a distressed
soul in greatest extremities to look for help from him alone, does so affect
him, as it does ravish his heart, and in a manner overcome him ( faith being
the beautiful eye of the Church, that wounds the heart of Christ with love to
the same). Therefore does Christ himself will the Spouse to turn her eyes
upon him (as Tremelius does read it); which if she shall Cantic. 6. 2.
do, she shall even lift him up with great joy and gladness after Tremelius
reading.
to see her, so to believe in him, and to depend upon him. Now who would not
be glad to cast up such an eye to the Lord, as he might be thus delighted
withal?

If this also seems to be more, then well can be performed by them, they
being in their own conceiving, as those that are past all hope of recovery,
and as men that are already dead; yet seeing there is no name under heaven
Acts 4. 12.
that is given, nor any other means in the whole World beside to be used, by
which any can be saved, but only by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ our
Savior. Let them (as knowing there is no other for them to rest upon for
salvation, but upon him, and him alone) by some means or other, get themselves
to be rolled and cast upon him; and let them not fear, but that as the dead
man that was cast into the Sepulcher of Elisha, so soon as he touched the 2.
King. 13. 21.
bones of the Prophet, he was made to stand upon his feet, and to live again;
so such being cast upon Christ, though they were dead, yet should they surely
live (there being John 11. 25.
infinitely more virtue in Christ that was crucified, then ever was in the
bones of the Prophet that was dead, to revive and cause to live again all that
are cast upon him, as seeking so to have life from him).

Lastly, if they be able no manner of way to do any thing to help
themselves, and further their own salvation, but only desire to be helped,
and desire that they might be saved by Christ Jesus; let them make of that
desire, keeping it, and nourishing it, and comforting themselves yet in this,
that God has given them a desiring heart, to hunger, thirst, and long after
the salvation that is in Christ Jesus. He that gives them so to desire, will
also in due time give them to have the thing so desired; only let them wait
for Christ his helping hand, using the best means that possibly they can, and
let them keep themselves within the compass of Christ his walk where he uses
to come; loving and resorting to the habitation Psalm. 26. 8.
of his house, and the place where his honor dwells, that he may see them
there. And they shall find by good experience in the end, that as our Savior
going by the Poole of Bethesda, saw that impotent man, who had an infirmity 38
years, and hearing him complain of his unableness Ioh. 5. 5. 6. 7. 8.
to help himself, and that there was no other that would help to put him
into the Poole, but while he was a coming, some other was more ready to step
in before him; our Savior having compassion, put no other task upon him, but
only to desire to be made whole, asking him if he would be made whole; and
so presently restored him to his desired strength again, willing him to take
up his bed and walk: So doubtless these weaklings in faith, that can do no
more for themselves through their great infirmity, then desire to be helped,
and to have salvation from him; our blessed, loving, and most merciful Savior
( who will not break a bruised reed, nor Matthew. 12. 20.
quench the flax that smoaketh) beholding their great distress, and
lamentable plight that they are in, will be moved in pity to relieve them. And
knowing, that they are able to do no more in the matter of believing in him
for their salvation, then to desire they could believe better, and depend more
upon him, that they might be saved, will accept of such a desire, in stead of
the deed it self; and as undoubtedly save them with such an earnest and true
desire of believing better, as they shall ever be saved that believe best of all.

Q. In the description of faith which you made at the first, beside the true
knowledge of Christ, and laying hold of him, you joined therewith a comfortable
persuasion also of the favor and love of God toward us, in and through him.
Do you take it, that this comfortable persuasion of Gods favor toward us, as
it is felt and perceived by us, does always accompany true and saving faith in
Christ, and that it is so necessary to the essence and being of faith, as
without it true faith cannot at all consist?

A. Not so; but I take such a settled persuasion of Persuasion of Gods favor.
Gods unalterable love toward us in and through Christ Jesus, to be necessary
rather to the well-being of faith, and even to the finishing and perfecting of
it, when it is grown to the greatest strength and perfection, that it can come
unto in this life, then to the being of faith at all: for to a higher pitch or
degree of greater perfection, faith cannot grow nor rise up unto, so long as
we have any being in this life (even then when it has made the best
proceedings, and prospered most happily, increasing with the increasings of
God, and has run through all the degrees that are set unto faith in this
life, till the best and highest be attained unto), then for faith to settle the
heart in a clear, full, and undoubted persuasion of Gods love and favor
toward us in Christ Jesus; to be so sure and unchangeable, as nothing shall
ever be able to separate us Romans 8. 38.
from the same again; like to that of the Apostles: but that true faith may
have existence, and being in the heart of a good Christian, where such an
undoubted and comfortable persuasion, is either very seldom, or peradventure
never at all felt by the true believer (especially in such a degree of
clearenesse and vndoubtednesse of assurance, as had the Apostle) may appear;
first, if we consider the first beginnings of faith, with what great
feebleness and imbecillitie it has his being in us, when it is new begotten,
and (as I may say) first bred and borne, lying in the swathing cloutes under as
great weakness, and with as little feeling and apprehending of the operation
of God Co^oss 2. 12.
in giving it self being, as does the infant that is newborn, either know or
apprehend the time or the means, in and by which it came to be first brought
forth into the world; though being once borne, and endued with all the powers
and faculties of the mind, and made in every part proportionable with all the
members of the body (howsoever it cannot well use either), it is even at the
very first as absolutely and perfectly a true man, as ever it shall be
afterward, when it can put the understanding that is in the mind to the
greatest use and work, with the members of the body to the best purpose that
it ever shall be able. So is it with the faith of Gods elect, that is once Jude
3.
given to the Saints, it is as true faith at the first, and as truly existing
and being, after it is once begotten by the working of Gods Spirit, and thereby
planted and put into the heart of a Christian (though in never so great
weakness), as ever it is, or shall be, when it is grown to the greatest
strength it ever can attain unto; or be of the most effectual and mightiest
operation and working that it possibly can be of.

Again, if we consider faith how it may be assailed (even after it has bin
once soundly wrought in us, and planted in our hearts) by the strength of
tentation, and the forcible Luke 22. 31.
working of Satan, who desires to have us, that he may winnow and sift us as
wheat; daily experience makes manifest the truth of this, that so may a man's
faith be shaken, and al feeling of comfort be made wholly to fail him; that he
who once with great joy did apprehend the love and favor of God toward him in
Christ Jesus, may be as far from such feeling and comfortable persuasion
(either so far as others can judge, or himself can any way apprehend) as
ever was Peter from that worthy confession of Christ, and of the faith he had
in him, which he once made profession of, and which was so greatly approved
Matthew. 16. 16. 17. 18.
and applauded by our Savior himself; when afterward he did most
unfaithfully, cowardly, and dastardly deny him, and falsely forswear him;
yea, curse and banne himself Matthew. 26. 70. 72. 74.
if ever he knew him. And yet (through the unchangeableness of Gods purpose
and grace, whose ways are ever mercy and truth to such as fear him, and his
works without repentance, never to be called back again; who never can deny
himself, though we may be unfaithful, 2. Tim. 2. 13.
and hardly can believe) the faith of such a Christian, howsoever soarely it
may be shaken, by the force and strength of tentation; so as unbelief may
seem to have gotten the upper hand, and feeling to be quite lost, that having
wholly let go the hold thereof: yet is it no more destroyed from having any
further being, nor can be more made finally to fail him, in whom it was ever
soundly wrought at all, then did the faith of Peter utterly fail; which was so
vpheld by the promise and prayer of Luke 22. 32.
Christ our Savior, as it was not possible for all the gates of hell to
prevail against the same, though they sifted it Matthew. 16. 18.
never so, and winnowed it to the full. This comfortable persuasion then in the
heart of a believing Christian, which accompanies the true knowledge and
laying hold of Christ, and rises and flows from them both, it is not so much
felt and perceived at the first being and beginning of faith, as after some
time of continuance; when faith by daily growing, has attained to some good
measure of strength, it then is found to manifest it self, to the much
quieting of the heart, in the which it is so felt. This is but the comfortable
progress and growing of faith, the proceeding of it on (as I may say) from
faith to faith (as the Apostle speaks.) And as in a word was noted before
Romans 1. 17. 1. Pet. 1. 21.
out of that which is set down by Peter, from the faith that we have by
believing in Christ, to come to believe in God, and to have faith and hope in
him, reckoning upon all favor and mercy from him.

CHAP. VI.
The use that is to be made of this, that God has given the Commandments both
of the Law and Gospel, for the attaining of eternal life.



COme now to show, what use we are to make of the knowledge of this, that
beside the commandments set down in the Law, for the fulfilling the
righteousness thereof (promise being made, that if we shall so do, we shall
live thereby), we have another commandment enjoined unto us in the Gospel,
for our believing in the name of the only begotten Son of God, with promise
likewise made in the same Gospel, that all that believe in him shall never
perish, but have life everlasting?

A. We are occasioned hereby, to observe the inestimable goodness of God
toward mankind for his salvation, so many ways being used by the Lord, for
the recovering of this most woeful creature so lamentably fallen, that yet he
might not perish for ever, but live and be saved in the end. First, for that
in giving forth his Law, he would ever treat about life with so rebellious a
traitor, as man had showed himself to be against his Creator; and would offer
any conditions of peace, or make any covenant at all for life and safety with
such a rebel, deserving so often to die, yea, and that everlastingly: but such
was the first covenant of the Law, given by the Lord unto Deuteronomy. 4. 13. 8.
all mankind to be observed by them; wherein it pleased the Lord to enter into
this covenant with man, that (howsoever by his transgression, he had deserved
to die without any mercy; yet) if he would now observe these his Statutes, and
keep the commandments which he had set down in his Law, he should for all
that live and be saved thereby: Do this (says the Lord) and thou shall Leuit.
18. 5. Romans 10. 5.
live: which was done, to let man see his inability to keep this Law, and
thereby to drive him to seek for life by the new Covenant made in Christ.

Secondly, whereas the conditions of this first covenant Rom 8. 3. Gal. 3. 21.
22. Heb 7. 18. 19. Gal. 2. 16. Romans 7. 10.
of the Law, were found much too hard to be stood unto, and to be kept by any
man, that so he might live, and be saved by so doing ( for by the deeds of the
Law no flesh can ever be saved): for by reason of sin, that commandment
which was ordained to life, is found to be unto us to death. Herein the
goodness of God did yet super-abound, that it would please him to covenant
with man the second time for life and salvation, making a new covenant; which
is said to be a better covenant then the Ier. 31. 31. 32.
former, because it is stablished upon better promises (our Savior Christ
Jesus himself being the Mediator thereof), Heb. 8. 6. 7. 8. 9.
even the Covenant of grace, for the obtaining of life and salvation freely by
his grace, through the redemption Romans 3 24. 25.
that is in Christ Jesus, and through faith in his name: whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation, and price of redemption for all that believe, with
this promise made to every such a one, that whosoever do believe in him, they
shall never perish, but have life everlasting. And John 3. 16.
that by Christ all that do believe, shall be justified for ever from all
things, from which by the works of the Law, Acts 13. 39.
none could be justified. Now this being the second covenant for life, the
promises whereupon this is stablished, are said to be better promises then the
former, because it is not said, do this, and thou shall live; but believe
this, and thou shall live (there being a possibility of obtaining power at the
hands of God to believe, if we be not wanting to our selves).

Thirdly, though this second covenant for life and salvation, be a better and
more favorable covenant, then was the first; and the condition thereof more
easy to be performed through the aid of Gods grace, which is ordinarily given
to such as shall be saved: yet (lest any should fail to do that, which
otherwise he has means to be made able to do, and so might do, namely,
believe) herein Gods exceeding goodness unto man seems more abundantly to be
set forth, in that he leaves it not as a thing indifferent to the choice of
every man whither they will believe or not, but as that which is most needful
for all, he charge all that they do believe; that is, that they be not
wanting to themselves in using all possible means, whereby they may come truly
to believe. So that if any shall now perish under the Gospel, wherein
salvation is offered unto us, under the condition of our believing, such shall
perish; not so much for their other sins, as for their unbelief, because they
believed not in the John 3. 18.
name of the only begotten Son of God; and they shall die twice damned as
double transgressors of all the commandments, both of the Law commanding them
to do, and of the commandments of the Gospel commanding Heb. 2. 23. and 4. 1.
6.
them to believe; and as violaters of both covenants of works and of faith,
not keeping the conditions of either; neither doing that which the Law
commands, nor believing that which the Gospel promises. Unutterable
therefore is this goodness of God, that commands us to believe, that we might
be saved; who thus thought it not enough to prepare salvation for us, and to
proffer it unto us, but presses it upon us, and urges us to take it, charging
and commanding us to believe: which is the only hand, by which salvation is to
be laid hold upon.

Fourthly, the knowledge of this, that God commands us to believe, may be
our warrant for our making sure to our selves our own salvation, and for our
steadfastly 2. Pet. 1. 10.
believing, without all manner of doubting to be saved by Christ Jesus, and to
have redemption in his blood, even the forgiveness of all our sins: as also
to free us from that false imputation charged upon us by our adversaries, of
being too presumptuous thus boldly and confidently to believe (and not to
remain as they do ever in some doubt), since it is obedience, and not
presumption, to do that we are commanded, God thus commanding us to believe.

Lastly, the practice of this knowledge that it is our duty to believe, ought
to be seen in our careful endeavoring by taking all possible pains, and
using with all diligence the good means of reading the Scriptures, of hearing
of Sermons, of often partaking at the holy Sacraments, of private conference,
of holy meditation, of fervent and continual prayers; so to get the saving
knowledge of Christ, as we may bring our hearts to rest, and rely upon him
and upon him alone for our salvation; apprehending him to be our Savior, and
laying hold upon all that he has done and suffered for us, as that whereby a
full satisfaction has been made for our sins, and a price has been paid of
value sufficient for our perfect redemption: that so we having Christ with his
merits by faith to be ours, in having him we may have life by him: for God has
given us eternal life, and that life is in his 1. Ioh. 5. 11.
Son. We are every where counseled and called upon to get faith and to
labor to believe. It is the special work that our Savior set the people
about, which he said to be the work of God, to labor to believe. We are
Mark. 11. 22. John 6. 29.
willed to have faith in our selves, whatsoever else we should want beside.
And no marvel, for of all other graces it is that which is most needful,
without which even Christ himself should profit us nothing. It is the mother
grace of all the rest, and root from whence all virtues beside do spring and
flourish out: it is a jewel of invaluable worth, and pearl of an unspeakable
price. Among precious stones, the fairest tincture is given to Excellency of
faith.
the Ruby, and the quickest light unto the Diamond: but there is no Ruby, no
Diamond nor Sapphire, how costly and precious soever they be, that may be
compared with it for brightness and beauty; or that can in like manner
enrich, deck and set forth the outward man, as this does in rich the heart,
beautify, deck and adorn the hid man thereof. There is not the like precious
stone ever to be heard of, having such virtue to be found in it, as has
precious faith, which is the faith of Gods elect. No not that stone (if ever
such there were) which being cast into the sea when the storm is at the
highest, and the waves thereof most troublesome and horribly raging, (as some
have conceited and stick not to report) to quiet and to calm all the
boisterousnes thereof: yet were not that work so wonderful and change so
great and marvelous, that thus should be seen done in the foaming wild sea,
as is that which is most certainly and that usually and daily found to be
wrought and done by this precious faith in the afflicted conscience, in the
perplexed souls and trembling hearts of the distressed servants of God. Who
encountering with the tentations of the devil, and wrestling in conscience with
the wrath and displeasure of God, as for life and death, are sorely shaken with
the terrors of God, and blasted with the whirlewinde of his displeasure; which
is able to drive the whole frame of our nature into extreme misery and utter
confusion: especially when Satan with all (taking the advantage of such
opportunity) most furiously does break in upon those distressed hearts with
such force and violent rage of his dreadful tentations, as is able to lift the
mind off the hindges, and to tear up the very foundations of comfort from the
bottom; the storm of tentations being so at the highest, the poor distracted
and distressed soul is then as the raging sea that cannot be quiet; but is
like to Psalm. 88. 6. 7. 15. 16. 17. 18. Psalm. 69. 14. 15.
be overwhelmed and swallowed up in those tempestuous waves which threaten to
drown all in the gulf of despair, when neither bank nor bottom can be
seen, nor any thing before them but present death and utter perishing: yet if
in all this extremity faith can find but any intertainment, and if any way
can be made in the heart for the same to have footing, and that place may be
given unto it there to work in; so will it keep the heart, the hands, the
voice and the eyes upward, as it will keep all safe from drowning, or final
miscarrying in the end; and will never give over working in the effectualnes of
the operation thereof, till it has obtained help from God, and till safety
and deliverance be fully come; till by his help who stilleth the rage of the
sea, the noise of the waters Psalm. 65. 7.
and tumults of the people, these heavy tempests and storms of tentations may
be made wholly to cease, and all be made peaceable and comfortable, yea joyful
again: asswaging all sorrows, expelling all fears, bringing quietness to the
conscience, refreshings to the soul, setting the heart at peace with God, and
causing that the peace of conscience as a sweet sleep, may fall upon such
Romans 5. 1.
tired and wearied souls, that were well near worn up and wasted with
distresfull griefs and sorrows before, that so they may now return to their
own rest again. Psalm. 116. 3. 6. 7.
These be indeed worthy of the name to be called the fair Havens, into which
faith (where it may be allowed Act. 27. 8.
to be Pilot) will bring out of the greatest flawes and fearefullest storms
(that can happen) the poor distressed soul ready to wrack; that so in all
safety at the length, the same may be thrust in here, and most quietly and
joyfully again rest therein, as in a most sure haven. These with the like
being the effects, which are wrought in the hearts of true believers by this
precious faith (even in the hearts of so many, as it can find way and place
given unto it to show the operation thereof), they are such as are most worthy
both to be marked and to be marueiled at: when as in the stead of the horrors
of conscience, and the sound of fears which affrighted them before in the
times of their troubles, Gods servants are yet again so cheared and comforted
in the end, as their change seems worthy to be celebrated with the songs of
Angels and the reioycings of men. We wonder at the virtue of the Lodestone
that it should ever be pointing at the Northpole, Called Magnes of the great
virtue that is in it.
and that it should draw so forcibly the heavy iron up to it self, contrary to
the natural motion thereof. God has put this admirable virtue into faith,
that it is ever looking unto Christ alone, and pointing us only unto him; it
fails not to draw home most effectually Christ Jesus our Savior into every
soul in the which it is placed, and lifts up again unto him the heart of
every true believer (how heavy soever), coupling them together by an union,
though true and inseperable, yet every way strange and most unutterable. Faith
follows Christ as does the flower follow the Sun, which has the name given
it upon the same to be called the flower of the Sun: because it is ever seen
turning it self to the Sun, when it does arise and when it does decline.
Thus does faith ever turn it self unto Christ, it looks Gal. 2. 16.
after him alone, and after none but him; which worthily is therefore called
the faith of Christ, and the faith of his name. This saving grace which comes
from above, Acts 3. 16.
and has his beginning from on high, as it comes from God, so does it lead
us to God again; it mounteth us above the world, and sets us upon the power
and providence of God, assuredly to look for and steadfastly to believe to have
(without failing) all that he has promised, who speaks in righteousness and
is mighty Isai. 63. 1.
to save: it staieth and setleth the heart from inconstantly wavering and
doubtfully staggering or reeling in uncertainty to this side or to that: it is
a sure arch-pillar of strength to lean unto, we may be bold with all our
weight to stay our selves by it. Mighty is the working of that faith that is
not fained, to get help and saving from Christ for every soul that has it:
yea so powerful and effectual is the working of it in this behalf, as
nothing can stand in the way to hinder it from Christ which it will not remove,
nothing can be able to keep it from Christ. It bursteth through all things,
not only that we have in our selves, but whatsoever else is in earth, heaven
or hell, until it come to Christ crucified, and to the eternal sweet mercies
of God in Christ Jesus. Here here is the only resting place thereof, and no
where but here. By how much the greater be the vnlikelihoods and impediments
that lay before faith, by so much the more glorious and excellent does faith
show it self to be in the working thereof, and wrestling to overcome all that
stands against; still rising up from under all her burdens, and running on
with greater force when it meets with lets in the way to stop her course,
taking strength ever from resistance. If way be not made for it to get unto
Christ, it will make way for it self, whosoever or whatsoever it is that may
seem to resist. It is not a poor silly garment, that can stand in the way of
it to hinder it from touching Christ to draw virtue out of him, but it will
Mark. 5. 27. 28. 30. 34. Luke 6. 19. Mark. 6. 56.
reach through all coats and couerings that Christ can put upon him: he cannot
so hide himself under any covering or garment, how strange soever it may seem
to be that he may put upon him, but faith will find him out: though he should
kill me, yet would I trust in him, Job. 13. 15.
says the constant believer. Christ cannot so convey Mark. 7. 24. 25.
himself away into any place, or go into other company, Whether shall I go
from thy presence, says David? so of God it may be said, whether shall he go
and not be followed and found, of hungring and thirsting souls?
and get among the throng and thick of the multitude, but faith will strive
and wrestle to come near unto him. He cannot so shut himself within the
walls of any house, but faith will break in upon him: if other entry will
not be allowed unto it, it will uncover the house and pluck down the tiles,
but it will have passage unto him. If Christ be any where upon earth, it will
be with him: yea though he has left the earth, yet faith has not forsaken
him; but it follows him through the clouds, as Mark. 2. 4. 5. Mark. 6. 31.
32. 33. 1. Pet. 1. 8.
it were with the wings of an Eagle, entering the heavens after him. Where
Christ gives it leave to have access unto him, there is no keeping it from
him, no force nor violence this way can serve the turn: not armies of men nor
troops of soldiers, not closing up in prisons, not castles and holds, be they
never so strong, though the walls and the gates were all of brass; not all
the force of the world, if it were all joined together against one poor man,
were able to keep back from out of the sight of Christ Jesus that party,
whom and whose case faith has once undertaken to present and bring before him.
The whole world is too weak to strive against faith: for this is our victory
whereby we overcome the world, 1. Ioh. 5. 4. 5.
even our faith; yea, all the gates of hell shall never be able Matthew. 16. 18.
to resist faith, or to prevail against the same: so wondrous is the force
thereof in our souls, as by it all things Mark. 9. 23.
are made possible unto us, whither to suffer or overcome. O most incomparable
and victorious grace of faith! that is thus impregnable and unconquerable,
which cannot be resisted of any thing, but overcomes all things that it
strives withal. How safe is it with that soul, that this grace does once
inhabit in? How well is it with that man, to whom is ever given the power of
believing? for who so finds this precious faith, finds life, and has 2.
Cor. 5. 7. Romans 11. 20. Gal 2. 20. John 3. 36. John 5 24.
obtained mercy and favor from God for ever to be saved: by it we walk, by it
we stand, by it we live; yea, he that truly believes, does so live as he
has now eternal life, and shall never see death; where every one that
believes not, is condemned already. How then is the merchandise of this
better, then the merchandise of silver? and the gain of this grace better,
then the gain of the finest gold? It is Laeta mercatura fides. Cyrill.
a gladsome and merry merchandise to be traffiqued about, and a gainefull
commodity to be got: for he that has it, has all things to be his: God
for his Father, Christ Jesus for his Savior, the holy Ghost for his Comforter,
the Angels in heaven, the Ministers in earth, the world it self, things
present and to come; all is his, he is 1. Cor. 3. 21. 22. 23.
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. What cause is there then, that all should be set
aworke, to labor about the obtaining and getting of this grace, that is so
precious, and even to be rich in this? and that every one do make provision
for believing, that true faith do not fail us; that should be all our care.
How well may that be spoken of getting faith in particular, which is spoken of
wisdom in general Prou. 4. 5. 7.
by Solomon in his Proverbs; Get wisdom, get understanding, forget it not:
wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom with all thy gettings,
get understanding: So may it be truly said, get faith, get the power of
believing, forget it not; faith is the principal thing, Heb. 12. 2. Phil. 1.
29. Ephesians. 2 8.
therefore get faith, and with all thy gettings, get the grace of true
believing. Faith we know is the gift of God, a Faith, Gods gift by word.
commodity engrossed into his own hand alone, it is not to be had elsewhere
at the hand of any other, then only at his hand, whose prerogative royal it
is to be the Father of light, from whom every good and perfect gift does come;
James 1. 17.
particularly touching this gift of faith, he is known to be the only author,
and the only finisher of it. The Ministers of the Gospel, they indeed may be
said (as Paul speaks of himself and of Apollos) to be Ministers, by whom 1.
Cor. 3. 5.
the people do believe (God using the ministry of the Gospel, as a
powerful means and ordinance of his own, to work faith in the hearts of the^
that shall believe); but they are not the Ministers of whom, as of the authors
of it, the people receive their faith, as though they were Masters and Lords of
their faith: which the Apostle elsewhere does utterly disclaim; but only
helpers (as he there speaks) 2. Cor. 1. 24.
of the peoples joy. The Ministers in this work, they are indeed laborers and
workers together with God: but yet 2. Cor. 6. 1.
in an inferior degree, and in such a low place, as the same Apostle says,
they neither are any thing, nor can do any 1. Cor. 3. 7.
thing without the Lord, who alone does all; their labor is but as the labor
of them that do plant, and that do water, it is the Lord alone that is the
blesser, and he that gives the increase to come: in saying therefore they are
the Ministers by whom the people do believe, he presently shows how;
notwithstanding they came to have their faith, even (says he) as the Lord gave
to every man. 1. Cor. 3. 5.
To come then to have faith, we must first attend upon Gods ordinance in the
ministry of his Word, watching daily at wisdoms gates, and giving attendance
at the posts Prou. 8. 33. Isai. 55. 3.
of her doors: we must incline our ears and come; we must hear, that our
souls may live; faith is said to come by hearing; they that have lost and left
hearing, how should they look to find faith, or ever come to believing? Yet
this is not all: for have not men heard, and do not men daily hear? Yes
verily: for the sound of the Gospel is gone abroad in all the earth, and the
Romans 10. 18. 1. These. 3. 2.
word of this preaching unto the ends of the world: yet all men have not faith.
And the Ministers of the Gospel may take up Isaiahs complaint again, and say,
Lord Isa. 53. 1. Mat. 3. 11.
who has believed our report? Ministers may offer grace to all, but they
cannot confer or give grace to any. Paul may speak to the women that resorted
to prayer and to preaching; but if God had not opened Lydia's Act. 16. 13. 14.
heart to believe what was spoken, they should have gone away as they first
came. We must then, beside our hearing, send up to heaven for help in this
thing, that we may believe. We must pluck down that power of God by earnest
begging, that may strengthen us unto this thing: for it is no easy matter to
have faith wrought soundly in any man's heart: it is such a work, as stands
in need of no less then the mighty power of God to be set a work about the
effecting of it. Which the Apostle knew full well; which made him speak as he
does, when he prayed for the Thessalonians, that God would fulfill all the good
pleasure of his goodness toward them, 2. These. 1. 11.
and the work of faith with power. Like unto this, is the manner of his
praying for the Ephesians, that God would open the eyes of their understanding,
that they might know Ephesians. 1. 18. 19.
what is the exceeding greatness of the power of God to them that do believe,
according to the working of his mighty power. In both which places, for the
work of faith in the hearts of believers, he makes mention of the power of
God, the mighty power of God, and exceeding greatness of the power of God, and
all but needful: for there is so great an opposition against our believing,
and so many lets lying in the way to hinder the working of faith in our hearts,
as less then all this would not be sufficient thoroughly to effect it. The
heart is bound up so in unbelief; in bonds as strong as bonds of brass, that
no power Romans 11. 32.
can possibly loosen them, but the Almighty power of God. The devil holds
men in so strait a bondage, Heb. 2. 14. 15. and 3. 12. 13. Isa. 61. 1.
and does shut up men's hearts so in unbelief, as none can break in upon the
heart to work any faith there, but he, whose power is such as cannot be
withstood, and who only can loosen the works of the devil: if the Lord 1.
Ioh. 3. 8.
himself do not open the door of our hearts for faith to be got in; even he
who only has the key of the house of David, who opens and no man shuts.
and shuts when Apoe. 3. 7.
no man can open: all the gates and doors of our hearts are so barred up, that
there is no passage for faith to have entrance. The heart is fast locked up in
the devils gaile of blindness and ignorance, he has rampired up every Mat.
13. 15.
gate there, to keep grace out; he deals as enemies that labor the
destruction of a place, who take all passages that no victual may be brought,
nor help to give them succor. The devil does thus; he takes the passages of
the soul, by which, comfort, knowledge, and grace might be derived unto it,
and faith might be there wrought, that would put him to flight. As he blindes
2. Cor. 44.
up men's eyes, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus should
not shine unto them; so he stoppes their ears, as with clay, and with earth,
that they can listen after nothing but earthly matters, and things belonging
unto this life: they hear not Gods word; or if they do, they do not regard;
they are as the deaf adder that hears not the voice of the charmer. The
devil fitteth Psalm. 58. 4. 5.
in men's hearts; he has so erected his throne there, as no grace will be
suffered to come in. The only remedy in this case, is to fly to God for
succor, to lift up our voices, and cry loud unto him; to importune him by
earnest prayer night and day, till help do come. We are to set out our
throats and cry; yea with a holy kind of impudency; as did blind Bartimeus,
cry out to the son of David, and not hold our peace, that he would have mercy
Mar. 10. 47. 48.
upon us, and open our eyes that we may receive our sight; not withstanding
the devil would keep us still in blindness, we are to bring our deaf ears
unto him, that Mark. 7. 32. 33. 34. 35.
he may boar them open, that we may hear Gods blessed word; and in hearing,
may come to believe, that faith may be begotten in us, by that immortal seed
of Gods everlasting word, and that God himself will become the worker, and the
author of this true saving grace of precious faith in us. Neither are we to
rest in the first beginnings of this grace, but follow on with our best
endeauours, using all good means for the daily increases thereof; plying God
still with incessant prayers, that he who has been the author, will now also
be the finisher of Prayer is the exercise of faith, her recreation, and means
to keep it alone.
faith in us; that he will bless us with happy growth and increases in this
grace, carrying us on from faith to faith. This is that which our Savior
himself has taught us to do, ever to pray, O Lord increase our faith. We
Romans 1. 17.
are to follow herein the example of the poor man in the Gospel, that came to
Christ to have his son healed; who showed great faith in his unbelief, in
that though he doubted whether Christ could heal his child, yet he Mark. 9.
24.
believed he could heal his faith; crying with him, Lord, I believe, help my
unbelief. Neither are we to rest in so doing alone, but to do what we can our
selves, yt the small How to nourish faith.
measure of this grace being once thus begun, may ever be increased, by our
more diligent using the means of the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer; stirring it
up by meditating, endeavoring, striving, asking, seeking, knocking; when we
feel any sparkles of true and lively faith lie glowing in our hearts within,
they must be cherished, succored, and much made of: that holy fire must not be
quenched, nor let to go out for want of tending, and blowing up the (...) 2.
Tim. 1. 6.
coal, as Paul speaks to Timothy. When we perceive any light of faith to
break forth and shine out, we must look well to our lamps, that oil be
poured in and be never lacking. When the fire of this burning is once kindled
upon the altar of our hearts, every one must do, the office of the Priest to
himself, to keep this fire still a burning; and to trim these lights that
they may never Exodus 2^. 20. 21
leave shining: yea, this fire is not only to be kept in, but to be blown up
and made to flame: prayer is in stead of bellows to the fire; the Word and
Sacraments rightly and reverently used, are as oil to make this holy fire to
flame; conference with others, and holy meetings with Gods servants, for the
comforting of themselves together, by the mutual faith both of one and of
another (as the Apostle speaks), are as the bringing together Romans 1. 12.
of firebrands that do set one another a burning; as the two disciples that
went to Emmaus said one to another, did not our hearts burn within us, while
he was talking to Luke 24. 32.
us? heavenly meditations, as we are alone by our selves, when the heart is
rapt up to heaven, flaming up in the desires thereof, to receive grace from
above; they are as a fiery chariot, which carries us up with Eliah, from this
earth, unto heaven. If after this manner we shall be diligent in using all
good means, both for the beginning and increasing of precious and true saving
faith in our hearts, and shall be found no way to be wanting to our selves;
God will not be wanting to give his blessing, but do that for us in this
behalf, which Paul craved of him in the behalf of the Thessalonians; namely,
Fulfill 2. These. 1. 11.
all the good pleasure of his goodness, and perfect the whole work of faith
in our hearts, with power to our eternal salvation in this life; and in that
which is to come.

CHAP. VII.
How men may be mistaken in this point, of their believing, with the use
thereof.



But may not men be mistaken about this point of their believing, and think
they have obtained like precious faith with Gods Elect, looking to be saved as
soon, and as well as the best (as many may be heard so to speak); and yet
miss of all in the end, and fall short of their reckoning, both deceiving
others by their so confident boasting, and to their everlasting woe, proving by
lamentable experience, that they are worst and most of all deceived themselves?

A. Yes undoubtedly; and in nothing sooner then in Many deceived.
this, according as there is no one saving grace (though Satan be an enemy to
all), against which that vowed enemy of our salvation, does more bend all his
force Satan beguiles with false faith.
to the overthrowing of it, where he finds it to be in truth: or about which
that deceiuer of the world does more bear his brain, or set a work his seven
heads, to use greater cousonage, or more sleighty working, and cunning
craftiness to deceive, then about this one grace of faith: either for the
keeping of men from having faith, or caring to have it (if he sees they be
without it); or else in making them believe (when he perceives they are of
mind that faith is needful to be had), that they have faith without all doubt,
and that even of the best and strongest faith that is in the world beside, then
the which no better can be had; when their faith scarce has so much to be
seen in it as the very shadow or show of a true faith; or when it is at the
best, it is but a counterfeit mocke-faith, even a false fained faith; which he
well knows can do them at all no good, nor stand them in any manner of
stead. This is his subtilty and devilish policy, with the shows of nothing,
to make men believe they have all things; and when they are empty, to think
they are full. This is truly said to be one of the chaine-shot, wherewith he
slays thousands upon thousands: and with which (as it were) with the Iaw bone
of an Ass ( Sampson-like) he daily does make heaps upon heaps. Men are fowly
and fondly deceived, and most childishly cousened by the devil in this point
of their believing: which yet is a case of so great weight, and a matter of
such importance and consequence, as to be mistaken about it, proves to be the
utter undoing of men, and their final ruin. For altogether lamentable it is
to see, that men should trust so much to their broken and bankerupt estate in
their souls affairs; and should so hazard their souls, and bear so great an
adventure of their lives for ever, upon the hope of being saved by such a faith
as can no way help them, but will utterly fail them in the end. They are like
foolish and desperate persons, that dare go to sea in a rotten or riuen
ship: or like the foolish man, of whom our Savior speaks in the Gospel,
that builds his house upon the sand, looking to be sheltered there, and
saved from all harm against every storm; but when the storm comes and
beats upon his building, all falls about his ears; and the fall thereof is
the greater, by how much the more he hoped, and was conceited in himself that
he had built it so strong, as it could never fail him in any need. True and
precious saving faith is not so common True faith rare.
a grace, nor so easy to come by, as many do think for. There be that do
travel as painfully to bring it forth, and do with as great difficulty and
hardness come to find and to feel that they have it; as any weak woman by
her forest labor when she endures the sharpest brunts, and strongest pains
of travel in childbirth, comes at the length to bring forth her fruit. So
that in respect of their hard coming by it, and the pains they endure for it,
and charge that it cost them at the length to obtain it, and become owners of
it, it may well be called and reckoned in their account to be indeed precious
faith (according as it is in it self, in regard of the inestimable worth that
is found to be in it, and of the admirable effects that it causes, and of the
precious fruits that it does bring forth, it most worthily and deservedly has
that honorable style and title put upon it, to be called precious faith), for
it is unto some the price (in a manner) 2. Pet. 1. 1.
of their dearest life. And I doubt not but as Rachel having hard labor, died
herself when Benjamin was Genesis 35 16. 18.
borne: so some may as well die in the throws of the new birth, and pangs and
pains of their travel about having faith to be borne, and getting that fruit
to be brought forth (which yet being once borne, and so brought forth, will
never fail to save them that bear it, though they die themselves in the birth
thereof). And therefore in regard of their own feeling, they may seem to have
cause with Rachel, to call it their Ben-oni, even the son of their sorrow:
though as Jacob changed the name of that son whom Rachel called Ben-oni, for
the sorrowful travel she brought him forth with, and called him Benjamin: so
in regard of the powerful and blessed effects that faith works, for the
undoubted saving and bringing to eternal life such as truly do believe, he
that is the author of this precious faith, and the only true father that has
begot it in them, may justly have it named, not Ben-oni, but Benjamin, that is,
the ^^n of strength, against which no power of the enemic can prevail; or the
son of the right hand, even such a hand as lays hold of life, and such life
as never will have an end. I know there be a company, who resting upon a vain
and false fained faith; that may be truly said of them, in regard of their
speedy and easy coming by such faith (which they yet conceit to be as good as
any bodies faith is beside), which the Egyptian midwiues said of the women of
Exodus 1. 19.
the Hebrews, that they were not like other women of Egypt, but were so
lively, so lusty and strong, as they needed not their help, but were
delivered before ever they could come at them. So this sort of people they are
delivered of this kind of faith, without any aid of Gods Ministers; they are
so healthie, so lusty, and so strong, as themselves do deem, that they need
none of their help: for they are not acquainted with the pangs of conscience
in the new birth, whereby others are hazarded: there being many a poor weak
Christian that is seen to lie traveling, to bring out true saving faith in
such weakness, as they are ready to faint and give over before ever that can
be brought forth and seem to be borne. But these of a sudden, growing great,
and swelling big with a windy conceit that puffs them up, make their
reckoning that faith is formed in them: they travel indeed about it, but (as
the Prophet speaks) they travel with the wind, and bring out nothing but the
Hos. 8. 7. Isa. 33. 11. Psalm. 7. 14.
whirlwind: they conceive chafe, and shall bring forth stubble; they travel
with falsehood, and bring forth a lie; their surest faith being nothing else but
most dangerous presuming. There is then great mistaking about this question of
faith. Some thinking their faith to be less then it is; and though it be in
them in truth, yet that it is not in them at all. Others thinking their faith
to be greater then it is, and that they are richly stored therewith, when they
are wholly empty of it, and have not of it in quantity so much as is the
least grain of mustard seed. Who therefore have no cause to be so secure as
they are, and to reckon upon such safety as they do: for undoubtedly their
faith so failing them, and they from mistaken grounds deceiving themselves,
they cannot but perish in the end, and woefully at the length miscarry for
altogether.

Q. This then being a matter of so great importance and case, which many times
on both sides is so much mistaken (as you have already spoken), me thinks it
were worth the labor to have this thing somewhat better scanned upon, for the
clearing of the doubts that may arise about the same, And first, where you made
mention of some, who think worse of themselves then there is cause; in whom
though there is true faith indeed, they yet feel it not to be so, but are as
much dismayed, as though they had no faith at all. I desire to hear what you
conceive of the estate of such, and what you think may be the reason why faith
being given unto them, they yet should not have given unto them the feeling of
the same?

A. When God the only author and finisher of precious Faith without feeling.
and saving faith in all his elect, has begun to put his hand to this blessed
work of giving life and being to this indeleble and neuer-failing grace, till
the last end thereof be attained unto, which is the eternal salvation of every
soul that has it: when (I say) God has once infused this grace into us, and
planted it in our hearts, that it has a true being there, though we be not
aware thereof (for God who can work without us, without our merit and desert,
without all manner of help and aid from us; can also work within us, without
our discerning of his work, or his making us privy to that he is in hand
with, or any way acquainting us with what he is a doing, and a working for us,
till in his wisdom he sees it fit and meet to have this made known unto
us, for our greater comfort), then and from thenceforth for ever, may it be
said of that soul which was said of Zacheus Luke 19. 9.
house, after Christ Jesus once set his foot within the doors thereof, this
day is salvation come into this house: so that day and hour, that instant time
wherein faith had any entrance and way made for it to be planted, and to have
being in the soul that once has it wrought therein; it may be said of that
soul, this day is salvation come to this soul, and that salvation that will
be everlasting: so as it is thenceforth safe for ever, from finally perishing,
or ever miscarrying. And the safety of such a soul is as sure by the true
being of it, without the sensible seeling and discerning of such a being, as
ever it shall be safe either by the most lively and comfortable feeling of the
being of faith. Yea or of the having of that for which faith ever had such
being, namely, salvation it self, when we shall be most surely and fully
possessed of it in Gods kingdom. We are (I say) from that very instant of time
as sure to be saved, as if we were saved already and were even now in heaven.
It is therefore no small favor from God unto us, when our estate is thus most
certainly in it self become an estate of salvation; and most evidently many
times discernable so to be by others to whom a spirit of discerning is given:
though in like manner, not so believed, so felt or perceived to be by our
selves. And though the Lord for good respects and causes best known to
himself, does see it meet not to exempt us from staggering and doubting, and
still calling into question the state of our own salvation: yea letting us
abide under great fear and much trembling, lest that we should not at all
belong unto him: that so we may give the better diligence to make our
election, which is ever sure 2. Pet. 1. 10.
in it self, to be also sure to us; yet ought we herein to submit our selves.
And if it shall please him (lest we should become lasie and idle and carnally
secure, by knowing too soon, before we are fitted to use well that which in
this behalf we so should know, even the certainty of our salvation) to keep
us from knowing for a time, that which is and has been known to himself
before 2. Tim. 2. 19.
all beginnings; to the end he may set us a work about the more diligent
using of all such means, and careful endeavoring to do all such things as
are needful to be used, and done by every one for the attainment of salvation:
and that not without great fear and trembling also, lest (especially if we
should in any respect herein be found wanting) we should miss of our desired
salvation in the end. And if he will that, by such our painful endeavors in
the discharge of all Christian duties, we shall so work out our own salvation
as with our own hands; Phil. 2. 12.
that is to say, labor that our own selves may at the length come to know
that which always was known to God before; which is that we with the rest of
Gods elect shall undoubtedly also be saved, that so that salvation may (after a
sort) by such our endeavors be wrought out by us: which yet was fully
accomplished and wrought out before for us by him, which was thereunto
appointed before the world had a beginning; and who therefore came into the
world in the fulness of time, that he might become the author of salvation to
all that should believe Heb. 5. 9.
in him: who is Jesus* our Lord. Who are we, that we should control the
wisdom of our heavenly Father, in thus dispensing out his own gifts, which
are always most freely bestowed, and can never by any be deserved? especially
seeing the Lord is God only wise, who alone knows both what is meetest for
the measure; and when 1. Tim. 1. 17.
is fittest for the time for any to receive grace from his hands, upon whom it
shall be his good pleasure to bestow Why faith is not seen.
any grace at all. It is not unknown to the Lord how depraved our nature is,
how deeply infected and enuenomed we are with most poisonfull and deadly
corruption; so as it is hard for any grace to be put into us, which we shall
not be found to spot and defile: we are apt to abuse not only the gifts of
nature which God has given us; but the supernatural graces also, and gifts of
his spirit bestowed upon us: yea even this gift and grace of faith it self,
which is a gift of gifts and grace most gracious that God does bestow upon
those, whom he loves best; then the which none is either more precious or
excellent in self, nor none is more sovereign or saving unto us. Which
howsoever it has virtue in it, according to the natural working thereof, to
purify our hearts; yet Acts 15. 9.
being once placed and planted in our hearts (such is the strength of
corruption that it meets with there), as it becomes polluted it self, and
that with all other graces put into us: as our best works that do go from
us, and are done by us, they all by being once in us, and by coming so from
us, are but as spotted and polluted Isai. 64. 6.
clothes are. Let the Lord bestow this most precious faith upon us, which is
called the faith of Gods elect (which Tit. 1. 1.
is so precious, as whosoever has once received it, can never perish
afterward), if always upon the first bestowing of it upon us, and at the very
first being of faith in us, we should undoubtedly know that we had true saving
faith, which is available even in the least measure and degree thereof to save
every soul that truly is possessed with it; it were possible, yea and that
very likely too (unless we were better aided with a second grace given), that
we might abuse this first, so as the knowledge thereof might cause us become
negligent in further using good means to attain to greater degrees of faith
and increases thereof, because we would think a little would be sufficient and
serve our turn well enough. Contrary to that which he that is the author of
our faith would have to be done of us, who sets us a work ever to desire
and daily to pray to God for the more increasing of our faith. Even as we are
also willed not to be wanting to our selves in building up and edifying our
selves in our most holy faith. Jude 20.
Not without just cause then is it, that the Lord is found to take this usual
course with many of his children, whom he full dearly does love; that in this
point of having the assurance of their salvation by the lively feeling of
saving faith to be in them, he holds them off for a long time before he
grants them herein their desire; though they desire nothing more earnestly,
and long for the finding and feeling thereof, even to the very fainting of
their hearts; giving to them that which is most needful for them to have
(which is faith to be saved), though withholding from them that which might be
thought most comfortable for them to have in regard of their own feeling,
namely the assurance of faith for salvation. And though the Lord knows that
such his children desire to know nothing sooner, nor nothing more, then to know
themselves to be of that number that are appointed to life and salvation for
ever; yet does he see it fit not to acquaint them too soon with what he
either has done for them, in the free electing of them Ephesians. 1. 4.
before ever the world had any beginning, or what he has now wrought in them,
by putting faith into them, for the making their estate safe for ever, in the
matter of their so much desired and longed-for salvation; because he well
fore-seeth (such is our pronenes and readiness to abuse, even Gods best
favors and mercies bestowed upon us), that if we should know too soon, that
all were wrought and made sure by God himself for our everlasting salvation,
we our selves would take little pains to make sure our own salvation to our
selves: whereas the Lord would have this to be the work of every man, that we
our selves should work out our own salvation, as with our own hands, and
that not without fear and trembling too. This is a work enjoined unto all,
and a duty that is to be done and practiced by all, not only of them that are
the weakest younglings, that are but as infants in the faith, and babes in
Christ; but of those also that 1. Cor. 3. 1. Ephesians. 4. 13. 14.
are the strongest and of ripest age, that are grown men in the faith, and
have attained to the greatest degrees therein. For though the Lord (as seems
best to his wisdom) does in a differing manner dispense of this grace of
saving faith to such, as shall be heirs of eternal salvation: to some he
gives to have a lesser, and to some to have a greater measure therein; some to
have great doubting remaining with their true believing; others to be more
comfortably persuaded, and at times also most undoubtedly Romans 8. 38. 39.
assured of their obtaining salvation with God for ever; and that with so great
a certainty and clearenes, as nothing can make them at all to doubt, or call
the matter once into question; yet who so has the greatest assurance of all,
has no such assurance, as will allow him to be carnally secure, or exempt him
from passing the time of his 1. Pet. 1. 17.
dwelling here infeare, or free him from an awful kind of trembling also, even
then when he has his greatest comfort, and is in the midst of his chiefest
rejoicing; seeing these are both coupled and commended unto us to be used
together, to serve the Lord with fear, and to rejoice Psalm. 2. 11.
with trembling: which may occasion the very best never to be idle nor
unfruitful in the Christian conversation, never to slack their diligence; by
adding virtue to virtue, still to make sure to themselves their eternal
election, and never to withdraw their hand from the labor of this blessed
work, of ever working out their own salvation, and that not without some
fear and trembling also. Which if they should be wanting in, and fail to do,
and by abusing the assurance they have at one time become secure at another,
growing to presume by an ouer-weening that should be within them; there is no
such promise to be found in the whole book of God made to any, that are most
preferred in Gods favor, and that have allowed them the best assurance that
may be, of their salvation The strong faith may have fears and doubts.
for ever: but through such default, that assurance may be overtaken with fear
and trembling again; yea, with a horrible fear coming upon them, and they
shaken with another manner of trembling, then before would have been
sufficient, and have served the turn. We read of no man's faith better
graced, or more secured, or unto which greater promises were made, even by our
Savior himself, then was the faith of Peter, and profession that he made
thereof; which was not only approved of by him, but Peter was pronounced
blessed for the same out of Christ his own mouth, and the same secured by a
most gracious promise made thereunto; that Mat. 16. 16. 17. 18.
the gates of hell should never prevail against it. Howbeit, when Peter began
to presume, and to have an ouerweening Mark. 14. 31. 37. 38. 68. 70. 71.
of himself, when he became careless and secure, neglecting by prayer and
watching to safeguard his faith, he entered into tentation, his faith was
dangerously winnowed, and most soarely shaken. David, who was a man of an
invincible courage, and of a most noble and heroical spirit, a man of that
resolution, and so strongly holding fast the confidence of the hope he had in
God, as he cared not for thousands, nor ten thousands of them Psalm 3. 6.
that should set themselves against him; who feared not, though he should walk
through the valley of the shadow Psalm. 23. 4. 6.
dow of death; but reckoned, that goodness and mercy should follow him all
his days, and that he should dwell under Gods protection in his house for
ever. All this was during such time as he kept his integrity, and continued
his diligence and pains taking in such religious exercises and holy
endeauours, whereunto he had been wont to inure himself; which made grace so
happily to grow in him, and his comfort so greatly to abound: But when he once
came to give ouert is so blessed a course, and began to grow careless and
negligent in the best things, setting himself to seek after his sinful
pleasures, and the satisfying of his lusts; when in his prosperity his heart
began to be lifted up, and by an ouerweening of his estate promised unto
himself, and presumed that he should never be removed: then God hid his face,
and withdrew his Psalm. 30. 6. 7.
comforts from him, and how then became he troubled? then were the joys that
he was wont to have in God utterly Psalm. 51. 8. 11. 12
to seek; then in stead of all that confident and comfortable boldness he
was wont to have in his heart, fearfulness and trembling began to come upon
him, and an horrible fear to ouerwhelme him; then began the Psalm. 55. 5.
arrows of the Almighty to be shot at him, which stooke so fast in his sides,
that he was made to roar out for the Psalm. 38. 28.
very disquietnesse of his soul; then he that was wont to call others to
praise God for his mercies, began to doubt of Gods mercies for himself,
whether they were not come wholly to an end; whether he were not cast off for
ever, Psalm. 31. 22,
which in his haste he did not stick both to think, and also to speak. Yea,
that great Apostle Paul himself, that elect and chosen vessel of the Lord, who
so gloriously did triumph and insult over all the greatest enemies of Rom 8.
33. 34. 35. 37.
our salvation that we have; challenging them all to do their best and their
worst, for doing us any harm; and shutting up that whole matter with that
great assurance of faith, that constant resolution, that full and undoubted
persuasion, that there was nothing present, nor to come, that ever should be
able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus; he was not void of
all manner of weakness, he was not freed from all kind of fearing and
trembling; but as have other the servants of God, he had also his weakness
which he could not be freed from: when Satan's messenger was sent to buffet
him, though he 2. Cor. 12. 7. 8.
prayed earnestly unto God for the removing of the same: he felt that strength
of natural corruption at sometimes Romans 7. 24.
ouermastering him, that made him cry out of himself, as of a most miserable
man: He served the Lord in all humility Acts 20. 19.
at Ephesus (as himself says) with many tears and tentations: he professes,
he was among the Corinthians in 1. Cor. 2. 3.
weakness, in fear, and in much trembling: he says, when he was come into
Macedonia, he had no rest in his flesh, but was troubled on every side: he met
with fightings without, 2. Cor. 7. 5.
and felt terrors and fears within: he had care, and took pains as well as
do other the servants of God, to look to the maine point of the safety of
his own salvation, by taming and keeping under his own body, and bringing it
into 1. Cor. 9. 27.
subjection; left by any means when he had preached unto others, he himself
should become a castaway. It is not for None must be secure.
any then (let their assurance be what it will be) to cast off all manner of
fear or care, but let every one that thinks he stands, take heed that he
fall not: nay, he that stands indeed, and stands by faith, yet let him
listen to the counsel given by the Apostle, thou stand (says he) by Romans
11. 20.
faith, be not high-minded, but fear. Though such cannot fall finally away, and
their faith fail for altogether; yet may they fall so fearfully, and into
such a decay of their faith, as in regard of their own feeling, the comfort of
their faith may be wholly gone and lost for a time: yea, and it is possible (so
lamentable may their fall be), that for so great a degree of assurance of faith
and measure of comfortable feeling, as they had before, they shall never have
again; nor during their whole lifetime fully recover all their losses, which
they have sustained by so woefully falling. And who would not fear and tremble,
if it were but at the thoughts of this thing, that through a man's own
careless negligence, such a case as this may too truly befall him? This then
is the work which every one, be he weaker or stronger in the faith, must be
ready to put his hand unto, and must never be willing to pull his hand from it
again, after he has once begun to fall a working, n^mely, to work out with
fear and trembling Phil. 2. 12.
his own salvation. Not that the salvation of any does depend upon the work
and labor of his own hand; for it is a thing put out of all question, that no
man can redeem his own soul, or make agreement with God for his sin: it
cost more to redeem a soul, then the whole world ^ither has, or is worth
beside; so that he must let it alone for over. God in his infinite love has
provided Psalm. 49 7. 8.
us a redeemer, and sent us into the world a mighty Savior, Heb. 7. 25.
that has been perfectly able by himself alone to save all that will come to
God by him; and this work he has fully finished, and so has perfected and
accomplished this work of our salvation, as in it self it is most safe and
sure. But he that has thus purchased and prepared salvation for us, howsoever
he keeps in his own hand Coloss. 3. 3.
that, which he so dearly has bought and paid for; yet has he prescribed and
appointed a way, which must be taken of us for the coming by it, if ever we
desire to have the comfort of the fruition of it; he has set us a race 2. Tim.
47. 8. Phil. 3. 13. 14.
to run, and a course for us to finish, at the end where of he has laid the
crown of righteousness, and this eternal salvation, as a rich recompense of
reward for the travel that shall be taken therein: but so, as except that race
be run all out, and that course be fully finished* there is no looking Heb. 12.
1.
for any to be saved. Every one therefore must fit himself with the Apostle, so
to run as he may obtain, endeavoring 1. Cor. 9. 24.
with him to sight a good sight, to finish his course, and to keep the faith;
and so he may make reckoning to wear the crown, when thus he has won it by
such a 2. Tim. 2. 5.
lawful kind of striving.

Q. Seeing you have rendered this as a probable reason, why the Lord does many
times withhold from some of his children the comfortable feeling of that saving
grace of precious faith, which by the work of his spirit he has once wrought
in them, and shall never more (till salvation it self be obtained) be taken
from them, though they cannot so feel and apprehend the same: namely that they
might hereunto give all diligence to make their election sure, and by their
painful endeavors work out their salvation, even with fear and tre^bling.
And seeing upon this occasion you have begun to show how needful a work this
is for every one (without exception of any, be they stronger or weaker) to put
his hand unto, and diligently to be employed about. I pray you before you go
from this point, show somewhat more particularly, what is to be done by every
man that would work out his own salvation, thereby the better to get comfort
to his heart, and to succor and sustain the faith that is in him whereby he
believes, or desires to believe better, to be saved in the end?

A. This is the work and travail that every such a one must principally set
himself about, and never give What is to be done for getting more feeling of
faith.
over to be laborious and painful therein. First and above all things he must
take pains and bestow labor about his faith. If he thinks he has it not, he
is by all possible means to seek to get the feeling of it, and to get daily
increases in it: and when he has once obtained it, his labor must be no
less to keep and maintain the same Jude 3.
, that it may not fail him in his greatest need. This is said to be the work
of God, and the chiefest work that he John 6. 29.
would set us about, if we would have the question answered from out of
Christ's own mouth. When faith is thus gotten and well provided for, then is he
forth with to join virtue with his faith, and to learn the course and 2.
Pet. 1. 5.
way of a godly life; standing and enquiring after the old Iere. 6. 16.
way, which is the good way that he may walk forward in it; doing wisely in
that perfect way, by setting straight steps to his feet; still walking before
God in the vprightnes Psalm. 101. 2. Prou. 4. 26.
of his heart; and ever pondring the path of his feet, seeing that all his
ways be ordered aright. And having Matthew. 24. 13.
thus well begun, he is to hold out to the end without any letting, still
laboring to increase more and more, as he has received how to walk and
please God: that his way 1. These. 4. 1.
in well doing may be as the way of the light, which shines cleerer and
cleerer till the perfect day come. He is to Prou. 4. 18.
labor lustily in putting forward himself, evermore gathering strength as he
goes on in his way, till he has finished the whole task that is put upon
him, and till all may be done that is required of him. For which purpose let
him look upon that worthy leader that has so well led the way before him,
and so follow on, doing herein as he has him for an example: (I mean the
Apostle Paul) let him ever forget the things that are behind, Phil. 3. 13. 14.
and reach forth and strain on to the things which are before, pressing hard
toward the mark, and contending with all his might for the price of the high
calling of God: never turning head for any opposition of enemies, that will
(like as did the Amalekites) come out to make resistance, and seek to let and
stop him in the way from going on in such a course: but arming himself with
the armor of righteousness (on the right hand and on the 2. Cor. 6. 7. 1.
Tim. 6. 12. 2. Tim. 1. 8.
left) be always provided to fight that good fight of faith, and make ready
to partake in the afflictions of the Gospel, since none can make reckoning
without suffering persecutions to hold out in well doing. And thus having 2.
Tim. 3. 12.
finished all things, and overcome the whole labor of this worthy work in
working out his own salvation, let him be assured that when his work is well
brought to an end; then shall his full felicity most happily begin, then shall
the wages of his work be fully paid him, and that recompense of reward be
given that will fully answer all the expectation of his hope, and far go
beyond all that ever he could look for too; then shall he receive the full end
of his faith, even the fruition of that salvation whereof before he had the
promise. And faith being thus come to an end, from believing he shall come to
having, and to enjoying of that which he believed, even his promised salvation,
and that eternally in Gods kingdom.

Q. This is indeed a happy end of a hard labor, and a royal amends for all
pains that have bin taken in the Christian course, all the days of a man's
life time: but what is this to the strengthening of a man's faith, or to the
furthering of his comfort while he does line? or how does it help a man to
better assurance of his salvation against fear and doubting?

A. Yes doubtless; this work yields sweet comfort, it will quit well all
the cost of whatsoever pains shall be taken about the same; a man may very
comfortably reap and eat the fruit of these his holy labors, even all the
while he is in the travail of them; who working the work of God, by laboring
to believe for the obtaining of salvation, and joining virtuous living with his
true believing, the more laborious he is in taking pains about this work,
and the better it is wrought, the more does his comfort increase: (the
confidence of his hope ever growing stronger, as his life is found to be made
better), if to faith be added virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge
temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to
godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness love (several
labors to be bestowed about the ending and finishing up of the whole and great
work of our salvation): if 2. Pet. 1. 5. 6 7. 8. 10.
these things be in you (says the Apostle Peter) and abound, as you shall not
be idle and unfruitful, so shall you be sure never to fall. There is a common
and most dangerous disease that takes hold of the whole stock and race of all
mankind, wherewith all are tainted and insected without exception of any (he
only being excepted, that is higher then the heavens, and ever separated from
sinners); which is the harder to be helped, because it is an hereditarie evil,
and we have taken it from our parents. We all are sick of that sore disease
of the falling Falling sickness.
sickness; we are in danger of falling in every place; we know not where, we
know not when, nor we know not how we may fall. How would men troubled with
that kind of disease make of a receipt, that were good against the falling
sickness to keep them from falling? Peter has here given us such an
excellent receipt, as will make a preservative remedy most sovereign to keep
us from falling: we may be bold upon it the better, and the more comfortably
receive it from his hands, because he that prescribes it was one that was
sick of the disease himself, and that fell grievously, and yet was cured of
it. The remedy is made of these simples that are here set down. How then are
these graces worthy the looking after, that we may gather them and get them
(the greater quantity is ever the better), and put them all together, that
they may have their kindly working in us, and we by them may so work in our
own salvation? How comfortable is the labor we take about them in daily
practicing of them, since Peter does warrant us that so long as we are found so
doing, we shall be sure never to fall? If after this manner then we shall
keep a working, we see that good assurance may be gotten by our so doing, and
we shall be sure comfortably to work out our own salvation, till that which
is most sure in it self be also fully assured unto us. The further a man goes
holding on this course, and keeping still his hand at this blessed labor, as
his salvation does still gather upon him, and is much nearer unto him then when
he first believed; Romans 13. 11.
so does he by thus proceeding gather also upon his own salvation, and
fasteneth every day better hold upon the same: for to be more undoubtedly
assured of obtaining it in the end, so that the longer he thus lives, the
more comfort he still reapeth, and the more grows he to be setledly
confirmed in that that he first believed.

Q. But if the working out of our own salvation, after the manner as you have
spoken, would bring us any comfort, or further increase our assurance of
salvation: why does the Apostle add, that we must do it in fear and
trembling?

A. That fear and trembling which the Apostle there Fear and trembling
needful.
speaks of, is not contrary to the boldness of faith, or to the assurance of
salvation, and of God his unchangeable election: whereby those that are once
known to be the Lords, are sure for ever to remain his: but depends rather
upon these, and is to be joined with the same. For as the salvation of the
faithful is safe and sure in it self: so has the Lord appointed, that in
such as shall be saved by means of this awful fearing and trembling, which as
a double bridle holds them hard in, and keeps them from sinning, and by
this careful endeavoring and working the things that are good and meet to be
done; both that same assurance of salvation shall be ever maintained in it
self, and likewise be made the more sure vnro them that are most strict to
hold on in this course, and keep themselves close within the compass of these
lysts and limits thus set them, without daring once wilfully to adventure any
way to break out of them. This fear and trembling may well have (and indeed
ought to have) this good and holy use to humble us, and to breed a watchful
circumspection and care over our selves in all our ways, and cause us by a
holy jealousy of the hidden corruption that is within us, and of the many
infirmities that hang about us, to prevent the danger of those sins that
otherwise we might fall into: but not wholly to dismay us, or put us out of
heart, which might enfeeble our hands to go on with this work. This should
work a care that may drive away security, not a fear to take away the
boldness of faith; but a fear of falling into sin, lest thereby we should
offend our merciful father, and he hiding his countenance, we should then
become troubled, and loose our former comfort: not a fear of falling from
grace, and from out of Gods favor for ever, that so he should take his mercy
from us for altogether. Fear and trembling in the working out of our own
salvation may stand us in this stead, the better to look about us, that
nothing be wanting which is necessary in this respect to be done, lest we
should fail in the end, and fall short of our reckoning. When we have once
begun to take up this course, and are entered upon that way that should bring us
to life and happiness; or passing on with fear and trembling as we are a
going, may become a good means to cause us to set straight steps, and make
even Heb. 12. 13.
paths to our feet, lest that which is halting should be turned out of the way.
They may well serve as two sharp spurs to both our sides to prick us
forward, and cause us to travel the harder, and ply us the faster, making
speed in our way, lest we should be cast too much behind; or so run, that we
should not obtain. Our case by our sinning, and by Gods mercy providing a
remedy to save us from perishing (if we will look out for it in time) is not
unlike the case of one among the Jews, that had unwillingly slain a man, and
Gods merciful indulgence unto such a one for the saving of him, by appointing
Cities of Deuteronomy. 4. 41. 42.
refuge for him to fly unto, that there he might be rescued and saved out of
the hands of the revenger of blood: now we may well think there was no need to
bid such a man run to that City; for if he were taken before he came
thither, he was in danger to be slain: and though he ran toward that City
never so fast, yet we may easily conceive he ran not without fear and
trembling all the way as he ran, lest the revenger of blood should have over
taken him before he should have gotten thither. So is it with us; Christ is our
only refuge and propitiation 1. Ioh. 2. 1. 2.
for our sins: if we be taken out of Christ, we are lost for ever. Should we
not plie us then with all possible have to get us unto Christ; and labor with
the Apostle, above all things in the world to take such a course as we may be
found in him, not having our own righteousness, but Phil. 3. 9.
the righteousness which is by faith in his name? Now who shall be found to be
in Christ, but those that shall be found walking in this good way; not walking
after the Romans 8. 1.
flesh, but after the spirit? have we not cause then by faith to get us into
this way with all the speed that may be, and to ply us as fast on in it after
we be once entered, as possibly we can? and will any blame us if we do not all
this without fear and trembling, seeing there is so much danger on every hand?
For if either we should mistake the way at our first entering, or go out of
the way again after we had once well begun, or slack our pace as we are a
going, that heaven gate should be shut before we come, all were lost with us,
and we were utterly gone; if we had a thousand lives they would perish all
without any redemption. Is not fear and trembling then worthily remembered by
the Apostle in this case; and not without great need commended unto us, which
are so good helps for us, and fit means to remedy all this, that will not
suffer us to abide secure, but stir us up with all carfulness to look well
about us in every respect? And where it is conceived that such fearing and
trembling would hinder our Christian rejoicing, and dash all our comfort; let
me add this for a conclusion about this point; that as the sweetest joys do
many times spring out of the bitterest griefs, and out of the lowest bottomes
of the deepest sorrows, the highest springs of the liueliest and most lasting
comforts do oftentimes fall out to be found and fetched forth: so out of this
fear and trembling, lest in any thing we should be wanting that were needful
to be done for our attaining to salvation, a most comfortable boldness and
most solid assurance of our firm standing in the state of grace and
salvation, will at the length be fetched and wrought out as by a strong hand.
For what should make us to doubt or cause us to fear any more, if Gods spirit
has pronounced peace to all such as walk according Gal. 6. 16.
to the rule that himself has set down for their direction, giving his word
and promise that there shall be no condemnation to such, as walk not after
the flesh but after the spirit. And our own consciences which have been
witnesses with us in all our ways, are ready to comfort us in this behalf,
and to say for us, that such has been our most usual and most ordinary
course: who shall then stand up to make us afraid; or what should hinder the
stablenesse of our comfort, and the assurance of our peace? Nay, having warrant
from God to go with this message, and to say to him that walks in his
righteousness, it shall be well with him: I would meeting Isa. 3. 10.
with such, greet and salute them: as did the children of Benjamin greet and
encourage David, saying, Thine are we O David, and with thee thou son of
Ishai, Peace, 1. Chro. 12. 18.
peace be unto thee, and peace to all thy helpers, for thy God helps thee.

CHAP. VIII.
How faith is discerned, and the true being thereof made manifest, both to the
believer himself, and to others.



NOw if it please you to return again to your former speech you were in hand
with, I would be glad to hear somewhat more of that point: how faith (which you
have said) may have a being in a man's heart, when yet it is not felt, comes
at all to be discerned; and how at length the true being thereof may be made
manifest?

A. When the seed of God his Word, which is immortal How faith is discerned,
and abides ever, whereof this precious faith is begotten, is once sown in
our hearts, and becomes so blessed there, and prospered from above, as it
shoots out this blessed bud, and causes this pleasant plant of saving faith
(how tender soever it may appear to be at the first), to spring up as from a
most sure lasting and lively root, full of sap and good nouriture, so to
feed and cherish it always, as it can never die afterward, till we be saved.
In whom it is so planted, that this saving faith has once given unto it a
sound beginning of the true being thereof, that it is now habituated and
incorporated into the mind of the true believer (which is called the first act
of faith); when (I say) we once become to have the habit of this grace put
into us, and soundly planted and seated in our hearts: the knowledge of this
(if it can be truly discerned, and undoubtedly fastened upon), is questionless
the surest and safest to trust unto, for them that are able to find out such a
work thus to be wrought in them: for this work being once done, is never to
do again, because it cannot be undone for ever any more; for such grace once
truly had, never fails the hauer afterward, it being a part of the
regeneration and newbirth of a Christian, whereby power is given unto him to
become the Son of God; now once borne the child of God he remains so ever,
he is no more to be borne again the second time: even as Baptism (the
outward Sacrament of the new birth) is once only administered, and so is
sufficient for all our whole life time, and is no more reiterated at any time
again. But though this be the surest, yet because it is the hardest to find
out, otherwise then by the second act, which is the more lively and effectual
working of this grace, the same is most evidently and manifestly discerned and
made known, to have a true and lively being in that subject, wherein so
effectually it is seen to have that manner of working. Even as it is a far
readier and easier way for one to know in himself, or make manifest to another
that he has life in him, and is indeed a living man; by speaking, by walking,
by working, and doing the actions of one that is living: then by the
apprehending the time of his first conceiving or quickening in the womb; or of
his first entering into the world when he was newborn. Therefore it is usual
in the Scripture for men to be directed in this case, to find out and manifest
their faith by the fruits and works that it does bring forth: to discern the
surenesse of their graces, by the effectualnesse of their operation, and by the
soundness of all that which is seen to come from them: every man being willed
to consider his own ways in his heart, and to look upon the works of his
hands, and thereby to give judgment how the case does stand with him as
touching his salvation. Which is an easy way of trial, and ready course taken
to find out this matter by: for even a blind man will truly judge by the
effects which he can sensibly feel, the certain and undoubted being of such
a thing as necessarily does cause such effects as he so does feel, though in
regard of his blindness he cannot see the same thing, nor discern where it
should be. As bring him to the fire, and let him feel the heat thereof, he
will as certainly apprehend, and as undoubtedly conclude that there is fire, as
those that by seeing it, are able by their sight best of all to discern it.
And otherwise without a feeling of some manner of the working of faith, I
think it to be most rare and difficult for any to find that he has faith in
himself at all. I deny not but faith may have a being, where the working of it
is not felt; but so long as the working of it is not felt, I hold that the
being of it is not found; and doubtless true and saving faith Faith may be
without feeling.
has no sooner given unto it a true being at all, then it has also given unto
it some kind of acting and working together with the being at the very same
time, though not always seen. For it is a living and a lively faith, and not
a dead faith, which must be a saving faith: now in every thing that has the
being of it in life, there is an act of living in that thing that has such a
being: and as the Apostle says, that works are to faith, as is the spirit and
Iam. 2. 26.
breath of life to the body: and concludes thereupon, that as the body without
the spirit is dead; so faith, without some kind of working and operation, is
dead also. It is true a body may have life remaining in it, though the spirit
and breath of life cannot be seen nor perceived to have any stirring or motion
at all in the same; but then that remaining of life, and being in this world in
such a body, is neither found nor felt by it self, but in such an exstasie
seems to it self to be as in another world; neither is judged by others that
look upon it, to be otherwise then if it were truly dead, and had no life at
all in it: and yet for all this such a party having his life still remaining
in him, may recover and get strength again. Thus may it fare with saving faith
in the heart of a true believer, it may have such weakness come upon it, such
faintnes and feeblenes may overtake it, it may fall into such an exstacie, and
into such qualmes and swoundings away, that shall so stint the sensible working
thereof, as no remainder of the life of it, by any working that can be
perceived to come from it, may either be felt by the hauer, or any way
discerned by the beholder that stands and looks upon such a weak Christian
so fallen and fainted away; and yet for all that, true faith is always living
faith, having ever the truth of life, and being remaining in it, though many
times with much fainting, yet never wholly failing for altogether.

Q. But if I may be so bold as to lead you on a little further in this
digression from your former speech, before you return to it again; I demand
(if it be possible, that it may fare thus with saving faith in the heart of a
true believer, that it may remain in life and being, when there can be
perceived no manner of operation and working to come from the same), how that
will stand true which you affirmed before, that faith has no sooner given unto
it to have life and being, then it is also in hand with some kind of action and
working, which do never cease so long as that remains to be: for what kind of
working can you show faith to be in hand withal then, when it is in such a
case, as lastly was mentioned and set down?

A. Even the work of living, as I said before, it is in hand with the
continuing of the act of life, till life it self shall cease to be (for life
so long as it lasts, is a continued act of that that so has life in it), and
besides by this means of the living of it that is in hand, with another most
blessed and happy work of the preservation Weakest faith saves.
of the soul in which it lives, that it may keep that safe from perishing
for ever, so long as that may have any abiding and remaining in the same. The
living and being of precious faith, how weakly so ever, it does live in the
heart of a true believer, stands that soul in as great stead (so long as it
abides in it) as does the spirit of life, or the lively spirit stand the body
in stead so long as it remains and abides in the same: which being that
golden claspe which handfasteth the soul with the body, keeps the body from
being a dead carkase; and is as salt to keep the body sweet (so long as it
abides in it) from stinking, rotting and corrupting, which quickly otherwise
it would do, if it were once dissolved and gone from out of the same. So does
true and saving faith, which is the golden button and claspe of our souls,
that claspeth and handfasteth us unto Christ, and will never let go the hold
that it has of him, till he has taken us to himself, and set us safe in his
kingdom, past all peradventure of more miscarrying. So long as this faith
lives and has any being, it assuredly preserves that soul, in which it so
lives, from all possibility of ever perishing; yea though it should abide in
the heart of a true believer in all such weakness, as before was spoken of,
until the very time of the dissolution of the soul and the body; and that a
true believer should dye in all that weakness and feeblenes of his faith: yet
were it not possible that such a believer could miscarrie, because he dies in
Christ his faith, holding him fast in Christ, and holding Christ fast to him;
faith being of that nature that having once taken hold of Christ, in the
greatest weakness that can come upon it, it never lets go the hold it has
taken (though being benumbed for a time by some disease of tentation, it may
not feel the hold it truly has), till that soul be saved that once has
entertained it, and had it abiding and dwelling therein; it dies not in death,
till it sees that soul that so has it to be put into life. And to show yet
further, how mighty and powerful this grace is to save every one that does
truly believe, it deals with us and for us toward Christ in the office that
it has to save us by Christ, as Christ himself deals for us toward God his
Father, in being our Mediator, that we might be brought to God by him. Now we
know he never will give over the office of his Mediatourship for us, till
having finished all things for the perfecting of the work of our full
salvation, putting down and subduing all the enemies that we have unto the
very last of them all which is death; drawing up all his members even to the
last and to the least that belong to his body, himself being the head, that
all together may be glorified with him; and then shall be the end of this his
office of Mediatourship in the manner as now he does execute the same, and
never till then: when the kingdom shall be delivered up even to God the
Father, and he himself as Mediator become subject unto 1. Cor. 15. 24. 28.
him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all: we being
inseparably joined to him, and unto God by him, that so we may reign for ever
in his kingdom. After some such manner does precious faith, which is the faith
of Gods elect, discharge the office assigned unto it. Christ is the only
Savior of mankind, there is no name given under heaven whereby we can be
saved, Acts 4. 12.
but only by him; he alone by himself has fully perfected and finished that
work of our salvation, and by the price of his blood has purchased eternal
redemption for us at the hands of God his Father. The benefit of this purchased
redemption is effectually communicated only to such as do truly believe: whom
he minds to bestow salvation upon, he never fails to give faith unto,
that they may have a hand to receive that which he has a heart most freely and
willingly to bestow: the office of faith is to apprehend Christ, and never more
to let him go: to lay hold of salvation which Christ brings with him, and
never to see it lost till the soul be set safe for ever, into which for this
purpose it is once put, and wherein it was wrought at the first. Faith is most
faithful in discharging all the trust yt is thus committed unto it; and
performs to the full, the office that it is appointed unto: for which cause
it sets upon our enemies that would let our salvation, and never gives them
over, till it has subdued them: it repelleth what would hurt us; it remoueth
out of our way what would hinder our good; it fears not our arch enemy, the
devil himself, but courageously Power of faith.
and stoutly it dares set upon him, and encounter him, and buckle with him,
and fails not to foil him, and in the end most valiantly and victoriously to
triumph over him, conquering him in the combat, and forcing James 4. 7. 1.
Pet. 5. 9.
him to flight: it dares take the whole world to task, and overcome it too in
the end; for this is the victory whereby Ephesians. 5. 4.
we overcome the world, even our believing: it stops so the mouth of the
Law, and puts sin so to silence, that they can have nothing to say against
us: it justifies the soul in which it is, and sets it at peace with God:
it brings us unto Christ, and so ingrafteth us into him, as it suffers us
not evermore to be separated from him by any kind of disunion that can happen:
it purifieth and purges the heart while we live: it comfort and cheareth
the heart, when we come to die: it once being entertained of us, abides with
us for our safety and comfort, even to the end: it never gives us over, so
long as we have a day to live; and when death that must part us does appear,
it yields not to death, till we be be put into life; and lets us not go,
till it has resigned us up unto Christ, who then takes us to himself for
ever out of the hand of faith, Thus faith having finished the whole work of
our salvation, that was to be done by it, and brought it to so happy an end,
it then takes a most sweet and happy farewell of us for ever after, as not
being able any more to stand us in any further stead. Oh happy and blessed
work of faith, that it thus does work for us! Oh grace most gracious and
precious indeed of saving faith, which being once given to the Saints, they can
never value the worthiness of the gift that is so given, nor the good will of
the giver, that most freely has bestowed it, who can never be enough loved of
us, nor his name sufficiently magnified by us, and praised for the same!

Q. I will withold you no longer, by moving any further questions hereabout;
nor draw you any further away from going on to speak your judgment about that
matter you were in hand with; namely, how faith which is a spiritual grace,
that is inwardly seated and ro^ted in the heart, comes yet at the length to
be plainly discerned, and made manifest. But I desire to know further your
mind in this, what you think to be the readiest and best course for a man to
take, that is desirous to work out his own salvation, and m^k^ his election
sure, whereby to find out that he has sauin^ ^aith, even that precious faith,
which is the faith of Gods elect?

A. I find, that the most general course in the Scriptures throughout, taken
by the Spirit of God himself (who is only wise, and searches the heart and
the reins, and knows all men thoroughly both behind and before, within them
and without them, what they are in most exact manner, so as nothing can escape
his knowledge), when he would make the hid things of man's heart manifest,
Usual trial of faith is by life, not heart.
and would make men either known to themselves, or manifest them what they are
unto others, or would overcome them himself, and convince them to be such, as
he does challenge them for, and charge them to be, what time he does enter into
plea with them, or hold and maintain any controversy against them; that then
his course is to put this more upon the trial of such men's lives, then upon
the disposition of their hearts; more to stand upon what is seen to come from
them, then to stand arguing the case, whether it be true that they say they
have, or have not this or that virtue or vice within them. Like as it will also
be the course, that the righteous Judge of the whole world will take in that
great assize (according as himself in part has made it known aforehand unto
us); when all men shall be made to appear, and shall be put upon their last
trial, even the trial of life and of death, the trial will pass, and the
judgment will be given upon them, either for guilty or guiltless, not so
expressly according to what has been in their hearts, as according to what
has appeared in their lives, and what has been found to have been the deed
and works of their hands, as namely, he tells us, they that have done John
5. 29.
good, shall go into life everlasting, and they that have done evil unto
everlasting fire; and it will be said, go you cursed, Mat. 25. 34. 41.
you gave me no meat, you did not visit me: come you blessed, you fed me, and
you clothed me. And this is that which the Apostle also says, we must give
an account, 2. Cor. 5. 10.
according to that we have done in our bodies. He says not, according to that
we have had dwelling, and abiding in our hearts: for the plain manifesting of
the one will be sufficient and enough, to make the other well enough known: So
that though we are not justified by our works, yet shall we be judged by them,
they being the infallible testimonies of our unfeigned faith in Christ Jesus;
and though works do not justify us, yet works do justify that, that must
justify us, even our faith by which we believe to be saved; that it is a
lively faith, and a faith that is not fained: therefore does James bring forth
his works to manifest his faith by, as the directest course that can be taken,
and the most ready to have faith made known by. Now if any think he can do
otherwise, and without works get his faith, to which he trusts to be
manifested and made known to be God; he calls him forth to do his best, in
showing how that can be performed: show me (says he) thy faith without James
2. 18.
works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. Which he so speaks, not
that any can possibly do it, but that their folly may the rather be laid open,
and the more discovered that so do think it. They be the works which come
from faith, that must both show faith, and justify it to be true. Faith is
operative, and works by love: if any will find out faith, let him seek after
the measures Gal. 5. 6.
of his love to God, and to his Saints. If any would know whether he be elect
or no to eternal life, let him gather the knowledge thereof from the
effectualnesse of his calling and sanctification of his life: for by these
Pcter leads the Christians as by the hand to the finding it 1. Pet. 12.
out. We must not soar alost, to know whether or no we be elected. If any man
would know whether the Sun shines or no, let him look upon the ground, to
see the reflection of the Sunne-beames from thence, and not upon the body of the
Sun, which will but dazzle the more his sight. As then we gather the cause by
the effect, the pattern by the picture, and by the form of a seal printed in
wax, we easily understand what is the very form and fashion of the seal it
self: so by the true and proper effects of lively faith, we conclude the
existence and being of true faith it self; and the same effects like seals,
do imprint and stamp the image of Gods election in us.

Q. But may not faith as well be found out by the causes which causes faith,
as by the effects which faith works and brings forth. As for example, the
publication of the promises of the Gospel made to poor sinners, calling all
that are weary and heavy laden with the burden of their sins to come to
Christ, promising they shall be eased, and promising that all that do believe
in Christ, they shall never perish, but have everlasting life; and withal
commanding us, that we do believe in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of
God. 1. John 3. 23.
Now if with the publishing of such promises out of the Gospel preached and
declaration of such acommandement given, the Spirit of God (who is the only
efficient cause and worker of this grace), shall be pleased to join his own
working with the word of that preaching and so open a door of faith to the
poor sinn^r that hears such promises, as he shall not only assent unto
them, but lay hold of them also, and assume them to himself, and taking God at
his wora, believe indeed that he shall have his sins pardoned, and his soul
for ever saved. May not a poor sinner so believing find out this way, that he
has true faith indeed, without any further inquiring, or making any more
question about the same?

A Yes doubtless, and no way better then thus, if so be he Faith known by
causes.
can after this manner, apprehend and feel that so he does believe, for now he
has set his foot upon that rock, that will never fail under him, but bear
up his whole building, and give him a sure standing for his faith to rest upon,
now has he come to the very ground work of his believing, and has laid open
to himself the foundation to the bottom, whereupon his faith is set so firm
and sure, that it is not possible it shall be moved to the ouerwhelming
thereof for evermore. And therefore he may comfortably cheer up his heart (as
did the Apostle) against every object of fear or discomfort, that might stand
before him at any time to dismay him, and say with him, I am not ashamed,
neither do I pass at all for this, for I 2. Tim. 1. 12.
know whom I have believed* and upon what I have grounded my so believing; and
I am persuaded, that he that has thus promised, is both able and faithful to
do that he has promised, and that he will also perform it. But if it be
well marked, this faith even by this search, is not found out by the causes
alone, but by that which is caused by it, and by that which it is in hand with
to effect, and work in the heart of that believer in whom it is so wrought;
for it is in hand with this work, to bring the sinner to his Savior, to join
the soul that has sinned to Christ that has saved it, by an inseperable
union, that shall never more be parted: yea, to take such hold of Christ, as
he may dwell in that heart for ever. And can there be a greater, a more
powerful, or more comforta^le work wrought by faith in a man's whole
lifetime, then this hand-fasting of Christ, and the believer once for ever
together? and can there a more blessed effect ever flow from faith, then so to
apprehend Christ by our believing in him, that now with Peter we do so believe
and know him to be our Savior, as we can go away rejoicing, and chaunt it out
with the Spouse, in that Song of Songs, My beloved is mine, and I am his, and
his desire is unto me. Howbeit, Cantic. 2 16. and 7. 10.
it is not every bodies case for faith thus to manifest it self in them at the
first, so soon as ever it has any manner of being at all in the heart into
which it is put, every body that have faith, cannot thus clearly and readily
find out the faith, that they have so soon as they have it at the first,
neither yet at all times after they have once truly received it, when they
would be glad to have the comfort of it. The faith of every one comes not to
grow up so speedily, and to attain to that ripeness of the sudden, as they
that have it can have such present refreshing by it, and the like benefit to
shelter and shadow themselves under the comfortable covering and shadow
thereof, in the fervent aching and fainting of their hearts, as had Jonah Jonah
4. 6. 10.
under the shadow of the Gourd, which God made to grow up in a night, and
prepared ready against the morning to come over his head, to deliver him from
the fervent scorching of the Sun, and vehement East Wind that did beat upon
him (which yet was the case of some in the beginnings of the Gospel, unto whom
both faith and the comfort of faith was given to be felt together, as the
Eunuch, the Iailor, Lydian, and some other.) But though some may have comfort
of their faith at the first, and for some good time together, yet is it as
possible for that course to be interrupted again, and they as much deprived of
that comfortable working of their faith, for the cheering and refreshing of
their hearts afterward for a time, through the strength of some sore tentation
assailing the same; as Jonah was deprived of the benefit of his Gourd for
altogether, that refreshed him so well with the shadow thereof, when once God
had prepared a worm to smite that gourd, so as it perished in one night
again, and became then more distressed then at the first; in so much that his
heart fainted in him, which made him wish in himself now to die, and no longer
to live. So fares it with many who have once been swetly refreshed with the
consolations of Gods, and have felt much comfort and gladness of heart in
their new Feeling lost.
conversion; and have been filled with joy and peace in their first believing:
who yet have afterward had all the light of their comforts so greatly
eclypsed, their faith so sorely shaken, their hearts so troubled and deeply
distressed, and they cast into such labyrinths of spiritual sorrows: as out
of which they no way have been able to dispatch themselves; but have been
forced to yield over, and fall down flat, oppressed with their burdens, and
overwhelmed with their griefs; the weight of their sorrows, and burden of
their fears, exceeding for a time the strength of their faith; and so breaking
it down, that all comfort fails them for the present; and their faith can be
no more felt, then if at all it never had been. Then are they more troubled,
then if they had never before known what comfort had meant: like Rebeckah,
Genesis 25. 22.
who was more troubled that she had ever conceived, when she felt those
struglings in her womb. Such comforts once had, but lost again, which (the
sorrows so coming upon them, have eaten up and devoured, as Pharaohs lean
kine did the fat) serve but to strengthen their present griefs, and to make
them twice more grievous then otherwise they would have been felt, if they had
not tasted how joyous and how comfortable the former consolations and
refreshings of their hearts had been. Then begin they to call all things into
question, which before they found so great comfort in, their conversion is
doubted of, either never to have been soundly wrought, or else that that which
was once happily begun, now to be untimely brought to an end, and wholly to be
undone again. Their faith is suspected, either to have bin but a mere fancy,
and they all the while deluded, when they thought they had true faith wrought
in them, and did best of all believe; or else yt which was once true, for want
of strength to be now perished from the^, and to fail the^ for altogether, and
wholly to be lost and gone. Then as Rachels voice was heard in Rama, when she
wept for her children, and would not be comforted because they were not: so are
their lamentable voices heard in the Churches, of weeping and mourning and
great lamentation; they weeping for the want of these graces, and will not be
comforted, because (to their sense and feeling as themselves so do think)
they now are not, but are quite lost and gone.

CHAP. IX.
What remedy there is for the weak in faith, and withal the excellency of
faith is declared, with the practice or use to be made thereon.



WHat course is then to be taken for help and remedy in this case, that such
may be succored and supported in this their great weakness, and not seen to
faint and give over for altogether? A. They to whom God has given Isa. 50. 4.
tongue of the learned, so as they know how to speak a Comforts to weak faith.
word in season to them that are weary: had need to strengthen such with their
mouth, and tempering their words with a certain sweetness of speaking; by the
comfort of their lips, to assuage their griefs. These, Job 16. 5.
whose hearts are thus dismayed and discomforted; languishing and fearing, and
ready to faint within them, had Cant. 2. 4. 5.
need to be carried into the Lords wine cellers of the holy Scriptures, that
they may be refreshed and stayed with Isa. 66. 11.
his flagons, and comforted with his apples; that thence they may suck, and be
satisfied with the consolations of God, to get strength in the inner man
again: that so they faint not in these their fearings, through the enemies
tentations. Such are to be directed to got and listen how graciously the Lord
himself (who is the father of mercies, and God of all consolation) vouchsafes
even in that place to speak comfortably to the heart of her that Iere. 31. 13.
15. 16. 17.
would not be comforted (in a case not much unlike to that which theirs now
is): promising that he would turn their mourning into joy, that he would
comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow; willing Rachel to
refrain her voice from weeping, and her eyes from tears, for her children
(which she thought were not) should come again from the land of the enemy,
and there was hope left for her that in the end the same her children (whom she
so mourned for) should come again to their own border. Thus did ye Lord create
the fruit of the lips to be peace to sorrowful Rachel in her uncomfortable
mourning, speaking such words as were the best and most easing lenitiues that
could possibly be desired or wished for, to be applied for the easing the smart
of her grieved heart, in the case about which she was so much disquieted and
perplexed. They were words spoken to Rachel no better fitting her turn, to
lift up her heart in comfort again that was before so much cast down; then
being applied as a most sovereign medicine (then the which there cannot be a
more fitter prepared for the cure of such a wound) unto these mournful and
sorrowful souls, whose hearts are so much cast down within them, as they are
ready to faint and give over their hope, for fear that all saving grace in
them is quite extinct and gone: they being (I say) applied and fitted to the
case and state they now are in; they will be able so to revive them in comfort
again, as their hearts shall be made to rejoice, and their very bones to
flourish like an herb (as the Prophet speaks), and they themselves Isai.
66. 14.
to laugh and sing: yea they will bring them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy
for mourning, and the garment Isai. 61. 3.
of gladness for the spirit of heaviness: that they may cry out with that
joyful acclamation, how good is a word spoken in due season? they are even
like apples of gold in pictures of silver: for doubtless if these saving Prou.
25. 11.
graces of faith unfeigned, of true conversion, and beginning of the work of
regeneration; could ever be found to have been wrought in their hearts by the
finger of Gods spirit, and manifested in their lives by any kindly and natural
working, any way discernable to a spiritual eye; that it may be known they
had once a sound beginning and a true being in them; howsoever by means of the
weakness of such graces, and strength of some grievous tentation, the course
of their effectual working may seem to be interrupted too soon: yet may they
be willed (and that warrantably too) with Rachel, to refrain their voice from
weeping, and their eyes from tears; for these graces which they think are
not, but to be quite perished and gone, are surely living and remain fast
rooted within them; and in due time will spring forth and show out their
effectual working. Again, grace in time of some grievous tentation, may be
driven into some narrow corner of the heart; as they that are in a Castle
besieged, may for saving their lives fly into some corner, some inward and
secret place, and yet after come forth and show themselves again. There is
hope therefore for such in the end (whatsoever they either fear or feel to be
for the present) that these gifts of God which Fidem nemo vnquam perdidit, nisi
qui non babuit.
are without repentance, and graces which are indeleble, and never fail the
hauers of them, since they are begotten of seed that is immortal, and never
can dye; howsoever by the force of tentation they now are so nipped, and
bitten, as herbs and plants are with the ycie teeth of the winter, so as they
are feign to keep their sap close in the root, out of which they do grow;
yet when the winter shall be past, the storm of tentations be over and gone;
and the joyful spring time of consolation be once come, that it is as when the
singing of the birds be come, Cant. 2. 11. 12.
and when the voice of the Turtle be heard in the land; (as Christ speaks to
the Spouse) then shall these saving graces with fresh vigor revive and get
strength again; then shall they sprout and flourish goodly, and shooting out
their buds, and bearing out their blossoms, and yielding forth their fruit
in all abundance; even the fruit of sure and lasting joy, which shall satiate
the souls of those heavy mourners as with fatnes, and make them become Iere.
31. 14.
satisfied with goodness; then shall the light of comfort break forth upon
these cloudy and dark hearts, even as the morning; and the health of these
languishing and fainting souls shall grow speedily: light shall arise unto
them out of all their obscurity, and their darkness shall be as the noone
day, their souls shall be satisfied in all this drought of theirs; and their
bones be made fat; their hearts Isai. 58. 8. 10. 11
shall be like gardens that are watered, and their comforts like springs of
water, whose waters fail not.

Q. But if these graces may have but their working only interrupted and let
for a time, and their being not wholly destroyed, nor they at any time so
extinguished, as to be made to fail for altogether (as you seem to affirm):
why is it that many of Gods worthy servants, whom God has given great measure
of such saving grace unto; have yet at times complained of the want of such
grace, as if they had wholly lost them; and al were so quenched, as if there
were no one sparkle of them remaining any more. As look upon David's faith, who
for a while believed, and then he spoke confidently; but within a little time
after that, that faith of his seemed so to fail him; as if Gods promises had
had little certainty in him, and the Prophets themselves that brought them,
and published them unto him, were no better then liars: I said in my haste
(says he) that all men are liars. Again, see the Psalm. 116. 10. 11.
failing of his comfort, and the hope he had in God when he said in his
haste; I am cut off, or cast out of the sight of thine Psalm. 31. 22.
eyes: and how does he pray to God elsewhere that he would not cast him away
from out of his presence, nor take his holy Psalm. 51. 11.
spirit from him. As though these were but looseable graces, gifts and favors;
which God for some time had bestowed upon him, so as they might when he pleased
be yet taken from him again.

A. I would instance in no other example to make good my former assertion, then
in that, and the like unto Faith never lost.
it which you have now produced, to make it be doubted of and called into
question whether it should be so or not. For that those in whom precious faith
and repentance unto life have been ever soundly wrought, and the work of
regeneration in any measure has once been truly begun: that such (I say) being
so in the state of grace, are sure never quite to fall from God, for any thing
that afterward can happen; and that such saving graces can neither totally nor
finally be lost of them that have once received them. We may see it true by
the examples of those against whom Satan has bent all his force, and laid as
it were his cannon shot; endeavoring (if it had bin possible) to have
overthrown them: as of David, Solomon, Peter, and such other men, who have
been in the greatest danger that way, in whom their faith and life of grace
have seemed in a manner to have been quite extinguished: partly by security,
partly by the strength of tentation, wherewith they were sorely assailed: and
yet we know these were the Lords Worthies, whom no power of the enemy was
ever able to prevail against, or finally to overcome, and their graces, though
much eclipsed for a time, yet gloriously recovering themselves again, and
shining out with a more perfect brightness in some of them, then ever before
was seen. The reason of it is, for Certainty.
that God is the Lord and changes not, his gifts and calling Mal. 3. 6. Romans
11. 29.
to his children are without repentance, he will not take his saving mercies
and graces from them for evermore, but whom he loves he loves to the end. And
because Gods servants John 13. 1.
stand not by their own strength, but by the power of God (as the Apostle
speaks): they are kept by the 1. Pet. 1. 5.
power of God, as in a castle strongly fenced: this second being a benefit
equal to the first, to keep us in a happy state after we once are brought
into it. For what benefit were it to a man to have possession given him of a
rich City, or strong Tower or Hold, and the enemy to beat him him out again
the next day? Touching those instances you brought in of the failing of David's
graces, there was never any total abolition of such graces in David when he
was so fallen, but a soporation only, and a spiritual slumber that came upon
them (as one of the Fathers Bernard.
speaks): his faith indeed seemed to fail him for a time, and the comfort of
his hope for a while to have bin gone: but this was neither conceived nor
uttered of him out of any mature deliberation, or stayed and settled judgment,
when he was well advised with himself what to determine; but out of a hasty
infirmity, when strength of tentation had ouerset him; for he professed, he
speaking Psalm. 31. 22. and 116. 11.
thus, did but speak it in his haste. And that David being a worthy Prophet,
and a man of great and heavenly knowledge, and of a sound judgment in the
truth; yet in his heaviness did pray that God would not cast him out of his
presence, nor take his holy spirit from him: this showed a diseased mind to be
then in him, and a heart much distempered through his great distress. So hard
a thing is it for a man to keep himself sound, no not in the chief points and
principles of religion, in times of sore affliction and strong tentation. For
trouble and grief will sorely shatter a man: when a man's eyes are full of
tears, it is no marvel if he be found to miss even in reading his own
pardon. We know the Lord had sworn by his holiness, that he would never
fail David; and his mercies bestowed upon him were called the sure mercies of
David: and though David might fear in his weakness, yet God had made a
faithful promise that he would not take his spirit from David, as he had
taken him away from him that was before him. To conclude then this point, as
wine failed even in that banquet John 2. 3.
at which Christ himself was present; so comfort is sometimes interrupted in
that heart in which Christ himself dwells: and as in the one he turned water
into wine in the end; so in the other he will turn all sorrow into endless
joy and peace at the last. The comforts then of the godly are everlasting, the
state of grace they stand in is sure and will never fail them. Faith is an
euer-abiding and unconquerable grace; which all the force of the enemy can never
destroy, nor cause to miscarrie; which once being planted in the heart, can
never be quite plucked up again, till that soul be saved, in which it ever
did first take root.

Q. If all this be so which you have spoken and set down touching true faith,
which is the faith of Gods Elect (according as for mine own part I see no
great reason to make any further doubt therein): namely, that true faith,
whenever it is wrought and planted in a man's heart, it never fails to save
every soul that has it: and that the least measure of saving faith, is as
true faith as is the greatest. And that true faith being once had, howsoever it
may be winnowed and assailed, yet can it never be afterward lost; till that
soul be saved that ever truly had it, and was possessed thereof. I see that
Excellency of faith.
this grace of faith is most excellent, that thus brings salvation to every
soul that so has it; and that worthily it is called precious for it? how well
may all that be said of it which Job speaks of wisdom, in the praising and
extolling Job 28. 13. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.
of the same, that man knows not the price thereof: Gold shall not be given
for it, neither shall silver be waighed for the price thereof. It shall not be
valued with the wedge of the gold of Ophir; nor with the precious Onix, nor the
Sapphire: no mention is to be made of Corrall, nor of the Gabish; for faith is
more precious then all these: the Topaze of Ethiopia shall not be equal unto
it; neither shall it be valued with the wedge of the most puregold. And (to
conclude with that which you made the beginning, for exhorting all to labor
about getting faith), I see the speech may well be applied and spoken in
particular for Prou. 4. 5. 7.
the getting of faith, which you so remembered Solomon in his Proverbs spoke in
general of wisdom for getting of understanding, viz. fully, justly, and
truly may it be said to all; get faith, get the power of believing, forget it
not; faith is the principal thing, therefore get faith, and with all thy
gettings get the grace of true believing. According as the Apostle himself
puts also this task upon every Christian diligently 2. Cor. 13. 5.
to examine himself; to sift, try, and prove himself whether he be in the
faith or no: setting every one a work about searching and finding out the true
being of faith in them, under no less penalty and damage, then is the loss of
all their comfort of their being in Christ, and of the whole claim they do
make unto salvation by him; and of their abiding otherwise in no better estate
then in the state of plain reprobates, that are sure to be damned.

A. It is most true that you say this grace of faith is of an inualuable worth;
it is the very hindge, upon which the gate of heaven turns, which opens it
self to give entrance to every one that has it; but always stands shut,
keeping them out that come without it. Worthily therefore did the Apostle
enjoin this unto us, to give all diligence to make sure work about our faith,
proouing and examining our selves how the case stands with us, touching the
matter of our faith and true believing; for he knew full well, that faith (of
all other the graces of Gods spirit) is a grace most necessary to be had of
every one that desires to be saved, and that it is well worth the looking
after, and laboring for, if happily with all our labor, our looking, and our
seeking, it may be found and light upon: for it is a pearl of that price that
who so is a wise Merchant, will sell all that ever he has to purchase and to
get it. It is a find-all, and a Jewel of that worth and value, as who so
knows it, will never give over seeking till he has found it; for he that
finds it, is made for ever by it: in finding it, he finds life, and is sure
for ever to be saved by it. Such may rejoice indeed with the joy of Gods
people, and glory with Gods inheritance; yea, they may rejoice and triumph for
evermore: and not only themfelues, but call in others of Gods servants to
rejoice together with them, and praise God heartily for his mercy this way
showed unto them, upon more weighty and just occasion, then did that woman
mentioned in the parable in the Gospel; who lighting a Luke 15. 8. 9.
candle, and sweeping her house, and finding her Groat, called in her
neighbors to rejoice* with her, because that her Groat that was lost before,
was now found again. Neither is it more comfortable then it is possible to
have this effected; that by proving we may find that we have true faith, and
so by consequent come to have assurance of being saved; otherwise should we
never be Faith may be known.
commanded thus to endeavor to go about to do it; for howsoever under the
law precepts were given of things that were impossible, that we might know our
own weakness: yet under the Gospel precepts are given of things though hard
to be done, yet of things that possibly may be done, and well may be attained
unto, that the power of Christ his grace may thereby be made the more manifest,
and the better to appear: as when we are commanded to believe and to prove and
to try our selves whither we truly do believe. But though it be true that
faith by searching may be felt, and found out; being once undoubtedly had, that
it cannot finally and for ever be lost again: yet it is as true that through
the default of the hauer, neglecting to use the means to have it go well with
his faith, whereby the vigor of it, and lively operation and working of the
same may be showed forth: the comfortable feeling of the presence of faith may
be so lost to such a man: and through his no better Feeling may be lost.
looking to it, nor looking after it; so may faith it self be to seek, as if
neither were at all, nor never had been before in such a heart; neither will
the comfort of it be had again, nor faith it self be ever light upon and
discerned to have any residence or certain being there, tillby a long labor
of seeking, looking, ransacking, and searching all the rooms and corners of
the heart, all the courses and carriages of the life, having also the light of
best direction out of the word of God lighted up unto us for our furtherance
herein; the same may happily at length be discerned where it is remaining, and
to have (though in weak manner) yet still a true being; which may seem in
some sort to be exemplified by this phrase and manner of speaking thus used by
the Apostle, willing us to prove our selves whether we be in the faith; and
again, to examine our selves, and to know our selves; doubling and re-doubling
the charge upon us. Which may give us to understand, that as false faith may
easily, without good examination and trial, be taken for true faith; so that
true faith it self is not so readily to be discerned, unless there be some
narrow search and trial made about it, and proof to find it out: for
otherwise, what need should there be of all this proving, examining, and trying
whether we be in the faith or not; which the Apostle here so earnestly does
enjoin, if it were obuious, and a thing always ready to be found out and
received by us?

CHAP. X.
Two things propounded: first the differences between saving and sauelesse
faith, and how far a reprobate may go in faith: secondly, the notes and
properties of true and precious faith: and here the maine difference is
entreated of.



IF you would then but resolve me of these two points: first, what be the
chiefest and plainest differences between saving and sauelesse faith, which is
a faith of no worth nor validity to do them any good that have it, and trust
most unto it, but with which they may, and undoubtedly shall, certainly perish,
if they labor not and seek not after the having of a better. Secondly, for
the better discerning of that which is precious faith indeed, even the faith of
Gods elect, to show what be the undoubted notes and marks whereby a man may
know assuredly that he has it. I will trouble you no further to make any
longer discourse about this point of faith, but rest in that which already has
been said and set down concerning the same: this only being more added, which
I thus do entreat and request to be done?

A. I will not be unwilling to do the best I can herein, and plainly to show
what I think concerning either of them. And to begin with the first: Among all
other the True and false faith differ.
differences between good and bad faith, there is none that is a mainer or a
greater difference, none that from the first to the last keeps them further
asunder, or causes a more general or universal disagreement, a more stronger
opposition, or a more direct and plain contrariety between them; then is the
truth of the one, and the falsehood of the other: the one being sound and
unfeigned, the other having guile in it, and colored with much counterfeit
dissembling that may be found to be in it. And these two differences and
contrary qualities, do always keep the fences several between them, as
howsoever there may be a very near neighborhood between them, a bordering
and an abutting of the one hard by the other, yet can they never commune
together, nor the one be suffered to come within the other, by means of this
strong fence and partition wall, that from the first to the last runs
throughout between them, evermore to keep them asunder. For as soon will God
and the devil agree in one; light and darkness be made to accord, as truth
and falsehood can ever meet together. it is true that as the devil is said to
be Gods Ape, who after an Apish fashion being the God of the world, can, and
Ephesians. 2. 2.
does forge in the shop wherein he works (that is, the hearts of the children
of disobedience) the counterfeit of all such graces as Gods Spirit does frame
and work in the hearts of the Elect; so this false faith may well be the
counterfeit of true faith, and may have an Apish imitation of it in every
respect; but it comes no more near to be like it, then is a dead carcass to
a living body; or a fire that is painted, to a true fire that does burn
indeed: and therefore it is but a mocke-faith that will beguile them sorest
and soonest, who do trust unto it most.

Q. But how may this difference be discerned, and the ^auth of the one, and
falsehood of the other be best found out?

A. To find out which is the true faith, and which is the false (besides other
manifest signs whereby the same may be discerned), there is none more pregnant
to make that clear and evident, then that true faith is sure and firm,
constant and abiding to the end; which never fails 1. Differenco is
continuance.
till it has attained that end for which it had first a beginning and a being
given unto it, which is the saving of every soul that once has had it.
Whereas false faith is uncertain, not to trust unto, unconstant and but
temporary, when it is at the best, which will last but a season, and will then
fail a man most, when he should have the greatest use of it: as in the day of
battle, when he should stand in the face of his enemy; then it will start
aside like a broken bow, that he can make no shot; and like a broken staff,
that will leave a man in the ditch, when he aduentureth to leap over with it.
Now this being worthily held for a maine difference between saving and
sauelesse faith, whereby they are clearly distinguished, and plainly may be
discerned, the one of them from the other: that this difference may the better
be discerned and made manifest, Time is herein to lend her help; for all
things are made manifest by time: as the Apostle speaking 1. Cor. 3. 13.
of the diverse manner of working and laboring by the builders that build in
the Church of God upon the foundation; some building gold, silver, precious
stones; others timber, hay, and stubble; he says, every man's work shall be
made manifest, for the day (says he) shall declare it. Truth is said to be the
daughter of Time, and so is falsehood also: Time traveling with them both,
brings them both forth at the last, and shows them as they are, to the view
of every man. Truth may be blamed Laborare potest vinci non potest.
, but shamed it will never be. True faith may be hazarded and sorely shaken
for a time, but vanquished can Luke 22. 32.
it never be, nor fail finally, or be overcome: for it is of nature
invincible, and the trial of true faith shows it 1. Pet. 1. 7.
self in the end to be more precious then gold that perishes; and redoundeth
to the greater praise, honor and glory of the true believer. On the contrary,
falsehood may for a time be covered and masked under the visour and veil of
truth; but at the length time will cause it to be discerned, for it is full of
crackes and rents on every side, which can never be so made up; but the
dissimulation thereof will thereby break out at the last, and easily be
discried. For truth pierces through falsehood on every part, which opposing it
self to sound sincerity, and innocent simplicity; is found to melt away as
snow does against the Sun. False and fained faith may indeed show goodly and
flourishing fair for a time; it may shine out with such a luster and
glistering brightness, as may seem to dazzle the eyes of all that are the
beholders of it, as though it were among other virtues, as Lucifer is among
other stars; which coming next before the Sun, is filled full of light,
and brighteth the day before him; when in the end, for all such shining, time
will make it appear to be no better then the light that comes but from
rotten wood, which when it is once discerned, every one does contemn as a
thing of no worth, but to be spurned away, and to be trodden under his feet. In
like manner all the light of joy and comfort which seemed to be given out from
that faith which is not sound, will at the length be put in obscure darkness,
the heart being left destitute of all manner of cheer and comfort, both
hopeless and joy less, when times of trial and of sore affliction Mat. 13.
21.
do happen to to come: as our Savior shows manifestly in the parable, and
daily experience also witnesses to be most true. Neither does the unsoundness
and and falsenesse of faith only appear at the end, when once the end of it
is come, showing it to have been but temporary which did not long endure: but
before the end be come, even when it is in the prime of the chiefest working,
if it be well observed, there is a clear difference evidently discerneable
between the sincerity and entire working of true faith yt abides, and the
much hollownes and hypocrisy of this temporary and truthlesse faith yt is not
to be trusted unto, though it be taken even then when it is at the best, and
when all things may be found to be in it as gloriously appearing in outward
show, as can be found to be in that faith which is most true indeed. And this
difference may readily be discerned, if men rightly considering their own
ways in their hearts, will be impartial Judges to give a right sentence
according to such evidence as they may well gather from that which they can
find to be done and wrought in themselves. For true faith deals truly in all
that it does, how weak and imperfect Secondly, if true faith deals truly.
soever it be that it does; yet it is true, and ever purges the heart, as
from other dross and filth of sin, so from that pernicious plague and
pestilent poison, which is the venom of all virtue, and as a fretting canker
that eats out the very heart of all grace, and extinguisheth the life of all
sincerity that is therein; I mean close and privy hypocrisy and guile of
heart: for where guile and falsehood is found to bear rule, there plain truth
of believing and of faith that is unfeigned can abide no longer. On the other
side, false and fained faith, though in show that seems to be very good which
it works; yet may there much guile and deceit be found to be in it, and the
work will appear to be unsound and falsely wrought, if good trial thereof
be made, that only having guile for the refuge, and under falsehood and vanity
it Isai. 28. 15.
delighting ever to lie hid, for there it rests and setleth it selse, there
it finds best cherishing and kindliest being, as the dorres do in the dung.
But this may better be considered in some particulars. Temporary faith (which
yet is as good as no faith (if it be not worse) for if any withdraw himself,
the Lord will have no pleasure in Heb. 10. 38. 39. 2. Pet. 2. 21.
him. And Peter says, it had been better not to have known, then to turn
away again) seems to have all the complements that can be found in true
faith, and that in as goodly a show, and in as glorious a manner, as the most
precious and saving faith has or can have (if goodly shows and appearances
might be sufficient to serve the turn): for if we consider the nature of
true faith, and what be the parts whereof it does consist; if we mark well
what be the graces which principally do concur in true believers, for the
making up of that faith in them How true says is wrought.
which is true and unfeigned, and by which they assuredly shall be saved, it
will be found that, first their minds come to be illuminated and lightened from
above with divine Acts 26. 18. Ephesians. 1. 17. 18. Col 1. 9. 26. 27. and ^. 2 2.
Cor 4. 6. John 17. 3. Acts 28. 24. Ioh 6. 68 69. Acts 15. 11. John 1. 12. Phil.
3. 12. 1. Tim. 6. 12. 2. Tim. 2. 14. Romans 4. 20. 21. Romans 8. 38. John 3. 16.
Romans 15. 13. Acts 8. 39. 1. Pet. 1. 7. Tit 3. 8. 14. Coloss. 1. 10. Gal 5. 16.
22. 2. Pet. 1. 8. Phil. 1. 11. Romans 12 2. 1. Cor. 6. 11. Ephesians 4. 22. 24. Ephesians* 4.
20. 21.
knowledge of Gods truth, especially with the saving knowledge of Christ Jesus,
whom to know is eternal life. Secondly, then their hearts are strengthened, as
to assent to that they know, so to rely upon Christ whom they know,
apprehending him, and laying hold of the promises of life and salvation which
are made in him. Fourthly, from thence they proceed further, and do grow at
the length to be assured in the truth, and setledly persuaded of God his
unchangeable love toward them in and through Christ Jesus, so as they believe
comfortably they shall never perish, but have eternal life by him. Whereupon
next follows, fifthly, Joy and gladness to be bred in their hearts, even
such as is said to be unspeakable and glorious. All which former graces have
following and accompanying them the fruits of the Spirit. Sixthly, in good
works, breaking out in their lives: which may plainly be discerned by the
general change of their whole course of life from evil to good, casting off
the old man, which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts, and putting on the
new, which is created after God in holiness and righteousness. And thus have
true believers learned Christ, heard him and been taught by him, as the truth
is in Jesus, as the Apostle says. Now a temporary believer, who is but a
cunning reprobate and a true believers counterfeit, may have the shadow and
resemblance of all these graces, and that with so lively colors, so workmanly
set out, and painted forth, as shall cause them to carry a goodly gloss, and
to shine out with such a glistering brightness, as if they were comparable
with the best, when there is nothing at all sound, but How far areprobate may
go.
all is bastardized, adulterated, and no better then plain counterfeit stuff;
such a man may have common graces in so good a degree, as a natural man may in
the possibility of his nature be capable of, even so much as his nature not
renewed may permit him to have. As (to instance in the former particulars) he
may have great measure Heb. 6. 4. 1. Cor. 13. 2. Isai. 42. 20. 1. Cor. 1. 19.
20. and 8. 2. Romans 2. 13. 19. 20. Acts 26. 27. James 2. 19. John 12. 42. 43.
Luke 8. 13. Mat. 23. 2. 3. Romans 2. 20. 21. Romans 1. 31. and 3. 19. 20. Phil 1.
16. Mat. 7. 21. 22.
of illumination, and may attain to much knowledge not alone humane, but
divine also; to know the truth of God, to understand the Scriptures, to believe
the Word of God to be true, crediting it in his judgment, and approving of it
in his affection, he may not alone become expert in the understanding and
opening of the Law, thereby to know himself and all others to be guilty of
sin, but he may grow also acquainted with the mysteries of the Gospel
thereout, to know Christ and him crucified for the sins of the world, and to
know him to be theone and only Savior of all mankind, he may have a confused
persuasion and conceit in his mind (though vnwarrantably) that Christ and all
his benefits do belong to him; and laying claim to them, (as the woman that
was not the mother, did to the child that was not hers) apprehend 1. King 3. 22.
and lay hold of them all as his own. He may out of this conceit, that he is
now in the state of grace, and in the Luke 8. 13.
way of life, have his heart rapt and lift up with much joy; he may take
delight, and after a manner grow proud of the good estate, which (as he does
think) he now stands Luke 18. 11.
in: as in regard of the outward reformation of his life, the unclean spirit
may be said to be gone out of him, Mat. 12. 43.
and another spirit to be given unto him, as was given to Saul, when another
heart was given unto him, after Samuel 1. Sam. 10. 6. 9. 10.
had once anointed him, after which it is also said, that the Spirit of the
Lord came upon him. He may be found much humbled before the Lord with Ahab,
for many 1. Kin. 21. 27. 29.
evils he has done; and much commended before men with Herod, for many good
things he has done, of Mark 6. 20.
whom it is said, that he heard John gladly, and that he did many things after
that he had heard him. These also many several gifts and graces, which are
very glorious to look upon, and fair in show, may concur and meet together
in one man, and yet never a one of them right, nor the man himself sound at
the heart. All these thus coupled, thus compact and joined together, meeting in
one person, may seem to carry before them a fair resemblance of the comely
feature of true saving faith; when yet it is but as a dead image, which having
all parts and lineaments of a well proportioned body, wants the spirit and
breath of life to animate the whole, and agitate all the parts with lively
motion and vigor of effectual operation, to be seen working and coming
from the same. So this goodly and glorious imaginary dead ceremonial and
seeming faith, which thus may be seen to have all the parts and lineaments of
the well proportioned body of true and lively faith, it may well be said to
have indeed the shape and image of saving faith, but yet all this while it is
no better then a dead image, wanting the soul of faith, and spirit of life
that should breath in it, even the spirit of sanctification and holiness to
inspire these common graces, as parts and lineaments of this image and body
with holy motion, and life of sanctifying grace, which might derive holiness
and purity so into every part, for the seasoning and sanctifying of all, that
all might be made pleasing and acceptable unto God by the same. Now for the
want of this, which is the very soul and lively life of true and lively faith
it self, all the rest is but as the body without the soul, which is dead, and
is no more then the image or outside and rotten carcass of a true faith, but
is not true faith indeed. And therefore as one faith of the knowledge of the
Heathen, who did excel in all literature and human learning, O fortunatos
Ethnicos fides si accesserit: O happy Heathen, if to other learning the grace
of faith and true believing had also been added. So would I say of these
temporary believers; O thrice happy Christians, if with these common gifts and
graces of Gods Spirit bestowed upon them, wherein many of them so greatly do
excel, they might have also that gift of sanctifying grace given vpto them to
sanctify the rest and themselves throughout, that as for Grace sanctified, is
grace refined.
outward parts, they seem and appear to be much beautified, so they might in
like manner be all glorious within, soundly sanctified in their inmost
affections, and renewed in the powers of their souls, the spirit of grace and
holiness, reinuesting them with such a measure of sanctity and integrity, as
they might be found entire and sincere before God in all that they do: but
this being wanting, all the rest is nothing. For the want whereof, the like may
be said of these in particular, which the Apostle says of all other 1. Cor.
13. 1. 2. 3.
graces where love is wanting; though they had such learning and knowledge, as
they might seem to speak with the tongues not of men, but of Angels; and yet
had not their knowledge sanctified, they should be but as sounding brass, or
as tinckling Cymballs. And if they had never so strong faith and steadfastness
of believing in their own opinion; if they were never so much rapt up with the
joy they have conceived, and should become most secure in their so confident
boasting; if they did never so many things with Herod, and should be found so
to be changed and altered in their lives, that they might seem to be as holy
as Saints, and were become most glorious in show as are the Angels of light,
into whose shape it is no hard thing for Satan, when he will transform
himself; yet for the want of this one grace of true and sound holiness, which
alone should grace all the rest, both they themselves are nothing, and all that
they do shall profit them nothing, for the causing either themselves to be had
in any reckoning with God, or for any account to be had of whatsoever they
possibly can do without it in his gracious acceptance.

CHAP. XI.
Of the special differences in the principal graces appertaining to faith;
and first, of the first grace, which is knowledge, with the use that is to be
made of the difference herein.



SEeing you have thus made mention, that there must be a concurrence of some
principal and particular graces in true believers, to the making up of true
faith in them; as namely, the mind to be enlightened with knowledge, the heart
strengthened by grace, to apprehend for their own comfort that which it so
knows, with persuasion thereupon of Gods favor for it self, which causes
great joy to be felt: with all which must be joined a sound and through
reformation of life in like manner to be wrought: and have likewise showed,
that temporary believers, who are no better then plain reprobates, may have
the counterfeit and a near resemblance of all these: I desire to hear further
declared, what special differences in these particulars on both parts may be
observed, that if there be no agreement in the parts nor like proportion held
in any of the particulars, the difference may be known to be the stronger in
the whole, and the odds perceived to be the greater in the general, when they
are compared together. First therefore (if it please you) show what differences
may be discerned between the knowledge of him that is unsanctified and
unsound, and the knowledge of a true believer, inwhom may be found the faith of
Gods elect?

A. The knowledge of these two may be found to differ Difference of knowledge.
in that which is common between them both, and in that which is private and
peculiar but to one alone, which the other can never at all have any part in:
even very reprobates may obtain from God very large allowance to In Reprobates.
be made unto them in common gifts, and of those of the best kind, as not only
to speak with tongues, but likewise 1. Cor. 12. 10.
to prophecy and preach learnedly, and like great Clerks: they may be endued
with most rare and excellent gifts this way, and graces of Gods Spirit; they
may excel in them, and peradventure go beyond some of the elect, to whom
Christ yet wili say, he never knew them. The secre^s of Nature Matthew. 7. 23.
we know have been most found out by them, that have had nothing but Nature in
them, and they have in a manner excelled this way. God has given them the
excellency of skill in their own element: but the secrets of grace he has
more abundantly revealed to such as do fear him, upon whom he has bestowed
the riches of his grace, making them to excel therein. Though unregenerate men
may know much, yet they are ever defective in the chief, they have more of
such knowledge as is less necessary, then have many true believers: but in
that which is most necessary, that makes men not only learneder, but better,
therein they come far behind; though they may have great illumination, yet
something in all their knowledge is ever wanting, and kept from them, which is
as the quintessence of all knowledge, The sanctification of grace is the
quintessence of grace.
namely, to have their knowledge sanctified, and to have true saving knowledge
given unto them; this the Lord does never bestow upon them. He that has not
sanctifying grace in him, as shows the Apostle Peter, let him be never so
learned, and so great 2. Pet. 1. 9.
a Clerk otherwise; yet he is blind, and cannot see a far off; he cannot see
the happiness to come, the glory that shall be revealed, the honor that shall
be to the Saints, the end of Gods servants how happy it will be, nor the
vengeance prepared for the wicked, to be warned in time to shun and avoid
it; nay, they many times do not see things that are present, though so clear
and palpable, as might be groped and felt by blind men, and not only discerned
Isai. 26. 13. and cap. 5. 12.
by such as have eyes to look upon them; such as are judgments that are
present, and benefits that are present, and cap. 42. 25.
that they might profit by them. They have therefore but an obscure knowledge,
and there is darkness in their greatest light; the Sun going down upon
them even at Job 5. 14. Micha. 3. 6. Isai. 28. 7.
noone, and the day it self being dark over them. No marvel then though they
err in vision, and stumble in judgment; as the Prophet speaks.

Here then stands the greatest preferment that men unregenerate, can ever
look to be brought unto, and largest allowance of gifts, that they may ever
hope to receive at the hands of God, that they may peradventure be equalled
with the most of Gods faithful servants, and often preferred too before many
of them in the common gifts and graces of Gods Spirit: as in the gift of
knowledge, to have much humane learning given them, yea, and a deep insigh^
too into much of that knowledge that is divine; yet all these gifts and
knowledge not being sanctified, it may be truly said of them, they are but as
offals cast to dogg^; the other being childrens bread, and as Manchet made of
the finest of the Wheat.

As for true believers, and such as are sound in the faith Knowledge of true
believers.
indeed, besides that they are Commoners with the rest, and Commoners with the
best, in the best gifts that they have (though in the very things which the
godly have in common with the wicked, they have them in a far better kind,
and far more sanctifiedly, then any of the wicked have, there being ever a
tincture of holiness put upon them, when they are given to them), they have
some things peculiarly bestowed upon them, whereunto the unregenerate shall
never attain, nor have the like: for as they are the Lords peculiar ones, so
will he grace them Tit. 2. 14. Psalm. 135. 4.
with peculiar favors and gifts given unto them, whereby they shall do some
singular thing (which our Savior Mat. 5 47.
would have his true disciples always to endeavor themselves to do) the like
whereunto no reprobate shall ever be able to do, do what he can. He may go
about to color and counterfeit, and sample it as near as may be; but there
will ever be as great a difference between them, as between that which is
colored and counterfaited, and that which is most kindly and natural of it
self. They have the grace of true sanctification given unto Ioh. 17. 17. 19.
them, sanctifiedly to do that which they do, which the other want: a grace
that graceth all the graces they have. Beside, their knowledge they have is
sanctified, and so it becomes saving, the like whereunto can never have any
wicked man.

But more then this, the Lord reuealeth some things to Some things revealed to
Gods children, not to the wicked.
them, which the other sort shall never know on (like as he dealt with his
Disciples whom he told every thing apart unto), even the hid wisdom of God;
the unregenerate Mark. 4. 34. Luke 10. 23. 1. Cor. 7. 8.
man is not so far trusted of God, as to have his secrets made known unto
him: the Lord deals with them, as we deal with some whom we do not greatly
trust: we communicate not all that is in our hearts unto them, but only such
things as we care not who hear us, and whether they tell it or tell it not.
Men will know them well whom they impart their secrets unto. Kings will not
make every subject to be of their privy Council, they are privileged men
that are preferred to such a favor. The Lord makes not all of his Counsel;
he will know them well, whom he will tell all his mind unto; he tells it to
his beloved ones, he tells all things to them apart; yea, he knows how to
tell them apart, when others are in presence, giving an understanding heart to
one to understand the teaching, when another that hears is never the wiser
for that he hears; but all is kept secret still and hidden from him. The
secret of the Lord is said to be revealed to such as do fear him: and they
are Job 17. 4. Isa. 29. 14. Psalm. 25. 14. Ephos. 1. 9. Luke 24. 45. Ephesians. 1.
4. Mat. 13. 43. Mat. 25. 34.
promised that he will show them his Covenant. He opened the minds of his
Disciples that they might understand the Scriptures. The Lord will show to
such, great secrets, what he did for them before the beginning of the world in
their Election; what he will do for them after the world has an end, in their
glorification: and what he will do for them in the day of judgment, for
their clearing. And Ioh. 5. 29. Ioh. 16. 13.
this is according to that Christ promised his Disciples, that the Spirit
should show them things to come.

The true believers the^ have such a peculiar kind of know ledge of God, and
from him, as they know of his fatherly, yea husbandly kindness unto them: they
have such an inward acquaintance with him, as the wife has with her Hos. 2.
16. 19. 20
husband that lies in his bosom, which knows all his secrets, from whom her
loving husband will conceal nothing: if his call unto him, he promises to
show to them great and mighty things, which they know not; the Ier. 33. 3. Amos
3. 7.
Lord will do nothing but he will reveal it to his servants the Prophets. As
for the wicked they shall be nothing so, it is not so between God and them:
but as they are Psalm. 1. 4. Psalm. 58. 3.
strangers from the womb, so shall they be kept strangers from knowing of
such things to their dying day. That heavy judgment is sentenced out against
them, which Isaiah speaks of, and was sent to pronounce against Isa. 6. 9. 10.
them: Their hearts are made fat, their ears are made heavy, and their eyes
are shut up; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
and understand with their hearts, and convert and be healed. Such things as the
Lord in special favor to his elect reuealeth to babes, and those that are of
little regard and account in the world, he yet hides from the wise and prudent
in the Isa. 29. 14. Mat. 11. 25. and 13. 11. 13. 14. 16.
world, even because it is the good pleasure of his will, so to privilege and
prefer such as once he has received into his favor, showing mercy to whom
he will show mercy, and whom he will he contrarily does harden. Romans 9. 18.


Now the use of the knowledge of such a difference to be between the gifts and
graces given to the reprobate, and to the elect, should move Gods true
faithful servants not to content themselves with having such graces and gifts
of Gods spirit as cannot save them that have them, but though they be had, yet
the hauers of them may be lost themselves: not to content themselves with such
a kind of knowledge of God and of Christ, as though they say in words, and
think in theirt hearts, that they have the knowledge of God; yet Christ in the
last day shall say unto them, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I never
knew you: But to labor to get such a spiritual, effectual; particular, and
distinct, experimental, practical, lively and saving knowledge of God and of
Christ, as may be sure to bring them to life: ever coucting after the best
gifts, if there be any better then others, and desiring to hear of that more
perfect way which the Apostle speaks of, and promises to show; which is, not
to be content to prophecy and speak with tongues, but to follow love 1. Cor.
12. 31.
which is the chief, and to practice holiness: they must labor to join with
all gifts and graces that they have, In every part of Gods service there is
some hidden thing, which if it be wanting, the whole action is nothing worth.
and add to the performance of all religious duties they do; a singularity of
holiness, and of pureness, of sincerity, and entireness; that they may be
sound and sincere in them; doing that they do with all integrity and
uprightness, in a sanctified manner, in all the powers, and with all the parts
of soul and body, that so they may do some singular thing, so exceeding the
righteousness of all reprobates and hypocrites.

But to give you yet further and more fuller satisfaction, in showing more
particularly some differences which may be observed to be between the
knowledge of a true believer, and of one that is but hollow and unsound in his
faith. I think they may in these particulars be well differenced one from
another. First, in the original, whence their knowledge is fetched. Secondly,
in the end, to which it tends. Thirdly, in the object, about which it is
occupied. Fourthly, in the subject, in which it abides and is seated. Fifthly,
in the kinds, wherein they are much severed. Sixthly and lastly, in the uses
to which they are put.

For the first, the one sort fetch their learning no higher, then that the
reach of humane understanding may well Original of knowledge.
be extended unto, and is found able to comprehend by the power and strength
that it has given thereunto; Wisd. 9. 15. 16.
and therefore in some respect may be still said to be but natural and humane,
though the things that are known are above the course of nature, and truth in
themselves may be said to be divine.

The other sort fetch their knowledge far higher, and therefore their
wisdom is said to be wisdom descending from above, which is supernatural
and spiritual, Iam. 3. 17.
transcending all that nature can reach unto, being the hid wisdom of God,
which is wisdom among them that 1. Cor. 2. 6. 7.
are perfect; of whom (as being the true and only children Luke 7. 35.
of wisdom, it alone is justified, the Lord revealing to such by his spirit
those things which neither the eye of 1. Cor. 2. 9. 10.
man can see, nor their ears hear, neither can it enter into their hearts in
such manner to conceive of them; and therefore of all others is the true,
solid, eternal, and every way most divine wisdom, as being especially given
Job. 32. 8. and 38. 36.
by divine inspiration.

They in coming by their knowledge, are either their (...).
own teachers (as they are their own scholars, who love to hear themselves
speak, and their own admirers, who like of nothing but what is done by
themselves, as being wise in their own eyes) or else their learning Isa. 5.
21. Galath. 1. 11.
is of man, and after man (as the Apostle speaks) they being taught it by
man, because they are of the 1. Ioh. 4. 5.
world, they have them for their masters that are of the world, if any come in
his own name they are ready to hear Ioh. 5. 43.
him, as our Savior told the Jews.

These are all taught of God, because they are of God, (...).
they hear his word; because they are of Christ his stock, Isa. 54. 13. Ioh.
6. 45. Ioh. 8. 47. and 10. 5. 27. Ioh. 6. 45. Psalm. 119. 102.
they hear his voice, but a stranger, they will not hear, they hear and
learn of the father, and so their knowledge brings them to Christ. They are
taught of God, and therefore they live well, and decline not from his
judgments.

2. And as the beginnings are diverse from whence Diverse ends of knowledge.
both these derive their knowledge, so are not the ends the same for which they
labor to come by knowledge. They, that is, the unsanctified and unsound in the
faith, seek to know either but that they may know; which (as is said by one)
is but mecre curiosity: or that they may Bernard.
thereby come to preferment, dignities, and greater livings, which sauoureth of
ambition, worldly-mindednes, and filthy avarice.

These seek to get knowledge to far better ends; as not alone to know, but
to do as they know: they desire knowledge as for it own sake, and for the
excellency which they see to be therein, so for the good of others, and of
themselves also; that thereby they may teach others, which is charity; and also
teach themselves, which Phil. 3. 8.
to do is piety. But above all, they labor to get the true Vtque alios alij
de religione docerent. Contiguas pietas iussit habere domos.
knowledge of God, that they may know how to honor him, to fear God and keep
his Commandments, which is the whole duty of every man.

3. The third difference is in respect of the object of their knowledge.
Eccles. 12. 13.


The unsanctified Christian, and the men that are unregenerate, In matters to
be known.
they care and study more to know all other things that may be known in the
world beside, then either truly to know God or themselves as they ought: they
bestow more precious time about hearkening for all manner of tidings that may
be known throughout all countries abroad; to know the state of all other
people of kingdoms and commonwealths, though never so far remote, to
search what things are done a far off, though nothing at all appertaining
unto them: then to know how things go with themselves at home in their own
bosom, or to take intelligence, and grow acquainted with the state and
commonwealth of their own souls, or once to think of those things that are
done in their own breasts, which appertain to none but themselves alone. They
delight to tell and to talk of the trouble and business of this or that
country, when in the mean time they care not to take any knowledge what
trouble is made in their own breasts, by wrath, envy, bodily lust, ambition,
and the like; in so much as they may be said to be more strangers to their own
nature, to their own souls, and to the things that do concern themselves
most nearly and peculiarly, then they be to the deserts of India, or to the
seas that are furthest off, worst to be sailed upon, and hardliest to be
known. Of whom in respect of such kind of knowledges, that may be spoken and
well applied unto them, which a learned man spoke of some, of whom he said,
that in Melancthon.
omnibus sciunt aliquid and in toto nihil: In all things they will seem to
know something, and yet in the whole they know nothing; and so they know
nothing to any purpose.

The godly on the other side and true believers esteem with the Apostle to
know nothing, saving Christ and him crucified, and so to know themselves, as
they may the better know how to be saved by him: and this is their chiefest
and profoundest learning that they look after.

Besides, the carnal men desire to be well read in any book, rather then in
the book of their own conscience, preferring pamphlets, and books of idle
discourse written by men of corrupt and vain minds, who have more wit, then
wisdom how well to use it; (of whom it may truly be said, that spider-like
they draw out their bowels for the ctching but of flies), before the wholesome
and sauourie writings of men, both godly and learned, which afford much good
help to them that are well exercised in them, for their better profiting and
furtherance of their godly edification. Yea, before the most sacred and holy
word of God it self, and the divine Scriptu^es, which are the only religious,
and most royal sanctuaries of the truth, there being the wisdom of God
revealed unto us in them, and that Vrim and Thummim, whereby we are answered as
by Oracle from God in all our controversies: yea, God himself in them is made
known unto us, who drawing as it were the curtains of heaven, does out of
them reveal his own majesty unto us as with open 2. Cor. 3. 18.
face. If they can light upon any thing that is extant, published and brought
forth, dressed and (as I may say) dished out and set before them, which being
once tasted of, both in regard of the agreeablenes of the matter, which they
find therein to be handled, and pleasantnes of the manner and style of writing
in which it is delivered, the same be found to be meat (as we use to say) for
their own teeth, and as well pleasing the appetite of the old man that is
vainly and carnally minded, as ever did old Isaac (who desired to eat of the
flesh of venison) take delight to eat of his sons venison, being prepared
after the manner of Rebeckahs fine dressing: then, as among the Jews, if any
would prophecy to them of wine and Mich. 2. 11.
strong drink, he should be a Prophet alone for that people. Such books are
the only books in these times for such sort of readers, such writing they
think most worthy their reading, and are never weary in so doing. The man
famished with hunger, does not more eagerly fly upon, or more greedily devour
the meat that is before him, then these do the things that are so written,
till having eaten thereof to the full, and satiated themselves with that windy
stuff, they may blow it out again into the ears of the next company they
come into, and be able to discourse and hold talk and babble with all sorts of
men of all manner of businesses, save of those only which of all others it
were most fit for them to busy themselves about. But that which Seneca
complained Seneca ep. 88.
of in his time touching things that were unprofitable, written and taught
then, may well be the complaint of these times, that many things are written
and set forth which were worthy to be unlearned, if at all they were known,
and to be chopped off with hatchets, rather then not to have them gone.

These contrarily neglect not to look to their conscience, and daily to turn
over the leaves of that book to see what is written there, as well as to read
other writings for the getting of other knowledges; yea they above all things
labor to keep faith, and the knowledge they have in a good conscience both
toward God and men always: and as for their choice of reading books, and
things that are written for their getting of sound knowledge and better
profiting in good learning, they prefer the reading of one line of the sacred
Bible and holy Scriptures, and one leaf of other good books found consonant
to the Scriptures, sanctifiedly and sauourly written by such as are Orthodox,
containing in them wholesome doctrine and profitable instruction that do tend
to spiritual edification, before whole legends and vast volumes of idle and
unprofitable discourses contained in books, though judged never so witty, and
found never so pleasing and plausible to the palate and liking of unsanctified
men.

The misbeleeuing professors know the Scriptures and Acts 13. 10. 2. Pet. 3. 16.
abuse them, and so are the worse for their knowledge, perverting the
Scriptures to their own destruction: and 2. Pet. 2. 20. 21.
though they know the truth and the way of righteousness, yet they turn away
from the holy commandment, and therefore they had been better never to have
known the same; their knowledge serving but to increase their sins, and to
further the more their just condemnation: and as is said by the Prophet, their
wisdom and knowledge Isai. 47. 10.
does pervert them, and cause them to err.

The true believers know the Scriptures, and are guided Psalm. 119. 133. 2. Tim.
3. 25.
by them, ordering their steps in the word of God, and so are made wise by them
to salvation, they know Gods Iam. 1. 25.
word and do it, and so become blessed in their deed.

They know Christ, and so do these: but in a differing manner. They know
Christ, and perish with their knowledge of him, they knowing him but as the
Devils know him, who knew him to confess him, saying, We know who Mark. 1. 24.
thou art, even the holy one of God: but they do not willingly obey him, nor
soundly believe in him: and therefore shall never be saved by him.

These have the saving knowledge of Christ, they know him to acknowledge him,
as did Peter when he did confess John 6. 69.
him, We believe and know thou art Christ the Son of the living God: so
forsaking all to follow him, and truly and steadfastly believing in him, their
faith is so strengthened, as the gates of hell shall never prevail against the
Mat. 16. 18.
same.

Their knowledge of Christ has guile and deceit in it, making them more bold
in sinning, because they know Christ has done all away by his suffering,
abusing the knowledge they have of him to a more liberty of licentious living.

These know Christ as the truth is in Jesus to become new creatures in him,
casting off the old man, and putting on Ephesians. 4. 21. 22* 24
the new.

4 In respect of the subject, in which the knowledge of these two abides and
is seated, this difference may be observed.

Their knowledge is swimming in the brain, in an idle and bare speculation
only.

These have their knowledge descending and sinking lower down into their
hearts, to work upon the affections, to breed the hatred of sin there, and
the love of goodness.

They keep the word of God in their ears to hear it, and in their tongues to
talk of it: they get knowledge out of the word of God to tip their tongues
with fine and eloquent speech, and to dispute learnedly about points that are
intricate.

These lay up the word of God in their hearts, that it may dwell plentifully
there in all wisdom; they hide up Coloss. 3. 16.
the word of God in their hearts with David, that it may Psalm. 119. 11.
keep them from sinning: they get knowledge not so much to tip their tongues
with speech, as to season their hearts with grace, and to liquour their whole
lives with holiness, that all their actions may relish and savor of some
goodness.

5 There is great difference between the knowledge of these two, in respect of
the kinds of their knowledge: which are very diverse.

All the knowledge and wisdom of men unregenerate, that is to say of natural
men, it does most lighten the understanding downward: and let it be of things
never so high and heavenly, yet being once in them, it becomes drossie and
polluted with their corruption.

But the knowledge which is inspired and infused into the hearts of men
regenerate by the spirit of sanctification, is both most holy and pure in it
self, and in like manner sanctifies them into whose hearts it is put; and
John 17. 17. 1. Pet. 1. 22.
being far more divine, sets before their minds a heavenly great and
lightsome Torch shining upwards, to make their minds more heavenly, and their
affections to Coloss. 3. 2.
be set upon things above.

Of the greatest excellency of their unsanctified knowledge (in regard of
themselves, and of the hurt also thereby done to others) that may be said of it
that was said of the knowledge of Nouatus, that it was but venenata facundia,
but a poisoned and venomous finesse and elegancie of their skill and speech.

These have the wholesome knowledge of the truth, for Tit. 2. 8.
the safety of their own souls, and they speak the words of truth and
soberness unto others also, whom they do instruct. Acts 26. 25.


Their knowledge many times, is an affecting to know above that which is meet,
and so are found exercising themselves Romans 12. 3. 16. Psalm. 131. 1.
in things that are too high.

These understand according to sobriety, keeping themselves within due
compass, not stretching themselves beyond their line. 2. Cor. 10. 13. 14.


They have much obscure, confused, general, and theoricall knowledge, wherein
many of them do excel: they have plenty of illumination without change of
affection, and so remain but carnal still; their heart and life being left
wholly unreformed.

These have a much more clear, distinct, special, effectual, and
experimental knowledge, their minds being so enlightened by the Spirit of God,
with the knowledge of God out of his Word, as thereupon they are transformed 2.
Cor. 3. 18.
into the image of God from glory to glory.

They have much verbal and litterall knowledge in Tit. 1. 16.
word, to say they know God, but in their deeds to deny him, so being in the
mean time (as one justly calls them) but believing Atheists.

These have powerful and spiritual knowledge, knowing Phil. 3. 10.
Christ with the power of his resurrection, which causes the power of
godliness to be seen in their lives.

6 And lastly, in respect of the use that these put their knowledge unto, much
is the difference between the knowledge that is had on both sides.

The unregenerate and unsanctified men have knowledge, Ier. 10. 14. Amos 3. 10.
Ier. 4. 22
but (as the Prophet speaks) they are brutish in their knowledge, they know
not how to do right: they have knowledge and they are wise for the doing of
evil, but to do well they have no knowledge at all.

The true believer and sanctified Christian has knowledge and his
understanding is unto him as a wellspring Prou. 16. 22.
and fountain of life, to cause him to depart from the snares of death. The
wisdom of the prudent (says Solomon) Prou. 14. 8. Psalm. 101. 2. Prou. 11. 9.
Psalm. 47. 10.
is to understand his way, that with David, he may know how to behave himself
wisely in a perfect way. The just by his knowledge is delivered from the error
and deceit of the hypocrite, who with his mouth destroys his neighbor.

They having knowledge, many times their wisdom and knowledge does pervert
them, that being wise in their own eyes, they fall into heresy, maintain
errors, and they having knowledge and utterance of speech, as they are of the
world themselves; so (says the Apostle) they 1. John 4. 5.
speak of the world, and the world through them.

These having light of knowledge, do ponder the path of their feet, to order
their ways aright, and thereby are Prou. 4. 26.
better stablished in the truth. These put their knowledge to a better use,
they having the tongue of the learned, Isai. 50. 4.
know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: when they speak,
their lips do spread abroad knowledge, and their tongue talks of wisdom;
for the Law of Prou. 15. 7. Psalm. 37. 30. 31.
God is in their heart. The tongue of the wise (says Solomon) Prou. 15. 2.
uses knowledge aright, where the mouth of fools does nothing but pour out
foolishness.

They having knowledge of things that are in their nature 2. Cor. 2. 17.
divine, do yet handle divine things in a devilish manner, and handle the word
of God deceitfully. 2. Cor. 4. 2.


These handle the Word of God purely, as with washed hands; they do with
David, wash their hands in innocence, Psalm. 26. 6.
and so compass the Altar: they speaking Gods Word, speak it as the word of
God; yea, their speech is 1. Pet. 4. 11. Colo^^. 4. 6.
ordinarily gracious, and powdered with salt.

They by their knowledge may preach: but either they preach themselves, and not
Christ; or preaching Christ, Phil. 1. 15. 16.
preach him of contention, and not sincerely, but of strife and envy.

These having knowledge to preach, preach not themselves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord, and themselves servants 2. Cor. 4. 5.
to the people for Christ his sake: they preach Christ, not as the other do of
envy, but of good will.

Their knowledge puffs them up, and makes their 1. Cor. 8. 2.
minds to swell, they being wise in their own eyes, think Job 12. 2.
themselves the only, and that wisdom must needs die with them.

The knowledge of these pulls them down, and makes Prou. 30. 23. Genesis 18.
27. Job 9. 20 30. 31 1. Cor. 8. 2. Job 89. 1. Cor. 3. 18.
men more vile in their own eyes, as they have more knowledge of themselves:
their knowledge teaches them to know, that they know nothing as they ought to
know; and to say with Bildad, We are but of yesterday, and Nihilignotum in
coelo nihil no tum in terra.
know nothing? learning from the Apostle to become fools in their own eyes,
that they may be wise.

Their knowledge is idle knowledge, they know and do not with the Pharisees,
and as evil and naughty servants, Matthew. 23. 3.
knowing their masters will refuse to do it, and therefore Luke 12. 47.
are like to be beaten with many stripes.

The knowledge of these is fruitful, causing them to join with their
knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, 2. Pet. 1. 6. 7. 8.
etc. and so they are neither idle nor unfruitful: it teaches them to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, Tit. 2. 11. 12.
righteously, and godlily in this present world, that they may walk worthy of
the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, as they do
increase in the Coloss. 1. 10.
knowledge of God. And this does the Apostle John make to be the trial of the
knowledge of Christ to be good, and that we may know, we do know him aright,
if we 1. John 2. 3.
keep his commandments.

Their knowledge serves but to make them wiser and learneder, teaching them
how to discourse well, and how to dispute well.

The knowledge of these serves not only to make them learneder, but to make
them better, teaching them how to live well.

Their knowledge is often abused to wrong the truth, Nihil inimicum magis
veritati acumine nimio.
they by learning being as enemies that are armed; many that have had great
learning, and great wits, often proouing great enemies unto goodness.

These can do nothing against the truth at all, but all the 2. Cor. 13. 8.
learning and knowledge they have, is employed and set aworke to defend the
truth: but they have no knowledge to do any thing against the truth.

These and the like are found to be the sundry and diverse uses, whereunto both
the one and the other do make their knowledge to serve, by which it may
evidently enough be discerned how greatly, as in other respects; so in respect
of the use of knowledge, the knowledge of either does differ from the knowledge
of the other. And so to conclude this point, concerning the differing knowledge
in them that are unsound and unsanctified, and in them that shall be saved, by
that which has been said (I think) it may plainly enough appear, that in
Gods matters the greatest Clerks (according to that which is said in the
proverb) are not always found to be the wisest men: neither Nil prosunt lecta
nisi teipsum legas.
will much learning alone be sufficient to bring men to eternal salvation,
unless their learning be good learning, that may make them not only wiser,
but better men, and their knowledge be sanctified and saving, causing them as
to know Christ with his sufferings that he died for their sins, so to know by
their own experience, and feeling in themselves, what is the power of his
resurrection, for the quickening and reviving of them to all righteousness and
holiness of living. If men had all other knowledges, if they had skill in all
Arts and Sciences that could be attained unto; and were so great Doctors, and
deep Divines, as they could discuss the hardest points in Divinity, and
answer all questions, and resolve clearly all doubts that might be moved; if
they were never so cunning disputers, yet if they have not learned to know
Christ, 1. Cor. 1. 20.
as the truth is in Jesus; which is, that all that say they are in him must be
new creatures, that is, be renewed in mind, 2. Cor. 5. 17.
thoughts, purposes, desires, affections, speeches, actions and whole
behavior, and this be so known, as it rest not alone in idle speculation, but
in like manner be brought into action, and known by practice in life and
conversation; for want of the knowledge of this one truth al such knowledges
(be they never so absolute and exact (of all manner of truths that are to be
known beside, which by their earnest studies, their incessant pains of their
days labors, their nights watchings, their unknown trauells all their
lifetime taken, they have now at the length so hardly come by, shall yet
profit them nothing. In so much Isai 29. 14.
as (which were a strange saying, even a marvelous work and a wonder to see
it done, and who will believe the report of it, if it should be spoken), yet I
dare be bold to say, let men be failing but in that one point alone, and
though they were the greatest learned men that were in the whole world beside,
whom all did admire for their most absolute and most excellent skill and
knowledge in all good literature, wherein beside they were seen never so to
excel; yet should they undoubtedly with all their knowledge perish, for the
want of knowledge: the wisdom of such wise men should perish, and the
understanding Hosea 4. 6. Isai. 29. 14. 1. Cor. 1. 14. Verse. 27. 28.
of such prudent men be hid; and the poorest idiot, being a sound Christian,
wanting other knowledges, but knowing this may worthily be said, to go beyond
the profoundest Clerk of them all, that is not sanctified. It were good
therefore, that learned men upon this consideration would do, as it is said
Augustine did, hearing of Anthony the Heremite his holy life, who speaking to
his companion Alipius, cried out to him, saying, Quid hoc est? quid patimur?
Lib. confess. 8. cap. 1.
surgunt indocti and coelum rapiunt and nos cum doctrinis nostris sine cord
ecce vbi volutamur in carne and in sanguine? What means all this? what is it
that we suffer? thus tyrannized over by our lusts, the unlearned getting up,
are before us in getting of heaven, while we with all our learning, as without
heart, lie still groueling and wallowing in flesh and blood. It were good that
they would think of joining with their 2. Pet. 1. 6. 7. 10.
knowledge, virtue, te^perance, patience, brotherly kindness, and the like, as
Peter counsels; that so as they might neither be idle nor unfruitful, so
these things being in the^, and abounding, they may become sure they shall
never fall. Their danger of perishing for want of knowledge, is not for want of
literal, theoricall, and speculatiue knowledge, but for want of lively,
effectual and practical knowledge; their Romans 6. 23. Psalm. 125. 5. Psalm. 9.
17. Heb. 12. 14.
minds are enlightened sufficiently in general to know, that the reward of all
sin is death; that all workers of iniquity must perish, that the wicked shall be
turned into hell, and all the people that forget God; and that without holiness
no man shall see God: but I fear many are ^eceiued in this point (who know
much otherwise) to think that there may be virtutis ni^ium, men may be too
precise, and too strict in their holiness; and in that they dream of a greater
liberty, and make larger grants and licenses to themselves to continue in
their sins, then they can find warrant for out of Gods Word, and yet hope for
all that to come well enough to heaven. And others, when they see them that are
learned so to take liberty, and so to live, they follow after without either
fear or wit (as we use to speak), holding it for a principle, that tutum est
errare authoribus illis: these men (say they) know as much as the best; if they
knew they might not do it, they would not do as they do; if such men err,
we dare at a venture err with them for company. If there be any thing hidden
and kept secret from men in these knowing and understanding times, wherein the
world and age we live in, may be said after a sort to be as full of knowledge,
as the sea is of water; it is in things not so much appertaining to the
information of men's minds, as to the reformation 2. Cor. 4. 4.
of men's manners, the god of the world so blinding the eyes of the most, even
among them that are professors of the faith, that the light of the glorious
Gospel (though it shine clearly enough to make known this whole matter) yet
it should not shine unto them, to let them see how absolutely necessary it is
to the attainement of salvation, for all that names the name of Christ, to
depart from al manner of 2. Tim. 2 19.
iniquity, and so to be changed and throughout sanctified, as not to rest with
Agrippa, in being almost or half persuaded Acts 26. 28. 29.
to leave their sins, and reform their lives, but wholly to be like Paul,
and altogether of his practice, who bestowed labor upon himself, for the
taming of his body, 1. Cor. 9. 27.
and bringing it under, lest by any means when he had preached to others, he
himself should be a castaway. That which was a secret in David's time, or
whosoever else it was that made the Psalm for the Sabbath, is still a secret
to this day unto men of the like fashion, that is, an unwise or brutish Psalm.
92. 6. 7.
man knows not, neither does a fool understand this, that all the workers of
iniquity, even when they flourish most, shall be destroyed for ever; and that
many who know Christ to profess him, and know Christ to preach him, yet shall
not be known of Christ in that day of his appearing, Matthew. 7. 22.
but be sent away with this answer given them, Depart from me I know you not,
and all because they have been workers of iniquity: and then they shall
(though too late) see their own folly in the end, and how much (for all their
good knowledge that in other things they have had), they yet have been deceived
in this; when they shall have cause (too justly) to complain, that destruction
and Romans 3. 16. 17.
unhappiness have been in their ways, and the ways of truth they have not
known. Let men have what knowledge they may, if they fail in obedience to
Gods commandments, there is not a dram of sound wisdom, and saving
knowledge in them at all, as the Lord speaks by his Prophet, How do you say,
we are wise, and the Law of the I^r. 8. 8. 9.
Lord is with us; they have rejected the word of God, and then what wisdom is
there in them? That was good learning Seneca ep. 95.
which a Heathen Philosopher could say, was the learning and wisdom of old
time, which taught nothing more Job 28. 28.
then what was fit to be done, and what to be left undone. Now we are taught
more how to dispute well, how men were much better, though not so learned: now
men, since they are grown more learned, have left of to be so good. Of all
learning it is the best learning, truly to know God, and fear him, the fear
of the Lord being true wisdom, and the departing from evil being the best
understanding: according to that which the Psalmist speaks, that a good
understanding Psalm. 111. 10.
have they that do there-after, and the praise thereof will endure for ever.
If any desire to know, how with all their other knowledges they might come to
know this last, and of all the rest, the best, and most needful point of
knowledge, namely, so to know Christ, as there withal to know also, that all
that are in Christ, and look to be saved by him, of necessity must be new
creatures, and purge themselves as he is pure, let them with prayer and Psalm.
25. 9.
holy meditation, learn in humility the way of living well: in learning it, let
them obey it; and in obeying, they shall still learn it better, as our Savior
himself has promised to them, that will do the will of his Father. And so
much John 7. 17. and 8. 31. 32.
let be said concerning this point of the difference of the knowledges that may
be discerned, and found to be among men.

CHAP. XII.
The second difference, which is in their laying hold of Christ for salvation.



BEside knowledge you have showed, there must be also a laying hold of Christ,
with a persuasion that God will be favorable to us in and through him: and for
as much as in hypocrites, these also may seem to be found as well as the
knowledge of Christ; I pray you show what difference may be put between the
apprehension of Christ for salvation by a true believer, and the persuasion he
has of obtaining salvation by him, and that which can be found in one that is
not current nor sound in his believing.

A. The one lays hold of Christ in imagination and Diverse apprehension of
Christ.
conceit only; and therefore is never the better: the other in truth and
certainty, and so undoubtedly becomes saved thereby.

The apprehension of Christ by an hypocrite in his own imagination, is but as
the holding of an Angel of gold in the hand of one, that is deceived by a
Iuggler, that has his senses prestigiated by the cunning working of the
devil: such a one is made to believe he has that he has not; the Iuggler in
show, and to his seeming, puts an Angel into his hand, bids him shut his hand,
and hold it fast; the man now thinks he has it sure, but when he opens his
hand to take out his piece of gold, he either finds nothing there; or if any
thing at all, nothing better then a slip, a piece of copper, or a counter
that will go for no payment, and so finds himself to be never the better for
it, nor never the richer, but merely cousoned and deluded by a false conceit.

There is a history related (if the matter be not mistaken) of an Apostatate
professor, who coming to the table of the Lord to receive the Sacrament, when
he had received the bread into his hand, it became turned into ashes by and
by. Which (if it were so) did plainly enough show that Christ would feed no
such; but as he had withdrawn his heart from Christ, so Christ could well
enough withdraw himself from him, that he should never apprehend him, and have
no part in him: the devil made such a one believe, and his own false heart
beguiled him as well as did the devil, causing him to think, that if he could
come to the Lords table and partake in the Sacrament, he should receive Christ
well enough: as it is the conceit of the most to this day, who never do go
further; but he found by lamentable experience, that the deceiuer had beguiled
him: for, opening his hand for bread to put into his mouth, there was nothing
but ashes found, and so nothing to eat; he might starve well enough for any
nourishment that was there to be had.

Though all hypocrites in coming to the Sacrament, there to apprehend Christ,
and to receive (as they use to speak) their Maker, have not always such a
visible sign put into their hands of receiving nothing, as had this
back-slider; yet let them look into their hearts, and there they shall find
(if they be well ransacked and searched) as true nothing to be there; no
presence of Christ, of his flesh, and his blood, for their spiritual
nourishment; as that man had no bread remaining but ashes in stead of bread for
him to feed upon: a lie being in their right Isa. 44. 20.
hand through a seduced heart beguiling them, as speaks the Prophet. And so
their case paralelleth the case of that man, whose senses the cousoning Iugler
by Satan's so powerful working had so prestigiated, as he was made to believe
he had a piece of gold put into his hands, but when he looked to take it out,
there he found nothing, but all was gonne. In like manner these, with those of
Laodicea, who were professors as well as the best, and Apoc. 3. 17.
thought they had their part in Christ as plentifully as who had most: that
thought they were rich enough and wanted nothing; when in the mean time they
knew not that they were wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked, wanting
all things; till the matter at length came to be tried, and then it was proved
to be so indeed: so these think they have laid good hold of Christ, and are so
surely possessed of him, as there is no fear at all of their ever perishing
for their being out of him. But when trial shall be made thereof at the day
of judgment, or at the hour of death, when they shall begin to cry, Lord,
Lord, unto Christ, Master, master, now help and save us! he will then stand
aloof off, and make the matter very strange unto them, as though he had never
known them. Then shall it appear that there was never any sound nor true
acquaintance between Christ and them; they never in Christ, because they were
not new creatures: Christ never in them; and therefore they will be found to be
no better then plain reprobates.

Q. But of such professors coming to the Sacrament there to receive Christ,
and to be partakers of him, you cannot say they receive nothing, for they
receive the holy signs and seals of Christ his body and blood, stamped with
the true and vncounterfait impression of Gods own Ordinance and institution,
to make them more reverend in our eyes and estimation: yea they are styled and
named by the institutor and ordainer of himself: not the signs and seals of
his body and blood, but they are called his body and blood, that we Mat. 26.
26. 28.
might know to our comfort, the Lord his plain and full meaning is not to
present only the signs to be received by us, but the thing that is signified,
as well as the signs in like manner to be offered unto us, to become ours?

A. True, and so it proves to be to the worthy receiver, who brings with him
as well a spiritual hand of faith, to receive and lay hold of the thing that
is signified, as a bodily hand of flesh to receive the outward sign thereof,
and brings as well the vessel of his heart purged and made clean for the
flesh and blood of Christ to be put into, for the spiritual nourishing of him
to eternal life, as his mouth is prepared, and readily opened to receive the
bread and wine for the bodily nourishing of this temporary life. And for all
that hypocrites and misbeleeuers in receiving the Sacrament, either receive
nothing, or that which to them is as good as nothing, if it be not worse,
making themselves thereby guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and so
receiving their own damnation, but Christ to salvation I am sure they do not
receive, neither at all apprehend to have him to be theirs. They may receive,
as Judas is said to receive panem domini, but not panem dominum; the bread of
the Lord, but not the bread which is the Lord. The Word and Sacraments by Gods
ordinance are as Christ's vestments and garments wherewith he is covered, unto
which the true believers coming, taking them, and touching them with the hand
of faith, they reach further then to the outward garment and covering, touching
Christ himself, and taking hold of him; and so with the woman in the Gospel,
they draw Mark. 5. 27. 28. 30.
virtue out of him for their healing. But unbelievers that want this true
faith, they can catch hold of nothing but the bare garments, and outward
couerings alone, they coming to seek Christ there, find him no more there
present unto them, then Peter and John found Christ in the sepulcher when they
went to seek him after he was Ioh. 20. 5. 6. 7.
risen; they found indeed the linen clothes in which he was wrapped, but him
they found not, for he was risen and gone from thence. They find in the
Sacraments the outward elements of Christ's outward vestments and garments he
uses to be clothed withal; but him they shall be sure never to find coming
in that fashion to seek him; no, though they should go after him with their
bullockes, goats and offerings, so seeking his acquaintance Hos. 5. 6.
, and to get a countenance at his hands, the Lord so justly requiting them,
that as they like hypocrites draw near to them with their lips only, their
hearts in the mean time being removed far from him: Isa. 29. 13.
so he will be seen to take no pleasure in them, not to be found of them, when
they do seek him, or to show at all any countenance unto them: according to
that, If any man withdraw himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in Heb. 10.
38.
him.

Indeed I cannot deny they have received the Lords holy Sacraments, of God his
own institution, and that they are not a little proud on; they think they are
well enough for that day, and it may be for that year, till that day
twelue-moneth come again: they think, having admittance from the Minister,
and gotten the Sacrament once into their hands; they have wealth enough, and
are rich enough to defray all charges, and to pay all debts, that either God
their Creditor, or the devil their accuser can burden them withal; for
Christ (they make reckoning) shall now answer for all; they make no doubt they
have received him when they received the Sacrament, and so having had him, they
still hold him fast. Indeed if this were so, that opening their hands of faith,
they might see him there held fast, and opening the door of their hearts, they
could find him truly present, and there dwelling in their hearts by that faith,
then were they rich indeed, both to pay all that were owing, and to live of
that which remained beside. But in stead of this Angel of gold, that which
they have, proves to be no better then a very slip or counter, which they
took in stead of good gold or silver, which will go for no payment, that will
buy them no bread, nor pay any penny debt; they may starve for hunger for any
thing that with that they can buy at Gods hands: they may be cast into prison,
and there lie till they rot, for any shortening of their debt they owe unto God
with making such payment: for these to plead before God, the receiving of his
Sacraments, will be so far from clearing of the debtbooke, as it will run
them further into arerages with him, and bring them deeper into his danger:
nothing is for them to be hoped for, that this way can be gotten.

But now on the other side, a true Christian that is sound in the faith, does
by his faith so truly apprehend Christ, that he has real and true union and
communion 1. Cor. 6. 17.
with him to become one with him, and is so nearly and inseparably joined unto
him, so ingrafted by faith, and thereby so incorporated into him, as he is in
Christ, and Ioh. 14. 20. Romans 8. 1. 10.
Christ in him. The meat that ^^ feed upon is not more truly made one with our
substance, after once we have eaten John 6. 56.
it, and God has blessed it for our nourishing. The plant that is well grafted
and set into a stock, becomes John 15. 5.
not more one with the stock, after once it has flourished and grown up with
the tree. The husband and the wife Ephesians. 5. 30. 31.
of two are not more truly become one flesh, after marriage be consummate. The
body and the head are not more Ephesians. 1. 22. 23.
nearly united and conjoined together in a man that is living, then is Christ
with a true Christian, after that by faith he has once laid hold on him. Yea,
so is a true Christian really and undoubtedly possessed of Christ by his
steadfast believing, as that he has him dwelling in his Ephesians. 3. 17.
heart by faith, and that in so lively a sort, and after so effectual a manner
of working in him, as that thencefoorth, not so much the Christian does live,
as Christ himself Gal. 2 20.
does live in him, and the life which a true believer does afterward live in
the flesh, he does live by the faith of the Son of God, from whom as from his
head he draws and deriueth by his faith such influence of grace, as does
strengthen and sustain him in his spiritual life.

Their conceits of apprehending Christ and of eating his flesh and his blood in
the Sacrament, to be nourished thereby to life eternal, is but as when a
hungry man dreameth and behold he eats, but when he awaketh, his Isai. 29 8.
soul is still empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth and behold he
drink^th, but when he awaketh behold he is faint, and his soul has still
appetite, and he is yet a thirst. So these men they are but in a dream when
they have such contentment, and seem to have such satisfying in their manner
of having Christ, which is but in fantasy and conceit alone: for when they
shall awake out of their dream in the morning of the resurrection, they shall
not find according to that David reckoned Psalm. 17. 5.
upon, that when he should awake up, he should be satisfied with Gods image:
and find fullness of joy in Gods presence, Psalm. 16. 11.
and pleasures at his right hand for evermore: But rather as vagrant and needy
rogues that have nothing and can get no entertainment, and as hungry dogs
run about Psalm. 59. 14. 15.
the streets snarling and grinning, and grudging because they are not
satisfied: and as it is said in Isaiah, They shall then be hungry and
thirsty, ashamed and confounded, crying Isai. 65. 13. 14. and 8. 21. 22.
out for sorrow of heart, and howling for vexation of spirit, leaving their
name for a curse to Gods chosen in the day that the Lord shall slay them.

Contrarily, sound-hearted Christians and true believers indeed, whose souls
with David do thirst for God, even for the living God: who hunger and thirst
after righteousness, Psalm. 42. 1. 2. Matthew. 5. 6.
and the salvation that is to be had in Christ Jesus: wheresoever that dead
carkase may be light upon of Christ crucified, of his flesh and blood broken
and powered out and prepared for their spiritual nourishment; whether in the
word preached or Sacraments administered, thither as the Eagles of heaven do
they swiftly fly Matthew. 24. 28.
and resort, that prey do they light upon, there do they seize and lay hold
upon Christ, even upon him crucified, seeking their repast in him; there do
they feed upon him with fresh appetite, and take their fill of such dainties,
as in him they find to be prepared for them. Neither do they this in a
fantasy alone, and mere imagination, as do those that dream, but with as
joyful a feeling and as great a rejoicing, as those that are made most merry
at a banquet of wine: for there find they a most sumptuous banquet and
princely feast prepared for them upon the Lords mountain, even a feast of fat
things and of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on
Isai. 25. 6.
the lees well refined. The Lord his table being furnished as the royal table
of a King at the marriage of his Son, Matthew. 22. 2.
with the sweet bread of the finest of the wheat, even the bread and manne of
God that came down from heaven, John 6. 58.
and with wine of the grape of a most noble kind: that is, with the precious
body and blood of our Savior Christ Jesus. There are they so abundantly
satisfied with the fatnes of Gods house, and the Lord does make them Psalm. 36.
8. Psalm. 65. 13. 14.
so to drink their fill out of the rivers of his pleasures there, that they
cannot but be merry and much rejoice, yea sing for very joy of heart. And the
effect of their true feeding upon this spiritual nourishment, and of the
comfortable refreshing they feel themselves to be cheared withal, after they
have sucked and been satisfied with such honey combs of all Gods mercies, as
they have found and plucked out of the carkase of that dead Lion of the tribe
of Judah, does as manifestly appear in the carriage of their lives following
(which is sufficient to show they have fed in deed, and not in fantasy),
while their spirits are found to be revived in them, they waxing lusty and
strong thereby, fat and well liking, and fresh in doing duty, and in bearing
out their labor as strong men in Christ Jesus, and the eyes of their
understanding so cleared and made lightsome to see their way, and to understand
Gods will* that they may know how to walk and please him: as ever the effect
of Samsons drinking of waters after his great thirst, and of Ionathans tasting
of honey after his great weariness, was seen and perceived in the refreshing
of either of them thereby. Of Samson it is said that his spirit came again,
and he revived after his great thirst, when once he had drunk of that water
which the Lord caused to flow out of the hollow place of the iaw, Judge. 15. 19.
with which he slew so many of the Philistims. And of Jonathan it is said, that
when he and all the people were faint with much fasting, his eyes were cleared
and enlightened after he had once dipped the end of the rod that was in his
hand in an honey comb, and putting it 1. Sam. 14. 27.
to his mouth had tasted of the same.

Though a temporary believer may be said to apprehend and lay hold upon after
a sort, of the promises of salvation, and upon the merits of Christ for
salvation: yet there is guile also in this, for both it is upon wrong grounds,
misapplying the promises and after a wrong manner, more laying hold upon the
merits of Christ, then upon Christ himself, and therefore laying hold upon the
streams and missing the fountain; whatsoever their comfort may be for a time,
yet their hearts at length are as the dry cisternes that want water, because
they are cut off from the fountain: and so their candle and the light of all
their comfort is quite extinct and put out again.

True believers lay hold of Christ himself who is their life; they apprehend
him for their Savior, and they find salvation in him: God having given us
life, that life is in 1 Ioh 5. 11. 1. Ioh. 5. 12.
his Son; they that have the Son, have life: the true believer has Christ
dwelling in his heart by faith; they have the fountain of life and comfort in
themselves: and as John says, they have the witness in themselves: their
comfort 1. Ioh 5. 10. Ioh. 7. 38.
therefore is sure, and it is lasting, rivers of water of life slow out of
their bellies, they never are dry.

As the manner of their apprehending is faulty, so the ends which they aim at
in apprehending of Christ are not right. They seek to have Christ and to have
his acquaintance, and to be known to be toward him, that they might be
honored among men, and the better thought on for the professing of him, as
Saul desired Samuels 1. Sam. 15. 30.
company and presence, that thereby he might the more be honored before the
people. The most they seek in s^eking to him is but themselves: they wish with
Baalam to die the death of the righteous: salvation they would have from him,
and that they catch at, but Christ himself they do not so much seize upon,
nor care so much to have that either he should be in them by the power of his
death, crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof; or they be
in him to become new creatures in him. Their dealing herein is like to the
dealing of thieves and malefactors, who look for no other benefit by a
Parliament, but to hear of a pardon, never desiring to hear of any good laws
to govern better their lives: they that mind to live by theeuerie carry such
a mind.

The true believers desire and seek to have Christ, not alone in respect of
their own salvation, but for the surpassing excellency that is seen to be in
himself: they know him to be the chief of the choice of men; yea to be the
chiefest of ten thousand, and in himself to be every way wholly delectable;
and therefore their hearts are so affectionated toward him, as that he, and he
alone is their only well-beloved; his name is as sweet ointment powered out, and
therefore with the virgins they do love him, and with the Spouse they run
after him, seeking for him in every corner, because it is he whom their soul
loves and delights in: yea with the Spouse they do grow sick of love,
until they may enjoy him. In seeking Cantic. 5. 8.
him they seek not their own honor, but that they might honor him, and are
willing to be subject to him as to be saved by him; and therefore renouncing
all others they betake themselves only unto him, and say (as it is in the
Prophet) O Lord, other Lords beside thee have had Isai. 26. 13.
dominion over us, but we will make mention of thee and of thy name only.

They laying hold of Christ, lay hold of him that lays no hold of them; they
cry Master, Master unto him, seeking and scraping acquaintance of him that
renounceth them, and wholly does disclaim them; bidding them depart from him,
for he does not know them: they lay hold of Christ as Saul did of Samuel, that
took no delight 1. Sam. 15. 26. 27. ^8.
in him, but turned away from him, as having no heart to abide longer with him;
he was therefore feign to offer violence to Samuel, and to rend his garment,
though he got no more by it but to hear, God had rent away his kingdom from
him: these rend and tear the Scriptures by mis-applying of them, and all to
pull Christ to them, who cares not for them; who shall get no more by that
reading, then Saul did by his; for their names shall therefore be rent out of
the book of life, because they have wronged and abused Gods book, and pulled
and rent the Scriptures to a clean contrary end and purpose then was meant, or
they ever were written for.

These apprehend Christ, because he first did apprehend them, and knew them
for his own, as a good shepherd knows his flock, so the Lord knows who
are Ioh 10. 14. 2. Tim. 2. 19.
his, and he gives then again to know that he is theirs, and so to make
claim unto him: according to the stipulation of the new Covenant between
Christ and the redeemed; he says to them, you are my people; and they Hos. 223.
saying to him, thou art our Lord; thou art our Christ, thou art our Redeemer.
It is well observed by a godly Perkins in Gal. 4. 9.
man and learned Divine of our time, that the works of grace and favor in
God, imprint their image in the hearts of them that belong to God in whom they
are wrought. There is a knowledge in God whereby he knows who are his: this
knowledge brings forth another knowledge in us, whereby we know God to be our
God. There is an election in God, whereby he chooses the Elect to be his
people; which works in them another election, whereby they choose God to be
their God. The love whereby God loves us, works in us another love whereby we
love God again. Christ apprehends 1. Ioh. 4. 19. Phil. 3. 12.
us to be his redeemed, that works in us the apprehension of faith whereby we
lay hold upon him to be our reredeemer: and by this (says he) we may know that
we belong to God, if we find any such impression of Gods grace in us. These
then know Christ to be their Savior, because he first knew them to be his own
whom he would redeem; they are his, and he calls them by name, and cheareth
them at the heart, by saying unto them, as it is in the Prophet, Fear not, I
have redeemed thee, thou art Isa. 43. 1.
mine. They lay hold of him, because he lays hold of them, holding them by
his right hand, and holding also Isa. 41. 10. 13. Psalm. 73 23. 1. Sam. 15. 26.
27. 28. Luke 19. 5. 9.
their right hand, that he may ever help them. They do not lay hold of him as
Saul did upon Samuel, that turned away from him and would have been gone: but
as Zacheus did welcome Christ unto his house, who first bespake his own
entertainment, and was desirous to come to his house, and brought salvation
with him when he came.

They laying hold of Christ, lay hold of him who does not at all belong to
them, not was ever given them, or appointed for them, no more then childrens
bread belong Mat. 15. 26.
to dogs, though they stick not to snatch it from them: for though Christ
died for the sins of the world, yet intentionally he did never lay down his
life for hypocrites and unbelievers, who shall die and perish for all him
(though he has done enough to save them) only by means of their own
unbelief, because they do not truly and rightly believe in his name: and
therefore their Ioh. 3. 18.
chalenging of Christ to be their Savior, and claim that they make to the
benefit of his redemption, is no more just, then was the claim that the harlot
made, who was not the own mother to the live child that was none of 1. King.
3. 22.
hers.

These lay hold of him, and by faith do apprehend him, as having of all others
the greatest interest in him, and all lawful right to claim him for their
own, as who was prepared, set apart, and appointed for them before the world
had any beginning; and in the fullness of time Galath. 4. 4. Luke 2. 11.
was sent to be borne of a woman, and to be borne a Savior unto them; and
therefore they may justly say, and joyfully proclaim it before Angels and men,
as Isaiah sets it down, that unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is
Isa. 9. 6. Ioh. 3. 16. Gal. 2. 20. Ephesians. 5. 25.
given, even given by a double donation; one from the the Father, another from
himself: which gift has been published by proclamation throughout all the
world; established in blood, sealed in Sacraments, and the performance thereof
witnessed unfeignedly, both by Angels and men. Now what is more free then gift?
and who is more faithful then God, and Christ, who are the giuers, to see the
grant and gift performed. Every good Christian therefore and true believer have
a free deed of gift to show out of the Court-rolles of the Scriptures, whereby
to prove the title and claim they make to Christ for being theirs* to be most
lawful and just; and therefore they may challenge and claim him by as good
right to be their own, as may the bride challenge the bridegroom to be hers
after he has given himself to her; and she on the other side given her self
unto him, by mutual promises, and by faith and truth to each other plighted,
in which those promises are given and received, and that before sufficient
witnesses, that are able to witness and testify the same: and so may sing
joyfully with the Spouse in the Canticles, without fear of controlment by any,
my beloved is mine, and I am his, and his desire is unto Cant. 2. 16. and 7. 10.
me.

They, as temporary believers and time-seruers, do Mat. 13. 21.
lay hold of Christ, and let him go again, as Apostatates, and back-sliders
revolt from him and fall away, so making Ioh. 2. 19.
themselves liable to that danger which our Savior Christ threatens will
befall to such as abide not in him, Ioh. 15. 6.
which is the true vine, which is that as withered branches they shall be cast
into the fire and burned, and culpable of Heb. 10. 26. 27. 29. and 6. 4. 5. 6.
^ Cant. 3. 4.
such a sin as will never be forgiven.

These lay such fast hold of him with the Spouse, as having once found him, and
gotten to lay hold upon him, they never more will let him go, not giving him
over till they have brought him home, and carried him into the inmost rooms
and chiefest chambers of their hearts, that they may have him dwelling in their
hearts by faith: that they so enjoying his presence there, and happy fruition
Mat. 28 20. Ioh. 14. 18.
(according as our Savior himself has promised to be ever with his to the
end of the world, and never to leave them Orphans) may have the sweet lasting
comfort thereof, and solace themselves therein with infinite and unspeakable
contentment. If there should be question made to them, as our Savior made to
Peter and the rest, whether they also with others would go away? their answer
Ioh. 6. 67. 68. 69.
unto him will be as Peter's was, Lord to whom should we go, thou have the
words of eternallife, and we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ,
the Son of the living God: for whom has a faithful believer in heaven but
Christ? neither is there any in earth whom he cares for, Psalm. 73. 25.
or does desire but him alone.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the third difference, which is in the difference of their assurance to be
saved: wherein is entreated of, the want of feeling of true faith, or of the
former or present comfort thereof.



YOu having showed thus much difference to be between the apprehension of
Christ by a counterfeit believer, and of one that is sound in the faith; go on
in like manner to show what difference there is (if there be any) between the
assurance and persuasion, that the one has of being saved by Christ, upon his
so apprehending of him; and the assurance of the other?

A. The difference between them in this, is no less Difference of assurance.
then was found to be in the other. The difference between mis-beleeuers, and
the true faithful that are called the Israel of God, in the point of their
assurance, and comfortable persuasion of their being saved by Christ Jesus
(they both bearing the venture of the lives of their souls, in the passage
that they have through the wild sea of this world, in hope of their safe
arrival and landing at that happy port of all safety in Gods kingdom and
heavenly Canaan in the end), is not unlike to the difference that was between
the Israelites and Egyptians for their passing thorongh the red sea; both of
them ventured and went into the sea; the one got well thorough, the other came
short home; the one had Gods word for their warrant, they therefore were saved,
and gained the port and land which they ventured for; the other were blinded
with pride and presumption, and ventured without all warrant from God, as being
found rather fighters against God in disobeying his word: and therefore they
miscarried all, and were drowned in the midst of the sea, and sunk to the
bottom as a stone.

True believers are persuaded of Gods mercies in Christ, that they shall never
perish, but have everlasting life; their faith and hope they have in God does
never fail them, for it is grounded upon the truth of Gods promise, and the
rock Christ Jesus. They escape therefore in all dangers, and happily are saved
in the end; for the just shall live by his faith. Heb. 2. 4.


Misbeleeuers and hypocrites they also are bold and confident in their
persuasion; it may more justly be said, in their proud presuming; for they are
but as the fools, that believe every thing: they believe they cannot Prou. 14.
15.
tell what, they having nothing to ground their persuasion upon; they have
neither word nor writing from God, to show why they should so believe: their is
neither bill nor scroll, nor any tittle in the Bible, if it be rightly
understood, that does make for them, and yet they flush themselves as though
all were theirs; they flatter themselves, and beguile their own hearts with
misapplying promises out of Gods word. They are ignorant, and yet most
confident: according to that, Who so bold as blind Bayard: they fear nothing,
they defy the devil; they have (they say) a strong faith, and are sure to be
saved: they never doubted of their salvation in all their life, neither would
they doubt for all the world. Which boldness of theirs, being rather
blindness, then good boldness, comes not through the abundance of faith
believing more strongly then others do, the promises which God has made them,
but through abundance of folly, making promises to themselves, where God never
made any; and reckoning to receive that, which God never minded to give; so
building without a foundation, and believing without any word spoken or promise
that was ever given; the Lord sending them strong delusions, that they should
believe a lie, and so go on in their dangerous security, that they may stumble
and fall, and rise no more.

They both seem to be assured, and to stand persuaded, that they shall be
saved by God in the end, but upon far differing grounds. The ground of the
ones persuasion is found only to be in himself, and to be laid upon himself
alone, and his own conceit, and may be rather said to be the assurance of man
so persuading himself, then any certainty of the thing, whereof he is
persuaded that ever it shall so fall out, as he does make reckoning. The ground
of the others persuasion is laid out of himself, even upon God and the truth
of his promise, as knowing 2. Tim. 1. 12.
whom he has believed, and may rather be said to stand more in the certainty
and infallibility of the thing promised, then in the strength of the man's
assured believing and standing persuaded that it shall be so performed that
does believe it.

The ground of the persuasion of an hypocrite, and such as is unsound in the
faith, is laid only within himself, for out of himself he finds nothing to
bear up such a confident boasting withal, but it is only resting in his own
bosom, and all the weight of his building has no surer ground to be set upon,
then are the imaginations, thoughts, and conceits of his own heart alone;
which is deceitful above all things, and so false and unsound, as none is able
to know the hollownesse that is therein. And therefore a ground (for any to
think it possible ever to lay a steady, and sure foundation therein, or set a
strong building upon the same, which he desires to see remain firm, and
immovable for himself to dwell safe in), that is more moveable, then is
either sea or wind, where all is seen to flow and blow away; as well may a man
reckon upon building Castles in the air, and walled Cities upon the rolling
and ragged seaes, safely to inhabit in, as sure persuasions that a man may
trust too, and not be deceived in, and upon the vain imaginations, conceits
and affections of his seducing and seduced heart; which are so unstaid, and so
unsettled, that the affections are not unfitly said to be the very waves and
storms of men's souls, that toss and turmoile them vpside down. And
otherwise beside their own conceits and imaginations of their own hearts,
that makes them thus peremptory, and thus bold in presuming, there is nothing
at all in the world, that can else warrantably assure them, that they shall
ever have that salvation, which they so much do reckon up. For that in it
self is so far from being certain unto them, as there is a certainty of
the clean contrary; and they may be sure, when they shall once come to make
trial, they shall find it clean otherwise to fall out, then they looked for;
they may be bold and build upon it, there is no peace at all from God for such
Isai. 57. 21.
ever to receive in, nor salvation at his hands for them to have; though at the
last, when it shall be too late, they should as earnestly crave it, and seek
for it by their crying unto him, as ever did Esau seek his fathers blessing,
when he came too late, and then he could find no place of repentance with him,
though he sought it with tears: for the Heb. 12. 17.
Lord has assigned another manner of estate and condition to hypocrites and
unbelievers, and declared in his word so great a condemnation to abide them in
the pit of destruction, as he thinks it threatening great enough unto other
kind of sinners to tell them, they shall have their Mat. 24. 51.
portion with unbelievers, and with hypocrites. For them then to persuade
themselves they shall be saved, contrary to all that which the Lord does
otherwise plainly set down in his word; and when they hear the words of his
so great a curse, to promise to themselves for all that, that they shall have
peace; it is not only to delude their own Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 20
hearts with lying and false conceits, but to set God the more against them,
that he may never be merciful unto them, but cause his wrath more fiercely,
and more furiously to smoke out against them. This is not the boldness of
good assurance, and of a warrantable persuasion, that has Gods word to rely
upon; but the blindness of a most damnable pride, and presuming against all
that God himself has spoken, when (as though they had made Isai. 28. 15.
a covenant with death, and were at an agreement with hell, that they should
never take any hold of them) they do not only promise to themselves safety
and deliverance from perishing, but high advancement in glory, and life
eternal in Gods kingdom: as if when the King has proclaimed them al to be
traitors, that were conspirators in the late Gun powder treason, and that so
many as can be proved to have been of that conspiracy, are as traitors to be
hanged, drawn and quartered; if some principal traitor of them all, having to
this day escaped, should now be apprehended and attached for his treason, and
being to be carried up to the Court, that it might be known what should be
done with him; he all this while should bear himself as bold, as the best
subject in the kingdom, in such sort, as none can make him believe, there is
any danger toward him; but he still promises to himself, that coming once
at the Court, he shall not only escape punishment, and be freed from all
manner of blame and rebuke, but be lifted up to much higher advancement, and
made some great Duke or Lord in the and: every one would think, that some
spirit of frenzy or madness had strongly possessed such a man. So are these
men strangely bewitched, and inchaunted by the devil, to take for sure truths
those things, which are but Satan's mere delusions; and when the best is made
of them, no better then are waking men's dreams.

The foundation whereupon a true believing Christian does build his assurance
and persuasion that he has, of being saved in the end, is that which the
Apostle calls, the foundation of God; and therefore a most strong and 2. Tim.
2. 19.
sure foundation, having this seal, the Lord knows who are his; the
knowledge of God being perpetual and unchangeable: for whom the Lord knows
once, he never after Isai. 49. 15.
does forget. and this is the most firm, steady, and immovable foundation,
that any possibly can build upon; Zach. 6. 1.
strong as those mountains of brass, which Zachary makes mention of, to
bear up all that is set upon the same, which makes it impossible, that a true
believer should ever perish. It is not the strength of his faith (though he do
truly believe, as looking thereby always to hold the comfort which he now
has) that works up this assurance; but the faithfulness of him, whom this
faith does rely upon; which is such, as though we cannot believe, 2. Tim. 2.
13. Tit. 1. 2.
yet he abides faithful, and cannot deny himself, for he is God that
cannot lie. The comfortable and confident persuasion of a true believing
Christian, for his obtaining of salvation through Christ Jesus, stands more
in that he knows who^ he does believe to receive salvation from (as that
which he has purchased, and that which he has promised, and which he is both
able and faithful to perform), then in knowing that he does believe, and what
he looks for to receive by his believing, which is to be saved by his faith.
His assurance is more in the assurance of the thing believed, through the
steadfastnes of him that has promised the same, then in his own steadfastnes,
that he always shall so believe, or in the steadfastnes of his faith by which
he does believe, that it never more shall be overtaken with any fear or
doubting. For our faith may Psalm. 118. 13.
be dangerously assailed, and thrust soar at, that it might fall: it may be
shaken, but Gods promise is vnfaileable, and the truth of his Word, as a rock
that cannot be moved nor shaken, whatsoever be the surges that beat against
the same. His assurance is more, in that he knows Phil. 3. 12.
Christ comprehends him, who will never let go his hold, because he is
stronger then all, that none can pull any out Ioh. 10 28. 29. Ioh. 6. 39.
of his hand; and because he is most faithful to answer that trust he is put
in by his father, whose will it is, that of all that he has given him, he must
not loose one: then in the knowledge that he has, that he does apprehend
Christ, and does lay hold upon him by his believing; for he may let go his
hold, and let slip that hand-fasting which he holds him by; at least in regard
of his own feeling, it may be gone: for feeling may fail a true believer,
and then there is no other help, but for hope to hold fast, and still to stand
persuaded, that though we cannot apprehend him, yet he does still comprehend
us; who as he was yesterday, Heb. 13. 8. Mal. 3. 6. Ioh. 13. 1.
is even so to day, and will be the same for evermore; for he is the Lord, and
changes not: therefore was it that the sons of Jacob were not consumed; and
therefore it is, that who^ he once has loved, to the end he will love them
still: this we are to remember, and to fetch comfort from the same; yea, to hope
also, yt howsoever our feeling may be forth present, yet our selves shall find
it to be otherwise afterward again.

Q. You are light upon a point that many good Christians are much troubled
about, who for want of feeling the comfort they have had, fear they are quite
given over, and for saken of God. I pray you therefore let me be bold to
interrupt your other speech a little, and to crave of you, that you would
speak your mind somewhat in this matter, what you would think were fittest to
be done by such, or to be conceived of the estate of such a Christian that
cannot have such feeling of his faith, and standing in the favor of God after
the manner as before sometime he has had?

A. Such are to labor by judgment, to convince and control their abused
sense and feeling, who sometimes Want of feeling.
to their own sense and feeling, may think God to have forsaken them; Christ
Jesus to have quite left them, and to be departed and gone from them; when as
yet he is still where he was, and as touching his favor and his love,
unalterable, remaining still the same toward them that he was; the alteration
being found only to be in themselves, by reason of the strong tentations that
are upon them. Men are therefore not to measure their estate by sense and
feeling: for many times in natural things, reason is able to control our
sense, as if I being in a ship that is driven with a fair wind and tide, do
sail by a Tower or Castle standing upon a bank, when I look upon the Tower,
as the ship does swiftly pass by, my sense of seeing thinks that the Tower
goes away, while I my self stand still in the ship: but my judgment and
understanding tells me, that it is otherwise in truth, and that the Tower
stands still and moves not, but it is I and the ship that do go away from
it, though to my sense of seeing it seems otherwise to be. In like manner as
touching, feeling, a man that has but raging pain in one tooth, or has but a
fellon on the uttermost joint of his finger, or the pain of the gout only in
his toe; though all his body should be sound and in good health besides, he
feels more the pain of that one little member of his tooth, or of his toe,
then the sound health of his whole body beside, though the health of the whole
body be much more, then is the pain of that one member. In like manner does it
many times fall out with good Christians, if they be endued and enriched with
never so many good graces of Gods Spirit, having true faith, and joined
therewith virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly
kindness, charity, hope, humility meekness, repentance, and the rest that
are linkes of that golden chain, wherewith the virtues are chained and linked
one to another, if it should happen not to be well with them in any one of the
said graces (according as these several graces of the mind, as well as the
several members of the body, may be put out of their right frame, and have
distemper and disease bred in them, and brought upon them), though in the mean
while it were never so well with them in all the rest, yet is it found usual
for them more to feel the disquiet of the distemper, and hurt of some one of
these graces so out of frame, then to feel the content and comfort of the
abiding in good estate of all the rest beside; and to be more grieved with the
disease that is grown upon that one, then ioyed with the health that does still
remain in all the other. As if a good man being sore provoked and set upon of
the sudden, should be so much distempered, and put out of all patience, as he
should break forth to much fury and rage in his hasty anger (which is no
better then a short madness), and being come to his right mind again, his fit
being once over (for all that while beside himself), he should then bethink
himself what he had done: so would he be out of conceit with himself, he
would be so cast down in his own eyes, so smitten in heart, so pricked in
conscience, so wounded in his soul with grief for his sin, he would cry
out and complain for being thus ouerseene, as that the distemper of that one
grace of patience, and the weakness thereof, which could then bear no more,
would more be felt of him with grief, and work him greater woe, and disquiet
him much more, then he should feel comfort, or have contentment in the good
estate which all the rest did abide in beside, and yet that one slip of his for
a time is not so blameworthie, as is commendable the ordinary course of
goodness, constantly held on in the well-vsing and practicing of other his
graces: wherein much soundness is found still to be remaining.

And as among the members and parts of the body, some are more necessary then
are others, and so more hardly can be spared; some are more dangerous to take
hurt in, or for any disease to breed upon them, because they are the vital
parts of the body, such as is the heart, the liver and the brain, which if
they should be perished, the life it self would be lost: when such parts are
affected, men are found to be more troubled about the hearts of such, and the
diseases bred upon them, then upon any other there the parts of their bodies
besides, they are most suspicious and doubtful of the recovering of them
above, that they are of all the rest, ever fearing lest those hurts should not
be well healed, or those diseases soundly cured and recpiered again. As if one
should have among other the outward parts and members of his body, his right
hand so maimed, as it should be in danger to be quite cut off, and so lost;
and of all the inward parts should have a disease breeding in him, that should
dangerously affect the heart, which being a most vital part, even the very
fountain and seat of life, that does send forth the vital spirits, and life
it self to the other parts, if that should be perished, then the very life it
self would vetterly be lost.

Much after this manner is it found to be with good Christians, in respect of
the differing graces of Gods Spirit, which they have received from God, though
all very useful for the Christian life, yet some are more absolutely
needful, as being unto the soul, not only the hand by which it works: but
as the heart which is the very receptacle and seat of life, by which it
lives, which if they should miscarry, all would be lost, such as is faith, and
love and repentance unto life. If these should receive any dangerous hurt, or
fall into any deadly disease, whereof they should not be again well recovered,
there must needs follow the utter ruin of such a Christian. When therefore
their faith is mightily assailed, and by the strength of tentation sorely
shaken: when their repentance is challenged not to be sound, and such as it
ought; Oh, then how solicitous is a careful Christian, about the having of
these well cured and recovered again? how fearful and doubtful is he, lest
these should fail him, and never be helped? how does he enquire after the
best Physicians, to hear the best counsel that in this case may be given?
yea, if a whole College of Physicians should all meet together to confer
about his disease, they all would scarce be able to give him satisfying that
his disease were curable, and might well be helped; he would doubt, that all
the Balm in the Lords Gilead would not suffice to make for him a remedy, that
should be soueraigue and saving enough; nor that all they together, should
have sufficient skill how to apply it, so as he might have good recovery
thereby. Yea, if it once grow ill with them in their faith and repentance, and
that these graces are smitten at, strooken, and wounded by some soar and
dangerous tentation, then in stead of complaining of the weakness and hurt of
their faith and repentance, they fall to entertain a conceit into their
minds, which troubles them worse then did all the rest; namely, that they
have no faith at all, that they have no true repentance, nor ever yet had. But
I would demand, if they had not some remainder of the life of these graces of
faith and repentance, by which they feel the wounds and hurts, that these
affected members and parts of the inner man have received? how come they to
make complaint in particular, about their faith and repentance, that it is not
well with them? Can a man that has his legs cut off, so having no legs, be
affected with the aching, or painful dolor of the wounds and hurts which are
in his legs? he may complain of pains in other parts, but griefs in his
legs he can neither feel nor complain of, for he has none at all to be
pained in. But if a man having indeed a leg that is now hurt and wounded, then
were it mere solly and madness for him to complain and say, that he has no
leg, because his leg is so maimed and hurt, for that proves that he has a
leg, in that he complains, all his pain is in his leg, and complains not of
his arm, nor of his head, which both may be well for all that.

Q. True: but may not a man complain he has no legs at all, if his legs
indeed be once cut off?

A. But I demand again: Can a man in like manner Of feeling.
complain that he has no heart at all, if his heart be plucked out? We know
that then he is but a dead man: for the heart is the most vital part of the
body, and the very seat of life, which being principally in it, the life it
self by it is communicated to all the rest: destroy therefore and pluck out
the heart, and then tell me what life will be remaining in that body for it to
complain it has no heart? Faith is as vital a part for the life of the
soul, as the heart is for the life of the body: for it is the only organe and
receptacle of all the life of the soul, that it receives from Christ the
only fountain of true life, and by it that spiritual life which is received
from Christ is communicated to every power and part of the soul beside. It is
the very soul of our soul: for we live by faith, we walk and work by it,
and not by sight: the life of faith is that which does animate all other
virtues beside that are in us. Pluck this faith away and destroy faith which
is the life of the soul, and then what life will there be remaining in that
soul, for a man to feel by it that he has no faith? or to complain of the
weakness and wants of his faith? for then he should be as a dead man that
should have no feeling in him; as unbelievers and wicked persons are said to be
dead, even while they live; 1. Tim. 5. 6. Jude 12.
yea twice dead and plucked up by the roots, and are past feeling, as the
Apostle speaks. Nay, the complaining by weak Christians about their faith
for the weakness thereof, or for the want of their faith, argues the presence
and being in life of their faith, by which they have such feeling and make such
complaining; as one complaining that he feels pain at his heart, that does
argue that he has a heart, and that his heart is in life which makes him so
to complain.

These are not unlike unto that melancholic person, Treatise of Me lacholy*
pa. 215
who being over borne and ouerset with that dangerous humor of melancholy,
complained he had no head, nor could not possibly be otherwise persuaded, then
by that course which that prudent Physician Phylotimus did take with him when
he caused to be made a cap of lead very weighty and heavy, and the same to be
put upon his head, that feeling the weight thereof upon his head, he might be
brought to conceive otherwise, and be persuaded that he had a head. And as
they are not much unlike that melancholic for kind of disease, who was
deluded with melancholy conceits, to think that he wanted that which indeed
he had; so do I think the like kind of remedy in this case not unfit to be
used for their cure, which was used for his. I would therefore lay upon these
weak Christians no other burden, but the weight of their own burden, of
holy sorrow and grief and doubtful despair for their wanting of faith (as
themselves do deem), which is so weighty, as they are like to sink under
it, and wholly to be broken down with the load thereof, yet that being laid
upon the head of their faith, they may be asked whether they feel any such
burden, and are pressed under the heavy weight of the same? which if they do,
let them never make doubt more but that they have faith, and their faith has
both head and heart too, that has life in it, which moves that sense, and
causes that feeling, and works that holy grief and sorrow so to complain,
the whole soul being quickened thereby throughout, and all the graces of Gods
spirit that are therein. There is no life of spiritual graces otherwise to be
had, then as the same be derived from Christ, who is our life and the fountain
thereof: there is no passage for this life to flow into our souls, but as by
faith the same be let in, which only is the instrument of the union that is
between Christ and us, and the proper hand to receive all grace from him: the
very receptacle, and (as I may say) the cisterne to hold the grace it has
received from him as out of the fountain, and so to distribute it to all the
rest of the graces that are in that soul wherein it is seated.

If therefore there be any lively feeling of our want of faith and mourning for
our want; if we complain of the want of faith, feeling it to be a burden unto
us that is too heavy for us to bear: if we sigh and groan under that
burden, with earnest longings and daily prayers to be eased, and with such
desires of obtaining that which we want, as willingly we neglect no means that
we can know, is to be used for our better coming by it: doubtless there is
the presence of holy grace (for such a true desire of grace in the want of
grace is grace it self) and there is the evidence of the life of grace
manifestly to be seen. Now that life of grace cannot otherwise be had but as
from faith, and by means thereof it be received, which drawing life from
Christ, and taking it from him does replenish the whole soul therewith, and
quickneth every grace with the same that is found therein. So that such a
lively feeling of the want of faith, and complaining of that want, with desire
of having that want supplied, do no other in truth but argue the presence of
lively faith, howsoever it be not felt.

Faith as well may be present in the soul, though it be not felt, and though
having it we be not for a time privy Feeling.
to our so having of it, as Christ himself may be present with a true
Christian, when yet being strongly set upon by some sore tentation, he may
think himself for the time, wholly to be given over and to be quite forsaken.
Christ, once received by a believing Christian to dwell in his heart by faith,
may be and doubtless (according to his promise) will be with his to the end of
the world, still Matthew. 28.
remaining and abiding with every such a believing christian, dwelling in that
heart which once received him, though so closely keeping himself hidden, that
the same Christian may for a time seek him, as much sorrowing for not finding
of him, as ever did Mary his mother sorrowfully Luke 2. 4. 8.
seek him when he was missing, and hunt as much after him with as longing a
desire to light upon him, as ever did the Spouse (when she was most sick of
love) Cantic. 5. 8.
long for and look after her well-beloved, and yet with her for a good time
never find nor light upon him, when all the while he is (though very secretly,
yet most certainly) remaining with them and abiding in them. For the Lord
knows how to be present with his children, and yet they themselves shall not
be aware of his so being: as Jacob spoke of Gods presence with him at Bethel,
God (says he) was here, and I was not aware. The Lord can tell (says one of
the ancient Fathers) how to be wholly every August. epist. 3. ad Volusianum.
where, and yet contained in no one place; he knows how to come to one, by
not leaving that place from whence he so came; he knows how to go away
again, and not to leave him from whom he is so gone. And again, speaking of
the marvelous manner of Christ his being borne of a woman, she being yet a
virgin, and so of his coming into the house, the doors yet being shut, says
further, If a reason of this could be found, it should not be wonderful; if an
example of the like it should not be singular. We must know (says he) and
believe, God can do some things which we can never find out the manner and
the way by which they are so done. And in such things, the greatest reason of
the doing of them is, the only power and might of him by whom they are done.
There are two ways after which the Lord may be said to be with his children,
while they remain in this world: one, which may be perceived and well may be
felt: another, which is secret and cannot be known but by the event and
effect, as they by proof find themselves to have been sustained and vpheld in
all their greatest troubles, though they know not how, and could not then
perceive by whom; but it was the Lord that sustained them with the one hand,
while he was putting them down with the other.

After such a manner may faith be known to be present in the heart, when yet
it cannot sensibly be felt: namely, as it may be followed, discovered, and
found out by the working. It is well worth the observing, that it is promised
in the Gospel, that whosoever believes shall John 4. 16.
never perish, but have life everlasting. Now it is to be marked, that it is
not said, Who so has the comfort of believing, and the feeling of his faith,
and so knows vn^oubtedly that he has true faith; he, and he only is the ^an
that shall be saved: but he that indeed believes, that is, he whom God (who
only knows the hearts of all, and knows them better then we know them our
selves) knows that he does truly, though never so weakly, believe; and who
has faith in Gods account, though it be not so in his own, though he have not
the feeling of his faith, nor the comfort of his own believing, nor can no
more apprehend how the Lord can in any favor be present with him, then could
Gideon conceive how that could be so which the Angel spoke unto Judge. 6. 12.
13.
him, telling him that the Lord was with him (they being in the mean while
oppressed by the hands of the Midianites), yet that man is undoubtedly in the
state of salvation, such a one can never perish in the end. For there may be as
blessed a believing, without some kind of seeing and feeling: as was Thomas his
believing blessed, when once he had seen his Savior present with his eyes,
and sensibly had felt him, and laid hold upon him with his hand: witness that
which our Savior Christ answered unto Thomas, upon that occasion; Thou have
seen and Ioh. 20. 29.
have believed; blessed are they have not seen, and yet have believed.

And thus much for the interpretation of that my speech I was in hand with, for
showing how the assurance of a true believing Christian, is more in the
assurance of the thing believed, then in the person that does believe: and so
much for answer inaway of some satisfaction to your request, who desired to
hear some thing spoken touching that point, of a Christians not feeling the
comfort he has had, and of his not feeling that he has faith at all, nor any
comfort of his present true believing.

CHAP. XIIII.
Further differences between hypocrites and sound believers, in their
assurance to be saved: and first, in the whole building thereof; as also of the
builders themselves.

NOw to prosecute my former speech, and to show some further differences that
are discernable between the assurance of hypocrites and mis-beleeuers, and
such as soundly and truly do believe. As therefore there has been showed a
manifest difference to be in the foundation and ground work of either of
their assurances; so is there as clear a difference to be discerned in the
whole frame and manner of the building and working up of such assurance; the
workmanship being as Difference in building assurance.
differing, as are the workmen that do build thereon, even the master workmen
themselves, and chief builders, who having drawn the plot, give all the
direction how things are to be carried; who are as clean opposite in their
doings each to other (one working one way, and another working another) as good
is to bad, and right is to wrong; as light Difference in builders.
is to darkness, or God is to the devil. For indeed it is God that has the
disposing of all the business about the one; and the devil bears all the
sway, gives all the direction, has the whole command, and all the controlment
about the other. The Spirit of God, which is the Spirit of truth, bears rule
in the heart of the one; and that lying false spirit, even the spirit of the
devil, who rules Ephesians. 2. 2.
mightily in the children of disobedience, and was a lying spirit in the
mouths of the false prophets to deceive 1. King. 22. 22.
Ahab; it is he that carries all the stroke, and has the whole government in
the other, (for questionless all hypocrites have unclean spirits breathing in
them) the Lord having so in heavy judgment mingled among Isa. 19. 14.
them spirits of error, which do cause them to err in every part of their
work.

We know it is meet in every building, from the ground to the roof, to have
every thing so ordered, as the house may be well contrived for use, made
beautiful for view, and substantial for continuance. Now as for use and
continuance, that lying false spirit who guides and directs 2. Cor. 11. 13.
these false and deceitful workers that work upon this frame, as he
intends not either of them himself, so does he not suffer them to strike one
right stroke to further such a business; but indeed his aim is for the clean
contrary, in setting them a work to do all to no purpose in such respects.
His whole drift is, to have matters carried so, as all may show as fair, and
be as beautiful and goodly to behold and look upon, both in their own eyes,
and view of others, as that which is best and truliest wrought of them that are
most skillful in their working, and do all that they do most soundly and
substantially indeed; but as for use, his desire is to have all so bungled up,
and so confusedly wrought, as none may know what to make of such work, nor
what good use to put any thing unto when all is done: no other order or method
being observed for the framing of things to any purpose, but such orders and
methods as the Apostle (...) Ephesians. 6. 11.
gives us warning of, and wills us to take heed of, that are used by the
devil, but all to deceive by. In which respect he uses art and skill enough,
and none so much as he in that kind of profession. He is the greatest Artisan
that is in the whole world beside; he is most orderly and methodicall in his
wily working, to catch men by deceit, and overthrow them in perdition; he is
therein both male artifex, and mill artifex, if one way succeedes not, he will
fetch about another, till he have gained his purpose in that he goes about:
yea, he train^s up men this way and teaches them cunning, till as perfect
workmen, they have got the skill how to deceive others, and most of all
themselves, that being become evil men and seducers, Ephesians. 4. 14.
they may wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being 2. Tim. 3. 13. Isa. 28. 15.
deceived, as the Apostle speaks of those that have made lies their refuge,
and that v^der vanity have hid themselves.

And as for continuance, this whole frame is set upon so sandy a ^oundation,
and so slightly and falsely is wrought beside, as it will stand no storm nor
shower that shall happen; but be as a castle of come down, that shall fall
upon the heads, and about the ears of them that dare venture to abide therein.

Temporary believers and hypocrites that are these Hypocrites.
deceitful workers, who for their double-heartednesse carrying (as we use to
say) two faces in one hood, may not unfitly be likened to some two faced
pictures, which on the one side shall be seen to laugh like a man, and on the
other side like a monster: they can make as fair pretenses of holiness as who
shall make best, and go as far in the external and outward practice of all
religious duties, as who shall go furthest: they will come to sermons, they
will be at good exercises, they will pretend great holiness, they will seek
the Lord daily, and delight Isa. 58. 2
to know his ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the
ordinances of their God: they will ask of God the Ordinances of Justice, and
they will take delight in approaching to God. Hearing the word of God, and that
with some kind of joy; as our Savior shows in the parable, in so much as
many, by means thereof, come to be greatly enlightened, and to taste of the
heavenly gift, to be Heb. 6. 4. 5.
made partakers of the holy Ghost, to taste of the good word of God, and of the
powers of the world to come: yea, they will be found not only to serve God
with others, in the ordinary religious exercises of Gods daily worship, but in
the extraordinary also; if there be any more excellent then other, they will
therein also be found as forward, as who shall be foremost; they will fast and
humble themselves; they will afflict their souls, and bow down their Isa. 58.
5.
heads like a bulrush: and make (as Paul says) a fair show Gal. 6. 12. Colos.
2. 18.
in the flesh, and in a voluntary humility: they will not stick with the
Pharisie, to fast twice in the week, pay every man Luke 18. 12.
his own, pay tithes of all they have, give alms to the poor: and with the
rich young man in the Gospel, (who came to our Savior Christ, to know what
he might do to Mat. 19. 20.
gain eternal life), keep after his manner, all the Commandments of God
even from their youth. And thus much for any to do, is the most that Satan
their captain will allow the best hypocrites of them all to do: which yet to
do, is to set up a very fair outside of a Christian-like well framed life and
conversation, which for sight and outward view shows as beautiful, and as
comely as does the best; and yet neither profitable for any use, nor
substantial for continuance. Hence is it that this sort of men are not only
well thought on of others, but they have high thoughts of themselves, and
reckon upon great things that they are to receive at Gods hands: they make no
doubt but to be saved for ever; they look to be in heaven before their feet
be cold; whosoever stand out, they promise to themselves that they shall be
received in: there are none more confident herein then they: though there
should but two in a country be saved (says such a one) yet I hope that I
shall be one of them: yea they dare challenge God himself for not doing right,
if such persons as they should not be well regarded of him: Why (say they)
have we fasted and thou see it not? Isa. 58. 3.
why have we afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge of it? And our
Savior Christ telling us of such sort of men how it will be with them in the
day of judgment, brings them in before us, coming to heaven gate as though
they were in have, and calling earnestly to have the gate opened unto them, as
maruelling they should be let to stand without so long; crying, Lord, Lord,
open unto us: have not we prophesied in thy name: and Luke 13. 25. 26. 27.
have not thou taught in our streets? unto whom, for all this, it will be
answered, depart you away, I know you not, yo^ have been workers of iniquity.
Though the work of prophesying and so of hearing, reading, praying, fasting,
and the like, were, and are in themselves holy actions, yet the doers of them
not doing them holily, may be workers of iniquity: for doing unjustly, that,
which otherwise in it self were just to be done. Prayer, and prophesying are
spiritual Isa. 1. 13.
actions, but they may for all that be carnally performed, and so turned to
sin unto them that are the doers of them. He is an evil worker, or a worker
of iniquity, first, that does that which is in it self evil: secondly, that
does not that which is good, being the good that he ought to do: thirdly, that
does that which is good, but does it not well; as doing it in some sinister
respect of an evil mind, vain-gloriously, or hypocritically, and the like. And
thus all that before have been mentioned, that temporary believers and
hypocrites may do, or possibly can do, not being soundly and sincerely done,
in such truth and uprightness as God does require, all is but lost labor that
so is done, and (according to the proverb) As good never a whit, as never the
better. When holy things in themselves are thus hollowly done, and in in so
great hypocrisy by the doers of them; the things which were otherwise most
excellent, are now most vile, and whatsoever shows they have, they are but
beautiful abominations; the fairest works are then become the foulest faults,
and their best deeds, their worst sins. Things thus done by such deceitful
workers, in their so doing of them, they have but marred (as we use to say)
good matters in the handling; and all that they have so wrought, even in the
working will crumble away as between their fingers, and come to nothing. They
may deceive others for a time, but they will find by woeful experience, that
they have most of all deceived themselves in the end, that they have toyled
themselves in vain, and that they have but wrought as in the fire, which as
quickly Haba^. 2. 13.
did consume it, as they could work it and bring it off their hand. Hypocrisy
is said to be spunne upon a fine thread; but for all that, it will make no good
cloth nor garments that will cover them; they may weaue it who that will, but
(as the Prophet speaks) they shall weaue but the spiders web: their webbes
will be no garments, Psalm. 59. 5. 6.
neither shall they cover themselves with their works. Such builders as these
that have builded but after this fashion, when they have set up all this goodly
frame, they may lean upon their house (as Job speaks) but it will Job 8. 15.
not stand; they may hold fast by it, but it will not endure. And because it is
slightly built above, it is as unsoundly and vnsetledly founded below, being
set upon so vnsteadie and so sandy a foundation, when the raines shall
descend, Mat. 7. 26. 27.
the floods come, and the winds blow and beat upon that house it will all
come down and be overthrown, it will surely Job 11. 20.
fall, and the fall thereof will be great. Then shall the eyes of these men
fail, and they not escape, and their hope shall be Job 18. 14.
even as the giving up of the Ghost. Their confidence shall then be rooted out
of their tabernacle, and they be brought themselves to the King of fear. Yea,
terrors will then (for all this great boasting of strong assurance) take hold
of them as waters and tempests will carry them away by night. The East wind
will carry them away and they shall depart, and as a storm it will hurl them
out of their place: then will God cast upon them and will not spare, Job 27. 20
21. 22. 23.
though they would feign flee from under his hand: men shall then clap their
hands at them and hiss them out of their place: as Job does thus speak: time
and experience will show what manner of workmen these have been; the day will
declare it, and the fire will reveal it, of what sort this whole work is;
namely, that they have builded upon a tottering and rotten foundation, no
better stuff then timber, hay, and stubble, and therefore all in the end 1.
Cor. 3. 12. 13.
will be consumed, wholly overthrown and brought to nothing.

On the other side, the Spirit of God, which is the spirit Sound builders.
of truth, and leads unto all truth, has a clean contrary working in the
hearts of true believers, who are said to be good and true in heart, and such,
as in whose spirit Psalm. 125. 4. Psalm. 3^. 2.
there is no guile: like those worthies of the Tribe of Zebulon that came to
David to Hebron, who are commended 1. Chron. 12. 33*
to have been men that were not of a double heart, they are guided to do that
they do with innocent Psalm. 24. 4. Psalm. 119. 1. 6.
hands, and upright hearts, not lifting up their minds to vanity, nor swearing
deceitfully, but to be undefiled in their way, which way so ever they shall
walk, still having respect to all Gods commandments. In their behavior Psalm.
101. 2. 3.
at home, to walk in the uprightness of their hearts in the midst of their
house, without setting any wicked thing before their eyes. In their outward
behavior toward men, or in the carriage of themselves toward God in his
worship and service, to follow the Apostles practice, in endeavoring evermore
to keep faith and a good Acts 24. 16.
conscience both toward God and man. In their dealings with men, to do no ill
to their neighbor, to speak every one Psalm. 15. 2. 3.
the truth from his heart, as children that will not lie: in coming to serve
God, to cleanse their hands in innocence, Isai. 63. 8. Psalm. 26. 6.
and so to compass Gods Altar; not as do hypocrites, to draw near to God
with their lips, when their hearts in the Isai. 29. 13.
mean while being removed from him: but so as they with David say and
profess, even unto God as did he, O God Psalm. 57. 7.
my heart is prepared, my heart is prepared; I will now sing and give praise.
In giving God thanks, they awaken their Psalm. 103. 1.
souls to praise God, and call upon all that is within them to magnify his
name: they praising God with their words, Psalm. 47. 7.
praise him with their understanding also. When they come to make prayers unto
God, they lift up their hearts with Lament. 3. 41. 1. Tim. 2. 8.
their hands unto God in the heavens; and holding up their hands, they hold up
pure hands in their prayers without wrath and doubting. In coming to hear the
Word of God, they with an honest and good heart hear it, and keep Luke 8. 15.
Psalm. 119. 11.
it, holding it up in their hearts with David, that it might keep them from
sin. As God loves truth in the inward Psalm. 51. 6. John 4. 24.
parts, so do they worship God in spirit and truth. They do not desire to
seem to do any thing better, then indeed they do it: neither do they
desire to seem to do that, which in truth they do not; but as God is truth,
so are they found in all their ways to walk in truth. They believing 3. John
4. John 14* 1.
God, do believe also in Christ, their hearts therefore need not to fear,
nor at all to be troubled, they know with the Apostle whom they have believed,
and that he is able to 2. Tim. 1. 12.
keep all they have committed unto him sure and safe unto the day of his
appearing. This therefore is the victory whereby 1. John 2 13. and 5. 4. 5.
we overcome that evil one, and the whole world with him, even their steadfast
believing: such as do thus, may indeed be assured of undoubted safety and
salvation for ever. They thus believing, and thus living, may know asuredly
themselves to be in Christ Jesus, because they walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit: they have good warrant Romans 8. 1. Cant. 2. 16.
to say, that Christ is theirs, and they are his; and therefore laying hold of
Christ, they may be assured most certainly to be saved for ever by him. They
may be fully persuaded, there shall be no condemnation to them, being Romans 8.
1. 38. 39
thus in Christ Jesus; neither shall any thing be ever able to separate them
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus. They in this case may lay
themselves down in peace with Psalm 4. 8. Psalm. 3. 6.
David, and take sweetly their rest; for the Lord is he that will now make
them to dwell in safety, not fearing though ten thousand had beset them round
about; they need not be Psalm. 112. 7. 1. John 4. 28.
afraid of any evil tidings, but cast away all fear that has painfulness,
and let their hearts be setledly fixed, and trust in the Lord: for such have
their warrant made them out of Gods Word, that doing these things, they shall
never Psalm. 15. 5. 2. Pet. 1.
be moved: and as the Apostle Peter says, they shall never fall. These have
laid for themselves a good foundation for eternal life, and as good builders
indeed, have well Prou. 10. 25. 1. Tim. 6. 19. Isai. 26. 1.
builded a sure habitation for themselves to dwell safely in. Salvation may be
called the walls of this building, and safety it self the bulwarks thereof.
They that dwell in such a defenced Castle, they dwell to high for any to pull
them down, their defense is the munition of rocks (as the Prophet speaks),
they having thus built their faith upon Isai. 33. 16.
Christ, that is a rock so strong and sure, as never can be moved, it is
impossible that the gates of hell can ever prevail against the same: such as
these are surely out of all Mat. 16. 18.
danger, and as one set upon a high rock, and standing upon a sure and
invincible Tower, they may look and laugh at al their enemies below, not caring
what they al ca^ possibly do against them, how fiercely and how furiously
soever they shall assail them. These therefore (ascleane contrary to the other)
being those that hear the sayings of Christ, and do them, that truly do
believe, and thus holily do live, they are most wise men, and good builders
that have built their house upon a rock; and therefore when the rain descends,
the floods come, the winds blow and beat upon the house, it does not fall,
because all is founded upon a rock; and so the whole work of their building
(they thus building up themselves in their most holy faith) is not only made
beautiful for view, but wisely and well contrived for necessary use, and made
strong and substantial for continuance. They hereby in all their works thus
wrought, showing themselves to have been workmen, that need not be ashamed of
that they have done: as the Apostle Mat. 7. 24.
gave counsel to Timothy for the discharge of his duty. Their work in time
shall also be made manifest, the day will declare it, and the fire will
reveal, that upon a most 2. Tim. 2. 15.
sure and precious foundation they have builded gold, silver and precious
stones, and that their work has been 1. Cor. 3. 12.
wrought according unto God, and therefore of him they may look to receive
their reward, and so to have praise of John 3. 21.
God.

CHAP. XV.
The different uses they put their persuasion unto.

AS the truly faithful lay hold of Christ, so does the hypocrite: as they are
comfortably persuaded to be saved by him, these seem also to be every day as
confident therein as they, and do as boldly presume and reckon thereupon, but
as there is truth in that which is done by the one, and much guile and
falsehood in that which is done by the other: as the one have warrant for their
so doing, the other have none; so do they in like manner differ in the use
they put this their assurance and Difference in the effects of assurance.
persuasion unto, as they differed in the ground that either of them had for
their being so persuaded.

The one by means thereof fear God the more, because Psalm. 130. 4.
they know mercy to be with him: the other fear him the less; yea not at all.

Misbeleeuers and carnal Gospellers upon this idle conceit that they are sure
they shall be saved, lay aside all fear of God and care of goodness, they
sing such a requiem to their souls, as they now sing cock on whoope, (as we
use to say) and sing all care and fear away* yea Job 6. 14.
they are as those of whom Job speaks, that have forsaken the fear of the
Almighty. That grace of God, which Jude 4.
they say, they hope to be saved by, they turn into want onnesse: they having
gotten this by the end, that the just shall live by his faith, even by faith
alone, and not by works, they hereupon lay away all care of good works, which
God Ephesians. 2. 10.
has ordained that true believers should walk in, and they hold themselves to
their idle and their single sold faith, and they run away counter with this
in their mind, and this in their mouth, the just shall live by his faith: as
though they had now found out such a way to heaven, as do what they will in
all their life time, they can never come short of the place that they seem so
to hunt for. But they and their faith are like to perish together, and their
assurance is as sure to trust to, as is a reed or broken staff, which will be
sure to leave them in the ditch, when they trusting unto it most, do reckon
and look to leap over thereby.

True believers who know of Gods love and favor toward them indeed, and
apprehend th^se everlasting sweet mercies of God in Christ Jesus, which have
eternal life and salvation accompanying them, whereof they have good assurance
given them, and wrought up in their hearts by their so believing, their souls
being now satisfied as with marrow and fatness, which makes them praise God
with joyful lips; they do not receive this grace of God in vain, but because
they find such mercy from God, they fear him the more with a child-like
fear, which makes them awfully to serve him, and willingly to perform every
good duty unto him. Yea, the love of God in Christ Jesus constraines them to
do their Psalm. 18. 1.
duty, and to profess with David, that of force they must love God. Now are
not his commandments grievous unto them, but their delight is in the law of
God, which they have learned Job, to prefer before their appointed food. The
more assurance they have of Gods love toward them, whereby they know God to
be their God, and have boldness to cry abba father unto him, the more surely
has the Lord their hearts joined unto him in true love again, they being tied
fast with the cords of his own love wherewith first he loved them, which
causes them reciprocally to love him back again. And because he has given
them the Spirit of adoption, whereby they know him to be their father, the more
may he reckon upon the naturalnes of their love and child-like duty unto him,
because he now knows them (as being so made by him) to be his own true
children indeed, whom he has made partakers of his own divine nature, setting
2. Pet. 1. 4.
his own image upon them, and giving them a heart and disposition to be like
minded to himself, to love that he loves, and hate that he hates: even to
love righteousness as their life, and hate all manner of wickedness which God
does most hate. He may now reckon upon them as upon his peculiar ones, to have
service done at their hands, though others will do none, that they will
stir, when others sit still: and though others do grumble and snuff when
they are spoken unto, yet for them to be found willing, cheerful and
unwearied in their well doing.

CHAP. XVI.
How easy it is to get a false persuasion, but difficult to attain sound
assurance of salvation: which is another difference between them.

THe assurance of an hypocrite is of no such excellency, but it is easy to
come by, and may be as soon light upon as ever it is looked after: for it is
as refuse stuff that lies in every man's way, not worth the taking up. No
marvel then that they are so full of it, for of such rubbish there be cart
load fuls to be had in every ditch, and thrown out upon every dunghill, which
he that has understanding to discern between things that differ, would
rather throw from him, then ever take up, though it lay in his way. A wise
Christian will rather empty his heart of such idle conceits (as these set so
great store by) if any such he found there, then so to fill himself as with
emptiness and wind that will put him more to pain, then profit him any whit.
Such Christians as these they are no sooner borne, but they are grown men the
first: so soon as ever they begin to make any profession of Christian religion
they attain to their perfection: so fast as they make any beginning, they by
and by know as much as any can teach them, as to love God above all things, and
their neighbor as themselves. This they reckon to be all that can be taught
them, there is no more to be learned: they know al are to be saved only by
faith in Christ Jesus, what need they any more? they are now sure of their
salvation for ever, they will never doubt after. It may be said of the
assurance that these men have, according to that which goes in the proverb,
it is soon ripe, and it will be as soon rotten: it is brought forth at once
like Ionahs gourd, they never labored for it, no more then he did for his
gourd (for such weeds as these idle conceits and fond fancies, wherewith such
sort of Christians use to flatter their own hearts, they will grow fast enough
of themselves): but as it is easily come by, so it is as easily lost again: it
may grow in one night, as did Jonah 4. 10.
his gourd, and perish in another; and then it will be with them as it was with
him, they will fret more for the want of it, then ever they ioyed in their
first having of it.

The good assurance of Gods faithful servants, is very True assurance hardly
gotten.
hard to come by. The assurance of faith, like faith it self, as it is most
precious, so it is most rare, and not common to be found. In this particular
the truth of that which runs in another proverb (that is common) is much
confirmed, that dainty things are dear things, and things of most excellency
will not be attained to without great difficulty. Great is the cost many of
Gods servants have been at, and hard has been the labor which they have taken
about this one point of their assurance: they have sweat much and taken sore
pains hereabout, night and day do they seek it, yea days and years have
they bestowed upon it in seeking after it, and yet hardly can find (...), and
with much difficulty can ever attain unto it: the Lord seeing it meet so to
have them exercised, so to de^erre them, and so long to put them off, before
ever he will give them to have their hearts desire herein. For he knows such
to be the worth and excellency thereof, as it will quit well the cost they
have been at, and pay well for the travail and pains they have taken for the
coming by it, when once they shall have obtained it: he holds it therefore at
so dear a price, that knowing what it cost them before they could purchase it,
they may the better esteem of it when they have it. The Lord sees well enough
that the things we easily come by, we use as little care for and as lightly to
set by. Neither does the Lord use to give this to be had all at once, and
wholly to be wrought up of the sudden. It is not a plant of a nights growing,
as was Ionahs gourd: for when it is once grown and come to perfection, it is
neither the bitterest nor eagerest frost of one nights freezing, nor all the
sharpest winters of a man's whole life beside, nor the bitings of all worms
that shall lie nibling at the root, that ever can so possibly bite it or
sinite it, as wholly for altogether to overthrow it in the end. We know that
the great and mighty oaks, whose enduring is for many ages, are longer a
growing and slower in attaining to their full growth, then are either shrubs in
the wood, or weeds in the garden, which easily may be brusht up, or weeded out
with the hand, or being let alone, will of themselves fade quickly and wither
away: but being once grown they will stand any storm, and endure the sorest
tempest. So is the coming forward of the good assurance of a true believing
Christian: it asks many a years growth before it can gather strength and
attain to due perfection, it must be helped forwards by manifold experiences,
and much observation had of Gods gracious favors in the whole course of our
lives, and so be made to increase as with the increase of God. The growth of it
is slow, and requires much attendance, much labor and cost to be bestowed
about it to have it got forward: but when it is grown it is sure, as that
which is everlasting, and will not perish for ever. And it proves to be of
nature invincible, that dares encounter the bitterest enemy that it has:
whereof we have a most pregnant Romans 8. 38.
example in that blessed Apostle Paul.

CHAP. XVII.
Of another speciali difference, which is, That the misbeleeuer is free from
the assaults of Satan, wherewith the true Christian is always troubled.

THe assurance of a mis-beleeuer, how unsure it is, if no otherwise it could
be known; hereby it may well appear, that he who is so great an enemy of
the salvation of every man, lets them alone with such courses as they take
about their salvation when they promise salvation to themselves, and say they
are undoubtedly assured thereof already. He does never gainsay them, nor call
their assurance into any question; for they use not to doubt, neither would
they doubt for all the world, and as for the devil they say they do defy
him: but for all their defying of him, and as well as he on the other side does
love them, if he knew that they were right, and so like to escape him; if he
were not certain that so long as he can keep them to be of that mind that now
they are of, they are sure enough his own, he would be so bold as to have
about with them in that point of their assurance, as well as with other men.
But he is too subtle, too wily, and in his kind too wise, so much to wrong
himself, and disadvantage his own cause, as ever to disquiet their rest, and
awake them out of that slumber: so long as he finds the^ to be still dreaming
that all is well with them. He thinks soon enough to give them such a good
morrow at his greeting them in hell, where he most desires to have them, as
shall gaster them well enough out of this drunken peace of carnal security,
wherein they have slept so long, which then shall have an end when their
torment shall begin, which never more shall have end. If he can carry them to
hell without any noise, and lead them on by stealing steps to that dungeon
of darkness: as the foolish young man caught by the whorish woman, was lead
like a fool that knows nothing, when yet he was carried to the stocks for
Prou. 7. 7. 22.
his due correction, it is the only course above all others that he could take
to choose. Whereas then it is the known practice of the dwell to assail true
faith in every man, and by all means to overthrow and destroy faith where he
finds it to be, if possibly he can. It is more then evident, that those who
are many times found to be both ignorant in knowledge, and very careless in
life, who do boast of great faith, and brag of so strong assurance; that they
have nothing less then true faith indeed, or any so good assurance as can
stand them in any stead, and that Satan knows well enough, who lets them so
alone without any troubling of them, or disquieting them at all; which
doubtless he would never do, did he perceive any one spark of true faith
to be in them, or any such assurance as whereby they apprehending Christ
Jesus, might have any true comfort of obtaining life and salvation by him.

On the other side, all true beleeuets, and such as are Godly assaulted.
Gods faithful servants indeed, find by their own lamentable and sorrowful
experience, how troublesome an enemy Satan is unto the^ in these points, of
their true believing, and comfortable assurance of their salvation. In these
things he will not let the^ alone to die for it, so long as he can find them
living here upon earth, within the precincts of his jurisdiction, if God do
not restrain him, he will be ever this way troublesome unto them. A deuo^ring
Lion is not more greedy of his prey, then he is of making ha^ocke and spoil
of the faith of men. Oh how did he desire to have Pet^r that he might toss him
a while and winnow his faith, that he might leave nothing Luke 22. 13.
behind, but the chafe of unbelief? He spares none, he is afraid of none, he
will set upon the best, if he can spy any advantage that may be taken. Our
Savior Christ himself could not escape his hands, this prince of the world
Ioh. 14. 30.
came even against him (though he could find nothing wherewith once to hurt
him) he ventured upon him to have a bowt with him in the matter of his faith,
and to try a fall with him therein, though himfelfe was cast, and went so much
by the worst, as by means thereof he lies foiled for ever, without all
possible hope of being recovered for evermore. Our Savior being baptized,
there came a voice from heaven, proclaiming him to be the Son Mat. 3. 27.
of God, even the Son of his love, and of his chief delight: this our
Savior knew well enough in himself, this he believed, this he had the
comfort of. After this our Savior fasted forty days, and forty nights,
receiving no meat to eat from his Fathers hand. Here was now an advantage
spied out by the devil for him to work upon, he slippeth not the
opportunity, he plays upon the vantage, and fears not to assail our
Savior Christ in that point of his faith, whether he were the Son of God or
no, endeavoring to call that into question, and trying if he could bring our
Savior Christ to make doubt thereon, taking occasion from the present want that
he found him to be in, as one left of his Father, that now was to shift for
himself; and he reasons thus with him: If thou be the Son of God, thou
can cause these stones in this Mat. 4. 3.
thy hunger to be made bread: but that thou can not; therefore thou art not
the Son of God. If he thus durst be bold to call the filiation of the Son
of God himself into question: whom will he spare or be afraid of to sift in
that point, and that to the full? whose evidence is so clear in this behalf,
as the devil shall not know what to say against, at the least to find
something to cavil at, and to quarrel thereabout? Nay, the true children of
God have too much experience of Satan's malice this way: true believers can have
no rest for Satan's troubling of them in these points; let him be answered never
so often, he will take no answer, nor ever give over: he is like to malicious
and wrangling adversaries, who will never give over to molest such as they
hate, but will spend all they have at law to undo their poor neighbors, and
not leave them worth a groat. If they be overthrown in one Court, they will
begin their suit in another: if they have lost the day at one Assize, they will
about with it again to try it at another. So this cauiller and envious enemy
of ours, Satan, he will bear good Christians down, either they have no faith
at all, or that their faith has this or that fault in it, that it can stand
them in no stead; and so stopping them at the point of their faith, as in the
head, he would (by his good will) never suffer them to proceed to get any such
assurance, as whereby they might find any sound rest for their souls: and where
he finds the best assurance of all, that any of Gods servants during their
abode in the flesh, can be found possibly to have though they were men as well
grown up in the strength of their faith as ever was Abraham the father of the
faithful; Romans 4. 19. 20.
of whom the Apostle says, that he was not weak in the faith, neither did he
stagger through unbelief: yet will he not fail to try what he can do, even
against the best; he will thrust as sore at them as he can, that they might
fall: and though he cannot wholly overthrow them, yet will he labor to bend
and to make to shake the very foundation of their faith and steadfast believing.
And albeit at one time he finds he can do little against them, they being in
some sort aware of him, and well armed to withstand him, yet will he come
another time when they shall not be so well provided, and try again (
Sampson-like) to bend the pillars of their faith, and of the confidence of
their hope. And thus by his incessant assailings he sometimes has wronged even
the most principal of Gods servants. Abraham that was so invincible in his
Romans 4. 19. 20.
faith at one time, at another time was made to stagger weakness of faith in
the best.
and bewray the weakness of his faith, and trust he had of Gods keeping of
him, by betaking himself to such a way of shifting for himself, and escaping
of a danger; Genes. 12. 13. 18. 19. and 20. 2. 9.
and that not once alone, but again the second time, as did not beseem the
constancy and victoriousnesse of the faith of so great a Patriarch. Moses was
brought to show weakness of faith, in not giving glory to God, but speaking
Psalm. 106. 33.
unadvisedly with his lips, for which he was punished with the rest, in not
being suffered to enter into Canaan, but only Number. 20. 12.
to see it with his eyes. Aaron the Saint of the Lord, caused to take an
unsanctified course in making a molten Calfe, which they said to be the Gods
of Israel, which Exodus 32. 4.
brought them up out of the land of Egypt. David in his have, made to say, all
men be liers, and to yield so far through Psalm. 116. 11.
much weakness of his faith, as to say of himselge, he was now cast off of
God: Nay, though Satan did surely know Psalm. 31. 22.
(as I am persuaded that of some he makes no other reckoning) that in dealing
against them he shall never prevail finally to overthrow their faith with all
that he can do, nor to hinder their attainment of salvation in the end; yet
will he never let them alone, nor fail otherwise to trouble them what he can,
and to weary them, by molesting them from time to time: and though he cannot
destroy theirliues, yet (such is his enmity against them, and malice that will
never be laid aside) he will do his best to make their lives as uncomfortable
as possibly he may. If God will but send him or his messenger to Paul though
he find him so strongly supported by the presence of Gods grace, as he cannot
utterly overthrow 2. Cor. 12. 7.
him, yet it will do him good, that he may be suffered well to buffet him,
and to beat him as black and blew, before he be constrained to leave him, and
to part from him again. It is usual then for all that have true and sound
faith indeed, to have it tried, and that many times to the full (such trying of
it proving the truth of it, their enemies being judge, who else would never so
assail it), that the trial of the faith of Gods children, and of the
assurance thereof, being much more precious then gold that 1. Pet. 1. 7.
perish^th, may be found to their praise. The Lord seeing it meet to have it
thus, does sometimes try the faith of his children his own self, and
sometimes permits Satan to do his best against them, that he may know their
faith, and try their assurance and thrust at it with all his might to make it
yield; yea to break it down for altogether if possibly he could. Not that the
Lord in permitting Satan so to do, would either pleasure or gratify him, or
wrong his own servants, or see the^ wronged by him: nothing less; but to
speak as the truth is, the Lord in suffering Satan so to do, gives him nothing,
but rather makes him an instrument of his own shame and overthrow: he does not
so much give them into his hands, as rather Romans 16. 20.
gives him up to be vanquished and overcome by his servants, whom he does so
aid and strengthen, as he makes them able to conquer him, and to tread him
under their feet; the Lord preparing thus for his servants a glorious victory,
that having thus overcome, they may rejoice and triumph for evermore.

CHAP. XVIII.
The fourth maine difference between them is seen in their joy: where the
soundness and stability of the joy of true believers, with the contrary of
(...) is declared.



AS you have showed much difference to be both between the knowledge of one
that is unsanctified and unsound in the faith, and of him that is a true
believer, whose heart is purified by sound and saving faith^ indeed: and in
like sort between the manner of their apprehending and laying hold of Christ
for salvation. As also no less difference to be between the assurance and
persuasion that either of them do ground themselves upon for the obtaining of
life and salvation in Christ, by means of such their laying hold upon him;
Proceed now to declare what you think concerning such difference as may be
found between the joy that follows hereupon, and makes glad the hearts of
either of them, once truly having, or supposing themselves to have good and
warrantable assurance of their salvation.

A. Joy and gladness (which is an affection of the Difference in joy.
heart that is derived, and springs out of the love and liking of a present
good, or out of an assured hope and expectation of some good that is to come,
whereby the heart is dilated and set out, and the spirits therein stirred to
liveliness and cheerfulness) cannot but (according to the measure of the
apprehending of such a joyful object as promises all good contentment and
pleasure to be found therein) be more or less felt in the heart, and follow
abundantly, when there is a full assurance, an abundant and confident
persuasion of obtaining so great a good, as is indeed the greatest good of all
that can be wished or hoped for, or possibly may be looked for by any to be
enjoyed, which is the everlasting good of soul and body for ever: whereby they
do not only know they shall be delivered from the wrath that is to come, but
be made partakers of that glorious inheritance which is prepared for the Saints
in light: and that for the present, their state is so comfortable, and they so
highly in Gods favor (at least in their own consciences persuaded) as of the
children of wrath, power is now given them to become the sons of God; yea
heirs, and heirs apparent of life and glory with Christ Jesus. This cannot
but raise up in their hearts great and abundant joy, yea joy that is
unutterable and unspeakable, such as will make their hearts to dance in their
bellies for joy and merrines in the good liking they have of this their so
blisse-full an estate and most happy condition, that both presently they now
stand in, and yet hereafter far more fully do look for to enjoy.

Now both these having such a persuasion, they likewise have and do feel joy
in their hearts following thereupon. And the joy is answering to the kind of
assurance and persuasion that is had of so comfortable an estate and condition
that does cause the same. And for so much as it has been sufficiently cleared,
and made manifestly to appear, that there is as great odds and difference
between the assurance of a true believer, and of a true believers counterfeit;
as is between the boldness of faith, and the blindness of folly; between
humble obedience in believing what God does promise, and proud presumption in
promising to themselves without any word or warrant from God, what themselves
alone do fancy; the causes being so differing, and found to be so far at
odds between themselves, the effects rising from such causes, must needs be
severed as far asunder, and differ as much the one from the other.

The deceivable and unwarrantable assurance of misbeleeuers False joy fades.
cannot produce any better effect, then a carnal, lying, a false, and a fading
joy, that is not to be trusted unto, but will vanish away, and not be found nor
felt in times of the greatest need, when their beguiled hearts shall then most
of all be left void of all sound comfort and contentment, when trouble shall be
hard at hand, the greatest light of their joys is soon ecclipsed, and
ouercast with any sad remembrances, and but the very hearesay of any trouble or
danger toward them, is able to dash all their mirth at once; yea, to strike
them so as was Nabal, strooken when his heart died within him, and he became 1.
Sam. 25. 37.
as a stone. Their smiles are but faint and heartlesse, they may sometimes
counterfeit a laughing gesture, when yet the heart within takes no such
pleasure, as they do make show for: they be but false and durelesse pleasures,
they use to make themselves merry with, in the midst whereof, though they do
what they can, yet their hearts for all that will be felt to be in heaviness:
they may be full iocund, and all on the hoigh for a time, and yet by and by the
case as much altered with them, as ever it was with Belshazzer, when he saw the
handwriting against him, Dan. 5. 6. 30.
what time he was most merry in his cups and carowsings, drinking in that wine
which the swords of his enemies did soon draw out of his body again ( for
even that night he was slain), then will their merry Comedies be turned into
sad and heavy Tragedies, their pleasantness into pensiveness, their mirth
into woeful mourning, and they desperately sorrowing as those that have
out-liued all their joys, they being for ever left in distress and
heaviness, when all joy and gladness shall fly far away.

Contrarily, the stable, firm, and good assurance of the True joy lasting.
other, will beget, breed and bring forth a sure, solid, spiritual, and true
lasting joy, which with a sweet and heavenly motion, v^ill cause their hearts
to rejoice in Christ Jesus as in their chiefest good, and present good. The
nature of this joy, is to enlarge and exhilarate the heart, and so much to
affect him that has it, as it will cause him to exult and leap with
rejoicing. This is not a half joy, a giggling from the teeth outward, but a
through and full joy, that affects soul and body, spirit and flesh, to make
Psalm. 84. 2. Job 35. 10.
all rejoice together: such joy as will give songs to a man in the night
season, even such songs to God his people, as in the night when a solemn feast
is kept, and such gladness of Psalm. 77. 6. Psalm. 30. 29.
heart, as when one goes with a pipe (as the Prophet speaks). Even such joy
as is not only unspeakable to them that have it, and do feel it, but it is
incredible to them that have it not, and do but hear of it, as who by their
own experience did never come yet to taste of the like. Many think that good
Christians are deprived of all comforts, they have no joy nor gladness, they
know not what a merry life means, they think for any to do as they do, is to
live but a mopish and melancholy life, there is no cheer in their course. But
Gods servants are allowed to have their delights in this world, to have joy and
gladness of heart in this life, as well as any others, nay above and before
others; they may have more fuller contentment, more solid joy, more sweeter
delight, more stable and sure comfort, then any in the world beside: not the
merriest Greeks, and lustiest galllants in the World beside (that power out
themselves to the satisfying of their pleasures, and bathe themselves in all
manner of carnal delights, that take so much care for the flesh to fulfill
the lusts thereof) can come near them for a true comfortable life indeed:
all the pleasures that they have being but counterfeite shadows, in
comparison of the soundness and substance of the joys that these have; theirs
are but bastardly, false pleasures, that will end in sorrows: these are true
joys indeed, that will never have an end. The sweet music of the Temple was
typical, figuring the joy of the Church, where is assurance of forgiveness of
sins, and of Gods favor in Christ Jesus: how sweet is the music and
heavenly melody, that the peace of God which passes all understanding, makes
in that conscience wherein it is so felt? how great is that joy that cannot be
contained, and kept within the heart that has it, but must needs break out,
and be expressed by singing for very joy of heart. It is Isai. 65. 14. Psalm.
25. 13. Prou. 15. 15.
said, that the soul of him that fears the Lord, shall dwell at ease: and he
that has a good conscience, has a continual feast. Put these two together,
and let them meet in a good Christian, and tell me whose state is so happy,
as is the state of a righteous man; easy dwelling, and merry-making? what
would any desire more? if things be rightly compared together, the Friday (as
we use to speak) of a good Christian is better, then the Sunday of a
worldling. And though the wicked have their bellies in this world filled with
his hid treasure, yet the very scrapings of the Psalm. 17. 14.
trenchers of Gods servants are better then all the dainties that the wicked
have, when their fare is all the best. For that is true which is said by one,
if Christians be not merry, it is not because they are Christians, but because
they are not Christians enough: and if Gods servants have not comfort and joy
of heart, it is not because they serve God, but because they serve him not as
they might, and as they ought. Unto them therefore who cannot conceive, how
this possibly can be, it may be said, as Cyprian out of his own experience did
write unto a certain friend of his of Lib. ^p. 1.
this matter concerning himself, who before his conversion thought it
impossible, if he should change his manners to find such comfort in a virtuous
life, as afterward he felt, says thus to him in his writing, accipe quod
sentitur antequam discitur; hear the report of that which is sooner known by
feeling it to be so, then learned by any teaching that it is so: for he by his
own experience now felt and found that to be, which (before he so felt it) he
would not have believed, whosoever should have told it him, that it ever would
have so been. As then the sense of Gods love is the surest ground of our stable
peace, and the mainest prop of our greatest assurance, so the same assurance,
so long as it can be felt, causes the heart that so feels it, to rejoice
with such a joy, as Peter says, to be unspeakable, as passing 1. Pet. 1. 8.
all speech and uttering, and glorious in regard that it is divine, spiritual,
solid and continual, which brings no shame with it, that it may so be
differenced from the shameful reioycings, which many wicked in the world are
found often to have, and to use: called glorious or joy Romans 14. 17.
full of glory, because it is part of the kingdom of heaven, and the beginning
of that glory that is to come. To the getting of which joy, our Savior Christ
exhorts and inciteth his disciples, when he recalling them from rejoicing too
much in other things, though otherwise very great and excellent preferments
bestowed upon them, and gifts given unto them: such as was the having of the
very devils themselves to be subdued unto them, which one would think might
minister cause of much rejoicing unto any; yet because that alone is not a
ground sufficient for any to stay upon, that would have a stable and sure
lasting comfort, neither can there be found enough therein for the soul to
rest upon, that desires every way to be satisfied, and the joy thereof to be
made full; he wills them to fetch their chiefest comfort, and take their
greatest joy and reioicing, from the knowledge of this, that their names Luke
10. 20.
were written in the book of life: this allowed them to rejoice in, as that
which he knew was able to make their joy every way to be full.

This joy of a true believer that can thus know* his name to be written in the
book of life, and thereupon feels his heart filled with much comfortable
assurance, and persuasion of his present most happy condition, as being well
assured of his now standing in God his favor, and so in the state of salvation
for ever. It does go far beyond all the joy that any hypocrite or
misbeleeuer in the whole world (of what sort so ever he be) can ever have or
possibly attain unto, when he has done what he can. And it exceeds their
joy in all the sundry dimensions (if after that sort these several joys
should be considered and compared together), namely, in height, in depth, in
breadth, and in length; in all which several respects, the joy of an hypocrite
comes not near the joy of a true believer, but is in many degrees cast
behind the same, and these joys by a great distance are kept asunder, and
far removed the one from the other.

CHAP. XIX.
Hypocrites differ from sound believers in all the dimensions of joy; whereof
the first is, the height both from whence it comes, and to which it reaches
to.

FIrst, for height and altitude, the joy of an Hypocrites joy is from himself.
hypocrite is neither fetched so high, as is the joy of a true believer, and as
does the joy of one, whose heart is sanctified and purified by his faith: his
joy has no higher descent, then to comefrom himself, and to be fetched out of
the idle fancies, and false conceits of his own seducing and seduced heart,
which the deceiuer of the world, together with the deceit that is in it self,
has so much abused and beguiled, as to bring it into such a fools paradise,
as now to think no man's estate to be better then his own, and that therefore
none may be merrier then he may be, nor any have better or greater joy, then
he may have; so that this his joy being but homebred, is no better then a
carnal joy, and a fruit of the flesh. And as it is fetched no higher then
from himself: so does it reach no higher then to himself; for beyond himself
upward, it truly and properly cannot be said to go; it mounteth not so high, as
to reach unto God above, as unto the most worthy and principal object, that it
can find to settle upon, and to solace it self and take delight in. Such a one
seems to have a delight indeed, and take some great pleasure in the favor
of God, which he stands persuaded he now abides in, and which he holds (by
misapplying of promises, and mistaking of grounds) without all controversy to
belong unto him. Those favors of God (how slightly, superficially, or
wtongfully soever they be laid hold upon) he can well enough joy in, when once
they are descended, and come down so low, as they are found to light upon him
(as he conceiues), that now he may seem to touch them, and take hold of them,
reckoning without all fail to be saved by them as well, and as soon as the
best. Neither need any to marvel, though they are seen to have such a joy;
for what reprobate is there that is so foolish, that would not with that
foolish prophet Balaam, that was more blind and brutish, then the dumb Ass he
rode upon; be joyful and glad, if he knew he might be saved at the last, and
share with the righteous in his latter end? this differs not much from the
pleasure, delight and contentment, which a very brute beast may have: the
Hog which hunteth after nothing more, then to get his ravenous appetite
satisfied, seems to be glad when he can get under an Acorn tree, greedily
gathering up the Acorns that fali from the tree, and never leaves eating, till
he has eaten his fill, it is the fruit only that he joys in; as for the
tree* he neither cares for, nor any whit does look after. Much after this
manner is the ioying of these kind of believers; they joy in Gods favors so
far, as they may any benefit by them, but God himself they little care for,
neither do they so much delight themselves in him; if salvation might fall to
their lot, they would leap and be glad, but to have the Lord himself their
portion, that do they not so greatly desire, nor so much reckon upon. The
faith, the love, the fear and joy of such sore of men, and all whatsoever else
they do, proceed but of corrupt self love, whereby they love their own
welfare, their present and future good estate; they desire Gods favor, and
they joy in conceiting that they shall have it, not simply for it self, but in
a by-respect, either to escape some evil, as Pharaoh desired favor to have
the plague gone; or to obtain some greater good, as Balaam that wished he
might be saved; and Esau as profane as he was, could yet desire to be
blessed. They pretend the love of God, when yet they love him not for himself,
but in respect of his benefits; as Saul loved God for a Kingdom. The joy then
of this sort of believers, arising out of a wrong persuasion which they have
entertained into their hearts, that they are in Gods favor, and are as well
loved as any, and therefore shall be saved with the best in the end, is but a
fruit of self-love, and therefore no fruit of faith, but a fruit of the
flesh, which is wholly thus occupied about themselves: for as it took the
first beginning from themselves alone, so ends it in themselves, and in no
other thing, that being the uttermost aim that it ever has to respect their
own good: higher then themselves simply it cannot be said to reach, and
further then to themselves properly it cannot be said to go.

On the other side, the joy of the just and righteous servants Believers joy is
spiritual*
of God, who are true believers indeed, is fruit of a more noble offspring,
and of a far higher descent; for it is said to be the fruit of the spirit,
and joy of the holy Ghost. Gal. 5. 22. 1. These. 1. 6.
It is spiritual, heavenly, and divine, like the wisdom that is said to be
from above, which is pure and pcaceable: so does this come from 2n high, as
being given of God, and coming from him that is the Father of light, even the
Father of mercies, and God of all consolation: he that created all things of
nothing in the beginning, creates still the fruit Isaiah 57. 19. Isai. 65. 18.
of the lips to be peace to his people: it is he that creates Jerusalem a
rejoicing, and her people a joy. He that is the heavenly Psalm. 97. 11.
husbandman is he that has sown light for the righteous, and joy for the
upright of heart, and in due time, when this that is sown shall once come up
and be ripe for them, and they be come ready for it, then shall they that
mourn Isai. 61. 3. Psalm. 125. 5. 6.
in Zion have beauty in stead of ashes* the oil of joy for mourning, and
garments of gladness for the spirit of heaviness: then shall they that have
sown in tears, reap in joy in the time of that harvest, bringing not their
arms full, but their hearts full of these bundles of gladness, that will make
them rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. This joy of the faithful, is
said to be the joy of the Lord, because he is the only author of it, and it
alone is given by him, none can either take joy or comfort for himself, or give
it to another that does want it, if God do withold it: but on the other
side, if he do give comfort and peace, none can make trouble; if he do give
joy, none can take that away Nehem 8. 10.
again; and this joy of the Lord, is said to be his peoples strength. This joy
is so high and so heavenly, as it is part of the kingdom of heaven, and is the
beginning of the glory that is to come: this joy it is part of the kingdom of
God here, which our Savior Christ says to be within Luke 17. 21.
us, the Lord setting up his kingdom in the hearts of his elect, and ruling
mightily there by his Word, and by his Spirit. Now this kingdom (says the
Apostle, consists not in meat and drink, but in righteousness, and peace,
and Romans 14. 17.
joy in the holy Ghost. It is called the joy of the holy Ghost, because it is
not so much our joy, as the joy of the holy Ghost that moves our joy, and
causes our joy, especially this joy of our salvation, to have the assurance
thereof, and comfortably to stand persuaded of the love of God toward us, and
of his saving mercies in and through

Christ Jesus: for it is he that is the Comforter that was promised John 14.
16. 17 Ephesians. 4. 30.
to be sent unto us; it is he by whom we are sealed up to the day of our
redemption: he is given unto us, not alone to be with us, but to be in us, that
we may have him remaining with us, and hold him abiding in us, as the earnest
Ephesians. 1. 14.
of our purchased and promised inheritance, and as a pawn and gage left with
us in our hand never to be taken away, till we come to have the full bargain.
It is he that is the Spirit of adoption, that imboldens us to cry Abba Father,
Romans 8. 15. 16.
and makes us to know God to be our Father, testifying to our spirits, as a
most true and faithful witness, that we are his children. So that all the
sound comfort which at any time we have, we may well father it upon him, and
this joy of our salvation may truly be said to be the joy of the holy Ghost,
and not our own.

And a the joy of a true believer surmounteth in height the others joy, in
respect that it is more highly descended, as that which comes from above, and
is given him of God, and wrought in his heart by his spirit (the others joy
having no higher descent, then to be descended of himself, he heing the
father of his own joy, which being but a bastardly joy, it is all the while
but a bastard of his own breeding), so in this respect also, that it reaches
higher then the others do, which rests but in himself, as from himself it
took the first beginning; but this reaches unto God that first gave it, and
first instilled it True joy reaches to God.
into the heart that is so replenished with it; and therefore in right it ought
to return, from whence it came, neither can it ever find any full contentment
or satisfaction elsewhere, till it be got to him, as being the truest and most
perfectest object it can possibly find ever to respect and to seat and settle
it self upon: but when the joy of a true believer is extended unto God, and is
once fastened upon the happy fruition of him, there has it all satisfying and
full contentment indeed, there finds he enough to make his joy full, yea,
more then heart can think, or ever wish to have, may there be found, and
abundantly to be had: for in the presence of God thtre is fullness of joy to
be had, and Psalm. 16. 11.
that for evermore. A true believer has indeed great joy in the assurance he
has of his own salvation; howbeit, not so great joy in his salvation, as in
his Savior himself that has saved him, that he now knows God to be his
God, that God himself is for him, and that God is with Romans 8. 31.
him (for so he need not care, who possibly can be against him), and that he
knows Christ himself to be his Savior that has loved him, and given
himself for him, apprehending Gal. 2. ^0.
him assuredly to be his own: for now he knows, he has not only salvation
as a stream flowing out of him, but in having the Savior himself, he has so
the whole fountain of salvation it self to be his own. And therefore a true
believer, if he should express his joy in singing, he would sing the song of
Marie the blessed Virgin, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit Luke
1. 47.
rejoices (not so much in my salvation as) in God that is my Savior: for
though other things may cause joy to Gods servants, yet God himself is their
exceeding joy, and Psalm. 43. 4.
the gladness of their joy: as the Psalmist speaks. And doubtless if God
and our selves, his glory and our salvation could not both be respected and
regarded together, but the one must be forsaken, that the other may be
followed, and the one left yea hated, that the other may be loved, a good
Christian and faithful servant of God would according to the precept of Christ
labor to deny Luke 9. 23. and 14. 26.
himself, yea to hate father, mother, and his own life to, to follow Christ,
or else he were not worthy to be his disciple: and according to the practice of
Moses and Paul, show the naturalnes Exodus 32. 32. Romans 9. 3.
of their love how mucb they stand affectioned to God, and to his glory, in so
much as in respect of the precious and high account they have God and his glory
in, they would not stick to set behind, and vnder-valew the regard of
themselves, and their own salvation; more desiring that God should be
glorified, then their own selves saved. If a true believer can find his name
to be written in the book of life, and that the lot is fallen unto him, as
that he shall now share with the rest in that inheritance, which is prepared
for the Saints in light, he worthily may, and indeed ought to rejoice
therein: for so does our Savior will his Disciples to rejoice in this, that
they knew their names to be written in the book of life, and he may upon good
cause sing with David, The lines are fallen to me in a fair place, I have a
goodly inheritance. But all this cannot give him the like contentment, nor make
his joy so full, as when he knows that the Lord himself is become his
portion: for God being our God and Christ our Savior, in having him to be
ours, all is ours and given us with him. And this was that which David seemed
most of all to take his greatest pleasure and chiefest delight in, by his often
repeating of this, that the Lord himself was his salvation, and become his
ioynter and happy portion: and though the lot did otherwise fall out well and
happily for him, yet he acknowledges that it was God who maintained that lot,
and caused Psalm. 16. 5.
it to fall out so as it did, that be might show, if the lot was to be loved
and liked of by him, how much more he that caused it, who ordered that lot, and
maintained it in that sort, as he might have it and enjoy it, was above all to
be loved and liked for it: teaching all good Christians by his example and
practice, that if they do greatly account of their salvation and joy much
therein, that they do far more highly account of God himself that is the
God of their salvation, and has freely bestowed it upon them, that he may
have the love and joy of their hearts principally, and above all things else to
be most delighted in. David had many preferments in earth, he had good
evidence also to look for something in heaven as well as another, his own
heart did often afford him much comfort when he desired but to have those
joys again restored unto him that he was wont to find, and yet there was
nothing in heaven, nor nothing in earth that he desired to have besides the
Lord, and in comparison of him; yea he esteemed more of having the Lord for
his portion, then of all the comfort his heart could afford him: for his flesh
did often fail him, and his heart would also fail him much, but God failed
him never, but became Psalm. 73. 25. 26.
the strength of his heart (when that failed him), and his portion for ever.
Like as they who to day do believe, and have now the comfort of their
salvation, which they do much joy in, to morrow may have their faith so
shaken, that they cannot believe as they did before, and so the comfort and joy
of their salvation for the time may be gone: but God is the strength of their
faith, and the vpholder of their salvation for ever, who himself is so
faithful, as though they cannot believe, yet he cannot deny himself. Gods
children have learned therefore more to joy in God, who is the strength of
their faith, and the vpholder of their salvation, then in the stedfastnes of
their believing, or any assurance that they have of the same their own
salvation. If a man have a rich and royal portion, he is much pleased and
delighted therein: the Lord being the portion of his servants and their chief
treasure, all their longing desire is to enjoy him, which if they can obtain
it is enough to them, and that which their souls are fully satisfied in, this
is the making up of their joy, their chiefest solace and their hearts only
delight. Give a man his delight, he asks no more, he is then content: Gods
children think they want nothing, so long as they have him for their own,
above all joys, above all pleasures, above all that their hearts can delight
in, they delight in the Lord, and in his love and favor continually, when they
know him to be their God and father reconciled in Christ Jesus, and do feel
his love shed abroad in their hearts, so as they know he loves them by tasting
the sweetness of his love, which is better then wine: such is the goodness
and the greatness, such is the glorious excellency of God his own majesty, as
the better he is known, the more he must needs be loved, delighted and ioyed
in for his own majesty's sake: Gods children do therefore love God dearly,
yea they cannot but of force they must love him: so do they love him, joy and
delight in him, as they love the habitation of Psalm. 26. 8.
his house, and the place where his honor dwells, they love (as we use to
say) the very ground he goes upon, they are never well but when they are with
him; their soul is a thirst for God, even the living God, they use to long for
Psalm. 42. 2. Psalm. 84. 2. Cantic. 5. 8.
him, even to the very fainting of their heart, and to grow sick with the love
of him, there is nothing they can less bear then his absence, and for him to
be estranged from them for any time, it is as death to them to want his
presence, but they ask no more then to have the light of his Psalm. 4. 6.
countenance lifted up upon them, for they find contentment enough in him:
this causes to them more joy then the abundance of corn and wine and oil,
(though never so increased) can. Yea, the loving kindness of God is, better
Psalm. 63. 3. 5.
then is love it self, they are ever satisfied with the sweetness of his
mercy as with marrow and fatnes. This makes them to rejoice in the Lord
always, and to rejoice in his strength, Psalm. 18. 31. Psalm. 77. 13. Psalm. 34.
2. and 44. 8.
continually to praise him, and to make their boast of his praise: for who is
God but the Lord, and who so great a God, as is their God, and who so gracious
and good as he? They are (as I may say) proud of their Master, his greatness and
excelcencie being as it is, many are seen to get them under great men to serve
them. A noble man thinks himself honored if he may but hold the basen to a
King, it may be the rejoicing, and counted for the greatest dignity that the
highest Kings in the world can be advanced unto, to serve so great a God as is
he, there is no place in his service mean, his Majesty is so great, there is
none so honorable a Master as the Lord to wait upon, for his throne is
prepared in heaven: therefore do the faithful serve the Lord with gladness
and much ioyfulnes of heart, as thinking themselves greatly honored that they
may serve him: neither do they as mercenarie servants only respect their wages
and hire they shall have for their service, but they look upon the high
dignity, the great worth and glorious excellency of him they attend upon*
whose highness and greatness is such, as that touching him, it may well be
said, Worship him all ye Gods. In serving the Lord they never think any duty
sufficient, nor service great enough that can be performed to so eminent a
Master, so mighty and so gracious a God as is the Lord: for God is with such
an affection, with such a desire and mind to be loved, served and ioyed in,
that he himself may be esteemed and reckoned reward great enough of his own
worship of all the love that is borne to him, and of the best service that any
can do unto him: otherwise he that serves God for any other respect then for
the Prosper. lib. sent.
Lords own sake, serves not so much God, as that which by serving him he
aims at and desires to have.

CHAP. XX.
Of the second dimension of joy wherein they differ, which is the depth of a
dejected and disconsolate estate.

THE second dimension that the joy of a true believer exceeds the joy of a
true believers counterfeit in, is, in the depth of a dejected and low estate
and condition: whereinto they both, as well the one as the other, may at
sometimes indifferently be brought: which so happening, the joy of one unsound
in the faith, is altogether extinct, and can no more be had, when distress
comes upon them they begin to mourn, as those that had outliued all their
joys. But the joy of a true believer, which is the joy of faith, it is either
felt in it according to the power of faiths working, as he then can get to
believe: or it is undoubtedly in the end fetched out of it, and many times
doubled afterward for the little time that it then was ecclipsed. Both of them
may Psalm. 140. 10.
be cast into a labyrinth of troubles and into a sea of miseries, they may be
in woeful distress, and brought to False joy in sorrow does sink.
the state of the forlorn hope (as we use to speak), the one by biding the
adventure is blessed with such success, and scapeth happily out of danger,
when the other shifting for himself, miscarrieth in all that he endeavors,
and so comes short home in the end. A true believer True joy rises out of
sorrow.
is never in such a sea of misery, but he escapes drowning, and swimmeth
safely out of it again; for he is always held up as by the chin, either by
the strength and comfort of his hope, which makes him to rejoice in hope that
he shall be delivered in the end; his hope (by holding fast the confidence of
it) boying him up that he sink not in all those waves: or else he is caught
hold upon and held up from sinking, by the good hand of God his gracious aid,
as Christ took hold of Peter when he was in the Mat. 14. 31.
hollow of the wave, and saved him out of danger. The other when he comes to
the depth that he can feel no ground with his feet, is left there in the
suds, and being hopeless and ioylesse, sinkes down to the bottom, like as
does a stone. Both Gods faithful servants and false hearted dissemblers may
fall down so low, and after a sort be drowned in such depths of desperate
sorrows,* as they may be thought in their own feeling, and in the judgment
of others also, to be sunk, even into hell, as the Psalmist acknowledges God
had delivered his soul out Psalm. 86. 13. Jonah. 2. 2.
of the nethermost hell. And Jonah being cast into the sea and swallowed up of
the Whale, (when he thence cried unto the Lord) said, he cried out of the belly
of hell. The wicked they also sometimes meet with their hell in this life, and
are tormented somewhat timely, or (as the devils complained to Christ) before
their time: for as they that truly serve God have a double heaven, one heaven
upon earth while they live here, another heaven when they have left the earth,
and are out of this life, wherein they shall remain and abide for ever: so
they that serve sin and Satan have a double hell; beside that which was
prepared for them of old, (as the Prophet speaks) which is made deep and
large to hold them all, the burning whereof Isa. 30. 33.
is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord as ariuer of brimstone ever
kindling it, into which they shall be thrown at the last, when their life
here shall have an end: they have another hell in this world: For when they
have done the devil the best service they can, and wrought all the mischief
that possibly they are able, they can find no rest to their souls in the end
of their work, when they seek some rest after their labor, the bed is found
too Isa. 28. ^0.
short, the covering too narrow, so as they cannot wrap themselves, so churlish
and cruel masters are these to serve, as they deal but blows in stead of
wages, and cruel death for their last reward; in the end, they that serve them
best, are beaten most, carrying deepest wounds in their consciences, and
feeling a very hell in their souls, so as they are in hell, before they be in
hell.

When Gods children are in hell, they are not (as I may so say) in a piece of
hell, there is a little heaven in their hell: either they have hope when they
are at the worst that it will be the better with them, and they shall be
delivered out of it again, or they cry out for help, and desire to be
delivered, looking and longing for it till it come: or if they have not such
strength of grace to hope and to pray, yet they have that grace to desire the
having of such grace as might be saving unto them.

The wicked, when they come into hell, they are in a true and whole hell, there
is no piece of heaven to be found therein, there is no hope, there is no help
for them, there is no comfort, there is no peace (says my God) to Isa. 57. 20.
21.
the wicked, they are as the raging sea that cannot be still, but is ever
casting up mire and dirt; they are forced to cry when calamity comes upon
them; yea to roar and howl for vexation of spirit; but being left void of all
hope and comfort, they know of no other remedy but to sly to the halter
despairing and hanging themselves out of the way, and so miserably getting out
of this wretched life, they make have to bring themselves vnrecouerablie to be
plunged into a ten thousand times worser woe, through the little hell of their
miseries they have endured here, they go to that great hell of everlasting
torments that are readily prepared to take hold of them at their first entrance
thither; so hastening out of a few troubles that were of themselves but
momentanie, and could not possibly ever have lasted long, to bring themselves
where they shall have their fill of those hellish torments and troubles that
will never have an end, where they shall be tormented in fiery flames, which
neither can possibly be endured, nor ever avoided: so by the first death,
bringing themselves to the second, where they shall die no more; for they shall
find no halters in hell to hang themselves out of the way as they have done
before.

The joy of a true believer is of the nature of true faith, True joy euercomes
all.
which causes it, and brings it forth. Now faith if it be true and precious
faith indeed, is a grace that is victorious and unconquerable: such is the joy
of a true believer which always does accompany a man's faith; if that may be
felt, this also will be found present: and according to the degree and measure
of the working of his faith; so will joy be felt to be either more or less,
and where faith does not fail, there joy in believing cannot wholly be
extinct: it will live in the fire, it will not be drowned in the water, nor be
made to die even in death; but procure to him that has it, a joyful passage
unto life.

The joy of an hypocrite is answerable to his brainsicke fancy that bred it;
and therefore as a fancy it comes to nothing, but soon flies away,
especially in a tempest and troublesome storm, that it can no more be found,
nor ever heard on again.

Gods people may sometimes be in heaviness, as were the people of the Jews,
when they mourned and wept, hearing N^h. 8. 9. 10.
the book of the Law read by Ezra the Priest, and did perceive how it had not
been kept, but then the joy of the Lord becomes their strength; and if in the
time of their heaviness this joy for the present cannot be felt, yet will it
in the end be fetched out of their greatest heaviness, and most sorrow that
they at any time can fall into. For true joy uses to rise out of godly sorrow
and to further the same again: as godly sorrow taking some beginning out of a
joyful feeling of Gods loving kindness and mercy in Christ Jesus, ends in
the fullness of joy afterward, making the measure thereof far more to abound.
These (as twins and friends) do keep company together, and do follow one
another. The joy of the faithful is often made out of sorrow; yea the soundest
and sweetest joys use to spring out of the bitterest griefs; as the best wine
that was drunken at the marriage, was that which by our Savior Christ was made
out of water: and so out of the lowest bottomes of the deepest sorrows, the
highest springs of the liueliest and most lasting comforts do oftentimes fall
out to be found and fetched forth. These springs are not opened, till there be
Sorrow brings joy.
digging so deep into the hollow ground of the heart, (which above all things
is most deceitful) as there may be coming at the length to the rockie
hardness that is there to be met with, and that rock it self be so far
dug thorough, till there may be felt such a tenderness and softness of the
heart, and such a brokennesse of spirit, as the heart at length may become
wholly contrite, Psalm. 22. 14.
and so molten in the bowels with godly sorrowing, that it be as water powered
out, and being thus broken, contrite, and sorrowful, it so be made fit to be
presented as a most acceptable and well pleasing sacrifice unto God. Now when
the heart of a poor penitent is thus deeply pierced wounded, and beaten
down, even to the very bottom and lowest depth of a thorough-sorrowing and
holy desparing, that he lie complaining and crying out of the bottom of those
deepes for help unto God, setting out his throat and crying with David; Out of
the deep have I Psalm. 130. 1. 2.
called unto thee O Lord, Lord hear my voice. And with Jonah being in the
Whales belly, cry out from thence as out of the belly of hell, then will not
the Lord despise nor Psalm. 22. 24.
abhor the low estate of such as are so deceived, he will not hide his face
from them; but when they cry he will surely hear them: for though he
inhabit eternity, and dwells on high, yet will he listen and look to him
that is Isa. 57. 15.
of a contrite spirit, to receive the spirit of the humble, and to give life
and chearing to them that are contrite in heart. Prayers, sighs and tears
going up from such a distress, mercies and compassions from God, must needs
come down to help all again; and the succors of the Lord are usually in
such cases so ready to be found, as he lets those poor perplexed servants
of his to see them before their eyes, and to touch and feel them as with their
hands; and that in such a manner, as they are not alone comforted for the
present, but confirmed for evermore afterward to trust assuredly in him (fall
out whatsoever at any time may happen), such sighing and weeping, such calling
and crying out unto God for help in time of great need, cannot but ever at the
length obtain a prosperous issue: as may be seen in David, who by his long
crying, was at the length drawn out of that horrible pit, Psalm. 40. 2.
out of the mire and clay wherein before he did stick so fast: and as he else
where says, had his heaviness turned into Psalm. 30. 11. 12.
joy, his mourning into dancing, his sackcloth put off, and he himself girded
with gladness: for which cause his tongue gave praise unto God without
ceasing, and he vowed to give thanks unto him for evermore. And by how much
the more they have hungered and thirsted for the consolations of God, by so much
the more does the Lord fill them Psalm. 90. 14. 15.
and satisfy them with his mercies, and that right soon, so as they are made
to rejoice the more, and to be glad all the days of their life: yea it is the
Lords manner to comfort his, according to the days that he has afflicted
them, and according to the years that they have seen evil, then is their
mouth filled with laughter, and their tongue with joy, as in Psalm. 126. 1.
the turning again of the captivity of Sion. So that the ioyfullest body that
ever was, or is, is a true penitent sinner, who having first felt the load and
burden of his sins, and been wounded in conscience for committing of them,
coming at the last to have those stiff and stark wounds of his, suppled by
the pouring in of that oil of gladness into his heart, whereby he is cheered
and comforted again in Christ Jesus, assurance being given unto him to have
full redemption in his blood, even the forgiveness of all his sins. Oh then
there is joy unspeakable and glorious in that heart, which so sweetly refresh
the soul of that mourning sinner, as he is in a manner, wholly swallowed up
therewith; blessing now the time that ever he so mourned for his sin before,
whose so mourning before, has brought him this great measure of comfort now,
and has put such gladness into his heart, as causes him for very joy both to
laugh and sing. Isa. 65. 14.
These are the sweetest joys that are thus fetched out of the most bitter
sorrows, and these are the surest joys that will last longest, whose ground
has been laid so deep, as to be raised thus out of the lowest bottomes of a
most afflicted estate, in a mind that has been sore wounded, and much pierced
thorough with painful sorrows, and most woeful griefs. And thus at the
length comes that promise to be fulfilled, which the Lord so long ago made to
his people that had endured great affliction, that Isa. 61. 7.
for all the sorrow and shame they had endured, they should have double
comforts, and for their confusion he would make them rejoice in their portion.
Yea, so are Gods servants comforted in their troubles, as ever after they are
made better able to comfort others which are in trouble, by the 2. Cor. 1. 4.
comfort wherewith they themselves are comforted of God.

CHAP. XXI.
The difference of their joy in the third dimension or breadth of it, and how
it is straitened or extended in them.

THe third dimension wherein the joy of these two sorts of believers may be
perceived much to differ, is in respect of the large spread that the one has,
reaching it self out every way far and wide, and extending it self to such
a latitude and breadth, as no man can say, Thus far go the bounds of it, and
no further: and on the other side, the narrow breadth, stra^t lysts, and short
precincts, within the compass whereof the other is shut in, hardly pent up,
and so narrowly confined, as beyond the same it can never be found to extend it
self or reach out any further.

Hypocrites and mis-beleeuers, who are no better then Hypocrites joy is small
or none.
mere reprobates, and plain wicked persons, have the lists of their joy, and
bounds of their rejoicing made so narrow, and so nearly set together, as if
one should demand what allowance of breadth is there made unto such to spread
out their joy upon, and to let their rejoicing lawfully be extended by it? may
be answered, if there be respect had to the lawfulness of their joy, they
have not so much as the breadth of a foot, of one inch, or of one nail to
plant and settle true joy upon. If one would ask in what things may such men
lawfully have joy and true rejoicing? The answer must be, they warrantably
can have joy in nothing: for to whom there is no peace granted, there can be no
sound joy allowed unto them: but there is no peace, says God unto the wicked:
and therefore Isa. 48. 22.
having nothing to do with peace, they have as little to do with joy: if they
take joy in any thing, they do but usurp the joy that they take; nay they are
so far from having cause to rejoice in any thing, as contrarily they have
cause to fear in every thing, because they fear not him whom they ought to
fear: that is, they do not sanctify the Lord of hosts to let him be their
Isa. 8. 13. 14.
fear and their dread, who so would become a sanctuary unto them, to save
them from all things else that might hurt them. They therefore may fear every
thing they meet with, till they can truly come to fear God, they may fear the
wind, the sea, the earth, the air, all things they have use of: their hook,
their hatchet, their horse, their cow, their dog that follows them, the
meat they feed upon; they may fear men and devils, and all things beside:
they wanting a good conscience, washed in the blood of Christ, and in all
holiness of life and conversation, which is a continual feast, cannot but
want true comfort, and want the feeling of sound joy and peace in their hearts;
nay contrarily, having an ill conscience, that is either without feeling,
seared as with a hot iron; or else blinded by the error of judgment; or that
has guilt in it to accuse and condemn for sin yt has bin committed; it so
comes to pass, that they cannot but either be restless for the present, the
accusation of their consciences ever stinging them, and tormenting them with
the guiltiness of their sin; or if they have quiet, it is because hypocrisy
has put their conscience to silence here, that they may soon after roar out
the louder in hell fire; where their cries neither will be pitied, nor their
pains ever be eased. It is truly said that evil doers they are their own
prisoners, and their own hang-men. And if it be so (says one) Plessis.
what skilles it who thou be, if thou be not thine own man? They that are
cast into prison for treason, or stealing, they have (after a sort) already the
halters about their necks, even from the very instant of their first being
taken and put in; howsoever it be that sometimes forgetting their own
misery, they may (as desperate wretches after their cursed manner) be sound
merry together, playing at dice and cards, to drive (as they use to say) the
time away. Such professors as are but hypocrites and mis-beleeuers, who have an
ill conscience, that either ever does, or ever may be accusing of them, they
have nothing to do with sound joy, and true peace: for they are peculiar
comforts, appointed peculiarly to true believers, and to righteous persons, for
whom only they are sown (as light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the
upright in heart), and unto them alone it will come up, and by them alone such
fruit will be reaped. As for the other, the Lord has bidden woe to be cried
out and proclaimed unto them, as who have rewarded evil to their Isa. 3. 11.
own souls. Unto such all things are vnpure; they have no freedom to take
joy or comfort in any thing: they are those that are made prisoners in their
own houses, who can neithey go out to fetch sound comfort abroad, nor have
allowed unto them any liberty to be merry at home. If these do look without
themselves, they being not in Christ Jesus, there is nothing in all the world
which they can find justly to belong unto them, or which they can claim
rightly to be their own. If they take the use of any thing, they are but
usurpers of the same; yea as very thieves they have but stolen all they do
set hand upon; and therefore they must look to be had to the Gaile, and put
into the Lords pinfold, to answer for the trespass which they have done unto
him (as to the right owner) therein. The delight which they take in all outward
things of this life, is but as the pleasure of stolen waters, that are thought
sweet of them that do drink them; and like to bread eaten in secret, that is
pleasant for a time: but they that banquet with no better cheer, vnhealthsome
and unhappy is their fare. The guests that are at such feasts (as Solomon
tells us) are all in the very depth of hell. If these do rest in themselves,
and Prou. 9. 18.
seek for some comfort at home, as who would gladly be made merry, and feel
some joy and delight from that which is within; for as much as their hearts are
not sprinkled Heb. 10. 22.
from an ill conscience, and their bodies are not wash^d with pure water; there
is no joy to be assoorded from thence: nay, there they find the least ease,
and the most torment and disquiet of all the rest that possibly they can meet
with else where: beside (unless they chance to earth themselves in the caves
of oblivion, that judgment to come may not come to their minds), their estate
in that behalf is as uncomfortable, as is their that are clapped up in closest
prisons, and cast into deepest and darkest dungeons, so as they can see no
manner of light of Sun or Moon, or any star that does shine: the liberty
they find there, is as little as the liberty of him that is chained fast to a
post that cannot stir at all. For where the conscience does accuse, their
soul is made restless with the vexations thereof, and then any palace, how
princely soever, would be no better then a prison, or a Gaile to keep the
offender in: yea, Paradise it self would be little better then Purgatory, or
hell it self; as may be seen in Adam, who having lost a good conscience by
eating the forbidden fruit, though he was in Paradise still, yet all the joys
therein were not able to comfort him; but as one condemned in himself; when
the Lord called for him, he ran into the thicket to hide himself from Gods
presence, that he might not be found. Thus are the workers of iniquity
imprisoned in the little-ease of their own accusing and condemning conscience,
and held as captives bound ^^st in the cords of their own iniquities: they may
dwell in good houses, they may walk in fair galleries and pleasant gardens,
they may solace themselves in many other delights: but if they be but
hypocrites, that have only fair outsides, and but rotten hearts, carrying about
with them the crying of their restless conscience that is ever accusing of
them, though outwardly they may seem to look as smirke and as clear as the
Sun, and not once look awry; yet within the faces of their conscience do
gather blackness, and there are terrors and fears of damnation felt within;
and so while the body dwells in a palace, the soul lies in the mean while
in a painful prison; and when outwardly they seem to live at ease, and to
have great liberty and freedom to do what they will, they inwardly are in
very great staits, and lie fast snared and fettered in those spiritual bonds,
out of which they cannot possibly deliver themselves. And this is that common
gaile that the Lord (as the high and chief Justice of all the world) sends
all malefactors unto after they have trespassed and done evil against him, he
makes his warrant to have them bound in the cords of their own sins, and
their souls to be thrown into the hellish dungeons of their accusing,
condemning and tormenting conscience, where they shall lie in little ease,
restless and ioylesse, deprived of the light and true comfort of their hearts,
and overwhelmed with such darkness, such horrors and fears as cannot but
dismay them, where they shall find no more ease then if they did lie upon a
rack, but be as restless as any prisoner that lies under bolts and heavy
irons, when he is put in the most uneasy stocks that do pinch him with
pain, gawling and hurting him as he lies in them: as it is said of Joseph,
that when his feet Psalm. 105. 18.
were put into the stocks, the iron entered into his soul. There is no prison
so uneasy, nor dungeon so uncomfortable for any to be cast into as this is.
And yet Gods own servants and children for displeasing their father are many
times committed to ward, and put into this prison and Gaile where they are
suffered to lie, without seeing either Sun, or Moon, or light of any star,
no light of comfort shining to them for a long time. Howbeit these are but
prisoners Zach. 9. 12.
in hope (as speaks the Prophet) Christ their surety will in good time bail
them; for he is come to bring deliverance Isa. 61. 1.
to the captive, and to them that are bound in prison the opening of the door.
But as for the other, their sentence is to endure perpetual imprisonment in
this kind of prison here without bail or main-prize, till the day of that
great Assize come, when there shall be a general gaile-deliuerie out of all
prisons on earth, to send all such prisoners to hell, there to be fast bound in
the chains of darkness for evermore, during which time, there is none that
can rescue or bail these prisoners, or fetch them out of this captivity which
they are thus held fast in: friends may be made to fetch out a malefactor out
of man's gaile, his pardon may be sued out and gotten for him, yet being got out
thence, he is never the nearer for being freed, and got out of Gods gaile, he
will be sure to hold him still fast chained to the block, till pardon be
obtained of him, then he may be heard say (as it is in Job), deliver him, and
according Job 33. 24.
as he made his warrant to put him in, so he likewise do make his warrant to
have him out again. Otherwise where the sorrows of the mind are the fetters
of the soul, if any will go about to break out of them, or to file them off,
before God himself shall be pleased to unlock them, and free them out of
them, woe will be to them. For howsoever out of other gailes, the prisoners
sometimes by breaking prison escape the hands of their keepers, yet it is not
so in this prison of a restless, unquiet and accusing conscience, none that
has been committed to it could ever by any indirect means of his own which
possibly he could use, break out of it again: this prison will hold him, and
have still where ever he become; if he flee away it will follow him, and go
with him as fast and as far as he goes; though he flee never so far off,
yet he is never a whit the further from it; he is still in safe prison here,
and in sure ward; he may not think he can escape out of Gods hands, as
sometimes the prisoner does out of the hands of his keeper; God stands in no
such doubt as men do, the offender can never get out of his circuit and
compass, for he has branded him as with the broad arrow in his forehead (as
well has observed that thrice Noble Man), He may (says he) well shift his
apparel in some Morney.
privy place, and change his name; but do what he will, he can never so lie
hid, but God will find him out; for the Lords branding iron has pureed even to
his very heart, he can never fly so fast but God will still be before him; if
he she from the East, the Lord will have him in the (...) the further be goes
from the North, the near (...) is unto the South; he ever runn^th as in a
round, and (...) be is with in the Lords reach and compass so that there is
escaping from him. The Lord will be sure to fetch again every one that would
break from him, and play the runaway; run whither they can, he will belay
all the world for them, but he will be sure to have them, he will send out his
serieants to arrest them, and he has his Bailiefes in every corner, that have
writs to serve upon them, and to bring them in. Jonah Jonah 1. 4. 12. 15. 17.
played the runaway, and would have been gone from God, but he sent out after
him, the sea had commission to arrest him, which would never be quiet till it
had him, and had committed him to ward as close prisoner in the Whales belly.
Thus hypocrites and unbelievers, and all wicked persons whosoever that are
workers of iniquity, they do ever traile their own halters after them, and
spin the thread that will make coards to hamper them, and to hang them in the
end. And this may truly be said to be the latitude of the sound joy of an
hypocrite, or mis-beleeuer, that it has no latitude at all to be laid out unto
it, there being no one thing to be found wherein he may have sound comfort,
and which he may settle true joy upon, as in the end shall never fail him.

Contrarily so ample is the joy of a sound Christian and Sound joy is la^ge.
true believer indeed, so wide and large is the spread of it every way, as the
extent thereof reaches itself out to every thing; their eyes are clear to
see from East to West that all is theirs, as they are Christ's, and as Christ is
Gods: 1. Cor. 3. 22. 23.
neither is there any one thing that may happen unto them, wherein their true
and warrantable joy cannot find some ground or other to set footing upon, and
to be raised out of the same, though not primarily and simply for the thing it
self, yet for their own selves, and for their own sakes in some one or other
respect they may find cause (though not in themselves, yet in the Lord) to
rejoice always for his goodness unto them, who by his gracious and wise
providence does so order and dispose of every thing that does happen, as he
never fails, but does cause all to work together, to the good of them that
truly do love him. This is that which the Apostle wills Phil. 4. 5. 6.
and waranteth to every good Christian, that they do rejoice in the Lord
always. Now always includes, as all times, so all things and all cases that
may happen; for if there were any thing that might come to pass, or any
condition might befall a true Christian, wherein there could not be found some
cause of rejoicing in the Lord for some one respect or other, then might not a
Christian rejoice always: but this the Apostle has said, he may, yea and
ought also to do, or else he would not so directly have spoken it, and willed
the doing of it: and lest any should think, he had somewhat with the most,
and granted too large an allowance unto Christians thus always to rejoice, to
meet with that doubt, and to make it clear, that there is warrant for them so
to do, he says it again, and speaks it the second time, doubling that
speech; as if he should say; I willed you to rejoice in the Contra. 116. 128
Lord always, in saying whereof, I have said nothing too much, I know what I
do^ say* I say nothing but what I have warrant for; I will therefore say it
again, Rejoice in the Lord always, and again, I say rejoice. But it is
worthy the marking, he does not will us to rejoice always in all things that
may happen; for some things may either be done by us, or be done to us, which
are not simply to be ioyed in, but to be lamented in, and much be wailed by us;
for which things (themselves alone being considered) we are to be greatly
sorry, as being evil in themselves. But because so wonderful is the Lord in
counsel, and so excellent in working, as he knows how to bring good out of
the greatest evil that can happen to be done ( for otherwise (as well has one
of the Fathers observed) the Lord would never let evil be, unless he knew
how to bring good out of evil); therefore he wills us (whatsoever cause we
may have) to be humbled in our selves for that which may befall us, or unto any
others; yet to rejoice in the Lord always, in his mercy and goodness,
justice and truth, in the excellency of his wisdom and the absolute
perfection of his skill, as who knows without all failing, to make all things
beautiful in due time; for Eccles. 3. 11.
so perfect a workman is he, as it skilleth not what matter and stuff he
takes into his hand to work upon; reffuse and rubbish that none others can
tell how to put to any use, he will improve to such a purpose, and cause so
well to serve his turn, as the very perfection of beauty shall be seen in
that passing workmanship of his hands, which he will make evident to be done by
him, and to be wrought upon the same: For perfect is the work of the mighty
God, and all his ways are judgment; God is true and without Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
wickedness, just and righteous is he, as Moses did sing in his Swannes song.

Now if any do desire, that as the Lord turns all things to good, so he
might get good also out of every thing, that so he might always rejoice in
all things so made profitable unto him, the Apostle gives him this direction
following in the place before cited, that in nothing being too mistrustfully
careful, he do make prayers unto God always, and in all things for the same.

Innumerable be the things that in particular may and do fall out in our life
time, which do much and nearely concern us, some which of themselves in their
own nature, and at the first hand are very joyful and comfortable unto us,
sent from God as benefits and blessings to cheer comfort, and do us good, and
so they are accounted of by us, and entertained with all gladness and
rejoicing on our parts, returning back again hearty thanks and praises unto
God for the same. In such things it is clear enough, a good Christian may and
ought much to rejoice: but there are many other things happening, which may
seem to be as much against us, and about such things is all the question, and
the greatest doubt made, how in those things (which first and in their own
nature are heavy things to be heard of, to be seen with our eyes, or felt by
our own experience, which justly do bring matter of grief and heaviness to
our hearts, and as justly may call for much humiliation at our hands), a
faithful servant of God may possibly gather or pick out any kind of true
comfort, or find how any cause of sound joy, and warrantable rejoicing in any
respect may be raised from the same; that so this may stand true, the joy of a
sound Christian is of so large an extent, as it may be reached out to every
thing that does happen, and (according to that the Apostle wills) that a good
Christian may be warranted to rejoice always in the Lord.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the lets of true joy, and first of sin: And how the Lord raises thence
maater of rejoicing to believers.

OF all the things that are of this nature and kind, the greatest doubt (so
far as I conceive) may be made of these two in particular: viz. either of
such things as do respect our dealing against God by sinning and disobeying of
him, or do respect Gods dealing against us by chaftising and not sparing of
us, and that either by his withdrawing himself from us in hiding his own
countenauce, or by his coming near unto us in judgment to smite us with his
rod, laying on heavy chastisements, and bringing sore and great troubles upon
us. For as for all else that do befall unto us, by any other means of men or
devils, or any other the creatures, if they were not armed and made strong
against us by our sins, or were not sent and set on by Gods own hand his
warrant and allowance, he being thereunto justly provoked by us to set them
upon us, and to set them against us, we need not weigh them a rush, nor care
at all what they al together could possibly do, for the doing to us any hurt,
or any way to hinder our steady comfort. But even in those things whereof the
greatest doubt may be made: if there can for the present no manner of cause be
found why in any respect a true believer may have his joy in the Lord even then
still abiding, and some kind of lawful reioyeing in the Lord yet allowed unto
him; it is not because there is wholly wanting all manner of ground from whence
may be raised a true and warrantable kind of rejoicing, but because we cannot
see it till our eyes be opened, and the same be showed unto us, as the Angel
did show Hagar the well and fountain from whence she Genesis 21. 19.
fetched water for her refreshing in time of her great thirst, when she thought
there was no way but perishing, both for her and her child too in that her
distress.

If we consider of our sins against God, which of all things else may justly
be thought to be the greatest let of our joy, and that which does most hinder
our rejoicing, it cannot be denied, if there be any one thing more then other
in the world (in respect of our selves alone) that may cast us lowest down,
and make us vile in our own eyes, which may cleave the reins of our back
asunder, load our hearts with heavy grief, and fill them brimme full of
sorrow and woe, which may take all joy and gladness from us, and cause our
harpes to be turned into mourning* Job. 30. 31.
and our organs into the voice of them that weep, and make our songs be turned
into howlings, as the Prophet Amos 8. 3.
s^^^keth: it is this that we not only do know that in us, that is in our
flesh no good thing is abiding, but that there is such a perpetual rebellion
found to be in us, and such a law in our members rebelling against the law of
our minds, Romans 7. 23.
as is often c^rrying us captive unto the committing of sin, whereby our own
consciences are deeply wounded, God dishonored and much displeased, and
thereby enough done to incense his wrath, and to cause the fire of his anger to
be kindled and flame out against us: in regard whereof we have cause to take
up that sorrowful mourning and lamentation of Jeremiah: Woe to us that Lam. 3.
16.
ever we have thus sinned, and every one to cry out with the Apostle, Oh
wr^tched man that I am, who shall now deliver Romans 7. 24.
me from this body of death!

Howbeit, as the Apostle Paul feeling that prick and thorn^ in the flesh* the
messenger of Satan which was sent to buff^t him, and praying earnestly to the
Lord that it might be taken from him, when he once had received answer from
the Lord, that he would have his own strength made perfect in his weakness,
did rest in that answer, and was content to have his own weakness made
known unto him, that so the power of Christ might the rather rest upon him,
for the Lord would have that continued still, causing it to turn to the
singular good of the Apostle, which he was so much afraid of, and did so
earnestly pray that it might be removed and taken quite away from him, thereby
wholly disappointing Satan of his malicious purpose, in turning that to a
sovereign remedy and preservative medicine for the good of his servant, which
Satan had prepared and iniected into him as a most pernicious poison to do him
hurt withal.

After this manner may the true servants of God, when the Lord either leaves
them to themselves to fall through their own infirmity, or gives Satan leave
not only to buffet them, as he did Paul, but to beat them quite down and
overcome them, so far as to make them fall to the committing of some gross
and grievous sin: if by that means (the Lord being merciful unto them) What
gain out of sin.
through the supply of his grace given) they may be brought the more to be
humbled, and the better to know their own frailty and weakness how great it
is, and to be the more careful for ever after with fear and trembling to
work out their own salvation. If the riches of Gods grace, and superabounding
of Gods mercy may be occasioned to be showed forth the rather, and to shine
out the more to his praise, in pardoning the sins, and passing by the
transgressions of his people, by the means of Satan's great malice, in drawing
Gods servants to commit both many and most heinous offenses, until sin every
way may be seen to have abounded in the^* If the glorious excellency of Gods
almighty power may be made clearly to appear in raising up again his fallen
servants from under so great a weakness, giving such new strength unto them,
as whereby for ever after they are made to stand much more firm and sure, then
they did before they so fearfully and dangerously did fall: If Gods infinite
wisdom, and the wonderfulnes of his working, who has given skill to the
Physician by his art to take the flesh of the viper, which is poison, and to
temper it so with healthsome things, and to correct it so with cordials, as of
poison he can make sovereign triacle that shall expel poison, and so make
that which would have caused death, to become an excellent means of preserving
life: shall in like manner appear in so ordering and using the sins of his
servants, after they have once been committed, yea even the greatest and
grieuousest of them (which are the deadliest venom of all other, and the
rankest poison that can be, which does not only kill with death, but with death
everlasting), as by those sins they have so committed, he cures them of
many sins past, and preserves them from many sins for time to come, fetching
from them, and causing to be expelled out of them a deal of inueterated
naughtiness and poysonfull corruption that was so habituated in them, that
hardly by any other means would ever have bin drawn from them, or any way got
out of them: If by seeing and suffering them to be cast into such filthy
sloughs, such puddle and mire and sinkes of loathsome sins, he forces them
by occasion thereof to go wash and rinse themselves cleaner, purer and whiter
from them, and all other their sins, then ever they were before: If by their
falling away for a time, and departing from him for a season, as did Onesimus
from Philemon, he recouereth them to a better condition, and thereby makes
them his own for ever, that now they may no more depart away from him, but
cleave faster to the Lord with purpose of heart then ever they did before: If
by the committing of some enormious vice, some most heinous and flagitious
wickedness, in committing whereof the very deeds of the wicked may seem to
be exceeded, the Lord shall bring his hard-hearted servant, whose heart was
harder then the nether millstone, that could not before by any means be broken,
now to be so suppled and softened, so mollified and made to melt, as did the
heart of Josiah, in such sort as 1. King. 22. 19.
that the same sin of his which was most dammable, and would have caused death,
is now made to be a means of such humiliation in him and godly sorrowing, as
causes and works (...) in him, even repentance unto life. In these 2. Cor.
7. 10.
and the like respects a true servant of God (notwithstanding his manifold
sinning) may and ought to have joy and hi^ rejoicing in the Lord.

For some one or other of these respects, or it may be for them altogether,
does the Lord suffer many, and some of his most worthy and excellent servants
too, to have been overtaken with many infirmities, yea sometimes As the
mighty power of God in the beginning of the world did appear, in bringing
light out of darkness, and shall appear in the end of the world, in bringing
life out of death: so does the same mighty power and wisdom of God daily
appear, in bringing good out of evil.
with very gross and grievous sins, yet always so ordering and disposing of
every thing, as he that is seen daily to bring light out of darkness, never
has failed to bring good out of all their evil, and such good as has been
for the very good of those his servants themselves that have done all that
evil, and made to the high honor and glory of his own Majesty; who is so
good in himself, as he is goodness it self, and makes all things good that
he medleth with, and is wrought by his hand. This is and has been the Lords
own and only doing, and that from the beginning, and worthily may it be
accounted marvelous in our eyes. In the first sin that ever was committed by
man, how wonderful has been the Lords working therein, to bring so much good
out of that great evil, as unto all Gods elect, and redeemed in Christ, their
case is now made far better then ever it was, far happier and far surer
then either it was, or would have been, if to this present Adam had kept his
standing, and should still have kept his foot from slipping or stepping amiss.
The Lord we know has turned Adams fall to his higher rising, and his dangerous
slipping to a more sure standing, in so much as not praising the evil, but him
that brings good out of evil, we may say with that reverend Beza, Oh happy
fall which has brought us higher! Oh most happy darkness, without which this
truly Sermon. on Cantic. cap. 2.
group light had never appeared unto us. After this manner has the Lord still
for the one improued the falls and foiles of his servants ever to their more
good. David that fell so foulely, and committed so gross, and so heinous a
sin, that gave him cause to think of washing and cleansing himself from such
filth and pollution, that made him seem loathsome even in his own eyes, was
brought by means thereof to go ransack his whole life, and search out all his
other sins, until he came to the gaging of the very belly and womb of
sin, where it first had the conception, and from whence originally it first
took his beginning, and did first of all spring, and that he cries out on,
and brings it forth, does disgrace himself therewith, confessing unto God,
that beside that great sin that he had now committed, he saw himself to be
an unclean creature, ouer-run with a contagious leprosy of sin all over,
and that from his conception: so as his falling into that one great sin, became
a means of his going in hand with the labor of getting himself washed and
cleansed, not only from that, but from all the rest of his sins, even his
birth sin and all; and that not slightly, but earnestly with a through rinsing
and rubbing of himself, till he might become as clear as the glass, and as
white as snow. Psalm. 51. 5. 7.
Many are conceited of themselves, and of their own strength, taking no notice
of other filthiness of the flesh and spirit, or corruption of sin that is
within them, so long as they are kept from committing gross and enormious
iniquities, the Lord is feign therefore to give them over, and to leave them to
themselves, that they may fall into such gross sins, as whereby their other
hidden corruptions may break out, and manifestly be discerned both to
themselves and others how great it is. There be that will never think of
thoroughly repenting themselves, nor of Ier. 4. 14.
cleansing and washing their hearts from wickedness, that they may be saved,
until they be tumbled into some such puddle as David was, and bemired with
such filth, and then of force they are driven to it, and made to set hand at
once to that work, unless they care not to see themselves perish for
altogether. Thus the Lord is feign to make of the poison of some gross sin
an antidote against the poison of other lesser sins, which of themselves are
baneable enough, if they be not in time expelied and purged out, to kill every
soul in which they are retained, that so there may be a ridding away of all by
a general repenting for all, though the going in hand with such repentance was
at the first occasioned by one. And thus we may perceive, how as the Lord is
said to punish sin with sin in the wicked, so he knows how to cure sin
Sin cured by sin.
by sin in the godly, so making their sins as well as all things else to
turn to their good. Look but upon the strange cure of that one sin of
pride, which is a sin as high-borne as any other, and spreads out it self
as far, the whole race of mankind being either more or less infected Pride.
and tainted with the same. This sin will live, when other sins shall die,
and will raise it self up out of the ruins of them all, which is more to be
feared among virtues, then found among other vices; it is the very venom of
virtue, and as a spreading cankar or gangrene, having once gotten to be
fastened upon the body of virtue, it never leaves (unless it be the more
timely cured) till going from joint to joint, it has weakened and overthrown
that whole body, how beautiful soever it were otherwise and goodly to look
upon. This is the greatest enemy to virtue that it has, as that which has
virtue ever in chase, and still is dogging it at the heels. The Apostle
himself after his high advancement, and abundance of revelations given him,
when he had been wrapped up into the third heavens, was not exempt from the
peril thereof, nor from the danger of the hot pursuit and assailement thereof,
as which was ready to set upon him, if help and aid the sooner had not been
sent; the messenger of Satan therefore was feign to be sped out apace* to
stand Paul herein in some stead, who fell to beating and buffeting of him, 2.
Cor. 12. 7.
and brought him so low, as he was every way vnsitted for any manner of pride
to set upon him, or once to meddle or make any whit at all with him, but was
feign to leave him as it found him. And so by one enemy he was helped out of
the hands of another enemy, every way as bad as he. Though Satan sending his
messenger, aimed at nothing less, then at such an end: but God that
ouer-powreth Satan, and ouer-ruleth in all things, would have it so come to
pass. But what is the cure of this mischief of pride? surely as pride
spoileth virtue, so vice spoileth pride again. And as out of the ashes of
other sins, pride is said to spring up; so out of the flourishing again of
other sins, all that pride is plucked down again. And this may be thought
to be one cause, why the Lord sees it meet, not wholly to free his servants
from many infirmities, and much corruption of nature which is found still
remaining in them; namely, that as he would not cast out all the enemies of his
people out of that good land, to which he had brought them, lest the wild
beasts for want of their help should prevail against them: so does the Lord
suffer that strength of corruption to remain in his children, that they may be
aided thereby against all the assailings of pride, which is such a wild beast
as otherwise could not well be with-stood, but were likely otherwise to
devour all virtue that it could find in them, and by so doing, come finally to
overthrow them. Satan therefore that is so busy with Gods children to be ever
tempting them to sin, and to one sin after another, does therein but work
against himself, and does but lay a train to blow up the castles of pride,
wherein himself should most strongly and safely abide. And while he never
leaves, till he have drawn the child of God at the last to commit some great
and heinous sin which proves to be as a wakening sin unto him, who before
was slumbring in security, and makes him to start up and arise out of his
sleep, and considering his ways in his heart to humble himself at once, and
to repent for that, and for all his sins beside. Now Satan in this doing,
does but pull (as we use to say) an old house upon his head, for he pulls
down, and overthrows thereby the whole frame of all the other sins which
he had built up, and got to be planted in that man's heart before, and so by
his restless tentations, he destroys and crosses his own work, the Lord
making him in despite of his teeth, to work against himself, who though he
do what he can, yet will the Lord ever be found to ouershoote Satan, even in
his own bow. In all which respects, the Lord (through his infinite wisdom,
goodness, and mercy) so ordering every thing, as he makes the very sins of
his servants committed by them, not a little to turn to the good of
themselves, by causing them thereby the better to know their own frailty, and
what strength of corruption is still abiding in them, that so they may be
drawn to a greater humiliation, and more earnest repenting not alone for their
last sins, but for such sins also as before, either were not known, or
never at al soundly repented on, and withal to have a far greater care bred in
them, how to carry themselves more warily for afterward, evermore with fear
and trembling working on their own salvation. And when besides Gods servants
shall see the works of Satan thus distolued in them, that what he intended for
their overthrow, does now serve for their furtherance, and to their making for
ever, the devils poison being so altered and changed by the ouer-ruling hand,
as it becomes medicine, Satan tempting and drawing them to sin, and the
Lord by that sin pulling them out of more sin, so curing sin by sin.
And lastly, and chiefly when they at the length does see, how the Lord does out
of the sins committed by them (how odious and abominable soever they have
been which they have done), make way for his own greater glory, and the more
magnifying of the riches of those his mercies, whereby both the same, their
sins are pardoned unto them, and they themselves in like manner cleared and
purged from the venomous infection, and strong corruption of them; what should
let, but that (which being ever humbled in themselves with godly sorrow for
their sins, and going out of themselves), yet the true servants of God (their
sins notwithstanding) may rejoice in the Lord, and always rejoice in him,
for the excellency of all this work thus wrought by him?

Q. Though there may be some cause of a Christians rejoicing in the Lords
blessed work, whereby he brings good out of the evil of such sins as he
has committed, when once such good effects are seen to be brought out, yet
while this sin is still abiding, without being put to any such use, as you
have before spoken; I demand what cause there can be showed, or any way found
to be, of a Christians rejoicing in the Lords work which he is in hand with
toward him at the very time of his sinning, or still abiding in his sin?

A. That I may not be mistaken herein, I am so far from either saying or
thinking, that any servant of God falling into sin, may any way rejoice in
himself, in respect of the sin that either he has once fallen into, or
still is seen to continue and abide in; as confidently I do affirm, he can
never be sufficiently cast down, nor grieved enough with godly sorrowing for
the same; and therefore according to the counsel given by the Apostle James 4.
9. 10.
James, I say, he ought to be afflicted, to mourn, and to weep; letting his
laughter be turned into mourning, and his joy into heaviness* humbling
himself daily in the sight of the Lord, till having obtained mercy from God,
for having repentance unto life granted to him, whereby he may turn from his
sin, and bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of life, the Lord may then
lift him up, in giving him sound comfort, and true joy again. Howbeit, in
respect of another work which the Lord himself is then in hand with, even
when his servant is sinning; or after he has sinned, found still abiding in
that sin he has committed (if that work of God could be well seen into,
and rightly and wisely discerned), I see nothing to the contrary, but there
might be found the like cause of rejoicing therein, as the sick patient
finds cause to rejoice in the work, which he sees his skillful Physician to
be in hand with, when he is tempering the potion, mixing the ingredients,
preparing the medicine, and then does administer it unto him, and sets it a
working; the patient cannot all this time rejoice, as having seen and felt
what is the good effect of that medicine, nor in perceiving the cure to be
fully wrought, and finished upon him: but knowing that the Physician, who has
taken him in hand, is both skillful and faithful, he rejoices to see him to
be about the work, and so diligent therein, as to be a preparing the medicine
within his best understanding, he knows of all others to be most fit for
his curing. So when the Lord sees no other means, to be so fit for the
recovering of some dull and dead-hearted servant of his, out of some sin that
he is fallen into, and in which he still lies slumbring, without any
repenting for the same, but to leave him to himself, that the falling into a
greater sin, may by occasion of so great a fall, be made to awake out of his
slumber, and be brought to a through and sound repentance for all his sins
together: while such a secure Christian, thus sick and diseased, is committing
of some great and heinous sin, the Lord who is his Physician, is in hand in
the mean while with another work of his own, namely, to be tempering of
such a medicine as shall not fail to cure him, the Lord taking the poison of
that sin which he is a committing, and making thereof a most sovereign
medicine, it being the Lords manner, as has bin spoken before, to cure sin
with sin. Now this work which the Lord is in hand with even at that time, if
it either can be seen by himself (which is most hard so to be seen by any
for the present time), or can be showed him by any other to be so a working,
has matter in it sufficient to bear out a warrantable rejoicing for that the
Lord is a doing, though otherwise there is most just cause of deep sorrowing,
and most bitter lamentation for that which already is done, and is yet further
a doing by his owneselfe in that thing.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the second hinderance of joy in Gods hiding his face, and how that is made
an occasion of rejoicing unto a true and sound believer.

THe second maine point about which especially doubt may be made how a true
believer may always have joy, and rejoice in the Lord, is in regard of Gods
own dealing toward us: and that either in regard When God hides his face.
of his withdrawing himself from us by hiding his face; or in regard of his
coming near unto us by smiting us with his hand. Touching the first; it is
true there is nothing more grievous and fearful, then to be forsaken of God;
and therefore God himself says, Woe unto Hos. 9. 12.
you when I shall forsake you: for if God be our light, our confidence, and
our comfort; and if all our happiness be in him, then to be forsaken of God,
is to be deprived of all true comfort, to be left to all misery, and to be cast
as into a whole sea and gulf of desperate sorrow, and into very hell it self:
the favor of God being better then is life it Psalm. 63. 3.
self. A man were better be out of his life then out of Gods favor. But it
may be demanded with the Apostle, does, or will God at any time cast off his
people? and it may Romans 11. 1.
be answered again with the same Apostle, God forbid. God will not cast away
his people! And as the Psalmist says, he will not forsake his inheritance: for
so has God Psalm. 94. 14. Heb. 13. 5.
himself said, I will never fail thee, nor forsake thee. True it is, God
sometimes for a moment in his anger, does hide his Isa. 54. 8.
face from his children; and carries the matter of his good will toward them
so closely, as they can know of no favor that he bears them, it not being
between him and them as it was yesterday, and yesterday, when Psalm. 90. 13.
he is found to be unto them as a passenger, and as a stranger that tarryeth
but for a night: then there is hanging about him, and crying with Moses and the
people, Oh God return, be pacified toward thy servants: then there is
entreating and praying, with David, Go not far from me Psalm. 22. 11. Psalm.
119. 8.
O God, for trouble is hard at hand, and forsake me not ouerlong, Oh God. Yea
the Lord himself seems to rise up against his children, and then there is
crying out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The^ Sion mournes and
Psalm. 22. 1.
complains, the Lord has forsaken me, my God has forgotten Isa. 49. 14.
me. But this hiding of Gods face is but a fatherly frowning for a time, to awe
his children the more, and breed the better circumspection in them for
afterward: when God does forsake his children, that forsaking is neither fully
nor finally for ever. He many times having forsaken them, does tarry long
before he does return to them again; he holds off, till he can hold off no
longer; that so he may make his children fear the more to fall out with him
again. But it is a saving fear that keeps us in that state, as we shall not
need to fear anymore, and it is a profitable vexation and anguish of the soul
that brings rest thereunto for ever after. Though the Lord may seem sometimes
to go away, and to hide his face, yet he never takes such a farewell of them,
as meaning Ioh. 16. 7. 22.
no more to come at them: But as our Savior Christ about the time of his
departure, comforted his Disciples, by telling them it was expedient for them
that he did go away; assuring them, that though he did go away, yet he
would see them again, and then they should have the greater joy; yea their
hearts should so rejoice, as none should take their joy from them: So may it in
some other respect be truly said in this case, that it is sometimes expedient
for Gods servants, that their heavenly Father do hide his countenance from
them, withdraw his presence and go away; especially when that through their
too great unthankfulness and security, they begin to play the wantons too
much, and it is found with them according to that which runs in the proverb,
Too much familiarity breeds contempt: then it is time for the Lord to hide
his countenance for the better awing of such; then does need require that such
be made sorry and left in heaviness: for howbeit this is ever but for a time,
I will go away Hos. 5. 15.
(says the Lord) and hide my self till they seek me, in their affliction
they will seek me diligently: the Lord looks for certain to hear from such
when they are in affliction; but howsoever he does go away, yet may it truly be
said to such, as our Savior promised to his Disciples, he will surely come to
see them again, and their hearts shall rejoice with such joy as none shall
take from them, when they shall once see his face, and know his face again,
and perceive the rays of the bright countenance of God to shine upon their
dark and cloudie hearts, what light of comfort will not that bring to a poor
distressed soul? even more joy then corn, and wine, and oil, though never so
increased, can possibly cause to be felt. And this is that which the Lord
promised his people, that though for a moment in his anger, he Psalm. 89. 32.
33.
hide his face, yet with everlasting mercy he would have compassion upon them.
Yea when the Lord himself seems to be in greatest displeasure, so as he does
visit the offenses of his people with the rod, and their sins with scourges;
yet will he not take his mercy from them, nor falsify his truth: though for a
time he may be angry, yet will he not keep his Psalm. 103. 9.
anger always toward his children: and unto this it has pleased the Lord to
bind himself not only by promise, but by oath, that his kindness shall never
depart from his, nor the Covenant of his peace be removed from them: which he
would have them know is as sure to be performed, as the oath which he has
sworn shall be kept, that the Isa. 54 9. 10.
waters of Noah shall no more go over the earth; and if any man can break the
Covenant which the Lord has made with the day and night, that there should not
be day nor night Ier. 33. 20. 21.
in their season; then may they break this Covenant which the Lord has made
with his poople in this behalf. Howsoever then the Lord being offended, may
sometimes in his displeasure hide his face from his servants and forsake them,
as Christ did the Spowse, that we might more desire after him, and more
earnestly seek for him; yet may there a favor be found and perceived to be
borne unto them by the Lord himself, even in that his displeasure: yea that
vey kind of forsaking of Gods children, is a token that they are not forsaken,
because it is done by way of correction, and in meaning to reclaim them. When
he so seems to go from us, he does indeed but offer himself to come nearer
unto us (though this be not so casily discerned); for so does the Author to the
Hebrews tell us, that God in chastening of us, does offer himself unto Heb.
12. 7.
us as unto sons. It is more fearful forsaking of God when the Lord seems
to do nothing less then to forsake, and when he brings no trouble nor
affliction for sin, but leaves men to themselves, and to the fulfilling
Psalm. 81. 12. Romans 1. 28.
of the lusts of their own hearts to do what they he is never more angry,
then when after that sort he seems to be pleased in doing nothing against
them; for this is such a kind of dealing by the Lord; as if a Physician should
give over a patient when his case is desperate. And so on the other side, the
Lord is never less angry, then when he seems to be so angry, as to have now
left and forsaken us, that thereby he might the better humble us and break our
hearts. For this he uses as the best medicine, the fittest remedic to cure us,
and recover us out of that most dangerous lethargy of carnal security into
which we were fallen; and therefore as sick patients are not glad of their
sickness and disease, but being sick, are glad of the coming of the
Physician, that brings them medicine and ministers it to them, because now
they hope they are in the way of being cured and recovered again; so Gods
children having fallen by their sinning, so far to displease God, as now he
will give them no countenance till their hearts be broken for their sinning,
and they brought to better humiliation; though there is no cause they should
be pleased with their sinning; yet have they cause to rejoice in the Lords
faithfulness unto them, that when no other way could be found sufficient for
the reclaiming of them out of their sin, and bringing them home again that
were departed from him, then for himself to be a while estranged from them:
he would choose rather to loose them for a time, that so being occasioned more
earnestly to seek his face and his favor again, he might by means thereof
make them more constantly to abide with him for ever after, rather then by
continuing his wonted favors toward them, see and suffer them to depart still
further from him, till there should at the length a perfect breach grow to be
made between them, and so a falling off for altogether

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the third let of true joy, which is the Cross; and how their joy is
augmented, through the much good that comes thereby.

TOuching that other point of Gods drawing near unto us in laying the cross
upon our sholders and bringing troubles and afflictions upon us for our sins,
when he does visit our offenses with the rod, and our sins with scourges; the
like doubt may be made how Gods children bearing the cross, should not be so
pinched and gauled with the same, and being smitten and sorely stricken, yea
deeply wounded with Gods own hand, should not so have all comfort and joy in
God taken from them, as that possibly they should do any other thing during
all that time, but lament and mourn; especially when the Lord himself finds
it to be a great fault in his people, and complains of it by his Propher,
that he has smitten them and they have not sorrowed; and ler. 2. 30. and 5. 3.
therefore says, that in so smiting them he has smitten them in vain.
Doubtless it is a great fault in Gods people, when being justly smitten for
their sins by the hand of God, they turn not unto him that smites them, and
do not Isa. 9. 13.
seek the Lord of hosts: when they being afflicted, do not mourn and weep,
causing their laughter to be turned into Iam. 4. 9. 10.
mourning, and their joy into heaviness, as James counsels. Howbeit that
Gods servants may still keep their joy, and hold their rejoicing in the Lord,
even during the time while themselves are in heaviness, through manifold
afflictions that do befall them, the Apostle Peter 1. Pet. 1. 6. 7.
does plainly show, who finding these to meet together in one and the same
subject (though in diverse respects) says thus, writing to the dispersed people
of God that were elect, that they greatly rejoiced that they were kept by the
power of God unto salvation, though even at that time for a season they were in
heaviness through manifold tribulations. Not much unlike to this, for this
matter is that which the Author to the Hebrews says concerning Heb. 12. 11.
troubles, that no chastisement for the present seems joyous, but grievous;
nevertheless aftherward they yield the peaceable fruit of righteousness, to
them which are exercised thereby: he says, that the troubles and chastisements
are not presently so grievous, but the fruit of righteousness which afterward
will be reaped thereby, will be every way as pleasant, and as peaceable to
them that so have endured them. There is cause then why a Christian, even
during the time that he is under the chastisement, should rejoice in hope of
the good fruit he shall reap of it; like as hope is said to be that which does
hold up in comfort the heart of the husbandman, who having been at much cost to
prepare his ground, and commit seed thereunto, is yet cheered in hope, that
when harvest shall come, the crop that he shall then reap will quit all the
cost he has formerly been at; but above others, that place is most pregnant
and clear for this purpose, where the Apostle writing to the Romans, says,
that being justified by faith, we not only are at peace with God, but also
rejoice even in tribulation, Romans 5. 3.
knowing how many ways tribulation brings benefit and profit unto us, as he
there shows the particulars. Indeed tribulations in themselves are
troublesome, and do much trouble Gods children, being as needles in the flesh
which make men restless; but if they were rightly considered of us, and the
great benefit well valued that might be reaped by the same, we should not need
to be so troubled with them as we are, but should find and perceive, that
when they do befall us, they bring no hurt at all unto us, though a number (as
if they were venom) are seen to fly from them: if things were rightly taken
as they ought to be, we should soon see, that the hand of God, when it were so
laid upon us, were not a destroying but a delivering hand; not put forth to
thrust us from him, but a hand reached out to draw and pull us more nearer unto
him; and that as Gods judgments are just unto all, so unto us in particular:
it is of very faithfulness that he Psalm. 119. 75.
causes us to be troubled, who otherwise had been like to have perished in our
sins, if troubles had not medicined us to pull us out of them again. If God
will ever recover a people that have falsified their faith, and broken covenant
with him, he must take that course which he told his Prophet he would take
with the backsliding people of the Jews; namely, cause them to pass Ezech.
20. 37.
under the rod, and so bring them into the bond of the covenant again. The
Lord by manifold afflictions uses to nurture and school his children: partly
to prevent sins 1. Cor. 11. 32. Icr. 31. 18.
to come, and partly to humble them for that which is past. The Lord is feign
sometimes to put his children into the salt brine of afflictions and long
troubles, thereby to season them, and to sweeten them, and to suck out from
them the most stinking and rotten corruptions that do breed in them, that he
may the better preserve them safe until his last coming. It is well observed
by one, that the evils which men call evils, are helpers unto good men to do
good withal, and furtherers of them in the exercise of virtue; As poverty
serves well to bridle Basil.
their lusts; baseness serves to humble their pride; sickness to meeken their
stoutnes, and all manner of encumbrances to drive them unto God. Sickness and
disease does many times prove to be wholesome medicine unto life, for the
making of it to be led much better, when soundnes of health does contrarily
prove often the greatest sickness to the soul, to make it much worse, and to
bring it at the length to eternal death. Men use to gather acquaintance of
other neighbors and familiars, by living long and conuersing much together
with them; but how long soever we have lived with our selves, we hardly can
gather any good acquaintance with our selves, or come to know our selves, till
we have been taught it in the school of affliction: the rod of God is that
which sends us home to the house, lodging, and privy chamber of our own
heart: example in Manasseth, 2. Chron. 33. 12
who learned the way into his own heart out of the dark cold prison, lying in
fetters and chains; which he could never learn sitting in his throne and
glorious palace. So the prodigal son being at home in his fathers house,
having the company of civil men, knew not himself; but when all was spent,
having the company of swine and beasts, he was led into himself, and began to
know himself, and to know then that he was not at home Luke 15. 15. 16. 17.
when he was at home; but his troubles brought and made him to come to
himself again (as the Scripture speaks), and so to be in his right mind,
for before he was one besides himself. Which things and the like being well
considered, may justly cause us, not only to be comfortable and cheerful
under our troubles, but much thankful for them, as being true tokens of Gods
fatherly love (for if we should want them we were bastards and Heb. 12. 6. 8.
not sons), and as needful promoters of our holiness and better
sanctification; for God in chastening of us, aims at our profit, that he
might make us pertakers of his holiness, that we might be holy even as
himself Heb. 12. 10.
is. To conclude then this point also as touching troubles befalling a good
Christian, which seem ever to bring with them causes enough to hinder their
holy rejoicing, and not to descend to any more perticulars, but to muster all
troubles together (manifold, and after a sort infinite and innumerable though
they be), and for an overplus of store for the making the heap the greater, to
put and to join unto them all other things also that may happen and befall to
a true Christian during his whole life time, I doubt not but a wise and
understanding Christian may be borne out, if he in some one or other respect
should find cause of some joy in every thing, and of his holy rejoicing in the
Lord for his most gracious and most wise dispensation of all things that any
way do concern him: My ground and warrant for so saying is in that remarkable
place and speech of the Apostle in his writing to the Romans (which for the
great light and comfort in this behalf that it does give forth, shining
gloriously unto us out of the firmament of the Scriptures, seems among other
places of Scripture to be as the morning star shining out of the midst of a
cloud, yea as the passing brightness of the Sun it self, that lighteneth all
things when the full and perfect day is come; which to be but remembered by us,
is as the sweet smell of perfume, and of the most aromaticall spices which
have power in them to comfort both heart and brain, and which to be spoken
unto us is as the sweetness of honey in the mouths of all men) namely, we know
(says the Apostle there) that all things work together for good to them that
Romans 8. 28.
love God. As if all things did conspire together in one to lend their common
help to further this one and only work, to see and take heed together that
nothing more or less be done by any thing, but that which may be for the most
certain and undoubted good of a sound and true Christian, as if they were all
sworn to be true unto him herein, and were in such perfect league and
friendship with him, as could not be broken at any time: yea and as if every
thing were so willing hereunto, as al might be seen pressed so chearefully, to
bestow their labor and take pains about this thing, as it were not easy to
be discerned which were found to be foremost or forwardest therein; all things
diligently working together, one thing as well as another to work good to them
that do truly love God, as if they had all their power and all their
willingness bent only upon this, to do that man good, but had no power nor any
manner of inclination at all to do him the least hurt in any respect at all:
as the Apostle speaking how he stood affected to stand for the truth, 2. Cor.
13. 8.
and for the maintenance thereof, said he could do nothing against the truth,
but that all he could do was for the very truth alone. Let this be apprehended
and believed by such a man, and then tell me if you can find in all the world
throughout, a more joyful creature, a more happier or a merrier man, then is a
true believing Christian, who stands thus confident and comfortable in his
persuasion, that blow where the wind blow will, it shall ever blow good to
him. This may (to very good purpose in this behalf) be instanced in those
things which were lastly mentioned and spoke of before, namely, the many
troubles that may befall a good man during his life time (which are things that
the most make no small doubt of, how possibly this can be true in them): let us
therefore grant that changes and armies of sorrows may come upon such a man,
as Job complains Job. 10. 17.
they came upon him: and let them come as fast one in the neck of another, as
did the messengers who came to bring Job all the ill news of the sundry and
many evils that were at once befallen unto him, one having no sooner Job. 1. 16.
ended the telling of such heavy news as he came to bring, but another at
hand to tell one as bad after him; yea for haste beginning his tale while the
other was yet a speaking: such a multitude of troubles coming so by heaps,
and rushing all at once so suddenly upon a man, may for the present not a
little astonish and amaze a right good and sound Christian, though otherwise
never so well settled and known to be a most constant and a most resolute man,
and may for the time as much disquiet and affright him; as one would be much
troubled, yea in a manner wholly overwhelmed with dreadful fear, who
traveling alone in the twilight, or in the darkness of the night over
New Market heath, Gads hill, or Salisbury plain, of in the most theeuish and
dangerous places, where the borderers were wont to make their greatest Inroads
to rob and steal, and carry all away before them that possibly they could set
hand upon, should there of the sudden be overtaken with a troop of horsemen,
that having followed after him, should all at once come rushing in upon him;
now in that case who would merueile if such a man were found to be much
dismayed at that time, and to tremble and shake with fear in every joint of
him: for he might well think (being thus fallen into their hands) at that
time of the night, and in such theeuish places too, besides the losing of all
that he had about him, he were like never to die any other death: but if in the
mean time, contrary to his expectation, and beyond all that he feared, these
should be found and proved to be his good friends all, that intended no manner
of hurt unto him, but come in a meaning to comfort him, and to do him all the
good that they can, if his father or dearest friend he has, having care for
his welfare, and knowing the dangerousnesse of the way that he were gone,
should of purpose have sent all this company in haste to ride post after him,
that they might be a safe conuoy unto him, till they might see him set past all
danger, and safely gotten to the place whereunto he were traveling; and if by
reason of their coming thus suddenly upon him, they finding him to be thus
stricken with fear and trembling, should for the better staying of him,
comforting and chearing of his heart again, all of them begin at once to tell
him they meant him no manner of hurt, but were all his friends, who were come
to do him what good they could, if one after another should begin to speak
unto him after some such manner as this; I see you are much disquieted and
dismayed by our hasty and unlooked for manner of coming unto you at this
time, but stay your self and fear you nothing, you shall receive no manner of
harm by our coming, we are al sent from your loving father (who has a
special care of your welfare, and would that no evil might come unto you) to
the end that we might be with you, bear you company, and see to you in this
time of your need, that nothing might hurt you: and as for my part I protest
and swear unto you by a solemn oath, that as I will do you no hurt, so will I
do you all the good I can, to stand between you and all your harms, for
therefore am I sent, and in token thereof, for your better satisfaction and
security, lo here I do unarm my self, and deliver into your hands all my
weapons, that so you shall not need to fear any thing. And while he were yet a
speaking, another should begin, and say as much for himself, and the third
likewise, and so all the rest, till every one had spoken unto him after the
same fashion. All this being done, we may well think the case would be much
altered from that it was with this man, and a great change would be found in
him, now would he begin to revive and to be cheared again, that heart of his
(which was so much overcome with inward heaviness, and skarred with fears and
frights of the perils and dangers that were iminent before) being now made glad
for it self, and all the fellow members beside, would even dance for joy of
this happy change of things, and those cheerful spirits which before were
retired into the heart, as into the chief center of nature, and had been there
locked up for a time with fear and affrightnes of that which was expected,
would break forth and issue out all again upon this occasion, to give a
cheerful welcome, and comfortable gratulation of that, wherein they could not
but take singular contentment, and much pleasure and delight in; yea, so would
this sudden and rare joy, occacasioned by this unlooked for and unexpected
change, ravish his conceit, and astonish his heart, as all would be turned
into nothing, but much wonder and admiration; then would he after a little
recovering of himself out of that amazedness and astonishment, wherewith
Nature it self before seemed to be benumbed, and after a sort dazeled, be
ready to exult and leap for joy; even clap his hands for gladness, and sing
for very joy of heart: then would he perceive what love his Father did bear
him, and what care he had of him, wondering at such a kindness as herein should
be showed unto him. His fear and trembling did not so much distract him
before, as boldness and assurance would settle him in peace, and put courage
and comfort into his heart now. He would see that his fear was causeless (he
being now in better case then he was before); for as there was not an enemy
near him to do him any harm, so they were all his undoubted friends that
were about him, that were ready to stand him in the best stead they could, and
to do him the best good they were able, and should see that he were in the
midst of most sure and undoubted friends, whom before in his great fear, he
doubted to have been most dangerous and The world a tedious wilderness: Gods
servants walking therein, hardly find any place where to refresh their wearied
members. Afflictions like gnats and flies importune them, that they can have no
rest therein.
deadly enemies unto him, that would have wrought his destruction.

Much after this manner it is with Gods poor servants, in the sore travel of
this life which they do endure, and wearisome pilgrimage they are to pass
over through this most uncomfortable, and vast roaring wilderness of this
troublesome world, which needs must be gone through, before ever they can be
brought to that heavenly Canaan that is above; innumerable are the dangers
which they lie open unto, and the hazzards are more then can be showed that
they may light upon. If any desire to have some particulars named, especially
by one that has had the trial of them in himself, there is none can bring in
a better reckoning from his own experience, nor speak more fully of this
thing, then that most blessed Apostle Paul himself has already done, in that
rehearsal he has made, writing to the Corinthians of the sundry and manifold
afflictions and tribulations, that had befallen him after his conversion; who
comparing himself with the other false Apostles, says, that he was in labors
more abundant, 2. Cor. 11. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27.
in stripes above measure, in prison more plenteously, in death often; of the
Jews sieve times he received forty stripes save one, he was thrice beaten
with rods, he was stoned, he suffered thrice shipwreck, night and day he was
in the deep sea: in iourneying he was often in perils of water, in perils of
robbers, in perils of his own Nation, in perils among the Gentiles, in perils
in the City, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils
among false brethren: in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in
cold and nakedness, besides other daily encumbrances which he there does speak
on. These and the like things thus incident to Gods best servants, makes them
in their passage through this Psalm. 84. 6. Psalm. 23. 4.
world, to go as through a valley of tears; and brings them sometimes to
walk, as in the valley of the shadow of death, where nothing can be looked
for but utter miscarrying; so great are the distresses of Gods children in this
life, their troubles so many, and those so dangerous too sometimes, as they are
even brought with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 1. 8. 9.
to receive in themselves the very sentence of death, as thinking they shall
never be able to shift with them, nor escape with life; but cry out with the
Psalmist, This will be Psalm. 77. 10.
my undoing, or my death. The endless pursuit of David by Saul, who hunted him
as a Patridge in the mountain, and persecuted him as a Flea; made David at the
length to grow heartlesse, to faint, and to quail so much, as he was near
giving over his hope, and to say (in his great weakness, and much fear and
doubt that he was in), One day or other. I shall surely fall into his hands.
Yea, Gods servants* are sometimes so beset, so environed and compassed about
with innumerable troubles, and most dangerous on every side, as they are
brought to the like pass as David was brought unto, when he cried out, that
his heart was pained Psalm. 55. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.
within him, and the terrors of death were fallen upon him, fearfulness and
trembling do then come upon them, and a horrible fear does ouerwhelme them;
then are they ready to cry out and say with him, Oh that I had wings like a
Dove! then would I flee away, and be at rest; behold, I would take my flight
far off, and lodge in the wilderness, I would hasten my escape from the
windy storm and tempest. So near are they sometimes brought to the very
jaws of death, that after a sort it even breaths upon them, and they in as
great straits, and brought to as soar exigents, and as narrow pinches, as were
the poor Israelites; who departing out of Egypt to find better liberty in
another land, unto which God promised to bring them, before ever they could get
themselves clearly gone, and rid away out of the Egyptian Country, had such a
farewell given them, when they were even upon the point of parting out of that
land, as brought then greater distress, and more fear upon them, then ever
they were in before; and caused them to have less hope of their lives, then
when they were in Egypt under the soarest bondage, and pressed with the
heauiest burdens, which Pharaoh with all his cruelty had willed to be imposed
upon them: For marching as with a double pace from Etham, toward the valley of
Pihahiroth, they were forced to sit down (as not seeing how they could go any
further) between two ledges of Mountains adjoining to the red sea; and so
being come to the brinke and wash of the sea, the Egyptians getting sight of
them, and they of the Egyptians, then was the time of Jacobs trouble, and the
greatest pinch Ier. 30. 7.
of their hardest trouble; for the sea was now before them, the Mountains on
either side of them, and their fierce and furious enemies at their backs
pursuing of the^, so as there was no hope left of ever escaping: for though
they did all they could to flee before the Egyptians, yet death seemed to come
running after them in Pharaohs chariots: this made them to murmr against
Moses, and to cry out for fear, because of the present danger. According as
it is usual with Gods servants, when they are in soar Psalm. 40. 11. 12.
affliction, and in heavy distress, then do their hearts begin to faint
within them, and their hope to quail; hobeit if they would but hold their
peace a while, and labor to throw out that fear that has such painfulness
in it, 1. John 4. 18.
possessing their souls with patience: if they would but stand still (as Moses
willed the Israelites to do), and behold Exodus 14. 13. 14
the salvation of the Lord, waiting for the happy issue that the Lord would
make for them out of all their greatest distress, then should they well
perceive and find, that the Lord would be seen of them, as he was of Abraham
Genesis 22. 14.
in the mount, though not in the way to it, yet in the very mount when it is
come to the extremity, and to a pinch indeed: then will he show himself a
help at hand ready to be found, and make a sweet and comfortable deliverance
for his servants so hardly bestead: yea, they should not only perceive, and
see the strange and marvelous manner of the Lords working (who in doing of
another work, knows how to bring his own work to be perfected), and not
alone come to find their deliverances happily wrought out by him, to be so
famous and so notable, as they will deserve to be acknowledged by a most
triumphant song in the end, as was that of Isreal's Exodus 15. 1.
carrying through the red sea: but experience would also show them, that their
greatest fears would make up their chiefest comforts, and the most dreadful
dangers they were brought unto, become means of their safest security, and
best assurance at the last: witness both the horrible fear that came upon the
people of Israel, which was like to ouerwhelme them, when they were at the
brinke of the red sea, their enemies being at their helles in their hot pursuit
after them, and the joy and gladness, yea, triumphant joy wherewith they were
cheared and comforted, yea, made to exult with rejoicing, when once they saw
all dangers to be escaped, and themselves (not one of them being missing among
them), brought all safe to the shore, and on the other side; then did they
sing for joy of heart, yea, triumphantly rejoice and sing with timbrels and
dances, and at the length they found, that those things Exodus 15. 20.
which before bred, and brought greatest fear upon them, served now but to
make them far more secure, then either they ever were, or in any likelihood
ever could have been, if this had not happened, which now was done. True it is,
that when their merciless enemies the Egyptians (who had so tiranously
oppressed them in the house of bondage) were now come with bloody minds, to
make a full end of their tyranny, and to perfect their cruelty upon them, in
their utter and last destruction, and were now come within sight of the
Israelites, it is not otherwise to be thought, but the nearer they perceived
them to be unto them, the greater was their fear of them: but see how all this
was ordered by the Lord to make them far more secure. The purpose of the Lord
doubtless was with his own hand, to do execution upon the enemies of his
people, and to take full vengeance upon the Egyptians, upon Pharaoh and all his
host, in destroying them at once for the cursed cruely, they had exercised
toward the Israelites. Now if Pharaoh had not followed them at all, but had
let them depart quietly out of his Country for the present, yet might they
have afterward been in some doubt and fear, lest for the old grudge he bare
them, he might have joined with other their enemies, and at some other time
have again set upon them; or if the Lord (minding to destroy Pharaoh and his
army), should have done it at some other time, or in some other place where
Israel should not have seen it, but only heard the idings and the news
thereof, the very report might have much cheared and gladded their hearts
indeed, but yet their minds would not so abundantly have been every way
satisfied and secured, as when they should see all this done in their very
presence, they standing by, and beholding the same. The greatness therefore of
their fear by the near approaching of their enemies, who were now at their
heels, made but for their greater quiet, safer security, and fuller
satisfaction, that those enemies who had troubled them so long, should
henceforth never trouble them any more; execution being done upon them while
they did look on. Israel seeing with their own eyes the Egyptians dead upon
the sea bank, Exodus 14. 28. 30
not one remaining. Beside, the waters which were so deep and vnfoordable for
any army to pass through, and the swelling and mountanous billows of the
sea, which (as the Psalmist says) are mighty, and do rage horribly, might
add to their fear, and make their hearts more to fail and to faint within
them: for what could they otherwise expect then (if they should venture that
way) to be quite swallowed of the deep: but that which they feared would have
been for their destruction, they found by Gods providence so ordered for their
good, as it became unto them a sure and safe protection: for the slouds stood
still as an heap, the depths congealed together in the heart of the sea, and
stood about Gods people as walls of defense for them on their right hand, and
on their left; so as all things here wrought now together for their good, even
that which they most feared would have hurt them, did now best of all help
them: the raging sealaying down her proud waves, and making way for the
entertaining of them, became now as a sanctuary unto them, and as a City of
refuge for them, that flying unto it, they might be preserved from the hand of
the revenger, that so hotly did pursue and follow after them; their sorrows
brought them solace; their deepest dangers gave them best safety, and most sure
defense, they being in the depth and bottom of the sea, were walled about as
with strong bulwarks, and kept safe as in a Castle, that no power of the enemy
could prevail against them; yea their very enemies themselves, who so fast
followed after them, did (though against their will) serve to help them
forward in their way, and to further them on to make more speed, that the
sooner they might be set out of all danger, and brought where they should need
to fear them no more. Never could any be more distressed nor put to a greater
plunge, then were these poor Israelites at this time: but though all was
fearful to them for a season, yet nothing (we see) proved hurtful unto them
in the end: the troubles which now came upon them, were not sent nor appointed
of God to trouble them further, but to put an end to the troubles they had
endured before, and to bring them rest from the hands of their hateful
enemies, that otherwise would never have rested from their despitefull
vexations, their deepest dangers became their best defenders; the waters
standing about them, as walls and Castles do about Cities defenced, which no
enemy can possibly scale or ever break down. If therefore when the case of
Gods children is as was the state of the Israelites now, as it was with David,
Psalm. 18. 4. 5.
when he complained that the sorrows of death had compassed him, and the
floods of wickedness did make him most Psalm. 116. 3.
afraid: when the snares of death did overtake him, and the griefs of the
grave did so catch hold upon him, as he could find nothing but trouble and
sorrow: If in the multitude of these troubles so rushing upon them at once,
they would but pauze and take breath a while; and as Moses willed Isa. 63. 1.
the Israelites, stand still and not fear, but see and look for the salvation
of the Lord (who having promised to deliver his servants, speaks in
righteousness, and is mighty to save), they should find the issue would be
with them as was both with the Israelites then, and with David afterward; who
acknowledged thus unto the Lord, that when I said my foot slideth, thy mercy, O
Lord, stayed me up; in the multitude of my thoughts thy comforts have rejoiced
my soul. Yea, if their troubles themselves had but Psalm. 94. 18. 1
language to talk with them* and tongues put into their heads to declare to
them in words, what by proof shall be found at the last they will do to them
in deeds; in stead of dismaying them, they would abundantly satisfy and
content them, ease and quiet their minds; yea much cheer, rejoice, and make
glad their heavy hearts with letting them know what a benefit they should
receive by their coming unto them, and how much good they all would do unto
them, before they would ever leave them, or part from them any more: for though
the troubles were never so many, yet all of them would begin one after another,
to speak comfortably unto them, letting them know they are come as friends to
help them, and not as enemies whom they need to be afraid of, for any manner
of way harming or hurting of them. Troubles indeed in their vizards, are
fearful to Gods children, and terrible to look upon, but in their true faces
when those vizards are pulled off, and the true end and plain meaning of their
coming is once discovered and made known according to Gods gracious purpose
in sending them to his best belouest children, then do they appear amiable,
and are found lovely to look upon, then will they be thought worthy the
welcoming of them, and of finding a cheerful and friendly kind of
entertainment to be given unto them: for so witnesses the Apostle James, who
plainly affirms there is cause why Christians should account it all joy when
they fall into Iam. 1. 2.
diverse tentations; for then they are happened among their friends, and fallen
into the company and hands of such as are their well-willers, that will all of
them work together (each one doing his part) to do them good. When they see
many troubles to be before them, if they had eyes opened to see them unmasked,
and were able rightly and wisely to judge and discern of them for the present
(according to that which they will show and prove themselves to be unto them in
the end after due trial be once taken and made thereof) they would be as much
comforted in the beholding of them, and seeing the^ nearly to approach unto them
as was Jacob who flying from his unkind and churlish father in lay Laban,
standing also in no less fear in meeting of his most cruel and currish
brother Esau, that threatened his death, when in the midst of all these
dangers the Angels of God met him in the way for his comfort, whom when he saw
he said of them, that they were Gods host which God had sent unto him, calling
the name of that place Mahanaim, Genesis 32. 1. 2.
that is, two hosts: even two that were now joined together, his own, and that
camperoyall from heaven, for the better safe guarding of him. For so are these
Gods messengers, that go forth at his bidding, and they go to no other but to
whom he does send them; neither do they otherwise demean themselves where
they become, then according as they have direction given unto them, and their
appointment from him. They are sometimes sent out against Gods enemies, and
othewhiles (when need does so require) they are most employed about his
friends, and about his dear children whom he loves best: but as the persons
are much differing to whom now and then they are thus sent; so is not the end
of their sending to either of them the same, neither the manner of their
working found to be alike with them, after they be once come, but as clean
contrary, a carrying of the matter in their dealings with the one and the
other, as was appointed by the Lord to be used by the six men whom Ezechiel
saw in a vision to be sent out into the City, to Ezech. 9. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
kill and slay the sinners that were in Jerusalem, every man having a
slaughter-weapon in his hand. Among whom order was first taken for the
preserving of the faithful, that they might be marked out to be known from
therest, charge being given that none of them should come near any man upon
whom the mark might be seen; but as for all the other, their commission was
large to go through the City and slay utterly to destruction, the old and the
young, not letting their eye spare nor have any pity, but to fill the courts
of Gods house with their slain. When troubles come upon the wicked, when
afflictions, calamities, and woeful distresses are sent out to take hold upon
ungodly persons, who go on with a high hand to provoke God by their sins, th
en are they mustered as the host of God, and as his levied soldiers and
strong warriors that are sent forth to fight Gods battles, and to be revenged
of his enemies; then have they slaughter-weapons put into their hands, and
their commission is made large to kill and slay freely, without sparing any, or
showing any pity. But when they are sent to the godly (as they are sent to The
sea is found oftener without wind and tempest, then the lives of Gods servants
without troubles and affliciions.
none more, and scarce to any so often, in so much as for any to be without
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, were to carry the brand of a bastard,
and of one that were not the Son of God), then have they their
slaughter-weapons taken from them. Then must all troubles unarm themselves,
and lay down their venomed Heb. 12. 8.
weapons with which they are found so much to hurt others: for Christ upon the
Cross unarmed them to his, the venom of all crosses and troubles being taken
out of them by his sufferings upon the Cross. And being thus sent out, they
are not sent forth without their limitation, what to do, how far to go,
when to stay, and where they must go no further, and meddle no more. The
devil was not more limited nor prescribed by the Lord how far to go, and
where to stay in his dealing against Job 2. 6.
Job, to see that his life might no way be touched, then these are restrained
from doing the least harm to such as love God: nay contrarily, their whole
employment for which they are sent forth, and about which they are set a work,
is, that they do neither more nor less save that which may be good unto such;
and that they do all work together to work them good in the end: whilst
Gods servants being through their troubles, judged of the Lord, and so bettered
by them, might (like those that were marked in Jerusalem, to the end they
should be spared, when others were to be destroyed), by their chastisements
in like manner be marked of the Lord as those whom Heb. 12. 6.
he loves, and whom of very faithfulness, he causes to be troubled, to the
end (as the Apostle shows) they might Psalm. 119. 75. 1. Cor. 11. 32.
not be condemned with the world. Never was David more careful for the saving
of the life, nor for the good usage of his unnatural and rebellious son
Absalom, when he sent forth his Captains with the host and army of the
people, to fight his battles against those rebels, in giving them charge to
deal gently for his sake with the young 2. Sam. 18. 15.
man, even with his son Absalom: then the Lord is found careful of the
safety of all that do belong to him, to give charge to the whole host and
armies of sorrows when they are sent out and do go forth into the world
(though there were hundreds and thousands of them, that whatsoever they do to
others, yet they ever take heed they use well Gods servants: neither is this
charge at any time neglected, nor any found that ever durst (with Ioab) be so
bold as adventure to transgress Gods gracious commandment and appointment
herein. How excellent then, how blessed and how happy is the state of all Gods
servants, that living in the world, are yet such privileged men, as no manner
of evil (how greatly soever it may prevail against others) can yet ever hurt
them; but that which is others bane, be comes a blessing unto them; and the
sorest judgments that are found to be heavy plagues where they light upon
others, are become so altered unto them, they bearing the same, that (as if
their nature were wholly changed) they then (of judgments) are made mercies
unto them. A skilful and learned Chemist, can by his art maruellously change
the nature of things; and by separation of visible elements, draw helpful
medecines out of hurtful and rank poisons; but all the changes that they can
make, come not near to this change; and the greatest excellency of their skill
in working things, otherwise strange in nature, is infinitely beneath, and
comes short of the glorious workmanship which is showed forth to be done and
wrought by the Lord (who is said to be he that works wonders alone) in that
work of grace whereby men are so altered and changed by him, as they are made
new creatures, and all things are made new (after a sort) unto 2. Cor. 5. 17.
them. There is a conceit of the Philosophers stone, that it should have such a
virtue in it, as to turn into gold that which it should touch: it were
doubtless a most precious stone, if this could ever be found to be so done
indeed. But so wonderful and strange is the alteration and change that is made
in Gods children, when they are once made new creatures by him, so are they
then become precious, and made of such metal, when as (their nature being
changed) they are now made partakers of the divine 2. Pet. 1. 4.
nature of God, as that whatsoever then touches the^ and comes at them,
though it were evil before, does then become good unto them. Troubles may come
upon Gods children, afflictions may befall them, and the like outward
calamities as are seen to happen unto other men; but yet in a far differing
manner, they are altered and ordered, they are blessed and sanctified, and
otherways made good unto them, then they are found to be unto any other sort
of men: for there is nothing that ever befalls to Gods children, which
comes not in mercy, and through mercy unto them: the reason of it is, because
Gods mercies do compass them about on every Psalm. 32. 10.
side. Now we know that when a place is surrounded with a strong wall on every
part, or compassed about with a moat on every side, there is nothing can come
at that place, but of necessity it must come by, and through that which
compasses it. Every child of God is as a man standing in a center, having a
circumference of mercy circling him about on every side, so as nothing can come
to the true child of God, but from, or through mercy; and that in such manner,
as it shall relish and taste of mercy, and become mercy unto him, before ever it
come at him. Yea, so are all the ways of God mercy and truth, to all Psalm. 25.
10.
such as fear him, as he never sets foot, nor treads step out of this
path, he never does any thing but in all mercy to his children; not only then
when he ladeth Psalm. 68. 19.
them with his benefits, and rich blessings bestowed upon them, but as well
when he does humble them under the hardest pressures, and weight of the
heauiest judgments that he lays upon them, because it is in all love and
faithfulness that he causes them so to be troubled. Whence it is, that when
Gods mercy in a favor and blessing bestowed, being once abused, and his grace
being turned into wantonness, would become a plague and judgment, if it
should so be contained; then is it Gods greater mercy to take that mercy, that
favor and blessing away, and to bring on some judgment for the remedying of
that abuse; and in that case mercy being so removed, judgment it self is made
mercy unto such. Why it should be thus, the reason is, for that God has made
his children to be Romans 9. 22. 23.
vessels of his mercy, as others are made vessels of his wrath. Now we know,
none (but those that ouerseene in that they do) will put contrary liquors into
contrary vessels; as poison, where they should put their potion; or new and
sweet wine, into mustie and old vessels; as neither will they put sour vinegar
into their bottles of Rose of solace: but the Lord is never thus ouerseene, to
power in wrath into those chosen and elect vessels of his, which he has set
apart for to be only vessels of mercy; neither on the other side, to lavish
out his saving mercies upon castaway reprobates, that are vessels appointed to
be filled with nothing but wrath and vengeance. If then there is nothing ever
done to Gods servants, which is not done in much mercy at all times; if
judgment it self is made mercy unto them; if whatsoever touches them, is
turned into a blessing unto them; if when they are in trouble, God does it in
all faithfulness, causing them to be so troubled, to the end their troubles
might do them good; if when they are judged, they are chastened of the Lord,
to the end they might not be condemned with the world: what should let, but
that as they are at peace with God by being justified by faith; so they should
rejoice even in their tribulations also? Yea (as Saint James wills) count it
all joy when they fall (not into some few, but) into great variety and
multitudes of them? Which if any shall be so far from doing, as they shall
rather despise the chastening of the Lord, contrary to the counsel given Heb.
12. 5.
by the holy Ghost, they shall but (as the Prophet Jonah speaks) forsake
their own mercy. Jonah 2. 8.


CHAP. XXV.
The difference of joy in the last dimension, or the longitude thereof; and how
the joy of sound believers is permanent, and inducing the joy of hypocrites
transitory and fained.

THe fourth and last dimension, wherein the joy of true believers, and of such
as are but hollow and unsound in the faith, may appear far to differ
between themselves, is in respect of the longitude and length of time, for the
continuance and enduring thereof. The one is transitory and fading: which
(according to the unsoundness of them that have it) will not last long, but is
momentany, and of short abiding like a morning cloud, and as the early dew,
which when the Sun arises, Hos. 13. 3.
passes soon away; the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the
hypocrite is but for a moment (as speaks Zophar Job 20. 5.
the Naamathite) but the other is lasting comfort and termelesse joy, which
will endure as long as the days of heaven, and is so firmly fixed and deeply
rooted in the heart of him that is sound in the faith, as it is found able to
endure the skorchingst heat, and most fervent Sunshine of the hottest
persecution, without any withering.

The ioyings of hypocrites, the chearing and lightning Joy of hypocrites ^ut
short.
of their hearts, are but as the flashes of lightning in a dark night; which
though they may bring some light for a time, yet the darkness is doubled
afterward; the candle Prou. 13. 8. Amos 8. 9.
of the wicked (says Solomon) shall soon be put out; yea, their Sun goes
down over them, even at noone, and the Lord will darken their earth in the
clear day: their joy is but as their hope is, which is as soon blown away,
as is the flower of a dried thistle. There are none that seem to have greater
forwardness, greater delight and joy in good things for a time, then have
temporary believers. Mark 4. 16. 17
Our Savior Christ compares them to the seed that is sown in sto^ie ground,
which uses to come up hast^ly, as soon and sooner then other, and to show as
green and goodly for a time, but yet wanting depth of earth, never comes to
perfection, but is quickly withered, and soon comes to nothing again: their
delight and joy in the best things is not constant, they may delight and joy in
one Sermon, and loath the next they hear again; they may with Herod,
reverence John Baptist, to day hear gladly Mat. 6. 20.
his preaching, and feel some joy at the Sermon, and yet to morrow do as bad
as he did, who added that to all his other evils, that he put John into prison,
out of which there Luke 3. 20.
was no bailing of him, till he had paid his head for a ransom. Yea, their joy
is so deceitful, so false and durelesse as it will not last long in any thing,
they may be as pleasant and iocund for a time, as was Agag, when he said, the
fear of death was gone, and then in a moment and turn of the hand, feel
nothing but the bitterness of death and vnauoideable sorrows upon them, and
then their hearts like Nabals will soon die away in them, and become as heavy
as a stone. The light of their joy is soon put out in darkness, and all the
shining thereof ouercast of the sudden with some sad remembrance, or but the
Job 18. 5. 6.
hearsay of a danger, the light of the wicked shall be quenched, and the
spark of their fire shall not shine; their joy being but as the shining of
some great light, when it is ready to go out, which may shine with a great
(though not with a long) blaze, and then all of the sudden ere one be aware,
it is quite extinguished, and seen to go out again; and then as the candle
stinketh more, being put out, then if it had never been lighted before; so they
that have once loved the truth, and had joy therein, if they leave so to do,
or loath it afterward; if they wilfully reject 2. Pet. 2. 21.
it, and turn^ away again from the holy commandment, they are then (...) to
greater judgment, and become more odious both to God and man, then if they had
never known and embraced the same. Who was hotter in 2. King 10. 16.
zeal then John for a time? what delight and contentment took he in that he
did? how was he conceited for it, and prided himself therein, in so much as he
called in others to come and see, and behold what zeal he had for the Lord?
and yet he was but an hypocrite, this was not sound, neither lasted it in him.
Judas seemed to begin well, and made a show of leaving all, as well as did the
rest, to follow Christ: but he was a foul hypocrite, he held not out as he
seemed to begin; woeful was his end, he being one of the twelve, to whom power
was given against un^leane spirits, to heal all manner of sicknesses and
diseases, being Mat. 10. 8.
sent forth as well as the rest to use this power; it is like he had great joy
as well as the rest, in seeing such things to be effected by him (according as
it is said, that the Disciples whom Christ sent forth, returned again with
great joy, because the devils were subject* unto them): but this joy Luke 10.
17.
did not last long in Judas, but was changed into a most desperate sorrow,
woeful and fearful was his end. Alexander the Copper-smith was thought a
while to have joined with Paul and (as some think) to have suffered in his Acts
19. 33.
case, and to have bin near unto martyrdom: but he soon fell from the faith,
and lost all the love, the joy and delight that he had in the truth, making
shipwreck of al, so as the Apostle 1. Tim. 1. 19. 20.
delivered him up unto Satan, and doubted not directly to pray against him.
Saul while things went to his mind, was content for a time to advance Gods
religion, he was turned Prophet on the sudden, the people with much wondering
saying one to another, is Saul also among the 2. Sam. 10. 11. 1. Sam. 11. 15.
Prophets? he served God with the people, offering peace offerings, and had
great joy in so doing, he was so hot upon Gods service, as he was impatient of
tarrying till Samuel might come to offer the sacrifice, and therefore fell to
offer 1. Sam. 13. 10. 12.
it himself; for he thought the time long (as himself said) till he had made
his supplication to the Lord: but he was a foul hypocrite, his joy and his
zeal they continued not, his end was fearful. Flitting spirits be never
good, and this warbling and quauering music of joy that is thus but by fits,
brings never such steady comfort, as may be reckoned upon, will stay long with
a man. If men seem never so to joy in good things, to affect godliness for a
time, if they be not constant, they may go to hell for their pains in the
end. Great joy if it be but only for a time, Apoc. 2. 4. and 3. 1.
good motions and fits of zeal that will not last long, are not so much to be
rejoiced in while they are had, as the loss of them is to be lamented when
they are so lost, as they can no more be found nor perceived to be in them
that had them. If there be a terrible sight in any thing to be seen, it is in
this, that a man was good, but now he is become naught: he had delight and
comfort in well-doing, but now he has none: he had zeal and forwardnes, but
now he is lukewarm; he was alive and quick to good works, but now he is
dull and dead-hearted, and that way become as lumpish and heavy as a stone: he
seemed to hear the Word with much gladness, and to have had great joy for a
season; but now there is no such thing to be found remaining with him, but all
is vanished and quite gone, all is withered away and brought to nothing; that
being found verified upon him which our Savior has threatened, that as to him
that has shall still be given to Matthew. 25. 29.
have more, so from him that has not, shall be taken away, even that which
both to himself and to others he seemed otherwise to have had before.

On the other side, true believers have joy and peace in Romans 15. 13.
believing, their joy is sound and lasting: and as their faith is True joy is
lasting.
sure which never will fail them, so are their comforts and joys steadfast,
solid, and unconquerable, such as are able to cheer up a man's heart in
greatest distresses, and make him strong to endure by a firm and most settled
resolution, against all manner of opposition, and whatsoever thing may happen;
yea, so lively and effectual is the sense and feeling of their joy, as it is
able to carry their hearts after a sort out of their bodies, and to lift them
up, even to the very heavens. Their joy is permanent and enduring, and their
comforts are like a spring of water, whose waters fail Isai. 58. 11.
not, for rivers of waters of life flow out of their bellies, so as John 7. 38.
they never can be wholly dry again; the joy of the Lord, which (as Ezra told
the people) was their strength, is said to Nehem. 8. 10.
be everlasting joy; the Lord promising his people, that everlasting joy shall
be upon their heads; they are promised Isai. 35. 10. Psalm. 112. 4. Isai. 42. 16.
to have joy and gladness, and sorrow, and mourning shall (...) away; Unto the
righteous does light arise in darkness, but such light as is not like to
flashes of lightning in a dark night, which tarrieth but a moment, and then
doubleth the darkness when it is out again but their l^ght is as the
breakings sorth of the light of the morning, or as the light Isai. 58. 8.
of the Sun when it breaks out of a cloud, and shines sorth in his
greatest strength, whereby al darkness is dispelled, and driven quite away. And
if comparison be made, the light of the Moon to them, is far above that, which
the light of the Sun is to others, and the light of their Sun is found to be
Isai. 30. 26.
seuenfold, and like the light of seven days, in the day that the Lord does
bind up the breach of his people, and heal the stroke of their wound (as says
the Prophet). The joy yt these have, and light of comfort arising to them, is
not like to the light of those whom Jude calls wandering stars, to Jude 13.
whom is reserved the blacknes of darkness for ever, for the Lord is the
creator of their joy, and he gives to them the light of their comfort, so as
their sun shall never go down, neither shall their Moon be hidden from
them, for the Lord will be their everlasting light, and their God, Isai. 60.
19. 20.
their glory. The Lord deals with them as he dealt with his people in old
time, when he brought them out of Egypt, and went before them in a pillar of a
cloud by day to lead them the way, and in a pillar of fire by night to be
guide Exodus 13. 21. 22.
unto them of that unknown journey, that they might go both by day and by
night, neither taking away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of
fire by night from before his people. Christ who did this for his people then,
does no less for his Church at this day, and is no less present with his
faithful ones now, then he was with those Fathers then at that time. And
therefore Isaiah prophesying of the times of Christ, among other blessings
reckoned, remembers this, that God will create upon Isai. 4. 5. 6. Psalm. 105.
39. It is said he spread out the cloud for a covering to his people, as though
he had held a canopie over their head. Thus does God to this day spread over
the wings of his gracious and mighty protection over all his faithful, that
they may rest safe under the shadow of the almighty. On the other side, whom
be leaves of them, it is said, their shadow is departed from them. Numb. 14.
9. Joy ecclipsed. 1. Pet 1. 8. Isai. 61. 7.
every place of mount Zion and the assemblies thereof a cloud, that it may be a
covering and shadow in the day from the heat, and the shining of a flaming
fire by night, that upon all the glory (that is, upon the Church and company
of the faithful who are so called) may be a defense, and that by day and by
night they might have comfort, which comforts shall no more be taken away from
his servants. Now then was this shadow of the cloud by day, or the shining of
the pillar of fire by night, taken from the Israelites after they were gone out
of Egypt? True it is, the joy of Gods servants sometimes, may through their
own default be ecclipsed from them, as we perceive to be sometimes to be the
very light of the Sun, but howsoever the Sun may be ecclipsed for a time,
yet we see that it is soon recovered again: so it is with the joy of Gods
servants; howsoever for a time it may be interrupted, and they may seem to be
in heaviness for a season (need so requiring) yet never can it wholly be lost
from them, nor finally fail them for altogether, but so is it found in the end
to be restored again with advantage unto them, as that for their single
sorrows, they have double joys given them; yea such joys as Peter calls
joys unspeakable and glorious, at what time they shall see cause to rejoice in
their portion. They may by their sinning against the Lord, and by the provoking
of his anger against them, have the feeling of this joy kept from them for a
long time, and their desired comforts so long withholden, as may make their
hearts to fear and to faint within them: but as the Prophet Habakuk
counsels and Hab. 2. 3.
gives direction, though it tarry a little, yet let them wait and hope
undoubtedly to find it again, for certainly in the end it will come and it
will not stay long; and then the desire once so accomplished, will much more
delight their Prou. 13. 12. 19.
soul, and though they have tarried for it long, yet that will be verified
upon them at the last, that the patient abiding Prou. 10. 28.
of the righteous will prove gladness in the end. Though then the joy of the
faithful may not be felt for a time, yet is there no fear but it will be
found again afterward, for their joy is such joy as is everlasting, in respect
of the grounds thereof, and which being given the^ by Christ, according to the
promise he has made, none shall for ever be Ioh. 16. 22.
able to take it from them any more. The sunshine of Gods favor may for a
while be hidden out of their sight, but then as the Lord himself has
promised, that though for a moment in his anger he hides his face, yet with
everlasting Isai. 54. 7. 8.
mercy he will have compassion on them again, and turn their shadow of
death into a most bright and cheerful morning. Amos 5. 8.


The joy of a temporary believer, how great soever it may seem to be for a
season, yet (as the seed sown in stony ground) it cannot be kept from
withering in the scorching heat of hot persecution, because it wants depth
of earth and good ground to root it on, as not being Make. 4. 17.
grounded either upon any stable assurance of Gods undoubted Temporary joy
withers.
love and rich mercy unto him, or upon any good stedfastnes of his own love to
God back again in thankfulness for the same: as who for that love of God
wherewith he sees God to have first loved him in Christ Jesus, should be made
so far to forget himself and to prize Gods glory, as for Gods cause to be
found willing to carry his own life in his hand, and to hazard the exposing
of himself to any danger that may happen; but rather raised and being grounded
upon some worldly, some self and by-respects, which failing, and not falling
out according to his own reckoning and expectation, then is his joy also gone,
and he as much altered, as if he had never been the man. The joy of an
hypocrite vanishes quite away and comes to nothing in time of tribulation.
How triumphing soever he was found to be before in his great rejoicing, yet
when persecution and fiery trial does come, he grows then to be most
heartlesse and crest fallen of the sudden, whosoever dare show himself in
presence: then he will be sure to play least in sight at that time. And no
marvel though an hypocrite be but a coward, for what has he to trust unto
that might make him bold, in whom nothing is sound and right as it should be,
who has nothing but shows in stead of substance? And who will marvel if
such a one being false to God, though (his heart deceiving him) he prove false
to himself also? and if wanting such faith as is only able to give him the
victory, he be overcome of fear that causes him dastardly to fly the field,
and turning his back upon his enemies, to run the country. Such kind of
persons (whose faith does so fail them, and whose hope is unsound) in the time
of trouble and adversity, are like a man that is in the wild sea in time of a
storm, without anchor or cable, without mast or sail, or any tackling to make
shift with and help himself by, who having no means left unto him to use for
his succor and relief in time of such distress, as one dispoiled of all
things but the expectation of death only, what else can he look for but to
perish in that storm, without all hope of any possible escaping? These kind
of persons as they are left faithless, so are they made hopeless, when they
see their case to be thus helpless, and therefore ruin and utter confusion
must needs be their last end.

But the joy of a true believer, as it has better rooting True joy lasts.
and is grounded upon a better foundation, whence it springs up and takes
the beginning, so is it of a more firm and fast abiding, standing unmoved,
what time the other is not only shaken and wholly cast down: and then
flourishing and seen still to grow green, when the Vinesoit vulnere virtus.
other (not being able to abide the heat of persecution) becomes so sulged
and blasted, and so withered away, as it wholly fades, and in the end is quite
brought to nothing. The joy of a true believer arises and grows out of faith
which is unfeigned, whereof Christ is the author and the finisher, and the holy
Ghost is the worker and the framer of this blessed work, planting faith in the
good ground of an honest heart, and causing this joy to spring out of that
flourishing plant, as the most sweet and pleasant fruit thereof: for it is
called the joy 1. These. 1. 6. Gal. 5. 22.
of the holy Ghost, and it is numbered among the fruits of the spirit. Faith is
the sure ground of this joy from whence it springs, while by faith we are
persuaded of the love and favor of God toward us, in and through Christ
Jesus, into whom we being grafted and planted by our believing, do come so to
find our selves to have a most happy and joyful being in him; which causes
us, not only to have some joy and rejoicing, but our joy is made Ioh. 15. 11.
full in him, for there is no want in Christ, but enough to be found for the
making of our joy full every way: for the fulness of the Godhead and of all
goodness, is and dwells Coloss. 1. 19. Ioh. 1. 16.
in him, that of his fulness we may receive, even this fulness of joy and of
spiritual and heavenly consolation, which he Ioh. 16. 24.
himself wills us to seek by prayer for to obtain. And so is the heart of
the believer filled with this joy of the holy Ghost by Christ Jesus our
Savior, as it is more then the world (or all the enemies he has besides) can
do, to pluck that joy from him which Christ has once given Ioh. 16. 22.
him, or so to rifle and rob him of it again, as it can ever truly be said, he
is now wholly empty who before was full, (according to that which Naomi spoke
in the grief Ruth. 1. 21.
of her heart as touching the change of her estate) and he is now dispoyled of
all joy, and has all cause of rejoicing wholly taken from him, that before was
so abundantly filled and replenished with the same. For light being sown for
the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97. 11.
as being the pleasant fruit and rich crop which they are to reap of their
sowing to the spirit; that fruit is not like to the summer fruit which will
not last, that soon must be spent, but it is lasting fruit that will endure,
not alone all the year, but all their life time for them to live upon, and to
cheer their hearts so long as they have a day to live upon earth. And
therefore does the spirit of God call upon the righteous to be glad, and all
such to rejoice Psalm. 32. 11. Phil. 4. 4. Psalm. 5. 11.
and be joyful as be upright in heart: they are willed to rejoice in the Lord
always, and again to rejoice, yea to rejoice and triumph for evermore. Now if
all joy could be so wholly extinct at any time, as not only all power should
be wholly taken away of bringing it into act for the present, but in like
manner all such ground and causes of it removed, that otherwise might as
warrantablie and sufficiently cause it to be, (though now it is not for the
present act in being) as does the true cause bring forth the natural and
proper effect: how could this possibly be done which the spirit of God in
these and many the like places of Scripture, does will and warrant the
righteous to do? The reason why true joy in Christ being once given to the
faithful, can never be afterward taken from them again, is, because Gods
gifts of grace to his children are without all repentance: Romans 11. 29.
the mercies of God which he gives to them, are called the sure and the
everlasting mercies of David, God having promised to David, that he would not
take away his mercies 2. Sam. 7. 15. Psalm. 89. 28. 33. 35.
from him and his, as he took them away from Saul that was before him. And
this is no more then that which in express words our Savior Christ did
promise to his Disciples before he left them, that he would come again Ioh.
16. 22.
unto them, and their hearts should rejoice, and their joy should none take
from them. All true believers then to whom God at any time has given to have
true joy and peace in believing, may with a joyful reverence, rejoicing Psalm.
2. 11.
with fear and trembling before the Lord, hold fast this their joy: and
following the example of that worthy leader in the Lords camp and host (even
that blessed Apostle Paul) challenge all their enemies to do their Romans 8. 35.
worst herein, and ask who, or which of them all shall be able to separate
them from the love of God in Christ Jesus, which alone is the surest ground,
and mainest foundation of all this their joy and constant rejoicing. If
anguish* tribulation, affiction, or persecution (things which already have been
so much treated on) shall stand out to try what they can do hereabout, they
are things indeed grievous to the flesh, and to a worldly minded man, they are
as pricks and thorns in the flesh, that will make him restless, disquiet his
carnal ease and peace in the world; and such may they be, as not only by
feeling of them when they come, but by the fear of them before they light upon
him, not only take all joy from him, but strike him dead at the heart;
witness the example of Nabal. But to a true believer, whose faith is unfeigned,
and who by his faith knows himself to be certainly justified, and so set at
peace with God, all afflictions that may befall him, can cause no such effect
ever to be seen wrought upon him, as can wholly and altogether bereave him of
all comfort, and take for ever his joy from him, howsoever for the sudden (by
the power and strength of tentation they may somewhat astonish him; yet calling
himself to better remembrance, he well perceives, and soon comes to know,
that they are but sent of God for the exercising of that precious faith, which
once by his grace he has received from him, that now the worth and the value
thereof may be the better known, and that they are come rather to be triers,
then destroyers of his faith, that the trial thereof being much more precious
then gold that perishes, may cause to him the greater praise, and 1. Pet. 1. 7.
make more to his honor and glory at the appearing of Christ Jesus. And
therefore by that faith of his, whereby he finds himself enabled to
overcome the world it self, he fears not to encounter such afflictions,
such tribulations and persecutions as he meets with in the world, as not
only daring to wrestle with them, but to promise to himself the carrying away
of the victory from them, and so finally in the end to overcome them: yea, in
all such things to look with the Apostle, to be more then a conqueror Romans 8.
35. 37. 38. 39.
through him that has loved him. These things then cannot wholly extinguish
nor destroy the joy of a true believer, they may better serve to double, then
to destroy the joy of such a man. It is that property which is only peculiar
to the joy of faith, so to abide in tribulation, as it makes him that is
justified by his faith, and so is at peace with God, not to be troubled with
his troubles, but 2. Cor. 6. 10. and 8. 2. 1. These. 1. 6.
to rejoice in tribulation, and to suffer valiantly and patiently; yea
cheerfully and joyfully every thing that falls out by God his appointment for
his trying. The fishes are not more fresh in the salt sea, then Gods servants
remain faithful and comfortable in their afflictions and greatest
persecutions: there are no misaduentures can dishearten their well resolved
minds, the Christian resolution of a valorous and steadfast believer, in the
cause and quarrel of Christ Jesus, is so stiffened with a magnanimious and
manly temper, as nothing can daunt his valiant If there were as many devils in
Worms, as there are tiles on their houses; I will among them says Luther.
Psalm. 56. 4.
courage from looking the stoutest and proudest enemy of Christ in the face;
for he knows his cause to be so good, as he is ready to bear the hazard of
the most dangerous adventures, and fears not what flesh at all can do unto
him; for when God has once spoken peace to his soul, and given unto him the
joy of his salvation; such peace and such joy unto him, are as brazen boots to
make him run without fear, through all briers and thorns that are in his
way, and through the sharpest pikes themselves of most cruel persecutions. Of
the truth of these things we have whole clouds of Gods witnesses, that the joy
of such as are true believers, and sound in deed in the faith, has still
abidden with them, as well in the time of their greatest trial, as of their
most happy and longest continued peace: for such has been found to have been
the joy of Gods servants, as in their greatest troubles it has caused them to
find comfort, yea and ease upon the very rack it self: some have been so
refreshed in the fire, as if they had been laid upon the bed of sweet roses,
James Bainham, Act. and Mon. page 939. One burned at Bruxels. p. 799.
when they were but frying among the faggots: many have been seen to have
looked on deaths face with good assurance, and to have stood upright in the
midst of all other ruins that have happened on every side; and so have the
holy Martyrs been ravished with joy in John Bradford, page 1474. and Cicely
Ormes burned at Norwich. Act. and Mon. page 1835. Cyprian willed his friends to
give the executioner for his pains 25. rials. Thomas Hawks burned at
Copehall. page 1447. Ten Martyrs burned at Colechester. p. 1822.
their greatest sufferings, as they have not only patiently endured them, but
most cheerfully and joyfully embraced them, kissing the stake to which they
were bound, rewarding the executioner that should put the^ to death; clapping
their hands in the flame while they were a burning, and that with as great
triumph and kind of heavenly rejoicing, as the victorious soldier (after his
valor has been showed in the field) comes at length to be made a knight: or
as does a king when he enters upon his kingdom, and goes to be crowned with
such pomp and solemnity, as may beseem his kingly dignity. They were
comforted of the Lord with such inward joy, as some writing to their friends
professed they were never so merry in all their lives before: some leaping for
iow, some for triumph would put on their scarfes, some their wedding garment,
when they went to the fire. One says well, That to be cooled in the shade,
is'a thing of no great wonder; but to be refreshed in a hot fiery furnace is
strange and admirable: to be cheered and refreshed with wine and oil at
banquets and feasts is not a matter so much worthy the speaking of; but in
prison, persecution and trouble to be refreshed, and find comfortable
cheering, is a thing worthy both to be made of, and marvelled at: but thus has
it been with diverse. Witness that famous Italian Martyr, Pomponius Algerius,
who Pomponius Algerius his story. page 857.
found even when he lay in prison, in that same deep and dark dungeon, a very
Paradise of pleasure: and in that place of sorrow and death, he found to dwell
tranquillity and hope of life: in that infernal cave, he found heavenly joy,
he found ease and rest to his soul, in his strait bonds, and cold irons: yea,
where other did weep, there did he rejoice, and there had he boldness and
strength, where others through fear did tremble and shake: and so he shuts
up his excellent letter with as comfortable a farewell, bidding his friends
farewell in the Lord, from the del^ctable Orchard of Leonyne prison. But in
reporting of these things which every way Isa. 53. 1.
may seem strange and incredible to a carnali worldling, we may say and cry
out with the Prophet, Lord, who will believe our report? Doubtless it may well
be thought that the joy of the holy Ghost, even that joy that Peter says to
be unspeakable and glorious, wherewith the hearts of these worthy Martyrs were
so abundantly replenished, and the interior heat of Gods love in them, The
creature that serves the Creator, as it increases his strength against the
unrighteous for their punishment; so it abateth his strength for the benefit of
such as put their trust in him. Wisd. chap. 16. 24. See Acts and Monuments,
page 1879. The history of John Dauis. Heb. 11. 38.
wherewith they were fired within, did much surmount the heat and burning of
those fiery flames that outwardly did fasten upon them; the fervent zeal and
burning of which fire within sustained them so in their greatest torments, as
they shrunk no whit, nor gave any place at all to such things, which otherwise
without that sustaining had been able to have enforced them; not only to have
given back, but to have given over for altogether; the cause wherein so
manfully they stood without any staggering. These things which men of renown
in former times, even the worthies of God (whom worthily the Apostle says, the
world was not worthy of), have abundantly tried by their own experience to
have been most true: their cheerings, and comforts having so far surmounted
their sorrows and griefs, in the midst of all their torments and pains, as
that when they were tried with the greatest tortures, and put to the most
painful rackings, and then offers made them to be released, they have yet
refused to be delivered (so great was their constancy, the joy and the comfort
that they had in their hope, of obtaining a better resurrection): these things
Heb. 11. 35.
(I say) are so high, and do so far transcend, not only all sense by
feeling, but all height of reason by apprehending and conceiving, how possibly
they could ever be in the understanding of any mortal man, as that even unto
Gods children themselves (especially to such of them as are of the weaker sort,
who through frailty and fear, seem to be very doubtful what they should do,
if times of trial should ever come) to them that saying of Cyprian to his
friend, had need in this case be again remembered (which was alleged before),
Accipe quod sentitur antequam discitur: Hear the report of that which better
shall be known by experience and feeling, then any can now learn, or so well
stand persuaded of by others telling, or their own hearing; as well as did
those blessed Martyrs find by their own trial and proof, whom God called
forth to the witnessing of his truth, who of weak ones were made strong ones,
as the Apostle speaks, waxing valiant in battle, so as though at Heb. 11. 34.
the first they did quake and tremble, as so many fearful Hindes and Hearts,
that were ready to run for hiding and covert into every thicket, and behind
every bush, yet when they were brought forth, and put to the trial in deed,
the cause of God being hazzarded, and pawned upon their heads, then were they
found to be most cheerful, and of courage invincible, their fear was then
taken from them; and they which before were wont to run away quaking and
trembling, did then come forth, and show their faces like the faces of Lions,
who had courage to turn back to any that listed to pursue them, and boldness
enough to encounter their greatest force: like to those worthy Gadites that
were David's helpers, of whom it is said, they were valiant men of war, and
men of Arms, 1. Chron. 12. 8. 14.
that could handle spear and shield, whose faces were as the faces of Lions;
one of the least could resist a hundred, and the greatest a thousand. Yea, so
lyon-like was become the courage then of those poor weak ones before, as some
of the weakest sex have been heard to say, when they were at the point of
martyrdom, and the raging fires before them kindled, ready to devour them in
the flames thereof, that if every hair of their heads were the life of a man,
they would die so many times all those deaths in that cause for which they then
suffered; for so great was the comfort they then had, and so unspeakable and
glorious indeed was the joy that they then felt, as death it self was bid
defiance of them, neither did they esteem at all what proud flesh was able to
do unto them, when the storms of greatest troubles met them a head, yet were
they of courage, because they ever failed by the Cape of bone sperance, hoping
that God whom they did with David, set always before them would so be at their
right hand, as if Psalm. 16. 8.
they did faint, he would certainly cheer them; if they did Cyprian.
fight, he would undoubtedly crown them, and never fail to give them the joy
of his salvation. Psalm. 51. 1^.


Hypocrites and counterfeit Christians, they know of no such joy, they are
mere strangers to this joy that the true godly have, and as strangers they are
not to meddle Prou. 14. 10.
therewith, as Solomon speaks. They have carnal joy enough, and many times
too much, far more then they know well to use, though it never will last
long: they can laugh and be merry, they have laughter as if they were tickled,
they can laugh even at a feather. If they come where worldly delights are, and
pleasures of sin, which yet will last but a season, they stick not to take
their pleasures in them to the full; yea, they will be ready to burst with
their fullness, and surfeit in the middst of their delights; for they can keep
no measure, but pour out themselves to merriments, to sport and to laughter,
proving their hearts above that ever did Solomon, with vain Eccles. 2. 1.
and sinful mirth, suffering them to enjoy such ungodly pleasures above that
ever did he; and therefore most worthily does such laughter deserve to be
reproved with Salomons rebuke given unto it, who said unto it, thou art mad;
and of such mirth it may well be demanded, What is it that thou do? If
carnal men can but flourish in worldly prosperity, if they may swim in
pleasures, abound in wealth, be advanced to honor, they have what their hearts
desire, and are ouer-ioyed with gladness, and soon ouerset with the pleasant
gales of their overmuch joys, as shipes are with gales that fill too full
their sails; they are light and merry, they are al on the hoigh, they know not
themselves, they contemn all others, boasting themselves of their Psalm. 10. 3.
hearts desire, and blessing the covetous, as the Psalmist speaks, Ambitiosas
honor and opes and foeda volup^as, Haec tria pro trino numine mundus habet.
whom the Lord does abhor. If it be profit and commodity of the world, if
pleasures and honor, they never have done enough in admiring of such things,
thinking them all to be either fools or mad, that do not the like as do
themselves: but such comforts as these joys and delights as are taken in such
matters, they are no better then plain witcheries, which do disguise men, and
transform them to bruit beasts. But how merry soever worldlings are found to
be, so long as things are as they would have them, and do ever sort well to
their liking; yet if they be crossed in any thing, if the cross come, if
trouble and affliction chance to happen, then they are all a mort, there are
none so ioylesse and so heartlesse as are they; then grow they so dead-hearted,
as it is in vain to go about to cheer them, and to comfort them again: for
worldly joy rising on worldly causes, the causes fading, the joy as soon has
an end, and comes to nothing. Haman rejoiced so long as he was in favor
with the Hest. 5. 9 11. 12. and cap. 7. 6. 8. 10
King and Queen, and all that time who but he: but his joy soon failed him
when he was thrown out of their favor again, and then who could be found a
more unhappy man? Men worldly minded are joyful in harvest time, when come,
and wine, and oil are increased unto them: but if the fire of God come and
burn it up, al their joy is gone. Thus is it not with true believers, they
have not only joy in their prosperous estate, but they knowing themselves to
be justified by faith, and so to be at peace with God, they can rejoice in
tribulation also, let all their enemies do what they can: for if a man knew
he were so in the favor of a great man, as it were more then the worst, and
then all the enemies he has can do to thrust him out of his favor again; he
would be comforted, though his enemies were never so malicious: this makes true
believers to have much joy and peace in their believing, Romans 15. 13.
fail out whatsoever otherwise may happen.

Hypocrites, who are but true believers counterfeits, they may (and I know they
often will) make a show as if they had good comfort, and some joy in their
trouble, as well as have the best Christians; for they are like the Egyptian
Sorcerers, that did strive to do all the things that Moses did, that so they
might be thought to be as good as he: they will seem in their troubles not
only to take them patiently, but also thankefully, as if they had some
comfort, and felt contentment in their bearing of them, when in truth they have
none; they will be heard to thank God for them, and yet never feel any manner
of benefit o^ good that they have gotten by them, which is but a very mocking
of God, and a deceiving of men; and to say as the truth is, it is indeed but a
very wicked kind of thanksgiving, when a man with his mouth only thanks God
in some great affliction that is upon him; and when he lies sick (it may be
on his deaths-bed) shall be heard to say, he is sick he thanks God, when yet
in his heart he connes God no thank at all for sending it upon him, but
wishes rather a thousand times he had never had it, or that he could well
tell how to be without it again. What is this but deep dissembling? for will
not we think a man did mock us, if he should thank us, when we do him no
better pleasure, then thrust a knife through his cheeks: so is it for men to
thank, God when he smites them with his plagues, and thrusts them in with
the sword of his scourges, and fearful judgments, except they found that
they were sanctified unto them, and that they did them good, by letting out the
impostume of some great corruptions, that lay ranckling in their souls,
whereby they are now like to have better, and more found health for ever after.
If God shall by any means show to a man at any time, what benefit his
sickness shall bring unto him, and what is the good that he shall reap out of
his troubles and his affliction, that thereby, as the Lord speaks by his
Prophet, The iniquity of Jacob shall be purged, Isai. 27. 9.
and this shall be all the fruit thereof, to take away his sin; he has then
cause indeed to be thankful and cheerful in his trouble: but for a man to
rejoice against his conscience, and contrary to that he feels cause for, is
but to rejoice in playing the hypocrite, for he neither is, nor can be soundly
merry at the heart in such a case. This is as if a man should be seen to go
leaping and rejoicing to the gallows, when he is to suffer, not for a good
cause, but as a malefactor; every one knows that is a cause of sorrowing and
mournful heaviness, and not of rejoicing; and they to be pitied, and not to
be envied that are seen to do so. As therefore many do fear, where no cause
of fear is; so yet there are more that rejoice where no cause of true joy is.
The Lord has promised to make the hearts of his servants glad and joyful in
the house of prayer; Isai. 56. 7.
Gods faithful servants they are, and may be merry, but they only take
comfort in that which is matter of true rejoicing indeed: the other (like them
that are sick of light frenzies) laugh at their own shaddows, and at their
own fancies and vain conceits.

To conclude then this matter also; hypocrites and temporary believers may have
in outward show and appearance, the like for a time that have true believers,
though never any such joy as can be found to be in like manner true for the
sincerity of it, or in like degree pure without other mixture, for the
soundness and simplicity thereof, as is theirs. Their joy is neither of like
measure for fullness, nor of like soliditie and firmness for continuance.
Their joy therefore may rather be said to be like, then any way equal, to the
joy of true believers, which is the only true joy when all is done, all other
being but counterfeit in comparison of the same, which being compared together,
in respect of those sundry dimensions that severally before have been
expressed, and which have in like manner between themselves been apart
considered, thereout so plain a difference will be made to appear between
them, as is between truth and falsehood, between that which is most sound,
and that which is but mere seeming and in bare shows alone. We had need
therefore to look well and to make sure work, that we desiring to have
comfort and joy of heart, wherewith to be made glad, may have of that joy that
is true indeed, because we can have no other witness of our having thereof, but
only our own selves; neither any other to help us to consider of our own
estate in this behalf, how it stands and fares with us in this thing, then
our own selves alone; so as we shall be but even plain cosoners of our
selves, if we be deceived herein.

CHAP. XXVI.
The fifth maine difference between sound believers and counterfeits is, in
their repentance; and how far hypocriees may proceed therein.



THere have bin showed many plain and clear differences between the 1.
knowledge of Christ that men have, and between the manner of men's 2.
apprehending and laying hold of him for salvation, as also between the 3.
persuasion and assurance that men have of obtaining life and salvation in
Christ, by means of such their laying hold upon him: and lastly between the
4. joy following thereupon, which may be found in those that are but hypocrites
and temporary believers, and in those that are unfeigned in their faith and true
believers indeed. It remains that for so much as you have showed in all that
have true faith indeed, there must be found wrought together with all these
graces before going, a sound and thorough reformation of life to follow after,
and for ever to be maintained and continued in, to the end. And that hypocrites
can as well counterfeit this as any of the rest: that you likewise do now show
some prognant and clear differences, whereby the repentance of a true
believer, whose faith is unfeigned, may be found to differ from the repentance
of an hypocrite, that is always hollow at the heart and unsound in his faith.

A. Repentance among other the graces of Gods spirit Repentance.
given to such as shall be saved (being one of the vital parts of the body,
among other the members which cannot be wanting) if we would have life well to
remain, (repentance being called repentance unto life) and being in some sort
as necessary to be had as is true faith it self, which cannot be true, except
this be accompanying of it: and therefore they are many times joined together
in the Scripture, and both by John the forerunner, and by Christ himself that
followed after, the one of them is as well commended unto us, as is the other:
Repent (say they) and believe the Gospel. This therefore being a grace
absolutely needful for all, and which all seem to be desirous greatly to
obtain, there are none that will bear themselves more bold upon it, and that
will presume further upon their undoubted having of it, then those that are
most without it, and are furthest from all likelihood or possibility of ever
obtaining it: those are hypocrites and counterfeit believers, of whom our
Savior Christ says, their portion assigned to them is to be with the devil
and his angels: showing that of all others there is least hope of their being
ever brought to sound repentance, that so finally they may be saved; for he
says, that harlots and publicanes are nearer unto it, then are they, and
therefore sooner shall be saved, as who shall before them enter into the
kingdom of heaven. And yet none will make a more fairer show of being indeed
humbled, and of earnestly repenting, then will such. There is no external
action requisite to be done by him that is truly penitent How far hypocrites
go.
indeed, which they will not perform, and that in outward appearance to the
full, they will fail in none of the parts that do belong to the humbling of
the outward man, and bringing down of the body, though it it were to lie under
ashes, and to rake themselves in the dust, but in all the bodily worship of
sound and true repentance indeed, so far as ever that does extend, there
shall be nothing found wanting in them, but as if their work were absolute
herein, they will appear to be very complementall in all. There are none that
will bid fairer, nor go further for giving God contentment in all outward
respects, then they will do, if they might but know wherwithal they might come
before the Lord, and bow themselves before the high God, and what would be
pleasing unto him, in such respect he could not ask the thing at their hands,
but he might be sure to have it: If their coming before him with burnt
offerings, and with calves of a year old might be accepted if he would be
pleased with thousands of Rams, or with teme thousand rivers of oil: if the
giving of their first borne for their transgression, the fruit of their bodies
for the sin of their souls, they would stick at none of this: as may be
seen in those hypocrites of Mich. 6.
old. Nay they will pinch themselves nearer, and come to be no sparers of their
own flesh. If punishing of their bodies, and whipping of their flesh will help
any thing to better this matter, they will be whipped, and whip themselves in
vie who shall whip themselves sorest, and till the blood shall be seen to
follow after: all which things (as the Apostle speaks) have indeed a show of
good wisdom Coloss. 2. 23.
and great humility, while thus they are found neglecting of their own
bodies, not having them in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh. Which
courses of theirs making such afaire show in the flesh, causes their
repentance in outward show to seem, as great and as good as does the best, and
sets such a gloss and luster upon it, as makes it not only seem to be
very conspicuous and notable in the eyes of all men that do see it and look
upon it, but so obseruable, as the Lord himself from heaven seems to take
knowledge of the same, and in some sort not to neglect: as in the example of
Ahab is plain and manifest. Yea not 1. King* 21. 29.
to restrain their repentance to so narrow a compass, nor to keep it shut in
within the lists and bounds of an outward casting down and bodily humiliation
alone, let us grant it a larger scope, and give way unto it, that it may have
entrance and passage into the very heart, and see what work it will make
there. Now thither will it also bring in all manner of disquiet, the sea does
not rage more, then that will turmoile the heart: great stirs are made there,
and sore broils are bred therein. There does it work upon all the powers and
faculties of the soul, the judgment, will and affections, are all set upon
strongly, and seen much to be altered and changed. By it the judgment is
brought to understand better, and see that they were much deceived, and that
they have grossly sinned: the will begins to will, and to vnwill again that
which before it did so eagerly covet: their affections are pierced through with
hellish sorrows, horrors and fears, and stricken after a sort dead with
pensive heaviness, which will bring to death. Who ever felt his sin heavier
upon him, loading his conscience, then did Caine, who complained Genesis 4. 13.
that his sin was greater then could bo forgiven, or his punishment for it,
greater then could be borne? Who has cried out more lamentably, or shed tears
in greater abundance for his oversight, then did Esau for the loss of his Genesis
27. 34.
birthright? Whose conscience was ever more stung with the guilt of sin, or
felt the burning thereof more fretting, like fire in his bosom that was not to
be endured, then Judas did, who crying out of his sin, could no better hold
Mat. 27. 3. 4. 5.
the money in his hand, which he had gotten as a purchase of iniquity, then if
hot lead had been poured into them, and therefore threw it away, though that
could not quiet his conscience, nor purchase him at all any more ease then he
had before? But yet to go further, what glorious works and goodly fruits of
their fair seeming repentance, will many cunning hypocrites be seen to bring
forth? How many good things did Herod after he heard John's preaching? Who
fasted oftener then did the Pharisees, prayed more, gave more alms, paid their
tithes better then did they? Who could go further in the show of doing good
works for outward appearance, then did that rich ruler that came to Christ to
know what he might do Luke 18. 18. 21.
to inherit eternal life, who being directed unto the Commandments, answered,
he had kept them all even from his youth up, and yet he seemed to be but an
hypocrite? What seeking of God was there daily by the hypocrites in the time of
the Prophet Isaiah, how did they delight to know Isai. 58. 2.
the ways of the Lord, to ask of him the ordinances of justice, taking
delight in their approaching unto God, fasting often, and afflicting their
souls much, and bowing down their heads like bulrushes, with spreading
sackcloth and ashes under them? and yet all to no purpose, because they doing
all this, did yet hold fast their sins, without loosing the bands of
wickedness. Such their repenting was no whit more acceptable unto God, then if
they had not repented at all, they with the Pharisees, making clean but the
outside of the plattar, when all within was full of briberie and excess:
neither could that kind of their fasting cause their voice to be heard on
high, as the Prophet there tells them. All such kind of repentances, they
were and will be found to be but counterfeit, and very fruitles, repentances
ever to be repented of, because they that have rested most on the^, and trusted
most unto them, shall still find cause to repent, because they have repented no
better. Thus is there no grace or gift of Gods spirit how excellent so ever,
which the devil (who is said to be Gods ape) will not have a counterfeit of. As
he has gotten a counterfeit of true faith, so he has gotten a counterfeit of
true repentance, which shall seem as like it, as if it were the very same,
when there shall be as great difference as between silver and lead, and
between gold and copper. He is like those cousoning coiners, who having gotten
the stamp of the money that is current among merchants, carrying the Princes
arms and picture upon it, does after the form thereof coin that that is
counterfeit, and pay it over for current: they that have good skill can
perceive which is gold, and which is but copper; but they that are unskillful
take one for another. Of these false and counterfeit, unsavory and unsound
repentances of false hearted hypocrites, with which they are known to have
perished, and by which they could never be saved, the Lord would have sundry
patterns and examples to be set down in the Scriptures, to teach and admonish
all the world to take heed how any do trust unto the like, but to seek to
have better, and such as is true indeed, every way sound and unfeigned.

CHAP. XXVII.
The description of Repentance that is unto life; with the kinds of it: And how
true believers and hypocrites differ in them; as also in the whole body and
frame of Repentance.



Show then (I pray you) what is that true repentance that may be trusted unto,
and which is never to be repented of, which the Scripture calls repentance
unto life, and how it does differ from the unsound repentance of hypocrites;
which how glorious soever it may be in show, yet when it is at the best, it is
but (as you say) a repentance still to be repented of, because it is no better?

A. Repentance is an action and work of grace, whereby a man that has mistaken
himself and gone out of the way (upon knowledge and persuasion of Gods
mercifulness, and readiness to receive again to favor every sinner that
repents), does again recover himself our of his errings and dangerous ways
wherein he has gone astray, and by a kind of retractation of those ill courses
he has taken, be comes changed in his mind, in his will, and his affections,
and wholly altered in the ways of his life, and outward actions; eschewing
evil, and doing good, so bearing out the fruits worthy of amendment of life.
All which arises from the sorrow of his heart, that has been bred by the
knowledge and sense of such sins as he has committed: which sorrow is not
only felt within, but also manifested outwardly, by agreeable actions, words,
and gestures. When such repentance is wrought and found in any, then is
repentance unto life (as the Disciples Act. 11. 18.
called it) granted unto them. Such repenting is the recovery of the soul,
after, and out of some deadly disease fallen into. It may well be called the
sick man's salve, or the sinners salve; for it cures all diseases, and is an
universal antidote against all plagues and punishments whatsoever. Of true
repentance there are two sorts: an ordinary, and (as I may say) a common and
daily repentance, which every Christian is bound to use, and to practice all
his life long, and every day of his life. The second is, an extraordinary and
special repentance, upon some extraordinary and special occasion, either of
obtaining some singular blessing, or getting to be either removed, or kept away
some heavy and grievous plague. This kind of repentance may justly be
occasioned, by a man's falling into some gross sin, after he has been called
to the participation of grace; the rising again from which sin, is a
special repentance: as David's rising again from his fall was. In the first we
are all to walk, and that we are to use and practice every day, it being no
other, then the showing forth of the efficacy and power of the death and the
resurrection of our blessed Savior, in us that are members of his body, while
we are seen daily to practice the mortification of the flesh, and
vivification of the spirit: the putting off the old man, and the putting on the
new: the dying unto sin, and living unto righteousness, and the endeavoring
daily to do these things: for the repentance of the very best men is but a
daily sorrowing that they cannot be sorry enough, and repent no better: but as
we are to walk in the daily practice of this first kind of repentance; so from
some of the occasions of the second, and especially any falling into gross
sins, we should beseech the Lord to preserve us always, if it might be
possible by any means: if it cannot be but through too much human frailty
we should find occasions, not only to renew our ordinary daily repentance, but
often to bring into use and practice, a special and extraordinary kind of
humbling our selves before the Lord, in a manner of repentance used more then
ordinary for some special sins, or special occasions, our own, or others;
then is that course to be carefully taken and used, which in the description
of true repentance was beforeset down. And such kind of extraordinary
repentance in humbling of themselves upon extraordinary occasions, is ever like
to speed the better at the hands of God, and to prevail more with him,
whenever, and by whomsoever it shall be performed in his sight: if they that
are so humbled, are known and found to be of the number of them which walk
and live in the use and practice of daily humbling themselves by ordinary
repentance, for their daily slips, common frailties and infirmities. Whereas if
it be otherwise done, by others that are not acquainted with the like course,
and inured thereunto; the like reckoning cannot be made by them, neither is
there the like hope for them to expect at Gods hands the like gracious
acceptance.

Hypocrites they have little to do with the first of these two kinds of
repentance, they scarce know what it means, and are little acquainted with
it: it is not their custom nor manner ordinarily to humble themselves before
God, for their daily infirmities and sins, to make conscience of their ways,
as being desirous to please God better, by going about daily to reform their
lives: it is well for them if any judgment and plague do come, then to be
heard howling upon their beds, and to assemble themselves for corn and wine,
though they still rebel: then it is for them to fall a rending their garments,
though they keep whole their hearts, if guilt of some heinous wickedness
committed, like those fiery serpents in the wilderness, do sting and bite
their conscience; then is it time for them to cry and roar out with Cain and
Esau, and to fall a repenting with Judas, and confessing their sin, with like
satisfaction as was made by him. If the Angel of Gods vengeance pour out the
vial of Isa. 8.
his wrath, so as men are plagued for their sins, then is it Apoc. 16.
time for them to fret and vex themselves, and gnaw their tongues for the
pains and sores that are upon them; and then make trial what their formal,
ceremonial, and always extraordinary repentance (because ordinary they use
none) can prevail with, and for them. To show then 1. Difference of repentance.
some differences between the repentance of true conuerts, and of them that
are but colored counterfeits: first, this is a maine difference evidently to
be discerned, that there is one degree or kind of true repentance, more in the
one, then can be found in the other; which is so much missing with them, that
many of them do never meddle with a daily and ordinary humbling of themselves
all their life time, but defer it to their end, and think it time enough to
begin, when they shall lie a dying: the other having their use and practice of
it all the days of their life; and therefore the extraordinary repentance of
hypocrites, with whom the ordinary is ever wanting; especially* that also
being sickly and faulty (as it ever is) is like to stand them in very little
stead; which can no way be allowed to be repentance unto life: which were safe
for any to trust unto.

Again, the repentance of a true convert, differs from that of an hypocrite,
in the whole body of repentance and frame of it, as it is compact and made up
together, and in the several joint parts and members if it, if they be a part
considered and so taken asunder; they differ in the object, which either of
them do most respect, and are most occupied about; they differ in the effect
which they work, and which either of them do bring forth* they differ in that
which causes either, and in that which is caused by either.

The words for repentance used in the new Testament, are two; the one is (...),
which comes of a word that signifies as much, as for one to come to his
right mind, to be wise, at the least after some oversight to recover ones
self, it is after-wit, or after-wisedome; so called, because the children of
God take warning by the Spirit of God to be wiser, after they have once been
ouerseene and beguiled through the deceitfulness of sin: this has in it a
godly sorrow, with hope of Gods mercy, truly and wisely converting all the
powers of the soul; and causing a through change in the whole man, from sin
to righteousness, and so it becomes repentance unto life. And this is
properly the repentance of true believers, and of all such as shall be saved;
for it is sound repentance, and has the perfection of parts in it, though not
of degrees.

The other word used in the new Testament, to set out repentance by, is, (...),
coming of a word that signifies to be sorry after a fact committed, to be
heavy and pensive, to be vexed and grieved for it: it is aftergriefe, because
sorrow and grief, pensiveness, and heaviness of heart, vexation and trouble
of conscience usually do follow upon the committing of some heinous sin.
This may be without any conversion or change of a man to make him better; this
after-griefe may be without that after-wisdome, which brings a man to his right
mind again: but the other is never without this, but has it always included
in it; for it is sound, and has the perfection of all parts in it. This may
be alone without the other, which yet is the chiefest part of true repentance;
and therefore it is unsound and imperfect repentance, and so, unprofitable and
vnauailable every way to salvation: and this is indeed properly the repentance
of hypocrites, and may be the repentance of all manner of reprobates. This is
that repentance that Judas had; for the Scripture says of him, that he
repented; but with this Mat. 27. 3. (...)
repentance, he went to the halter, and so from thence unto hell fire.

Thus the repentance of true believers, does differ from the repentance of
hypocrites, in the whole frame and body of repentance, when all of it is taken
and considered together.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How they differ in all the parts of repentance severally considered in their
sorrow for sin, and the effects of it: where also is showed the necessity of
sorrow in Repentance.

THey differ also in the parts and several members of the whole, they being
looked on, apart, and considered asunder.

There is in true repentance a sorrow for sin, which is the first occasion of
a man's repenting (for if a man had not his heart troubled for that he had done,
he would never repent and change his couse) then follows a turning from
sin, and a bearing out of fruits that may be worthy of amendment of life.

Our souls by sweruing from God, and going out of the path of Gods
Commandments, breed their own sorrow, and bring painful grief and vexation
upon the heart, such as many times hardly can be endured; like bones that are
broken, or out of joint, cause heavy dolours to the body, and pain
intolerable, and the longer they abide so, not well set and put into socket
again, the more painful is the aching that is felt therefrom: so is it with
the wounds that do pierce the soul, they will never leave aching, till some
good means be used for the well curing of them. Sin (which is as a serpent)
carrying his sting in his tail, after it has been once committed, leaves
such a guilt in the conscience, that is as painful to be felt, as is the sting
of a Scorpion that is dashed into the flesh; or the biting of those fiery
serpents in the wilderness, that did torment them with extreme pains, as if
fire had been burning in their flesh. Sin is like a most venomous serpent,
and draggeth a long tail of punishment after it where ever it becomes: God
has tied together as with fetters of brass, the pleasures of sin, and pains
of punishments, and plagues for sin: he that will have one, must have both;
they that will sow iniquity, shall be sure to reap affliction; much smart,
much grief, much sorrow of heart will always follow after: the sense of the
guiltiness of sin cannot be felt, but the heart will be made restless, and
it will disquiet all the peace thereof, causing those painful dashes and
heavy compunctions in the tender soul, as has forced out those lamentable
voices, and sorrowful outcries, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be
saved? And without such bitter grief and sorrow of heart that may force us
thus to cry out, yea to roar like bears, and mourn sore like Isa. 59. 11. 12.
doves, we may doubt of our repentance, and can have small hope of obtaining
any forgiveness or pardon for our sin; as well as may any woman hope to get
to be delivered of her child, while she is a sleep, or in a dream, without
ever enduring any further pains or travel, usual to all women in their
childbearing, as for a sinner to be freed and delivered from his sins,
without the sorrows, the painful throws and pangs of through and unfeigned
repentance, whose working is many times felt so forcible upon the heart, as it
is ready to overcome it, and make it for a time utterly to faint. Sin will
not be got away without a great deal of sorrow and grief, and that of such
sort, as must break and bruise the soul, and grind the very heart to dust and
to powder. Sin sticks so fast to, and is so baked on, as there must be
rubbing hard to get it off. Wool is as fit to wipe away pitch or birdlime, as
an ouerly sighing or slight saying, Lord have mercy upon me, will get sin
done away: who so does go about by truly repenting and humbling of themselves
to do away their sins, shall find sin in their souls to be like
melancholic humors in their bodies, which are found to lie so low, and to be
so hard to purge away, that they who by purging would seek to be rid of them,
must almost be purged to death, before such humors will ever be got out: So
when any of Gods true children have been drawn into some foul sin, and
gross kind of offense, before they can get to be recovered by repentance
again, they are brought so low by sorrowing deeply, and bitterly mourning for
their sin, that they seem not to be worth the ground Leuit. 26. 39.
they go upon, by pining away for their iniquities, and by such sorrowing for
them unto repentance, lest they should pine away for them by punishment,
because they did not repent at all. Repentance then cannot be without much
sorrow of heart; where that is, there will be found mournful heaviness, and
great dolor and grief for sin, that has been committed. And this sorrowing
and mourning is so necessary to all sound repenting, as the latter can never
be found, where the former has wholly been wanting. But where sorrowing and
mourning is perceived, and found to be for some offense that has been done,
there we conclude is a kind of repenting: for when men are said to repent, we
understand by and by, that they are grieved, and are sorry for that they have
done; so as they would feign, if it were possible, have it undone again. And
as sorrow is necessary unto repentance, so it must be very effectual, and
through sorrow indeed that must cause such repentance as shall be sound: the
heart must be contrite, and ground to dust, as is pepper in a mortar, or corn
in a mill: the bowels must sound like a harp with sighing Isai. 16. 9. 11.
and sobbing for the offense done. There must be weeping with the weeping of
Iaazer, and Elealah is to be made drunk with tears by daily lamentation. If
corn come whole out of the mill, what is it better for having been put to
grinding? If men come from under repentance not bruised and contrite-hearted,
it will profit them nothing. God (I know) commends unto men the preservation
of their health; but yet he will not that we tender so our health, that we
may not break our hearts with sorrow after God for our sin. They that are so
smyrck and so smug, that being old, have yet so young faces, and so few
wrinckles upon them, no palenesse or leanenesse to be seen, it is to be
thought, that if ever they have come where true repentance had grown, they
would have lost some of their color by this time: it is dangerous for men to
be ouer-quiet with themselves after they have once sinned: for it is well
observed, that the way to draw sins on with cart-ropes is, not to be grieved
for sin; and the refusing and casting off temporal grief, is the way to be
brought to eternal grief: they that drive sorrow away from their hearts,
work their own sorrow, and procure to themselves the greater woe; for
afterward we surely do know and feel much more earthly sorrow then we
should, because we will not disquiet our own souls, nor trouble our selves
with that godly sorrow that is required. Too much merrinesse (unless the mirth
be the better sanctified, arising from the joy and peace of a good conscience)
does not well. It is hard for any to bring two ends together, that will not
meet: to think to fly to heaven with pleasant wings, to dance with the world
all day, and look to sup with God at night. They that have their hearts
thoroughly stung with the conscience, and guilt of their sin, and feel the
biting of that worm that lies at the heart, nibbling and nipping it through,
and gnawing and grating upon it with endless vexation, and casting the coals
of hell ever in their face, they can easily lay aside their vain mirth, and
listen to the counsel of James, who wills such to sorrow and mourn, to let
their James 4. 9.
laughter be turned into weeping, and all their merrines into mournful
lamentation: they can easily be drawn to go and hang up their harpes with the
poor captives, upon the Psalm. 137. 1. 2.
willow trees, and sitting by the river banks, go weep with them their
bellies full. David, how many excellent Psalms did he compose and make? for
how pleasant tunes did he make those ditties, which he so divinely did frame
and devise? he was worthily styled the sweet singer of Israel: 2. Sam. 23. 1.
but David himself, when he had so long fallen in sin, so long as he had a
wolf in his own breast, he could be no Physician to other men, he left of
making Psalms, till he had soundly recovered himself by true repentance, and
had gotten restored to him again the joy he was wont to find; till then he
left off his singing, and fell to weeping, and that in so great abundance, and
with so long continuance, as he made his bed to swim, and watered his couch
Psalm. 6. 6. 7.
with tears, and his eyes did grow dim, and waxed old with weeping. As for
such as love to be so iocund, and to be all of the hoigh, that cannot abide to
hear of this repenting, and of having their hearts to be broken with this
sorrowing for their sin, they may put away Preachers, and keep fools to make
them merry with: but let such fear what will be the end. Godliness will not
dwell but in a broken John. 7. 38.
heart, the waters of life that must fill the belly, till they flow thence
again, even the manifold graces of Gods spirit must enter through those
passages into the heart of a man; that is to say, through the holes and cliftes
of the brokennesse of a man's heart; for God will give grace to the humble, and
them will he teach his way. Neither is it when men be called to weeping and
mourning, to baldness and Isai. 22. 12.
sackcloth, and sorrowing for their sin, that then the way is taken to
deprive men of sound comfort, and take all true joy clean away from them, but
thereby they are prepared for the obtaining more sweeter comfort then ever they
yet felt, and to have their joy now more to abound, then ever before it did,
even so to abound until it be made full; as our Savior has spoken, for they
that mourn thus, they Mat. 5. 9.
are promised to be comforted; and such godly sorrowings as these are, do ever
end in contentments, and are turned into the best, and the most lasting joys;
yea, there wants not some comfort and sweetness of joy in the midst of most
bitter mourning, and greatest lamentation that is made for sin, when the
heart is best humbled, and most broken for the same: for men are deceived if
they do not believe, that the very tears for sin be much more pleasant to
devout and holy men, then be to wicked men their laughings, mockings, iestings
and scoffings which they delight so much in; and if they do not think fasting
to be sweeter to the one, then feasting is to the other, though they should
fare never so daintily, fed with Plouers, Quails Pheasants, and such other
costly meats, and most dainty dishes.

Now as there be some that cannot abide to be called to this sorrowing, and to
hear of such mourning for their sin, there be others that would sorrow more
abundantly, and mourn more thoroughly, and in far greater measure, if they
knew how: it is the grief of their hearts that they cannot be grieved enough,
they are still complaining of the hardness of their hearts, because they relent
no better, and are not more broken asunder; they complain of the dryness of
their eyes, and of the dullness and deadnes of their affections, that are not
more moved for their sins, to open themselves as so many fresh springs of
sorrow abounding so in the heart, that the head might be filled with water, and
the eyes made a fountain of tears to weep day and night, for all their
offenses and things they have done amiss. They sigh and are sorrowful in
their very souls, to perceive what softness and tenderness they find in
their hearts, readily to be moved for any worldly matter, falling out any
thing crossely with them. And on the other side, how stony and flinty their
hearts are felt to be, when they would sorrow most for their sin, and fainest
get their hearts to melt with greatest remorse for the same. True it is (as one
has well observed it) were it to grieve at earthly occasions in things wherein
we are crossed in the world, here our affections will come to us, before we
sent for them, but to sorrow godly, that is not so ready with us, we have not
our affections at command in that case, our foolish hearts love not holy
mourning, our hard hearts (till God has better softened them) are far from
relenting. How beit, let such know this for their comfort, if they do mourn
for the hardness of their hearts, if they be truly grieved, because they
cannot be better grieved, and desire yet more to be grieved, and further to be
humbled, there is doubtless comfort and hope in such an estate: for what is
this but the smoke of true repentance, whose sparks are now new kindled in
such a heart; and though the fire thereof has not yet gotten such strength, as
to flame forth with that hot burning and lightsome shining as may be hoped for
it will do afterward in the due time; yet has our Savior promised, he will
not for the present quench, nor suffer to be put out Mat. 12. 20.
such smoke as this, but nourish it, and cherish it, and never leave it, till
he has made it to blaze out with a stronger burning. And so much may be
enough to have spoken about the making clear of this point, that it is
absolutely needful for every one that would be brought to repent for his
sin, that he specially labor for the humbling of his heart, to get it much
broken and contrite with deep sorrow for the same.

CHAP. XXIX.
The diverse sorts of sorrow, with the objects about which they are conversant.

NOw of grief and sorrow thus necessary to be found in every kind of
repentance, there are two sorts; the one is a godly sorrow, or sorrow after
God; the other is a worldly sorrow, conceived for worldly respects and fleshly
ends. Godly sorrow is that sorrow which God himself is the author of, and
Godly sorrow.
which is wrought by Gods own Spirit in the hearts of his elect; and therefore
cannot but always be pleasing unto God. It is called godly sorrow, because it
is more for Gods cause, then for our own, caused more with disqueit Psalm. 51.
3.
and grief for the sin that has been committed, then with the smart of the
punishment for sin either feared or felt. It is a grief for sin, because
it displeases God, which Zach. 12. 10.
is made so much more to abound, by how much more we apprehend and have feeling
of his favor, and his love unto us in Christ Jesus. This godly sorrow may be
occasioned not only by our own matters, but others matters may in like manner
justly cause this godly sorrowing, when men can be grieved to see God to be
dishonored by others, Deuteronomy* 9. 28. Numb. 14. 6. Joshua 7. 8. 9.
and cry out with Moses and Joshua, when they saw Gods glorious name was in
danger to be blasphemed by the Heathen, after the people having sinned, God was
stirred in wrath to be revenged, and to execute heavy judgments upon them.
When Gods servants with David can put on sackcloth Psalm. 35. 13.
in others heaviness, and their souls with Jobs, can be in heaviness for the
poor, weeping for such as be in misery: Job 30. 25. Psalm. 119. 136.
when men's eyes can gush out as did David's, with rivers of tears, because men
keep not Gods Law; when they can mourn with those mourners in the days of
Ezekiel, for the abominations in the land. All such kind of sorrowing is to
sorrow godly, and tears so shed, are tears of love and pity to men, and
tears of zeal and piety toward God. Now this godly sorrow is the sorrow
that is only proper and peculiar to the elect of God to all true believers,
such as are truly sanctified indeed, which causes and brings forth in them
that repentance which is unto life, by which they shall undoubtedly be saved
in the end. A worthy and excellent gift which God has given to his elect (as
one of the Fathers has well observed) That (says he) which God gave first for
a punishment, he has Ambrose. Peccatum peperit dolorem and dolor contririt
peccatum.
now turned into a blessing, sin has caused sorrow, and sorrow has consumed
sin: like as the wood breeds the worm, and the worm consumes the wood
again; that is a happy sorrow that does drive sin away; one tear of true
repentance caused by this godly sorrow, is worth a thousand sack-clothes of all
hypocrites beside.

There is also another sorrow, which the Apostle calls Worldly sorrow.
a worldly sorrow, when he that sorroweth, sorroweth as men of the world use
to doc that are wholly addicted and given to the world, and not as men that are
renewed by the Spirit of God. This sorrow is like to that spoken of by the
Prophet Hoseah, which makes men whine because Hosea 7. 14.
the world is hard. And this sorrow is common to all worldlings, and indeed is
but the sorrow of all hypocrites, for they have no better, though they can
better color the matter then others, and cast a fairer cloak of a pretense of
holiness, to do sanctifiedly all that they do, when yet their most
spiritual actions are but carnal deeds and works of the flesh. Worldly
sorrow may be occasioned as well by others matters sometimes, as by men's own:
when any mourn, sorrow and lament, for the troubles, losses, and crosses of
other men, their kindred, friends, and acquaintance: but yet in a worldly
respect. There is a Vixque tenet lachrimas, quia nil lachrimabile cernit.
kind of sorrow that is conceived about others matters, which is the sorrow of
envy, conceived for others welfare, which is devilish and destroying sorrow.

But to leave others matters, and to consider of the sorrow of a worldling in
his own particular case. This worldly sorrow is such a sorrow, as is conceived
by him for worldly respects, for fleshly and carnal ends; when one is made
sorrowful, not so much in respect of God, or any reverence he bears to his
glorious Majesty, whom he has so much offended, as for the present pain that
is upon his carkase, the anxietie upon his conscience, and the grieuous^es of
some judgments and plagues, either feared or felt: this is but a blind terror,
vexation and anguish of conscience, which being brought upon them, they many
times neither know from whom that comes that does so trouble them, nor for
what it is that they are so smitten. Stricken they are, and they know not by
whom; they find not out the cause that procures their griefs, which are their
sins and wickedness, to get them removed; and therefore the cause not being
removed, the effect must still remain. They lie snared and held fast by the
cords of their own iniquities, to those heavy miseries, plagues and
calamities, which God by his righteous and just judgment does bring upon them.
And as blind men in the dark, they see no way to escape, or how possibly to
get out, and therefore they must needs miscarrie in it, their sorrow being but
sorrow unto death. This kind of sorrow is either intended in a high degree, or
it is in such a measure as may be suffered: when it is in an high degree,
desperation is the end of it, making them to lay violent hands upon themselves,
to become their own hangmen and executioners to devour themselves. When it is
but in a small measure, then by little and little it vanishes away as it
began, and soon comes to nothing again; no sooner the pain over, and the
affliction gone that did trouble them, but their tears and their sorrows are
at an end, and no more to be heard on, they becoming as bad as ever before,
without any amendment to be seen, but with the swine they turn again to
their filthy puddle and wallowing in the mire, and with the unclean dog
they fall to the eating up again the vomit which they spued out before. Such
sorrow bettereth not the heart by changing and turning a man so as he become
soundly converted by means thereof, but only moves the heart for the present
with the diuquiet of pain, which only was the cause why it has been so vexed.

By all this it may appear how the sorrow that is in the repentance of a true
convert, is found to be differing from the sorrow that is in the repentance of
an hypocrite; and that is in the object that either of them do respect and is
occupied about. The sorrow of him that is truly penitent, is most conversant
and occupied about malum peccati, The evil of his sin, whereby God has been
offended, to be most grieved for that.

The sorrow of him whose repentance is unsound, is most of all occupied about
malum poenae, The evil of punishment, and this (by the marvelous sly and
subtle working of Satan, and the unknown deceitfulnes of his own heart) is
always and even then done; when it may be a false hearted hypocrite does both
think with himself, and boldly profess to others, that it is his sin that
he mournes for, and is most troubled about: when indeed if the truth were
known, and could be sounded and seen into, which lies so deeply buried
under a mass, and (as I may say) a mountain of hollow hypocrisy of such a
man's heart, it would be found that it were either fear of some further
punishment, then yet he has endured; or shame for his sin already
committed, which has thus broken out; or loss of his credit, or some profit
and benefit that is like to follow thereof; or else the sense of some stinging
judgment and plague that he now goes under, and things of the like nature
(all which are yet but punishments for his sin) to be the things that he is
most chiefly moved for. About these things he principally is grieved, and that
in the first place, and for their own sakes, as which he is most afraid of,
and which he does most abhor. He may also be grieved for his sin, False
sorrow for sin.
and wish it had never been done: but this he does in a secondary place and in
a by respect, not simply grieuing for the sin, and abhorring it therefore
because it is sin, but because it is like to bring all this woe upon him, and
is the cause of the punishment that he presently does go under. For who
knows the depths of Satan how cunning a deceiuer he is, that can deceive the
false-hearted hypocrite himself, that is so ordinary a deceiuer of others, and
cause that in a most material point necessary to salvation, he shall be
ouerseene most and soonest deceive himself? And who knows besides Satan's
cunning working, how many nookes and crookes, windings and turnings again is
in that labyrinth of an hypocrites hollow heart, wherein deceit may closely be
hid and never found out, no not the wrong and wrie respects that are in his
own heart, and privily do lead and guide him in the actions that himself
do commit; they are not easily discernable to his own self, much less can
they be showed by others, which they are, and where they lie, that so they may
be the better taken heed of. But indeed the maine object of the sorrow of an
hypocrite is malum poenae, the evil of the punishment, with which he is
smitten and made so to smart, that he cannot rest in quiet, and that makes
him so much to sorrow and be grieved, which else he would not. He may be
humbled, but it is rather before his sickness, with which he is afflicted,
then before the Lord, whom he has offended.

CHAP. XXX.
How they diff^r also in the effects which either do bring forth, and in the
causes of either.

THe one, namely godly sorrow of a true convert, Effects of godly sorrow.
draws a man to God, and causes him to seek comfort from him alone, even
then when he seems most of all to be enemy unto him: saying with Job, Job
13. 15.
Though thou should kill me, yet will I trust in thee.

The other, which is the worldly sorrow of an hypocrite, drives a man away
from God, after he has sinned, and causes him to fly, what he can, the
presence of God, in whose sight he dares not be seen; but shunning his
presence, he thinks himself never more safe then when he is furthest from
him. The one therefore finds comfort, and the other has none.

They differ also in that which causes the sorrow of the one, and of the
other; and in that which is caused by either.

That which causes the sorrow and repentance of hypocrites, is more usually
plagues and punishments, either inflicted and felt, or threatened and feared
when they are imminent, and hang over their heads: their hearts resemble flint
stones, which will cast no sparkles unless they be struck. Rarely will it be
found that any of them are brought to be humbled by the sole ministry of the
Word; or if by that, rather by the denouncing of judgments, and by the
threatenings and thundrings of the Law, then by the sweet and amiable voice and
sound of the Gospel, whereout the promises of life, and offers of grace are
made unto us. Foelix trembled when Paul preached of temperance, and
righteousness, and judgment to come, but Festus mocked when he heard him
preach Christ, and begin to open the secrets and mysteries of the Gospel in
his hearing; then he cried out against him, that he was beside himself, and
that too much learning had made him mad. They be not (for the most part) words,
but blows and strokes, and those well laid on too by the powerful hand of a
revenging and irefull Judge, that will serve to maule and break down the
stoutnesse and stubbornness of the hearts of proud hypocrites, though so well
able is the Lord to smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and to slay the
wicked with the breath of his lips, as he can make his word quick and
powerful, and forcible enough to pierce deep, and cut sharper then a two
edged sword, and out of that quiver can draw out such arrows to shoot into the
sides of all hypocrites, as shall be sharp enough to pierce and to split the
hearts of all the Kings enemies, and be able to draw blood out of their sides,
and to fetch sighs out of their hearts; yea to make them for the time to roar
out of their throats for horror and fear, be they never so secure, though in
the end they become little the better for it. The Lord can make the threatenings
of his judgments out of his word denounced, come bleake to the hearts of
offenders, which shall send a terrible shaking through all their bones, and
become as thunder strokes doubled, that are able to daunt the stoutest stomach
that is: the Lord can make the terror of the Law, and the thundering out of the
threatenings thereof to flash as the lightening in every conscience that has
guiltiness in it, and to be as fire to make their hearts to melt, though
otherwise as hard as brass. Thus either by the mighty strokes of Gods
revenging hand; inflicting judgments, plagues, and punishments, or by the
terror of the Law, that does nothing but thunder out threatenings of vengeance,
do the hearts of most secure hypocrites many times come to be daunted; yea in
a manner stricken dead with horror and fear, and trembling for the time. And
these are the things that breed and bring out the repentance that they have,
and causes all their sorrow to be such as it is.

On the other side, the true and godly sorrow, the sound and unfeigned
repentance, the best conversion of true believers, that is freest from
suspicion of being counterfeit, is that which is caused by the ministry of the
Word, and by the powerful working thereof upon the conscience: which is as a
hammer to break the stony hardness of the heart, that it may go all to dust
and powder, and is as fire with the heat thereof to melt the heart, though it
were never so hard frozen in the dregs of sin before, as shall cause such a
thaw to be in that heart, and to abound of weeping, mourning, and shedding
tears for sins committed, as if the very springs of sorrow were all opened
and loosened, that might cause whole streams The tears and waters of
repentance are as that red sea, wherein the whole army of our sins, which are
our most dangerous enemies that do pursue us, are deeply drowned.
and brooks of tears to run down, and flow from the eyes of him that is
truly penitent, sufficient to lay in soak the very heart it self in that
abundance of tears; yea, to cleanse both heart and life, and wash away all
filth of sin that ever before have been committed. When such a work is wrought
upon a man's heart by the ministry of the word, and the conscience feeling it
self wounded and stricken at the hearing thereof, shall find no rest till it
has eased it self by abundant weeping, sorrowing and mourning that God should
ever be so offended by him; and until direction be given him, what better
course is now to be taken, crying out with those true conuerts, and penitent
persons in the Acts, Men and brethren, what shall we do that we may be saved?
When the word does thus work upon any, without any other inforcement of
outward cross or affliction, that else do happen, it is an excellent good
sign, and one of the best evidences that can be brought out, of the truth of
that sorrow that has been bred thereby, and of the soundness of that
repentance that has followed thereof. I deny not but that by crosses and
afflictions the Lord does oftentimes recover and fetch home his stray-seruants,
and reclaim them out of their sins. The Lord has many means, and he can
make all, or any of them effectual to do good to those that are his: he
sometimes awakeneth his servants by the sound of his word, knocking at the
door of their hearts: sometimes Act. 2. 37. 2. Sam. 12. 1. 7. 13. Neh. 9. 30.
Genesis 6. 3.
by his Spirit, wherewith he strives within us: sometimes by striking and
whipping our naked consciences, leaving them dismayed with fear and dread, and
hiding the light of his countenance from us, so as we feel not the joy we
were wont to have: sometimes by corrections and punishments 2. Sam. 24. 10.
Psalm. 38. 2. 3. 8. Job 33. 16. 17. Jonah 1. 17. and 2. 1. 2.
on our bodies for our sins, opening our ears by them, and sealing our
instruction; that so he may keep back our souls from the pit, and our lives
from perishing, the Lord making this the fruit of all the affliction he sends
to his children, even the taking away of their sin. For Isa. 27. 9.
which cause it is that the heavenly justice and fatherly care of God is often
showing us his rods; sometimes shaking them at us, sometimes striking them upon
us, to make us awake and leap out of this miserable, filthy, and dirty puddle
of our sinful life. If then the Lord be feign to lay on bodily crosses upon
us, the better thereby to break our hearts, they being blessed of God, may
well be made auailable this way to do us good. But it is not so free from
suspicion; it is better to leave one sin by the power of the ministry of the
word, then twenty by being beaten from them by constraint of outward trouble
and affliction, especially when the knowledge of Gods inexpressable love unto
us in Jesus Christ, is manifested and brought to light by the Gospel preached,
so as thereout we are made to know how God has so loved us, as he has given
his Son Christ Jesus unto us to be our Redeemer, and so has given us to him
to be his redeemed; yea, that he has given his own self unto us to be our
most loving Father, reconciled unto us in Christ Jesus, and given us again
power by him, to become his children, with boldness to cry, Abba father to
him, by the spirit of adoption which we have received from him; when the
knowledge, especially the sense and feeling of th^se things (...) hearts with
sorrow and grief for (...) committed, that ever we should have (...) gracious,
and a Father most kind (...) spoken: when of a childlike affection (...)
toward him, with sorrowing deeply for having off^nded him, and are found as
The soul that is drenched with tears of true repentance, receives such a
tincture and die of grace, that will never after out.
good natured children, that have soft and tender hearts, to be grieuing,
sobbing and sighing in every corner for angering our Father; so as our tears
may be perceived not to be tears of fullennesse or stubbornness, but of
kindness and dutifulness toward him: when looking upon him whom we have
pierced with our sin, we shall be found to mourn before him, as one that
mourns for his only some; and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that
Zach. 12. 10.
is in bitterness for his first borne. And when on the otherside, the Lord
looking graciously back upon us, as he did upon Peter; that look of his shall
pierce our Luke 22. 61.
hearts in remembering all his kindnesses, causing us then with Peter, to go
out and weep bitterly. When our sorrow grows thus, and is caused after this
manner to arise; and when the change of life following hereupon, takes also
his beginning from the like ground, which is, that the appearing of the grace
of God, which brings salvation unto all men, is that, that teaches and
moves, Tit. 2. 10. 11.
yea after a sort compels us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live godly, righteously, and soberly in our whole life time following: then is
such a sorrow a true godly sorrow indeed, and such a conversion and repentance
following thereof, undoubtedly sound and unfeigned; which safely may be rested
on, and trusted unto indeed. I deny not but that Gods servants both may, and
ought to have sorrow and grief of heart when Gods chastisements are upon them,
and when they are wounded and smitten by his hand; but that must not be the
principal cause of their sorrowing, nor that which should cause their sorrow
most to abound: not the punishment, but the fault is most to be respected of
such, and ought principally to be lamented and bewailed by them: I do also
acknowledge that the terror of Gods Law denouncing plagues and punishments,
and threatenings of vengeance to all that are transgressors thereof, may so
strike and astonish for a time the hearts of Gods humbled and dejected
servants, as there can be felt of them no other then a servile and slavish
fear of death and condemnation, trembling before the fierceness of Gods
wrath, whose angry countenance they behold frowning upon them, and his hand
lifted up, bending the blow at them, which they fear will strike them dead at
his feet. Then is their sorrowing little differing from that worldly sorrow
that causes death: they sorrowing, because they can see no way of escaping;
but of necessity (as they think) they must have their portion with the devil
and the damned, in eternal hell fire. But this kind of sorrowing and fearing,
is not that which they do ever abide in, nor no longer then the Lord sees it
most expedien for them, for their better humbling, and then it is taken away
again with that spirit of bondage that made them so to fear, and their
worldly sorrow becomes changed into godly sorrow, that causes in them
repentance unto life; and their slavish and servile fear, into a sonne-like
and a child-like fear, causing them to fear the Lord; not so much because of
his wrath, as for that there is mercy with him: with which fearing there is
joined boldness, and the spirit of adoption given them, which causes them to
fear after that painful manner no more. Legal contrition then is not any
part or cause of repentance in Gods children, but only an occasion thereof;
and that by the mere mercy of God; for it self is the sting of the Law, and
the very entrance into the pit of hell. The Law and the Gospel, although in
some sort they teach one thing, yet they persuade not by the same arguments.
The Gospel persuades by the death of Christ, who has loved us, and given
himself for us, that we might be saved by him: this the Law never knew, nor
yet takes knowledge of, but it persuades with terror and fear of judgment:
but the Gospel has a more sweeter voice, and in a more amiable manner calls
us to repentance and amendment of life, and our Savior Christ comes with
blessing us, to turn us from our iniquities. Our godly sorrowing then for
sin, which causes repentance in us, and a turning from our sins, it Ier.
32. 39. 40. 2. Cor. 7. 1.
is a gracious effect of the Gospel, and a part of the new Covenant which the
Lord promised to make with us in the latter days.

Thus the sorrow of true conuerts differs clearly from the sorrow of
hypocrites, in that which causes either.

CHAP. XXXI.
How the sorrow of true believers and hypocrites differs in that which is
caused by either.

THey differ also no less in that which is caused by either. And to name the
chief and principal difference at the first; the one causes death, and the
other causes life; and that is a difference broad enough for every one plainly
to discern. The worldly sorrow of hypocrites causes death two manner of
ways; either by making men too secure, or by filling them too full of
dreadful horror, and hellish fear; either by making them to presume too
much, and so they come to perish that way; or by making them to despair too
much, and so they come to be overwhelmed and drowned in perdition, that way.
When hypocrites are brought by the fear of Gods judgments, or by the feeling
of them, to be much troubled and vexed with grief and sorrow in their hearts,
and to express their inward heaviness by an outward great humbling of
themselves, after the manner that Ahab was seen to be before the Lord, they
grow so conceited in themselves for that they have done, and do so flatter
themselves with a vain hope that that which was feared, shall now never come,
or that which they felt, shall now not tarry long, trusting to the merit of
their halting, lame, and every way imperfect repentance, wherewith they seemed
to be humbled: as that Michah of Mount Ephraim never promised to himself more
confidently, though most vainly and vnwarrantably, that God would now do him
Judge. 17. 13.
good, seeing that he had a Leuite to be his Priest: then these after once they
can say, they have (they thank God) repented of their sins, they have
humbled themselves, they have mourned and wept, they have asked God mercy for
all that they have offended in, will hereupon be ready to say, they know now
assuredly that they shall be spared, and doubt not but the judgments which
already are upon them, shall shortly be removed, and not tarry long: they are
made hereby as secure from fear of ever perishing; as was Agag the Amalekite,
grown foolishly and desperately careless of the sudden, a little before the
time that execution was to the full to be done upon him: for they trust too
much to lying vanities, and follow not that course that would assuredly procure
them mercy; and therefore they come at the length to sink upon the sands of
security. If they fast often, as did the Pharisie in the Gospel: if they
wrinkle their faces with weeping, and look sour, as they then used to do in
that time: if they weep and howl and roar out upon their beds: if they
afflict their souls with fasting, and bow down their heads like bulrushes for
a time: they make so full reckonings, and presume so largely upon the merit of
that they have done, as though God were now come to be in their debt, and that
they had abundantly deserved it at the hands of God to have all things granted,
which in such a manner they should seek to obtain, and that the Lord should
deny nothing, which men so humbled after such a fashion should make suite for,
and request to have given: yea, they seem to be impatient of any delay to be
made, and that the Lord is not more present, looking beside upon all others, to
attend better upon them: and so these run a-shelfe upon the steep banks of
presumption, where they once touching, can never be safely got off again, till
they have made their graves there, and do sink right down to the bottom of
deep destruction.

Anorher way by which this worldly sorrow causes death is, when (there being
no measure kept in it, nor moderation that can be had of it, to keep it within
the compass that were fit), the sorrow that is awakened and raised up out of
the heart that before was secure, breaks out to all extremities in the
highest degree, there being No outward balm able to assuage a raging
conscience.
nothing to stay, or ballaste the heart from being utterly overwhelmed in the
stresse and storm of tentation, when it comes upon the conscience: no light
of comfort, no dram of faith can then be found to give any succor in time of
that woeful distress, or to support and hold up the heart from falling flat
down, and sinking quite under the importable and intolerable load and burden
of sorrow pressing hard upon them: but yielding over (as those that can resist
no longer) to the lust and will of their vowed enemy, who all the while did
but seek opportunity to work their utter ruin, they tarry not til he destroy
them, but damnably destroy themselves, and desperately do take on their course
to throw off this sorrow, that shortly would otherwise of it self have here
had an end; making haste by laying violent hands upon themselves, to rush into
hell at once, and that with such violence, as if by force they would break
open the gates of that gaping gulf before them, that they might have the more
speedy entrance there to grow acquainted with those sorrows, that will never
have an end, which can neither be thrown off, nor possibly boarne, can never
be avoided, nor no way endured; ridding themselves out of these painful
fears of some worser things that might have happened unto the^, wherewith they
were before endlesly perplexed, tortured, and tormented, by coming to feel
the worst of all, many thousand times worse, then the worst they could possibly
have feared before: that so from fearing they may be brought to feeling of as
much, and more then ever they feared. When, though they shall never find any
cause to fear any more that that can be worse then they do feel; yet shall
they feel worse, and much more then ever they could have feared: and such
fear having an end, their feeling shall be everlasting, of pains that are
unspeakable, and torments that never will have an end. Thus worldly sorrow,
proves hellish sorrow in the end; and when it is an ouer-deepe sorrow
intended to the uttermost and furthest degree, it causes death, and death
everlasting, by swallowing men up in the gulf of deadly despair, and dashing
them against that most dangerous rock, where they split in a thousand pieces,
and wrack woefully to their final and everlasting undoing, All this may be
seen in Saul, Achitophel, and in that arch-traitor Judas, who having been a
long while secure and dead-hearted, every way vnreclaimeable from further going
on with that mischief he was in hand with, till he had committed it; when
once he had done that enormious fact, yt heinous sin of his most unnatural
treachery and villainy against his Lord and Master, that incomparable
wickedness, and unmatchable villainy of his, did lie so boiling in his
conscience, as made him restless, and never gave him over, till for want of
other ease and comfort elsewhere to be found, he sought to get rid out of that
trouble, by strangling himself in an halter: and so though he sorrowed as much
as some other, and repented more then did, or do many, yet because it was but
a slubbering sorrow, and a fruitless and false repentance, his hellish sorrow
drowned him up in despair, and for all such repentance, he went to hell in the
end for his labor.

Again, some sorrowing for sin, how commendable soever it may seem to be in
the outward appearing, and very hopeful for a time, that much good will come
thereon, yet not being deeply enough rooted, and soundly wrought in the heart,
but slight and ouerly, so as the heart is but a little rased by it, and not
wholly rent up, such kind of sorrowing (being still but of the nature of
worldly sorlow), have been seen to have brought out no good effect, but in the
end to have also caused death. Some that have been much astonished, and soarely
gastred by some extraordinary judgment happning, and who have sometimes come
wounded from a sermon, mourning for a time, and making bitter lamentation for
their sin; because they have not held fast their sorrow by a longer labor of
serious meditation, in better considering their own ways in their hearts, that
so their sorrow might soake and sink deep enough into their hearts, their
sorrowing have soon been given over, and they quickly have ceased from their
mourning, and so have lost all benefit that might have come thereon; and making
no better use of such their sorrowing for a time, they have gone away, and
grown to be more hardened ever after, and have been found to become worse then
they were ever before; according to that of Peter, their end is worse then
their beginning.

Besides, worldly sorrow in worldly minded men causes death, while they, too
eagerly pursuing the things of the world, and setting their hearts too much and
too strongly upon them for the enjoying of them; if they have not their
longing, if they be crossed in their desires, if they miss of their purposes,
and cannot obtain what they so much aimed at, and travel for, they grow sick
with Ahab, and pensive, they tumble on their beds, and will eat no bread* 1.
King. 21. 4.
they pine away to nothing. Men for worldly things are sometimes seen to go
and run mad, to loose their wits; yea, to hang and kill themselves. Saul
killed himself, not sorrowing for his sin, but lest the Philistims should
mock him, or insult over him. So Achitophel, because his counsel was no
better regarded and followed. It is reported of Lycurgus, the Lawgiver among
the Lacedaemonians, that he would have hanged or starued himself, Tertullian
Apcap 46.
because somewhat against his credit they had m^nded his Laws. Some have been
so impatient of disgrace, as they have been ready to hang themselves, for not
playing their parts well in a Play. Thus worldly and carnal sorrow being the
only sorrow that all hypocrites can have, is found to cause death every manner
of way.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the seven atendants on godly sorrow, in the heart of every true convert
and unfeigned believer.

GOdly sorrow, being the sorrow of true conuerts, and of unfeigned believers,
that on the other side causes life, for it couseth true repentance, which is
called repentance unto life; and it causes not a single and bare kind of
repentance alone, but a repentance richly furnished with such graces as are
most fit, and found to be most meet to be her attendants; and they are
reckoned up by the Apostle to be seven in number, which we know makes a
perfect number, all which are brought forth, and set every one in her place and
order, as so many maidens of honor, to give their attendance, to accompany and
wait upon their Lady and Mistress, true and saving repentance; which among many
other virtues takes place before them, and sits as a great Princess, and
chief Lady of honor, whom the rest are to give much way unto, and duly to
attend upon. Now godly sorrow marshalleth in all these graces, as which
procures and causes them all, the Apostle sets it out as a very generous
grace, and fruitful virtue, having a goodly train following her, and a very
fruitful offspring, and generation of other graces that spring out of her, and
are produced by her.

The first grace mentioned by the Apostle, which grows out of godly sorrow,
and is caused thereby, is care; and that not an ordinary care, after an
ordinary manner taken, but a singular and very special care every way notable
and remarkable: as the words used by the Apostle to show and set it forth by,
do plainly import, that it was a care worthy the marking and looking upon,
when he says, behold your care; and not simply your care, but what a care;
with a new rise, and as it were a double vye: both words showing, that it was a
very great and extraordinary care, that they were now seen to have, after
they had once sorrowed thus godly. So long as men have not the sight and
knowledge of their sins, and have not the sense and feeling of their sorrow
and grief for them, they abide secure and careless, and are troubled with
nothing: but when their hearts are thoroughly once pierced and wounded with
sorrow for them, then they begin to bestirre themselves, and to look about
them, then they begin to take care for the business, how things may be
remedied, that are so much amiss; how they may get out of Satan's clouches, of
whom they have been held fast as prisoners so long; and when, as poor
prisoners, they have escaped out of the hands of a rough and cruel Iailor, to
care and take heed never to come into his fingers any more. And since by
grieuing Gods spirit, we have been thus grieved our selves, to have care to
show our selves more tractable ever after to follow better his guiding, and the
leading of his hand. The word that is used, may signify study, earnest labor
and diligence, which they used to (...)
correct the fault, and take away the scandal: it was not an idle thinking,
but a deep weighing and laying matters together, and as it were a beating of
their brains with an earnest study and care about those things. So that where
godly sorrow has been first wrought, for offending God by our sins
committed, that sorrow will breed and bring in this caring, this studying and
ever taking thought about the matters of our salvation, how God that has been
so offended, may again be pacified: how his anger that is kindled, may be
quenched and be caused to cease: what we are to do that we may be saved: what
course we may take to please God better. It breeds in us care to shun all
such occasions, as by which we were drawn to fall into sin before, and care
to use all good means, without neglecting any, whereby we may be confirmed in
our better standing, and kept from falling for afterward. In whom such a care
is not found to be wrought and follow upon their sorrowing for sin, their
sorrow is unsound, and they themselves are far from repenting truly, for they
are not come yet to the first step that should lead to the same.

The second grace, caused by godly sorrow, was a clearing of themselves: and
that too, in a notable manner: for of all these several graces, the Apostle
uses the same words, to show they were all very remarkable in them. Behold
(says he) what a care! behold what a clearing! Giving all to understand, that
these graces were right and of the best kind, and were in a very notable and
excellent degree found to be in them. Now the word may signify Apology, or
defense of a man's self, whereby he may be excused. This clearing of
themselves, was rather by a free acknowledging of the fault, confessing of the
action, asking mercy for it, by suing out a pardon to have it forgiven, and
they that way to be cleared and discharged, when the action is once withdrawn,
the contrcuersie taken up, and the suite so brought to an end: then for them to
stand upon points with God, in holding plea with him, to make that either
nothing or less then it is, made by God himself, in his declaration that he
has drawn and put in against them. If a child has offended his father by
evil doing, and his father knowing it, shall call him to an account for it, it
is not for the child to go and seek how he may excuse himself, by laying it
upon some others, by telling this or that lie unto him, for that will but more
offend him: but his way is, to down upon his knees, to confess plainly the
fault, to show his grief for it, and to crave to have it forgiven. This will
soonest purchase pardon from his father, and so being forgiven, he goes away
cleared of the fault. This clearing, the Apostle mentions twice in one verse
in the same place, and makes it to be the last and blessed effect, which all
these graces (together where they are found to be wrought) will at the length
bring forth in him that truly does repent: and that is, they will clear him
from all his sins. There is no better clearing to be got from sin, then by
soundly repenting: that will clear him before God, who harh promised to pardon
all the sins of such, to take away all their iniquities, to cover their
transgressions, and never to remember such their sins any more; in such sort,
as if they should be enquired for, they should not be found, and if they should
be asked after, there should be none: now if God do justify, who shall
condemn?

Repentance is the best way of clearing any sinner in like manner before men:
who if he be once found to have truly and soundly repented indeed, and to have
given that satisfaction, which in some cases is necessary to be given: then let
his sin have been never so grievous, they ought to forgive it, to clear him
of it, and to vpbraid him no more by the same.

Sound and true repentance is the best way of clearing any sinner, and of
defending of him against the strongest accusations that sin it self or Satan
can lay in against him: for though they can justly lay to his charge that he
has done such a sin, yet he can as readily clear himself again from that
accusation, by answering that he has unfeignedly repented for that sin, and
obtained pardon for the same, which he has ready to show for his lawful
discharge, against all that list to challenge him, or call him further into any
question. The sinner that has truly repented for his sin, has always such
an answer as this to make unto Satan, even when he is most troublesome unto
him: for such sins as cannot be undone, he may say unto Satan, Tell me not what
I have been, and what I have done; but what I am, and what I do, and what I
would do: I was a rebellious sinner, but I have obtained grace truly to repent
and to leave my sin, soundly to be converted and changed from that I was, and
now to become a new and another man, I am no more what I was, and I would yet
be better then I am. There is a double kind of clearing away sin: there is a
clearing of the guiltiness of sin by pardon for the same: and a clearing
away of the filthiness of sin, by purging and cleansing sin away. He that
has committed sin, as well open before men, as before God, is to seek to
clear himself, as before God, so before men, by free acknowledging of the
same, humbling themselves for it, and showing themselves to have truly repented
of it.

The third grace, caused by godly sorrow, is indignation. This follows godly
sorrow, that men are set in a chafe, and put into a heat with fervent anger
and indignation against their sins, and themselves, for committing of them,
to make them fret in their minds, to be at defiance with sin, and fall out
with themselves for being so grossly over seen; and as men when they are
angry one with another, they will not stick to fall a railing one upon
another: so are they ready to give themselves hard terms, to say, What a
beast was I? what a fool thus to be ouerseene? how was I bewitched? I think I
was mad, as Paul says, he was mad in raging against the poor Church. Yea how
impatient such have bin with themselves, has bin made to appear by some
outward gestures, of smiting their bands on their thigh, tearing their hair of
their head, and from their beards, rending their garments: which Ezra. 9. 3.
shows they could not keep quiet with themselves. And as for their sins,
by which they have offended God, there is nothing so deadly hated and abhorred
of them, as are they: they can never more abide them, their blood rises, and
their hearts swell against them where ever they see them. Never did Amnon more
loath Thamar, 2. Sam. 13. 15.
after he had satisfied his filthy lust with her, when he could not abide her
presence any longer, but commanded she should be thrust out of the doors, and
the doors bolted against her that she might come in no more, insomuch, as it
is said, the hatred wherewith he then hated her, was greater then the love was
wherewith he had loved her before* then these true penitent servants of God do
loath and abhor most those sins, which before they were known to have
loved best, so as they cared not if they never saw their faces more: and it is
an endless vexation and torment to their conscience but to think of them, and
of the vile evils that they have committed with them, so as they can have no
rest, till they have rid them away out of their sight, thrust them out of the
doors of their hearts, cast them out of their hands, as things most loathsome
that cannot longer be abidden, and in detestation of them, bid them get them
hence, barring up all passages so to keep them out, as there may be no place
left open, by which it might be possible for them, returning, ever to get any
entertaiment there again. Their angry carriage toward their sins that have
deceived them most, is not unlike the rage of some men, when they come once to
see how they have been often abused and undone by filthy queanes and harlots
that have enticed them, they then grow impatient, and can no more abide them,
they are ready in defiance of them, to spit them in the teeth, to slit their
noses and give them whores marks, and send them away disgraced, that none may
ever more be deceived and abused by them, but know them what they are. So do
these deal with their sins, they do not only loath them themselves, to spit
in their faces, thereby to show in what degree they do abhor them; but they
cast all the shame and disgrace upon them they can, to make others in like sort
to loathe them, and not to be deceived as they have been by them; they so brand
and mark them, that al may be warned to take heed of them, and not to endanger
themselves to be mischiefed and spoiled by them. This is that which the
Prophet shows shall be done by the people, when they are once reclaimed out
of their way of erting, and showed the right way they were to take and walk
in; he says, they should not only leave worshipping of graven Images, care no
more for them, and do them away: but show their indignation against them, by
defacing them, spoiling the couerings of them, tear and rend their golden
ornaments, defile that Isai. 30. 22.
that was about them, and then cast them all away as a menstruous cloth, with
words of greatest abhorring and defiance spoken unto them, when they shall say
unto them, Get thee hence. This is that fervent anger and indignation that is
caused by godly sorrow, in the hearts of them that do truly repent, against
all their sins which they have committed, and wherewith God so much has been
offended.

The fourth grace caused by godly sorrow, in the heart of him that is truly
penitent, is fear, a grace that is contrary to security, profaneness, and
all contempt of God. This fear, so it be understood of a holy fear, such as
may beseem a true servant and child of God to have, may be carried as far
and as wide as you will, it has included under it all that is to be feared:
for he that is thoroughly touched and wounded in his conscience with godly
sorrow, cannot abide careless any more, nor remain void of much trembling
and fear; fearing for that that is past, and cannot be undone, what mischief
and harm may grow thereupon; fearing for that which through the hidden
corruption of nature may be fallen into and committed, yet worse then that
which has been done, if grace be not in time begged and sought of God for
preventing the same; fearing lest by this his falling into sin, God shall now
be dishonored, his truth slandered, the Gospel disgraced, the holy profession
evil spoken of, and brought in contempt: fearing lest his example in sinning,
should imbolden others unto evil doing, and should lie as a stumbling block
in the way, to cause others to fall; offending the weak, grieuing the good,
and opening the mouths of the wicked to blaspheme: fearing Satan's malice, lest
he do again assail him, and set anew upon him: fearing his own frailty,
lest he should again be overcome: fearing lest God being displeased with him,
should withold his grace from him; and lest being left to himself, he should
let the spirit be quenched in him, and the sparkles of grace die out, that were
so lately but new lighted and kindled in his heart. There is nothing that he
may not in some sort fear of the things that are to be shunned, and which he
ought to be careful evermore to prevent all that he can; according to that, A
good man fears always; and that is the best way to cause him to depart from
evil. Many labor to put away this fear, but then they put away that which
should breed their safety, and their best security in the end: in this doing
they lay the raines upon the neck of their own lusts, being without fear to
be carried by them which way they take liking; and then they were as good ride
upon a wild colt without a bridle, there being no bridle to keep men in from
sinning, if the fear of God be not found to be in them: the fear of a wounded
conscience is whereby they forecast all the worst things to themselves, and
labor to prevent them.

The fifth grace which godly sorrow causes in the heart of him that is truly
penitent, is desire; which is a grace contrary to that dullness and
dead-heartednesse, that sluggish and careless negligence, that is usually
found to be with them that are never troubled about the estate they abide in;
and therefore they seldom or never are moved with any thing; they have dead
hearts and feel nothing; and their desires after goodness are as dead as
their hearts, so as they care for nothing. But a poor, grieved, and humbled
soul, that is stricken and wounded in his conscience with the guilt of his
sin, he is made of desires, he has nothing but desires in him. The Heart
that is chased, desires not more after the water brooks, then his soul is a
thirst for God, even for the living God, that he might see the light of his
countenance lifted up upon him, and so be received into his love and favor
again. How does his soul open it self in desire unto God after
reconciliation with him, for the obtaining of pardon for his sin, and that he
might be refreshed with his mercies right soon; even as the thirsty and dry
ground when it is chopped and dry gapeth and riueth for want of rain, till it
may be mostened and refreshed with showers from heaven. What is there more in
the longing desire of his heart for afterward, then to cry out with David, Oh
that my ways might now be made so direct, as I might henceforth keep the
Commandments of God always: and that a new heart might be given, and a right
spirit renewed in him: that he might have strength to withstand tentation the
next time; and that measure of grace given him, as by which he might be able to
overcome his chiefest corruptions, deny himself, bring under due obedience
the rebellion of his will, and rule better his unruly affections; that his life
may be so reformed, as God may be well pleased, the Church better satisfied, he
may have more peace, and sound comfort in his heart. These, and the like, are
the holy desires which a godly sorrow will cause in that heart wherein it is
once wrought. Such will complain they cannot pray as others, remember Sermons
as others, prevail against their sins as do others: but they have desires
to do all these; and so they being of the number of them, whose desires are
still unto goodness, and who are ever hungring and thirsting after
righteousness; they therefore are pronounced by Christ his own mouth to be
blessed, because such (in the end) shall undoubtedly be satisfied.

The sixth grace which godly sorrow causes in the heart of a true penitent, is
zeal; which is somewhat more then is desire; for it is desire intended and
increased. This zeal is occupied either about that which is good, with great
and fervent desire after a most earnest manner for loving of it, and having it
better practiced: or about that which is evil, with like desire to have it
shunned and abhorred. It is a most earnest affection of the soul, which cannot
be kept in, but breaks through all, and bewrays it self: it is a feruency
of spirit, arising of a mixture of love and anger, causing men, with all
earnestness, to stand for the truth, and the maintenance of goodness, piety,
Gods worship and honor, and all things that may make for the furtherance and
advancement thereof. And on the contrary, so to be filled with grief,
displeasure, indignation, and holy anger, to see God dishonored, and the truth
wronged, or goodness any way to be disgraced: as Gods servants have not been
able to endure these things, but their zeal about them has even consumed
them: as David professed, that his zeal had even consumed Psalm. 119. 139. 136.
him, because his enemies did forget Gods word. A true convert then, that is
thoroughly penitent for his sins, whose soul melts within him, and (as it
were) droppeth away Psalm. 119. 28.
with heaviness for his sin, where he thinks how God has been dishonored
by him, what evil he has done by the sin he has fallen into. How do his
eyes gush out with rivers of tears, when he considers of these things? his
zeal compels him so to do, he can do no otherwise. And as he is thus
troubled about his own sin, such is his zealous hating of sin wheresoever
he finds it committed and done, as his soul within him, is vexed and
tormented; as was Lots from day to day, in seeing and hearing men's outrage in
wickedness, and all the abominable and filthy words and deeds of ungodly men;
on the other side, how is the heart of such a one inflamed with the love and
zeal of the glory of God, what a burning desire has he, that as God has been
dishonored by him through his falling into sin, so he might now bring some
glory to his name, by his rising again from the same, and by doing of things
worthy of amendment of life, laboring to keep the commandments of God, with
zeal as hot as fire? what an earnest care has he over the good of his
brethren, lest any of them should be hurt by his example in sinning? how ready
is he found to be in his true zeal to God, and love to so many as he that way
has wronged, to make them the best mends he is able, and to give them any
satisfaction? he stands not upon his credit among men, how that may be hindered,
neither cares he for worldly shame, so he may be sure God may be honored and
well pleased by him. He has burning in his breast such a fire of ardent zeal,
as soon will consume all such trashie counsel, if any such should be given,
so to let and hinder him, and bring it so to nothing, that as nothing it would
be esteemed by him.

The seventh and last grace mentioned by the Apostle, which godly sorrow
causes in the heart of him that is truly penitent for his sin, is revenge.
All the other things being done, it does not yet content a true penitent
person; he will not forgive himself, though God should forgive him: he would
not spare his sin himself, though God should spare him for it, and never at
all be found to smite him. The reason why he is thus implacable and
unappeasable toward his sin, is, for that he knows he has not the like
enemy in all the world beside (no not excepting the very devil of hell
himself, with all his malicious working) that possibly could do him the like
hurt and mischief, as his sin alone, either has, or might have done: which
so long as it is spared by us, and no execution seen to be done upon it, that
sin is all the while in hand with doing that against us, as may become our
utter undoing: for enough is done by it, so long as it is contained and
maintained, as may cast us out of Gods favor for altogether, and cause the
Lord to take no more delight nor pleasure in us, but to hide his countenance,
and to withdraw the love of his heart, and his favor from us; yea, to incense
his anger, and cause the fire of his wrath to flame out upon us: enough is done
by it, to set Gods Angels and men against us; yea, the devils of hell also, and
all other the creatures with them, to become ministers of God his vengeance, to
do execution upon us, because we have not done execution upon our sins, that
they might not have stirred up such displeasure and wrath against us. What
child would not be revenged of such a mischievous and spiteful enemy, as is
never ceasing to set his father against him, so as he can have no countenance
at his fathers hands when he comes before him, but is the cause why the
father looks with a most irefull countenance upon his son, and is ever
frowning and bending his brow upon him, in such sort as is intolerable, and
cannot be abidden; yea, is ever upon the point of disclaiming him to be his
son, and so for altogether to dis-inherit him? All which is done by sin
against every party offending. Who could ever endure the mischievous working of
such a spiteful enemy and malicious makebate, as will be sure to work a
man's unquiet at home, and see that he shall have no long peace nor rest
abroad, but is ever running to the Justice, often to the Council, to have him
up to the Starrechamber; yea preferring to the King himself many and grievous
complaints against him, for which, warrants are still out for him, to fetch him
coram, that he can never rest nor abide in quiet by him; if such an enemy
could be known, would not a man be provoked rather to die upon him, then not
to be revenged on him to the full? But such a despitefull enemy have we of
sin, which sets all that it can against us, it being the greatest makebate
that is in all the world, putting us to more trouble, then do all the enemies
we have beside. It is the only cause we can have no peace nor rest in our
consciences at home, because it ever leaves there a sting of guiltiness behind
it, which never cease to torment us. It breeds us all the trouble, the
molestation and the grief, which we at any time do meet withal abroad; that
is ever crying in the ears of the Lord against us, the cries thereof still
going up to heaven. Whence it comes, that wrath oftentimes goes out from God,
and then whole armies of sorrowful troubles, afflictions, crosses, losses,
sicknesses, pains, diseases, and death it self, are sent out against us, and
come upon us, as ministers of his vengeance, to execute such justice as is meet
for such offenders. Will any one then marvel, that a true penitent person that
has been much humbled, and whose soul has thoroughly smarted for his sin,
should carry such an unappeasable hatred against it, and be at such deadly fewd
therewith, as nothing can turn, nor stay him from taking vengeance to the full
upon the same, seeing by revenging his sin himself, he knows he shall
spare God a labor, who 1. Cor. 11. 31.
then will be revenged thereof no more. Therefore is it that you shall see
true penitent persons take the whip and rod into their own hands, and whip
their sins stark naked; not after a Popish fashion, with opinion of meriting
for the same: but after a child-like fashion, that mourns before his father,
whom he has wronged and wounded when he knew not what he did, as one that
was for a time beside himself, and looking upon him whom he has so pierced:
and being in bitterness before him, catches hold upon the instruments and
weapons by which all the mischief has been done, and then throws them as
far from him as possibly he can, that he may never see them more. Thus does a
poor grieved soul (that is ever mourning before God for the offense that he
has done against him), fly upon the face of his sin, and rending his heart
with grief within, and tearing his garments for sorrow without, setting his
hand upon his sin, wrecketh all his anger upon the same, tearing it into a
thousand pieces, and rending it all to fitters: pulling out his right eyes,
cutting off his right hands, martyring the whole body of sin, and maiming all
the members of the old man; till that as his sins have crucified Christ, he
may see them also crucified, and to have breathed out their last life breath. A
notable example of zeal in taking vengeance upon sin, and of seeing
execution to be done upon the same, and that to the full, we have in Moses the
man of God, who otherwise was the meekest man upon earth: this Moses when he
was come down from the Mount, and saw the Calfe they had made, and their
dancing about it; it is said, his anger first waxed hot, and he cast the
Tables out of his hand and brake them beneath the Mount: and then be took the
Calfe which they had made, and burnt it in the Exo. 32. 19. 20. 26. 27. 28.
fire, and ground it to powder, and strowed it upon the water, and made the
children of Israel to drink it; that if they would have it again, they might
no more pluck it off their ears, but go and rake it out of their bowels. All
which was done for the greater detestation of their sin, and of that their
insufferable abomination, which he thus found to have been erected and set up
by them. And yet not satisfied herewith, he called the sons of Leui to him,
and commanded them, every man to put his sword by his side, and to go in and
out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother,
every man his companion, every man his son, and every man his neighbor,
until there was vengeance taken of three thousand men, which fell that day by
the sword. So severe was the vengeance that was taken, and the execution that
was done, both upon the sin committed, and the sinners themselves that had
done it. And this is the furthest that a poor grieved and troubled soul can
go in his angry and zealous pursuit of sin, to be revenged upon the same;
namely, when he has set hand upon it, and got it under the hatchet, then to
wreake all his anger upon ^^, hacking and hewing it, mangling and martyring it,
and cutting and chopping it, as small as herbs are to the pot (as we use to
speak), making sure work of it, in giving it such deadly blows, as it may
never be possible for it to recover any more, of the wounds and hurts it so
has taken, and ever seeking (as sin does revive) to mortify the deeds of
the flesh by the spirit, by a daily dying unto sin, and breathing out the
ghost thereof. And this is that holy revenge the Apostle means, when a
repentant sinner uses all good means he can, that may serve to subdue the
corruption of his nature, to bridle carnal affections, and to mortify all
manner of sin.

The Author having thus far fully perfited this Treatise, was called out of
this life, leaving so much as follows (according to the first draught) in
loose papers; whereout being collected by a faithful Minister, and found fitly
to agree, it was judged convenient to be adjoined.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How sorrow for sin causes confession of sin, according to the diverse
kinds of it; and of the differences to be seen in men therein.

that cannot any longer be smothered; and the fullness of that sorrow that
cannot be held and contained in the heart, will seek some way to have vent,
and to empty and pour out it self, by uttering of speech with the tongue, and
by making open and plain confession before others of the sin, for which the
heart is so ouerburdened with grief and sorrow within; which is for the time a
little easing to the heart, which otherwise was as if it would have burst with
the fullness of sorrow it felt, if this had not bin the sooner done. Even as
when the stomach is oppressed, and surcharged with too great a fullness, and
ouerladen with more then it can either brook or bear, there is never any
quiet to be felt, until the stomach be eased by vomit, and casting out of
that surplusage of matter in it, that makes so sick and painful: so likewise
when sorrow and grief for sin committed, does ouerlade and press the
cons^ience, and fill the heart brim full with painful heaviness, and woeful
distress, which is felt broyling within, and turmoyling and loathsomly
fretting the bowels of the soul with greater disquiet, then can be abidden;
there is no case to be hoped for, or that ever can be felt, until by open and
plain confession (which is, as I may say in this case, the vomit of the soul)
that sin be with utter detestation vomitted up, and cast out with all kind of
abhorring and loathing of the same. Whereof there is a pregnant example set
forth in David 2. Sam. 11. 4.
after the committing of that great and gross sin of his, into which he so
foulely did fall. Who did ever take more pains to hide his sin after it was
committed, then did he for a time? Who tried more ways? Who cast more about
by using sundry and diverse likely courses, to have had his sin smothered,
that it might never have been known, nor come to light, then did David, as the
history does report? 2. Sam. 11.
And yet all his labor this way was lost, nothing prospered nor succeeded to
his mind, he could find no ease of that torment which he felt in his
conscience, through the guilt of his sin; no rest to his soul from the
turmoile and disquiet which he felt within; no freedom from the pains which
he was so soarely vexed withal, which God had inflicted upon him, as just
punishments for his sin; but which way soever he turned him, he felt no more
ease, then if he had lain upon a rack; for night and day the hand of God was
heavy upon him, so as his bones waxed old through his roaring all the day, and
his moisture was turned into the drought of summer. All this he himself says
(Psalm. 32. 3. 4. 5) was while he kept silence, and would still have kept close
his sin, and bit in his sorrow and grief he felt for the same: but such
smothering of his sin was, as if he having hot coals powered into his bosom,
should have clasped his garments close about him, so to shut them in; which
every one knows, would have been a course not to be abidden, for the burning
and scalding would have been intolerable, and never to have bin endured and
borne, until all had been ripped open, and thrown out again. Therefore when
he could find no more ease by keeping silence, he burst out to make open
confession of what he had done, and came to the acknowledging of his sin,
without any further hiding of his iniquity: for so he says, he did conclude
with himself, and resolved to do, even to confess his transgressions unto the
Lord; showing what a blessed effect followed upon this course taken, that then
he was refreshed, and found ease to his soul, the Lord was pacified toward
him, and forgave him the iniquity of his sin. A very memorable example, and
thing most worthy to be marked, as we are well given to understand by that
word [ Selah].

Sin in the conscience is as a thorn in a man's foot, as needels in the
flesh, or as poysonfull matter in a soar, which lies burning, and belching,
and aching with pain not to be abidden; there is no rest in such cases until
they be got out, the soar launched, and the poison expelled; then comes ease
to the patient. Job does say, that If he Job. 31. 33.
had covered his transgressions as did Adam, by hiding his iniquity in his
bosom, he could have had no comfort by that course in his distress. Yea, the
Spirit of God directly sets it down, that whosoever covers and hides his
sins shall never prosper: but he that confesses and forsakes his sins,
that is the man that shall have mercy, Prou. 28. 13. The couers and cloakes of
sin do nothing but intercept and hide the gracious light of Gods countenance
from shining upon the obtenders and users thereof: for why should God vouchsafe
to forgive that to us, which we will not vouchsafe to acknowledge, seeing that
mortal men do look for confession of such faults as others, though being but
their fellow-seruants, have done against them, before they will forgive them.
Thrusting out of sin then, and a clearing of the conscience by casting it up,
and vomiting of it out of the stomach of the soul as a loathsome burden, that
cannot any longer be borne, by a free, an open, and plain confession made
thereof; and by an acknowledgement of the evil that has been done, though it
be against a man's own self, that has been the doer of the same, is the
readiest and best way that can be taken, to ease a grieved heart that is
oppressed with sorrow, and heavily laden with the importable burden of his
sin: Confessio peccati est medicina peccati: Nazianz.
for confession of sin is the medicine to cure sin; and where sorrow is in
such a degree felt in the heart, it cannot always be kept in, but it will
force out some confession to be made by the tongue, to try if that way any
ease can come to the heart, or any relief possibly be gotten by such a course
taken.

This confession of sins is to be made first and chiefly 1. To God, Public,
to God, and that both publicly with, and before others, in the public
Congregations and Assemblies of the Church; and also privately in our secret
and private prayers Private.
by our selves, which is then sufficient, when our sins are not known to
others, or none else thereby wronged and offended; unless we find cause to
discover our privy faults and secret infirmities to some faithful Minister or
friend, that is fit and able to counsel and comfort us in respect of the same,
as Iam. 5. 6. wills Christians to do.

And we are to confess our sins unto God, not as to one that were ignorant of
them, and knew them not before to have been done; but as to him that knows,
and perfectly remembers all things, having them as it were written before him
in a book, who searches the heart, and knows all that we do amiss; that
spieth out all our ways, and has the heavens, the earth, and our own
consciences the faithful witnesses of our sins against us; therefore are we the
rather to confess our secret sins unto him, because we know he knows them,
that by our so confessing of them we may do him to know, that we also know
them our selves; and that our hearts are so filled with sorrow within for
having done them, that we cannot but express the bitterness of our grief,
by making such an humble confession of our sins unto him, who takes
knowledge of all sins, and that only can forgive them, and grant us pardon
for them; as he has promised so to do, Prou. 28. 13. 1. John 1. 9. and has
accordingly performed to David and others, 2. Sam. 12. 13.

Beside this confessing of sin unto God, if the sin 2. To men.
committed, has not only been done in the sight and knowledge of God, but
also before men, with scandal and offense to the Church wherein it is so done;
then is it to be openly confessed both to God and men thereby offended, that
the plaster of confession being spread as far, as the hurts and wounds of
sin have extended, they may be soundly cured.

Sins for which confession is due unto men, are either such as be offensive,
and hurtful unto some certain and particular persons only, unto whom like
private confession is requisite, by the testimony of our Savior Christ; Mat.
5. 23. 24.
or else they are such as be publicly offensive, and scandalous to a whole
Church or Congregation; either in regard of the notoriousnesse of the crime
committed, or in respect of the obstinacy of the offender, proceeding
vnreclaimeably with an obdurate heart and high hand in 1. Cor. 5. Matthew. 18. 17.
any private or lesser sin, whereby he does justly deserve* and cause that it
should be made public, that others may take heed of him, and he accordingly
be censured, ashamed, and chastised* for these, no less then public
confession is sufficient, that thereby the Church and Congregation may be
satisfied, and the poor sinners sorrow and grief of heart, as one that is
indeed truly penitent, may be brought out, and made manifest to be true and
sound, as it ought to be.

Here in confession of sin also, there is many manifest Difference thereof.
and plain differences between the repentance of sound conuerts, and of those
that are impenitent, unrepentant, and at the best but counterfeit.

And first to begin with the Papists, who for private 1. From popish confession.
confession are more severe in their tradition, then God is in his Word, urging
every man under pain of damnation to confess in the ear of a Priest, all,
and every one of his 1. Unto men.
sins in particular, how secretly soever they have been done; and so many
times do urge men to do open penance for secret sins, inuerting the
discipline of the Church: this neither the Word of God any where requires,
neither the Orthodox Church has taught, as well does Master Perkins make to
appear in his Reformed Catholic in his Treatise of Confession, that Auricular
August. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 3. Chrysostom. tom. 5. hom. 5. de dei natura. Et
in Psalm. 50. hom. 2.
confession was not known unto Augustine, it is clear, for he said, What have
I to do with men, that they should hear my confessions, as though they should
heal all my diseases. And likewise Chrysostom; I do not compel thee to
confess thy sins to others. And again; I do not bid thee confess them to
thy fellow-seruants, who will mock thee: but confess them to God, who will
cure and heal thee.

The Papists do likewise err about the confession of sins which they make
unto God, in that it is, and must 2. Unto God.
be made in a tongue or language not understood of the speakers thereof being
ignorant, which hinders the feruencie of his zeal, that so does make his
confession, and the breaking of his heart with sorrow for that sin, which he
confessing, knows not what it is that he does confess; and therefore may
well think such confessing will be fruitless, and bootlesse, and all in
vain: for it is not likely that ever God will take knowledge of that for the
forgiving of it, though pardon in some sort may be asked of him, when he that
asks it, knows not what he asks, and understands not what he says; it
is not like that ever the Lord will hear him, that hears not himself all
the while he is a speaking he cannot tell what.

Now in the next place to come to the openly profane 2. From open Atheists.
and ungodly persons, they offend against the making confession of sins unto
God, at least in any particular manner, because they are shut up in hardness
of heart, so as they cannot repent, and therefore will be brought to no
special confession at all; which course does need no light of Gods word and
glorious Gospel to show the damnablenes thereof; for the candle light of the
Heathen is sufficient to discover their state to be most desperate and past
all hope. Seneca could say, that as to tell a dream is the part of one that
first wakened himself out of his dream, that now he may tell it unto others;
so to confess sin, is the office and part of him that is in the way of being
recovered out of sin: whereby is intimated the contrary, for any to hold his
peace this way, is to be in his dream still, and to lie drowned in the gulf
of perdition, and in a deadly lethargy and sleep of sin.

But to come to set down some differences of confessing 3. From common
Protestants.
sins between common Protestants (I mean those that only are but carnal
Gospellers, hypocrites, and counterfeit conuerts at the best), and them that
are thoroughly penitent, and who have their hearts broken indeed with godly
sorrow for their sins. The first sort, if they could 1. Difference.
get their shame and ignominy removed, and still keep credit with men, they
care not though they do keep still their sin, which appears by the manner
of their making confession of their sins; which is done after so slight a
fashion, and in a stubborn manner, having such a companion of pride joined
with the same, as will strangle it to death before it come forth: but a true
penitent child of God does make confession of his sins with shame and
confusion of face for them; yet not sparing nor caring for any shame amongst
men by confessing his sins, nor what cause he has to look sadly upon them,
but how he may in all humility look up with hope and comfort unto God; he
cares not what punishment soever God lays upon him, so as his sin may be
taken away; he is still crying out with David, Lord take away mine iniquity,
and blot out all my sin: for the Psalm. 51.
nature of true repentance is to make a man ashamed of sin, which he has
committed, but not ashamed with grief to confess it when it is done; but men
are for the most part so full of self-love, as they will not yield to make any
other confession of their sins, then such as will (as they think) stand with
their own outward safety, credit and honor.

Hypocrites are more general in folding up all their 2. Difference.
sins in a bundle together, when they come to make confession of their
sins, regarding no more one then another of them; but shuffling of them
together upon a heap, they do make a general and confused kind of
confession and acknowledgment of them, and such also is their humiliation for
them. But as in surfets taken in eating, some one kind of meat intemperatly
eaten, may be the principal cause of that surfeit; so among many sins there may
be some one or two chief festring sins, which do lie rankling in men's
consciences, that require special cost to be bestowed about them, and regard
to be had of them.

True penitents therefore do deal more particularly, and look to their
special and chief sins, acknowledging them with grief of heart unto God,
making their beginning there; and having their thoughts most specially to dwell
upon the consideration of them. It is meet that men should take several
repentances for their several sins, and for the vain pleasures and carnal
delights they have taken therein, that having had many unlawful pleasures in
sins, they do not shut up all with one repentance alone. There is a story,
2. Sam. 21. 1. that in David's time God sent a plague upon the land for a sin
committed in the days of Saul: if David and his people were punished for not
regarding Saul's sin; how much more liable was he to punishment, if he had not
regarded his own sins, and the sins of his time? It was well said by one,
that if for the blood of the Martyrs shed in this land in Queen Maryes time,
we had had every year since a fast throughout the whole land for that blood
shed, it had been little enough; how much more then for our own proper sins,
and the sins of this time, which now ouerflow the banks both of religion and
civil honesty? Where capital and principal sins that have much angered the
Lord, and greatly provoked his displeasure against the offenders, have not in
special manner been bewailed, acknowledged and confessed unto the Lord, when
men have made their repentance, and humbled themselves for their sins, it has
come to pass, that such as have gone forward a great way in repentance, have
been feign to go a great way back again to fetch better repentance, that
they may repent for that which yet they never repented of: as in the time of
Ezra. 10. 10. 11, the people having repented long, were feign to go back to
fetch now repentance; and having fasted before, to fast again, and turn all
mirth into mourning, because they forgate a special sin of marrying with
strange wives. For as in an Evidence and writing for assurance, there may be
left our such words as should be most effectual in the conueiance, to the
great prejudice of the lawful owner, which must cause it to be new written
again: so in a man's repentance many things may be found out, which were
forgotten at the first, to the great hindrance of a man's comfort. Hence it is
that men often remember upon their deathbeds, with much grief of heart, the
sins of their youth, their incontinencie, their pride, their oppression,
their slanders and wrongs they have done to their neighbors that are dead and
gone, no satisfaction having been therefore made by them. And experience has
tried and taught this, that many, though they left their sins long ago, yet
because they did not thoroughly and soundly repent for them, they have rebounded
back upon them with terrible sights and fearful visions, to humble them, and
to bring them to a more serious examination of them, and better sorrowing for
them, though long since left, and in a manner quite forgotten.

I do not deny, but that hypocrites and reprobates The confession of Judas.
may sometimes, through the great distress of conscience Matthew. 27. 3. 4.
that they are in, be brought to make a more particular confession of their
sins, and to make special mention of their most heinous and enormious vices,
which they are guilty of, and which now have brought them to that distress
wherein they are. Judas was a rank hypocrite, and a close cunning one, if ever
there was any, yet he is said to have repented; and in the hellish sorrow that
he was in, he made confession of his sin; yea he made confession of his
particular sin, and that openly, he cared not who heard him; and he confessed
that sin that was of all his sins the greatest, and whereby he had most
offended: but because it was without faith in Gods mercy, and without any true
humbling of himself before the Lord, seeking unto him to have it pardoned; and
was made not in the true and perfect hatred of that sin, because it was
sin, but because he could keep his own counsel no longer; and the
ouer-ruling hand of God would have, that he should pen his own indictment,
and confess the action that he was guilty of, the fact for which he was in
his conscience now arraigned, before he should be hanged; that being out of his
own mouth thus condemned, all the world might know that he died justly
damned. This confession of his, though it was of his particular sin, though
it was of his chiefest and most heinous sin, and that openly made to his own
shame; yet was it no better then his satisfaction, when he brought again the
money and cast it a forehead from him: for nothing can be well done in a
wicked man, which yet would be excellent, found done by a good man. Besides,
the confession of Judas was a falfe confession, made to wrong parties, such as
were guilty of the same sin himself had committed; and therefore were no
way fit nor able to relieve him. He made his confession to man, he made none
to God, whom he had so greatly offended, to ask mercy of him; he humbled not
himself before his Lord and Master, whom most villanously above all he had
wronged, to ask pardon and forgiveness at his hands, who only could help him;
it was a confession of desperation, and not of hope; a confession that had no
true humiliation joined with it; a confession more of the innocence of Christ,
then of the greatness of that sin, by which he had done all that mischief
that then was done: it was therefore but an effect of worldly and hellish
sorrow, that caused his death and just damnation.

But the humble confession, which godly sorrow in the True confession.
hearts of such as are truly penitent does cause them to make, is the reverend
and modest blushing of their guilty consciences; they now putting themselves
to shame, not hiding their sins any longer, but making open confession of
them both before God and men, when there is just cause for them so to do, with
desire of reconciliation, with hope of obtaining mercy at the hands of God,
and pardon for the same: and these do so confess their sins, as it is done
with an utter loathing and perfect hating of them, as those that have no
purpose at all to have any more to do with them from that time forward, as
Ephraim who said, Hos. 14. 8. What have I to do with Idols any more?

The confession of sin made by hypocrites, and such 3. Difference.
as are unsound in their repentance, is not a voluntary humble confession of
sin in the grief of their hearts that they have done it, moved by a loath
some hating of it, that makes them so to throw it out, as ouerburdensome longer
to be kept: for they commonly do not confess their sins, before their
sins be known in such sort, as the denial of them is in vain and without
color; and before the confession of sin be extorted out of them, by the
extremity of some judgment and plague upon them. As when that terrible
thunder, and hail mingled with fire, Exodus 9 27.
so grievous as never before was known, was thrown down upon Pharaohs head,
and upon all his land; and that innumerable Exodus 10. 16.
army of locusts sent after the hail had devoured all the fruit which the
hail had left, then was this confession wroong out of Pharaohs mouth, that he
had sinned, that God was righteous, but he and his people were wicked; that he
had sinned against God, and had sinned against his people. Hypocrites come not
to confession, till they be drawn out as by the ears to the making of it; as
was Adam, Josh. 7. 18. and that they be arrested and attached by some
judgments sent from God: as the Lord was said to have taken Adam, and so he
was brought out to make his confession. When they do make their confession,
they do make it but by halues, and with their mouths as half open, confessing
something, but not fully the whole matter as it was by them done. They confess
their sin as did Adam, who for all his confessing (as Job says of him, Job
31. 33), yet did still hide his sin; so do these, making confession of their
sins for all that keep close much iniquity in their bosom. Adam, because
his sin was known unto the Lord, who now called to examination for the same,
did indeed at the last with much ado say, he had eaten: but he kept close
his own iniquity in his bosom, and laid the whole blame of the fault upon
another person. When hypocrites come to confess their sin, they seek how to
extenuate it, and make it seem as little as possibly they can, excusing it in
themselves all they are able, and laying the greatest (...) upon the shoulders
of other men, if they can fast^n v^^^ any partners in the same course with
them. As in ^a^s example and practice is evident to be seen, who being
challe^ged by Samuel for 1. Sam. 15. 14. 15 20. 24. 30.
the bleating of the she^pe i^ his ears, and the loughing of the oxen which
were kept vbs^^ine, though at the length being strongly and notably convinced
by Samuel, he was brought in spite of his heart to make co^^^^sion of his
sin, and that twice for failing; once after his conviction, and then again
the second time before Samuel wholly left him; yet at the first he stood
stoutly to the matter, that he was innocent, and free from all bl^^e; yea, that
he deserved much commendation, for having done all that God commanded him, and
performed his whole will in all that he would have done; for he for his part
had slain the Amalekites: as for that fault of keeping some of the fat beasts
alive, he transferreth the blame thereof wholly from himself, as if he had had
no hand in it, and lays it al upon the people; they indeed (says he) spared
the fat beasts for sacrifice. Wherein he dealt like a notable hypocrite indeed:
for of that which was well done, he would have the whole praise, as though he
himself had done it all alone: but of that which was evil done, he would have
all think that he stood clear from all manner of fault therein; that, others
must answer for, let the people share that, and part it amongst them, and much
good do it them, for he will none thereof. And this is the most usual dealing
of false-hearted hypocrites that have lived since, and do live at this time:
in good things if they have done any thing, they will have it understood, that
they have done all things: but in evil things, except they have done all
things, they would have men believe, that they have done nothing: if they can
pick out any that have done as bad as they, or though not so bad, but fallen
into the lapse of those sins, wherein they do lie notably bemired; though
they cannot deny but they have done evil, yet they presently have such an
answer as this ready to make to all, that list to charge them therewith; I
cannot indeed deny, but that I have not done well in doing of this thing: but I
am not the first that in like manner have done amiss, neither shall I be the
last; there be others, I warrant you, that be as bad as I; neither am I alone
in this sin; there were others as well as I, that joined with me in it, and
were as forward as I, and provoked me to it; and though I cannot say I have
done well in doing of (...) yet I pray God I never do worse: I have as good a
heart to Godward as any whosoever, and I had a good meaning to do for the
best, how heinous soever you make the matter: God be merciful to us; if I
should not do thus, there were no living in this world, but to be undone and
laughed at for a precise fool. This and much more might Saul have answered to
Samuel; which answer would have been as good, as an aprone of Fig leaves to
cover his nakedness.

They that are truly penitent indeed, take none of these courses when they are
humbled before the Lord, or before men, to make confession of their sin; they
do it after a much differing* yea after a clean contrary fashion. When their
hearts are wounded and stricken through with godly sorrow for sin, there need no
great urging nor enforcing of them to make their humble confession and
acknowledgement of them; they are never well till that is done; their hearts
are so oppressed and filled with sorrow within, that they are as if they should
burst, till after this manner they have s^ught to ease them; they stay not
always the extremity, until by some outward judgment, the confessing of
their sins be extorted from them; it is enough that the greatness and
heinousness of their sins is set before them, and made known unto them, and
that there by they have offended God, their hearts being convinced of them, and
smitten with remorse and grief for the doing of them: this is found
sufficient, without the enforcement of further terror and fear of punishment,
to bring them on their knees before God, yea, and before men also, when there
is just cause for them so to do, to make their free and humble acknowledgement
of their sins, and to crave earnestly the pardon and forgiveness of them.

And in the confessing of their sins, they do not mince the matter, to make
their sins either fewer or lesser then they are; they seek not excuses,
pretenses and cloakes to cover their sins, and to shift of the blame and
fault from themselves to lay it upon other men: but they discover all their
sin, and lay them open to the full; they seek not how to extenuate, but
rather how to aggrauate the faults that they have committed; they leave other
men, and take the blame upon themselu^^, and lay the burden upon their own
shoulders: There are none so hard and severe unto them, as they are unto
themselves, in making the most and worst of their sins, and passing out the
sharpest sentences and censures against themselves above that any others would
ever do; they coming to take the scantling of their own sins, do set them
upon the tenter-hookes, to draw them out to the full and furthest length and
breadth that they can extend unto; yea, they strain them many times so hard,
that they do reach them beyond the true extent of them: and do make them
greater, then either God himself, or man would do. There are none have been
so humbled; none that have thought so meanly and basely of themselves, or that
have cast themselves down so low in the sight of their sins, and conscience
of their unworthiness, as have done some of Gods most worthy and excellent
servants; as it is plain to be seen by the Scriptures. Agur (Prou. 30. 2)
Prou. 30. 2.
says of himself, Surely I am more foolish then any man, and have not the
understanding of man in me. Now it is sure Agur was a wise man, and a holy man,
yet he thus meanly conceiueth and speaks of himself. So the Apostle
speaks of himself, that he was of all other the greatest sinner, 1. Tim. 1.
15: and yet answering for himself before 1. Tim. 1. 15. Acts 23. 1.
the Jews and High Priest, Acts 23. 1; he says, Men and brethren, I have in
all good consci^nce served God unto this day. Doubtless no other godly and
wise man living in those times, and knowing these men, would ever have given
such a hard sentence of either of them.

Zacheus, Luke 19. 8.
who, repenting of his getting goods unjustly, said, he would give half of his
goods to the poor: which thing, though an act of repentance will allow a man
to do, yet an act of strickt justice and judgment will not design and
inioyne a man to do so much. Zacheus repenting said, If he had done any Leuit.
6. 5.
man wrong, he would restore him fourefold; which was more then the Law would
have required. An indifferent and upright Judge coming to judge between two
sinners, must judge according to the truth of things, neither more nor less:
but a repentant person coming to judge of himself, he judges with the
hardest, according to the truth of that he does conceive and feel to be in
himself: so in the act of charity, a man thinks best of others, and worst
of himself, as we see in the Apostle (Romans 7. 24.) who in true sorrow for his
sin, cries out of himself, Romans 7. 24. expounded.
as of a most wretched man, (...), the word is a double compound, used when one
would most disgrace a man: now we know the Apostle had not committed any so
heinous a sin after his conversion; for in his apology for himself, Act. 23.
1. he says, that in all good conscience he has served God unto that day: and
2. Cor. 1. 12. he says, that that was his rejoicing, even the testimony of his
conscience; that in all simplicity and godly pureness he has had his
conversation in the world, etc. Now according to this president set before us,
in that which was thus done by this blessed Apostle, is the course and practice
of true conuerts, that are thoroughly humbled, and cast down with sorrow and
grief for their sins: there is none that will think more meanly of them,
nor any that will cry out more loudly against them, then they will think
meanly and abiectly of themselves, and cry out with a note higher, then they
that are loudest against them for their unworthiness and evil doing. And Qui
sibi displicet in vitijs, deo placet. Bernard.
indeed the more abject that any true penitent servant of God is in his own
account, so he end in faithful humility, and not in stubborn desperation,
it is the better. And so much may serve to have been spoken for showing some
differences between the confession of sins made by hypocrites, and those that
are sound conuerts, and true penitent persons.

Now as touching confessing of sins in geneall, when Confession in general.
we are brought upon our knees before the Lord, to confess and acknowledge our
sins unto him; though we may be specially moved thereunto, by some one, or some
few later gross and grievous sins committed and fallen unto by us; yet is it
meet that we rest not alone in the consideration of that one, or those few
sins so lately committed; but by means thereof to take occasion to find out
our other sins also, and them all (if we could) by which in former time we
transgressed and offended; that all may be repented of, and we the better
humbled for them. As when one lighting a candle to go seek some one thing
that he misseth, by means of that light, and seeking, does find another; yea
(many times) many things that were ouercast, and (in a manner) quite forgotten.
As a worthy man has wisely observed out of the practice of David, that being
checked by Nathan for one gross sin lately committed, and by him done, he
coming to make his repentance for it, thinks of more, and never rests till
he come to the root of all, to be humbled for his Original sin, as well as
for his actual; Psalm. 51.
as in that penitential Psalm composed by him is evident to be seen: so is
it meet, that when (by means of some gross sin lately or lastly committed)
our consciences are so wounded, and our hearts so pierced and smitten through
with sorrow and grief, as there is no abiding for us longer to defer and put
of our repentance, and humbling of our selves before the Lord for making our
peace with him, that we take occasion therefrom to suruay and ouerlooke all
our ways; to cast over the day-booke of our whole life, to see what Items the
Lord has against us, and what arrearages we have run into, by our
transgressing his most righteous laws, and to go so far back in searching
and trying our ways, and Job 14. 4. Psalm. 25. 7.
well considering them in our hearts, (according as the Lord wills us to do
by the mouth of his Prophets, Lam. 3. 40. Hag. 1. 5. 7.) until we come with
Job, and David, to bewail the very sins of our youth, and to ask mercy for
them; yea, until we come to the head spring and fountain of our Original
corruption; and to gage the very belly and womb of sin in our first
conception; and so acknowledge that, with all the rest, unto God, as
particularly as we can; laboring to break our hearts for them all jointly and
severally, that so our hearts may fall into the more pieces, there being the
more stroks given to the same, by the more sins we can remember to have been
committed by us, until our hearts may be so smitten and so contrite, that they
may be as if they were grownd even to dust and powder: for the which purpose we
must narrowly search and sift our selves, unto the which course the Prophets
have so much, and so often called Gods servants by their earnest exhortations,
Zeph. 2. 1.

Now albeit we be willing to take knowledge of all Of special sins.
our sins in general, yet are we most to humble our selves, to ask mercy,
and seek reconciliation for our special sins, whereof we are guilty, if we
can guess which they are that God has chiefly in chase, and for which he most
pursues us by his judgments, for still retaining of them. For commonly men
that could be contented that all their sins might die with the lean cattle
slain by Saul, yet have they some one or two fat sins, which 1. Sam. 15 9.
they would as feign spare, as Saul did the fat beasts and Agag the King. There
is no gift of God given to many men that is so dear unto them, but there is
something forbidden by God, that is in like sort as dear to them as that is,
and as loath to be parted from. Herod would not Mat. 14.
part with his darling sin: but God when he has sin in chase, and pursues
men with his judgments, because they will still retain those sins, will
never give them over, no more then Ioab pursuing Sheba the son of Bichri, 2.
Sam. 20.
did give over his pursuit until the traitors head was thrown over the wall
unto him. Gods judgments are as his armies of soldiers, that do pursue us
for our sins: we are to be as wise therefore for making peace with God, as
was the woman with Ioab in Abel, by whose counsel Verse. 22.
the traitors head was cut off, by cutting off the heads of all such our
sins, and casting them away speedily from us, that God may cease any further
to pursue us with his judgments for them. There are also some sins most
specially aimed at, as chief in the treason, which God will see special
execution to be done upon, before ever he will give us over: their heads are to
be cut off in time, and they most specially to be thrown out hy humble
confession and pardon craved for them. We are therefore to be most heedfull in
observing our chiefest infirmities, our strongest corruptions, our commonest
and most masterfull sins that have foiled us most, and into which we are most
in danger soonest and oftenest to fall; to acknowledge them especially unto
God, as bewailing them most, with desire to have mercy for them, and power
against them, ever keeping a vigilant eye open over our greatest frailties,
that we may be most humbled for them before the Lord, most afraid of them in
our selves, in regard of our known weakness; and labor to arm our selves
the better, and to make over selves the stronger to deal with them, and to
wrestle against them; both for the throwing them out of us, when they are got
in; and for the keeping them out when they are once expelled and gone. For as
one says well, they that are the best men of war against all the vanities
and fooleries of the world, do always keep the strongest guards against
themselves, to defend themselves against themselves, from self-love,
selfe-estimation, selfe-opinion, and such other homebred sins.

In confessing of sin, beside the variety and multitude Quality of sins.
of our sins, which thus are to be searched out, the quantity and quality of
sin is to be waighed and considered, to the end our humiliation may be
thereby the better furthered.

And first, for the finding out the heaviness and waightinesse of our sins,
we are not to do as they, that, coming to weigh gruffe or massy metal,
bring great scales, and leaden and great iron waights; but we are to weigh
them in the tried scales and waights of the Sanctuary, that are as the waights
where with men weigh gold, that will show what is wanting, though it were but
the weight of a dram, grain, or less. The cause why we undervalue sin, is
because we take out our own waights to weigh it by; which are as waights of
lead; if things be not somewhat excessive heavy, we cannot perceive or find
any great want or difference with them. But nothing is little, nor lightly to
be accounted of, that is committed against the great Majesty of God, the price
of Christ's redemption, the covenant that we have made in Baptism, by the
committing whereof we are made covenant Nihil leave quod praeponderatur mundo.
breakers, and as perjured persons. That cannot be accounted light, that is
able to weigh against, and to outwaigh the whole world, and overthrow it too;
as we know sin has done: one jot of Gods Law is more esteemed by him, then
all heaven and earth is beside. We know what the Psalmist says of men, yea and
of men in their best estate, how by sin they are made so subject to vanity, as
if they should be laid in the balla^ce, they would be found lighter then
vanity it self: and if the Lord should hold the scales, and put a sinner into
the balance, though weighed but with the least sin that ever can be
commmitted; yea though without any actual sin at all, no more being put in
than his bare Original corruptin; as let it be an Infant newly come into the
world, and not yet a day old, he would be found not to hold weight in the Lords
balance; and therefore the sentence of Gods justice passing out against such
an one would be so heavy, as would make manifest the waightinesse of his
sin; for thereby he would not only be thrust down from the throne of an
earthly kingdom, as was Balthazar, Dan. 5.
but of the everlasting kingdom of heaven, but also pressed down into
endless torment, and most woeful condemnation in hell. Let no man then account
of that to be light, which is able to sink and weigh down any under it into
utter destruction, and everlasting confusion; which the least sin in the
world is able to do.

As for the quality of every sin, there is as great difference between
sins and sins, as between moats and beams; hundreths of pence, and
thousands of tal^nts; between fifties and five hundreths, in our reckonings
and accounts. Yea, even the same sin again and again committed multiplyeth,
according to that order which is in cyphering; where that figure which in the
first place stands for single, in the second place is ten times as much, in
the third place an hundredth, in the fourth a thousand, and so infinitely
increasing by tens, hundreths, and thousands, according to the order of the
place wherein it stands. The same sins by circumstances are greater in one
then in another, according to the differences of men's persons and places.
Sins are greater in public persons, then in private; in such as have
knowledge, then in them that are ignorant: the white hairs of old men, do
make their sins a great deal the blacker: and this, that men sin in the
clear light and sunshine of the Gospel, sets them up to a far higher
degree of wickedness, and of just condemnation, both before God and man, then
if they had done the same wickedness in the night of ignorance, and times of
darkness. Sins of wilfulness, are above sins of weakness: but if there
be any one sin to be named more dangerous then another, it is security,
hardness of heart and impenitencie: all other sins, through faith and
repentance, may be pardoned: this only is the killing sin, which if it be
not prevailed against, will never be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in
the world to come: for except you repent, (says he that shall be the Judge of
all the world) you shall all likewise perish, Luke 13. 3. Neither does that
impardonable sin against the holy Ghost otherwise kill, but for that it is
accompanied with final impenitency: for though God in himself be infinite in
mercy, yet has Heb. 6. 6.
he set marks, marches, and limits, how far, and not beyond that, to show
mercy to men, that they may fear and tremble to offend and proceed in sin.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of satisfaction, and the diverse kinds thereof: with the differences between
true believers and hyp^crits therein.

BEsides confession of sin, there is another Satisfaction. 1. To God.
thing that godly sorrow will urge unto, namely satisfaction; in all such cases
wherein by our sinning we have wronged either Church, or Commonwealth, or any
singular person or persons, be they more or fewer. But as for making on our
part any satisfaction unto God for our sins committed against him, we wholly
renounce the opinion of the^ that hold it possible by any mere man to be done;
and we do as much abhor from the practice of ever endeavoring or going
about the doing thereof; giving ear to what is said by the Psalmist, Psalm. 49.
7. 8, concerning that, namely that it is to be let alone for ever; for it cost
more to redeem our souls, and the price is greater then we are able to pay,
though we were able to give the whole world, and offer it unto God in
satisfaction for our sin. We know not of, neither will we acknowledge any
other meet satisfaction and sufficient unto the justice of God for our sins,
then that alone which our blessed Savior himself has offered; when he gave
himself a price of redemption for us, and offered up his body upon the
cross, a sacrifice of a most sweet smelling savor Ephesians. 5. 2.
unto God. The best satisfaction that we can offer unto God for our sins is,
with the renouncing of our selves, and all opinion of our own merits, being
cast down before him in the brokennes of our hearts for offending of him, that
by the hands of our faith apprehending Christ Jesus we hold him up, and all
that he has done and suffered for us, desiring that thereby his justice may
be satisfied, and we discharged. And in this we may and are to rest, and that
boldly too. Christ (says Augustine) August. sermon 37 de verbis Apostolorum.
by taking upon him the punishment of our sins, and not the fault, has done
away both the punishment and fault: and then on our parts what is it that we
should fear, that we should go about the satisfying of Gods justice? Peter's
tears (says Ambrose) I read of; but I read of no satisfaction that was made
by him. Neither ever was, nor ever shall be made by any, that can be
sufficient or meritorious, but by Christ alone; and therein we rest as touching
such kind of satisfaction.

Satisfaction to the Church for faults committed to the 2. To the Church.
scandal and offense thereof, is when the offenders do submit themselves to
the discipline thereof, bear such censures, endure such corrections, and
perform such duties as shall be in justice imposed upon them, and enjoined
unto them, after such a fashion as the Church shall appoint or approve of; and
so long a time as till the Church do say it is enough, and think it is
sufficient that has been done, and so rest themselves as fully satisfied
therein.

This, hypocrites and counterfeit penitents will never Difference in hypocrites.
be brought readily to yield unto, nor found willing to perform; though they
make no dainty of sin to commit it, with how great offense soever that be
done, yet their stomachs are too weak to brook the shame that they ought
justly to take for it, or the punishment that does belong as due for the
committing of it: they think that which should be their gracing for ever, the
repairing and recovering of their credit again with them that are good; if any
thing else be able to do it, namely conscionably and penitently to give such
satisfaction to the Church, would be their shaming for ever, make to the utter
overthrow of their credit, and bring upon them so great a confusion, as they
should never know how to look any man in the face again. Rather then they
will stand in a white sheet, come into the congregation there upon their knees
with grief to confess their faults, and renounce them, publicly asking
forgiveness, they will either run the country, or if it may be bought off
with money, they will be as frank in offering liberally, even to the full
contenting of them that in that case have to do with them, if they will take
money, so as thereby they may be discharged from further penance, as ever were
those hypocrites in their offers they made to God in the days of Micah, so as
there might be dispensation Micah. 6. 7.
granted them for their sin. And yet these very persons will make a show of
being very penitent; talk with them in private, and you shall find them as
though they were much humbled; you shall see them weep and shed tears in
abundance, and cry out of themselves for having done as they have done; you
shall hear them to sob and sigh, as if their hearts would break within them:
but where they refuse to give the Church due satisfaction; this declares them
to be but rank hypocrites, hollow and unsound, and no better then plain
counterfeits in all that they do beside. For this their way (as it is in the
Psalm 49. 13.) declares their foolishnes. They are like unto stubborn
Absalom, who, though he had committed that flagitious fact, and most injurious
to his father, of murdering his fathers son and his own brother, yet rather
then he would any longer abide to go under that which was but too easy a
censure for so great a crime, namely to endure his fathers frowning, and the
hiding of his face from him for a time, he had rather dye, be knocked on the
head, or hanged out of the way. So these, rather then they 2. Sam. 14. 32.
will endure this shame of making such a satisfaction, they will give over all,
and will go as far as their legs will carry them; they are vexed and
confounded not for that they have sinned, but because their sin is found out
and known: for they are like to the people in Ieremiahs time, of whom the Lord
by his Prophet asks whether Iere. 8. 12.
they were ashamed, when they had committed abomination; and answers again
the question, nay they were not ashamed, neither could they blush or take
shame. And Iere. 3. 3. it is directly said, they refused to take shame: which
is the very thing that these do; and therefore the sentence which the Lord in
that place by his Prophet Jeremy, 8. 12. does set down against them, may be
justly feared of these; and that was, therefore shall they fall among them that
do fall, in the time of their visitation they shall be cast down, says the
Lord.

But they that are truly touched with godly sorrow, In true penitents.
and are unfeignedly penitent for their sins indeed, as led by another spirit,
are found to be of a clean other practice; they willingly submit themselves to
all the censures of the Church: they care not what they are appointed to suffer,
nor what is enjoined them for to do; they are ready to fulfill all, so as
thereby they may give that satisfaction to the Church and every good Christian
that is meet; so as none may any more remain justly offended, or further to
think themselves wronged by them. They stand not upon their credit with
worldly men; and as for shame they refused not to blush and be ashamed; for
they know it is duly belonging unto them, both before God and men. They are
ready to say with Daniel, To us Dan. 9. 8.
O Lord belongs shame and confusion of face: and when they make their
prayers, to say with Ezrah, O my God I Ezrah. 9. 6.
am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee. And when their sin is broke
out to the offense of many, then shame does also cover their faces before the
sons of men, especially when they are shamed by rebukes, corrections and
censures of the Church passed out against them; they refuse not to take that
deserved shame, but so draw themselves to a willingness, since that must be
their burden, contentedly to bear the same; saying with the Prophet Micah, I
will bear this indignation, because I have sinned. Micah. 7. 9.
For as the Lord answered Moses in the case of Miriam, If her father had but
spit in her face, ought she not to Numb 12. 14.
have been ashamed seven days? So if the fathers of the Church, as abhorring
such foul courses and gross sins committed, shall show how much they are
offended by the hard censures they do set down, and sharp penance they do
enjoin; should not the offenders be ashamed seven days as it were? Yea
doubtless; and they that do truly repent, though they had not such outward
shame put upon them, yet would they with repentant Ephraim, Ierem. 31. 19.
having truly repented and being turned, smite their own hands upon their
thigh, and grow ashamed of themselves, yea even confounded by bearing the
reproach of their so doing amiss. And this their shame, howsoever for a time it
may be their abasing; yet being well carried, contentedly, conscionably and
meekly borne, it will afterward make to the lifting of them up; to be had in
better account with all that are good, and to have the better credit and
estimation among all them. David committed a sin so gross in that kind, as
in many respects a grosser could not lightly have bin done; not a single sin,
but a compound sin, that had many other very grievous and most heinous
wickednesses folded up in it, and inwrapped with it, yea tied and twisted to it
to strengthen the evil of it, till it became hugely big, even a very gross
and grievous sin indeed; which could not be but with great offense given to
the Church of God, when it once became known. But who more penitent Psalm. 51.
then was David? or who ever gave the Church a better satisfaction then did
he? who spared not, besides the confessing and acknowledging of it in words,
though it were (as he said) against himself, and to his own shame, to
publish it in writing, with his great sorrow and repentance for the same; and
suffered it to be spread abroad, yea not only to be spoken of, but also to be
sung out openly aloud in the midst of the solemn assemblies and
Church-meetings throughout his whole land as it were, thereby gathering, and in
a manner pulling upon himself the shame belonging unto it from all the people
of his whole land: and not only shaming himself with it in his own country,
but also not refusing to bear the shame of it in all other countries, and from
all sorts of people, among whom that which he had so written should ever come
to be either read or heard: yea, as if it had not been enough to have made it
known to the people of that age alone, he has so published it, as if it had
been his meaning to tell all posterity of it, that we to this day, and all to
the end of the world may know what was his fall, and how great his frailty was.
Yet who does not know that all this abasing and casting down of himself, and
taking upon him the shame of that he had done, that so he might remove the
offense that was thereby given, and render unto the Church the better and more
full satisfaction, has tended to the lifting up of his honor higher in the
Church of God; and has caused him, and still will cause him, not only to be as
much reverenced, but a great deal more admired for the abundance of rare
grace, that by all this was manifested, then it is like he ever should
otherwise have been, if happily that which he so offended in, had never been
by him done and so repented of?

There is another kind of satisfaction, which is a civil 3. To the Common
wealth. 1. For violating good laws.
satisfaction, that is to be given and made to the Commonwealth, and civil
state, and societies of men, when the wholesome laws that are constituted for
the well ordering and governing of a country or kingdom, are violated and
broken by any; then is the civil state and societies of men wronged, and
Commonwealth it self impeached. For laws are said to be the bonds of a
Commonwealth Cicero pro Clemente.
to hold it together, and chains whereby men are tied one to another in the
world, to live ciuilly one by another; they are the foundations of liberty,
the fountains of equity, they are the very sinews and spirit of cuery state,
by which they live and move. And therefore no marvel though the Ephesian
Heraclitus said, that citizens were to fight as Laertins.
well for their laws, as for their cities themselves: for if they be seen
and suffered to be violated and torn asunder, all will soon be brought to
ruin.

The satisfaction then which transgressors of laws are to make unto societies
of men and Commonwealths thus wronged, is to bear and go under, and
contentedly to satisfy and pay the fines, mulcts, and penalties that are
imposed upon offenders; and patiently without resistance to suffer
imprisonments, chastisements, and punishments; yea even unto death it self,
according to the nature and quality of the offense and crime that has been
committed, be it greater or less.

And herein also a clean differing carriage is found to Difference in
impenitents.
be by the delinquents on both sides: unsanctified persons whose consciences
are never soundly touched with true remorse for committing any sin, neither
for violating wholesome and good laws, what wrong soever that way has been
done by them, they stand not upon making any recompense, or giving satisfaction
so far as they are able to tender their goods, where they are found
sufficient to make it; or to yield their bodies where their goods cannot do
it; or patiently to lay down their lives, in cases; wherein nothing else can
be found sufficient fully to satisfy: but they seek shifts how to avoid all;
if they be great in the world, they stand upon their prerogatives, their
greatness must allow them to be lawless; they are like the great flies which
do break through the cobwebs, they will not be taken, there is nothing can
hold them. If they be poor, and it be a pecuniarie mulct that is imposed upon
them for their trespass, they shift off the matter by their poverty, by means
whereof they promise to themselves an immunity in such cases; standing upon
that maxim, where there is nothing to be had, there the King must loose his
right; and so they will be sure by their shifting to pay nothing, whether then
be able yea or no. If their bodies be attached they their next course is, to
spy out some advantage how to escape away, and break out of the hands of them
that have taken them. If seeing of the Sergeant, or bribing of the Bailiffe
will not serve the turn; if they be clapped up i^ prison, the prison must be
strong if it can long hold them; they will have many times files to get off
their bolts; they have devices to open locks, to break bars, and find
shifts to make a way for their scaping, where no way could have been immagined
might have been made before. If they be put by all their muses, and prevented
of all their courses, and no remedy but to the gallows they must come, there
men of this sort are found to die either most desperately, as those who after
all the wrongs they offered to others all their life time, stick not to wrong
God and nature it self in the end, by carelessly, yea madly casting away their
life; (as though it were a thing but vile, which God has made so precious, and
nature teaches all to be so charie of, to stand so much for, and to make so
much of) as daily may be seen. Or else to take their deaths most impatiently,
as those who would yield no obedience, nor give any willing satisfaction,
either to law, or to Magistrate, otherwise then it is thus extorted from them:
but hold their rebellion to the end, and so die therein. Hereof we have a
pregnant example in that archenemie to the Gospel, and most bloody persecutor
of Gods faithful servants, and traitor to the Prince and State, Doctor Story,
Doctor Story.
who first brake prison into which he was put; and then being caught again,
when he himself was brought to suffer death, who had been the means of
putting to death hundreds of others, that died Martyrs in Gods cause, in time
of his most deserved execution by quartering, was (as the story does report) so
impatient, that he did not only roar and cry out, but also struck the
executioner while he was doing his office, and resisted as long as strength did
serve him, and was Fulke in his confutation of Papists quarrels, page 14.
feign to be kept down by three or four men until he was dead.

But they whose hearts are thoroughly touched, and deeply pierced with sorrow
for the sins they have committed, and whom God does give grace unto, to
consider rightly their own ways in their hearts, after they (having been left
to themselves for a time) through strength In true penitents.
of tentation, and frailty of nature, have not only been overcome to
transgress the laws by some lesser crimes, fallen into, and faulted in; but
also drawn to commit some heinous wickednesses, and enormious vices, greatly
prejudicial to the State and Commonwealth in which they do live; so as the
wrong and hurt they have done thereby cannot be recompensed, nor the law
satisfied, the impartial executing of Justice by the Magistrate, saved
harmless without confiscation of their goods, attaching of their bodies; yea
and in some cases, the taking away of their very lives; for so much as these
knew there is no hope of obtaining any pardon of sin at the hands of God, if
in the wrong done to a brother, and persisted in, the same be asked; much
less, having dong a wrong unto a whole society of brethren; yea a whole state
of a kingdom, the parties delinquent should come to the court of heaven to sue
for their pardon, would their petition he ever regarded or looked upon? but the
answer would be made them as Christ taughr in his doctrine, If thou know
thy brother has ought against thee, leave thy Mat. 5. 23.
gift at the Altar, and go and be reconciled to thy brother, and then come
and offer. And because they can have no comfort of their sorrow, if their
sorrow cause not satisfaction; nor prove that their repentance is unto life, if
fruits worthy of repentance and amendment of life be not borne out: they
willingly do not betake themselves to any such shifts, as are ordinarily to be
found to be taken by the other sort of offenders: but they come in and submit
themselves unto the law, and yield themselves to the Magistrate, and that for
conscience sake, to make what recompense they can for the fault that they have
done, and give the best satisfaction that they are able: they offer their goods
where they will serve the turn; they yield their bodies to prison, where their
goods cannot be taken; and where their bodies yielded to prison, or to other
punishment, will not be taken for a sufficient satisfaction, in regard of the
heinousness of their transgression; then their very lives themselves are no
longer held so dear unto them, but that even they also shall be laid down to
make the payment full. But all this is done of them with such humble
submission, and in so good a fashion, as all that took themselves to have been
wronged by them before, seem now to rest contented, and to be satisfied to the
full. Yea some that are executed as malefactors, are many times found to take
their deaths so patiently, and so penitently, with such brokennesse of heart,
with such sorrowing and mourning for their sins, and abundant bewailing the
mis-leading of their lives, with showing such testimonies of their sound
repenting, and being found to bear out such fruits of repentance upon the tree
they do hang on, that that tree seems now to be laden with good fruit, and
that of the best kind; whilst with the good thief on the Cross, they
condemn themselves, they justify the Law, they reprove Luke 23. 40. 41.
sin in others, they exhort to amendmeni of life, they warn all before them,
they pray much and fervently, they look to Christ, they commit themselves to
his mercy; and so taking their deaths patiently: all that see them thus dying,
make no doubt at all of their salvation.

Besides such a kind of satis-faction given to a public 2. For not performing
unjust laws and wicked.
state by parties offending, for violating wholesome and good laws that have
been made, even the innocent serseruants of God, when they have been taken and
condemned for offenders against a State, because they have not yielded simple
and absolute, whole and ready obedience to all laws in force; thoug sometimes
there have, and may fall out to be, that there is an antinomie between the
laws of men, and the laws of God: they also have not refused, neither yet
will refuse, in cases wherein they cannot satisfy the Law, or the Magistrate,
by obeying the precept, there to make satisfaction by their suffering the
penalties that are set down; and that whether it be to the loosing of their
goods, and the loosing of their livings, they have both learned and practiced,
to suffer with joy the spoiling of their goods, because they Heb. 10. 34.
look to receive in heaven a better and more enduring substance: or whether it
be to bonds, or to imprisonment, they are ready with Paul to be bound; and
refuse not to go to Act. 21. 13. Genesis 39. 20. Psalm. 105. 18.
prison with Joseph, though the iron do enter into their souls, when they are
hurt in the stocks. Yea, they have not refused to lay down their lives, if
nothing but that would go for payment. As did the three children in Daniel,
for Dan. 3. 22.
not obeying the Kings command, suffer themselves to be thrown into the hot
fiery furnace. And Daniel himself Dan. 6. 16.
to be thrown into the den of Lions, for not obeying the decree of Darius,
which as a law of Medes and Persians might not be broken: whose examples the
blessed Martyrs of God have since worthily followed. And such kind of
transgressors of laws as this second sort are, that have been now mentioned,
are not to be ranked up among rebels; neither are to be every way counted as
persons that are disobedient: for there must be a distinction made of
obedience; there is an obedience in doing, and there is an obedience in
suffering: now where that which the Law commands cannot so safely with a good
conscience, or readily be done; if that which the Law sets down as
punishment to be inflicted for it, be patiently borne, there is then another
obedience showed, and a satisfaction given for the want of the former, and for
that which else could not be done. Daniel though he disobeyed the commandment
of the King, in the doing of that, (though it were a law of the Medes and
Persians, which Dan. 6. 22.
being once made, might not be broken) that he might obey God the better, yet
justified himself in that he had done; and said plainly to the King, that he
had done him no wrong, he was no rebel, he was no undutiful subject: which
may be said for others of Gods servants in the like case and respect.

There is yet another kind of satisfaction, and that is 4. Private and
particular men.
more particular and private between man and man, when wrong is offered to any
man. And this is also requisite to be made by every person that is truly
penitent, if he would either give testimony to others that his repentance is
sound, or take comfort to himself that his sins shall ever be pardoned. For
Augustine has well set that Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum.
August.
down, there is no looking for pardon for the sin, if that which was taken
away be not restored again. And this did Daniel give in counsel to
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 27.
who had been a great spoyler, waster and vndoer of the greatest part of the
world, he having undone many, and made them poor, he counsels him to make
some satisfaction unto them again; and so break off his sins by exercising
now more righteousness, and showing mercy to the poor: whom in some sort he
shall satisfy for the wrongs before he had done them in spoiling of them, if
now again he will succor them, and help them in their need.

Hypocrites and worldly-minded persons, they have Difference in hypocrites.
no skill of this restitution, nor will, to make this kind of satisfaction: if
they have got any thing (that is no matter how) that they think to be their
own; that they will hold fast; and they will be sure to part with nothing.
They are of their religion that will neither do right to others, nor take any
wrong to themselves. Wherein they go not so far as Judas (that notable
hypocrite) did; nor do not so much as did he: the money that Judas had gotten
for selling his Master, was as justly and as lawfully his, as the money of many
is theirs that they come by: for it was his by buying and selling, and
performing his bargain: now it was as lawfully his, as the money that men sell
good corn for, and put chafe and dross into it: and as the money that men
get by oppression and usury; who feeling the sweetness of gaining, care not
how they come by money, though it were by sucking out the very lifeblood of
the owners thereof, so they may have it. But though these know and feel the
sweetness of the coming of it in, they know not with what bitterness it will
go out again. Judas might have kept his money by any law of the land; he had
sold and performed his bargain; and why might he not have kept the money that
he had therefore gotten? but his conscience so pincht him and pricked him for
his treason against his Master, whom he had sold to get this money; it being
the purchase of that his iniquity, and knowing how unlawfully he had got it,
his hands could hold it no longer, he was never quiet till he had brought it
again, and given it to them of whom he had it, though that neither would quiet
him; for nothing was done as it should be soundly by him: his repentance was a
false repentance; and this satisfaction a false fruit of the same. What then
may be hoped for of them that go not so far in making satisfaction, and
restoring again that which they have most unjustly taken, as this damned
devil Judas did, who is now in hell??

But they that are truly penitent indeed for their sin, whatsoever wrong they
either know themselves, or can be showed by others that they have offered to
any man, either in his person, in his name, or in his goods; they never can be
quiet till they naue made the party satisfaction, and that to the full, if
their ability will extend so far, that so it may be performed by them. If
means be wanting that they cannot do as they would, they show themselves
more penitent; and by a greater submission they humble themselves before the
parties wronged; and ask them forgiveness of that which they cannot make any
better satisfaction for. And in such kind of wrongs wherein others have been
wronged in their goods, either unjustly taken away, or wrongfully withheld by
them, if the parties be dead to whom such wrong has been offered, then seek
they out who are left that did belong unto them, and were nearest of their
kin, that to them they may make a full restitution and satisfaction for the
wrong. If none such can be found to be living, they will rather bring it to
the Church for holy use, and see the poor to have it distributed among them,
then they will keep penny or pennies-worth thereof: which as the plague,
would infect all they had beside, and fret as a canker, till it had consumed
whatsoever before had been justly gotten, and which with good peace they might
have still possessed well, and kept lawfully as their own. This care to make
restitution they have learned from the practice of that blessed penitent, and
saued-conuert, rich Zacheus, who having been a great pillar and powler of the
people, in the day that salvation by Christ was brought to his house, stood
forth and said, Lord, half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have
taken any thing from any man by forged accusation, I restore him fourfold.
Thus much touching confession and satisfaction; which two do never fail to
accompany that sorrow especially which is godly, that causes repentance never
to be repented of, being repentance unto life.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. line 24. read* hear. p. 74. l. 4. r. which. p 81. l. 21. r. good. p.
84. l. 22. r* Lydia. p 86. l. 22. r. the tongue. p. 92. l. 3. r. which. ibid.
18. r. for it. p. 94. l. 25. r. as if it. p. 97. l. 2. r. as if it. p. 97. l.
2. r. truth. p. 100. l. 14. r. so thirdly. p. 192. l. 2. r. dejected. ibid. 6.
r. revive. p. 240. chap. r. permanent and enduring, p. 269. chap. r.
considered; and first. p. 134. l. 6. r. rending. p. 140. l. 10. r. as. p. 145.
l. 36. r. hurts. p. 154.* marg. r. (...). p. 171. l. 14. r. himself. p. 180.
l. 3. r. have. p. 182. l. 36. r. And as. p. 183. l. 31. r. much. p. 186. l. 16.
^. l^fe. p. 189. l. 17* r. are such. p. 192. l. 2. r. dejected. ibid. l. 6. r.
revive. p. 199. l. 26. r. have him. p. 212. l* 6. r. do see. 213. l* 1^. r. is
found. ibid. 26. r. which in. p. 224. l. 31. r. on. p. 231. l. 25. r. cruelly.
p. 234. l. 20. r. beloved. p. 235. l. 1. r. father in law. p. 252. l. 25. r.
joy.


