A sermon of the sacrament of the altar made by a famous doctoure called
Fryderyke Nausea in Almayne and lately out of latin translate into englysh by
John^ More.

John^ More to the christen reader.
IT happened me but late good christen reader, to receive and read in a book
of a virtuous conning man called Fryderyk Nausea, a book of sermones, surely
meruelouse mete for the season. For as lenton is a time (whereof our savior
Christ him self shows us then sample) that ought esspecyally to be spent in
fasting, dyuyne service, and sermones: so shall not (I think) a man lightly
find many sermons made of late, more fruitful and godly, tha^ I find many of
his in that one book. Diverse whereof after I had onys perused and read / and
that they so specially well lyked me, that I determined utterly with my self
to translate into our tongue some one (for mo the shortness of time would not
suffer before this instant feast of Easter so nere coming upon before the
book came to my hand) but when I had so determined, then fared I with all
those as does some young lewd scatterloue that went a wooing / which having
the choice of diverse, so indifferently and therewith so well lyked the^
euerychone, that wottynge not which to chose fayn would wedde them all, and is
sorry that he may wedde but one. So I, though both I lyked the the other no less
then this, and as feign would have translated them all as this one: yet syns I
could not do any mo in the time / upon consyderacyon that this sermon most
agreed with this blessed feast of Easter at hand, as being grounded upon
these words Hoc facite in mei commemorationem, I left the rest and choice me
this to ^orne* which yet surely I would myche rather have wysshed to have be
tra^sla^ed by some other, that better could have handeled it. For who had been
able as well to have set it forth in our tongue and as lively as Nausea has
done it in ye laten, should have done a thing very worthy praise. But for as
myche as that perfeccyo^ in learning and eloquence, neither is in me, no skant
can in so young a man be lokyd for: I must humbly require you all good
christen readers, to accept my good will, and take this work in good worth.

Hoc facite in mei commemorationem. Do ye this in the remembrance of me.
AS often as I speak unto you of the word of god my well beloved brethren, and
in the mean while consider the state of our time, and condycyon of men: so
often I sorowefully sygh and am sick, because I perceive (which I am right
sorry to se) that these words of saint Paul, 1. Cori^. 10
no less trewly then sorowfully, may be veryfyed in us: we be they, whom
thendes of the world is come to. In whose miserable time, all those things
now hap hepyd on in a nothers neck, which our lord Jesus Christ the very
truth, Math. 24. Mar. 13. Lucc. 21.
both ernestly and truly showed should come in the end of the world. For as to
leave spekyng at this time, of the horrible wars and batayls that be at these
days thorough out chrystendome, ye and among them to, which as being our
chyefe heddes and rulers under Christ here on earth, ought to live most in
rest and peace, and also of the innumerable co^tagyons and dedely dyseases
that reygne, and specially of the great pestilence in Germany, besides the
sharp and cruel famine with such other like myschyefes: who sees not
euydently and vndersta^des not, that this is even the last end of the world,
in which as criste him self prophesied, Iniquyte has begone to habound, and
many men's charity wax cold / so that were yt not for ye electes, there
should be no flesh safe, for as myche as if yt were possible, the chosen people
self y^ live now at this day, might seem to be seduced from the true
catholyque faith of Christ: syns now I say I se, not allonely nacyon against
nacyon, realm against realm, or house against house, but rue the fathers
against their chylderne, the chylderne against their fathers, a one brother
with great cruelty to arise against the other. which thing surely, ye were yt
but for this cause greueth me very myche, for that I perceive those clean
departed from charity, stryuynge within them selfs, persecutynge one a another
as mortal enymyes, shamefully ragynge each against other, even as against
their uttermost dedely aduer saryes, which be not only brethren, as being
created of on eternal father, but also brethern thorough grace and faith, and
named the children of god, Galat. 6.
whom (as saint Paul says) syns they be of one household faith, ought
specially to be fre^des, and one of them glad to do for a another / who me I
say Criste our lord and gentle redemer in so farforth has exhorted unto a
mutual charity, showing it as a thing so necessary, that without that they
can not be known for his dyscyples, or by any other means then by that mutual
charity, Ioban. 13.
decerned from infydeles, that he says amongst other things, I give you a
new commandment that you love on a another: and as I have loved you, so love
you between your selfs: Ioban. 15.
By this shall all men know you be my dyscyples, if you have love amongst
you: This is my precepte, to love each other as I have loved you. And again:
This I command you to love to gether as my father has loved me, so have I
loved you: Abide you in my love. But how loved Christ us? Surely so as him
self says, that he lost his life for our sake, then which kind of love no
man can have a greater.

which also thapostles recyteth almost in every place: 1. Cor. 4.
Of which trewly ineffable love toward us (his own) he has left behind him
an inspekable token, Tesso. 5.
testymonyall, 1. John^. 3. and. 4.
and perpetual memoryal, in that he gave him self to be eaten of us, made
thereby both the feast and the geste both twain. As the prophet David said:
Psalm. 11.
Our most merciful and pytyful lord has made a remembrance of his meruayles,
and has given meat to them that dreded him. For why our lord Jesus Christ,
instytutyng this high excellent and wonderful holy sacrament, gave fode to
those that dreded him / and for pytye he had on us, left that sacrament unto
us, as a memoryall and remembrance, not only of ye offering of him self for
our sake upon the cross, and also gave him self as meat to all such as
worsshyppe him, dread him, love him, and honored him (as saint Paul says: 1.
Cori^. 11
Do you this as often as you drink yt in the remembrance of me / for as often as
you shall eat this bread and drink of this cup, you shall show the death
of our lord till he come) but also left this blessed sacrament unto us, for a
memoryall and remembrance of his inspekable love toward us / by which love he
was brought for our sakes, to the most bitter cross and shamfull death, in
which he might be with us as he was before in y^ sacrament, according to his
own promise where he says: Math vl timo.
And lo I am with you for ever even to the worlds end. which all though yt
may be understood of ye manner of presence, by which he is ever present with
us by his power, grace, and dyuyne majesty: yet seems it more lykely he meant
of the sacrame^tall presence, syns his dyscyples knew well enough he should
never be from them as concerning the former presence / but they were not
i^lyke wise sure of his presence in that sacrament / which in so farforth was
hard to be byleued and perceived, John^. 6.
ye many of his dyscyples went back and went no more with him. And therefore
our savior Christ first to fulfill the figure of scripture, gave him self
mete to us. Exodus 16.
Surely that figure was manna, given from heuyn to the chylderne of Israel,
with which they were fed.xl. year in deserte. Christ the interpretour, who
says, John^. ^.
Truly truly I tell you it was not that Moses gave you the bread out of
heuyn, but my father gives you the true bread out of heuyn. I am the bread of
life, your forefathers has eatyn ma^na in deserte and be deed: This is bread
descendynge from heuyn, so that who eats hereof shall not dye. whereby it
well appears that manna in deserte was but a shadow and figure of the very
ma^na, that is to wit, of the body of Jesus Christ to be given to us to eat /
sith also thapostell writes that thing and the history thereof, 1. Cor. 1^
but as a figure of that which after was to be fulfilled. Secondely he gave
him self meat unto us to accomplysshe in deed that he promised by word /
which god would have so sure and so true, Mat. 24 Marc. 12 Luc. 11 John^. 6
that he says, Heuyn and earth shall pass, but not my words. But now Christ
promised to give his flesh for our fode, saying, I am the lively bread
which am descended from heuyn. who eats of this bread shall live for ever.
And the bread which I shall give, is my flesh for the life of ye world. For
why my flesh in deed is meat, and my blood is very drynk. who cateth my
flesh and drynketh my blood, dwells i^ me and I in him. Thyrdely Christ gave
him self unto us for meat merueylously and ineffably, to show us his high
charity, by which both bodily and gostely he would be with us perpetually, and
all one with us by incorporacio^, as it is wont to be in love. For by the
communion of the body and blood of our lord Jesus Christ, all we be made one
hole body with Christ. Thapostell approuynge it and saying thus, 1 Cor. 1^
The bread that we break, is it not the parrycypacyon of the body of our lord?
because we men^^y be but one bread and one body, all that be partakers of one
bread and one cup. And for this cause, our lord Jesus Christ and only
redemer, to leave byhynde him a remembrance of his love toward us, and by
thensample of the same love, would have us (that be his) not only love him, but
also one another, and by the remembrance of his most bitter death, give him
thanks together / was content to be present with us, though inuysybly yet
bodily in that sacrament / and by that communyon (as we have said be fore) to
be all one with us, and so to leave this blessed sacrament of thaulter behynd
him as a sure pledge of his great love toward us. John^. 13
Of this it was that saint John^ said, that at this last holy supper the
instytucyon of that most blessed sacrament of thaulter was made for a sign of
love when he says, Before ye feast day of Easter, Jesus knowing yt his hour
was come, in which he should depart out of this world to his father, when he
had louyd his that were in the world, he loved the^ to the end. And after
supper and so forth. In which saint Luke answeryng with the other writes, that
Criste in his last supper said, I have inwardely desired to eat this pascall
with you before I suffer and so forth.

And within a little while after: And taking the bread, he said grace and
brake it, and gave it to the^ saying: This is my body that shall be delivered
for you. Do you this in remembrance of me. How in my remembrance? That you
may remember how I have loved all you that byleued in me / who for the great
love I bare you, to thentente I may be with you bodily to the worlds end,
have given you meat, mine own body and mine own blood, under the form of
bread, and so under the sacrament, to the intent that there may come in your
minds sometime, another great charity of mine, by which I dowre not to suffex
death for you / which death and charity you ought to remember with the rendrynge
of dew thanks, as often as ye consecrate and handell by mine ensample this
sacrament. which thing thapostell co^fyrmynge says, that Christ, the same
night he was betrayed, taking the bread and the cup, delivered it unto his
dyscyples and said, Do you this in remembrance of me. 1. Cor. 11
As often as you eat of this bread and drink of this cup, show you the death
of our lord till he come and so forth.

With how fatherly a love then Christ instytuted this holy sacrament of
thaulter, there is no good man that of these words of Christ, and also of
thapostell, as well of that y^ goes before as follows, understands not /
syns he hard that our lord Jesus Christ, not only had showed in that his
charity toward us (which he would should be perpetual) in that he took upon
him our nature, to make us as saint John^ says men by partycypacyon, John^. 1^
gods by faith, and all he took of ours gave us again for our health / but
also offered up to god his father, his own body on the cross, as a
sacrafyce for our reco^cylyacyon, his blood to be shed as a price and laua tory
of our sin, that being redeemed from the miserable seruytude, we might be
cleansed from our vice.

Wherefore to thentent the remembrance of so high a benefyte might abide in us,
and the greatness of the love of god more fyrmely fixed in our breasts, in his
last supper as yt is written in the gospel of saint John^, John^. 13.
in the pascall made with his dyscyples, at his departing out of this world
to his father, he gave his body for meat, and his blood for drink, to be
received of faithful folk under the form of bread, ordeynyng this holy
sacrament of thaulter, as a perpetual remembrance of his passion to the
fulfyllyng of tholde fygures, and one of the greatest miracles that ever he
did, as a syngulare comfort of all those that are sorrowful for his absence.
As though he would say: I shall not leave you fatherles / not for y^ I will come
again to you my self, but because I will be ever with you, even to the end
of the world by my mercy, by my grace, by my divine power, ye and in the
sacrament of my body and my blood. O the wonderful swetnesse of thine
ineffable charity. O the precyouse and meruaylous wholesome feast. O the most
excellent sacrament. O most to be worshypped. O most honorable. O most
reverend. O most worthy praise. O most worthy glory, highly to be magnifyed,
to be extolled by worthy cryers, to be honored with all the heart, with all
devotion, with all reverence. what more meruaylous then this sacrament, in
which bread and wine is verily converted into the body and blood of Jesus Christ
/ in which pertyte Crist is contained by the virtue of the word, under the
form and lykenes of a peace of bread: Take you this is my body, which is
eaten of good Christian folk, and in the mean while is not torn / but though
the sacrament be divided, yet the body abides and co^tynueth holevnder every
part of that that is dyuyded: O so wonderful a sacrament and meruaylous, so
full of charity, that no man can cry the worthynes of yt better, then by ye
words of saint Paul where he says to the Romans: Romans 1^
O the depnes of the dyuyne sapyence, and knowledge of god. How
incomprehensyble be his judgments? how inuestygable his ways? For who knew
the mind of our lord, or who was his cou^saylour? O in deed a wonderful
sacrament of which Esaias verily spoke when he said, E^ai. ^
Unless you believe you shall not understand. which Christ him self
affyrmynge said unto the unbelieving Jews of so high a sacrament: John^. 6.
But there be some of you that believe not / as though he would say, and therefore
understand not, and for that cause shall go back, and not walk with me, when
the Jews said: How can this man give us his flesh to eat? This is a hard
saying. And who can hear him? And the euangelyst shows, what Crist said. My
flesh is very meat, and my blood is very drink. who eats my flesh and
drynketh my blood, taryeth in me and I in him, and so forth. From that time
many of his dyscyples went back and walked not with him. Peter answering for
all the rest, what time Christ demanded of them, whether they would go from
him to: Good lord, to whom shall we go? Thou haste the word of theternal
life, and we believe and know, that thou art Christ the son of god, and so
forth. As though he would say, thou art able to do all with a word. Hebre. ^.
And (as saint Paul writes) thou be ryst up all thing by the word of thy
power, ye by which word the heuens were made. whereof David writes: He said
the word, and yt was done. Psalm. 32. and. 148
Now who is there my well beloved brethern, which wayeth the words of Christ,
and his apostles as he ought to do, will not in his heart be sorry, and also
with the zele of charity abhor the condycyon of this wykked time of ours, ye
and myche rather the wicked infydelyte of wicked people, by which (the devil
being authoure) in so farforthe do not believe in this blessed sacrament of
thaulter, confyrmed by Crystes own mouth when he says: This is my body and so
forth: Math. 26
My flesh is very meat, Mar. 14.
my blood is very drink, Lucae. 22
and so forth / but also all thank and love toward our sauyoure Jesus Christ
a far of rejected, 1. Cor. 11. John^. 6.
odyously, shamefully, irreuerently, blaspheme, condemn, and abhor all holy
scryptures, fygures, reasons, and senses, even spurnynge at him with their
fete, with tongue, with language not to be spoken / clearly forgetful in the
mean while of those holy words of Christ in his last supper proceeding of a
meruaylous zele toward us: Take you this is my body: Do you this in the
remembrance of me: And this doing, show you the death of our lord, till he
come to judge the world with an open and vysyble body / who in the mean time,
for ye love I have toward you, shall co^tenue with you under this visyble
sacrament of thaulter, and so by the communyon of mine own body in that
sacrament be made incorporate with you.

Oh good, oh best, oh most benygne Jesus our redemer, who can marvel enough
at thy great pacyence showed toward us, whom hitherto thou haste suffered so
shamefully to rail against thinsty tucion of the blessed sacrament of thaulter
unpunished. Is this the remembrance we have of that ineffable love of thine
toward us, by which thou louydest us even to the sufferau^ce of the most
shameful death of the cross? is this the kyndnesse, the recompense we make the
for thy so great benyfytes. woo may we be, woo may we be a good and just
jesus, which have all thy judgment of thy father, to judge every man
according to his deserte, which will leave no good deed unrewarded, nor no
evil deed unpunished, to whom we shall give account of every idell word.
what shall thou do with us I pray y^ then for our so great offense and
wyckednes, 1. Cori^. 11
syns (as the apostle says) thou iudgeste them that eat thy body unworthily,
and drink thy blood unworthily, gylty of thy body and thy blood, and with no
less pain to be punysshed then they which for malice persecuted the, and
crucyfyed the. who to the declaracyon, that there is in deed thy body and thy
blood, and how reuerentely every man ought to receive it, thou sufferedeste for
many men's amendment and health of those that on a time put no dyfference
between thy body and other materyall meat, some to fall syke, some weke, and
some to dye. will thou spare us if we amend not? No surely. For I wot that
thou art he of whom scripture says: Sapien. 11
Thou have mercy on every body, because thou can all, and dyssymblest man's
synnys for penance.

Consyderyng now therefore my wellbeloued brethren ye treuth of scripture / let
us beware as saint Poule counsayles us, that we set not at naught the
richesse of the goodness, pacyence, and long sufferaunce of our lord Jesus
Christ, but do penance for our trespass to him whom we have offended / whose
gentylnes (as saint Poule says) draws us to penance. 1. Cor. 11*
By whom truly we shall be both iudgyd and condemned, if according to his
admonicyo^, we do not judge ourselfes.

Nor let us in the mean while so folysshely flater our selfs with the
sufferaunce of god, as though he would forgete our sin, and as a just judge
not correct when he sees time, for our so irreuerent handelynge of ye holy
sacrament. How be it who knows not these cruel pestylences that now raygne
thoroughe out Germanye, syknesse, dissensyons, suppressyons, the mynysshement
of every estate, calamytees, and other such like kinds of euyls almost
infynyte / and no less horrible, chyefly to be cast upon us from god, if at
the lest way we believe saint Poule (as we verily must) for the unworthy and
shameful handelynge of this holy sacrament of thaulter. 1. Cor. 11
And go me thorough out Germany, and as full as that nation (which was of late
very devout and relygyouse) is now of all myschyefe and sin: yet is there
none therein greater then this. And surely unless we leave this so horrible a
wickedness, we shall be sure of the great stroke of god, ye and that more then
men can tell of. For in god (as saint Peter writes) neither is there none, 1.
Petr. 2
nor never shall be any lack of power, but he can deliver good men out of
their te^ptacio^, and evil men can he reserve to everlasting punysshement. In
which number to thente^t we may not be, it shall be needful and expedyent we
leave so shameful handelyng of this holy sacrament of thaulter, doing penance,
for that is past which I trust to god we will / and that after we have proved
ourselfes (as saint Poule would we should) we will I trust eat of that bread,
that is to wit the body of our lord in form of bread. And when we have
decernyd the body of our lord from other meat, then may we worthyly receive
it.

To the which yt is requysyte that first we should believe the plain word of
Christ: This is my body, which shall be delivered for you on the cross (as
theua^gelystes with one accord writes) demanding no reason thereof, Mat. 26
askyng no questyons as the vnbyleuynge Jews did, Mar. 14
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? Iuc. 22
This is a hard saing. John^. 6
And who can hear him? 1. Cor. 11.
as the scysmatyques said: To them that will deny yt and ask this questyon
of us, how can there be the body of Christ under the form of bread? and so
forth. How can we answer the^ better then with ye saying of Esaias. Ezaie. 7.
If you believe not, you shall not understand. Hebre. 11
And because all things be possible to him that byleueth Christ, who comes to
god must believe. Johan. 20.
For Christ him self said to saint Thomas of Inde: Be not unfaithful but
believe, Blessed be they that have byleued and saw not. That we comprehe^de not
by wit, that we se not at eye / let us believe, besides the comen order of
nature. why honor we not Christ that suffered for us, in that, sacrament of
thaulter? syns till this our of all as many as be and have been, there is none
that has brought any thing forth to prove, that we ought or may depart from
that faith, which the hole catholyke church, so long agon has kept and
approved, which the euangelystes and apostles writing so euydently reach,
showing with one consent and agreement, that Christ said: This is my body that
is geuyn for you. Against which there is not so myche as one tyttell of
scripture, y^ shows in any place manyfestly the contrary hereof, or says that
there is not ye body of our lord Jesus Christ. It is also very agreeable unto
the ineffable love of god toward man kind, that those whom he had redeemed
with this precyouse blood and body of his son, he would also by a certain
inspekable meanys, feed the^ with his flesh, blood and body, and so to be
conforted by this secret presence of his son, as by a plegge, till he should
come gloriousely in the sight of all the world.

God forbede it therefore we should give any place at all to all these folysshe
sophistycall sutteltyes brought against this sacrament, which arguments we
have confuted before, by hole and sound reasons of holy scripture / which were
such as never none yet hitherto, were able to impugn, ye the least part of
them / syns there is nothing stronger then truth, and also this is ye faith,
that ever has ye over hand, and by which all things (as Christ him self says)
be possible. 1. John^. 5
whereby I am more led to believe one word of the prophet, y^ says, He said
the word and it was done, Psalm. 32. and. 148.
then all ye colored crafty suttyll arguments or opinions of Arystotell,
Plato, other philosophers, or heretykes. So much before all ye reasons and
prynciples that ever could be brought, p^fere we this words, Hoc est corpus
meu^, This is my body. Nor it is not lefull that any reason of man should be
preferred before the word of god, for as myche as saint Peter says, Actu. 5.
we ought more to believe i^ god and obey him, then men. Nor this obieccyon can
not stand, if one should say, that Christ sytteth in heaven on the right hand
of his father, nor will not be with us till time he come to judge in ye day of
judgment, For I will answer here unto yt he yt is every where and ever, with
whom nothing is impossible, may be gloriously with his father in heaven, and
shall come in a vysyble body to judge, and both now is with us and shall be with
us (as him self says) even to the end of the world / not in no visible body,
Mat. 82
but in ye sacrament, i^ the form of bread. And also let these heretykes tell
us how this may be, y^ Christ should be verily here with us on earth, and yet
him self verily in heaven. For yt he so was in deed, himself witnesses where
he says: No man ascends unto heaven but he yt has descended out of heaven,
the son of man why che is in heaven. If they believe this why notyt? What and
they by leave neither another? ye, what and they believe nothing at all? as we may
easily perceive by their fruits they do not.

Nor again this reason can not hold that yt seems a jesting stock and a
folyshnes, to believe that Christ can be or ought to be under the form of a
little piece of bread, and there to be hyd and contained / and then say farther
that yt profyteth nothing and so forth.

I would answer if they would so say, that they nothing dyffer, neither from the
vnbyleuyng Jews nor yet reprobate Paynyms that were before time. For by this
means they another shall nor can, believe any point of the catholy like faith,
for as much as saint Paul says: 1. Cor. 1.
Nole Christ is crucyfyed, that is to say all ye hole faith of Christ / and
every word of his, is occasyon of ruin to the Jews, and amongst the paynyms
taken for very folly. who was I pray you more mocked at, the^ saint Poule,
when he taught the resurreccyon of Criste and of deed folk. were not the Jews
offended in Christ, reprouynge him of folly, when he said himself was bread
and meat from heuyn, when they murmured among them selfs and said: Is not
this the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we knew? Now then says he,
that I am descended from heaven? for they thought yt but a folyshe thing to
believe god incarnate, or to believe yt possible for any that desce^deth from
heaven to earth, might be at the same self moment in heaven still to. Trewly saint
Paul says: 1. Cori^ ^
The word of the cross to them yt shall peryshe is but folyshnes / but to them
yt shall be safe, yt is to wit to byleuers, yt is the power of god. wherefore we
may lightly gather, that we must believe this very bare word of god in which he
said, This is my body y^ is delivered for you: Do you this i^ ye remembrance
of me. Secu^dly if we will receive the body of our lord worthily we ought in
the receyuyng and doing, remember that merueylous great love of his toward us,
by ye which for our sakes he delivered up his body on thaulter of ye cross /
after which also he gave him self in ye sacrament for us as a spyrytuall mete
to eat, as a pledge and testymonyall of his love toward us / as though
vouchsafynge by the co^munyon of that self same sacrament, to be incorporate
and all one thing with us, by being partakers of his blessed body. which
euydentely appears by saint Poule to ye Corinthies, 1. Cori^. 10
where he says: The bread that we break is it not ye partycipacio^ or to be
parteyner of the body of our lord? for the bread is one, and all we that be
perteyners of that one bread and that one cup, being menny, be all one body.
And in good faith it is not much against reason to believe in this so noble a
sacrament, that Christ was hard of his father a little before, when he prayde
in this wise: I do not only pray for them, but also for all such as shall
believe in me by their prechyng, that all may be one as thou my father art in
me and I in the, that they may be all one in us, I in them and thou in me,
that they may be made one, that the world may know that thou have sent me, and
have loved them as thou have louyd me. But I pray you, this unity and so
wonderful a love of the son and the father toward us, of what (if the words
of thapostle be well wayed) shall it be rather understood, then in the
partycypacyon or being partener of this sacrament, where is the body and blood
of our lord. whereof thyrdely it follows to the receyuyng of it worthyly, that
we must keep the treuth at the receuynge, which (as saint Poule writes) is
marked unto us as a figure and a shadow.

First if we will receive it worthyly, let us be gyrdyd up, that is to say,
by chastyte of mind and body. Secu^dly hold staves in our hands / yt is to
wit, we must have a sure faith. Thyrdely stand vpryght not inclynynge now
again to vice and the fylthynes of sin, from which we be risen by confession
and contrycyon. Fourthly not eat this immaculate lamb sode in water and
bitter lettuse, but roast it with fire, that is to say with bitter contricyo^
for our trespass, and fyry cheryte.

Fyftly put on shows on our fete / whereby is meant we must keep the
affeccyons of our heart from fleshely desires, and compel them to serve for the
love of our lord Jesus Criste, auoydyng all that is contrary to him, doing that
may please him, and after the counsel of saint John^, not loving him alonely
by word and tongue, ^. John^. ^
but in deed and truth / as him self has loved us which dyed for our sake,
leuyng behynd him to us this blessed sacrament as a remembrance of his love
when he says: Take you this is my body that is given for you: Do you this in
ye remembrance of me, that is to say, remembering how I have loved you, which
dyenge for you, was co^to^t to be made also for you, mete, the feast, and the
gest to gether.

Prynted by w. Rastell. 1533. Cum priuilegio.


