Have with you to Saffron-vvalden. OR, Gabriell Harueys Hunt is up. Containing
a full Answer to the eldest son of the Halter-maker. OR, Nashe his
Confutation of the sinful Doctor.

The Mott or Posie, in stead of Omne tulit punctum: Pacis fiducia nunquam.

As much to say, as I said I would speak with him.

Printed at London by John Danter 1596.

To the most Orthodoxall and reverent Corrector of staring hairs, the sincere
and finigraphicall rarifier of prolixious rough barbarism, the thrice
egregious and censoriall animaduertiser of vagrant moustachios, chief
scauinger of chins, and principal quasi conversant about heads.
Head-man of the parish wherein he dwells, special superuisor of all
excrementall superfluities for Trinity College in Cambridge, and (to
conclude) a not able and singular benefactor to all beards in general, Don
Richardo Barbarossa de Caesario; Tho: Nashe wishes the highest Top of his
contentment and felicity, and the Shortning of all his enemies.
ACute and amiable Dick, not Dic mihi Musa virum, Musing Dick, that studied a
whole year to know which was the male and female of red herrings: nor Dic
obsecro, Dick of all Dickes, that in a Church where the Organs were defaced,
came and offered himself with his pipe and taber: nor old Dick of the Castle,
that upon the news of the loss of Calis, went and put a whole bird-spit in
the pike of his buckler: nor Dick Swash or Desperate Dick, that is such a
terrible Cutter at a chyne of beef, and deuoures more meat at Ordinaries in
discoursing of his fraies and deep acting of his sl^shing and hewing, than
would serve half a dozen Brewers Dray-men: nor Dick of the Cow, that mad
Demilance Northren Borderer, who played his prizes with the Lord Iockey so
bravely: but paraphrasticall gallant Patron Dick, as good a fellow as ever was
Heigh fill the pot hostess: courteous Dicke, comicall Dicke, lively Dicke,
lovely Dicke, learned Dicke, old Dicke of Lic^field, Iubeo te plurimum
saluere, which is by interpretation, I joy to hear thou have so profited in
gibridge.

I am sure thou wondrest not a little, what I mean to come upon thee so
straungelye, with such a huge dicker of Dickes in a heap altogether: but
that is but to show the redundance of thy honorable Family, and how affluent
and copious thy name is in all places, though Erasmus in his Copia verborum
never mentions it.

Without further circumstance to make short, (which to speak troth is only
proper to thy Trade) the short and long of it is this, There is a certain
kind of Doctor of late very pitifully grown bald, and thereupon is to be
shaven immediately, to try if that will help him: now I know no such nimble
fellow at his weapon in all England as thy self, who (as I hear) standst in
election at this instant to be chief Crowner or clipper of crowns in
Cambridge, and yet no defacer of the Queens coin neither: and it is pity
but thou should have it, for thou have long served as a Clarke in the crown
office, and concluded syllogismes in Barbara any time this sixteen year, and
yet never metst with any requital, except it were some few french crowns,
pild Friars crowns, dry shaven, not so much worth as one of these Scottish
horn crowns: which (thy very enemies must needs confess) were but bare
wages, (yea as bare as my nail I faith) for thy brave desert and dexterity:
and some such Thin gratuitie or Haire-loome it may be the Doctor may present
thee with, but how ever it falls, has his head or his hair the falling
sickness never so, without any more delay, Of or on, trimmed he must be
with a trice, and there is no remedy but thou must needs come and join with
me to give him the terrible cut.

Wherefore (good Dick) on with thy apron, and arm thy self to set him down
at the first word: Stand to him I say, and take him a button lower, fear not
to show him a Barbers knacking their fingers.
^nacke of thy occupation, and once in thy life let it be said, that a Doctor
wears thy Their lousy naprie they put about men's necks, whiles they are
tri^ming.
cloth, or that thou have cau^d him to do penance, and wear Haire-cloth for
his sins. Were he as he has been (I can assure thee) he would clothe and
adorn thee with many gracious gallant complements, and not a rotten tooth
that hangs out at thy shop window, but should cost him an indefinite Turkish
army of English Hexameters. O, he has been old dog at that drunk^n
staggering kind of verse, which is all up hill and down hill, like the way
betwixt Stamford and Beec^feeld, and goes like a horse plunging through the
mire in the deep of winter, now soust up to the saddle, and straight aloft on
his tiptoes. Indeed, in old King Harrie sincerity, a kind of verse it is, he
has been ^nf^oft in from his minority, for as I have bin faithfully informed
he first cryde in that verse in the very moment of his birth, and when he was
but yet a fresh-man in Cambridge, he set up Siquis a bill for any thing l^st.
Siquisses, and sent his accounts to his father in those i^ulting Heroicks.
Come, come, account of him as you list, by Poll and A^dipoll I protest, your
noble Science of For division and contraction.
decision and contraction is immortally beholding to him, for twice double his
Patrimony has he spent in careful cherishing and preserving his
pickerdeuant: and besides a divine ^icarly brother of his, called Astrologicall
Richard, some few years since (for the benefit of his country) most
studiously compyled a profound Abridgement upon b^ards, and therein copiously
dilated of the true discipline of peakes, and no less frutelessely determined,
betwixt the Swallows tail cut, and the round beard like a rubbing brush. It
was my chance (O thrice blessed chance) to the great comfort of my Muse to
peruse it, although it came but privately in Print: and for a more ratefied
pasport (in thy opinion) that I have read it and digested it, this title it
bears, a Therefore belike he gave it that title, because it was most of it
short ^aire his father made ropes of.
Defense of short hair against Synesius and Pierius: or rather in more
familiar English to express ^t, a Dash over the head against baldnes, very
necessary to be observed of all the looser sort, or loose haird sort of young
Gentlemen and Courtiers, and no less pleasant and profitable to be remembered
of the whole Commonwealth of the Barbars. The Pos^e theretoo annexed, (...)
est breuitate sua, as much to say, as Burn Bees and have Bees, and hair the
more it is cut the more it comes: lately devised and set forth by Richard
Haruey, the unlucky Prophet of prodigies. If this may not settle thy belief,
but yet thou requirest a further token to make up even money, in the Epistle
Dedicatorie thereof to a great Man of this Land, whom he calls his very right
honorable good Lord, he recounteth his large bounties bestowed upon him, `and
talks of the secret favors which he did him in his Study or Closet at Court.

Hear you Dick, mark you here what a jewel this learning is: how long will it
be, ere thou study thy self to the like preserment. No reason I see, why thou
being a Barber should not be as hair-braind as he. Only for writing a book
of beards, in which he had no further experience, but by looking on his father
when he made hairs, hair lines I mean, and yet not such lines of life as a
hangman has in his hand, but hair lines to hang linen on: for that small
demerit (I say) is he thus advanced and courted, and from Astrological Dick
raised to be favorite Dick. And very meet it is he should be so favored and
raisd by high Personages, for before he was as low a Parson or Vicar, as a man
could lightly set ey on.

With tears be it spoken, too few such lowly Parsons and Preachers we have,
who laying aside all worldly encumbrances, and pleasant co^uersing with Saint
Austen, Jerome, Chrysostom, will be cont^nt to read a Lecture as he ^ath done de
lana caprina, (almost as slender a cast subject as a Catts smelling hairs,) or
trauerse the subtle distinctions twixt short cut and l^ng tail.

Fie, this is not the ^ortieth dandiprat part of the affectionate Items, ^ee
has bequeathed on your mystery, with five ^housand other doctrinal devotions,
has he adopted himself more than a by founder of your trade, conioyning with
his aforesaid Doctor Brother in eighty eight brown Bakers dozen of Alman^ck^s.

In every of which fa^^ous Annals of the ^oure winds, infallible rules are
prescribd for men to observe the best time to breed loue-lockes in, and so to
So^e hold, that any place of a man's chin, ^eeing rubd with a gold ri^g being
heated, will so harden the skin, that t^ere shall never any hair grow there
more.
ringle a thorugh hair for rooting, that it shall never put forth his sn^yles
horns again: as also under what Planet a man ma^e with least danger pick his
tee^h, and (...) to catch the Sun in such a physical Sign, that one may
sweat^ and be not a hair the worse.

But these am^lifications adiourned to another Return, all the deuoyre Diamond
Dick, which I am in this Epistle of thy dainty composition to expostulate, is
no more but this, that since under t^y-redoubted patronage and protection my
works are to have their royal Bestellein, the royallest Pass in Germany
that may be, only for Dukes and great princes.
Bestellein and more than common safe conduct into the world, and that for the
Meridian of thy honor and magnificence they are chiefly elevated and erected,
tho^ would bravely mount thee on thy barbed steed, alias thy triumphant
barbers Chair, and girding thy keen Pa^ermo rasour ^o thy side, in stead of a
tre^chant Turkish semitorie, and setting thy sharp pointed A la^ce an
instrument to let blood with.
lance in his rest, be with them at a hairs breadth that backbite and detract
me.

Phlebothomize them, sting them, tutch them Dick, tutch them, play the valiant
man at Arms and let them blood and spare not; the Law allows thee to do^ it,
it will bear no action: and thou being a Barber Surgeon, art priuiledgd to
dress flesh in Lent, or any thing.

Ad^it this be not suff^cient to cool the hea^ of their courage, search them in
another vain, by discharging thy pocket dag^ against them, and let them smart
for it to the proof.

Ste^le thy painted May^ po^^* or more properly to term it, thy redoubted
rigorous horsmans staff (which at thy door as a manifest sign thou hangst
forth of thy martial p^owesse and hardiment) on their insolent creasts, that
malign and despise me, and forbear not to bring forth all thy brass p^eces
against them. It is well kno^^n thou have been a Commander and a (...) walked
the round, and dealt very short and round with all those tha^ come under thy
f^ngers: ^^rugled through the (...) deep, and skirmisht on the downs:
wherefore if thou ta^'st them not down soundly, with a hey down and a d^rry,
and do not s^uffle and cut with them ^ustilie, actum est de pudicitia, I
ask of God thou may light upon none but bald-pates till thou die. But I
trow thou will carry a better pate with thee, and not suffer any of these
indigent old fashiond judgments to carry it away: whose wits were right stuff
when those loue-letters in rhyme were in request and whose capacities n^u^r
mended their pace, since Pace the Duke of Norfolkes fool died. As for the
decayed Proctor of Saffronwalden himself, if he wander within the (...) of thy
indignation, I make no question but of thy own accord without any motion of
mine, thou will be as ready as any catchpoule, out of all scotch and notch to
torment him, and deal as snip snap snappishly with him, as ever he was dealt
withal since he first dated letters from his gallerie in Trinity Hall, not
suffering a lowse that belongs to him to pass thy hands without a powling
penny, and yet as I shrewdly presage, thou shall not find many powling pence
about him neither, except he rob Peter to pay Po^le, empouerish ^is spiritual
Vicar brother to help to pay for his powling, and he alas, (doleful four
nobles Curate, nothing so good as the Confeslo^r of Tyburne, or Superintendent
of Pancredge) has nitti^ide himself with a dish rotunde profunde any time
this fourteen year, to save charges of s^eep-shearing: and not to make of a
thing more than it is, has scarce so much Ecclesiastical living in all, as
will serve to buy him cruel strings to his booke^* and hair buttons.

Wherefore I pass not if in tender cha^itie and commiseration of his estate, I
add ten pound and a purse to his wages and stipend, canuaze hi^ and his Angel
brother Gabriell in ten sheets of paper, and so leave them to go hang
themselue^* or outright to hang draw and quarter them al under one, I care not
if I make it eighteen: on that condition in their last will and restament they
bequeath me eighteen wise words in the way of answer betwixt them.

I dare gine my word for them, they will never do it, no not although it were
inioynd to them in stead of their neck-verse: their whole stock of wit when it
was at the best, being but ten English Hexameter ^ and a Lenuoy: where^o^e
g^nerous Dick (without hum drum be it spoken) I utterly despai^e of them, or
not so much despair of them, as count them a pair of poor idiots, b^ing not
only but also two brothers, two blockheads, two blunderkins, having their
brains stu^t with ^ought but balder-dash, but that they are the very botts
and the glanders to the gentle Readers, the dead Palsy and Apoplexy of the
Press, ^he Sarpego and the Sciatica of the 7. Liberal Sciences, the
surfeiting vomit of Lady Vanity, the sworn bauds to one another
vain-glorie: and to conclude, the most contemptible Mounsier Aiaxes of
excrementall conceits, and stinking ke^nel-rakt up invention, that this or
any Age ever afforded.

I pry thee surmounting Don^el Dick, whiles I am in this heat of Inuectiue,
let me remember thee to do this one kindness more for me, videlicet, when thou
have frizled and scrubd and tickled the hairs sweetly, and that thou have
filcht thy self into an excellent honorable assembly of sharp judicial
fiery wits and fine spirits, be it this winter at an Evening term, or
where-euer, with all the thundering grace and magnanimous eloquence that thou
have, put up this heroycall Grace in their behalf, if thou be not past grace.

A Grace put up in behalf of the Harueys.
SVpplicat reuerentiis vestris, per Apostrophen, etc. In English thus.
MOst humbly sueth to your Reuerences, the reprobate brace of Brothers of the
Harueys: (...) wit, witless Gabriell and ruffling Richard; That whereas for
any time this four and twenty year they have played the fantastical
gub-shites and goose-giblets in Print, and kept a hateful scribbling and a
pamphleting about earthquakes, coniun^ctions, inundations, the fearful blazing
Star, and the fors^orne Flaxe-wife: and took upon them to be false Prophets,
VVeather-wizards, Fortunetellers, Poets, Philosophers, Orators,
Historiographers, Mountebankes, Ballet makers, and left no Art vndefamed with
their filthy dull-headed practice: it may please your Worships and
Masterships, these infidel premises considered, and that they have so fully
performed all their acts in absurdity, impudence, and foolerie, to grant them
their absolute Graces, to commence at Dawes cross, and with your general
subscriptions confirm them for the profoundest Arcandums, Acarnanians, and
Dizards, that have been discovered since the Deluge: and so let them pass
throughout the Queens Dominions.

Purposely that space I left, that as many as I shall persuade they are
Pache^^es, Poldauisses, and Dringles, may set their hands to their definitive
sentence, and with the Clearke help to cry Amen, to their ^ternall
vn^^andsomming.

Plie them, plie them incessantly v^ico Dick, even as a Water-man plies for his
Fares, and insinuate and go about the bush with them, like as thou art wont to
insinuate and go about the grizlie bushie beard of some savage Saracen Butcher,
and never surcea^e flaunting and sirking it in fustian, till under the
Universities united hand and seal they be enacted as Obsolaete a case of
Cockescombes, as ever he was in Trinity College, that would not carry his
Tutors bow into the field, because it would not edify: or his fellow qui quae
codshead, that in the Latin^ Tragedy of K. Richard, cride Ad ^rbs, ad vrbs, ad
vrbs, when his whole Part was no more, but Vrbs, vrbs, ad arma, ad arma.

Shall I make a motion, which I would not have thee think I induce to flatter
thee neither, thou being not in my walk, whereby I might come to wash my
hands with thee a mornings, or get a sprinkling or a brushing for a brybe:
will thou commence, and make no more ado, since* thou have almost as much
learning and far more wit, than the two Brothers, or either of those profound
qui mihi Discipulasses above mentioned.

Now merely (I persuade me) if thou would attempt it, not all the Gabriels
betwixt this and Godmanchester put together, would make a more perpolite
cathedral Doctor than thy self: for all languages at thy fingers end thou
have as perfect as Spruce, and nere a Dicke Haruey or cathedral Doctor of them
all, can read a more smooth succinct Lipsian Lecture of short hair, than thou
over thy Barbars Chair, if thou be so disposed, nor stand and encounter all
comers so constantly.

Dick, I exhort thee as a brother, be not a horse to forget thy own worth, thou
art in place where thou may promote thy self, do not close-prison and
eclipse thy virtues in the narrow glass lantern of thy Barbers shop, but
reflect them up and down the Realm, like to those prospectiue glasses which
express not the similitudes they receive near hand, but cast them in the air
a far off, where they are more clearly represented.

Commence, commence I admonish thee, thy merits are ripe for it, and there have
been Doctors of thy Faculty, as Doctor Dodipowle for example: and here in
London yet extant viu^ voc^ to testifi^ Doctor Not and Doctor Powle, none of
which in notting and powling go beyond thee* To utter unto thee my fancy as
touching those Neoterick tongues thou professest, in whose pronunciation old
Tooly and thou vary as much, as Stephen Gardineer and Sir John Cheek^ about
the pronunciation of the Greek tongue: lo, for a testifying encouragement how
much ^ wish thy ^ncrease in those languages, I have h^r^ took^ the pains to
nit and louze over the Doctors Book, and though m^ni^ chol^ricke Cooks about
London in a mad rage have dismembered it, and thrust it piping hot into the ou^n
under the bottomes of do^s^ts, and impiously pricked the torn sheets of it for
basting paper, on the outsides of Geese and ro^sting Beef, to keep them from
burning* yet have I naturally cherisht it and hugd it in my bo^ome, even as a
Carri^r of Bosoms Inn does a Cheese under his arm, and the purest Parm^s^n
magget Phrases therein, ^^ll'd and picked out to pre^ent thee with.

Read and p^ruse them over as di^ig^ntly ^s thou would do a char^e against
the toothache: for this I can gospelly ^uouch, ^o slight pains has the
Doctor took in coll^ct^^g them, consulting a whole quarter of a year with
Textors Epithites (which he borrowd of a friend of mine in Poules Churchyard)
only to pounse them out more poetically.

Be not self-wild, but insist in my precepts, and I will tutour thee so
Pythagoreanly how to husband them in all companies, that even VVillington
himself thy fellow Barber in Cambridge, (who has long borne the bell for
finicall descanting on the Crates) shall be constrained to worship and offer to
thee.

Abruptly to break into the bowels of this Index of bald inkhornisme, what
say thou for all thou art reputed such an A rag borrowd from his ^wne (...).
aenigmaticall linguist, (under the Doctors term probatorie license be it
spoken, being a term with him as frequent as standing upon terms among
lawiers) can thou enter into the true nature of villainy by conni^ence? I
hold a groate thou can not conster it. A word it is, that the Doctor lay a
whole week and a day and a night entra^^ed on his bed to bring forth, and on
the Monday evening late, causd all the bells in the Parish where he then
soiournd, to be rong forth, for joy that he was deliuerd of it.

Repent, and be ashamed of thy rudeness: O thou that have made so many men
wink whiles thou cast suds in their eyes, and yet know not what Conniuence
means. Plodding and dunstically like a clown of Cherry-hinton basely thou
beseechest them to wink, whiles thou make a Tennis-court of their faces, by
brick-walling thy clay-balls cross up and down their cheeks: whereas if thou
were right orthographizd in the Doctors elocution, thou would say in stead of
I pray Sir wink I must wash you, Sir, by your favor I must require your
conniuence.

Again, it is thy custom being sent for to some tall old sinckanter, or
stigmaticall bearded Master of Art, that has been chin-bound ever since
Charles the ninths massacre in France, to rush in bluntly with thy washing
bowl and thy nursecloutes under thy cloak, and after a few scraping
ceremonies, to ask if his Worship be at leisure to be recreated.

A malo in peius, that is the meanest salutation that ere I heard: utterly thou
bewrayest thy non-proficiencie in the Doctors Paracelsian rop^rethorique. What
a pestilence, a young brain and so poor and penurious in Conges? Raise thy
conceit on the trees, or rather than fail new cork it at the heels, before
it should thus walk bare-foote up and down the streets.

Hence take thy Harueticall exord^um, if thou would have thy conceit the
worlds favorite at first dash Omniscious and omnisufficient Master Doctor,
(for so he calls Cornelius Agrippa) will it please you to be cosmologizd and
smirkt.

Suppose a Bishop come to the University, as the Bishop of Lincoln sometimes
to visit Kings College, and the Bishop of Ely Saint John's, (whiles there was
ever a Bishop there) a plain Bishop (like Marti^) at every word thou will
term him, whereas if thou were but one hour entered commons in Haruey de
^ratore, A great, Po^tife or Demy-god in omnisufficiencie thou would enstall
him.

But to appose thee more dallyingly and familiarly. It is given out amongst
Scholars, that thou have a passing singular good wit, now so try whither thou
have so or no, let me hear what change of phra^es thou have to describe a good
wit in, or how in P^dagogue Tragotanto Doctors english thou can flourish upon
it.

I feel thy pusses beat slowly already, although thou be forty mile off
from me, and this impotent answer (with much adoo) drops from thee, even as
sweat from a lean man that drinks lack; namely, that thou think there
cannot much extraordinary descant be made of it, except it be to say, such a
one has an admirable capacity, an incomparable quick inneution, and a
surmounting rich spirit above all men. Hah, ha, a destitute poor fellow art
thou, and have mist me nine score: go, go, get thee a caudle and keep thy
self warm in thy bed, for out of question thy spirit is in a consumption.

A rich spirit quoth a? nay then a spirit in the way of honesty too: lo this
it is, to be read in nothing but in Barnabe Riches works. Spend but a quarter
so much time in mumping upon Gabrtelisme, and I Will be bound body and goods,
thou will not any longer sneakingly come forth with a rich spirit and an
admirable capacity, but an entbusiasticall spirit, and a nimble entelechy. In
the course of my Book a whole catalogue thou shall find of all these Guiny
phrases, to which in zealous care of thy reformation, I refer thee.

Dii boni boni, quid porto? What a large Diocese of Epistling have I here
progrest through? The Summons to a general Council with all the reasons
moving thereunto, or Tindalls Prologue before the New Testament, are but short
Graces before meat, in comparison of this my immoderate Dedication. But the
best is, if it be too long, thou have a comb and a pair of scissers to
curtall it; or if thou list not stand so long about it, with a Trinity
College rubb^r thou may epitomize it extempore.

Marry if thou long to hear the reason why I have so stretched it on the
tenter-hookes, forsooth it is a garment for the woodcocke Gabriel Harucy, and
fools ye know always for the most part (especially if they be natural
fools) are suited in long coats, whereupon I set up my rest to shape his
garments of the same size, that I might be sure to sit on his skirts.

Dick, no more at this time, but Nos-da diu catawhy, and all the recompense I
can make thee for being like a Chancery Declaration so tiring troublesome unto
thee, is this, if thou will have the Doctor for an Anatomy, thou shall; do
but speak the word, and I am the man will deliver him to thee to be scotcht
and carbonado^d: but in any case speak quickly, for here he lies at the last
gasp of surrendering all his credit and reputation.

Thy Friend Tho: Nashe, if thou be for Dick to all the generation of the
Harueys.

To all Christian Readers, to whom these Presents shall come.
WEll said my Masters, I perceive there cannot a new Book come forth but you
will have a fling at it. Say, what are you reading? Nashe against Haruey. Fo,
that's a stale jest, he has been this two or three year about it. O good
Brother Timothy rule your reason, the Miller gryndes more men's corn than one:
and those that resolutely go through with any quarrel, must set all their
wordly business at a stay, before they draw it to the point. I will not gainsay,
but I have cherisht a purpose of persecuting this Liff-lander Bogarian so long
time as ye speak of, and that like the long snouted Beast (whose back is
Castle proof) carrying her young in her womb three year ere she be delivered,
I have been big with child of a common place of revenge, ever since the
hanging of Lopus: but to say I plodded upon it continually, and used in all
this space nothing but gall to make ink with, is a lie befitting a base
swabberly lousy sailer, who having been never but a month at sea in his life,
and duckt at the maine yards arm twice or thrice for pilferie, when he comes
home swears he has been seventeen years in the Turks Galleys.

Patientia vestra, there is not one pint of wine more than the just Bill of
costs and charges in setting forth, to be got by ame of these bitter-sanced
Inuectines. Some fool^h praise perhaps we may mecte with, such as is affoorded
to ordinary I esters that make sport: but otherwise we are like those fugitive
Priests in Spain and Portugal, whom the Pope (veric liberally) prefers to
Irish Bishoprics, but allows them not a penny of any living to maintain
them with, save only certain Friars to begfor them.

High titles (as they of Bishops and Prelates) so of Poets and VVriters we have
in the world, when in stead of their begging Friars, the fire of our wit is
left, as our only last refuge to warm us.

Haruey and I (a couple of beggars) take upon us to bandie factions, and
contend like the Vrsini and Coloni in Room: or as the Turks and Persians
about Mahomet and Mortus Alli, which should be the greatest: and (with the
Indians) head our inventions arrows with Vipers teeth, and sleep them in the
blood of Adders and Serpents, and spend as much time in arguing Pro and contra,
as a man might have found out the quadrature of the Circle in: when all the
contr^uersie is no more but this, he began with me, and cannot tell how to
make an end; and I would fain^ end or rid my hands of him, if he had not first
begun.

I protest I do not write against him because I hate him, but that I would
confirm and plainly show to a number of weak believers in my sufficiency,
that I am able to answer him: and his friends and not his enemies let him
thank for this heavy load of disgrace I lay upon him, since their extreme
disabling of me in this kind, and urging what a triumph he had over me, has
made me to ransacke my standish more than I would.

This I will boldly say, look how long it is since he writ against me, so long
have I given him a lease of his life, and he has only held it by my mercy.

His Book or Magna Charta which against M. Lilly and me he addressed, I having
kept idle by me in a by settle out of sight amongst old shoes and boots
almost this two year, and in mere pity of him would never look upon it but
in some calm pleasing humor, for fear least in my melancholy too cruelly I
should have martyrd him.

And yet though vengeance comes not Zephiris and hirundine prima, in the first
springing prime of his schism and heresy, let him not look for one of Friar
Tecelius Pardons, he that (as Sleidane reports) first stird up Luther,
pronouncing from the Pope free salarie indulgence to any man, though he had
deflowred the Virgin Mary, and absolution as well for sins past as sins to
come: for I mean to come upon him with a tempest of thunder and lightning,
worse than the storms in the West Indies called the Furicanoes, and complete
arm more words for his confusion, than Wezell in Germany is able to arm men,
that has absolute furniture for three hundred thousand at all times.

Gentlemen, what think ye of this sober mortified style? I dare say a number of
ye have drawn it to a verdit alredie: and as an Elephants forelegs are longer
than his hinder, so you imagine my former confutation will be better than my
latter. Nay then, Aesopum non attriuistis, you are as ignorant in the true
mounings of my Muse, as the Astronomers are in the true mouings of Mars, which
to this day they could never attain too. For how ever in the first setting
forth I martch fair and softly like a man that rides upon his own horse, and
like the Caspian sea seem neither to ebb nor flow, but keep a smooth plain
for me in my el^quence, as one of the Lacedemonian Ephori, or Baldwin in his
morrall sentences (which now are all snatched up for Painters posies): yet you
shall see me in two or three leaves hence, cry Heigh for our town green, and
power hot boiling ink on this contemptible Heggledepegs barrain scalp, as men
condemned for stealing by Richard de cord Lions law, had hot boiling pitch
powrd on their heads, and feathers strewed vppor, that wheresoever they came
they might be known.

I know I am too long in preparing an entrance into my Text, sed tandem denique
to the matter and the purpose.

The method I mean to use in persecuting this Peter Maluenda and Sinibaldo
Crasko is no more but this.

Memorandum, I frame my whole Book in the nature of a Dialogue, much like
Bullen and his Doctor Tocrub, whereof the Interlocuters are these.

Inprimis, Senior Importunio, the Opponent.

The second Grand Consiliadore, chief Censor or Moderat^r.

The third Domino Bentiuole, one that stands as it were at the line in a
Tennis-court, and takes every ball at the volly.

The fourth Don Carneades de boon Compagniola, who like a busy Country
Justice sits on the Bench, and preaches to the eues out of their own
confessions: or rather like a Quartermaster or Treasurer of Bride-well, whose
office is to give so many strokes with the hammer, as the publican unchaste
offender is to have stripes, and by the same Tuballs music to warn the
blue-coate Corrector when he should patience and surcease: so continually, when
by Senior Importunio the Doctor is brought to the Cross, Don Carneades sets
down what proportion of instice is to be executed upon him, and when ^is back
has bled sufficient, gives a signal of retrayt.

Neither would I have you imagine that all these personages are fained, like
Americke Vesputius, and the rest of the Antwerpe Speakers in Sir Thomas Moors
Vtopia: for as true as Banks his Horse knows a Spaniard from an Englishman,
or there went up one and twenty Maids to the top of Boston Steeple, and there
came but one down again, so true it is that there are men which have dealt
with me in the same humor that here I shadow. In some nooke or blind angle
of the Blackfriars, you may suppose (if you will) this honest conference to
be held, after the same manner that one of these Italionate conferences about
a Duel is wont solemnly to be handled, which is, when a man being specially
touched in reputation, or challenged to the field upon equal terms, calls all
his friends together, and asks their advice how he should carry himself in
the action.

Him that I term Senior Importuno, is a Gentleman of good quality, to whom I
rest many ways beholding, and one (as the Philosophers say of wind, that it
is nothing but air vehemently moved) so has he never ceast with all the
vehemence of wind or breath that he has, to incite and move me to win my
spurs in this journey.

Under Grand Consiliadore, I allude to a grave reverend Gimnosophist, (
Amicorum amicissimus, of all my Friends the most zealous) that as Aesculapius
built an Oracle of the Sun at Athens, so is his Chamber an Oracle or
Convocation Chapel of sound counsel, for all the better sort of the sons
of understanding about London, and (as it were) an usual market of good
fellowship and conference.

He also (as well as Senior Impor^uno) has dealt with me very importunately,
to employ all my Forces in this Expedition, and as Hippocrates preserved the
City of Coos from a great plague or mortality (generally dispersed throughout
Greece) by persuading (...) to kindle fires in public places, whereby the
air might be purisied: so has he (in most fervent devotion to my well
doing) un^essantly persuaded me to preserve my credit from iadish dying of the
scratches, by powerful through enkindling this Pinego Riminos everlasting fire
of damnation.

For Domino Bentiuole and Don Carneades de boune compagniola, they be men that
have as full shares in my lous and affection as the former.

The antecedent of the two, besides true resolution and valor, (where with he
has ennobled his name extraordinary) and a ripe pleasant wit in conuersing,
has in him a perfect unchangeable true habit of honesty, imitating the Art
of Music, which the Professors thereof affirm to be infinite and without
end.

And for the subsequent or hindermost of the pair, who likewise is none of the
unworthiest retainers to Madame Bessona, he is another Florentine Poggius, for
mirthfull sportiue conceit and quick innention, ignem fac^^ns exlaplde nigro,
(which Munster in his Cosmography alleges for the greatest wonder of England)
that is, wresting delight out of aniething. And this over and above I will give
in eu^dence for his praise, that though all the ancient Records and Presidents
of ingenuous Apothegs and Emblemes were burnt, (as Polidore Virgill in King
Harry the eights time burnt all the ancient Records of the true beginning of
this our I le, after he had finished his Chronicle) yet out of his affluent
capacity they were to be renewed and reedified far better.

These four with my self, whom I personate as the Respondent in the last
place, shall (according as God will give them grace) clap up a Colloquium
amongst them, and so school my gentle Comrade or neighbor Quiquiffe in some
few short principles of my learning and industry, that (I doubt not) by that
time they have concluded and dispatched with him, my Gorboduck Huddleduddle will
gladly (on his knees) resign to me his Doctoursh^^, and as Antisthenes could
not beat Diogenes away from him, but he would needs be his scholar whether
he would or no: so shall I have him haunt me up and down to be my prentise to
learn to endite, and do what I can I shall not be shut of him.

This is once, I both can and will be shut presently of this tedious Chapter of
contents, least where as I prepared it as an antipast to whet your stomachs, it
clean take away your stomachs, and you surfeit of it before meat come:
wherefore only giving you this one caveat to observe in reading my Book,
which Aristotle prescribes to them that read Histories, namely, that they be
not nimis credulos aut incredulos, too rash or too slow of belief, and
earnestly commending me to Qui cytharam neruis, and neruis temperat arcum, the
melodious God of Gam vt are, that is life and sinnewes in every thing; as also
to Jove's ancient trusty Roger, frisking come aloft sprightly Mercury, that
has wings for his moustachies, wings for his ey-browes, wings growing out of
his chinne like a thorough hair, wings at his arms like a fools coat with
four elbowes, wings for his riding bases, wings at his heels in stead of
spurs, and is true Prince of VVingandecoy in every thing, and desiring him
to inspire my pen with some of his nimblest Pomados and Sommersets, and be
still close at my elbow, since now I have more use of him than Alchumists, in
love and charity I take my leave of you all, at least of all such as here
mean to leave and read no further, and have to the launching forth of my
Dialogue.

Have with you to Saffron-walden. Dialogus.
Interlocutores, Senior Importuno, Grand Consiliadore, Domino Bentiuole, Don
Carneades de boune compagniola, Piers Pennilesse Respondent. Importun^. WHat
Tom, thou art very welcome. Where have thou bin this long time; walking in
Saint Faiths Church under ground, that we never could see thee? Or have thou
took thee a Chamber in Cole-harbour, where they live in a continual mist,
betwixt two Brew-houses.


Cons^li: Indeed we have mist you a great while, as well spiritually as
corporally; that is, no less in the absence of your works, than the want of
your company: but now I hope by your presence you will fully. satisfy us in
either.


Benti^ole: Nay, I would he would but ^ully satisfy and pay one, which is the
Doctor: for this I can assure him, he is run far in arrearages with
expectation, and to recover himself it will be very hard, except he put twice
dubble as much aqua fortis in his ink as he did before.


Carnead: No aqua fortis if you love me, for it almost poisoned and spoiled the
fashion of Stones the sooles nose; and would you have it be the destruction and
desolation of a Doctor Fool now? What, content your self, a mess of
Tewksbury mustard, or a dram and a half of Tower Hill vinegar, will seem a
high festival banquet, and make a famous coronation show on this forlorn
Ciuilians hungry table.


Impor: Tush, tush, you are all for jest, and make him be more careless of his
credit than he would be, by thus contemning and debasing his Adversary. Will
you hear what is the united voice and opinion abroad? Confidently they say, he
is not able to answer him he has deferd it so long; and if he do answer him
howsoever it be, it is nothing, since he has been a whole Age about it,
though I for mine own part know the contrary, and will engage my oath for him
(if need be) that the most of this time they think him houering over the
neast, he has sat hatching of nothing but toies for private Gentlemen, and
neglected the peculiar business of his reputation, that so deeply concern him,
to follow vain hopes and had I wist humors about Court, that make him go in
a threadbare cloak, and scarce pay for boat hire. Often enough I told him of
this, if he would have belee'ud me, but at length I am sure he finds it, and
repents it all too late. In no company I can come, but every minute of an
hour (bebecause they have taken special notice of my love toward him, they
still will be tormenting me with one question or another, of what he is about,
what means he to ^e thus retchles of his fame, or whither I am sure those
things which are past under his name heretofore were of his own doing, or to
get an opinion of wit he used some other man's help under hand* that now
has utterly given him over and forsaken him, whether he be dead or no, or
forbidden to writ^, or in regard he has published a treatise in Divinity makes
a conscience to meddle any more in these controversies? with a thousand other
like idle interrogatories* whereto I answer nothing else, but that he is idle
and new fangled, beginning many things, but soon weary of them ere he be
half entered, and that he has too much acquaintance in London ever to do any
good, being like a Curtezan that can deny no man, or a grave commonwealths
Senator that thinks he is not borne for himself alone, but as old Laertes in
Homers odissaea, Dum reliqua omnia curabat, s^ipsum negl^g^bat* caring for all
other things else, sets his own estate at six and seven. Judge you, whom he
takes for his best friends, what the end of this will be. A disgraced and
condemned man he lives whiles Haruey thus lives unanswered, worse than he that
has peaceably and quietly put up an hundred bas^inadoes, or suf^red his face
to be made a continual common wall for men to spit on: Spittle may be wiped
off, and the print of a broken pate, or bruise with a cudgel quickly made whole
and worn out of men's memories, but to be a villain in print, or to be
imprinted at London the reprobatest villain that ever went on two legs, for
such is G^briell Scur^^ies (as in thy other book thou termst him) his wi^les
malicious testimony of thee* with other more rascally h^dg^ raked up t^rmes,
familiar to none but roguish morts and doxes, is an attainder t^^t will ^^icke
by thee for ever. A blot of ignominy it is which though this age or at the
utmost, such in this age as have conuer^^ or are acquainted with thee, hold
light and ridiculous, and no more but as a Bulls roaring and bellowing, and
running horn mad at every one in his way, when he is wounded by the Dogs,
and almost bayted to death: yet there is an age to come, which knowing neither
thee nor him, but by your ^euerall works judging of either, will authorize all
he has belched forth in thy reproach for sound Gospel, since as the proverb
is, qui tacet consentire videtur, thou holding thy peace, and not confuting
him, seems to confess^ and confirm all whereof he has accused thee, and the
innocent unheard do perish as guilty. Deceive not thy self with the bad sale
of his booke^, for though in no other man's hands, yet in his own Deske they
may be found after his death, wh^reb^ while Printing lasts, thy disgrace may
last, and the Printer (whose Copy it is) may leave thy infamy in Legacy to
his heirs, and his heirs to their next heirs successively to the thirteenth
and fourteenth generation, Cum Priuilegio, forbidding all other to Print those
lewd lying Records of thy scandal and contumely* but the lineall offspring of
their race in sempiternum. Have thou not heard how Orpheus wrote in the 2700.
age of the world, whereas it is now 5596. and yet his memory is fresh, his
verses are extant, whereas all the Kings that raignd and suruiude at that time,
have not so much as the first letter of their names to posterity commended: the
very same is thy case with those in Germany, which being executed are never
buried. Consider and deliberate well of it, and if it work not effectually
with thee I know not what will. Neither if thou be so senseless that thou will not let it sink into thee, do I hold thee worthy to be any thing but the
sink of contempt, to be excluded out of all men of worths companies, and
counted the abject scumme of all Poets and ballet-makers.


Respond: So you have said sir* Now let me have my turn another-while, to
counterbuffe and beat back all those overthwart blows wherewith you have
charged me.


Benti: No reason to the contrary, but in any case be not chollerick, since
the most of those speeches he has vttred my own ears can witness to be
true, when as at diverse great meetings, and chief Ordinaries, I have
Champion-like took thy part, and every one objected and articled against thee,
much after the same form he has expressed.


Respond: Will you have patience and you shall hear me expressly and roundly
give him his quietus est. To the first, wherein he concludes I am not able to
answer him, because I have deferd it so long; I answer that it follows not,
in so much as many men that are able to pay their debts, do not always
discharge and pay them presently at one push; and secondly, or to the second
lie, where he says and I do answer him it is nothing since I have been a
whole age about it, If I list I could prove his assertion to be under age: but
that's all one, I am content my wit should take upon it antiquity this once,
and nothing else in my defense I will allege, but Verit as Tempor is silia, it
is only time that reuealeth all things: wherefore though in as short time as a
man may learn to run at Tilt, I could have gone thorough with innention enough
to have run him thorough and confounded him, yet I must have some further time
to get perfect intelligence of his life and conversation, one true point
whereof well set down, will more excruciate and commacerate him, than knocking
him about the cares with his own style in a hundred sheets of paper. And this
let me inform the lury over and above, that age is no argument to make any
thing (...) and though gray beard drumbling over a Discourse, be no crime I am
subject too, yet in the behalf of the crazed wits of that stamp, I will
uphold, that it is no upright conclusion to say whatsoever is long labored; is
lows^e and not worth a straw; since by that reason you might conclude Dianas
Temple at Ephesus to have been a stinking Doue^ote or a Hog-sty, because it was
220. year in building by the Am^zons. Any time this 17. year my adversary
Frigius Pedagogus has laid waste paper in pickle, and published some rags of
treatises against Master Lilly and me, which I will justify have line by him
ever since the great matches of bowling and shooting on the Thames upon the
ye. But for my part, try me who will, and let any man but find me meat
and drink with the appurtenances, while I am playing the paper stainer, and
fishing for pearl in the bottom of my tar-boxe, and but free me from those
outward encumbrances of cares that ouer-whelme me, and let this Paraliticke
Quacksaluer fill ten thousand tons with Scelerata sinapis, ^^rewish snappish
mustard, as Plautus calls it, or botch and cobble up as many volumes as he can
betwixt this and doomesday, and he shall see I will have every one of them in
the nose straight, and give as sudden extemporall answers, as Pope
Siluesters or Friar Bacons brazen head, which he would have set up on the Plain
of Salsbury. As touching the vain hopes and had I wist Court humors which you
say I follow, there is no Husbandman but tills and sowes in hope of a good
crop, though many times he is deluded with a bad Harvest. Court humors like
cutting of hair must either be observed when the Moon is new or in the full,
or else no man will have his hands full that gleanes after them. Not unlikely
it is they so question you about the cause of my long stay, and their wits
being dull frozen and halse dead for want of matter of delight, (where of Poules
Churchyard was never worse fuelled) like those in Florida or diverse Countries
of the Negroes, that kindle fire by rubbing two sticks one against another: so
to recreate and enkindle their decayed spirits, they care not how they set
Haruey and me on fire one against another, or where us on to consume our
selves. But this Cock fight once past, I vow to turn a new lease, and take
another order with them, resolving to take up for the Word or Motto of my
patience, Perdere posse s^t est, it is enough that it is in my power to call a
Sessions and trusse him up when I list, conc^^ding with the Poet, Dum desint
hesles, desit quoque causa triumphi, as long as we have no enemies to trouble
us, it is no matter for any Triumphs or bonfires: and as it was said of the
black Princes soldiers, that they cared for no spoil but gold and silver, or
feathers, so ever after I will care for no conquest or victory, which carries
not with it a present rich possibility of raising my decayed fortunes, and
Caualier ^lourishing with a seather in my cappe (hey gallanta) in the face of
envy, and general Worlds opinion. As new fangled and idle, and prostituting
my pen like a Curtizan is the next Item that you tax me with; well it may and
it may not be so, for neither will I deny it nor will I grant it; only thus
far I Will go with you, that twice or thrice in a month when res est angusta
domi, the bottom of my purse is turned downward, and my conduit of incke will
no longer flow for want of reparations, I am feign to let my Plow stand still
in the midst of a furrow, and follow some of these new fangled Galiardos, and
Senior Fantasticos, to whose amorous Villanellas and Quipassas, I prostitute my
pen in hope of gain, but otherwise there is no new fanglenes in me but
poverty, which alone makes me so unconstant to my determined studies; not
idleness, more then discontented idle trudging from place to place, too and
fro, and prosecuting the means to keep me from idleness. My Doctor
Vanderhulk peradventure out of this my indigent confession may take occasion to
work piteously: It is no matter I care not, for many a fair day ago, have I
proclaimed my self to the world Piers Pennilesse, and sufficient petigrees
can I show to prove him my elder brother. What more remains behind of the
condemned estate I stand in, till this Domine Dewse-ace be conswapped, and sent
with a pair of new shoes on his feet, and a scrowle in his hand to saint
Peter, like a Russian when he is buried, as also of the immortality of the
Print, and how though not this age, yet another age three years after the
building up the top of Powles sleeple, may baffull and infamize my name when I
am in heaven, and shall never feel it, in four words I will deseate, and lay
desolate. Forsooth (be it known unto you) I have provided harping yrons to
catch this great Whale: and this Gobin a grace ap Hannikin by Gods grace shall
be met and combatted. Yet this I must tell you sir in the way of friend ship
twixt you and me, your grave fatherly forecasting Forasmuches, and urging of
posterity and after ages whose cradle makers are not yet begot; that they may
do this, and they may do that, is a stale imitation of this heathen Gregory
Huldricke my Antigonist. And thus I trust all reckonings are even twixt you and
me.


Impor: Nay I promise thee thou have given me my Pasport, and I know not what
to say, now thou say he shall be answered.


Benti: I am very glad for thy credits sake, that thou perseuerst in that
purpose, but more glad would I be to see it abroad and published.


Resp: Content your self, so you shall; although it has gone abroad with his
Keeper any time this quarter of this year, but as pro^ounde a reason as any I
have alleag'd yet of the long stay and keeping it back, was, that I might
fulfill that old verse in Ovid (...) metam properate simul cun^ plen^^
vo^uptits, as much to say as march together merrily, and then there will be
iusty doings and sound sport, so did I stay for some company to march with
me, that we might have made round work, and gone thorough stitch, but since
all this while they come not sorwarde according to promise but break their
day, as the King of Sp^^ne did with Sebastian King of Partugall, about his
meeting him at Guandulopeia, when they should have gone together to the
Battle of Alcazar; veiab diabolo, Saint George and a ^ickling pipe of
Tobacco, and then pell mell, all alone have amongst them, if there were ten
thousand of them.


Carn: Faith well-said, I perceive thou searst no colors.


Resp: Whatsoever I fear, I Will force I enkin Heyderry derry both to fear and
bear my colors, and suite his cheeks (if there be one pimple of shame in
them) in a perfecter red, than any Venice dye.


Consil: Vengeance on that unlucky dye may he cry, like a swearing shredded
gamester, that loses at one set all that ever he is worth: but I pry thee (in
honesty) if thou have any of the papers of thy ^ooke about thee, show us some
of them, that like a great Inquest we may deliver our verdit, before it come to
the Omnigatherum of Town and Country.


Respon: Then gather your selves together in a ring, and Grand Consiliadore be
you the grand commander of silence (which is a chiese Office in the Emperor of
Russi^es Court), for here it is in my sleeue that will besliue him: yet if I be
not deceived, some part of the Epistle I have read to you heretofore.


Import: I to the Barber such a thing I well remember, but what Barber it was,
or where he dwelt, directly thou never toldst us.


Respon: Yes, that I have both towld and bookt him too; nevertheless (for your
better under standing) know it is one Dick Litchfield the Barber of Trinity
College, a rare ingenuous odd merry Greek, who (as I have heard) has
translated my Piers Pennilesse into the Macaronicall tongue, wherein I wish he
had been more tongue-tide, since in some men's incensed judgments it has too
much tongue already; being above 2. years since maimedly translated into the
French tongue, and in the English tongue so rascally printed and ill
interpreted, as heart can think, or tongue can tell. But I cannot tell how it
is grown to a common fashion amongst a number of our common ill livers, that
whatsoever tongue (like a spaniels tongue) does not lick their aged soars and
fawn on them, they conclude it to be an adders tongue to sting them: and
whereas witty Aesope did buy up all the tongues in the market he could spy,
as the best meat he esteemed of, they (by all means possible) even out of
the buckles of their girdles labor to pluck forth the tongs, for fear they
should pluck in, their unsatiate greedy paunches too straight.


Carn: O peace, peace, exercise thy writing tongue, and let us have no more of
this plain English.


Resp: With a good will, agreed: and like Mahomets angels in the Alcheron, that
are said to have ears stretching from one end of heaven to the other, let your
attention be indefinite and without end, for thus I begin.


MAscula virorum, Saint Mildred and Saint Agapite! more Letters yet from the
Doctor? nay then we shall be sure to have a whole Grauesend Barge full of
News, and hear soundly of all matters on both ears. Out upon it, here is a
packet of Epistling, as big as a Pack of Woollen cloth, or a stack of
salt-^ish. Carrier, did^^ thou bring it by wayne, or on horseback? By wayne
sir, and it has cracked me three axeltrees, wherefore I hope you will consider
me the more. Heavy news, hea^ie news, take them again, I will never open
them. Ah quoth he (deep sighing) to me I wot they are the heauiest, whose
Cart has cryde creake under them forty times every furlong: wherefore if you
be a good man, tather make mud walls with them, mend high ways, or damme up
quagmires with them, than thus they should endammage me to my eternal
undoing. I hearing the fellow so forlorn and out of comfort with his luggage,
gave him his Char^ns Naulu^^ or ^erry three half pence, and so dismissed him to
go to the place from whence he came, and play at Lodum. But when I came to
unrip and vnbumbast this Gargantuan bag-pudding, and found nothing in it, but
dogs-tripes, swines livers, ox galls, and sheep gutts, I was in a bitterer
chafe than any Cook at a long Sermon when his meat burns. Do the
Philosophers (said I to my self) hold that letters are no burden, and the
lightest and easiest household stuff a man can remove? I Will be sworn upon
Anthenie Gueuar as golden Epistles if they will, there is not so much toil in
remoouing the siedge from a Town, as in taking an inventory suruay of any
one of them. Letters do you term them? they may be Letters patents well
enough for their tediousnes: for no lecture at Surgeons Hall upon an Anatomy,
may compare with them in longitude. Why they are longer than the Statutes of
clothing, or the Charter of London. Will ye have the simple truth, without any
devices or playing upon it. Gabriell Harney, may stale Gull, and the only pure
Orator in senseles riddles or Packst onis^^e, that ever this our little shred or
separate angle of the world suckled up, not content to have the naked scalp of
his credit new covered with a false periwig of commendations, and so return to
his fathers house in peace, and there sustain his hungry body with wythred
sca^lions and green cheese, has since that time deeply forsworn himself in
an arbitrament of peace, and after the ancient custom of Scottish amity,
unawares proclaimed open wars a fresh in a whole Alexandrian Library of
waste paper. Piers his Supererogation, or Najhes Saint Fame, pretely and
quirkingly he christens it; and yet not so much to quirke or cross me thereby,
as to bless himself and make his book fell, did he give it that title: for
having found by much shipwrackt experience, that no work of his absolute under
his own name would pass, he used heretofore to draw Sir Philip Sydney,
Master Spencer, and other men of highest credit into every pild pamphlet he
set forth; and now that he can no longer march under their Ensigns, (from
which I have utterly chased him in my Fo^re Letters intercepted) he takes a new
lesson out of Plutarch, in making benefit of his enemy, and borrows my name,
and the name of Piers Pennilesse (one of my Books) which he knew to be most
saleable, (passing at the least through the pikes of six Impressions) to help
his bedred stuff to limpe out of Powles Churchyard, that else would have lain
vnrepriuably spittled at the Chandlers. Such a huge drifat of duncerie it is he
has dungd up against me, as was never seen since the reign of A^^rrois. O
it is an unconscionable vast gorbellied Volume, bigger bulkt than a Dutch Hoy,
and far more boystrous and cumbersome, than a pair of Swissers omnipotent
galeaze breeches. But it should seem he is ashamed of the incomprehensible
corpulencie thereof himself, for at the end of the^ ^99. Page, he begins
with one 100. again to make it seem little, (if I lie you may look and
convince me); and in half a quire of paper besides, has left the Pages
vnfigured. I have read that the Giant Antaus Shield asked a whole Elephants hyde
to cover it, bona fide I v^ter it, scarce a whole Elephants hyde and a half
would serve for a cover to this G^gma^og Jewish Thalmud of absurdities. Nay,
give the devil his due, and there an end, the Giant that Magellan found at
Caput sanct ^ crucit, or Saint Christophers picture at Antwerpe, or the
monstrous images of Seso^^res, or the Aegiptian Rapsinates, are but dwar^fes in
comparison of it. But one Epistle thereof to John Wolf the Printer, I took
and weighed in an Ironmongers scales, and it counterpoys^ch a Cade of Herring,
and three Holland Cheeses. You may believe me if you will, I was saine to lift
my chamber door off the hindges, only to let it in, it was so fulsome a fat
Bonarobe and terrible Rounceuall. Once I thought to have called in a Cooper that
went by and called for work, and bid him hoope it about like the tree at
Grays-Inne gate, for fear it should burst it was so beastly; but then I
remembered me the boys had whoopt it sufficiently about the streets, and so I
let it alone for that instant. Credibly it was once rumord about the Court,
that the Guard meant to triema^teries with it before the Queen, and in stead
of throwing the sledge or the hammer, to hurl it forth at the arms end for
a wager. I, I, ^u^rie one may hammer upon it as they please, but if they will
hit the ^ayle on the head pat as they should, to nothing so aptly can they
compare it as Afric, which being an unbounded stretched out Conti^ent,
equivalent in greatness with most Quarters of the Earth, yet nevertheless is (for
the most part) ^uer-spred with barraine sands: so this his Babil^nian tower or
tome of confutation, swelling in dimension and magnitude above all the
prodigious commentaries and familiar Epistles that ever he wrote, is
notwithstanding more dry, barraine, and sandy in substance, than them all.
Peruse but the Ballet In Sandon soil as late befell, and you will be more
soundly edified by fix parts. Six and thirty sheets it comprehends, which
with him is but six and thirty full points; for he makes no more difference
twixt a sheet of paper and a full point, than there is twixt two black
puddings for a penny, and a penny for a pair of black puddings. Foul evil
go with it, I wonder you will prate and tattle of six and thirty full points
so compendiously trust up (as may be) in six and thirty sheets of paper,
when as those are but the shortest proverbs of his wit; for he never bids a man
good morrow, but he makes a speech as long as a proclamation; nor drinks to
any, but he reads a Lecture of three hours long, De Art bibe^di. O it is a
precious apothegmaticall Pedant, who will find matter enough to dilate a whole
day of the first invention of Fie, fa, fum, I smell the blood of an
Englishman: and if he had a thousand pound, he has vowed to consume it
every doyt, to discover and search forth certain rare Mathematical
Experimentes; as for example, that of tying a flea in a chain, (put in the
last edition of the great Chronicle) which if by any industry he ceuld
atchieue, his own name being so generally odious throughout Kent and
Christendom, he would presently transform and metamorphize it from Doctor
Haruey to Doctor Ty, (of which style there was a famous Musition some few
years since) resolving as the last cast of his maintenance, altogether to live
by carrying that Flea like a monster up and down the country; teaching it to
do tricks, hey come aloft ^ack, like an ape over the chain. If you would
have a flea for the nonce that you might keep for a breeder, why this were a
stately flea indeed to get a brave race of fleas on, your fly in a box is but
a drumble-bee in comparison of it; with no expense at all (on your chin like a
witches familiar) you might feed it, and let the chain hang down on your
breast, like a stale greasy Courtiers chain, with one strop. Alack and
weladay, too too inconsiderately advised was this our Poetical Ga^riell, when
hexameterly entranced, he cride out O blessed health, blessed wealth, and
blessed abundance,
O that I had these three for the loss of ^o. Commensments.
when he should have exclaimd, O that I had this flea for the loss of 30.
Co^^ensments.

Peradventure he thinks thus slightly to steal away with a Flea in his ear,
but I must flea his asses skin over his ears a little handsomer ere we part.
Those that be so disposed to take a view of him, ere he be come to the full
Midsommer Moon, and raging Calent^ra of his wretchedness, here let them behold
his lively counterfeit and portraiture, not in the pantofles of his prosperity,
^she was when he libeld against my Lord of Oxford, but in the single-soald
pumpes of his adversity, with his gown cast off, vntrussing, and ready to
beray himself, upon the news of the going in hand of my book.

The picture of Gabriell Haruey, as he is ready to let fly upon Ajax.
If you ask why I have put him in round hose, that usually wears Venetians?
It is because I would make him look more dapper and plump and round upon it,
whereas otherwise he looks like a case of tooth-pikes, or a Lute pin put in a
suit of apparel. Gaze upon him who list, for I tell you I am not a little
proud of my workmanship, and though I say it, I have handled it so neatly and
so sprightly and withal ouzled, gidumbled, muddled, and drizled it so finely,
that I forbid ever a Hauns Boll, Hauns Holbine, or Hauns Mullier of them all
(let them but play true with the face) to amend it or come within forty foot
of it. Away away, Blockland, Trusser, Francis de Murre and the whole generation
of them will sooner catch the murre and the pose tenscore times ere they do a
thing one quarter so masterly. Yea (without Kerry merry buffe be it spoken) put
a whole million of I ohannes Mab^siusses of them together, and they shall not
handle their matters at Painters sharp handling.
sharp so handsomely as I.

Benti: From sharp to come to the point, as far as I can learn, thou have
all the advantage of the quarrel, since both the first and last firebrand of
dissension betwixt you, was tossed by the Doctor.


Respond: Tossing (by your favor) is proper to the sea; and so (like the sea)
does he toss water, and not fire.


Benti: That is tossed or cast water on fire: if he did so, he is the wiser.


Respon: On a fire of sea-cole you mean, to make it burn brighter.


Benti: A fire that the sea will cool, or Haruey find water enough to quench,
if you look not too it the better.


Respon: I warrant, take you no care, I Will look to his water well enough.


Imp: But me thought even now thou contemndst him, because he tossed water and
not fire; whereas in my indgement, there is not a hairs difference betwixt
being burnd and being drowned, since death is the best of either, and the pain
of dying is not more tedious of the one, than of the other.


Respon: O, you must not conclude so desperate, for every tossing billow
brings not death in the mouth of it: besides, if the worst come to the worst, a
good swimmer may do much, whereas fire rapit omnia secum, sweepeth clean
where it seazeth.


Importun: I, but have you not heard that broken piece of a vearse,
Currenticede furori, give place to fire or fury, and you shall quickly see it
consume it self.


Respon: A stale puddings end, by that reason you may as well come upon me
with Tempus edax rerum, quid non consumit is anni? As though there is any
thing so eternal and permanent, that consumes and dies not after all his fire
of life is spent. For me, I know I shall live and not die, till I have digd
the graves of all my enemies; and that the fire of my wit will not be spent,
till (as amongst the Samogetes and Chaldaeans) I get it to be worshipped as god
of those whom it most co^founds: and as diverse of the Aethiopians curse the
sun when it rises, and worship it when it sets; so how-euer they curse
and rai^e upon me in the beginning, I will compel them to fall down and
worship me ere I cease or make an end, crying upon their knees Ponuloi nashe,
which is in the Russian tongue, Have mercy upon us: but I will not have mercy
or be pacifide, till I have left them so miserable, that very horses shall
hardly abstain from weeping for them, as they did for the death of Caesar; and
if they have but ever a dog that loved them, he shall die for grief, to view
his masters in that plight.


Consil: In any case leave this big thunder of words, wherein thou vainly
spendst thy spir^ts before the push of the battle; and if thou have any such
exhaled heat of revenge in the upper region of thy brain, let it ligh^en and
flash presently in thy adversaries face, and not a far off threaten thus
idely.


Respon: Threaten idely said you? Nay sure, I Will perform as much as he that
went about to make the dyuing boat twixt Dover and Callis, and as lightning
and thunder never lightly go asunder, so in my style will I temper them both
together, mixing thunder with lightning, and lightning with thunder, that is,
in dreadful terror with stripes, and sound thrusts with loud threats. Tell
me, have you a mind to any thing in the Doctors Book? speak the word, and
I will help you to it upon the nail; whether it be his words, his me^aphors,
his method, his matter, his metters. Make your choice, for I mean to use you
most stately.


Garn: Then good gentle Friend (if you will) let us have half a dozen spare ribs
of his retho^ique, with tart sauce of taunts correspondent, a mighty chyne of
his magnificentest elocution, and a whole surloyne of his substantiallest
sentences and similes.


Resp: And shall, I am for you; I Will serve you of the best you may assure your
self: with a continuat Tr^polo^gicall speech I will astonish you, all to
bee-spi^ed and dredged with sentences and allegories, not having a erum of any
cost bestowed upon it more, than the Doctors own cooquerie.


Import: Tropologicall! O embotched and tru^ulent. No French gowtie leg with a
gamash upon it, is so gotchie and boystrous.


Consi: It founds like the ten-fold ^^choing rebound of a dubble Cannon in the
air; and is able to spoyle^nie little mouth, that offers to pronounce it.


Resp: Gentlemen, take God in your mind, and nere fear you this word
Tropologicall, for it is one of Dick Harueys sheep trattest in his (...) of
God.


Imp: I, Dick H^rueys, that may well be; for I never heard there was more in
him, than would hard and scant serve him to make a Collation: but for the
Doctor, try it who will, his style is not easy to be match^, being commended
by diners (of good i^dgement) for the best that ere they read.


Respond: Amongst the which number, is a red bearded thrid-bare Caualier; who
(in my hearing) at an ordinary, as he sat fumbling the dice after supper, fell
into these terms, (no talk before leading him to it) There is such a Book
of Harneys (meaning this his last Book against me) as I am a Soldier and a
Gentleman I protest, I never met with the like contrived pile of pure English.
O it is divine and most admirable, and so far beyond all that ever he
published heretofore, as daylight beyond candlelight, or tinsell or
lease-gold above arsedine; with a great many more excessive praises he bestowed
upon it: which authentically I should have believed, if immediately upon the
nicke of it, I had not seen him shrug his shoulders, and talk of going to the
Bathe, and after like a true Pandar (so much the fitter to be one of Gabriels
Patrons) grew in commending to young gentlemen, two or three of the most
detested loathsome whores about London, for peereles beauteous Paragons, and the
pleasingest wenches in the world; whereby I guest, his judgment might be
infected as well as his body: and he that would not stick so to extol stale
rotten laced mutton, will like a true Millanoys suck figs out of an asses
fundament, or do any thing. I more than half suspect those whom you prefer
for the best judgments, are of the same stamp; or if they be not, I will set a
new stamp on their judgments: having (to let them see their dotage and error,
and what his style is they make such a miracle of) musterd together in one
galimafrie or short Oration, most of the ridiculous senseles sentences,
sinicall ^launting phrases, and termagant inkhorne terms throughout his
Book, and framed it in his own praise and apology, because I would cut his
cloak with the Wool, though Lilly and Najhe never so, cry N^n placet therear.
Auditors, awake your attention, and here expect the clear repurisied soul of
truth, without the least shadow of fiction; the vnflattered picture of
Pedantisme, that has no one smile or crinkle more than it should: for I deeply
auow on my faith and salvation, if he were a Doctor of gold, here in his own
clothes he shall appear to you, and not so much as a knot to his winding
sheet, orcorner tip to the smallest seluage of his garments I will insert;
only a needle and thread to trusse up his trinkets more roundly (upon better
advice) I am determined to lend him, in hope it may be his thread of life, and
even by that single bounty dubble stitch him unto me to be my denoted beadsman
till death, but not a pinnes head or a moaths pallet room gets he of any
farther contribution. Hem, clear your throats, and spit soundly; for now the
pageant begins, and the stuff by whole Cart-loads comes in.


An Oration, including most of the miscreated words and sentences in the
Doctors Book.
Renowned and amicable Readers, from whom it is not concealed, that Silence is
a flaue in a chain, and the Pen the hot shot of the musket:

Benti: Mark, mark, a sentence, a sentence.


Orati: that when the caitife Planet reigns, of Punical war there is no end,
and of the cou^ter-tenor of an offended Sire^, no ela.


Carne: There Is two, keep tally.


Orati: Tell me (I pray you) was ^uer Pegasus a cow in a cage, Mercury a mouse
in a cheese, Dexterity a dog in a dublet, Ledgerdemaine a slow-worme,
Vi^acitie a lazy bones, Entelechie a slug-plum, Humanity a spittle-man,
Rhetorique a dummerell, Poetry a tumbler, History a banqrout, Philosophy a
broker?


Consili: I marry, now it works.


Respon: I belly him not a word; just as it is there, in his own text it comes
together.


Orati: Why should I then, that have been an incorruptible Areopage,


Benti: Stay that same Areopage, he is a forreyner new come over, set us
examine him if he be the Queens friend or no, ere he pass.


Orati: without any pregnant cause be thus pres^igiously besiedged and marked
with an Afteriske by them that are superficial in Theory?


Carne: On my virtuous chastity and in verity, pregnant, prestigious,
superficial and pretty.


Orati: In many extraordinary remarkable energeticall lines, and
perfuncto^ie pamphlets both in ambiaexteritie and omnidexte^itie, together with
matters adiop^or all have I disbalased my mind, and not let slip the least
occasionet of advantage, to acq^aint the world with my pregnant propositions
and resolute Aphorisms.


Consili: That word Aphorisms, Greenes Exequutors may claim from him; for
while he lived, he had no goods nor chattles in commoner use than it.


Import: Away, away, I cannot be persuaded he would ever come forth with any
one of these balductum bastardly terms.


Respon: You cannot: then cannot I be persuaded that you cannot be persuaded;
since I have as much reason not to credit your bare assertion, where you say
you are persuaded it is not so, as you to distrust my deep vehement
protestatio^s, wherein I would persuade you it is so: but if none of these
persuasions or protestations may prevail with your incredulity, bring me to
the book if you please (the Doctors Book s^bintelligitur) and that will
soon resolve you.


Import: It shall not need, I believe thee, since thou standst in it so
seriously: yet I wonder thou ^etst not down in figures in the margent in what
line, page and folio, a man might find every one of these fragments which
would have much satisfied thy Readers.


Respon: What, make an Errata in the midst of my Book, and have my margent
bes^ratcht (like a Merchants book) with these roguish Arsemetrique gibbets or
flesh-hookes, and ciphers or round oos, like pismeeres eggs? Content your
self, I will never do it: or if I were ever minded to do it, I could not,
since (as I told you some few leaves before) in more than a quarter of that his
tumbrell of Confutation he has left the Pages vnfigured; foreseeing by
deuination (belike) that I should come to dis^igure them.


Consil: I warrant thee I, thou have figu'd him well enough as it is; and if
thou had tooken the pains of quotations or figures as he would have thee, I
doubt whether there be any would ever have bestowed so much pains to confer
or examine them.


Carnead: On forward good Piers Respo^dent with your Oration, for I am hungry
upon it; and with this I have heard already, my appetite is nothing stancht,
but rather whetted.


Respond: Bear wit^es my masters, if he dye of a surset, I cannot do
withal, it is his own seeking, not mine ^as long as I have it, I am no
niggard of i^, at all adventures I will set it before him.


Oration. Omitting (sicco pede) my encomiasticall Orations, and mercuriall and
martial discourses of the terr^bilitie of war, in the active and cheuatrous
vain, every way co^parable with the Caualcads of Bellerophon, or Don
Alpho^^sod' Aualos, my Seraphicall visions in Queen P^etrie, queint
theorickes, melancholy proiects, and pragmaticall discourses; whose beau-desert
and rich ^^onomie, the inspiredest Heliconists and Arch-patrons of our new
Omniscians, have not stickt to equipage with the ancient Quinquagenarians,
Centurions, and Chiliarkes: not withstanding all which Idees of monstrous
excellency, some smirking Singutarists, brag Reformists, and glicking
Remembrancers, ^not with the multiplying spirit of the Alchumist,) but the
villanist) seek to be masons of infinite contradiction; they (I say) with
their frumping Contras, tickling interiections, together with their vehement
incensiues and allectiues, as if they would be the only A per se a's, or great
A's of puissance, like Alexander, (whom yet some of our modern Worthies
disdain to have sceptred the est Amen of val^re) commensere doubtable
Monomachies against me, and the dead honn^ebee my brother.


Bentiu: A per se, con per se, tittle, est, Amen! Do thou not feel thy self
spoyld? why he comes upon thee (man) with a whole Horn-booke.


Import: what a supernatural Hibble de bean it is, to call his brother a dead
honnie-bee?


Consil: I laughd at nothing so much, as that word Arch-patrons. Go thy ways
thought I: thou art a Ciuilian, and may well fetch metaphors from the Arches,
but thou shall never fish any money from thence whilst thou live.


Carn: Troth I would he might for me (that is all the harm I wish him) for
then we need never wish the Plays at Powles up again, but if we were weary
with walking, and loath to go too far to seek sport, into the Arches we
might step, and hear him plead; which would be a merrier Comedy, than ever
was old Mother Bomby. As for an instance: suppose he were to solicit some
cause against Martinists, were it not a jest as right sterling as might be, to
see him stroke his beard thrice, and begin thus. Grave Heliconists, seraphicall
Omniscians, and the only Centurions, Quinquagenarians and chiliarks of our
time; may it please you to be advertised, how that certain sm^rking
singularists, brag Reformists, and glicking Remembrancers, not with the
^^^ltiplying spirit of the Alchumist but the villanist, have sought to be
Masons of infinite contradiction, and with their melancholy pro^ects, frumping
contras, tickling interiections, and vehement incensi^es and allectiues in all
pragmaticall terribilitie, commense redoubtable Monomachies against you, and
the beau-desert and: ^dees of of your encomiasticall Church go^ernment, and
partic^lar and peculiar ^^onomi^s. O we should have the Proctors and Registers
as busy with their Table-books as might be to gather phrases, and all the
boys in the Town would be his clients to follow him. Marry it were necessary
the Queens Decypherer should be one of the high Commissioners; for else
other-while he would blurt out such Brachmannicall fuldde-fubs, as no body
should be able to understand him.


Respon: You make too long gloses on the text, attend how it follows.


Oration. But Mercury sublimed is some-way a coy and stout fellow.


Ben: Very true, for it is a good medicine for the itch.


Oration. and spite as close a se^retarie as a scummer,


Canead: Secretary Spite and Secretary Scummer, give me your hands: I beseech
you, what Noblemen about Court do you belong too?


Oration. Resolution a forward mate, and Valor a brave man;


Bentiu: O brave man, will you buy a brave dog?


Oration. Impudency and Slander, two arrant vagabonds.


Carnead: I cry you mercy, I always took them for the two Brothers.


Oration. The world never such a Scogin as now, and the devil never such a
knave as now.


Bentiu: What a devil ails he to rail so upon a poor painful devil, that
dooes for him all he can?


Respond: Whist, silence on every hand, for here is the very S. Georges robes
of rhetorique, a speech that I have took up by the lump, as it lies in his
Book.


Oration. What Is the salvation of David Gorge? A Nullitie. What the
deification of H. N? A Nullitie. What the glorification of Ket? A Nullitie.
What the sanctification of Brown? A Nullitie. What the community of Barrow?
A Nullitie. What the plausibilitie of Martin? A Nullitie; yea and a woeful
Nullitie, and a piteous Nullitie.


Carnead: What a piteous noise like a spirit in a wall does he here make with
his Nullities? I should sure run out of my wits, if one should come to my
chamber door at midnight, with nothing but such a dismal note of A Nullitie,
a Nullitie.


Oration Nay, be you Load-stones to exhale what I say. Martin is a Guerra,
Brown a browne-bill, and Barrow a wheelbarrow; Ket a kight, H. N. an o. k. and
to conclude, as the Wheel was an ancient Hierogliphicke amongst the
Egyptians, so some tools are false Prophets.


Bentiu: That Is the cause we have so many bad workmen now a days: put up a
Bill against them next Parliament.


Import: But if he had said, many men have some tools that are little for
their profit, he had hit the mark somewhat nearer.


Oration. Judas the Gaulonite in the reign of Herod was a hot toast,


Carn: It cannot choose but the loved ale well then.


Oration. and present examples we have as hot as fresh, that he that has time
has life.


Consil: In good time be it spoken.


Import: A good admonition to Musitions to keep time with their instruments,
if they be desirous to live long.


Oration. Duke Allocer on his lusty cock-horse is a hot familiar,


Carnead: Let him but live in London half a year, and there be them that will
take him down and cool him, were he twice as hot.


Oration. and no such Art memoratiue as the crab-tree deske:


Consil: No; what say you to a crab-tree cudgel? if it were well husbanded
about his shoulders, I think it would make him remember it time enough.


Oration. for under correction of the art notorie be it spoken, enuic is a
soaking register, and mortal fewde the claw of an adamant.


Import: Has adamant such sharp claws? that makes it hold iron so fast when
it has it.


Respon: Hark, hark, how he praises Sir Philip Sidney.


Oration. Sweet Sir Philip Sidney, he was the Gentleman of courtesy, and the
very Esqu^re of industry?


Carnea: The Esquire of industry? O scabbed scald squire ( Scythian Gabriell)
as thou art, so underfoot to commend the cleerest myrrour of true Nobility.


Consil: What a mischief does he taking any man's name in his vlcerous mouth?
that being so festred and ranckled with barbarism, is able to rust and canker
it, were it never so resplendent.


Respon: In all his praises he is the most fore-spoken and unfortunate under
heaven, and those whom he seruentest strives to grace and honor, he most
dishonors and disgraceth by some uncircumcised fluttish epithi^e or other: and
even to talk treason he may be drawn unawares, and never have any such intent,
for want of discretion how to manage his words.


Bent: It is a common scoff amongst us, to call any foolish prodigal young
gallant, the gentleman or flower of courtesy* and (if it were well scand) I am
of the opinion, with the same purpose he did it to scoff and deride Sir
Philip Sidney, in calling him the Gentleman of courtesy, and the very Esquire
of industry.


Respond: Poor tame-witted silly Qu^rko, on my conscience I dare excuse him
he had never any such thought, but did it in as mere earnest, as ever in
commendation of himself and his brothers he writ these two verses, Singular
are these three, John, Richard Gabriel Haruy,

For Logique, Philosophy, Rhetorique, Astronomy. as also in like innocent well
meaning added he this that ensues.


Oration. His Entelechy was sine Greece, and the finest Tuscanisme in grain.
Although I could tickle him with a contrary president, where he casts
Tuscanisme, as a horrible crime in a Noble-mans teeth.


Carnead: Body of me, this is worse than all the rest, he sets forth Sir
Philip Sidney in the very style of a Diers Sign. As if he should have said:

HERE WITHIN THIS PLACE IS ONE THAT DIES ALL KIND OF ENTELECHY IN FINE
GREECE, AND THE FINEST TVSCANISMEIN GRAIN THAT MAY BE, OR ANY COLOVR ELSE YE
WOULD DESIRE. AND SO GOD SAVE THE QVEENE.


Bentiu: More Copy, more Copy; we leese a great deal of time for want of
Text.


Imp: Apace, out with it; and let us nere stand pausing or looking about, since
we are thus far onward.


Oration. But some had rather be a pol-cat with a stinking stir, than a
Muske-cat with gracious favor.


Bentiu: I smell him, I smell him: the wrongs that thou have offered him are so
intolerable, as they would make a Cat speak; therefore look to it Nashe, for
with one Pol-cat perfume or another he will poison thee, if he be not able to
answer thee.


Carnead: Pol-cat and Musk cat? there wants but a Cat a mountain, and then
there would be old scratching.


Be^tiu: I but not only no ordinary Cat, but a Muske-cat; and not only a
Musk cat, but a Muskecat with gracious favor (which sounds like a Princes
style Dei gratia): not Tibeult or Isegrim Prince of Cattes, were ever endowed
with the like Title.


Respon: Since you can make so much of a little, you shall have more of it.


Oration. To utter the entrayles of a spheri^all heart in few sillables, Musk
is a sweet curtezan, and sugar and h^ncy dainty hipocrytes.


Bentiu: O sweeter and sweeter, some body lend me a hand kercher, that I may
carry some home in my pocket for my little God-sonne.


Carnead: Madame Musk, if you be a curtezan (as the Doctor informs us), sure
you have dressed a number of my friends sweetly, have you not? But you were never
otherwise like, for man's apparaile and woman's apparaile, all was one to you;
and some mystery there was in it, that they always cride, Foh, what a stink
is here? and stopped their noses when you came near them. For your worships,
Master Sugar and Master Honey, (be you likewise such dainty hipocr^tes as he
gives testimony) I doubt not but at one time or other we shall taste you.


Respond: Stay, let me look upon it: I it is the same, right Isenborough good,
or never trust me. A speech or sudden exclamation, which after he had been in
a deadly sound for six or seven hours (upon what fear-procured sickness I
leave you to imagine) was the first words upon his reviving he uttered.


Oration. O Humanity my Lullius, and Divinity my Paracelsus.


Consil: As much to say, as all the humanity he has, is gathered out of
Lullius, and all his divinity or religion out of Paracelsus.


Carnead: Let him call upon Kelly, who is better than them both; and for the
spirits and souls of the ancient Alchumists, he has them so close emprisoned
in the fiery purgatory of his furnace, that for the wealth of the King of
Spaines Indies, it is not possible to release or get the third part of a nit of
any one of them, to help any but himself.


Import: Whether you call his fire Purgatory or no, the fire of Alchumie has
wrought such a purgation or purgatory in a great number of men's purses in
England, that it has clean fired the^ out of al they have.


Respond: Therefore our Doctor (very well here toward the latter end of his
Oration) comes in with a cooling card.


Oration. Cordially I could wish, that the pelting horn of these sturres
(according to the foeciall law) were rebated, whereby our populars might taste
of some more plausible Panegericall Orations, fine Theurgie, and profound
essential God-full arguments.


Carnead: Soft, ere I go any further, I care not if I draw out my purse, and
change some odd pieces of old English for new coin; but it is no matter,
upon the Return from Guiana, the valuation of them may alter, and that which
is current now be then copper. Only this word God-full goes with me, if it be
but to court a widow in Christ, or holy sister of ours with, that wears Thy
spirit be with us, for the posie of her ring.


Oration. But the art of figs had ever a dappert wit, and a deft conceit,
Saint Fame give him joy of his black cole and his white chalk.


Consil: Saint Fame is one of the notorious nickenames he gives thee, as also
under the art of figs (to cleave him from the crown to the waste with a
quip) he shadows Master Lilly: but if between you you do not so chalk him
up for a Crimme and Maniquenbecke, and draw him in cole more artificially than
the face in cole that Michaell Angelo and Raphaell Vrbin went to buffets about,
I would you might be cole carriers or pioners in a cole-pit, whiles colliers
ride upon collimol cuts, or there be any reprisalls of purses twixt this and
Cole-brooke.


Respond: Pacify your conscience, and leave your imprecations, we will bear
no coals, never fear you. As for him (whom so artlesse and against the hair
of any similitude or coherence) he calls the art of figs, he shall not
need long to call for his figs, for he will be choakt soon enough with them;
they having line ripe by him ready gathered (wanting nothing but pressing)
any time this twelve month. For my own proper person, if I do not (in
requital of S. Fame) ensaint and canonize him for the famousest Paliard and
Senior Penaquila, that has breathed since the reign of S. Tor, let all the
droppings of my pen be seized upon by the Queens Takers for Tar to dress
ships with. I tarry too tristing superfluously in the twittle cum-twattles of
his Text: take it with a wennion altogether, if you will have it.


Oration. Embellishtly I can resolve them, here they shall not meet with
chalk for cheese; and though some drink oil of pricks for a restorati^e,
they shall have much adoo to void sirrupe of Roses: for it is not every man's
blab that casts a sheep eye out of a calves head, and for ought I know, I see
no reason why the Wheel wright may not be as honest a man and pregnant
m^echanic^ an as the Cutler, the Cutler as the Drawer, the Drawer as the
Cutter, and the Writer as the Printer. And so I recommend every one and them
all to your courtesies. Your mindful debtor, Gabriell Haruey.


Thou have oppressed us with an Inundation of Biscanisme; Biscanism the most
ba^barous Spanish, cue as the Northren tung of the English.
and though we would saine have made him stand in a white sheet for his baudie
oil of pricks, (a common receipt for the green sickness); as also examind his
sirrupe of roses, wherein Rose Flowers is best experimented, yet time and tide
(that stays for no man) forbids us to tire any more on this carrion, being
more than glutted with it already.


Bentiu: But yet to giu^ him this one comfort at the parting, it had not been
amiss, that whereas he stands in such fear of ca^^ing his sheeps eye out of
his calves head, thou never meantst it, but if it were an oxes he should still
keep it, and rather thou would enlarge it than empayre it.


Respond: I, make it up a pair (I swear) rather than he should be
unprovided. Responde breuiter Senior Importune, have not I comprehended all the
Doctors works bravely, like Homers I liads in the compass of a nut-shell? Now
where be our honorable Caualiers, that keep such a prating and a gabrill about
our Gabriell and his admirable style, (nothing so good as Littletons with his
John a Nokes and John a Styles) let them look to it I would advise them, for the
course they take in commending this course Himpenhempen Slampamp, this stale
Apple-squire Cockledemoy; who some 18, years since, when these Italionate
carnation painted horse tails were in fashion, in self same sort was a bout
(if his chamber fellow had not ouer-rulde him) to have seutchaneled and painted
his pickerdeuant, to make it trauer like antic: ^this iadish course, this
iauel^ course, this drumbling course, this dry braind course, if you persevere
and insist in, and on the top of asses buskind ears, thus labor to build
trophies of their praise, canonizing every Bel-shangles the water-bearer for a
Saint, and the contemptiblest worlds dish-cloute for a Relic; inspiredly I
prophecy, your ends will be Ale and Shorditch, that all preferment and good
spirits will abandon you: and more, (to plague you for your apostata conceits)
ballets shall be made of your base deaths, even as there was of Cutting Ball.


Consil: Ho Ball, ho; in the name of God, whether will thou?


Respond: To Saffron-walden as fast as I can, though I go a little way about.


Import: Unfortunate Gabriell, I am sorry for him, for he has been a man of
good parts.


Respond: Good parts? I Will name you one of seven times better parts than he,
whom you and I and every one here, have known from our childhood.


Import: Who is that?


Respond: In Speech with his eight Parts. But without further speech, that you
may throghly be resolved what those good parts are you enable the Doctor for,
here have I set down his whole life from his infancy to this present 96, eue^
as they use in the beginning of a Book to set down the life of any memorable
ancient Author. Dispense with it though it drink some inck, or prodigally
dispend many Pages, that might have been better employed; for if it yield you
not sport for your money, at the same price shall you buy me for your
bond-slaue, that my Book costs you.


Carnead: On that condition, we will make thee a lease of our attention for
three lives and a half, or a hundred lacking one.


The life and godly education from his childhood of that thrice famous clarke,
and morthie Orator and Poet Gabriell Haruey.
GAbriell Haruey, of the age of forty eight or upwards, ( Turpe senex miles,
it is time for such an old fool to leave playing the swash-buckler) was borne
at Saffron walden, none of the obscurest Towns in Essex. For his parentage, I
will say as P^lidore Virgill says of Cardinal Wolsey, Parentem habuit v^rum
probum, at lanium, he had a reasonable honest man to his father, but he was a
butcher; so Gabriell Haruey had one Good Man Haruey to his ^ather, a true
subject, that paid scot and lot in the Parish where he dwelt, with the best of
them, but yet he was a Ropemaker: Id quod reminisci nolebat (as Polidore goes
forward) vt rem utique persona illius indignam, that which is death to Gabriell
to remember, as a matter every way derogatorie to his person, quare secum
totos dies cogit abat, qualis esset, non vnde esset; wherefore, from time to
time he does nothing but turmoile his thoghts how to raise his estate, and
invent new petegrees, and what great Noble-mans bastard he was likely to be,
not whose son he is reputed to be.

Consil: Give me leave before thou readst any further. I would not wish thee so
to vpbraid him with his birth, which if he could remedy it were another
matter: but it is his Fortune and Natures, and neither his fathers fault nor
his.


Resp^^d: Neither as his fathers nor his fault do I urge (...), otherwise than
it is his fault to bear himself too arrogantly above his birth, and to
contemn and forget the house from whence he came; which is the reason that
has induced me (as well in this Treat^se as my former Writings) to remember
him of it, not as any such heinous discredit simply of it selse, if his (...)
pride were not; (...) Namo genus and pronaues, and quae non secim^^ (...) It is
no true glory of ours what our forefathers did, no^ are we to answer for
any sins of theirs. Demosthenes was the son of a Cutler, Socrates of a
Midwife; which detracted neither from the ones eloquence, nor the others
wisdom: (far be it that either in eloquence or wisdom I should compare
G^briell to either of them) Marry for (...) or Socrates to be ashamed or take
it in high d^ri^^ (which they never did) the one to be said to have a Cutler to
his father; or the other that he had a Midwife to his mother (as H^r^ey does
to have himself or any of his brothers called the sons of a Rope maker,
which by his own private confession to some of my friends, was the only thing
that most set him a fire against me): I will ^^stify it, might argue the^ or
him more inferio^ and despicable, than any Cutler, Midwife, or Rope maker.
Turn over his two books he has published against me, (where on he has clapped
paper Gods p^entie, if that would press a man to death) and see if in the way
of answer or otherwise he once mention the word ropemaker, or come within
forty foot of it: except in one place of his first book where he names it
not neither, but goes thus cleanly to work, (as her^tofore I have set down)
though he (...) no room in the expense of 36. Sheets of (...) to resute it.
And may (...) his father? (a Periphrasis of a Rope maker, which (if should
shryue my self) ^ never heard before). This is once, I have given him cause
enough I wot (...) have stumbled (...), and take (...) of it; for where in his
first bo^^^ hee^ (...) beggar in my dish (...) third syllable, and so like an
Emperor triump^s over me, as though he had the Philosophers Stone to play at
foot bal with, and I were a poor Alchumist new^ (...), that had s^arce money
to buy (...) for my furnace. In kind g^er don and requital, h^olde him in
Piers (...) That be (...) (like the (...) for he was but the son of a
Rope-maker; (...) would not ^ave a shoo to put on his feet if his father' had
(...). And in another place, where he brought the Town Seal or next Justices
where he brought the Town Seal or next I (...) hands (as it were) to witness*
that his father was an honest man; which no man denide or impaired any
surther, than saying, (...) which is more, three proud sons, that when they
met the hang man (their fathers best (...) stomer) would not put off their
hatts to him; with other by glances, to the like effect: which he silently
ouer-skippeth, to withdraw men (lapwing like) from his neast, as much as might
be. Only he tells a foolish twittle twattle boasting tale, (amidst his
impudent brazen-faced defamation of Doctor (...)) of the Funeral of his
kinsman Sir Tho^^^ Smith, (which word kinsman, I wonderd he causd not to be set
in great capital letters), and how in those Obsequies he was a chief Mourner.
I wis his father was of a more humble spirit; who in grateful lieu and
remembrance of the hempen mystery that he was beholding too, and the patrons
and places that were his trades chief maintainers and supporters, proui^ded
that the first letter each of his sons names began with, should allude and
correspond with the chrese marts of his traffic, and of his profession and
occupation* as Gabriell his eldest sons name, beginning with a G. for
Gallows, John with an I. for Iayle, Richard with an R. for Rope-maker; as much
to say, as all his whole living depended on the Iayle, the Gallows, and making
of Ropes. Another brother there is, whose name I have forgot, though I am sure
it iumpes with this Alphabet. Iumpe or jar they with me as they see cause,
this counsel (if the ease were mine) I would give them, not to be daunted or
blancket any whit, had they ten hundred thousand legions of hang^^^ (...) or
per collum pe^dere debes to their fathers, and any should twit them or gaul
them with it never so: but as Agathocles coming from a durt^kneading Potter to
be a King, would (in memory of that his first vocation) be served ever after,
as well in earthen dishes, as sumptuous royal plate; so, had they but one
royal of plate or six penny piece amongst them, they should plat (what ever
their other cheer were) to have a salt eele in resemblance of a ropes end,
continuallye served in to their tables; or if they were not able to be at such
charges, let them cast but for a two-penny rope of onions every day to be
brought in, in stead of fruit for a closing up of their stomachs. It cannot
do amiss, it will remember them they are mortal, and whence they came, and
whether they are to go. Were I a Lord (I make the Lord God a vow) and were but
the least a kin to this breath strangling lineage, I would wear a chain of
pearl brayded with a halter, to let the world see I held it in no disgrace,
but high glory to be descended howsoever: and as amongst the ancient
Aegipt^ans (as Massarisus de ponderibus writes) there was an Instrument called
Funiculus, containing 60. surlongs, wherewith they measured their fields and
their vine yards; so from the plough harness to the slender hempen twist that
they bind up their vines with, would I branch my al^iance, and omit nothing in
the praise of it, except those two notable blemishes of the trade of
rope-makers, Achitophel and I^das, that were the first that ever hanged
themselves.


Bentiu: Thereto the Rope-makers were but accidentally accessarie, as any
honest man may be, that lends a halter to a thief, wherewith (unwitting to
him) he goes and steals a horse: wherefore, how ever (after a sort) they may
be said to have their hands in the effect, yet they are free and innocent from
the cause.


Respond: As though the cause and the effect (more than the superficies and the
substance) can be separated, when in many things, causa sine qua non is both
the cause and the effect, the common distinction of potentia non actu approving
it self very crazed and impotent herein, since the premises necessarily
beget the conclusion, and so contradictorily the conclusion the premises; a
ha^ter including desperation, and so desperation concluding in a halter;
without which fatal conclusion and privation, it cannot truly be termed
desperation, since nothing is said to be, till it is borne* and despair is
never fully borne, till it cease to be, and has deprived him of being,
that first bare it and brought it forth. So that herein it is hard to
distinguish which is most to be blamed of the cause or the effect; the Cause
without the effect being of no effect, and the effect without the cause never
able to have been. Such another pair of indiscernable twins and mutual
married correllatiues are Nature and Fortune. As for example; If it be any man's
fortune to hang himself and abridg his natural life, it is likewise natural
to him (or allotted him by Nature) to have no better fortune.


Carnead: Better or worse fortune, I pry thee let us hear kow thou go
forward with describing the Doctor and his life and fortunes: and you my fellow
Auditors, I beseech you trouble him not (any more) with these impertinent
Parentheses.


Respond: His education I will handle next, wherein he ran through Didimus or
Diomedes 6000. books of the Art of Grammar, besides learnd to write a fair
capital Roman hand, that might well serve for a boone-grace, to such men as
ride with their face toward the horse tail, or set on the pillory for
cousnage or perjury. Many a copyholder or magistrall scribe, that holds all
his living by setting school-boies copies, comes short of the like gift. An old
Doctor of Oxford snewd me Latin verses of his, in that flourishing
flantitanting goutie Omega fi^t, which he presented unto him (as a bribe) to
get leave to play, when he was in the height or prime of his Puer es cupis at
que doceri. A good quality or qualification I promise you truly, to keep him
out of the danger of the Statute against wilful vagabonds, rogues and beggars.
But in his Grammar years, (take me thus far with you) he was a very
graceless litigious youth, and one that would pick quarrels with old Gulielmus
Lillies Sintaxis and Pr^sodia, ^ucrie hour of the day. A desperate stabber
with pen-kniues, and whom he could not overcome in disputation, he would be
sure to break his head with his pen and ink-horne. His father prophecyde by
that his ventrus manhood and valor, he would prove an other S. Thomas a Becket
for the Church. But his mother doubted him much, by reason of certain strange
dreams she had when she was first quick with child of him; which well she
hoped were but idle swimming fancies of no consequence: till being aduisde by a
cunning man (her friend, that was very far in her books) one time she slept
in a sheep skin all night, to the intent to dream true, another time under
a laurel tree, a third time on the bare ground stark naked, and last on a
dead man's tomb or grave stone in the church in a hot Summers afternoon: when
no barrel better herring, she sped even as she did before. For first she
dreamed her womb was turned to such another hollow vessel full of disquiet
fiends, as Salomons brazen Bowl, wherein were shut so many thousands of
devils; which (deep hidden under ground) long after the Babilonians (digging
for metals) chanced to light upon, and mistaking it for treasure, brake it
open very greedily, when as out of Pandor as Box of maladyes which Ep^metheus
opened, all manner of evils flewe into the world; so all manner of devils
then broke loose amongst humane kind. Therein her drowsy divination not much
dece^i'd her: for never were Empedocles devils so tossed from the air into the
sea, and from the sea to the earth, and from the earth to the air again
exhaled by the Sun, or driu'n up by winds and tempests, as his discontented
poverty (more disquiet than the Irish seas) has driu'n him from one
profession to another. Deuinitie (the Heaven of all Arts) for a while drew his
thoughts unto it, but shortly after the^ world the flesh and the devil
with-drewe him from that, and needs he would be of a more Gentleman-like
lusty cut; whereupon he fell to morrall Epistling and Poetry. He sell I may
well say, and made the price of wit and Poetry fall with him, when he first
began to be a sripler or broker in that trade. Yea, from the air he fell to
the sea, (that my comparison may hold in every point) which is* he would needs
cross the seas to fetch home two penniworth of Tuscanisme: from the sea to the
earth again he was toft, videlicet shortly after he became a roguish
Commenter upon earth quakes, as by the ^amous Epistles (by his own mouth
only made famous) may more largely appear. Vltimalinea rerum, his final
entrancing from the earth to the skies, was his key cold desence of the
Clergy in the Tractate of Pa^-hatchet, intermingled like a small Fleet of
Galleys, in the huge Armada against me. The second dream his mother had, was
that she was deliued of a caliuer or hand-gun, which in the discharging burst.
I pray God (with all my heart) that this caliuer or caualier of Poetry, this
hand gun or elder-gun that shoots nothing but pellets of chewd paper, in the
discharging burst not. A third time in her sleep she apprehended and imagined,
that out of her belly there grew a rare garden bed, ouer-run with garish weeds
inn^merable, which had only one slip in it of herb of grace, not budding at
the top neither, but like the flower Narcissus, having flowers only at the
root; whereby she augur'd and coniectur'd, how ever he made some show of
grace in his youth, when he came to the top or height of his best proof, he
would be found a barrain stalk without fruit. At the same time (over and
above) she thought that in stead of a boy, (which she desired) she was
deliuerd and brought to bed of one of these kistrell birds, called a
wind-fucker. Whether it be verisiable or only probably surmised, I am
uncertain, but constantly up and down it is bruted, how he pist incke as
soon as ever he was borne, and that the first cloute he fowld, was a sheet
of paper; whence some mad wits given to descant, even as Herodotus held, that
the A^thiopians seed of generation was as black as ink, so happily they
unhappily would conclude, an Incubus in the likeness of an inke-bottle, had
carnal copulation with his mother when he was begotten. Should I reckon up
but one half of the miracles of his conception, that very substantially have
been affirmed unto me; one or other like Bodine would start up and tax me for
a miracle-monger, as he taxt Li^y, saying that he talked of nothing else, save
how oxen spoke, of the flames of fire that issued out of the Scipioes heads, of
the Statues of the Gods that swet, how I upiter in the likeness of a child or
yong-man appeared to Hanniball, and that an Infant of six months old
proclaimed triumph up and down the streets. But let him that has the poison
of a thousand Gorgons or stinging Basi^iskes full crammed in his inke-horne,
tamper with me, or tax me in the way of contradiction never so little, and
he shall find (if I find him not a toad, worthy for naught but to be stamped
under foot) that I will spit fire for fire, fight devil fight dragon, as long
as he will. No vulgar respects have I, what Hoppenny Hoe and his fellow Hankin
Booby think of me, so those whom Art has adopted for the peculiar Plants of
her Academie, and refined from the dull Northernly dross of our Clyme, hold
me in any tolerable account.


The wonders of my great Grand father Har^eys Progeniture, were these.

In the very moment of his birth, there was a calse borne in the ^^me Town
with a dubble tongue, and having ^ares far longer than any ass, and his
seete ^urned backward like certain people of the Tartars, that nevertheless are
reasonable swift.

In the hour of his birth there was a most darksome Eclipse, as though hell and
heaven about a consultation of an eternal league had met together.

Those that calculated his nati^itie said, that Saturn and the Moon (either
of which is the causer of madness) were melancholy conioynd together
(contrary to all course of Astronomy) when into the world he was produced.
About his lips, even as about Dions ship, there flocked a swarm of waspes, as
soon as ever he was laid in his cradles. Scarce nine years of age he attaind
too, when by engrossing al ballets that came to any Market or Fair
there-abouts, he aspired to be as desperate a ballet maker as the best of
them. The first fruits of his Poetry, being a pitiful Dittie in lamentation
of the death of a Fellow, that at Queen Mary's coronation, came downward with
his head on a rope from the Spyre of Powles steeple, and brake his neck.
Afterward he exercised to write certain graces in ryme dogrell, and verses
upon every Month, many of which are yet extant in Primers and Almanackes.
His father with the extreme joy of his towardness wept infinitely, and
prophecide he was too forward witted to live long. His Schoolmasters never
heard him peirse or conster, but he cryde out, O acumen Carneadum! O decus
addite diuis! and swore by Susenbrotus and Taleus, that he would prove another
Philo Iudeus for knowledge and deep judgment, who in Philosophy was preferred
above Plato; and be a more rare Exchequer of the Muses, than rich Gaza was for
wealth; which took his name of Cambyses laying all his Treasure there, when
he went to make war against Aegipt.

By this time imagine him rotten ripe for the University, and that he carries
the poake for a mess of porredge in Christ's College: which I do not vpbraid
him with, as any disparagement at a^l, since it is a thing euetie one that is
Scholar of the House, is ordinarily subject unto by turns, but only. I
thrust it in for a Periphrasis of his admission or ma^riculation. I am sure you
will be glad to hear well of him, since he is a youth of some hope, and you
have been partly acquainted with his bringing up.

In sadness I would be loath to discourage ye, but yet in truth (as truth is
truth, and will out at one time or other, and shame the devil) the coppie of
his Tutors Letter to his father I will show you, about his carriage and
demeanor; and yet I will not positiuely affirm it his Tutors Letter neither,
and yet you may gather more than I am willing to utter, and what you list not
believe, refer to after Ages, even as Paul^^ Iouius did in his lying praises
of the House of Medices, or the importunate Dialogue twixt Charles the fifth
and him, of Expedire te op^rtet, and parare calames: or his tempestuous
thunderbolt Inuectiue against Seli^us.

The Letter of Harueys Tutor to his Father, as touching his manners and
behauior.
Emanuell. SIr, Grace and peace unto you premised. So it is, that your son
you have committed to my charge, is of a passing forward carriage and profits
very soundly.


(...): That is, bears himself very forward on his tip-toes, (as he did ever)
and profits or battles soundly, and is a youth of a good size.


Letter.
Great expectation we have of him, that be will prove a^ other Co^ax or
Lacedemonian Cres^phon for Rheth^riq^e, (...) was (...) because he vaunted he
could talk (...) day of a^ie thing.


Benti: I would our Gurm^ Hidruntum, were like wise banished with him, for he
can hotch-potch whole Decades up of nothing, and talks idly all his life time.


Letter.
and not much infer^our to Demo^henes, Aeschines, Demades, or the mel^dious
recording Muse of Italy, Cornelius Musa, Bishop of Bitonto, or the yet living
mellisluous Pancarola, who is said to cast out spirits by his powerful divine
eloquence.


Carnead: The spirit of foolery out of this Archibald Rupenrope he shall never
be able to cast, were the Ne^tar of his eloquence a thousand times more
superabundant incessant sourding.


Letter.
When I record (as I do often) the strange vntraffiqu't phrases, by him new
vented and vnpackt, as if incendatie for fire, an illuminarie for a candle and
lant-horne, an indument for a cloak, an under foot abject for a shoe or a
bo^te; then I am ready (with Erasmus) to cry, Sancte Socrates; or (with
Ari^totle) Ens entium miserere mei! what an ingeny is here? O his conce^pt is
most delicate, and that right well he apprehends, having atreadie proposed
high matters for it to work on. For stealing into his Study by chance the
other day, there I found diverse E^istles and Orations, purposely directed and
prepared, as if he had been Secretary to her Majesty for the Latin tongue;
or against such a place should fall, he would be sure not to be unprovided: as
also he had furnished himself (as if he made no question to be the Vntuersitie
Orator) for all Congratulations, Funeral Elegiacall condolments of the death
of such and such a Doct^r in Cambridge; and which is more, of every P^i^y
Counsailour in England. T^^ are no Scholar, and therefore little know what
belongs to it, but if you heard him how sacredly he ends enerie sentence with
esse posse videatur, you would (like those that arrive in the Phillipinas,
oppressed with sweet odors) forget you are most all, and imagine your self no
where but in Paradise. Some there be (I am not ignorant) that upon his often
bringing it in at the end of every period, call him by no other name, but esse
posse videatur: but they are such, as were never endenizond in so much art, as
Similiter Desinens; and know not the true use of Numerus Rhetoricus. So upon
his first manumission in the mystery of Logique, because he observed Ergo was
the deadly clap of the p^ece, or driu'n home stab of the Syll^gisme, he
accustomed to make it the Faburden to any thing he spoke; As if any of his
companions complained he was hungry, he would straight conclude Ergo you
must go to dinner; or if the clock had stroke or bell towld, Ergo you must
go to such a Lecture; or if any stranger said he came to seek such a one,
and desired him he would show him which was his chamber, he would forthwith
come upon him with Ergo he must go up such a pair of stairs: whereupon (for a
great while) he was called nothing but Gabriell Ergo up and down the College.
But a scoff which longer dwelt with him than the rest, though it argued his
extreme pregnancie of capa^^tie, and argute transper sing dexterity of
Paradoxisme; was that once he would needs defend a Rat to be Animal rationale,
that is, to have as reasonable a soul as a^ie Aca^e^ick, because she eat and
gnawd his books, and except she carried a brai^e with her, she could never
digest or be so capable of learning. And the more to confirm it, (...) e^erie
(...) laughed at him for a c^mmon Mountebanke bank Rat-ca^cher about it; the
next rat he seazd on he^ made an Anatomy of, and read a lect^re of ^. days
long upon e^erie artire or musckle in her, and after hanged her oner his head in
his study, in stead of an Apothecaries Crocodile, or dride Alligatur. I have
not yet mentiond his Poetry, wherein he furmounteth and dismounteth the most
her ^ycallest Countes Mountes of that Craft; ^auing writ verses in all kinds,
as in form of a pair of gloves, a dozen of points, a pair of spectacles, a
two hand sword, a poy^ado, a Colossus, a Pyramide, a Painters eazill, a
market-crosse, a trumpet, an anchor, a pair of potbookes; yet I can see ^o
Authors he has, more than his own nature all Genius or Minerua, except it be
Have with ye to Florida, The story of Axeres and the worthy Iphijs, As I went
to Walsingham, and In Creete when Dedalus, a song that is to him food from
heaven, and more transporting and raushing, than Platoes Discourse of the
immortalit^e of the soul was to Cato, who with the very joy he conceiud from
rreading thereof, would needs let out his soul, and so stabd himself. Abou
Homers or all men's works who soever he does prize it, laying it under his
pillow (like Homers works) every night and carrying it in his bosom (next his
heart) euer^e day. From the general Discourse of his virtues, let me
digress, and inform you of some few fragments of his vices; as like a Church
and an alehouse, God and the d^^ well they many times dwell near together.
Memorandum, his laundresse complains of him that he is mi^htie fleshly given,
and that there had lewd^es past betwixt her daughter and him, if she had not
lu^kely prevented it by searching her daughters pocket, wherein she found a
(...) Bradfords Meditations no bro^der volu^'d than a Scale at Arms, or a
black melancholy velvet patch, and a three-pennie pamphlet of The Fall of man
he had bestowed on her, that he might ^^ow her under hatches in his study, and
do what be w^ld with her. In awast white l^afe of one of which books, he had
writ for his sentence or posie, Nox and amor, as much to say, as O for a pretty
wench in the dark; and underneath, Non sunt sine viribus artus, If thou comst
old l^sse, I will (...) thee: and in the other, Leave fit qu^d been f^rtur onus,
that is, we must bear with one another, and Foelices quibus vsus adest, use in
all things makes perfect. Secondly he is beyond all reason or Gods forbod
distractedly enamourd of his own beauty, spending a whole forenoone* ^uerie
day in spunging and licking himself by the glass; and uses cuerse night
after supper to walk on the market hill to show himself, holding his gown up
to his middle, that the wenches may see what a fine leg and a dainty foot he
has in pumpes and pantoffles, and if they give him never so little an amorous
regard, he presently boords them with a set speech of the first gathering
together of societies, and the distinction of amor and amicitia out of Tullies
Offices; which if it work no effect, and they laugh at, he will rather take a
raifon of the sun, and wear it at his ear for a favor, than it should be
said he would go away empty. Thirdly, he is very seditious and (...) in
conversation, picking quarrels with every man that will not magnify and
applaud him; libelling most execrably and inhumanely on Jack of the Falcon,
for that he would not lend him a mess of mustard to his red herrings; yen for
a lesser matter than that on the College dog (...), only because he proudly
bare up his tail as he past by him. And fourthly and lastly he uses often to
be drunk with the firrupe or br^th of ^^ewd prunes, and e^teth more bread under
pretense of swearing by it, than would serve a whole Band in the Low Countries.
These are the least part of his venial sins, but I forbear him, and proceed
no further, because I love him: only I would wish you (being his father) at any
hand to warn him of these matters privately betwixt him and you, and again
and again cry out upon him to beware of pride; which I more than fatally
prophecy will be his utter ouer-throw.

Yours assuredly, and so forth, Johannes fine nomine, Anno Domini, what ye
will.


Carnead: What is your censure, you that be of the common counsel, may this
Epistle pass or no without a demurre or prouiso?


Consil: Pass in the way of pastime, and so forth; it being no indecorum at
all to the Comedy we have in hand to admit Piers himself for his Tutor, for
if he proceed in the severe discipline he has begun, he is like to humble him,
and bring him to more goodness, than any Tutor or Master he ever had since he
was borne


Life. Leaving his childhood, which has leave or a law of privilege to be
fond; and to come to the first prime of his pamphleting, which was much about
the setting up of the Bull by Felton on the Bishop of Londons gate or rather
some pretty while before; when for an aslay or nice tasting of his pen, he
capitulated on the births of monsters, horrible murders, and great burnings:
and afterward in the year when the earthquake was he fell to be a familiar
Epistler, and made Powles Churchyard resound or cry twang again with four
notable famous Letters: in one of which he enterlaced his short but yet sharp
judicial of Earthquakes, and came very short and sharp upon my Lord of
Oxford, in a r^tling bund^e of Eng^i^h Hexameters. How that thriu'd with him,
some honest Chronicler help me to remember, for it is not comprehended in my
brains Diarie or Ephemerides: but this I can justify, that immediately upon
it, he became a common writer of Almanackes. It Is marvel if some of you
amongst your insatiable ouerturning of Libraries, have not stumbled on such an
approved architect of Calenders, as Gabriel Friend the Progno^ticator. That
Friend I not a little suspect (if a man should take occasion to try his Friend)
would be found to be no Friend, but my constant approved mortal enemy
Gabriell Haruey Well, I may say to you, it is a difficult rare thing in these
days to find a true Friend. But the probable reasons which drive me to
conjecture that it is a false Friend which deludes us with these durtie
astronomicall predictions, and that Gabriell Ha^uey is this Friend in a corner,
which no man knows of, be these that follow. First, he has been noted in
many companies where he has been, very suspitiously to undermine, whither
any man knew such a fellow as Gabriell Friend the Progno^ticator or no? or
whether they ever heard of any that ever saw him or knew him? Wheretoo, when
they all answered with one voice, not guilty to the seeing, hearing or
understanding of any such Starry Noune Substantive; up starts me he (like a
proud schoolmaster, when one of his Boys has made an Oration before a
country Mayor that has pleased) and bites the lip, and winkes and smiles
privily, and looks pertly upon it, ^ who should say, (...) quem querit is
a^s^m: and after some little coy bridling of the chi^, and nice simpr^ng and
wrything his face; o ways, tells them flatly that upon his credit and
knowledge (both which are hardly worth a candles end to help him to bed with)
there is no such Quartermaster, ^r master of the 4. Quarters, or Writer in
read letters, as that supposed flower of Frend-ly courtesy, Gabriell Friend the
Prognosticator; but to use plain dealing amongst friends, a friend of his it is
he must co^ceale, who thought good to shroud himself under that title. Now if
ye will allow of my verdit in this behalf, I hold vnusquisque proximus ipse
sibi, every man is the best Friend to himself, and that he himself and no other,
is that Friend of his he must conceal. The 2. argument that confirms me in
this strong article of my creed, is, for none is privy to a blank maintenance
he has, and some maintenance of necessity he must have, or else how can he
maintain his peak in true christendom of rose water every morning? By the
civil law peradventure you will allege he ^etches it in: nay therein ye are
deceiud, for he has no law for that. I will not deny but his mother may have
su'd in forma pauperis, but he never solicited in form of papers in the Arches
in his li^e. How then, does he fetch it aloft with his poetry? Dii faciant
laudis summa fit ista suae. I pray God he never have better lands or living
till he die. Shall I discharge my conscience, being no more than (on my soul)
is most true, the Printers and Stationers use him as he were the Homer of this
age, for they say unto him, Si nihil attuleris, ibis Homere for as, Haruey if ye
bring no money in your purse ye get no books printed here. Even for the printing
of this logger-head Legend of lies, which now I am wrapping up hot spices in,
he ran in debt with Wolf the Printer 36. pound and a blue coat which he
borrowed for his man, and yet Wolf did not so much as brush it when he lent
it him, or press out the print where the badge had been. The Story at large a
leaf or two hence you shall hear. The last refuge and sanctuary for his
exhibition (after his lands, law and poetry are confiscated) is to presume he
has some privy benefactors or patrons that hold him up by the chin. What he
has had of late, my intelligence fails me, but for a number of years past, I
dare confidently depose, not a bit nor cue of any benefactor or patron he had,
except the Butler or Manciple of Trinity Hall (which are both one) that
trusted him for his commons and sizing; so that when I have toyled the utmost
that I can to save his credit and honesty, the best wit craft I can turn him
too to get three pence a week, and keep the paper soales and upper leather of
his pantoffles together, is to write Prognostications and Almanackes; and that
alone has been and must be his best Philosophers Stone till his last destiny.

I was sure, I was sure at one time or other I should take him napping. O
eternal ieft (for Gods sake help me to laugh): What, a grave Doctor, a base
John Doleta the Almanack-maker, Doctor Deuse-ace and Doctor Mery-man? Why from
this day to proceed, I Will never go into Powles Churchyard to enquire for any
of his works, but (where ever I come) look for them behind the door, or on
the backe-side of a screene, (where Almanackes are set usually) or at Barbers
or Chandlers shop ^euer to miss of them. A maker of Almanackes quoth a, God
forgive me, they are readier money than Ale and cakes, and are m^re familiar
read than Tullies ^amiliar Epistles, or the Discourse of Debtor and Creditor,
especially of those that ordinary write Letters, or have often occasion to pay
money. They are the very Di^lls of days, the Suns ghesses; and the Moons
months-mind. Here in London streets if a man have business to enquire for any
body, and he is not well acquainted with the place, he goes filthely
halpering, and asking cap in hand from one shop to another, where is such a
house and such a sign? But if we have business to speak with any in the sky,
buy but one of Gabriell Friend or Gabriell Harueys Almanacks, and you shall
carry the sign and house in your pockets, whether Jupiters house, Saturnes
house, Mars his house Venus house, or any hot-house or baudy house of them
all. To conclude, not the poorest walking-mate, or threadbare cut purse in a
country, that can well be without them, be it but to know the Faires and
Markets when they fall: and against who dare I will uphold it, that there is no
such necessary Book of common places in the earth as it; as for example, From
London to York, from York to Barwicke, and so backwardes. It is a strange
thing I should be so skillful in Phisiognomie, and never studied it. I always
saw in the Doctors countenance, he greedily hunted after the high way to
honor, and was a busy Chronicler o^ high ways, he had such a number of ugly
wrinckled high ways in his visage. But the time was when he would not have
given his head for the washing, and would have took foul scorn that the best
of them all should have outfac'd him. I have a tale at my tungs end if I can
happen upon it, of his hobbyhorse reuelling and dominering at A^dley-end, when
the Queen was there: to which place, Gabriell (to do his country more
worship and glory) came ruffling it out huffty tuffty in his suite of velvet.
There be the^ in Cambridge that had occasion to take note of it, for he stood
noted or scoard for it in their books many a fair day after: and if I take
not my marks amiss, Raven the botcher by Pembrook-hal (whether he be alive or
dead I know not) was as privy to it every patch of it from top to toe, as he
that made it; and if every one would but mend one as often as he has mended
that, the world would be by 200. parts honester than it is: yet be he of the
mending hand never so, and Gabriell never able to make him amends, he may
bless the memory of that wardrope, for it will be a good while ere he meet
with the like customer as it was to him at least 14. year together, falling
into his hands twice a year as sure as a club, before every Batchelors and
Masters Commensment, or if it were above, it was a general Item to all the
University, that the Doctor had some ierking Hexameters or other shortly after
to pass the stamp, he never in all his life (till lately he fell a wrangling
with his sister in law) having any other business at London. The rotten mould
of that worm eaten relic (if he were well searched) he wears yet, meaning
when he dies to hang it over his tomb for a monument: and in the mean time,
though it is not his luck to meet with ever a substantial baudie case (or
book case) that carries rem in re, meat in the mouth in it (A miserable
intolerable case, when a young fellow and a young wench cannot put the case
together, and do with their own what they lift, but they shall be put to their
book to confess, and be hideously perplexed) yet I say daily and hourly does
he deal upon the case notwithstanding. You will imagine it a fable percase
which I shall tell you, but it is x. times more vnsallible, tha^ the news of
the Jews rising up in arms to take in the Land of promise, or the raining of
corn this Summer at VVake^ield. A Gentleman (long ago) lent him an old velvet
saddle, which when he had no use for, since no man else would trust him for a
bridle, and that he was more accustomed to be ridden than to to ride, what does
me he, but deeming it a very base thing for one of his standing in the
University to be said to be yet d^nsing in Sadolet, and with all scorning his
chamber should be employed as an oftry press to lay up iades riding iackets and
trusses in, presently vntrusseth and pelts the outside from the lining, and
under benedicite here in private be it spoken, dealt very cunningly and
covertly in the case, for with it he made him a case or cover for a dublet,
which has cased and couerd his nakedness ever since, and to tell ye no lie,
about two year and a half past, he creditted Newgate with the same
metamorphized costly vestiment. As good cheap as it was deliuerd to me (at
the second hand) you have it. Nil habeo praeter auditum, I was not at the
cutting it out, nor will I bind your consciences too strictly to embrace it
for a truth, but if my judgment might stand for up, it is rather likely to be
true than false, since it vanished invisible and was never heard of: and
besides, I cannot devise how he should behave him to consume such an implement,
if he co^fiscated it not to that use, neither lending it away, nor selling it;
nor how he should otherwise thrust himself into such a moth-eaten weed,
having neither money nor friends to procure it. Away, away, never hawk nor
pause upon it, for without all par-anters it is so; and let them tattle and
prate till their tongues ache, were there a thousand more of them, and they
should set their wit to his, he would make them set besides the saddle, even as
he did the Gentleman. A man in his case has no other shift, or apparaile which
you will, but he must thus shift other-while for his living, especially living
quiet as he does without any Crosses (in his purse subaudi) and being free
from all covetous incumbraunces: yet in my shallow foolish conceit, it were a
great dea^e better for him if he were not free, but crossed soundly, and
committed prisoner to the Tower, where perhaps once in his life he might be
brought to look upon the Queens coin in the Mynt, and not thus be always
abroad and never within, like a beggar. I must beg patience of you, though I
have been somewhat too tedious in brushing his velvet, but the Court is not yet
removed from Audley end, and we shall come time enough thither to learn what
rule he keeps.

There did this our Talatamtana or Doctor Hum, thrust himself into the
thickest ranks of the Noblemen and Gallants, and whatsoever they were arguing
of, he would not miss to catch hold of, or strike in at the one end, and take
the theme out of their mouths, or it should go hard. In self same order was
he at his pretty toys and amorous glaunces and purposes with the Damsells,
and putting baudy riddles unto them. In fine, some Disputations there were, and
he made an Oration before the Maids of Honor, and not before her Majesty, as
heretofore I misinformedly set down, beginning thus; Nux mulier asinus simili
sunt lege ligata,
Haectria nill recte faciunt si verbera desunt.
A nut a woman and an ass are like,
These three do nothing right, except you strike.



Carnead: He would have had the Maids of Honor thriftely cudgeld belike, and
lambeakt one after another.


Respond: They understood it not so.


Bentiu: No, I think so, for they understood it not at all.


Consil: Or if they had, they would have driu'n him ^o his guard.


Carnead: Or had the Guard driu'n him down the ^taires, with Deiu vous guard
Monsieur, go and prate in the yard Don Pedant, there is no place for you here.


Life. The process of that Oration, was of the same woofe and third with the
beginning: demurely and maidenly scoffing, and blushingly wantoning and making
love to those soft skind souls and sweet Nymphs of Helicon; betwixt a kind
of careless rude ruffianisme, and curious finicall complement: both which he
more expressed by his countenance, than any good jests that he uttered. This
finished (though not for the finishing or pronouncing of this) by some better
friends than he was worthy of, and that afterward found him unworthy of the
graces they had bestowed upon him, he was brought to kiss the Queens hand,
and it pleased her Highness to say (as in my former Book I have cyted) that he
looked something like an Italian. No other incitement he needed to rouse his
plumes, prick up his ^ares, and run away with the bridle betwixt his teeth,
and take it upon him; (of his own original ingrafted disposition theretoo he
wanting (...)) but now he was an insulting Monarch above Monarcha the Italian,
that ware crowns on his shoes; and quite renounst his natural English
accents and gestures, and wrested himself wholly to the Italian puntilios,
speaking our homely Island tongue strangely, as if he were but a raw
practitioner in it, and but ten days before had entertained a school master
to teach him to pronounce it. Ceremonies of reverence to the greatest States
(as it were not the fashion of his cu^tray) he was very parsimonious and
niggardly of, and would make no bones to take the wall of Sir Philip Sidney and
another honorable Knight (his companion) about Court yet attending; to whom I
wish no better fortune, than the fore locks of Fortune he had hold of in his
youth, and no higher fame than he has purchased himself by his pen: being the
first (in our language) I have encountered, that repurified Poetry from Arts
pedantisme, and that instructed it to speak courtly. Our Patron, our Phabus,
our first Orpheus or quintessence of invention he is: whersore, either let us
jointly invent some worthy subject to eternize him; or let War call back
Barbarism from the Danes, Pictes and Saxons to suppres our frolic spirits,
and the least spark of more elevated sense amongst us finally be quenched and
die, ere we can set up brazen Pillars for our Names and Sciences, to preserve
them from the Deluge of Ignorance. But to return from whence I have strayd,
Dagober^ Coppenhagen in his iollitie persisteth; is Hail fellow well met with
those that look highest: and to cut it off in three syllables, follows the
train of the delicatest favorites and minions, which by chance being
withdrawn a mile or two off, to one Master Bradburies, where the late deceased
Countess of Darbie was then harbinged, after supper they fell to dansing,
every one choosing his mate as the custom is; in a trice so they shuffled the
cards of purpose (as it were to plague him for his presumption) that will he
nill he must tread the measures about with the fouleft foulest ugly gentlewoman
or fury that might be, (then waiting on the foresaid Countess) thrice more
deformed than the woman with the horn in her head. A turn or two he
mincingly pac't with her about the room and solemnly kissed her at the parting:
Since which kiss of that squinteyd Lamia or Gorgon, as if she had been another
Circe to transform him, he has not one hour been his own man. For whilst
yet his lips smoakt with the steame of her scortching breath, that partcht his
beard like sunburned graffe in the Dog-dayes, he ran headlong violently to his
study as if he had bin born with a whirlwinde, and strait knocked me up together
a Poem calde his Aedes Valdinenses, in praise of my L. of Leycester, of his
kissing the Queens hand, and of her speech and comparison of him, how he looked
like an Italian, what vide says he in one place; Did I see her Majesty quoth
a? I mo, vide ipse loquentem cum Snaggo, I saw her conferring with no worseman
then Master Snagge. The bu^gerliest ve^rses they were that ever were scande,
being most of them hought and cut off by the knees out of Virgill, and other
Authors. This is a pattern of one of them, VVodde meusque tuusque suusque
Britannorumque suorumque, running through all the Pronounes in it, and iumpe
imitating a verse in As in presenti, or in the demeanes or adiacents I am
certain. I had forgot to observe unto you out of his first four familiar
Epistles, his ambicious stratagem to aspire; that whereas two great Pieres
being at jar, and their quarrel continued to bloodshed, he would needs
vncald and when it lay not in his way step in on the one side which indeed
was the safer side (as the fool is cra^ty enough to sleep in a whole skin)
and hew and slash with his Hexameters, but hewd and slasht he had been as
small as chippings, if he had not played ducke Friar and hid himself eight
weeks in that Noblemans house, for whom with his pen he thus bladed. Yet
nevertheless Sir James a Croft the old Controwler ferrited him out, and had
him under hold in the Fleet a great while, taking that to be aimde and leueld
against him, because he called him his old Controwler, which he had most
venomously belched against Doctor Per^e. Upon his humble submission, and
ample exposition of the ambiguous Text, and that his forementioned Mecenas
mediation, matters were dispenst with and quallified, and some light
countenance like sunshine after a storm, it pleased him after this to let fall
upon him, and so dispatched him to spur Cut back again to Cambridge.
Whereafter his arrival, to his associates and companions he privately vaunted
what redoubled rich brightness to his name, this short eclipse had brought, and
that it had more dignified and raisd him, than all his endeavors from h^s
childhood. With such incredible applause and amazement of his Judges he bragd
he had cleard himself, that every one that was there ran to him and embrast
him, and shortly he was promised to be called to high preferme^t in court, not an
ace lower than a Secretariship, or one of the Clarks of the Council. Should I
explain to you how this wrought with him, and how in the itching heat of
this hopeful golden world and honey moon, the ground would no longer b^are
him, but to Sturbridge Fair, and up and down Cambridge on his foot-cloth
maie^ftically he would pace it, with many more mad tricks of youth nere
played before; in stead of making his heart ache with vexing, I should make yours
bur^t with laughing. Doctor Perne in this plight nor at any other time ever
met him, but he would shake his hand and cry Vanitas vanitatum, omnia vanitas,
Vanity of vanities, and all things is vanity.

His father he undid to furnish him to the Court once more, where presenting
himself in all the colors of the rainbow, and a pair of moustachies like
a black horse tail tide up in a knot, with two tuffts sticking out on each
side, he was asked by no mean personage Vnde hac insania? whence proceeds
this folly or madness? and he replied with that wether-beaten piece of a verse
out of the Grammar, Semel insaniuimus omnes, once in our days there is none of
us but have played the idiots; and so was he counted and bad stand by for a
N^dgscombe. He that most patronizd him, prying more searchingly into him* d
finding that he was more meet to make sport with, than any way deeply to be
employed, with fair words shook him of, and told him he was fitter for the
University, tha^ for the Court or his turn, and so bad God prosper his
studies and sent for another Secretary to Oxford.

Readers, be merry; for in me there shall want nothing I can do to make you
merry. You see I hau^ brought the Doctor out of request at Court, and it shall
cost me a fall, but I will get him howted out of the University too, ere I
give him over. What will you give me when I bring him upon the Stage in one
of the principallest Colleges in Cambridge? Lay any wager with me, and I
will; or if you lay no wager at all, I Will fetch him aloft in Pedantius, that
exquisite Comedy in Trinity College; where, under the chief part, from
which it took his name, as namely the concise and firking finicaldo fine
Schoolmaster, he was full drawn and delineated from the soale of the foot
to the crown of his head. The just manner of his phrase in his Orations and
Disputations they stufft his mouth with, and no Buffianisme throughout his
whole books, but they bolsterd out his part with; as those ragged remnaunts in
his four familiar Epistles twixt him and Senior Immerito, Raptim scripta,
Nosti manum and stylum, with innumerable other of his rabble routs: and
scoffing his Musarum Lachrymae, with Flebo amo^em meum, etiam Musarum
lachrymis; which to give it his due, was a more collachrymate wretched
Treatise, than my Piers Pennil^sse, being the pittifullest pangs that ever any
man's Muse breathd forth. I leave out half; no^ the carrying up of his gown,
his nice gate on his pantoffles, or the affecte, ^ccent of his speech, but they
personated. And if I should reveal all, I think they borrowd his gown to
play the Part in, the more to flout him. Let him deny this (and not damn
himself) for his life if he can. Let him deny that there was a Show made at
Clare-hall of him and his two Brothers, called; Tarra^antantara turba
tumultuosa. Trigonum, Tri-Harueyorum, Tri-harmonia. Let him deny that there
was another Show made of the little Minnow his Brother Dodrans Dicke at
Peterhouse, called; Duns furens. Dick Haruey in a frenzy. Whereupon Dick came
and broke the College glass windows; and Doctor Perne (being then either for
himsel^e or Deputy Vice Chancellor), caused him to be fetched in, and set in
the Stocks till the Show was ended, and a great part of the night after.

The first motive or caller forth of Gabriels English Hexameters, was his
falling in love with Kate Cotton, and Widows his wife the Butler of Saint
John's. And this was a rule inuiolate amongst the fraternity of them, Gabriell
was always in love, Dick still in hate, either with Aristotle, or with the
great Bear in the firmament, which he continually bayted; or with Relig^on,
against which in the p^blique Schools he set up Atheistical Questions, and
besides compared his beard so Perphirian blasphemously, as I am afraid the
Earth would swallow me, if I should but rehearse, It fell to my lot to have the
perusing of a letter of his to Doctor Fulke, then lying at a Preachers house
near Criplega^e in London, as touching his whole persecution by the ^ellowes
of the House about it, and how except he had mer^ie on him, he were expulst and
cast away without redemption.

The third Brother ( John) had almost as iil a name as the Spittle in
Shorditch, for the old r^akes he kept with the wenches in Queens College
Lane; and if M. VVathe his ancient over wharter, (betwixt whom and him there
was such de^dly emulation) had bin furnished with those instructions thereof
which I could have lent him, he had put him down more handsmoothe than he did,
though at a Commensment dinner in Queens College, (as apparently as might be)
he graueld and set a ground both him and his brother Gabienus. This John was
he, that being entertaind in Justice Meades House (as a Schoolmasters) stole
away his daughter, and to pracifie him, dedicated to him an Almanacke; which
daughter (or John's wife) since his death, Gabriel (under pretense of taking out
an Administration, according as she in every Court exclaimes) has gone about
to circumuent of al she has: to the which effect, (about 3. year ago) there
were three Declarations put up against him, and a little while after I heard
there were Attachments out for him; whether he has compounded since or no, I
leave to the Jury to enquire.

Pigmey Dicke aforesaid, that looks like a pound of Goldsmiths candles, is
such another Venerian steal Placard as John was, being like to commit folly
the last year in the House where he kept (as a friend of his very soberly
informd me) with a Milke-maid; and if there had not bin more government in her
than in him (for all his diuinitiship) the thing you wot of, the blow that
never smarteth had been struck, and she carried away to Saffron-walden, he
sending for her to to one Philips his house at the sign of the Bell in Bromley,
and there seafting her to that end. Fast and pray luxurious Vicar, to keep
under thy unruly members, and wrap thee in a Monks Cowle, which (they say) is
good to mortify; or drink of the water of Saint Iues by John Bale (out of
Romish Authors) produced to be good against the temptations of the petticoate;
or (which exceeds them both) try Master Candishes Root he brought out of
the Indies, given him by a venerable Hermit, with this pr^batum est or virtue,
that he which tasted it should never lust after; by that token he could meet
with none about Court or in London, that was content to be an Eunuch for the
Kingdom of Heaven, or loved his pleasure so little, as to venture upon it. I
have not yet sealed and shakt hands with him for making two such false Prophets
of Saturn and Jupiter, out of whose iumbling in the dark and conjunction
copulative, he denounced such Oracles and alterations to ensue, as if (like
another Thebit Bencorat) he had lived 40. year in a mountain, to discern the
motion of the eighth Orb: but as he (for all his labor) could not attain to
it, no more could Dick (with his predictions) compass any thing but derision,
being publicly preached against for it at Powles Cross by the Bishop of
London that then was, who (according to Art, if such a Conjunction had
chanced) disproou'd the reuolutions to be clean contrary; and besides a
singular Scholar one Master Heath, (a Follower of the right Honrable and
worthy Lord of Hu^sdon that now is) set upon it and answered it in Print pell
mell cape a pee, by probable reason, and out of all Authors perspicuously
demonstrating what a lying Ribaden, and Chincklen Kraga it was, to constellate
and plannet it so portentously. I am none of the Cashiers or Prouiditores for
lame Soldiers, or men of desert, but were I one; as the Athe^ians (in the
noblest School of their Academy) erected to Berosus the Astrologer a Statue
with a golden tongue, for his predictions were true; so would I largely disburse
toward the building him a Statue on Sophisters Hills by Cambridge, with a
tongue of copper or ockamie (nearly counterfetting silver) such as organe
pipes and serieants maces are made of, because his predictions are false and
erroneous. And so lightly are all the trade of them, never foretokening or
foretelling any thing, till after it be come to pass: and then if it be a
Warrior or Conqueror they would flatter, who is luckie and succesfull in his
enterprises, they say he is borne under the auspicious Sign of Capricorn, as
Cardan says Cosmo de Medices, Selimus, Charles the fifth, and Charles Duke of
Burbon were; albeit I dare be sworn, no wizardly Astronomer of them all ever
dreamd of any such Calculations, till they had showed themselves so victorious,
and their prosperous reigns were quite expired. On the other side, if he be
disastrous or retrograde in his courses, the maleuolent Stars of Medusa and
Andromeda, inferring sudden death or banishment, predominated his nati^itie.
But (I thank heaven) I am none of their credulous disciples, nor can they they
cosen or seduce me with any of their iugling coniecturalls, or winking or
tooting through a six penny Jacobs Staff; their spells, their characters, their
anagrams, I have no more persuasion of, than I am persuaded, that under the
inuersed denomination or anagram of this Word September, (as some of our late
Deuines and ancient Hebrew Rabbines would enforce upon us) is included the
certain time of the Worlds first Creation; or that he which is born under
Aries, shall never go in a third bare cloak, or be troubled with the rheum,
because the Sun arriving in that Point, cloatheth the Earth with a new
fleece, and sucks up all the Winters superfluous moisture; or that he which is
borne under Libra shall be a Judge or Justice of Peace, because the Sun in
that Sign equally poyzeth the days and nights alike. Heilding Dicke (this our
Ages Alb^mazar) is a temporist that has faith enough for all Religions, even
as Thomas Deloney the Balletting Silke-w^auer has rhyme enough for all my
racles, and wit to make a Garland of good will more than the premises, with an
Epistle of Momus and Zoylus; whereas his Muse from the first peeping forth,
has flood at livery at an Alehouse wifpe, never exceeding a penny a quart day
nor night; and this dear year, together with the siiencing of his looms,
scarce that; he being constrained to betake him to carded Ale: whence it
proceeds, that since Candlemas or his Iigge of John for the King, not one
merry Dittie will come from him, but The Thunderbolt against Swearers, Repent
England repent, and The strange judgments of God. No more will there from Dick
quibus in terris, Dick Pa^tor of Cheselhurst, that was wont to pen Gods
judgments upon such and such and one, as thick as Watermen at
VVestminster-bridge. The miracles of the burning of Brustur with his Wench in
adultery he writ for Binneman; which a villain ( Brusturs own kinsman) long
afterward at the Gallows took upon him, and showed what Ninnies a vain
Pamphleter (one Richard Haruey) had made of the world, imputing it to such a
wonderful vengeance of adultery, when it was naught but his murdrous
knauerie. Dead sure they are in writing against the dead; dancing Moriscoes
and Laualtoes on the silent Graves of Plata, Buchanan, Sinesius, Pierius,
Aristotle, and the whole Petigree of the Peripat^^ians, Sophisters, and
Sorbonists; the most of whole mouths, clods had bungd up many Olimpiades
since, (...) they to s^ifle and choke them again with waste paper: when (in
this innouating self-love Age) it is disputable, whether they have any frend^
or no left to defend them. This is that Dick, that set Aristotle with his
heels upward on the School gates at Cambridge, and asses ears on his head: a
thing, that in perp^tuam rei memoriam, I will record and never have done with.
This is that Dick, that coming to take one Smiths (a young Batchelour of
Trinity College) Questions, and they being such as he durst not venture on,
cride Aquila non capit muscas, an Eagle catches no flies; and so gave them him
again: wheretoo, the other (being a lusty big boand fellow, and a Golias or
Behemoth in comparison of him) strait retorted it upon him, Nec elephas mures,
no more does an elephant stoop to myce; and so they parted. This is that Dick,
of whom Kit Marloe was wont to say, that he was an ass, good for nothing but
to preach of the Iron Age: Dialoguizing Dicke, Io Paean Dicke, Synesian and
Pierian Dick, Dick the true Brute or noble Trojan, or Dick that has vowed to
live and die in defense of Brute, and this our isles first offspring from the
Trojan, Dick against baldnes, Dick, against Buchanan, little and little witted
Dicke, Aquinas Dicke, Therefore Lipsian Dicke, because lamely and lubb^rly he
strives to imitate and be another English Lipsius: when his lips hang so in
his light, as he can never come near him.
Lipsian Dick, heigh light a love a Dick, that lost his Benefice and his Wench
both at once; his benfice for want of sufficiency, and his wench for want of a
Benefice or sufficient living to maintain her, Dilemma Dick, dissentious Dick;
with ab^ in malam crucem, that is, get all thy friends in their prayers to
commend thee, I shut up the congested Index of thy redundant opproby, and have
back to the right worshipful of the Laws Master D. Garropius thy brother,
(as in every Letter that thou writ'st to him thou tearmst him): who for all he
is a civil Lawier, will never be Lex loquens, a Lawier that shall loud throat
it, with Good my Lord consider this poor man's case. But though he be in none of
your Courts Licentiate, and a Courtier otherwise he is never like to be; one
of the Emperor Justinians Courtiers (the Civil Laws chief Founder) malgre
he will name himself: and a quarter of a year since, I was advertised, that
as well his works, as the whole body of that Law complete, (having no other
employment in his Faculty) he was in hand to turn into English Hexameters;
and if he might have had his will, whiles he was yet resident in Cambridge, it
should have been severely enacted throghout the University, that none should
speak or ordinarily converse, but in that cue. For himself, he very
religiously observed it, never meeting any Doctor or ^rend of his, but he
would salute him or give him the time of the day in it most heroically, even as
he saluted a Physician of special account in these terms, Nere can I meet
you sir, but needs must I veil my bonetto.

Which he, (loath to be behind with him in courtesy) thus turned upon him
again, Nere can I meet you sir, but needs must I call ye knauetto.

Once he had made an Hexameter verse of seven feet, whereas it would
lawfully bear but six; which fault a pleasant Gentleman having found him
with, wrapped the said verse in a piece of paper, and sent a lowse with it,
inserting underneath This verse has more feet than a lowse. But to so
Dictionarie a custom it was grown with him, that after supper if he chaunst to
play at Cards, and had but one Queen of Hearts light in his hand, he would
extempore in that kind of verse run upon men's hearts and women's hearts all
the night long, as Stout heart and sweet heart, yet stoutest heart to be stooped.
No may pole in the street, no wether cock on any Church steeple, no garden,
no arbor, no laurel, no ewe tree, that he would ouerslip without haylsing
after the same method. His brains, his time, all his maintenance and
exhibition upon it he has consumed, and never intermitted, till such time as
he began to Epistle it against me, since which, I have kept him a work
indifferently: and that in the deadest season that might be; he lying in the
ragingest fury of the last Plague, when there did above ^600. a week in
London, inck-^quittring and printing against me at VValfes in Powles
Churchyard. Three quarters of a year thus cloystred and immured he remained,
not being able almost to step out of doors, he was so barricadoed up with
graves, which besiedged and undermined his very threshold; nor to open his
window evening or morning, but a dampe (like the smoke of a Cannon) from the
fat manured earth with contagion (being the burial place of ^iue parishes), in
thick rouling clouds would strugglingly funnell up, and with a full blast puff
in at his casements. Supply me with a margent note some body that has more
idle leisure than I have at the post have hudling up of these presents, as
touching his spirits yearning empassionment, and agonizd fiery thirst of
revenge, that neglected soul and bodies health; to compass it, the health of
his body, in lying in the hell mouth of infection, and his fowls health, in
minding any other ma^ters than his soul; nay, matters that were utter enemies
to his soul (as his first offering of wrong, and then prosecuting of it) when
his soul and body both, every hour were at the hazard point to be separated.
The argument (to my great rejoicing and solace) from hence I have gathered,
was, that my lines were of more smarting efficacy than I thought, and had that
steel and metal in them, which pierst and stung him to the quick, and drove
him upon the first searching of the wounds I had given him, to such rauing
impatience, as he could rest no where, but through the poysonf^llest jaws of
death, and fire and water he would burst, to take vengeance, and not only on
the living, but the dead also, (as what will not a dog do that is angerd,
bite and gnarle at any bone or stone that is near him): but rather I deem
that from the harsh grating in his ears and continual crashing of sextens
spades against dead men's bones, (more dismal music to him, than the Voice or
Ghosts Hearse) he came so to be incenst and to inueigh against the dead,
therewith they exasperating and setting his teeth on edge, more than he would.
But let that rest, which would not let him rest, at VVolfes he is billetted,
sweating and dealing upon it most intentiuely; and for he would (as nere as was
possible) remove all whatsoever encumbra^ces, that might alienate or withdraw
him from his study, he has vowed (during his abode there) not to have a
denier in his purse, or see money, but let it run on the score and go to the
devil if it will, he is resolute, and means to trouble himself with none of
this trash: and yet it is a world to hear how malicious tongues will slander
a man with truth, and give out, how of one Mighell (sometimes Dexters man in
Powles Churchyard, though now he dwells at Exceter) he should borrow ten
shillings to buy him shoes and stockings, and when it came to repayment, or
that he was feign to borrow of another to satisfy and pay him, (as he will
borrow so much favor of him he nere saw before) no less than half a crown
out of that ten shillings he forswore, and rebated him for usury. Content your
self, it was a hard time with him, let not Mighel and Gabriell (two Angels) fall
out for a trifle: those that be his friends will consider of it and bear with
him, even as Benjamin the Founders father who dwells by Fleete-bridge, has
borne with him this four year for a groat which he owes him for plasters; and
so Trinity Hall has borne with him more than that, he being (as one that was
Fellow of the same House of his standing informed me) never able to pay his
Commons, but from time to time borne out in alms amongst the rest of the
Fellows; how ever he tells some of his friends he has an out-brothership or
beads^mans stipend of ten shillings a year there still coming to him, and a
Library worth 200. pound. John Wolf says nothing, and yet he bears with
him as much as the best, and if he had borne a little longer, he would have
borne till his back broke, though Gabriell looks big upon it, and protests by
no bugges, he owes him not a dandiprat, but that Wolf is rather in his debt
than he in his, all reckonings justly cast. In plain truth and in verily,
some pleasurs he did Wolf in my knowledge. For first and foremost he did for
him that eloquent postscript for the Plague Bills, where he talks of the
series the classes and the premises, and presenting them with an exacter
method hereafter, if it please God the Plague continue. By the style I took
it napping, and smelt it to be a pig of his Sus Mineruam the Sow his Muse as
soon as ever I read it, and since the Printer has confessed it to me. The
vermilion VVrinckle de crinkledum hoped (belike) that the Plague would proceed,
that he might have an occupation of it. The second thing wherein he made Wolf
so much beholding to him, was, that if there were ever a paltrie Scriuano,
betwixt a Lawiers Clark and a Poet, or smattring pert Boy, whose buttocks were
not yet cool since he came from the grammar, or one that houers betwixt two
crutches of a Scholar and a Traveler, when neither will help him to go
upright in the worlds opinion, and should stumble in there with a Pamphlet to
sell, let him or any of them but have conioynd with him in railing against
me, and feed his humor of vainglory, were their stuff by ten millions more
Tramontani or Transalpine barbarous than balletry, he would have pressed it upon
Wolf whether he would or no, and given it immortal allowance above Spencer.
So did he by that Philistine Poem of Parthenophill and Parthenope, which to
compare worse than it self, it would plague all the wits of France Spain or
Italy. And when he saw it would not sell, he called all the World asses a
hundred times over, with the stampingest cursing and tearing he could utter it,
for that he having given it his pass or good word, they obstinately contemnd
and mislik'd it. So did he by Chutes Shores Wife, and his P^ocris and
Cephalus, and a number of Pamphlagonian things more, that it would rust and
iron spot paper, to have but one syllable of their names breathed over it. By
these complots and careful purueyance for him, Wolf could not choose but be
a huge gainer, a hundred mark at least over the shoulder: and which was a
third advantage to hoyst or raise him, besides the Doctors meat and drink,
which God paid for, and it is not to be spoken of, he set him on the score for
sack centum pro cento, a hundred You must consider it was the dog days, and he
did it to^ cool him.
quarts in a seuennight, whiles he was thus saracenly sentencing it against
me. Toward the latter end, he grew weary of keeping him and so many asses
(of his procuring) at livery, and would grumble and mutiny in his hearing of
want of money. Tut man, money would he say, is that your discontent? pluck up
your spirits and be merry, I cannot abide to hear any man complain for
want of money. Twice or thrice he had set this magnificent face upon it, and
ever Wolf lookd when he would have terrifide the table with a sound knock of
a pursse of angels, and said, There Is for thee, pay me when thou art able:
but with him there was no such matter, for he put his hand in his pocket but to
scrub his arm a little that itcht, and not to pluck out any cash, which with
him is a stranger shape than ever Cacus shrouded in his den, and would make him
if he should chop on any such churlish lump unawares, to admire and bless
himself, with Quis nonus hic nostris successit sedibus hospes. Jesus, how comes
this to pass? here is such geere as I never saw. So bles^e himself he could
not, but being a little more roundly put to it, he was feign to confess, that
he was a poor impecunious creature, and had not trasfiqut a great while for
any of these commodities of Santa Cruz, but as soon as ever his rents came
up, which he expected every hour, (though I could never hear of any he had,
more than his ten shillings a year at Trinity Hall, if he have that) he would
most munificently congratulate correspond and simpathize with him in all
interchangable vicissitude of kindness; and let not the current of time seem
too protractiue exten^led, or breed any disunion betwixt them, for he would
accelerate and festinate his procras^inating ministers and commissaries in the
country, by Letters as expedite as could be. I give him his true dialect and
right varnish of elocution, not varying one I tittle from the high strain of
his harmonious phrase, wherein he puts down Hermogenes with his Art of
Rhetorique, and so far out-strips ouer-tunged Beldam Room, or her
super-delicate bastard daughter ceremonious dissembling Italy, as Europe puts
down all the other parts of the World in populous societies and fertilenes. A
Gentleman, a friend of mine, that was no stranger to such bandyings as had past
betwixt us, was desirous to see how he looked since my strappadoing and
torturing him; in which spleen he went and enquird for him: answer was made
he was but new risen, and if it would please him to stay, he would come down to
him anon. Two hours good by the clock he attended his pleasure, whiles he (as
some of his fellow In-mates have since related unto me) stood acting by the
glass, all his gestures he was to use all the day after, and currying and
smudging and pranking himsel^e vnmeasurably. Post (...) casus, his case of
tooth-pikes, his comb case, his case of head-brushes and beard-brushes run
over, and tot discrimina rerum, rubbing clothes of all kinds, down he came,
and after the bazelos manus, with amplifications and complements he belabored
him till his ears tingled, and his feet ak'd again. Never was man so
surfetted and ouer-gorged with English, as he cloyd him with his generous
spirits, renumeration of gratuities, stopping the posternes of ingratitude,
bearing the launcier too severe into his imperfections, and traversing the
ample forest of interlocutions. The Gentleman swore to me, that upon his
first apparition (till he disclosed himself) he took him for an Usher of a
dancing School, neither does he greatly differ from it, for no Usher of a
dancing School was ever such a Bassia Dona or Bassia de vmbra de vmbra des
los pedes, a kisser of the shadow of your feetes shadow, as he is. I have
perused vearses of his written under his own hand to Sir Philip Sidney,
wherein he courted him as he were another Cyparissus or Ganimede; the last
Gordian true loves knot or knitting up of them is this; Sum iecur ex quo te
primum Sydnee vidi,
Os oculosque regit, cogit amare iecur.
All liver am I Sidney, since I saw thee;
My mouth eyes rules it, and to love does draw me.
Not half a year since coming out of Lincolnshyre, it was my hap to take
Cambridge in my way, where I had not been in six year before, when by
wonderful destenie, who (in the same Inn and very next chamber to me, parted
but by a wainscot door that was naild up, either unwitting of other) should be
lodgd but his Gabrielship, that in a manner had lived as long a Pilgrim from
thence as I. Every circumstance I cannot stand to reckon up, as how we came
to take knowledge of one another being there, or what a stomach I had to have
scratcht with him, but that the nature of the place hindered me, where it is as
ill as petty treason, to look but awry on the sacred person of a Doctor, and
I had plotted my revenge otherwise; as also of a meeting or conference on his
part desired, wherein all quarrels might be discust and drawn to an
atonement, but non vult fac, I had no fancy to it, for once before I had bin
so cousend by his colloging, though personally we never met face to face, yet
by trouch-men and vant-curriers betwixt us: nor could it settle in my
conscience, to loose so much pains I had took in new arraying and furbushing
him, or that a public wrong in Print, was to be so slightly slubberd over in
private, with Come come, give me your hand, let us be friends, and thereupon I
drink to you. And a further doubt there was if I had tasted of his beife and
porredge at Trinity Hal as he desired, ( not andum est, for the whole fortnight
together that he was in Cambridge, his commons ran in the College detriments,
as the greatest courtesy he could do the House whereof he was, to eat up
their meat and never pay any thing); If I had (I say) rusht in my self, and
two or three hungry Fellows more, and cryde Do you want any guestes? what,
nothing but bare Commons? it had been a question (considering the good will
that is betwixt us) whether he would have lent me a precious dram more than
ordinary, to help disgestion: he may be such another crafty mortring
Drugg^ir, or Italian porredge seasoner, for any thing I ever saw in his
complexion. That word complexion is dropped ^oorth in good time, for to describe
to you his complexion and composition, entered I into this tale by the way, or
tale I found in my way riding up to London. It is of an adust swarth
choll^rieke dye, like restie bacon, or a dride scate-fish; so lean and so
meagre, that you would think (like the Turks) be observed 4. Lents in a year,
or take him for the Gentleman's man in the Courtier, who was so thin cheekd and
gaunt and starved, that as he was blowing the fire with his mouth the smoke
took him up like a light straw, and carried him to the top or funnell of the
chimney, where he had flowne out God knows whether if there had not bin cross
bars ouer-whart that stayde him; his skin riddled and crumpled like a piece
of burnt parchment; and more channels and creases he has in his face, than
there be Fairie circles on Salsburie Plain, and wrinckles and stets of old
age, than characters on Christ's Sepulcher in Mount Caluarie, on which, every
one that comes, scrapes his name, and sets his mark, to show that he has
been there: so that whosoever shall he hold him, Esse putet Boreae triste
furentis opus, will swear, on a book I have brought him low, and shrowdly
broken him: which more to confirm, look on his head, and you shall find a
gray hair for every line I have writ against him; and you shall have all his
beard white too, by that time he has read over this book. For his stature,
he is such another pretty Jack a Lent as boys throw at in the street, and
looks in his black suit of velvet, like one of these ieatdroppes which diverse
wear at their ears in stead of a jewel. A smudge piece of a handsome fellow
it has been in his days, but now he is old and past his best, and fit for
nothing but to be a Noble man's porter, or a Knight of Windsor; cares have so
cra^ed him, and disgraces to the very bones consumed him, amongst which hy^
missing of the University Oratorship, wherein Doctor Perne besteaded him,
wrought not the lightliest with him; and if none of them were, his course of
life is such, as would make ani^ man look ill on it, for ^e will endure more
hardness than a Camel, who in the burning sands will live four days without
water, and feeds on nothing but thi^tles and wormwood, and such like, no more
does he feed on any thing when he is at Saffro^-walden, but trotters, sheep
porknells, and butterd roots; and other while in an Hexame^er meditation, or
when he is inuenting a new part of Tully, or hatching such another Paradoxe,
as that of Nicholaus Copernieus was, who held, that the Sun remains immovable
in the center of the World, and that the Earth is moved about the Sun, he
would be so rapt, that he would remain three days and neither eat nor
drink, and within doors he will keep seven year together, and come not
abroad so much as to Church. The like for seven and thirty weeks space
together he did, while he lay at VVolfes coppying against me, never stirring
out of doors or being churched all that while, but like those in the West
country, that after the Paulin has called them or they have seen a spirit, keep
themselves dark 24. hours; so after I had played the spirit in hanting him in
my 4. Letters co^fsuted, he could by no means endure the light, nor durst
venture himself abroad in the open air for many mo^ths after, for ^eare he
should be fresh blasted by all men's scorn and derision. My instructions of him
are so ouer-flowing and numberless; that except I abridge them, my Book will
grow such a bouncer, that those which buy it must be saine to hire a porter to
carry it after them in a basket. For brevity sake, I omit twenty things, as
the conflict betwixt my Hostess of the Dolphin in Cambridge and him at my
being there, about his lying in her house a fortnight, and keeping one of the
best Chambers, yes never offering to spend a penie; the Hackney-mens of
Saffron-waldens pursuing him for their horses, he hiring them but for three
days and keeping them fifteen, and telling him very flatly when he went about
to excuse it, that they could not spare them from their Cart so long, they
being Cart horses which they set him on. The description of that poor John a
Droynes his man, whom he had hired for that journey, a great big-boand
thresher, put in a blue coat too short wasted for him, and a suit made of the
inner linings of a suit turned outward, being white canuas pinkt upon cotton;
his intolerable boasting at VVolfes to such as would hold him chat, and he
could draw to talk with him, that he thought no man in England had more
learning than himself, his threatening any Nobleman whatsoever, that dur^^
take my part, and vowing he would do this and that to him if he should; his
incensing my L. Mayor against me that the^ was, by directing unto him a
perswasiue pamphlet to persecute me, and not to let ship the advantage he had
against me, and reporting certain words I should speak against him that
Christmas at a Tavern in London, when I was in the ^le. of VVight then and a
great while after. His inciting the Preacher at Poules Cross, that lay at the
same house in VVood-streete which he did, to preach manifestly against Master
Lilly and me, with VVoe to the Printer, woe to the Seller, woe to the Buyer,
woe to the Author. But in none of these will I insist, which are remnants in
comparison of the whole piece I have to show; only I will have a short much at
VVolfes and his parting, and so make an end o^ an old song, and bid God night
to this History.

Pierses Supererogation printed, the charge whereof the Doctor had promised to
desray and be countable to Wolf for, amounting (with his diet) to 36. pounds,
from Saffron-walden no argent would be heard of, wheresore down he must go
amongst his tenaunts as he pretended, (which are no other than a company of
beggars, that lie in an out barn of his mothers sometimes) and fetch up the
grand sums, or legem pone. To accomplish this, Wolf procured him horses and
money for his expenses, lent him one of his Prentises (for a serving creature)
to grace him, clapping an old blue coat on his back, which was one of my
Lord of Harfords liueries, (he pulling the badge off) and so away they went.
Saint Christopher be their speed, and send them well back again; but so
prays not our Dominico Ciuilian, for he had no such determination: but as
soon as ever he had left London behind him, he insinuated with this Iuuentus,
to run away from his Master, and take him for his good Lord and supporter. The
Page was easily mellowd with his attractiue eloquence, as what heart of adamant
or enclosed in a Crocodyles skin (which no iron will pierce) that has the
power to withstand the Mercurian heavenly charm of his Rhetorique? With him he
stays half a year, rubbing his toes, and following him with his sprinkling
glass and his box of kissing comfets from place to place; whiles his Master
fretting and chafing to be thus colted of both of them, is ready to send out
Process for the Doctor, and get his Nouice cride in every market Town in
Essex: but they prevented him, for the impe or stripling being almost starved
in this time of his being with him, gave him warning he would no longer serve
him but would home to his master what ever shift he made. Gabriell thought it
not amiss to take him at his word, because his clothes were all greasy and
worn out, and he is never wont to keep any man longer than the suit lasts
he brings with him, and then turn him to grass and get one in new trappings;
and ever pick quarrels with him before the years end, because he would be
sure to pay him no wages: yet in his provident forecast, he concluded it better
policy for him to send him back to his Master, than he should go of his own
accord, and whereas he was to make a journey to London within a week or such a
matter, to have his blue coat (being destitute of ever another
trencher-carrier) credit him up, though it were third bare. So considered, and
so done, at an Inn at Islington he alights, and there keeps him aloose,
London being too hot for him. His retinue (or attendaunt) with a whole
cloke-bag full of commendations to his master he dismisseth, and in stead of
the ^6. pounds he ought him, wild him to certefie him, that very shortly he
would send him a couple of Hens to Shroue with. Wolf receiving this
message, and holding himself palpablye slouted therein, went and feed Baylies,
and getts one Scarlet (a friend of his) to go and draw him forth, and hold him
with a tale whiles they might steal on him and arrest him. The watchword
given them when they should seize upon him, was Wolf (I must needs say) has
used you very grosely: and to the intent he might suspect nothing by Scarlets
coming, there was a kind letter ^ram'd in VVolfes name, with To the right
worshipful of the Laws in a great Text hand for a superscription on the out
side; and underneath at the bottom, Your worships ever to command, and pressed
to do^ you service, John Wolf. The contents of it, were about the talking with
his Lawier, and the eager proceeding of his Sister in law against him. This
letter deliuerd and read, and Scarlet and he (after the ta^^ing of a cup of
dead beer, that had stood pawling by him in a pot three days) descending into
some conference, he began to find himself ill apaid with VVolfes encroaching
upon him, and asking him money for the Printing of his Book, and his diet
whiles he was close prisoner, attending and toyling about it, and obiecting how
other men of less desert were liberally recompenst for their pains, whereas he
(whose worth over balaunst the proudest) must be constrained to hire men to
make themselves rich. I appeal to you (quoth he) whether ever any man's
works sold like mine. I, even from a child good master Doctor replide
Scarlet, and made a mouth at him over his shoulder, so soothing him on forward
till the Baylies Cue came of VVolfes abusing him very grosely, which they not
failing to take at the first rebound, stepped into the room boldly (as they were
two well bumbasted swaggering fat bellies, having faces as broad as the back
of a chimney, and as big as a town bag-pudding) and clapping the Doctor with a
lusty blow on the shoulder, that made his legs bow under him, and his guts cry
quag again, by your leave they said unto him (in a thundering yeoman vshers
diapason) in Gods name and the Queens we do arrest you. Without more pause
away they hurried him, and made him believe they would carry him into the City
where his Creditor was, when coming under Newgate they told him they had
occasion to go speak with one there, and so thrust him in before them for
good manners sake, because he was a Doctor, and their better, bidding the
Keeper as soon as ever he was in to take charge of him. Some lofty tragical
Poet help me, that is daily conversant in the fierce encounters of Raw-head
and bloody bones, and whose pen like the Plowes in Spain that often stumble on
gold veins, still splits and stumpes it self against old iron and raking
ore battred Armor and broken Truncheons, to recount and express the more than
Herculean fury he was in, when he saw he was so notably betrayed and bought
and sold: He fumde, he stamped, he buffeted himself about the face, beat his
head against the walls, and was ready to byte the flesh off his arms if they
had not hindered him, out of doors he would have gone (as I cannot blame him)
or he swore he would tear down the walls and set the ^ouse on fire if they
re^isted him; whither quoth he you villains have you brought me? To Newgate
good Master Doctor with a low leg they made answer: I know not where I am.
In Newgate again replied they good Master Doctor: into some blind corner you
have drawn me to be murdered; to no place (replied they the third time) but to
Newgate good Master Doctor. Murder, murder (he cried out) some body break in
or they will murder me. No murder but an action of debt said they good Master
Doctor. O you profane Plebeyans exclaymed he, I will massacre, I will
crucify you for presuming to lay hands thus on my reverent person. All this
would not serve him no more than Hackets counterset madness would keep him
from the Gallows, but up he was had and showed his lodging where he should
lie by it, and willed to deliver up his weapon. That wrung him on the withers
worse than all the rest, what my arms, my defense, my weapon, my dagger quoth
he, my life then I see is conspired against, when you seek to bereave me of
the instruments that should secure it. They ratled him up, soundly, and told
him if he would be conformable to the order of the prison so it was, otherwise
he should be forced: Force him no forces, no such mechanical drudges should
have the honor of his artillery, marry if some worthy Maiestrate came, as their
Master or Mistress, it might be upon good conditions for his life's safety
and preservation he would surrender. The Mistress of the house (her husband
being absent) understanding of his folly came up to him, and went about to
persuade him. At her sight somewhat calmed he was, as it is a true amorous
Knight, and has no power to deny any thing to ladies and gentlewomen, and he
told her if she would command her servants forth, (whom he scornd should have
their eyes so much illuminated as to behold any martial engine of his) he
would in all humillity dispoyle himself of it. She so far yielded to him,
when as soon as they were out he runs and swaps the door too, and draws his
dagger upon her with O I will kill thee, what could I do to thee now? and so
extremely terrified her, that she scritcht out to her servants, who bur^^ in
in heaps, as thinking he would have ravished there. Never was our Tapthartharath
(though he has run through many briers) in the like ruthful pickle he was
then, for to the bolts he must amongst thieves and rogues, and taste of the
Widows Alms, for drawing his dagger in a Prison: from which there was no
deliverance, if basely he had not fallen upon his knees, and asked her
forgiveness. Dinner being ready, he was called down, and there being a better
man than he present, who was placed at the upper end of the board, for very
spite that he might not fit highest, he straight flung to his chamber again,
and vowed by heaven and earth and all the flesh on his back, he would famish
himself, before he would eat a bit of meat as long as he was in Newgate.
How inuiolably he kept it, I will not conceal from you. About a two hours
after, when he felt his craw empty, and his stomach began to wamble, he writ
a Supplication to his Hostess, that he might speak with her; to whom (at her
approaching) he recited what a rash vow he had made, and what a commotion
there was in his entrayles or pudding^house for want of food; wherefore, if she
would steal to him a byt secretly and let there be no words of it, he would,
I marry would he (when he was releast) perform mountains. She (in pity
of him) seeing him a brainsicke bedlam and an innocent, that had no sense to
govern himself, being loath he should be damnd and go to hell for a meals
meat, having vowed, and through famine ready to break it, got her husband to
go forth with him out of doors, to some Cocks shop at Pyecorner there-abouts,
or (as others will have it) to the Tap-house under the Prison; where having
eaten sufficient his hungry body to sustain, the devil a scute had he to
pay the reckoning, but the Keepers credit must go for it. How he got out of
this Castle dolorus, if any be with child to know, let them enquire of the
Minister then serving at Saint Albanes in VVood-street, who in Christian
charity only for the names sake (not being acquainted with him before) enterd
bo^d for him to answer it at law, and satisfied the House for his lodging and
Mangerie. But being restored to the open air, the case with him was little
altered, for no roose had he to hide his noddle in, or whither he might go to
set up his rest, but in the streets under a bulk he should have been constraind
to have kenneld, and chalkt out his cabin, if the said Minister had not the
second time stood his friend, and preferred him to a chamber at one Rolfes a
Serieants in VVood-streete; whom (as I take it) he also procured to be equally
bound with him for his new cousens appearance to the law, which he never did,
but left both of them in the lurtch for him; and running in debt with Rolfe
beside for house-roome and diet, one day when he was from home, he closely
conuaid away his truncke forth of doors, and shewde him a fair pair of
heels. At Saffron-walden (for the most part) from that his flight to this
present has he mewd and coopt up himself invisible, being counted for dead
and no tidings of him, till I came in the wind of him at Cambridge. And so I
wind up his third of life, which I fear I have drawn out too large, although
in three quarters of it (of purpose to curtall it) I have le^t descant, and
taskt me to plain song: whereof, that it is any other than plain truth let
no man distrust, it being by good men and true (word for word as I let it fly
amongst you) to me in the fear of God vttred, all yet alive to confirm it:
wherefore settle your faith immoueably, and now you have heard his life, judge
of his doctrine accordingly.


Carnead: His life and doctrine may both be to us an ^ns^mple, for since the
reign of Queen Gueniuer was there never seen worse.


Iimport: Yet for all he is such a vain Basilisco and Captain Crack-stone in
all his actions and conversation, and swarmeth in vile-Canniball words, there
is some good matter in his book against thee.


Respond: We will try tha^ matter immediately, for my mind ever giving ^ee,
that we should have you and such like Humorists of your Faction, run from
one matter to another, and from the matter to the manner, and from the manner
to the form, and from the form to the cause, and from the cause to the
effect, I provided to match you at all weapons And here next his life, I have
draw^n an Abridgement or Inventory of all the material Tractates and Contents
of his Book.


Import: Then thou have done well, for it is it that I all this while looked
for. I pray thee let me read it my self.


A Summarie or breife Analysis of such matters as are handled in the Doctors
Book.
INprimis, one Epistle of a sheet and more of paper, to his gentle and
liberal friends Master Barnabe Barnes Master John Thorius: Master Anthony
Choose, and ^^erie favorable Reader.

Carnead: O ho, those whom he calls the three orient wits. Mine eyes are
partly accessarie unto it. It is to thank them for their courteous Letters and
commendaterie Sonnets, writ to him from a far, as namely out of the hall into
the kitchen at Wolses, where altogether at one time they lodged and boorded.
With a great many maidenly excuses, of it is more of your gentleness than my
deserving, and I cannot without blushing repeat, and without shame remember.
Then he comes upon thee with I Will, I Will, I Will.


Respond: What should I say, I will and command like a Prince? he might as
well write against Poules for having three IIes in it.


Carnead: He calls thee the green Popiniay, and says thou art thine own
idol.


Respond: Let him either show how or wherein, or I will not believe him, and my
negative (in any ground in England) is as good as his affirmative.


Carnead: And so proceeds with complement and a little more complement, and a
crust of quippes and a little more complement after that; then he falls in
exhorting those his three Patrons to go forward in maturitie, as they have
begun in pregnancie; whose Parthenophils and Parthenopes embellished, and
Shores Wife eternized, shall ever lastingly testify what they are.


Respond: And so have I testifide for them what they are, which will last time
enough.


Carnead: He bids Barnabe of the Barnes, be the gallant Poet like Spencer, or
the valiant Soldier like Baskeruile; and ever remember his French Service
under such a General.


Respond: What his Soldiourship is I cannot judge, but if you have ever a
chain for him to run away with, as he did with a Noble-mans Stewards
chain at his Lords enstalling at Windsor; or if you would have any rymes to
the tune of ^link-a-pisse, he is for you. In one place of his Parthenophill
and Parthenope, wishing no other thing of Heaven, but that he might be
transformed to the Wine his Mistres drinks, and so pass thorough her.


Bentiu: Therein he was very ill aduisde, for so the next time his Mistres
made water, he was in danger to be ^ast out of her favor.


Respond: Of late he has set soorth another Book which he entitles no less
than A divine Centurie of Sonets, and prefixeth for his Posie, Altera
Musavenit, quid ni sit and alter Appollo? As much to say, as why may not my
Muse be as great an Appollo or God of Poetry, as the proudest of them? but it
comes as far short, as Paris Garden Cut of the height of a Cammell, or a
Cocke-boate of a Carricke: such another device it is, as the godly Ballet of
John Careless, or the Song of Green sleeves moralized.


Carnead: For his Caualiership since thou art not instructed in it, let me
tell thee, it is lewder by nine score times than his Poetry; since his doughtie
service in France five years ago, I not forgetting him: where having followd
the Camp for a week or two, and seeing there was no care had of keeping the
Queens Peace, but a man might have his brains knocked out, and no Justice or
Cunstable near hand to send forth precepts, and make hue and cry after the
murdrers; without farther tarrying or consultation, to the General he went,
and told him he did not like of this quarrelling kind of life; and common
occupation of murdring, wherein (without any Jury or trial, or giving them
so much leave, as to say their prayers) men were run thorough and had their
throats cut, both against Gods laws, her Majesty's laws, and the laws of all
Nations: wherefore he desired license to depart, for he stood every hour in
^eare and dread of his person, and it was always his prayer, From sudden
death good Lord deliver us. Upon this motion, there were diverse warlike Knights
and principal Captains, who rather than they would be bereaved of his
pleasant company, offered to pick out a strong guard amongst them for the safe
engarisoning and better shielding him from perrill. Two stepped forth and
presented themselves as musketeers before him, a third and fourth as
targatiers behind him, a fifth and sixth vowed to try it out at the push of the
pike, before the malicious foe should invade him. But home he would, nothing
could stay him, to finish Parthenophil and Parthenope, and write in praise of
Gab^iell Haruey.


Consil: He was wise, he loved no blows: but what said the Doctor to his
other two copesmates?


Carnead: Why thaus; Be thou John the many tungd linguist like Androwes, or
the curious Intelligencer like Bodley; and never forget thy Nether landish
Train under him, that taught the Prince of Navarre, now the valorous King of
France.


Respond: Of this John Thorius more sparingly I will speak, because he has
made his peace with me, and there be in him sundry good parts of the Tungs
and otherwise; though thirty parts coming, behind and limping after Doctor
Androwes: who (if it be no offense so to compare him) is tanquam Paulus in
Cathedr^, powerful preaching like Paul out of his chair; and his Church
another Pantheon, or Templum (...) deorum; the absolutest Oracle of all sound
Deuinitie here amongst us; he mixing the two several properties of an Orator
and a Poet both in one, which is not only to persuade, but to win admiration.
Thorius being of that modesty and honesty I ascribe to him, cannot but be
irksomly ashamed, to be resembled so hyperborically, and no less agreeu'd
than Master Bodley (a Gentleman in our Commonwealth of singular desertiue
reckoning and industry, being at this present her Majesty's Agent in the Low
countries) ought he to be at the hellish detested Judas name of an
Intelligencer, which the Doctor in the way of friendship has thrown upon
him. Master Bodley calls him rascal and villain for his labor, and before
his going over was mad to know where he might hunt him out to be reuengd:
which both he and Thorius have reason for, since but to be covertly suspected
for an Intelligencer, (much more to be publicly registered in Print for such a
flearing false brother or Ambodexter) is to make either of them worse pointed
and wondered at than a ^uckold or wittall, and set them up as common marks for
every iackanapes Prentise to kick, spit, or throw dirt at. To be an
Intelligencer, is to have oaths at will, and think God nere regards them; to
frame his religion and allegiance to his Prince according to every company
he comes in. A lew he is, that but for the spoil loves no man; a curre, that
flatters and fawns upon every one, low crowching by the ground like a tumbler,
till he may spy an advantage and pluck out his throat. An ungrateful slave,
that there spends the bitterest of his venom, where he has received most
benefits; a hangman, that dispatcheth all that come under his hands; a
drunken serieant or sumner, that could not live, it (like the devil) he did
not from time to time e^quire after the sins of the people; a necessary
member in a State to be used, to cut off unnecessary members. Such same has
he preferred Master Bodley too, and wishes Thorius to emulate. By his
Netherlandish train under him that taught the Prince of Navarre, now the
valorous King of France, is not to be gathered that he was schoole-fellow to
the King of France, as he would saine put the world in a fools Paradise,
because he has sonnetted it in his praise, but that he was Doctor Coranus
son of Oxford, who was Tutor to the said King, as well he might be, and that
no argument his son should be so well improou'd as he is.


Carnead: The last of them is Chute, to whom he thus dilateth. Be thou
Anthony the flowing Orator like Dove, and the skillful Herald, like
Clarencius; and ever remember thy Portugal Voyage under Don Anthonio.


Respond: Chute, is he such a high Clearke in his Books? I knew when he was
but a low Clarke, and carried an Atturnies books after him. But this I will
say for him though he be dead and rotten, and by his obsequies has prevented
the vengeaurce I meant to have executed upon him; of a youth that could not
understand a word ^f Latin, he loved lycoras and drunk posset (...), the
best that ever put cup to mouth, and for his Orators^ip, it was such, that I
have seen him non plus in giving the charge, at the creating of a new Knight
of Tobacco; though to make amends since, he has kneaded and daubed up a
Commedie, called The transformation of the King of Trinidadoes two Daughters,
Madame Panachaea and the Nymphe Tobacco: and to approve his Heraldrie,
scutchend out the honorable Arms of the smoakie Society. His voyage under Don
Anthonio was nothing so great credit to him, as a French Var^et of the chamber
is; nor did he follow Anthonio neither, but was a Captains Boy that scornd
writing and reading, and helped him to set down his accounts, and score up dead
pays. But this was our Graphiel Hagiels trick of VVily Beguily herein, that
whereas he could get no man of worth to cry Placet to his works, or meeter it
in his commendation, those worthless Whippets and Jack Strawes he could get,
he would seem to enable and compare with the highest. Hereby he thought to
connycatch the simple world, and make them believe, that these and these great
men, every way suitable to Sy^ Thomas Baskeruile, Master Bodley, Doctor
Androwes, Doctor Dove, Clarencius and Master Spencer, had seperately contended
to outstrip Pindarus in his Olympicis, and sty alost to the highest pitch, to
stellifie him above the clouds, and make him shine next to Mercury. Here some
little digression I must borrow, to revenge his base allusion of Sir Thomas
Baskeruile, even as I have done of Doctor Androwes; neither of them being men
that ever saluted me, or I rest bound unto in any thing: otherwise than by
Doctor Androwes own desert, and Master Lillies immoderate commending him, by
little and little I was drawn on to be an Auditor of his: since when,
whenever I heard him, I thought it was but hard and scant allowance that was
given him, in comparison of the incomp^rable gifts that were in him. For Sir
Thomas Baskeruile, France, England, the Low Countries and India acknowledges
him, and though it was never my hap, but once in a young Knights Chamber in the
Strand (none of my coldest well-wishers) to light in his comparie, yet for Sir
Reger Williams testimony of him, (a noble Gentleman that a year and a halse
before his death, I was excessiuely beholding too, and on whom I have vowed when
my business are a little overcome, to bestow a memorial Epitaph, such as Plato
would in no more but sour verses to be set upon the graves of the dead) down
his throat I will thrust this turn br^ach comparison of a chicken and a
chrisome, with one of the most tried Soldiers of Christendom. Doctor Dove
and Clarencius, I turn loos^ to be their own Arbitratours and Adu^cates; the
one being eloquent enough to desend himself, and the other a Vice roy and next
Heir apparent to the King of Heralds, able to emblazon him in his right
colors, if he find he has sustained any loss by him: as also in like sort
Master Spencer, whom I do not thrust in the lowest place, because I make the
lowest valuation of, but as we use to set the Summ' tot' always underneath or
at the bottom, he being the Sum tot' of whatsoever can be said of sharp
invention and schollership.


Consil: Of the Doctor it may be said, as Ovid says of the Scritch owl,
Alijsque (dolens) fit causa dolendi. He cannot be content to be miserable
himself, but he must draw others to miscarrie with him. And as Plato had his
best beloved Boy Agatho, Socrates his Alcibiades, Virgill his Alexis; so has
he his Barnabe and Anthony for his minions and sweet-harts* though therein I
must needs tell him (as Fabritius the Romanc Consul writ to Pirrhus when he
sent him back his Physician that offered to poison him) he has made as ill
choice of friends as of enemies; seeking like the Panther to cure himself with
man's dung, and with the very excrements of the rubbishest wits that are, to
reslore himself to his blood, and repair his credit and estimation.


Bentiu: If his Patrons be such Peter Pingles and Moundragons, he cannot
choose but be sixty times a more poor Slauontan arse-worme.


Respond: Tender itchie brainde infants, they cared not what they did so they
might come in print: and of that strain are a number of mushrumpes more, who
pester the World with Pamphle^^, before they have heard of Terence Pamphilus,
and can construe and pearse Proh Du immortales; being like those barbarous
People in the hot Countries, who when they have bread to make, do no more but
clap the dowe upon a poast on the outside of their houses, and there leave it
to the Sun to bake; so their indigested conceits (far rawer than any
dowe) at all adventures upon the poastes they clap, pluck them off who is will:
and if (like the Sun) any man of judgment (though in scorn) do but look
upon them, they think they have struck it dead, and made as good a batch of
Poetry as may be. Neither of these princockesses ( Barnes or Chute) once cast
up their noses toward Powles Churchyard, or so much as knew how to knock at a
Printing House door, till they consorted themselves with Haruey, who infected
them within one fortnight with his own spirit of Bragganisme; which after so
increased and multiplied in them, as no man was able to endure them. The first
of them (which is Barnes) presently upon it, because he would be noted,
getting him a strange pair of Babilonian britches, with a codpisse as big as a
Bolognian sawcedge, and so went up and down Town, and showed himself in the
Presence at Court, where he was generally laughed out by the Noblemen and
Ladies: and the other (which is Chute) because Haruey had praised him for his
Oratorship and Heraldry, to approve himself no less than he had given his
word for him, sets his mouth of a new key, and would come forth with such
Kenimnawo count metaphors and phrases, that Edge was but a botcher to him; and
to emblazon his Heraldrie, he painted himself like a Curtizan, which no
Stationers boy in Poules Churchyard, but discouerd and pointed at. One of the
best Articles against Barnes I have ouer-slipt, which is, that he is in Print
for a Braggart, in that universal applauded Latin Poem of Master Campions;
wherein an Epigram entitled In Barnum, beginning thus Mortales decemtela inter
Gallica caesos. he shows, how he bragd when he was in France he slew ten men,
when (fearful cowbaby) he never heard piece shot off, but he fell flat on his
face. To this effect it is, though the words somewhat vary.


Carnead: Alloune, alloune, let us march, and from arms and skirmishing, cast
thy self in the arms of a sweet Gentlewoman, that here at the end of the
Epistle stands ready to embrace thee. Gabriell calls her the excellent
Gentlewoman, his patroness or rather championess in this quarrel, meeter by
nature, and fitter by nurture, to be an inchaunting Angel with a white quill,
than a tormenting fury with her black incke.


Respond: What, is he like a Tinker, that never travails without his wench and
his dog? or like a Germane, that never goes to the wars, without his
Tannakin and her Cock on her shoulder. That Gentlewoman (if she come under my
fists) I will make a gentlewoman, as Doctor Perne said of his man's wise. Tun^
plena voluptas,
Cum pariter victi famina virque iacent.
Then it is sport worth the seeing when he and his woman lie crouching for
mercy under my feet. I will bestow more cost in belabouring her, because
throughout the whole pawnch of his book, he is as infinite in commending her,
as Saint Iereme in praise of Virginity; and oftener mentions her, than Virgill
and Theocritus Amarillis. In one place he calls her the one she, in another
the credible Gentlewomen, in a third the heavenly plant, and the fourth a new
star in Cassiopeia, in the fifth the heavenly creature, in the sixth a Lion
in the field of Minerua, in the seventh a right Bird of Mercuries winged
chariot, with a hundred such like: he says, she has read Homer, Virgill, the
divine Architipes of Hebrew, Greek and Roman valor, Plutarch, Polien,
Agtippa, Tyraquell.


Bentiu: I have found him, I have the tract of him: he thinks in his own
person if he should rail grosely it will be a discredit to him, and
therefore hereafter he would thrust forth all his writings under the name of
a Gentlewoman; who howsoever she scolds and plays the vixen never so, will be
borne with: and to prevent that he be not descride by his alleging of Authors
(which it will hardly be thought can proceed from a woman) he casts forth
this Item, that she has read these and these books, and is well seen in all
languages.


Consil: Shall we have a Hare of him then? a male one year, and a female
another: or as Pliny holds there is male and female of all things under heaven,
and not so much but as of trees and precious stoanes; so cannot there be a male
Con^uter, but there must be a female confuter too; a Simon Magus, but he must
have his whore Silenes; an Aristotle that sacrificed to his harlot Hermia, but
every Silius Poeta must insitate him? Does he when his omne wits fail, cry
Da Venus consilium? Holy Saint Venus inspire me? But as Bentiuole has well put
its, Pars minima est ipsa puella sui. I believe it is but a mere copy of his
countenance, and only he does it to breed an opinion in the world, that he
is such a great man in Ladies and Gentlewomens books, that they are ready to
run out of their wits for him, as in the Turks Alchoron it is written, that
250. Ladies hanged themselves for the love of Mahomer, and that like another
Numa Pompilius he does nothing without his Nymph Egeria.


Imp: Nay, if Jupiter joined with the Moon ( Haruey and his Gentlewoman)
conspire against thee, and that like another Messier Gallan the Hangman of
Antwerp he has a whole Burdel under his government, it cannot choose but go
hard with thee. She will say as the Itali^n Lady did, Kill my children as long
as thou will, here is the mould to make more.


Consil: We read that Semiramis was in love with a Horse, but for a
Gentlewoman to be in love with an Ass, is such a trick as never was.


Respond: It would do you good to hear how he gallops on in commending her,
he says she enuies none but art in person and virtue incorporate, and that
she is a Sappho, a Penelope, a Minerua, an Arachne, a Juno, yielding to all
that use her and hers well, that she stands upon masculine and not feminine
terms, and her hoatest ^ury may be resembled to the passing of a brave
Careere by a Pegasus, and wishes haruly that he could dispose of her
recreations.


Carnead: Call for a Bendle and have him away to Bridewell, for in every
syllable be commits letchery


Resp: He threats she will strip m^ wit into his shirt were that fair body of
the sweetest Venus in pri^t, and that it will then appear as in a clear
Vrinall whose wit has the green sickness.


Bent: If she strip thee to thy shirt, if I were as thee, I would strip her to
her smock.


Carnead: That were to put that fairest body of Venus in Print indeed with a
witness, and then she never need to have her water cast in an vrinall for the
green sickness.


Respond: She may be Queen Didoes peer for honesty for any dealings I ever
yet had with her; but any Gentlewomans name put in his mouth, it is of more
force to discredit it, than Licophrons pen was to discredit Penelope, who
notwithstanding Homers Praises of her, says she lay with all her wooers.


Consil: Whether she be honest or no, he has done enough to make her
di^honest, since as Ovid writes to a Leno, Vendibilis culpa facta puella sua
est. he has set her commonly to sale in Poules Churchyard.


Import: Let us on with our Index or Catalogue, and descant no more of her,
since I am of the mind that for all the storms and tempests Haruey from her
denounces, there is no such woman, but it is only a Fiction of his, like
Menanders Fable or Comedy called Thessala, of women ^^at could pluck back the
Mcone when they listed; or Ennius invention of Dido, who writing of the deeds
of Scipio, first gave life to that Legend. The Epistle Dedicatorie past, the
Gentlewomans demurre or Prologue staggers next after, the first line whereof is
stolen out of the Ballet of Anne Askew; for as that begins I am a woman poor
and blind,
so begins this O Muses, may a woman poor and blind,
and goes on, Is It possible for puling wench to tame
The furibundall champion of fame?
Bids thee hazard not panting quill thy aspen selse, calls thee bombard-goblin,
and most railipotent for every rain; then follows she with a counter
Sonnet or correction of her own preamble, where there is nothing but
braggardous affronts, white liuerd tronts, where does the vra^ie or surie ring,
pulcrow implements, Danters scar-crow Press; and ends; with Vltrixaccincta
flagello.


Respond: Yea Madam Gabricla, are you such an old ierker, then Hey ding a ding,
up with your petticoate, have at your plum-tree: but the style bewraies it,
that no other is this goodwife Megara, but Gabriel himself; so does the
counter-sonnet and the correction of preambles, which is his method as right
as a fiddle. I will never open my lips to consute any rag of it, it consuting
it self^e suficiently in the very rehearsal. And so does that which is
annexed to it, of her old Comedy new entitled, where she says her prose is
as resolute as Beuis sword, calls me rampant beast informidable-hide, with I
wot not what other Getulian slabberies; scarrebugges thee with a Comedy, which
she has scrawld and scribeld up against me. But we shall lenuoy him, and
trumpe and poope him well enough if the wind come in that door, and he will
needs fall a Comedizing it. Comedy upon Comedy he shall have, a Moral, a
Historse, a Tragedy, or what he will. One shall be called The Doctors dumpe,
another Haru^y and his excellent Gentlewoman Madame VVhipsidoxy, a third The
triumphs of Saffron-walden, with the merry conceits of We three; or The
three Brothers; a fourth, Stoop Gallant, or The Fall of pride; the fifth and
last, A pleasant Interlude of No fool to the old Fool, with a ^igge at the
latter end in English Hexameters of Oneighbour Gabrie^l, and his wooing of
Kate Cotton. More than half of one of these I have done already, and in
Candlemas Term you shall see it acted, though better acted than he has been
at Cambridge, he can never be; where, upon every Stage he has been
brought for a Sicophant and a Sow-gelder.


Bent: VVilt thou have nere a pluck at him for Danters scar-crow Press, and
so abusing thy Printer?


Resp: In pudding time you have spoken, my Printer who ever, shall sustain no
damage by me: and where he terms his Press a Scar-crow Press, he shall
find it will scare and crow over the best Press in London, that shall Print a
Reply to This. He that dares most, let him try it, (as none will try it,
that has a care to (...) by his trade, not a hundred of any Impresion of the
Doctors books ever selling). My Printers Wife too he has had a twitch at in
two or three places about the midst of his book, and makes a maulkin and a
shooclout of her, talks of her moody tung, and that she will teach the florme
wind to scolde English; but let him look to himself, for though in all the
time I have line in her House, and as long as I have known her, I never saw
any such thing by her; yet since he has given her so good a cause to find
her tung, and so unjustly and despitefully prouokt her, she will tell him such
a tale in his ear the next time she meets him, as shall be worse than a
Northern blast to him, and have a handful of his beard (if he defend not
himself the better) for a maulkin or wispe to wype her shoes with.


Import: The Gentlewoman having taken her Lenuoy or Farewell, Barnabe Barnes
steps in with An Epistle to the right Worshipful his especial dear Friend M.
Gabriell Haruey, Doctor of the Law.


Respo: It were no book else, if one or other were not drawn in to call him
Right Worshipful: and when he has no body to help him, he gets one of his
Brothers to Epistle it to him, or in their absence ^aines an Epistle in their
names, where his style to the full shall be set in great letters, like a Bill for
a House to be let: and upon pain of excommunication with bell book and
candle, none of his Brothers must publish any thing, but to his Dottel ship
they must frame the like dedication.


Import: The tenure of that scrimpum scrampum of Barneses, is no more but this,
to exhort the sweet Doctor (as he names him) to confound those viperous
critical^ monsters, wheretoo he is manifestly urged; though he be^ fitter to
encounter some more delicate Paranymphes, and honor the Vrany of Du Bartas.
He has a Sonet with it, wherein he muokes and contures up all Romes learned
Orators, sweet Grecian Prophets, Philosophers, wisest Statesmen, reverend
general Counsels, all in one to behold, the Doctors ennobled Arts, as precious
stones in gold. At the foot of that (like a right Pupil of the Doctors
bringing up) he inserteth his post-scrist or correction of his Preamble, with
a Counter-sonnet, superscribed Nash, or the confuting Gentleman. In which he
besmeares and ^^uiles thee with all the cutpurse names that is possible, and
says he cannot bethink him of names ill enough, since thou raylst at one,
whom Bodine and Sidney did not flatter.


Respond: No more will I flatter him, he may build upon it. Thus it is, there
was sometimes some pretty expectation of this Patter-wallet and Megiddo, that
now I am a salting and poudring of, and then Sir Philip Sid^ey (as he was a
natural cherisher of men of the least towardnes in any Art whatsoever) held
him in some good regard, and so did most men; and (it may be) some kind
Letters he writ to him, to encourage and animate him in those his hopeful
courses he was entered into: but afterward, when his ambitious pride and vanity
unmasked it self so egregiously, both in his looks, his gate, his gestures,
and speeches; and he would do nothing but crake and parret it in Print, in how
many Noble-mens favors he was, and blab every light speech they vttred to
him in private, cockering and coying himself beyond imagination; then Sir
Philip Sidney (by little and little) began to look askance on him, and not to
care for him, though utterly shake him off he could not, he would so sawne
and hang upon him. For M. Bodines commendation of him, it is no more but this,
one co^plementarie Letter asks another; and Gabriell first writing to him,
and seeming to admire him and his works, he could do no less in humanity
(being a Scholar) but return him an answer in the like nature. But my young
Master Barnabe the bright, and his kindness (before any desert at all of mine
toward him, might pluck it on or provoke it) I neither have nor will be
unmindful of.


Import: Here is another Sonet of his, which he calls Haruey, or The sweet
Doctor, consisting of Sidney, Bodine, Hatcher, Lewen, Wilson, Spencer; that
all their life time have done nothing but conspire to lawd and honor Poet
Gabriell.


Respond: Miserum est fuisse foelicem. It is a miserable thing for a man to be
said to have had friends, and now to have nere a one lest.


Import: What say thou to the Printers Advertisement to the Gentleman Reader?


Respond: I say, ware you break not your shins in the third line on preambles
and postambles; and that it is not the Printers, but Harueys.


Imp: In it he makes mention of Thorius and Chutes sonets to be added,
pre^ixed, inserted or annexed at the latter end.


Respond: The latter end? but the beginning of the tide it may be for the
flowing.


Import: As also a third learned French Gentleman's verses Monsieur Fregeuile
Gautius, who both in French and Latin has published some weighty Treatises.


Respond: Were they weighty Treatises? the Printers purse never so; but in
this respect they might be tearmd to be weighty, that they were so heavy,
they would ^ere come out of Poules Churchyard. I will have a sound list at him
anon, for all his Mathematical devices of his own invention, wherewith he
has acquainted Ma. Doctor Haruey, nothing so good as a knife with prickles in
the have, or these Boys paperdragons that they let fly with a pack-thrid in
the fields.


Import: His book.


Respond: Hand off, there is none but I will have the vnclasping of that,
because I can do it nimblest. It is divided into four parts; one against me,
the second against M. Lilly, the third against Mart^nists, the fourth against
D. Perne. Neither are these parts severally distinguished in his order of
handling, but like a Dutch stewd-pot iumbled altogether, and linsey-wolsey
wo^en one within another. But one of these parts falls to my share, I being
bound to answer for none but my self; yet if I speak a good word now and then
for my friends by the way, they have the more to thank me for. Incipit Caput
primum.
I was ever unwilling to undertake a^ie thing, etc.
You ly, you ly Gabriell, I know what you are about to say, but I Will shred you
off three leaves at one blow. You were most willing to undertake this
controversy, for else you would never have first begun it; you would never have
line writing against me here in London in the very heart of the Plague a whole
Summer; or after (through your Friends entreaty) we were reconcide, popt out
your Book against me. Now say what you will of being vrgd, loofing of time,
impudency and slander, and another Table Philosophy that ye fancy; for there
is not a dog under the table that will believe you.


Sa ho: has Apuleius ever an Attorney here? One Apuleius (by the name of
Apule^us) he endites to be an engrosser of arts and inventions, putting down
Plato, Hippocrates, Aristtle, and the Paragraphs of Justinian. Non est i^ (...)
ent us: there is no such man to be found; let them that have the Commission for
the Co^cealments look after it, or the Man in the Moon put for it. Gabriell
casts a vile learing eye at me, as who should say, he quipt me secretly under
it, if he durst utter so much, Also in that which succeeds, of One that is a
common contemner of God and man, stampes and treades under his foot the
reuerentest old and new VVriters, ^pposeth himself against Universities,
Parliaments and general Counsels, encloseth all within his own brain, and
is a changer, an innouater, a cony-catcher, a rimer, a rayler, that out-faceth
heaven and earth. But sost you now, how is all this or any part of this to be
proved? make account he will (upon his oath) deny it. Has he spoken, printed,
written, contrived or imagined, or caused to be spoken, written, printed,
contrived or imagined any thing against these? or expressed in his countenance,
the least wincke of dishke of them? Let some instance of that be produced, and
he be not able to resute it; I Will undertake for him (which is the most
ignominious imposition he can tie himself to) her shall give thee his tung for
a rag to wype thy tail with, and have his right hand cut off, for thy Mother
to hang out for an ale house sign. Cannot a man declaime against a Catalonian
and a Hethite, a Moabite Gabriell and an Amorite Dicke, but all the ancient
Fathers, all the renoumed Philosophers, Orators, Poets, Historiographers, and
old and new excellent Writers must be disparaged and trod under foot, God
and man contemned and set at naught? Universities, Parliaments, general
Counsels oppugned? and he must be another Roman Palemon, who vaunted all
Science began and ended with him? a changer, an innouater, a cony-catcher, a
railer, and out-facer of heaven and earth.

Is there such high treason comprehended under calling a soppe a ^oppe, and
cudgelling a curre for his snarling? Or it is thus, our iracundious Stramutzen
Gabriell standing much upon his reading, and that all the Libraries of the
ancient Fathers, renowned Philosophers, Poets, Orators, Historiographers, and
old and new excellent Writers, are hoorded up in the Amalthaeas Horn of his
brain, with whatsoever Constitutions and Decretalls of general Counsels and
Parliaments, and for he has commenst in both Universities; therefore he
concludes, He which writes against him must write against them all, and so) per
consequens) vaunt him above all; and if he vaunts him above them all, he is a
changer, an innouater, an impostor, a railer at all, and consounds heaven and
earth. This is the tydiest Argument he can frame to make his matter good,
though it follows no more, than that a man should be held a traitor and
accused to have abusde the Queen and Counsel, and the whole State, for
calling a fellow knave that has read the Book of Statutes, since by them all
in general they were made.


Carn: Thou art unwise to canuaze it so much, for he thrust it in but for a
Rhetorical figure of amplification.


Respond: Rhetorical figure? and if I had a hundred sons, I had rather have
them disfigured and keep them at home as ciphers, than send them to school to
learn to figure it after that order.


Carnead: You may have them worse brought up, for so you should be sure never
to have them counted liars, since Rhetoricians though they lie never so
groscly, are but said to have a luxurious phrase, to be eloquent anpli^iers,
to be full of their pleasant Hyperboles, or speak by Ironies; and if they
raise a slander upon a man of a thing done at home, when he is a 1000. mile
off, it is but Prosopopeya, personae fictio, the supposing or faining of a
person: and they will allege Tully, Demosthenes, Demades, Aeschines, and show
you a whole Talaeus and Ad Herennium of figures for it, four and fifty times
more licentious. These Arithmetique figurers are such like iugling
transformers, lying by Addition and Numeration, making frayes and quarrelling,
by Division, getting wenches with child by Multiplication, stealing by
Substraction; and if in these humors they have consumd all and are feign to
bre^ke, they do it by Fraction.


Respond: That last part of Arithmetique (which is Fraction or breaking) I
intend to teach Gabriel; though to all the other, as Addition, Division,
Rebating or Substraction, of his own ingrafted disposition he is aptinough,
and so he is to Multiplication too, he having since I parted with him last
got him a Gentlewoman.


Bentiu: Both the^ and he talk much of that Gentlewoman, but I would we might
know her, and see her vnhukt and naked once, as Paris in Lucians Dialogues,
desires Mercury he might see the three Goddesses naked, that strove for the
golden Ball.


Carnead: The Venus she is that would win it from them all, if the controuer
sie were now a^toate again: and which thou pretermitted^^ before, he puts her
in print for a Venus, yet desires to see her a Venus in print; publishes her
for a strumpet (for no better was Venus) and yet he would have her a strumpet
more public.


Respond: By that name had he not so published her, yet his peacocke pluming
her like another Pandora, (from Poets too parasiticall commending of whom
first grew the name of Pandare, though Sir Philip Sidney fetches it out of
Plautus) through his incredible praising of her I say (wherein one quarter of
his Book is spent) he has brought all the world into a persuasion, that she
is as common as Rubarbe among Physicians; since (as Thucidides pronouhceth)
she is the honestest woman, of whose praise or dispraise is least spoken. My
pen he prodigally insulteth she shall pumpe to as dry a sponge as any is in
Hosier Lane, and wring our brains like empty purses. I them per idem in sense
he speaks, though it be not his comparison, and Tamburlain- like he braues it
indesinently in her behal^e, setting up bills like a Bear-ward or Fencer, what
fights we shall have and what weapons she will meet me a^.


Con: Fasilia the daughter of Pelagius King of Spain, was torn in pe^ces by a
Bear; and so I hope thou will tear her and tug with her, if she begin once to
play the Devil of Dowgate: but as there was a woman in Room, that had her
child slain with thunder and lightning in her womb ere she was deliuerd; so
it is like enough hers will be, and prove an Embrion, and we shall never see
it: or if we do, look for another armed Pallas issuing out of Jove's brain,
or an Amazonian Hippolite, that will be good enough for Theseus; or the female
of the Aspis, who (if her mate be killed by any passenger in the way), thorough
fire, thorough the thickest assembly she will pursue him, or any thing but
water.


Bentiu: In some Countries no woman is so honor able as she that has had to
do with most men, and can give the lusteest striker odds by 25. times in one
night as Messalina did; and so it is with this his braiche or bitch-foxe.


Consil: Agelastus Grandfather to Crassus, never laughed but once in his life,
and that was to see a mare eat thistles; so this will be a jest to make one
laugh that lies a dying, to see a Gillian draggell tail r^n her tail into a
bushe of thorns, because her nails are not long enough to soratch it, and
play at wasters with a qu^l for the britches.


Carn: Multi illum iuuenes, multae petiere puellae, Boys, wenches, and every
one pursue him for his beauty. Non caret effectu, quod voluere duo, Thou can
never hold out, if thou were Hercules, if two to one encounter thee.


Respo: Quis nisiment is inops tenerae declamat amic^. Who but an ingram cosset
would keep such a courting of a Curtezan to have her combat for him; or do as
Dick Haruey did, (which information piping hot in the midst of this line was
but brought to me) that having preached and beat down three pulpits in
inueighing against dancing; one Sunday evening, when his Wench or Friskin was
footing it alo^t on the Green, with foot out and foot in, and as bufie as
might be at Rogero, Basilino, Turkelony, All the flowers of the broom, Pepper
is black, Green sleeves, Peggie Ramsey, he came sneaking behind a tree and
looked on, and though he was loath to be seen to countenance the sport, having
laid Gods word against it so dreadfully, yet to show his good will to it in
heart, he sent her 18. pence in hugger mugger to pay the fiddlers: let it sink
into ye, for it is true and will be verefide. Let Gabrtel verefie any one
thing so against me, and not think to carry it away with his general
extenuatings, ironicall amplifications, and declamatorie exclamations. Nor let
him muck ehill up so many pages in saying he looked for terms of aqua fortis
and gumpowder, and that I have thundered and given ^ut tragically, when naught
appears but the sword of cats-meat^, and the firebrand of dogs-meate, and Aut
nunc aut nunquam, and two staves and a pike: but let him show what part of that
his first Book I have not from the crown to the little toe consuted, and laid
as open as a custard or a cowsheard; and if my Book be cats-meate and
dogs-meate, his is much worse, since on his mine has his whole foundation and
dependence, and I do but paraphrase upon his text. Something that he grounds
this cats-meate and dogs-meate on, I will not with stand but I have lent him;
as in my Epis^le to Apis lapis, where I wish him to let Chaucer be new scowrd
against the day of battle, and Terence but come in now and then with the
snus^e of a sentence and Dictum puta, we will strike it as dead as a doore-naile,
Haud terun^ij estimo, we have cats-meate and dogs-meate enough for these
mungrels. Hence, as if I had continually harpt upon it, in every tenth line
of my Book he faith I do nothing but assail him with cat-meat and dogs-meat;
when there is not any more spoken of it, than I have showed you. So Aut nunc
aut nunquam he brings in for a murdring shot, being never my Posie, but Aut
nunquam tents, aut perfice at the latter end of my Foute Letters; speaking to
him, that he should not go about to answer me, except he set it soundly on; for
otherwise, with a sound counterbuffe I would make his ears ring again, and
have at him with two staves and a pike, which was a kind of old verse in
request, before he fell a railing at Turberuile or Elderton. Some Licos^henes
reading (which shows plodding and no wit) he has given a twinkling glimps
of, and like a schoolboy said over his gear to his uncles and kinsfolk, and
tells what Authors he has read, when he floted in the sea of encounters; which
for ought he has alleadgd out of them, he may have stolen by the whole sale
out of Ascanius or Andrew Maunsells English Catalogue. No villain, no Atheist,
no murdrer, no traitor, no Sodomite, he ever read of but he has likend me
too, or in a superlatiue degree made me a monster beyond him, for no other
reason in the earth, but because I would not let him go beyond me, or be won to
put my finger in my mouth, and cry mumbudget, when be had baffuld me in print
throughout England. The victorioust Captains and Warriors, the inuinciblest
Caesar's and Conquerours, the satyricallest confuters, and Luthers (like whom
the Germans affirm never any in their tung writ so forcible) in an Alphabet
he trowles up, and says I outstrip them all, I set them all too school. The
quorsum or quare if you demand, is this, I have out stripped and set him to
school, and he is sure he is a better man than any of them. The very guts
and garbage of his Notebook, he has put into this tallow loa^e, and not lest
any Frezeland, Dutch or Almain scribe (where they Commence and and do their
Acts with writig Books) that has but squibd forth a Latin Puerilis in
Print, or set his name to a Catechism, vnco^pared or vnscoard. Atrue Pelican
he is, that peirceth his breast and lets out all his bowels to give li^e to his
young. No Author but himself and Nashe hereafter he can cite, which he has
not s^ellified worse than Sapie^s dominabiturastris, the ordinary Posie for
all Almanackes, or the presenting of Artaxerxes with a cup of water, used in
every Epistle Dedicatorie; and those two he has wrought reasonably upon,
having worn the first (which is himself) naplesse, and the other owes him
nothing. Against blasphemous Seruetus or Muretus or Sunius, that have been so
bold with her Majesty and this State, was this Inuectiue of his first armd and
advanced; which (upon the missing his preserment or advancement in Court) he
suppressed, and in the bottom of a rustie hamper let it lie asleep by him, (even
as he did the Aduerrisement against Pap-hatchet and Martin, which he has yoakt
with it, by his own date ever since ^9.) and now with putting in new names here
and there of Nashe and Piers Pennilesse, he has so pannyerd and dressed it that
it seems a new thing, though there be no new thing in it that claims any
kindred of me, more than a dozen of fami^ht quips, but like a lose French
cassock or gabberdine would fit any man. Those more appropriate blows over the
thumb, are these. My praising of Aretine; so did he before me, the very words
whereof I have set down in my other Book: my excepting against his
Doctorship; better Doctors than ever he will be put it in my head, and if
therein I misrepor, I err by authority. My calling him a fawn^-guest
messenger betwixt M. Bird and M. Demetrius, in the company of one of which, he
never dined nor supt this ^ years; and forth^ other, he never drunk with to
this day: he may be a ^awn-guest in his intent nevertheless, and if he neither
eat nor drunck at M. Demetrius, why did he so familiarly write to him, M.
Demetrius, in your absence I found your wife very courteous? For a great
irespasse he lays it to me, in that I have praised her Majesty's affability
toward Shollers, and attributed to Noblemen so much policy and wisdom, as
to have a privy watch word in their praises, and crossing his slight opinion
of Inuectiues and Satyrs. Like Sophistical Disputers that only rehearse not
answer, he runs on telling, how I have fatherd on him a new Part of Tully,
which he fetched out of a wall at Barnwell, even as Poggius in an old Monastery
found out a new Part of Quintillian, after it had bin many hundred years lost;
my taking upon me to be Greenes advocate, my threatening so incessantly to haunt
the Ciuilian and the Divine, that to avoid the hot chase of my fiery quill,
they shall be constrained to enskonse themselves in one of their Physician
Brothers old vrinall cases; my calling him butter-whore, and bidding him Rip,
rip, you kitchin-stufle wrangler; my accusing him of carterlyderisions and
milkmaids girds, as Good bear bite not, A man's a man though he has but a hose
on his head. Pulchre mehercule dictum, sapienter, laute, lepide, nil supra,
nothing so good as the jests of the Council Table ass, Richard Clarke.


Carnead: Yes that he does more than rehearse, for he maintains them to be the
Ironies of Socrates, Aristophanes, Epicharmus, Lucian, Tully, Quintillian,
Sanazarius, K. Alphonsus, Cardan, Sir Th. Moore, Isocrates; look the first
156. Page of his Book, and ye shall ^inde it so.


Bentiu: What, had they no better jests, than Good bear bite not, or A man is
a man though he has but a hose on his head, Pulchre mehercule dictum? O
dishonor to the house from whence they come.


Resp: He charge me, to have derided and abused the most valorous
Mathematical Arts; let him show me wherein, and I will answer: of palbable
Atheism he condemns me, for drinking a cup of lambswooll to the health of his
Brothers Book, called The Lamb of God and his Enemies; then what Atheists are
they that turn it to wast paper and go to the privy with it? as to no other
uses it is converted, it lying dead and never selling: and again with the
Atheist he spur-gals me, in that I iested at heaven, calling it the haven
where his deceased Brother is arrived.


Carnead: Is it a jest that his brother is arrived in heaven? he is in hell
then belike.


Consil: A more likelier piece of Atheism thou may urge against him, where
he says in one leaf, that one acre of performance, is worth twenty of the
Land of Promise: as though God had not performd to the Children of Israel, the
Land of Promise he vowed to them.


Resp: The deep cut out of my grammar Rules Astra pet it disert^s he hits me
with. I am sorry for it I slanderd him so, for he was never eloquent; if he be
not above the stars, I would he were. He complains I do not regard M.
Bird, M. Spencer Mounsieur Bodin. In any thing but in praising him, and therein
as Aristotle non vidit verum in spiritualibus, nor Barnard all things; so they
may have their eyes dazeled. To a bead-roll of learned men and Lords he
appeals, whether he be an Ass or no, in the forefront of whom, he puts M.
Thomas Watson, the Poet: A man he was that I dearly loved and honored, and
for all things has le^t few his equals in England, he it was that in the
company of diverse Gentlemen one night at supper at the Nags head in Cheap;
first told me of his vanity, and those Hexameters made of him, But o what
news of that good Gabriell Haruey,
Known to the world for a fool and clapped in the Fleet for a Rimer.
For the other grave men, they all speak as their foreman. His imprisonment in
the Fleet he affirms is a lewd supposall (the Hexameter vearse before proves
it) as also his writing the welwillers Epistle in praise of himself, before
his first four Letters a year ago. The Compositor that set it, swore to me
it came under his own hand to be printed. He bids the world examine the
Preamble before the Supplication to the devil, and see if I do not praise my
self, and that the teno^r of the style, and identity of the phrase proves it
to be mine. He needed not go so far about to sent me out by my style and my
phrase, for if he had ever ouerlookt it he would have seen my name to it, and
besides another argument that he never read it is, which (whosoever shall peruse
it will find) it is altogether in my own dispraise and disabling, and grieuing
at the imperfect printing and misinterpreting of it, let him show me but one
tittle or letter in it tending to any other drist He vpbraides me by the poor
fellow my Fathers putting me to my scribbling shifts, and how I am beholding to
the Printing House for my poor shifts of apparai^e: My Father put more good
meat in poor men's mouths, than all the ropes and living is worth his Father
left him, together with his mother and two brothers; and (as another Scholar)
he brought me up at S. John's, where (it is well known) I might have been
Fellow if I had would: and for deriuing my maintenance from the
Printing House, so do both Universities, and whosoever they be that come up by
Learning, out of Printed Boookes gathering all they have; and would not have
furre to put in their gowns, if it, or writing were not. But if he mean that
from writing to the Press, I scrape up my exhibition, let him s^rape it out
for a lie; till the Impression of this Book, I having got nothing by Printing
these three years. But when I do play my Prizes in Print, I Will be paid for my
pains that is once, and not make my self a gazing stock and a public
spectacle to all the world for nothing as he does, that gives money to be seen
and have his wit looked upon, never Printing book yet, for whose Impression he
has not either paid or run in debt. Printers (above all the rest) have nothing
to thank him for, in his Praise of the ass, he putting in the Press for the
arrantest Ass of all, because it is such a means to press him to death, and
confound him. Danters Press swears after three Form a day, since he has
given it the Press and disgraced them it will (how ever others neglect it)
never have done Printers beating with ink balls.
beating upon him, nor has it acquitted him for calling me Danters gentleman,
who is as good at all times as VVolfes right worshipful Gabriell, or the
gentleman he brings in reading a Chapter (College fashion at dinner time)
against Piers and his proceedings, and the approbation of his Docterly
reincounter. Applaud and partake with him who list, this is my definitive
position, which Anaxandrides a Comic Poet said of the Egyptian superstition,
Maximam Anguillam quam Deum putant, comedo; canem quem colunt, verbero. They
worship the great Eeele for a God, which I eat or digest; and the Dog they
adore, I spurn or drive out of doors. Hidr as heads I should go about to cut
off, (as Tacitus says of them that think to cut off all discommodities or
inconveniences from the Laws) if I should undertake to run throghout all the
foolish frivolous reprehensions and cauils he has in his Book. I will take no
knowledge of his late of ten eggs for a penny, and nine of them rotten, a
gormandizing breakfast he says I was at of eggs and butter; which if he can
name where when or with whom, I will give him an annuitie of eg-pyes. No more
will I of his calling me Captain of the boys, and Sir Kil-prick; which is a
name fitter for his Piggen de wiggen or gentlewoman: or else because she is such
a honey sweetikin, let her be Prick-madam, of which name there is a flower, and
let him take it to himself, and reign entire Cod-pisse Kinko, and Sir Murdered
of placards durante been placito, as long as he is able to please or give them
gear. Likewise the Captainship of the boys I toss back to him, he having a
whole Band of them to write in his praise: but if so he term me in respect of
the minority of my beard, he has a beard like a Crow with two or three durtie
strawes in her mouth, going to build her neast. See him and see him not I will,
about that his meaziid invention of the Good-wife my mothers finding her
daughter in the oven, where she would never have sought her, if she had not
been there first her self: (a hackny proverb in men's mouths ever since K. Lud
was a little boy, or Belinus Brennus brother, for the love he bare to oysters
built Billinsgate;) therefore there is no more to be said to it, but if he could
have told how to have made a better lie he would. I will not present into the
Arches or Commissaries Court, what prinkum prankums Gentlemen (his nere
neighbors) have whispred to me of his Sister, and how she is as good a fellow
as ever turned belly to belly, for which she is not to be blamed, but I rather
pity her and think she cannot do withal, having no other dowry to marie
her. Good Lord, how one thing brings on another; had it not bin for his baudy
sister, I should have forgot to have answered for the bau^ie rymes he threapes
upon me. Are they rimes? and are they ba^die? and are they mine? Well, it may
be so that it is not so; or if it be, men in their youth (as in their sleep)
many times do something that might have been better done, and they do not well
remember.

O Yes. Be it known unto all men by these presents, that what soever names of
Duns, ass, or Dorbell I have given Gabriel Haruey, or of a kitchen stuff
wrangler, and reading the Lecture of Ram alley, I will still persevere and
insist in; as also, that I will be as good as my word in desending any (but
abominable Atheists) that shall write against him, that I will still maintain
there is in court but one true Diana, and so will all that are true subjects to
her Majesty; that I think as reverently of London as of any City in Europe,
though I do not call it the He might as well have called it the Countesle, or
Duches Tovvue,
Madam Town of the Realm, as he has done, and that I hold no place better
governed, how ever in so great a sea of all waters, there cannot choose but be
some quicksands and rocks and shelues, that I never so much as in thought
detracted from Du Bartas, Buchanan, or any general allowed modern Writer,
howere Gnimelse Hengist here gives out, with out naming time place or to whom
I did how I vowed to confute them all; that Mast. Lilly never procured Green or
me to write against him, but it was his own first seeking and beginning in The
Lamb of God, where he and his Brother (that loves dancing so well) scummerd out
betwixt the^ an Epistle to the Readers against all Poets and Writers, and M.
Lilly and me by name he berusfianizd and berascald, co^par'd to Martin, and
termd us piperly make-plaies and make-bates, yet bad us hold our peace and not
be so hardy as to answer him, for if we did, he would make a bloody day in
Poules Churchyard, and splinter our pens til they stradled again, as wide as a
pair of Compasses. Further be it known unto you, that before this I praisde
him (after a sort) in an Epistle in Greenes Menaphon.


Bentiu: But (...) thou so?


Respon: O what do you mean to hinder my Proclamation? I did, I did, as
unfeignedly and sincerely as in his first butter-fly Pamphlet against Green he
praisd me for that proper young man, Greenes fellow Writer, whom (in some
respects) he wished well too; as also in his Book he writ against Green and
me, he raild upon me under the name of Piers Pennilesse, and for a bribe that
I should not reply on him praisd me, and reckond me (at the latter end) amongst
the famous Scholars of our time, as S. Philip Sidney, M. Watson, M. Spencer,
M. Daniell, whom he heartily thankt, and promised to endow with many
complements for so enriching our English Tongue.


Consil: Then what an Ass is he to call thee an Ass for praising him, and
after thou had praisd him (though it was but pretty and so, for a Latin Poet
after others) upon a good turn done him (and no injury fore-running) to build
the foundation of a quarrel.


Resp: Further than further be it known (since I had one further before) I
never abusd Marloe, Green, Chettle in my life, nor ani^ of my friends that used
me like a friend: which both Marloe and Green (if they were alive) under their
h^nds would testi^ie, even as Harry Chettle has in a sh^rt note here.


I Hold it no good manners (M. Nashe) being but an Artificer to give D. Harue^
the ly though he have deserved it, ^y publishing in Print you have done me
wrong, which privately I never found: yet to confirm by my Art in deed, what
his calling forbids me to affirm in word, your book being ready for the
Press, I Will square and set it out in Pages; that shall page and lackey his
infamy after him (at least) while he lives, if no longer.

Your old Compositer, Henry Chettle.


Impo: Yes Green he conuinces thee to have abused, in that thy defense of him
is a more biting commendation than his reproose.


Respond: It is so heretical a falsifier, a man had not need talk with him
without a Bible in the room; for it may be he has some care of his oath, if
it be not in a matter of reconciliation, or repaying of money, as to Dexters
man: but his ipse dixit, his report otherwise is nothing so current as beggars
about the Courts remove. Nere tell me of this or that he says I spoke or did,
except he particularize and stake down the very words, and catching them by
the throat like a thee^e say, these are they that did the deed, I arrest you,
and I charge you all gentle Readers to aid me. What truly might be spoken of
Green, I published, neither discommending him, nor too much flattering him (for
I was nothing bound to him); whereas it may be alleadgd against Gabriel, as it
was against Paulus Iouius, Quae verissime s^ribere potuit noluit, and quae
voluit non potuit: Those things which he might have related truly he would
not, and those which he would he could not, for want of good intelligence. How
he has handled Green and Marloe since their deaths, those that read his
Books may judge: and where like a iakes barreller and a Gorbolone he girds me
with imitating of Green, let him understand, I more scorn it, than to have so
foul a iakes for my groaning stool as his mouth; and none that ever had but
one eye with a pearl in it, but could discern the difference twixt him and me;
while he lived (as some Stationers can witness with me) he subscribing to me in
any thing but plotting Plays, wherein he was his cra^ts master. Did I ever
write of Conycatching? stufft my style with herbs and stones? or apprentisd my
self to running of the letter? If not, how then do I (...) him? A hang-by of
his (one Valentine Bird, that writ against Green) imitated me, and would
embezill out of my Piers Pennilesse six lines at a clap, and use them for his
own. Nay he himself has purloyned something from me, and mended his hand in
confuting by fifteen parts, by following my presidents. There is two or three
mouth fulls of my Oo yes yet behind, which after I have drawn out at length,
you shall see me (like a Crier, that when he has done kireelosoning it, puts
of his cap, and cries God save the Queen, and so steps into the next
alehouse) steal out of your company before you be aware, and hide my self
in a Closet no bigger than would hold a Church Bible, till the beginning of
Candlemas Term, and then if you come into Poules Churchyard, you shall meet
me.

Oo yes, be it known, I can ryme as well as the Doctor, for a sample whereof,
in stead of his Noddy Nash, whom every swash, and his occasional
admonitionatiue Sonnet, his Apostrophe Sonnet, and tynie titmouse Lenuoy, like
a welt at the edge of a garment, his goggle-eyde Sonnet of Gorgon, and the
wonderful year, and another Lenuoy for the chape of it, his Stanza
declaratiue, VVriters postscript in meeter, his knitting up Cloase, and a
third Lenuoy, like a fart after a good stool; In stead of all these (I say)
here is the tufft or labell of a rhyme or two* the trick or habit of which I got
by looking on a red nose Balletmaker that resorted to our Printing House. They
are to the tune of Labor Dolor, or the Parliament tune of a pot of ale and
nutmegs and ginger, or Eldertons ancient note of meeting the devil in conture
house lane. If you hit it right, it will go marvelous sweetly. Gabriel Haruey
fames duckling,
hey noddie, noddie, noddie:
Is made a gosling and a suckling,
hey noddie, noddie, noddie.
Or that is not it, I have a better. Dilla my Doctor dear,
sing dilla, dilla, dilla:
Nashe has spoiled thee clear
with his quilla, quilla, quilla.
What more have I in my Proclamation to yalp out? No more but this, that in
both my books I have objected some particular vice more against him than pumps
and panto^les, which those that have not faith enough to believe, may toote and
superuize when they have any literal idle leisure. The Tragedy of wrath, or
Priscianus vapulans, promised in the epilogue Sonne^ of my Four Letters,
(three or four words whereof as Awayte, and paint, and tread no common path, he
mumbles and chewes in his mouth like a piece of Allom, or the stone of a
horse-plum to suck off all the meat of it,) let him take this for it, whereby
I am out of his debt, if not over plus. And where he terrefies me with
insulting he was Tom Burwels the Fencers Scholar, and that he will squeaze
and mazer me whenever he met me, why did he it not when he met me at
Cambridge, we lying back to back in the same Inn, and but two or three
square trenchours of a wainscot door betwixt us? By our reconciliation he
cannot excuse it, since the law-day was out, and the feude open again by his
breach of truce, and my defiance to him in an Epistle to the Reader in Christ's
tears. But let him hence forth provide him of two or three sturdie Plow men
(such as his swines faced blue-coate was) when I legerd by him in the Dolphin,
for otherwise not all the ^ence he learnd of Tom Burwell shall keep me from
cramming a turd in his jaws (and no other blood will I draw of him.) I have
bespoken a boy and a nap^in already to carry it in. Last of all there is
nothing I have bragd of my writing in all humors, no not so much as of his
fleshly humors, but shall be anuilde for true steel on his standish, I making
an indenture twixt God and my soul, to consume my body as slender as a stilt
or a broome-staffe, and my brain as poor and compendius, as the pummell of a
scotch saddle, or pan of a Tobacco pipe, but as the Elephant and the Rinoceros
never fight but about the best pastures, so will I win from him his best
Patrons, and drive him to confess himself a Conundrum, who now thinks he has
learning enough to prove the salvation of Lucifer; Apologize it for him as many
Chutes, Barnesses, or vile ^riggers, or Fregeuiles as there will.


Bentiu: Thou promisedst to have a dead lift at that Fregeuile.


Resp: I, here I am come to his verses, but let me take them in order as they
lie; Thorius is first, with a Letter, and Sonnet, and Postscript of Chutes


Carnead: More Post-scripts and preambles, has he (as with his Thrasonisme)
infectea them all with his method of Lenuoyes, Post-scripts and Preambles.


Respond: From Master Thorius I have a Letter under his own hand which he
sent me to be printed, utterly disclaiming the wrong which the Doctor (under
his name) has thrust out against me. This is the conuterpaine of it.


To my very good friend M. Nashe.
MAster Nashe, I pray you to let my carriage toward you always, beget but
thus much in your opinion, that I would never have been led with so much
indiscretion as to rail against any man unprovoked, or to offer him wrong that
never offended me. Trucly upon the sight of five or six sheets of Doctor
Harueyes Book, I wrote certain verses in his commendation, but that Sonnet
which in his book is. subscribed with my name is not mine, and I guess at the
mistaking of it. Indeed the Stanzaes are, though altered to your disgrace in
some places. To use many words were vain, and to end writing and leave you
unsatisfied, were to write to no end, and to leave my self discontented. But
if you consider how I was as much offended with the unjust vaineglorious Print
as your self, we shall both rest contented. Little did I think the book
should have had so famous a Title, or so many Prefaces, or so many Letters and
Pream^les, amongst which, some of mine blushing to look upon so conte^ptible
a person they were directed (...), could not but be exceedingly ashamed to be
presented to the eyes of a whole world. I could mislike other things, but I
will leave them as trifles, Farewell.

Yours to use I. Thorius.


Chute that was the bawlingest of them all, and that bobd me with nothing but
Rhenish fury, Stilliard clyme, oyster whore phrase, claret spirit, and
alehouse passions, with talking so much of drink, within a year and a half
after died of the dropsy, as diverse Printers that were at his burial
certefide me. Being dead, I would not have revived him, but that the Doctor
(whose Patron he was) is ali^e to answer for him. Mounsieur Fregus^us or
Mounsieur Fregeuile Gautiu^, that prating weazell faced vermin, is one of the
Pipers in this consort, and he is at it with his Apology of the thrice learned
and thrice eloquent Doctor Haruey, befooles and besots me in every line,
pleads the Doctors innocence, and the lawfulnes of his proceedings; praises
his moderate style, says he is sorry he is so unjustly pusht at' and being
pusht at glad he has so acquitted him, and that his Answer (...) reasonable
and eloquent.

I am sorry I have no more room to reason the ma^ter with him; for if I had, I
did not doubt but to make him a fugitive ou^ of England as well as he is ou^ of
his own Country: and in this great dearth in England, we have no reason but
to make him a Fugitive or banish him, since he is the rauenousest ^^ouen that
ever lapt porredge, and out of two Noblemens houses he had his Mittimus of ye
may be gone, for he was such a perverse Ramisticall heretic, a busy reprouer
of the principles of all Arts, and ^ower of seditious Paradoxes amongst kitchen
boys.

My clue is spun, the Tear me is at an end, wherefore here I will end and make
Vacation: but if you will have a word or two of Doctor Perne and Master Lilly,
in (...) of one of Gabriels Apostrophe Sonnets or Lenuoyes, by Struthio
Belliue^ento de Compasso Callpero and the Contents of it I protest and adjure,
you shall. ^

Against Doctor Perne our Poditheck or Tolmach has in his book twilted and
stitcht in a whole pennyworth of paper, which his Gossipship that had the
naming of the child, dubs the Encomium of the Fox. In it he endorseth him the
puling Preacher of Pax vobis and humility, (to both of which Gabriell always
was an enemy, even as Doctor Perne was to his loue-lockes and his great ruffes
and pantostes;) the triangle turne-coate, (I would he had any coat to turn but
that he wears:) and for triangles, one angle or corner he will be glad of to
hide him i^ after this Book is out, and brickil and oven up his stinking
breath, (which smells like the greasy snase of a candle) that I may not come
within aleuenteene score nose length of it. He brings in his coffin to speak,
what a wodden jest is that? An ap^stata, an hipocryte, a Machauill, a co^sner,
a iugler, a letcher he makes him, and says he kept a Cubbe at Peter-house;
that his hospitality was like Ember week or good Friday: and if a man should
have writ against Sergius that was the first setter up of Mahomet, he could not
have parbraked more vileness, than he has done against him. Vincit qui patitur
he says (or a great Counselor that gives that Posie) can unrip the whole
packet of his knauerie, making him a broker to his se^tcherie. The whole Quire
thanks you heartily. Doctor Perne is caskt up in lead, and cannot arise to
plead for himself: wherefore this (as duty to those some way binds me that
were somewhat bound to him) I will commit to ink and paper in his behalf. Few
men lived better, though like (...) but that a chie^e Father of our
Common^wealth loved him* (in whose house he died) he (...).

(...) upon the place he had, and for his (...) and learning, they that
mislike, want the like (...) and (...), or else they would have more indgement
to disc^rne of it. For Master Li^^te (who is halues with me in this indignity
that is offered) I will not take the take (...) ou^ o^ his mo^th, for he is
better (...) I am able to say he is able to (...) himsel^e, and in as much time
as he spendes ^^^taking Tobacco (...) w^eke, he can compile that, which would
make (...) repent himself all his li^e after. With a (...) ^^nt he means
shortly to be at his chamber window for calling him the Fiddlesticke of
Oxford. In that he ^wa^leth, it had bin better to have confuted Mar^in by (...)
Cooper, than such (...); tell me why was he not then con^uted by Reverend
Cooper, or made to hold his peace, till Master Li^^te and some (...) with their
pens drew upon him? A day after the (...) when he is hanged Haruey takes him i^
hand, but (...) had been alive now, even as he writ (...) the Cooper, so would
he have writ^^ Harueys whoope diddle* or the non-^uting (...). I have a
laughing (...) him say, he was once^suspected for Martin^* when there is nere
a Pursiuant in England* in the (...) on his boots, ever thought of him or
imputed to him so much wit. The bangingest things which I can pick out,
wherein he has ^e^^ered Martin or de^ended Bishops are ^hese: For a pol^shed
stil^ ^ew go beyond Car^^^^right; his ray^ing at me, for speaking against
Beza, the grand Champion against Bishops; his ma^^cious de^amation of Doctor
Perne; where after he has polluted him with all the scandale he could, he
^aies The Clergy never wa^ted excellent fortune-wrights. (...) he was one of
the chee^est: as though the Church of England were vpheld and A^lassed by
corruption, M^chauelisme, apos^atisme, hipocrysie and ^reacherie; in all these
he making him notorious in the highest (...), does give out, that he was one
of the Churches ^heife fortune-wrights: and besides, (to mend the mat^^r) he
asks, What Bishap or Politician in England was so great a Temporiser as he? I
hope there be some Bis^ops within the compass of the two Metrapolitane Seas,
that can fish (...) a (...) meaning out of this word Temporiser, and do
disdain their high Calling should be so G^atho^ically compared, for such is a
Tem^oriser; and with their profession it stands to be no state Po^^ticians,
but only to meddle with the state of heaven. Then he has a tale out of
Pontane against Bishops, for their riding upon horses, and not asses as Christ
did: aswe^ he might restrain them to ride upon mares, as John Bale says our
English Bi^^ops were limited too heretofore. Such another tale of a Horse he
has of Gelo a Tyrant of ^^cily, whom he (...) the politic Tyrant, for
bringing in his great (...) instead of a harper, into his Banquetting^ho^se; to
d^^g and stale amongst his guests. It is a ^^ale ^^inking Apotheg; but
Bene^^^^^ (...) interfectus; (as Vi^ellius said) the sweet sauer of an enemy
slain takes away the* he smell of it.

More battring engi^s I had in a readiness prepared to shake his walls, which I
keep back till the next Term, meaning to insert them in my Four Letters
Con^uted, which then is to be renewed and reprinted again.

So be your leave God be with you I was bold to call in. Spectatores, the
faults escaped in the Printing I wish may likewise escape you in reading. In
the Epistle Dedicatorie correct Willington and put in Williamson: in the midst
of the Book vide make vidi: about the latter end stellified stalified, and
Sunius Surius: with as many other words or letters, too much or too-wanting as
ye will.

The Paradoxe of the Ass, M. Lilly has wrought upon, as also to him I turn
over the Doctors Apothecarie terms he has used throughout, and more
especially in his last Epistle of notable Contents.

Herewith the Court breaks up and goes to dinner, all generally concluding
with Traian; The Gods never suffer any to be overcome in battle, but those
that are enemies to peace.

Tu mihi criminis Author.

FINIS.

