OF THE SEVEN WORDS SPOKEN BY CHRIST upon the Cross, Two Books.

Written in Latin by the most Illustrious Cardinal Bellarmine, of the Society
of Jesus.

And translated into English by A. B.

Foderunt manus meas and pedes meos.

Psalm. 21. They have dug my hands and my feet.

Permissu Superiorum. 1638.

The Translatour to the Reader.
GOod Reader, in place of a Ceremonious and formal Dedicatory Epistle, I send
thee these few lines. The work here translated is one the spiritual
Treatises of the most Learned, and Virtuous Bellarmine of Blessed Memory, being
entitled, Of the seven Words spoken by Christ upon the Cross. Prize the
Contents of those words, as thou prizest thy own soul; they being in number
few, in force and weight many. Take them, as so many rich Legacies, left by our
charitable Testatour, immediately before his death, to mankind. And who is he
that neglects the Legacies of his dying Lord and Friend?

Most men do much regard and ponder the last words of a dying man, at that time
having his senses and memory unperished, who during the whole course of his
life had gained among others a great name, and reputation of VVisdome. Of what
estimate then ought we to make the Words of Christ, uttered in his dying
state, who was not only wise, but VVisdome it self; Who is the Word it
self: Who is God himself. These Words hereafter following in this Treatise,
Christ spoke being nailed upon the Tree of the Cross, a Tree infinitely more
high (as reaching from Earth to Heaven) then the highest Cedar in Libanus. Taste
of the fruits, which may be gathered from thence; since arbor bona fructus
bonos facit, Matthew. 7.

Upon this Tree death became dead when life thereon did dye. This Tree was the
Chair, from whence our spiritual Doctor dictated his Precepts to us
Christians; It was the Pulpit, out of which our Heavenly Ecclesiastes preached
to mankind; Briefly it was, and is the true Ladder of Jacob (adumbrated and
shadowed by that Ladder spoken of in Genesis) by which the soul of Man
ascends up to Heaven. Thus not enlarging my self further, and humbly
entreating the charitable remembrance of all good Catholics in their Devotions,
I leave thee to the perusing of what follows.

Thine in Christ crucified. A. B.

The Preface of the Author.
Behold now the fourth year is passed, when as preparing my self to my End,
I retire to a place of quietness and rest, exempt from negotiations, and throng
of Business; but not exempt from the meditation of the sacred Scriptures, and
from the writing of such things, which to me in time of meditation do occur;
That if I be not able to profit others either by my own speeches, or by
composing of any large and voluminous Book; at least that I may be of power to
advance my Brethren in their spiritual Good, by some small devout Treatise.

Now calling to mind, of what subject I might chiefly make choice, which might
dispose me toward dying well, and might profit my Brethren toward living
well; The death of our Lord presented it self to me, and that last Sermon of
his, which consisting of seven most short (but most grave) sentences, the
Redeemer of the World from the Cross, as from a high and eminent Chair,
delivered to all Mankind: Since in that Sermon, or in those seven Words, all
those Points are contained, of which the said Lord thus speaks, Luc. 18.
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things shall be consummate, which were
written by the Prophets, of the son of Man.

Those things, which the Prophets did foretell of Christ, are reduced to four
Heads, or branches. To wit, to his Preaching and Sermons made to the People; To
his Prayer directed to his Father; To the most grievous Evils which he was to
suffer; To sublime and admirable Works performed by him. All which several
Points did admirably shine in the life of Christ. For first, our Lord did most
frequently preach in the Temple, in the Synagogues, in the fields, in desert
and solitary places, in private Houses, and to conclude even out of the ship,
to the People standing upon the shore.

Furthermore, He spent for the most part, whole nights in Prayer to God; for
thus the Evangelist speaks: Luc. 6. He passed the whole night in Prayer to
God, Now his admirable and astonishing working of Wonders, of which the holy
Gospells are very full, does concern the expelling of the Devils, curing the
sick, multiplying of bread, and in appeasing or allaying tempests or storms
all sea. To conclude, the Evils that, in recompense of the Good which he had
done, were perpetrated against him, were many, not only in contumely of Words,
but also in stoning of him, and in endeavoring to cast him headlong down from
a fearful Precipice.

But all these several Points were consummated and perfected most truly upon
the Cross. For first, He so mouingly and persuadingly preached from the
Cross, as that many returned from thence, knocking their Breasts. And further,
not only the hearts of men (but even the stones, as it were, through a secret
compassion) were riuen and torn a sunder. He in like manner so prayed upon the
Cross, as that the Apostle says thereof, Heb. 5. Cum clamore valido, and
lachrimis, exauditus est pro sua reuerentia, With a strong Cry, and tears, he
was heard for his reverence. Now what he suffered upon the Cross, was of so
high a nature, in reference to those things which he had suffered through the
rest of the life; as that they alone may be thought peculiarly to belong to the
Passion.

To conclude, He never wrought greater Prodigies and signs, then when lying
upon the Cross, he was brought to extreme imbecility and weakness. For at that
time, he did not only exhibit Miracles from Heaven, (the which the Jews had
before importunely demanded of him) but also a little after, he wrought the
greatest Miracle of all; When being dead and buried, by his own proper force
and Virtue, he returned from Hell, and resuming his Body, restored it again to
life; yea to an immortal life. Therefore we may conclude, that upon the Cross
all things were truly performed and accomplished, which were written by the
Prophets of the Son of Man.

But before we descend to write of the particular Words of our Lord, I hold it
conducing to our purpose, to speak some thing of the Cross it self, which was
the Chair or Pulpit of the Preacher, the Altar of the Priest sacrifizing; the
race, or place of him that did combat and feight, the shop (as it were) of
working miraculous things. First then, touching the form of the Cross, the
more common Opinion of the Ancients is, that it consisted of three several
parcels of Wood; One long, upon the which the Body of our Lord crucified, was
laid or extended; another overthwart, in which the hands were fastened; the
third was affixed and joined to the lower part, upon the which the feet did
rest, but so nailed thereto, that they could not be moved from thence. This is
the Opinion of the two most ancient Fathers, S. Justinius, and S. Irenaeus: Who
clearly show, that both his feet did rest upon the Wood, and that the one
foot was not lying upon the other. From which posture of our Lords Body it
follows, that there were four nails of Christ, and not only three, as many
do imagine, who out of that conceit do paint Christ our Lord, so upon the
Cross, as if he had the one foot upon the other. But Gregorius Turonensis (l.
de glo. mart. c. 6.) most evidently impugneth this, and fortifieth his Opinion
from ancient Pictures of Christ crucified. And I my self did see at Paris in
the Kings Library, certain most ancient Manuscripts of the Gospells, in diverse
places whereof Christ was painted Crucified, but ever with four Nails.

Furthermore, the long Wood did somewhat appear above that parcel of Wood,
which was overthwart, as S. Austin, and S. Gregory Nyssenus do write; And this
seems also to be gathered from the words of the Apostle, who writing to the
Ephesians, c. 3. thus says: That you may be able to comprehend with all the
Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and height, and depth, (to wit of the
Cross of Christ.) By which words he clearly describes the figure of the
Cross, which has four extremities; to wit, Latitude in the overthwart or
tra^suerse Wood; Longitude in the long Wood; Altitude, in that part of the long
Wood which appeared above the overthwart; and Profundity in that part of the
long Wood, which was stuck into the ground.

Our Lord did not undergo this kind of Torment by chance, or unwillingly; but
made special choice and election of it even from all Eternity, as S. Austin
teaches from that Apostolical testimony of the Acts c. 2. Him, by the
determinate counsel and prescience of God, being delivered, by the hands of
wicked men you have crucified and slain. And accordingly Christ himself in
the beginning of his preaching said to Nicodemus Joan. 3. As Moses exalted the
serpent in the desert, so must the Son of Man be exalted; that every one,
which belieueth in him, perish not, but may have life everlasting. In like sort
our Lord often speaking to his disciples of his Cross, did counsel them to
imitation, saying: Matt. 16. He, that will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me.

Why our Lord did choose this kind of punishment, he only knows, who chose
it: Notwithstanding there are not wanting some Mysteries thereof, the which the
holy Fathers have left to us in Writing. Saint Irenaeus writes, that the two
arms of the Cross do agree under one Title, in the which was written, Jesus
Nazarenus Rex Iudeorum, that we might understand thereby, the two People (to
wit the Jews and the Gentiles) which before were divided, in the end were to
be joined together into one Body, under one Head which is Christ. S. Gregory
Nyssene writes, that part of the Cross, which looks toward Heaven, to
signify, that by the Cross, as by a key, Heaven is opened to man; and that
part of it, which declineth toward the Center of the World, to denote that Hell
was spoiled by Christ, when he descended thither. The two arms of the Cross,
which are stretched toward the East, and West, to shadow, that the repurging
of the whole World was after to be performed by the Blood of Christ.

But S. Jerome, S. Austin, and S. Bernard do teach, that the chief Mystery of
the Cross is briefly touched in those words of the Apostle: Quae sit
latitudo, longitudo, sublimitas, and profundum; Since (say these Fathers) that
first the Attributs of God are signified in these Word, to wit, Power in
height; In depth wisdom; in Latitude goodness; in Longitude Eternity. Again
the Virtues of Christ suffering, are adumbrated and Typically figured therein;
As in Latitude Charity; in Longitude Patience; in Altitude Obedience; in
Profundity Humility. Lastly the Virtues, which are necessary to those, who are
saved by Christ, are also here signified: In depth Faith; in height Hope; in
breadth Charity; in length Perseverance. From the which we are to be
instructed, that Charity (which deservedly is called the Queen of Virtue)
every where has place in God, in Christ, and in us. But touching other
Virtues, some of them are in God, others in Christ, and others in us. And
therefore it is less to be admired, if in those last Words of Christ, which
we now undertake to explain, Charity do obtain the first Place.

First therefore we will explicate the three first Words or Sentences, which
were spoken by Christ about the sixth hour, before the Sun was obscured, and
darkness covered the whole Earth. Next we will discourse of the then defect of
the Sun. That done, we will explain and unfold the rest of the Words of
our Lord, which were spoken about the ninth hour, as S. Matthew writes; to
wit, when the darkness did depart^, and the death of Christ drew near, or
rather was even at hand.

OF THE THREE FIRST WORDS spoken by Christ upon the Cross. THE FISRT BOOK.
The first Word, to wit, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do,
is literally explicated. CHAP. I.
CHrist Jesus, being the Word of his Eternal Father, and of whom the Father
himself thus clearly speaks: Ipsum audite, hear him, Matthew. 17. and who
of himself manifestly pronounces, One is your Master, Christ, Math. 23, to
the end that he might fully perform the office taken upon him, not only
living, never ceased from teaching; but even dying from the Chair of his
Cross, ^reached and delivered certain fevv words, but those most fiery, most
pro^^^able, and most efficacious; and such as are truly worthy to be imprinted
in the depth of the Heart of all Christians, that there they being reserved and
meditated on, might ansvverably in their actions be put in execution. The first
Sentence is this. Luc. 23. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.
Which sentence as being truly new and unaccustomed, the Holy Ghost would have
it foretold by the Prophet Esaias. c. 53. in these words: He has prayed for the
Transgressors. Now how divinely S. Paul said, 1. Cor. 13. Charity seeks not
her own, may easily be euicted even from the order of these Sentences of our
Lord: since of these Sentences, three of them belong to the good of others;
Other three to a peculiar and proper Good; and one of them is promiscuous or
common. Thus the first care and solicitude of our Lord was touching others,
the last touching himself.

Now, so far forth, as concerns the three first Sentences, which belong to
others; the first is directed to our Lords Enemies, the second to his friends,
the last to those of his kindred and affinity. The reason of this Order or
Method is this: Charity first relieueth and helps such as be in want; And
those, who at that time suffered most spiritual want, were his Enemies; and we
also as being the disciples of so great a Master were in want, as standing in
need of being instructed how to love out Enemies. Which precept is far more
difficult, the^ to know how to love our friends or allies; since this is most
easy, being (after a sort) begotten with us, and increases with us, and does
often prevail more then reason requires. Therefore the Evangelist says:
Jesus autem dicebat, where the word (autem) designeth the time and occasion of
praying for his Enemies, and implies an Antithesis, or opposition of words
with words, and works with works. As if the Evangelist would have said: They
did crucify our Lord, and divided his garments in his own sight; and others
derided, traduced, and defamed him, as a seducer and Liar. But he seeing and
hearing these passages, and suffering most vehement pains, by reason of his
hands and feet most cruelly pierced through with nails, did render good for
evil, and said: Pater dimitte cis, Father forgive them.

He here calls him Father, not God, nor Lord; as well knowing, there was
need of the benignity of a Father in this business, but not of the severity of a
Judge. And because to appease God (doubtlesly offended through such perpetrated
impieties) it was convenient to interpose the comfortable Name of a Father;
Therefore that word, Father, seems thus much in this place to signify: I am
thy Son, who now suffer; I pardon them, pardon them also O Father. For my
sake remit them this their offense, though they do not deserve it. Remember
also, that thou art a Father unto them by Creation, through the which thou have
made them to thy own likeness and similitude; therefore impart to them thy
paternall Char^ty; since though they be wicked, yet are they thy sons. Dimitte,
forgive them: This word comprehends the sum of the Petition, which the
Son of God, as an Advocate for his Enemies, does exhibit to his Father. Now
this Word, Forgive, may be referred both to the Punishment and to the offense.
If it be referred to the punishment, then his prayer was presently heard:
because whereas the Jews t^rough this wicked Crime, deserved to be instantly
penished, as either to be consumed with fire falling from Heaven, or to be
overwhelmed with Water, or to perish through svvord and famine; yet was the
Punishment due for this offense and sin, prolonged and delayed for the space
of forty years, vvith^n which compass of time, if that Nation had done
Penance, it had remained safe and in security. But because it neglected all
performance of Penance, God did send against them the Army of the Romans,
Vespasian then being Emperor; who ouerthrovving the chief City, destroyed
the Jewish Nation, partly through famine in beseiging the City, partly in
putting to the svvord many after the City was taken; partly by selling and
leading them Captives; and partly by dispersing and relegating them into
several Countries and Places. Which very point first by the Parable of the
Vine, of the King causing a Marriage to be solemnized for his Son, and of the
barren and unfruitful fig tree; and after in most expr^sse words our Lord upon
Palme-sunday by his own weeping and lamentation did foretell.

Now so far as belongs to the fault and offense, his prayer was also heard;
because through the merit and virtue of his Prayer, Grace of Compunction was
given to many from God. Among whom those were, Who returned knocking their
breasts; as also the Centurion, who said: In very deed this was the Son of
God: And many others more, who after the preaching of the Apostles were
converted, and thereupon confessed him, whom before they had denied, and
worshipped him whom they had despised, The Reason, why Grace of Conversion was
not given to all, is, because the Pra^er of Christ was conformable to the
VVisdome and Will of God; Which point S. Luke writes in other VVord^, in the
Acts of the Apostles, c. 13. saying: As many believed, as were preordinate to
life everlasting.

Illis, them: By this word those are understood, for whom Christ prayed, that
they might obtain Pardon. And truly they seem to be the first, who actually
nailed Christ unto the Cross, and who divided his garments among themselves,
and then all those are understood, who were the Cause of our Lords Passion; for
example Pilat, who pronounced sentence against Christ, The People who cried,
toll, toll, crucifige eum, away, away with him, crucify him; The chief of
the Priests and the Scribes, who falsely accused him; And to ascend higher, even
the First Man himself, and all his Posterity, who through sin, gave occasion
of Christ his Passion. Therefore our Lord prayed for pardon, from the Cross,
for all his Enemies. All of us were in the number of his Enemies, according to
that of the Apostle. Romans 5. When we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God,
by the death of his Son. Therefore every one of us, even before we were
borne, are numbered in that most sacred Memento (so to speak) in the which
Christ (the supreme Bishop^) prayed in that most holy Mass, which he performed
upon the Altar of the Cross. What retribution therefore, O my Soul, will thou give to him, for all those Benefits, which he gave to thee, before thou
had Being? Our Blessed Lord did see, that thou once wast in the number of his
Enemies, nevertheless he prayed to his Father for thee (neither seeking after
him, nor desiring him so to pray) that this thy madness should not be imputed to
thee. Is it not then thy duty, ever to have ever imprinted in thy heart, the
remembrance of so benign and loving a Patron, and not to let slip any
occasion of serving of him? And is it not in like sort reasonable, that thou,
as being instructed by so great an example, should not only learn to pardon
thy enemies and to pray for them, but also that thou should persuade all
others to do the same? Say therefore, O my Soul, this is most just and
fitting, and I do much covet and determine to accomplish the same, and the
rather, seeing he, who has left this most remarkable Example, is ready out of
his goodness to affoard his efficacious hand and help, to the effecting of so
great a Work.

Non enim sciunt, quid faciunt, For they know not what they do. That this
Intercession of Christ may seem more reasonable, he does extenuate and excuse
the Offense of his Enemies, in such sort as he can. Certainly he could not
excuse the Injustice of Pilate, neither the Cruelty of the soldiers, nor the
malice of the Chief of the Priests, nor the foolishnes and unthankfulness of
the Common People; nor finally the false testimonies of those, who swore
against him. Only this remained, that he did excuse the Ignorance of them all;
For truly (as the Apostle speaks 1. Cor. 2.) If they had known, they never
would have crucified the Lord of glory. But although neither Pilate, nor the
Chief Priests, nor the People, nor the Ministers of his Passion, did know
Christ to be the Lord of Glory; yet did Pilate know, that Christ was a just and
holy man, and delivered over to him through the malice of the Chief Priests;
As also those high Priests did know, that he was the true Christ which was
promised in the Law, as S. Thomas teaches; because they could not deny,
neither did they deny, but that he did work many miracles, which the Prophets
foretold the true Mes^ias was after to do.

To conclude, the People did know, that Christ was condemned without just
cause, since Pilate openly cried out, saying: I find no cause in this Man; I am
innocent of the Blood of this just man. And although the Jews, or the Chief
of them, or the People did not know, that Christ was the Lord of Glory; Yet
they might well have known the same, had not Malice blinded their Hearts; For
thus S. John speaks, cap. 12. Whereas he had done so many miracles before
them, they believed not in him, because Esaias the Prophet said: He has blinded
their eyes, and hardened their Heart, that they may not see with their eyes, nor
understand with their Heart, and be converted etc. But yet this blinding does
not excuse the man blinded, since it is Voluntary, though not precedent; even
as those, who do sin of malice, do labor indeed with some Ignorance, which
Ignorance does not excuse them, in that it does not precede, or go before but
only accompany the sin. For the Wise Man truly says, Prou. 24. They do err,
who work Evil; And the Philosopher accords thereto, teaching, that, Omnis
malus, ignorans. And upon this ground it may be truly said of all sinners: Non
sciunt, quid faciunt. For it is impossible to desire or will Evil, with
reference to Evil; since the Object of the will, is not a thing either good or
Evil, but only that which is good; Wherefore those, who choose what is evil,
do ever choose it, as it is represented under the show of Good; yea under the
color of the chiefest good, that then can be obtained.

The reason hereof is the perturbation of the inferior part of the soul,
which does darken reason, and causes it to discern that seming Good only,
which is in the thing, that is desired. For who chooses to co^mmit Adultery or
Theft, would never choose the same, except his mind were bent upon the Good of
the delight or gain, which is in Adultery or Theft; as also except he had shut
his eyes against the evil of Turpitude or Injustice, which is in Adultery or
Theft. Therefore every sinner is like unto a man, who desiring to cast himself
down from a great height into a River, does first shut his eyes, and then
after cast himself into the River. In like sort, who does Evil, does hate
the light, and labors with volunta^y Ignorance, which Ignorance does not
excuse, in that it is Voluntary. But here it may be demanded, if this
Ignorance does not excuse, why then does our Lord say; Forgive them, for they
know not what they do? To this it may be answered, that the words of our Lord
may be understood chiefly and first of them, who crucified him; whom it is
probable to have been then ignorant not only of the Divinity of Christ, but
also of his Innocence, and that they simply performed the work or charge
imposed upon them. Therefore for these Men our Lord did most truly say: Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Furthermore, if the Words be understood of us, before we had a Being, or of
many sinners absent, which truly were ignorant of what was then done at
Jerusalem, our Lord with just reason said: They know not what they do. To
conclude, if the words be understood of those, who were present, and were not
ignorant, that Christ was the Messiah, or an innocent Man; then it is to be
said, that the Charity of Christ was so great, as that he was willing to lessen
the sin of his Enemies, in such manner as he could. For although that
Ignorance does not simply and absolutely excuse, yet it seems to pretend some
reason (though weak) of excuse; because they had more grievously sinned, if
they had wholly wanted all Ignorance. And although our Lord was not ignorant,
that that excuse was not a real excuse, but only a shadow of an excuse, yet
it pleased him to allege it for an excuse; that from thence we might be
instructed of the good Will and disposition of our Lord toward sinners; and
how desirous he would have been to have taken and alleged a better excuse
even for Caiphas and Pilate, if a better and more warrantable could have been
found, or pretended.

Of the first fruit of the first Word, spoken upon the Cross. CHAP. II.
WE have explicated and unfolded the construction and Sentence of the first
Word pronounced by Christ upon the Cross. Now we will undertake by way of
meditation, to gather from the said Word, certain fruits, and those most
wholesome and profitable to us All. The first then of these fruits is, that we
are instructed from this first part of the Sermon or preaching of Christ, from
the Chair of his Cross, that the Charity of Christ was more ardent and fiery,
then we can either understand or imagine. And this is that, which the Apostle
writing to the Ephesians cap. 3. says: To know the Charity of Christ,
surpassing knowledge. For the Apostle does intimate in this place, that from
the Mystery of the Cross, we are able to learn the greatness of the Charity of
Christ to be so immense, and of that measure, as that it does surpass and
transcend our knowledge, so as we are not able to comprehend it in our ^hought
or cogitation.

When any of us is afflicted with any vehement grief, either of the Teeth, the
Eyes, the Head, or of any other Member; our mind is so busied and fixed in
suffering that one pain, as that we cannot extend our thought to any other
thing or negotiation; and therefore we cannot their admit Vis^tation of
friends, or intercourse of men for the dispatch of any business, But Christ
being crucified, did wear a Crown of thorns upon his Head, as most ancient
Fathers (to wit, Tertullian of the Latin Church, and Origin of the Greek) do
clearly teach, and therefore he could not stir or move his Head without
dolor and grief. His Hands and Feet were fastened to the Cross with nails,
through the piercing of which our Lord endured most sharp and intermitted
torments. His naked Body being tired and spent through much whipping, and long
iourneys, and openly exposed to ignominy and cold, and with its own weight,
^^larging the wounds of his Hands and feet, with an immane and incessant
dolor, did offer several pains, and (as it were) several Crosses to our
Blessed Lord. Yet nevertheless (O wonderful Charity and surmounting our
apprehension) all these his afflictions sleighed by him and not weighed, as if
he had suffered nothing, he was sollicitous and regardfull only of the health
and good of his Enemies; and desiring to auert from their heads the impendent
danger, cried to his Father: Father, forgive them. What would he have done,
if those flagitious men had iniustly suffered persocution, and not exercised
it? I mean if those men had been friends, or of his kidred, or Sons, and
not Enemies, Traitors, and most wicked Patricides?

Truly, most merciful Jesus, thy Charity has overcome our Understanding; for
I behold thy heart tossed to and fro among the storms of so many injuries and
griefs (as a rock beaten upon with waves on each side) to remain immovable.
For thou look upon thy Enemies, who after so many mortal wounds by them
inflicted upon thee, did deride thy Patience, and rejoiced at their own
perpetrated injuries against thee: Thou look upon them (I say) not as an
Enemy upon his cruel En^mies, but as a Father upon his be wayling Sons, or
as a Physician upon his sick and languishing Patients: Therefore thou art not
offended at them, but thou take pity of them, and commends them to thy most
powerful Father, to be cured and made whole. For this is the force and Virtue
of true Charity; to wit to have peace with all men, to repute not any for
Enemies, but to live peaceably with those who hate peace.

And this is that, which in the Canticles is verified of the Virtue of perfect
Charity. Cant. 8. Many waters cannot quench Charity, nor floods shall
ouerwhelme it. These many Waters are many Passions, which the Spirituals of
wickedness, as so many hellish storms by the Jews and Gentills (as by clouds
full of hate) have showred down upon Christ; and notwithstanding, this deluge
of Waters (that is, of pains and vexations) could not extinguish the fire of
Charity, which did burn in the breast of Christ. Therefore the Charity of
Christ did (as it were) swim above that inundation of many waters, and burning
said: Father, forgive them. Neither only were those many Waters not able to
extinguish the Charity of Christ, but also the following floods of Persecution
could not ouerwhelme and drown the Charity of the members of Christ. And
therefore a little after, Christian Charity even boiling in the breast of S.
Steven, could not be extinguished by the shower of stones cast at him; but
increased its heat, crying: O Lord, lay not this sin unto them. Act. 7. And
after this the perfect and invincible Charity of Christ, being dilated and
spread in the Hearts of many thousands of Martyrs and Confessors, did so fight
and strive against the floods both of invisible and visible Persecutours, as
that it may be truly pronounced: Never to the end of the world shall the floods
of Persecution put out, or extinguish the fire of Charity.

And that we may ascend from the Humanity of Christ to his Divinity: Great was
the Charity of Christ, as being man, toward his Crucifiers; But the Charity of
Christ, as God, and of the Father, and of the Holy Ghost toward men, was, and
even to the consummation of the world, shall be far greater; I mean, toward
such men, who with God himself did wage emnity and malice, and who (if it had
layn in their power) would have detruded and thrust him out of Heaven, and have
killed him. Who therefore but in thought can conceive the Charity of God,
toward ungrateful and wicked men? God spared not the Angels sinning, neither
gave he them place of Repentance: Yet he patiently tolerateth men, who are
sinners, Blasphemers, reuolting to the Devil the Enemy of God. And which is
more, he does not only tolerate them, but in the mean time does maintain and
nourish them; yea sustayneth and supporteth them. For as the Apostle speaks,
in him we live, and move, and be. Act. 17. Neither does our merciful Lord only
nourish, feed, and sustain his Enemies; but withal even heapeth benefits upon
them, graceth them with wit, furnish them with riches, aduanceth them to
honors, places them in the Throne of Regal Sovereignty; ever expecting in
the mean time their return from the Way of iniquity and perdition.

But to forbear to wander in that large field of discourse, which manifests
the Charity of God toward wicked men; and Enemies of his divine Majesty; we
will hear consider only the benefit and favor of Christ. Do we not lead, God
so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son? Joan. 3. The world is
an Enemy to God, For in malign^ positus est, as S. John says, and, He who
loves the World, the Charity of the Father is not in him. 1. Joan. 2. Again,
as S. James contesteth, cap. 4. The friendship of the world is the Enemy of
God; And again: Whosotuer will be a friend of this world, is made an Enemy of
God. Therefore God loving the world, did love his Enemy, thereby to make it his
friend. For to that end God did send his Son into the world, who is Princeps
pacis, that by him the world might be reconciled to God. And therefore at the
birth of Christ, the Angels did sing: Glory in the highest to God, and in earth
Peace to men. Therefore God loved the world (his Enemy) that through Christ he
might procure reconciliation and atonement with it, and that it being
reconciled, might avoid the punishment due to his Enemy.

The world did not admit or receive Christ, It did augment its offense; It
became rebellious against the Mediator; God inspired into the Mediator, that
he should render good for evil, and that he should pray for his Persecutours,
He prayed, and, was heard for his reverence. Heb. 5. The Patience of God
expected, that the world through the preaching of the Apostles, do penance,
and those who performed penance, received pardon; but such who would not
repent, after long patience of God, were exterminated by the just judgment of
God. Therefore we truly learn from the first word of Christ, the Charity of
Christ surpassing knowledge; We also learn the Charity of God the Father,
surpassing knowledge, Who so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that every one, who belieueth in him, perish not, but may have life
everlasting. Joan. 5.

Of another fruit of the same first Word, spoken by Christ upon the Cross.
CHAP. III.
AN other fruit (and that very healhfull to all tasting the same) is, if men
will learn to pardon easily Injuries offered unto them, and by this means to
make friends of Enemies. Now for the persuading hereto, the Example of Christ
and God ought to be a most forcible argument and inducement: for if Christ did
pardon his Crucifiers, and prayed for them, why should not a Christian man do
the like? If God (the Creator of all) in whose power it is, as being Lord and
Judge, to take present revenge upon sinners, does nevertheless expect, that a
sinner should return to Penance, and does inuit him to peace and
reconciliation, and stands prepared to pardon all those, who have offended his
Majesty; Why should not a Creature be ready and willing to perform the same?
Add hereto, that the pardonning and remitting of an Injury wants not a great
Reward. It is written in the history of the life and death of Saint
Engelbertus, Archbishop of Cullen, that when he was entrapped by his Enemies
in his journey, and slain by them, and he then saying in his Heart, Pater
ignosce illis, O Father pardon them; It was revealed of him, that for this one
act (being in a high manner grateful to God) his soul was not only instantly
taken up by the Angels to Heaven; but that being placed in the Quyre of
Martyrs, obtained the Crown of Martyrs, and after his death was illustrious
for many miracles. Apud Sur. die 7. Nouemb.

O! if Christians did know, how easily (if themselves would) they might be
enriched with inestimable Treasure, and might be advanced to high Titles of
Honor and glory, if so they would suppress and curb the perturbations and
passions of their mind and with a true fortitude would spurn at small Injuries
against them committed, they would not be of such a flinty and inexorable
disposition, to remit, or suffer wrongs and offenses. But they will reply; It
seems to be adverse and even inco^patible with the law and right of Nature,
that a man should suffer himself to be betrampled and trodden upon by other
men, offered wro^gs and disgraces, either in word or deed: For we see even
brute Beasts, who are carried only by the instinct of Nature, to assault other
Beasts their Enemies, with great fiersnes, and do labor to kill them. In like
sort, we have experience in our selfs, that if unexpectedly we meet or fall
upon our Enemy; instantly our Choler is inflamed, our Blood begins to rise and
boil, and that we have a desire even naturally of Revenge.

But he is greatly deceived, who thus disputes, and he does promiscuously
confound a just defense, with an iniust revenge. A just defense is not subject
to reprehension; and this i^ that, which even nature instructs us; to wit,
vim vi repellere, to repel and withstand force by force; but she teaches us
not, to revenge an injury received. No man is forbidden to resist, that a wrong
be not offered him; But to revenge an Injury already committed, the divine Law
prohibiteth: since this belongs not to any private Man, but to the public
Magistrate. And because God is the King of kings, therefore he cries out, and
says: Revenge to me, and I will reward. Deuteronomy. 32. Now that Beasts with a maine
fiercenes rush upon other Beasts their Enemies, this proceeds, in that Beasts
cannot discern between Nature, and the Vice, or imperfection of Nature; but
men, who are endued with Reason, ought to make a distinction between Nature or
the Person which is created good by God, and the Vice or sin which is evil,
and proceeds not from God. Therefore a man receiving an Injury, ought to love
the person, but to hate the Injury; and not so much to be offended with his
Enemy, as to communicate and pity him; imitating herein Physicians, who love
their sick Patients, and therefore endeavor to cure them; But do hate their
disease and sickness, laboring with all their skill and art to expel it.

And this is that which our Master and Physician of our Souls, Christ Jesus,
did teach, when he said: Love your Enemies, do good to them, that hate you, and
pray for them that persecute and abuse you. Matthew. 5. Neither was our Master
Christ like unto the Scribes and Pharisees, who sitting upon the Chair of
Moses, did teach, but did not answerably thereunto; But he sitting in the
Chair of the Holy Cross, did accordingly as he taught and preached. For he
loved his Enemies, and he prayed for them, saying: Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do. Now whereas the Blood begins to rise and boil
in men, when they see them of whom they have received an injury; the reason of
this, is, because such men are Homines animales, and have not yet learned to
restrain with the bridle of Reason the motions of the inferior Part of the
Soul, which is common to them with Beasts. But such men, as are Spirituales,
to wit, spiritual, and know how not to yeald to their own Passions, but to
master and ouerule them, are not offended at their Enemies; but pitying the^^,
do labor by courtesies and be^^^^s to reduce them to pear and concord.

But this (many men say) is over harsh and ungrateful, especially to such, as
being nobly borne, are solicitous (and so ought to be) of their Honor. To this
I answer; that the point here enjoined is easy, for the yoke of Christ, who
imposed this Law to his Disciples and followers, is sweet, and his burden easy,
as we read in the Gospel, and his Commandments are not heavy, as S. John
affirms; Now if they seem more difficult and burdensome to us, then we
expect, this falls out through our own default, in that there is but little
Charity of God in us, or none at all. For nothing is difficult to Charity,
according to that of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 13. Charity is patient, is benign,
suffers all things, belieueth all things, hops all things, hears all
things. Neither did Christ alone love his Enemies (though he did in a far more
eminent degree; then any other) for even in the Law of Nature, holy Joseph the
Patriarch, did wonderfully love his Enemies, by whom he was sold. And in the
written Law, David did patiently bear his Enemy Saul, who sought his death a
long time. And yet when David had opportunity to kill Saul, he ever did forbear
the same. Again in the law of Grace; S. Steven, the Prot^martyr, did follow
the example of Christ, who, when he was stoned, prayed saying: Lord, lay not
this sin unto them. Act. 7. In like sort, S. James, who was cast down from a
great height, by the Jews, and being most near to his death, cried out: O
Lord, pardon them, for they know not what they do. And the Apostle S. Paul,
speaking of himself and of his fellow Apostles, thus says: 1. Cor. 4. We are
cursed, and we do bless; we are persecuted, and we sustain it, we are
blasphemed, and we beseech. To conclude, many Martyrs and infinite others
following the Example of Christ, have easily fulfilled this Precept.

But some others do further urge, saying; I grant, we are to pardon our
Enemies; but this is to be performed in due time; to wit, when the memory of
the received injury is partly forgotten, and the mind returns to it self, as
void of Passion. But what, if it fall out, that in the mean time, thou be
snatched out of this life, and happen to dye, and thou art found without the
vestment of Charity, and it be said unto thee. How came thou in hither, not
having a wedding garment? Matt. 22. Will thou not be then dumb, when thou
shall hear the Sentence of the Lord, saying: Bind him hand and foot, and cast
him into utter darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth? Therefore I
wish thee to be diligent and attent, and to imitate the Example of thy Lord,
who in that very instant, wherein he had received the injury, and when his
hands and feet did yet distill down abundance of Blood, and when his whole
Body was tormented with most bitter pains, said unto his Father, Father
forgive them. This is the true and only Master, whom all men ought to hear,
who will not be drawn into any Error. Of this our Master, God the Father
thus pronounced from Heaven; Ipsum audite, Hear him. In him are all the
Treasures of Wisdom, and knowledge of God. Certainly if thou would take
counsel of Solomon, thou might securely enough anchor thy self upon his
advice or judgment: E^ ecce plus quam Solomon, hic; And behold; more then
Solomon, here. Math. 12.

But yet I hear some refractory man or other, still impugning this doctrine,
and saying: If we should render good for evil, benefits for injuries, and
loving words for Contumelies; the Wicked by this means would grow insolent,
and the Transgressors more bold, the just should be oppressed, and Virtue
betrampled upon, and contemned. But the matter stands not so. For often, as
the wiseman speaks: Prou. 15. A soft answer breaks anger; and very often
the Persecutour does so admire the patience of the Just man by him wronged, as
that thereby of an Enemy he becomes his friend. Neither are there wanting here
upon earth Politic magistrates, Kings, and Princes, whose office and charge
is, to chastize according to the severity of the Laws, the procacity and
insolency of the Wicked, that so the Just and Virtuous may lead a quiet and
peaceable life. And if Humane Justice should sometimes conniue, or wink at
such evil deportment; yet the Providence of God is ever vigilant, which will
not leave any Injustice unpunished, nor any good unrewarded; and which by a
vvounderfull course procures, that the Wicked whiles they think to oppress
the Just, do therein exalt them, and make them more resplendent and glorious.
For thus S. Leo speaks, Sermon. de S. Laurentio. O persecutour, thou have been
cruel against the Martyr, thou have been cruel, I say; but thou have
increased his Palm, whilst thou increasest his pains; for what has not thy
wit invented for the greater glory of the Victour, when both the Triumphs, and
the very Instruments of his Punishments do proclaim his Honor? The which
sentence may be justified of all Martyrs, as also of the ancient Saints. For
nothing has made Joseph the Patriarch, more celebrious and famous, then his
Persecution coming from his own Brethren; for whiles through envy they sold
him to the Madianits, they were thereby become the Cause, that he was made
Prince of all Egypt, and of his Brethren.

But passing over these points with a gentill touch; Let us briefly gather
together the many and great detriments, which men suffer, who, that in the eye
of man they may decline but the shadovv of disgrace, do endeavor with all
stiffness, and resolution of mind, to revenge the Injuries received from their
Enemies. First, they discover and betray their own folly, whiles they seek to
cure a lesser Evil by a greater. For it is a Principle acknowledged by all,
and taught by the Apostle. Romans 3. That Evil is not to be done, that Good from
thence may rise; Even as greater Evils are not to be perpetrated, for the
prevention of lesser. Who receaueth an injury, falls into Malum Poenae: Who
reuengeth an Injury, falls into malum Culpae: But malum Culpa is incomparably
for greater, then malum Poenae, seeing this later makes a man miserable but not
wicked; the other makes one both miserable and wicked; This malum poena
depriueth a man of a temporal Good, but malum Culpa, depriueth him both of
temporal and Eternal Good. Therefore that man who to be freed of the Evil of
Punishment, falls into the Evil of Offense, may well resemble him, who to
make his shoo (being over short) fitting to his foot, is content to cut of
part of his foot, which is evident madness.

But there is not any man to be found so grossly exceeding the limits even of
natural Reason in temporal matters; Nevertheless many are to be found so
blinded, and seeled up in judgment, as that they fear not most heinously to
offend God, that thereby they may avoid the shadow (as above I said) of
disgrace among men, or that they may conserve the smoke of Honor with them.
These men do fall into the indignation and hate of God, and if they do not
recall and make a serious introuersion of their own state in time, and
perform great Penance, they shall be punished with sempiternall shame and
disgrace, and shall lose all eternal Honor and renown. Furthermore such men
by their reuengefull proceedings, do a most grateful office to the Devil and
his Angels; who incite and stir up their Enemies to offer to them Wrongs and
Injuries, to the end that Emnity, and want of Charity may rise among them. Now
how foul and unworthy a thing is it to seek rather to gratify the most cruel
Enemy of mankind, then Christ Jesus, I leave to the judgment and consideration
of all pious men.

But to proceed: it often falls out, that he who has received an injury,
and seeks revenge, does dangerously wound or kill his Enemy, and then by the
sentence of the Prince, all his goods being confiscated, he is either to suffer
death, or forced to fly his Country, to the utter ruin and destruction of
himself, his Children, and his whole House, and Family. Thus does the Devil
play with, and delude such men, who covet more to be Vessalls and slaves to
false Honor, then to become servants and brethren to Christ, our supreme King,
and Coheryes with him in his most ample and everlasting Kingdom. Wherefore
since so great and heavy a loss does expect, and wait for those foolish men,
who contrary to the Precept of our Lord, refuse to be reconciled to their
Enemies; let all others, who have true Judgment, hear and follow Christ (the
Master of us all) teaching in his Gospel, and confirming this his doctrine in
works, even from the Cross.

The second Word, which is: Amen, I say to thee, this day thou shall be with me
in Paradise. Luc. 23. CHAP. IV.
AN other Word, or rather another Sentence spoken by Christ upon the Cross, as
S. Luke witnesses, was that bountiful and magnificall promise to the Thief,
hanging upon the Cross with him: This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.
The occasion of this speech of Christ was, that when two thieves were
crucified with him (the one on his right hand, the other on his left) the one
of them increased the heap of his former sins by blaspheming of Christ, and
vpbrayding him with imbecility and weakness, saying: If thou be Christ, save
thy self and us. I grant S. Matthew and S. Mark do write, that the Thieves
crucified with Christ, did exprobrate to him his weakness* But it is most
probable, that S. Matthew and S. Mark did take the plural number for the
singular number; Which manner of speech is frequent in the sacred Scriptures,
a^ S. Austin observed in his book of the Consent of the Evangelists. l. 3. c.
16. For the Apostle writing to the Hebrews, says: They stopped the mouths of
Lions, they were stoned, they were hewed, they went about in sheepskins, in
Goate-skins; and yet who stopped the mouth^ of Lions, was but one Daniell, and
who was stoned, was but one Jeremy, and who was hewed in pieces was but one
Esaias; Add hereto, that S. Matthew and S. Mark do not so expressly say, that both
the Thieves did vpbraid Christ, as we find S. Luke expressly to write: Vnus
autem de his etc. One of the thieves, that were hanged, blasphemed him.

For the greater probability of truth, we may further say, that ther^ ca^ be no
reason alleged, why the same thief should both blaspheme, and praise Christ.
And whreas some do reply, that this thief, who before did blaspheme, did after
change his Judgment, and praised Christ, when he heard him say: Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do: is evidently repugnant to the Gospel;
for S. Luke relates, that Christ prayed for his Persecutours to his Father,
before the wicked Thief begun to blaspheme. Therefore the judgments of S.
Ambrose and S. Austine are to b^ embraced heerin, who mantaine, that of the two
thieves, the one did blaspheme, the other did praise and defend Christ.
Therefore the other thief did answer to the thief blaspheming, thus: Neither
do thou fear God, whereas thou art in the same damnation? Luc. 23. This good
and happy thief, partly from the virtue of the Cross of Christ, and partly
from divine light and inspiration, which then did begin to shine to him,
undertook to correct his Brother, and to draw him to a more safe mind and
iudment. The meaning of whose words is this: Thou would imitate the
blaspheming Jews; but they as yet have not learned to fear the judgment of
God, because they are persuaded they have overcome; and they do vaunt and glory
of their Victory, when they see^ Christ nailed to the Cross, and themselfes to
be free and at liberty, suffering no evil. But thou, who for thy offenses,
hangest upon the Cross, and hastest toward death, why do thou not begin to
fear God? Why heapest thou sin to sin? And further, this happy Thief
increasing in his good Work, and seconded with the light of the Grace of
God, confesses his sins, and preaches the Innocence of Christ: saying: Et
nos quidem just, and we are justly (to wit condemned to the Cross) but this
man has done no Evil. Luc. 23.

Lastly, the light of Grace more resplendently shining, he adds: Domine
memento mei etc. Lord remember me, when thou shall come into thy kingdom.
Certainly the Grace of the Holy Ghost, which was in the heart of this Thief,
is most wonderful, S. Peter the Apostle denies Christ; the Thief nailed to
the Cross confesses him: The disciples going to Emaus, say, But we did Hope;
the Thief confidently speaks, saying: Remember me, when thou shall come into
thy kingdom. S. Thomas the Apostle denied to believe in Christ, except he saw
that Christ had risen from death; The Thief being upon a Cross and seeing
Christ fastened to the Cross, doubts not ^o acknowledge, that after he was
to ^e a King. But who had taught this ^heefe so high Mysteries? He calls that
man Lord, whom he did behold ^aked, wounded, lamenting, openly derided and
contemned, and hanging with him. He further says, that Jesus after his death,
was to come into his kingdom. From which point we understand, that the Thief
did not ^reame of any future temporal king^ome of Christ here upon earth,
(such ^s the Jews do expect) but believed that Christ after his death, was to
be an Eternal King in Heaven. Who had instructed him in such sublime
Sacraments? Certainly only the spirit of Truth, which did prevent him in the
benedictions of sweetness. Christ after his Resurrection said to his Apostles:
Christ ought to suffer these things, and so to enter into his glory. But the
Theife did foreknow this after a wounderfull manner, and did confess it at
that time, when there appeared no likelihood in Christ to reign. Kings do
reign when they live, and when they cease to live, they cease to reign. But
the Thief openly affirmed, that Christ by death was to come into his Kingdom.

The which point our Lord did explain in one of his Parables, when he said:
Luc. 19. A certain Noble man went into a far Country, to take unto himself
a kingdom, and to return. This our Lord said, being most near unto his
Passion; signifying that by death, himself was to go into a far distant
Country or Region, that is, to an other life, or unto Heaven, which is most
remote from the Earth; and to go, to the end to receave a most large and
everlasting kingdom; and after to return at the day of judgment, that he
might make retribution either of reward or punishment to all men, according as
they had deserved in this life. Therefore of this kingdom of Christ, which
presently after his death he was to receive, the wise Thief said: Remember me,
when thou shall come into thy kingdom. But was not Christ a king before his
death* Certainly he was; and therefore the Magi cried out; Vbi est, qui natus
est, Rex Iudaeorum? Where is he that is borne king of the Jews? Math. 2. And
Christ himself said to Pilate: Thou say, that I am a King; For this was I
borne, and for this came I into the world, that I should give testimony to the
Truth. Joan. 18. Nevertheless he was a king in this world, as a stranger among
his Enemies, and therefore he was acknowledged as a king only of few, but
contemned and badly entreated by many. And in regard thereof he said in the
Parable above cited, that he was to go into a far Country, to take unto
himself a kingdom; He said not, to seek, or to gain a Kingdom which did
not belong to him, but to receive his own kingdom, and to return; therefore
the Thief wisely said: When thou shall come into thy kingdom.

To proceed; The kingdom of Christ signifies not in this place any Regal
Potency or So^^raignty: For this even from the beginning he had, according to
that of the Psalm 2. I am appointed king by him over Sion, his Holy Hill; And
in another place! He shall rule from sea to sea, and from the River even to the
ends of the world. Psalm. 71. And Esaias says: cap. 9 A little one is horn to us,
and a son is given to us, whose Principality is upon his shoulder. And
Jeremy, cap. 23. I will raise up David, a Just branch, and he shall reign a
king, and shall be wise, and he shall do judgment and justice upon the earth.
And Zacharias cap. 9. Rejoice greatly O daughter of Sion, make iubilation O
daughter of Jerusalem: Behold thy king will come to thee, the just and Savior,
himself poor, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Coult the foale of an Ass.
Therefore of this kingdom Christ did not speak in the Parable above, neither
the good thief, when he said, Remember me, when thou shall come into thy
kingdom: but both did speak of perfect Beatitude, by the which a man is
exempted and freed from all servitude and subjection of things created, and
only is become subject to God, whom to serve is to reign, and he is
constituted by God himself over all his Works,

This Kingdom, so far forth as it concerned the Beatitude of the Soul,
Christ received even from the beginning of his Conception; but as it concerned
his Body, he had it not actually, but only by right, until after his
Resurrection. For whiles he was a Pilgrim or stranger here upon Earth, he was
subject to wearines, famine, thirst, injuries, wounds, and to death it self:
yet because the glory of the Body was due to him, therefore after his death he
did enter into his glory, as due to him. For thus our Lord himself speaks
after his resurrection: Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so
to enter into his glory? Which glory is called his glory, because he is of
power to communicate it to others, and in this respect he is said to be, Rex
gloriae, Dominus gloriae, and, Rex Regum: And he himself says to his
disciples. I dispose for you a Kingdom. It is in our power to receive glory,
or a Kingdom, but not to give; and accordingly it is said to us: Matthew. 2^.
Enter into the joy of thy Lord, and not into thy own joy. Therefore this is
that Kingdom, of which the good Thief said: when thou shall come into thy
Kingdom.

But here the great Virtues, which shine in the prayer of this Holy Thief, are
not to be passed over in silence; that thereby we may the less wonder at the
answer which Christ our Lord made to him: he says, Lord remember me, when
thou shall come into thy Kingdom. He calls Christ Lord; by which title he
acknowledges himself to be his servant, or rather his redeemed bondslaue, and
confesses him to be his Savior. He adioyneth: Remember me, which is a word
full of hope, Faith, Love, Devotion, and Humility. He says not, remember me,
if thou can, because he believed Christ could do all things; neither says
he, if it pleases thee, because he was confident of Christ's charity and
goodness. He says not, I desire the consort and participation of thy Kingdom,
because his Humility would not bear this kind of speech; to conclude, he
desires nothing in particular, but only says, rmember me, which is as much,
if he had said, If thou will vouchsafe only to remember me; if thou will be
pleased to turn the Eye of thy Benignity toward me, it is sufficient for me;
because I am assured of thy Power and Wisdom, and upon thy goodness and Charity
I wholly anchor and stay my self. He lastly adds this, when thou shall come
into thy Kingdom; to show that his desire was not fixed upon any weak and
temporary benefit, but that it aspired to things sublime and eternal.

Here it follows, that we consider the Answer of Christ: he says; Amen, I
say unto thee, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise. That particle, Amen,
is a word grave and solemn with Christ, the which he was occustomed to use,
when he would affirm any thing earnestly and vehemently. S. Austin was not
afraid to say, that this word Amen, was (as it were) the oath of Christ, tract.
41. in Joan. Properly it is no oath, since when our Lord said in S. Matthew; I
say to you, not to swear at all. And a little after: Let your speech be, yea,
yea, no, no: And that, which is over and above these, is of Evil. Mat. 5. Now
it is no way probable, that our Lord should have sworn so often, as he
pronounted Amen, since he used this word, Amen many times; And in S. John, he
says not only, Amen, but Amen, Amen. Therefore S. Austin truly said, that
Amen, was as it were an Oath, but he said not that it was an Oath. For this
word, Amen, signifies Truly; And when one says, I say truly to thee, he
affirms earnestly, and an earnest affirmation is peculiar to an Oath Therefore
Christ with good reason said to the Thief, Amen I say to thee; that is; I
truly do affirm, but do not swear.

And indeed there were three emergent Reasons, which might cause the Thief to
waver and rest doubtful of the Promise of Christ, except he had auerred it
with so earnest an asseueration. The first may be drawn from the person of the
Thief, who seemed not in any sort worthy of so great a Reward, or so great a
gift. For who would imagine, that a Theife should from the Cross presently
pass to a kingdom? The second Reason is taken from Christ promising, who at
that instant seemed to be reduced and brought to extremity of want, weakness,
and calamity. For the Thief might probably thus reason and discourse with
himself: If this man during his life time, was not able to perform any thing
in behalf of his friends, shall not he be less able, being dead? The third
reason may have reference to the thing promised. For here Paradise is promised:
but Paradise (as then all men took notice) did belong not to the Soul, but to
the Body; since by the Word, Paradise, a terrestrial Paradise was understood
by the Jews. It had been more credible to the Thief, and subject to his
belief, if our Lord had answered: To day thou shall be with me in the place of
repose and refreshment with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For these Reasons
therefore did our Lord premise those words: Amen, Dico tibi.

Hodie, to day. Our Lord says not, In the day of Judgment, when I shall place
thee with the lust upon my right hand: Neither says he, After some years of
thy being in Purgatory, will I bring thee to a place of rest; Nor does he say:
I will comfort thee after certain Months, or Days; but he says, This very
day, before the sun shall set, thou shall pass with me from the gibbet of
the Cross, to the delights of Paradise. A wonderful Liberality or Bounty of
Christ, and a wonderful happiness of the sinner. With just reason therefore S.
Austin (following S. Cyprian herein) is of Opinion, that this good Thief might
be reputed a Martyr, and therefore escaping Purgatory, did pass from this
World immediately to Heaven. The Reason, why the good Thief might be called a
Martyr, is, in that he publikly confessed Christ, at such time, when his
Disciples were afraid to speak a word in Honor of him; therefore in regard of
this his free and ready Confession, his death with Christ, was reputed with
God, as if he had suffered for Christ.

Those words: Mecum eris, Thou shall be with me; though no other thing should
be promised, then what these words only import, yet had it been a great benefit
and reward unto the Thief: For as S. Austin writes: tract. 5. in Joan. Vbi
male poterat esse ^um illo, and vbi been esse poterat sine illo? Where could
the good thief be evil being with Christ; and where could he be well being
without Christ? For no small reward and remuneration has Christ promised to
those that follow him, when he said, Joan. 12. If any man minister to me, let
him follow me; and where I am, there also shall my minister be. But our Lord
promised to the thief not only his presence or company, but further added,
that the Thief should be in Paradise*

What the word Paradise, in this place may signify (notwithstanding the
different opinions of some) needs not be disputed of. For it is certain,
that Christ the same day after his death, was with his Body in the Sepulcher,
with his Soul in Hell: for thus much the Creed of our Faith delivers to us.
It is also no less certain, that the Name either of Celestial or
Terrestrial Paradise cannot be ascribed either to the Grave, or to Hell. Not
to the Grave; because that was a most narrow and strait place, only fitting to
receive and contain dead Bodies (to omit, that the Body of Christ and the Body
of the good Thief were not put in one and the same grave;) Therefore it
follows, that if the Grave had been understood in this place, that promise
had not been fulfilled, To day thou shall be with me. Neither can the Name of
Paradise be aptly applied to Hell; seeing Paradise does signify a garden of
delights. And certainly in the terrestrial Paradise, there were trees, bearing
fruit and flowers; there were also most clear Waters, and an incredible
sweetness of Air. And in the celestial Paradise there were, and are immortal
pleasures, an inextinguible Light, and the seats of the Blessed. But in Hell,
even in that place, where the souls of the holy Fathers did stay, there was no
light, no sweetness, no delight. True it is, that those souls were not
tormented, but rather contrariwise, seeing the hope of their future Redemption,
and the Visitation of Christ to come to them, did exhilerate and comfort them:
yet notwithstanding this, they were detayned (as Captives) in an obscure and
dark Prison. For thus does the Apostle, (expou^ding the Prophet) speak: Ephesians.
4. Christ ascending on high, led Captivity captive. And Zachary says, cap. 9.
Thou in the blood of thy Testament, have let forth thy Prisoners out of the
Lake wherein is no Water. Where those words, thy Prisoners, and, out of the
lake in which there is no water, do not intimate any sweetness of Paradise, but
the darkness of a Prison. Therefore the name of Paradise signifies no other
thing, then the Beatitude of the Soul, which is placed in the Vision of God:
for that is the true Paradise of delights; not corporal or local, but
spiritual and Celestial.

And this is the reason, why the Thief beseeching and saying: Remember me,
when thou shall come into thy kingdom. Christ did not answer and say: To day
thou shall be with me in my kingdom, but, in Paradise; For Christ himself
was not to be that day in his kingdom; that is, in perfect felicity of Body
and soul; but he was to arrive thereto upon the day of his Resurrection, when
his Body was to become immortal, impassible, glorious, and not obnoxious or
subi^ct to any servitude. Neither would Christ have the good Thief to be
partaker of this kingdom before the common Resurrection of all Bodies, and the
day of the last Judgment. Notwithstanding our Lord most truly and properly said
to him, To day thou shall he with me in Paradise, because that very day he was
to communicate to the soul of the good thief, as also to the Souls of all
the Saints in Limbo Patrum, the glory of the sight of God, which himself had
received from his Conception. For this glory, or felicity is essential, and it
is the supreme Good in the Heavenly Paradise. And certainly the propriety of
the words of Christ is to be admired. For he said not: We shall be to day in
Paradise, or, to day we will go into Paradise; but, To day thou shall be with
me in Paradise; as if he would have said: Thou art this day with me upon the
Cross, but thou art not with me in Paradise, in which I am, according to the
supreme portion of the soul; but a little after, yea this very day, thou shall
be with me, not only freed from the Cross, but even in Paradise.

Of the first fruit of the second Word. CHAP. V.
FRom the second Word spoken upon the Cross, we may gather certain fruits of
great worth. The first fruit is, the Consideration of the immense mercy and
liberality of Christ, and how behoofull and profitable a thing it is, to serve
him. Christ being oppressed with dolours, and pains, might not have heard the
Thief praying to him; but Charity made choice rather to forget the sharpnes of
his torments, then not to hear a miserable sinner, so confessing himself to
be. The same Lord, who was altogether silent at the maledictions and
exprobrations of the Chief Priests, and the soldiers, would not through his
Charity be so, to the cries of a poor and penitent suppliant. He was silent to
the reproaches uttered against him, because he is patient, he would not be
silent to the confession of the Thief, because he is merciful.

But what shall we may say of the Liberality and Bounty of Christ? He who
serves temporal Lords, does often take great pains, and gain but little.
Certainly we may daily see not few, who have rauelled and spent out many years
in Princes Courts, and yet in their old age they return home, ^lmost Beggars.
But Christ our Prince ^s truly liberal, truly magnificall; He ^eceaued nothing
from the Thief, but (...) few good Words, and a prompt desire of serving and
following him; and ^et behold, with how great a reward ^e was recompensed.
For first eue^ that day all his sins were fully pardoned, which he had
committed du^ing the course of his whole life. Next, he was adjoined to the
Princes of his People, to wit, to the Patriarchs and Prophets: To conclude, he
was taken up and advanced to the participation and fruition of Christ his
Table, of his dignity, of his Glory, and finally of all his Goods. Our Lord
said: To day thou shall be with me in Paradise. And what our Lord had said, he
presently performed: for he did not defer this his reward to another time; but
that very day Christ enriched the Thief with a great reward, an abundant
Reward, and a Revvard amassed and heaped together of all the goods of
Celestial Happiness.

Neither did Christ proceed in this manner of munificence only with this
Thief. The Apostles only left their small boats, their places of receiving
Tole or Tribute, and their poor Cottages, that they might serve Christ. But in
recompense of this, Christ made them, Princes over the whole Earth. Psalm. 44.
He also subjected to their power, the Devil, Serpents, and all kind of
diseases. Matthew. 10. A man has given to the poor (for the honor and love he
bears to Christ) (...) little bread, or but some old clothes, o^ rags, and
yet in recompense hereof he shall hear Christ say at the day of Judgment: I
was hungry, and you gave me to eat; I was naked, and you covered me; Therefore
take and possess an everlasting kingdom. Matthew. 25. To conclude, that I may
pretermit all other points of this Nature, Hear, and take notice of the
incredible bounty and liberality of our Lord: but we must remember, He was God
who thus promised: Every one, that has forsaken house, or Brethren, or
sisters, or Father, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my names sake, shall
receive an hundred fould, and shall possess life everlasting. Matt. 19.

S. Hierome, and other holy Doctors do explicate this promise in this sort; To
wit, that who sha l suffer loss of any temporal^ matter for Christ in this
present life, shall receive a double reward, and incomparably greater, ^he^ the
thing which is left for Christ. For first, he shall receive spiritual joy
(being a spiritual gift) in this life, which is an hundred fould greater and
more precious, then is that which is left for the love of Christ. So as a man
of a clear and perfect Judgment, would sooner make choice to retain and keep
that spiritual good to himself, then to change it for an hundred houses,
Lands, or other such like things. Again, as if this reward were but small,
and not to be much prized, that happy Merchant or Negotiatour shall receive in
the world to come eternal Life, by which word is signified an immense
abundance, or boundles heaping together of all goods. But this is the
unlimited liberality of Christ our supreme Lord, toward those who are not
afraid, or delay to bynd themselves seriously to his Service. Are not then such
men even distracted and deprived of their Wits, who abandoning Christ, make
themselves thral, and Vassals to Mammon, Epicurisme, and Luxury?

But some men will contest against what we here teach, and aver, as never
having tasted of the Riches of Christ, saying: All which is hitherto spoken,
are but naked Words, since we daily see many servants of Christ to be poor,
abject, contemptible, and in state deplorable. This Hundred fould which is here
so greatly magnified, we see not. To this I answer. It is so indeed; for a
Carnal man never sees that Hundred fould promised by Christ; because his eyes
are not capable of such a sight; neither does this man at any time taste that
solid and true joy, which a pure Conscience, and Seraphicall Charity toward,
God is accustomed to taste. But here I will produce an Example, from the which
Carnality, and Sensuality may in some sort make a conjecture of spiritual
delights, and riches.

We read in the Book of Examples ( distinct. 3. exempl. 26.) of the most
famous men of the Cistercian Order, that one Arnulphus (noble by birth, and of
great riches) leaving the World, and abandoning from him all temporal cares,
became a Monk of the forsaid Order, under the famous Abbot S. Bernard. This
man God did exercise and try with diverse most sharp scourges of many corporal
Infirmities, especially toward the later end of his life. But at one time,
when his pains began to seize upon him with greater violence then usually
before, he cried out with a great voice, and said: Vera sunt omnia, qua dixisti
Domine Jesus. O Lord Jesus etc. all those things are true, which thou have said.
And when as those, who were about him, demanded why he spoke these Words, he
replied: Dominus in Euangelio suo dicit; Qui reliquerit diuitias etc. Our Lord
has said in his Gospel, He who has left his riches, and all other things for
Christ; shall receive an hundred fould in this life, and afterward life
everlasting. Ego vim huius promissionis nunc demum intelligo etc. I now at
length do see and acknowledge the truth and force of this promise; and do
confess, that now I do receive an hundred fould of all things, or goods, which
I have left. For the great bitterness of these my pains is so pleasant and
grateful to me, through my hope of Gods good mercy of which these dolours are
a pledge, as that I would not have wanted this Hope and Comfort for so much
riches of the world, though a hundred times doubled, as I have left and
forsaken. For certainly the spiritual joy, which now is but in hope and
expectation, does a hundred thousand times exceed al worldly joy which now
actually, and in possession is. Thus far the forsaid Arnulphus his words. And I
would desire the Reader maturely to weigh and consider of them, and then let
him judge, how much is to be esteemed and pryaed a certain, and firm hope
(infused by God) of the present obtaining of eternal Beatitude and Felicity.

Of the second fruit of the second Word. CHAP. VI.
ANother fruit of the former second Word or Sentence, is an acknowledgment of
the power of the Grace of God, and of the imbecility and weakness of man's Will.
From the knowledge whereof we may learn, that it is a chief matter greatly to
confide in the help of God, and greatly to distrust in our own proper force
and strength. Do thou covet to know the power of the Grace of God? Behold
the good Thief. This man was a notorious sinner, continuing in that most
wicked state, till he came to suffer punishment upon a Cross, that is, almost
till the instant of his death: And in so great a peril of Eternal damnation,
there was not any who would relieve him either with counsel, or with other
help or ease. For although he was placed near to our Savior; yet he did hear
the High Priests, and the Pharisees, affirming him to be a Seducer; ambitious,
and to affect the kingdom of another man. He heard his fellow Thief
vpbrayding Christ with the same men. There was not any man in all that
Presence, who would speak one word in defense of Christ; neither did Christ
himself seek to refute those blasphemies and maledictions. Yet
notwithstanding all this through the most gracious and admirable favor of God,
when the Thief seemed to have no help for his Salvation; and being thus most
near to Hell, and most distant from eternal life, he being in a moment
illustrated, and enlightened from above, and loathing his former wickedness,
confesses Christ to be innocent, and to be the king of the future World; And
thus being made (as it were) a Preacher, he reprehendeth his fellow, persuadeth
him to repentance, and in the eye of them all does deuoutely and humbly commend
himself to Christ. To conclude, he did so bear himself herein, as that his
penal torments upon the Cross, inflicted justly upon him, for his offense,
was accepted and taken for his pains due in Purgatory, and thus instantly upon
his death, he entered into the joy of his Lord.

From this then we may learn, that no man ought to despair of his Salvation,
seeing this poor man, who came into the Vineyard almost at the last hour,
received the revvard with those who came at the first. Contrariwise, the other
Thief (that humane infirmity might more appear) took no correption, or
admonishment from that notable Charity of Christ, who prayed for his Crucifiers
in so loving a manner, neither from his own proper punishment; nor from the
counsel and example of his fellow; nor from the unaccustomed darkness, and
cleaving of the stones; nor from the Example of those, who (after Christ was
dead) returned back beating and knocking their Breasts; All which things did
fall out after the Conversion of the good Thief, that from thence we might be
instructed, that the one Thief without these helps could be converted, the
other with all the sam^, could not, or rather would not.

But thou will here demand, why God did inspire and give the grace of
Conversion to the one Thief, and did not inspire it to the other? I answer,
that sufficient Grace was not wanting to either. And if the one of them did
perish, he perished through his own fault; if the other was converted, he was
converted through the Grace of God, but not without the cooperation of his own
free will. But thou will reply; Why did not God give to both the Thieves that
efficacious Grace, which is not refused, and rejected even of hard and stony
Hearts? This belongs to the secrets of God, the which it becomes us to
admire, but not to search into: since it is s^fficient for us to know, that
there is no Iniquity with God, as the Apostle speaks, and that the Judgments
of God may be secret, but iniust they cannot be, as S. Austin teaches. It
behooves us rather to learn from this proceeding of God, not to defer or
prolong our Conversion, till the end of our Life. Since though it happen to one
man, to find the Grace of God at the last hour, yet to another it falls
out, to find Judgment.

And i^ any man will reuolue or look over Histories, and observe the daily
events and chances, he shall certainly find them to be very few, who have
fortunatly and happily passed out of this World, if so they lived wickedly
throughout the whole course of their life; but rather after their life
negligently led, have been sent to everlasting Punishment* As on the contrary,
most few can be numbered, who have lived piously and saintly, and yet have
perished unhappily and miserably: but many may be rekoned, who after a virtuous
and godly life have arrived to sempiternall joys. Certainly they are over bold
and over rash, who in a matter so much importing (to wit, life Everlasting, or
torments everlasting) dare defer to remain in deadly and mortal sin but one
day; since they may be received and deprived of this present life every moment;
and that after death there is no more place left for Penance, and no
Redemption in Hell.

Of the third fruit of the second Word. CHAP. VII.
THe third fruit of the same Sentence of our Lord may be gathered from that, if
one will consider, that there were three Persons crucified in the same place,
and at the same hour: One, that was Innocent (to wit, Christ) an other
Penitent, the good Thief; the third, obstinate and obdurate in his sins, the
bad Thief. Or otherwise we may say, There were three Persons crucified at one
time; Christ, who was ever excelle^tly good; One Thief, ever notoriously
wicked; Another Thief, who was sometimes wicked, sometimes holy. From this now
we may infer, that no man in this life can live without his Cross, and that
those labor in vain, who hope and endeavor to avoid the same; but those
are wise, who receive their Cross from ^he hand of our Lord, and do suffer the
same even till death, not only pati^ntly, but also resignedly and ^^llingly.

That all good and Virtuous men are to have their Crosses, appears from those
words of our Lord: Math. 16. If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me. And in another place: He that
does not bear his Cross, and come after me, cannot be my Disciple. Luc. 14.
The which point the Apostle clearly teaches, saying, 2. Tim 3. All who will
live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. To whom are concordant
the holy Fathers, both Latin, and Greek. For greater breuity I will insist
only in two. S. Austin who writes: Vita ista etc. This life is a little
Tribulation; If it be not a tribulation, it is not a peregrination; but if it
be a peregrination, either thou little love thy Country, or without doubt thou
suffer Tribulation. in Psalm. 137. And the same Father in another place: Si
putas te etc. If thou be persuaded, that as yet thou have suffered no
tribulation, then thou have not begun to be a Christian, in Psalm. 11.

S. John Chrysostom thus accords with the former Father: A Christiani vita
etc. Tribulation is an indissoluble bond from the life of a Christian, hom 67.
ad Pop. And again: Non potest dicere etc. Thou can not allege any one, who
is exempt from tribulation, because he is Just. hom. 29. in Ep. ad Heb. To
conclude, the force of Reason manifestly euicteth this point. Things contrary
without a mutual concertation and fight cannot stand together. Fire and
Water, so long as they remain in several and remote places, rest quiet, and
without iarring; But when they meet together, then instantly the Water begins
to euaporate and send forth smoke, to leap (as it were) and to make a noise,
until either the water be spent and consumed, or the fire extinguished.
Ecclesiasticus says, cap. 33. Contra malum, bonum est; contra mortem, vira;
Sic and contra virum iustum, Peccator. Against Evil, is good; against death,
Life, so also against ^^iust man, is a sinner. Just men are like to fire; they
shine, they burn, they ascend high, and whatsoever they do, they do it
efficaciously, vigorously, and sparkily: Bu^ the Iniust resemble Water, they
are could, they ^^de upon the earth, causing in every place dirt and filth.
What vvonder then is it, if all good men do suffer persecution at the hands of
the Wicked? But because even to the consummation of the World, the wheat and
the Darnell shall grow in the same fi^ld; the chafe and the Corn in the same
Barn; good and bad Fish in the same Net; that is, Virtuous and wicked men not
only in the same World, but even in the same Church; therefore it cannot be
otherwise, but that virtuous and holy men shall receive from the wicked and
impious, Injuries, and Tribulations.

But neither the wicked do live in this world, void and exempt from the
Cross. For although they do not suffer persecution from the Just; yet they do
suffer from other wicked men; they suffer from their own Vices; they suffer
from a guilty and self tormenting Conscience. Certainly the most wise Solomon,
who was thought and reputed most happy (if any man could so be) could not deny,
but that he suffered his Cross, when he said: Vidi in omnibus etc. I saw in
all things Vanity and affliction of mind. And a little after: I have been weary
of my life, seeing all things under the sun to be evil, and ^ll things
Vanity, and affliction of spirit. Eccl 3 And Ecclesiasticus also cap. 40. (a
man very wise) has delivered this general Sentence: Great Business and travel
is created to all men, and an heavy yoke upon the children of Adam. S. Austin
says: Inter omnes tribulationes etc. Among all Tribulations not any is
greater, then the Conscience of a man's sins. in Psalm. 45. S. Chrysostom in
his 3. Homily upon Lazarus, teaches, that the wicked do not want their
Crosses. For if he be poor, Poverty is to him a Cross; if Poverty be absent,
then his own unbridled Concupiscence does afflict him more vehemently; If he
keep his bed for any disease, he lies upon a Cross; if he be free from
diseases and infirmities of the Body, then is he inflamed with anger, which
also is a Cross.

But S. Cyprian demonstrateth, that every man even from his nativity is borne
to his Cross, and to tribulation; and that he does fortell and presage the
same by his weeping, as soon as he is borne; For thus that Father writes,
sermon. de patientia. Vnusquisque nostrum etc. Every one of us, when he is borne,
and received into the World, takes his beginning from tears; And although as
yet he be ignorant of all things, he knows no other thing even at his first
birth and nativity, then to weep; through a natural providence he bewaileth
the anxieties and labors of a mortal life; and the poor ignorant soul
presently in the beginning does protest, and foretell with lamentation and
crying, the storms of the world, into the which he is ready to enter and
suffer. Thus S. Cyprian. Since then these things are so certain, who can deny,
but that the Cross is common both to good and evil men?

It yet remains to make it evident, that the Cross of virtuous men is ^^ort,
light, and profitable; and continually the Cross of the wicked, heavy, barren,
and continual. And touching the Cross of Godly men; That it is short it
cannot be denied, seeing it cannot be extended beyond the term or time of this
life. For just men dying: Now says the spirit, they rest from their labors.
Apoc. 14. And that, God shall wype away all tears, from their Eyes. Apoc. 21.
That this present life is most short, though whiles it is flowing away, it
seems long and tedious, the sacred Scripture does not obscurely signify, when
it says: Job. 14. Breues dies hominis sunt etc The days of man are short; and
man borne of a Woman, living a short time. And yet more: What is your life? It
is a vapor appearing a little while, and after it shall vanish away. The
Apostle, who may be thought to have suffered a most heavy Cross, and this for
a long time; to wit, from his youth unto his old age, yet does thus speak
hereof: 2. Cor. 4. Our tribulation, which is momentarie and light, works
above measure exceedingly an eternal weight of glory in us. Where he compares
his tribulation (suffered above thirty years) to an indivisible moment of
time; and he styles it but a small tribulation; to wit, to be hungry, to be
thirsty, to be naked, to be stricken and buffeted, to suffer a daily
persecution; to be thrice beaten with rods by the Romans; five times to be
whipped by the Jews; to be once stoned; to suffer shipwreck thrice; To
conclude, to be conversant in many labors, to be much in prison, subject above
measure to stroks and wounds, and to be often at the pit-brimme of death.

Now what Tribulations are to be accounted heavy, if these of the Apostle be
truly light and easy? But what If I should add and aver that the Cross of lust
men it not only light, but sweet and pleasant, in regard of the superabundant
consolation of the Holy Ghost, accompaning it? Christ himself thus pronounces
of his yoke, which may be said to be a Cross: Matthew 11. My yoke is sweet,
and my burden light. And in another place: You shall weep and lament, but the
world shall rejoice; you shall be made sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy; and your joy no man shall take from you. Joan. 16. And the Apostle
cries out: I am replenished with all Consolation, I do exceedingly abound in
joy, in all our Tribulation. 2. Cor. 7. To conclude, that the Cross of the
Just, is not only short and light, but also fruitful and most profitable, it
cannot be denied, since our Lord plainly thus speak^th in S. Matthew cap. 5.
Blessed are they, that suffer persecution for Justice, for theirs is the
kingdom of Heaven. And the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans. cap. 8.
bursteth out, saying: The Passions of this time, are not condign to the glory
so come, that shall be revealed in us. With whom agrees his Co^postle S. Peter,
when he says: Communicating with the Passions of Christ, be glad, that in the
revelation also of his glory, you may be glad, rejoicing. 1. Pet. 6.

Now that the Cross of the wicked is most tedious, most heavy, and deprived of
all reward or fruit, is easily demonstrated. Certainly the Cross of the wicked
Thief ended not with his temporal life, but continues even to this day in
Hell, and shall continue for all Eternity; for the worm of the Wicked (in
Hell) shall not dye, and their fire shall not be extinguished. And the Cross
of the Rich Glutton, which consisted in heaping together of Riches (the which
our Lord most truly compared to thorns) was not ended in his death, as the
Cross of Lazarus the poor beggar was; but accompanying him even to Hell, does
burn, and torment him, and forces him to say: I would to God, that a drop of
Water might cool my tongue, because I am tormented in this flame. Thus we see,
that the Cross of the wicked never finds end. And in this very time and
life, how heavy and sharp their Cross is, the words of them, whom the Book
of Wisdom introduces as lamenting, do fully witness, Sap. 5. We are wearied
out in the way of iniquity and perdition, and have walked hard ways. What? Are
not Ambition, Covetousness, Luxury, hard ways? Are not those hard ways, which
inseparably attend upon Vice; to wit, Anger, Dissentions, Envy? Are not the
works, which spring from these (that is to say, treacheries reproaches,
contumelies, Wounds, and death it self) hard ways? Certainly, these are of
that vvorking Nature, at that not seldom they force men (as being desperate)
to become their own Parricides and Butchers; and thus by flying from one
Cross, they fall upon an other far more insupportable, and dreadful.

But let us see, if the Cross of the wicked do bring forth any gain or fruit.
Doubtlesly it cannot produce any thing, that is good, since Thorns do not
bring forth grapes, nor Thisles figs. The yoke of our Lord makes a man quiet,
and reposed, according to his own Words: Take up my yoke upon you, and you
shall find rest unto your Souls. Matthew. 11. But the yoke of the Deui^l (which
is contrary to the yoke of Christ) what can it engender, but solicitude and
anxiety? And which ballanceth all other respects, the Cross of Christ is a
degree or step to everlasting Happiness: Ought not Christ to have suffered these
things, and so to enter into his glory? Luc. 24. Whereas the Cross of the
Devil affords a passage to eternal punishment: Go you into everlasting
fire, which was prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Matthew. 25. Such men,
who are careful of their souls health, let them not covet to descend down
from their Cross, if so they be crucified with Christ, as the Evil Thief
labored to do; but rather let them with the good thief adhere, and cleave
willingly to the side of Christ; and let them pray to God, that they may
obtain Patience, but not a descending from the Cross. For thus suffering
together with Christ, they shall reign together with him: Si compatimur, and
conglorificabimur. Romans 8.

But they who suffer the Cross of the di^^ll (if they will be careful of their
own good) let them labor in all have and speed to change their Cross. Let
them change the five yoke of Oxen, for one yoke of Christ. The five yoke of
Oxen seem to signify the labors and molestations, which the wicked undergo,
thereby to satisfy the pleasure of the five Senses. But these five yoakes are
changed for that one sweet and light yoke of Christ, when a man does turn
those labors, which before he suffered for the committing of sin, through
the grace of God, into labors and works of Penance. Happy is that soul,
which knows how to crucify his flesh from all vice and concupiscence; and
what riches or charges he has heererofore wasted, in nourishing and feeding
his sensuality, so much to bestow after in Alms deeds; and what time he has
lost in attending, or visiting great Persons, or in affecting of Ambition, to
redeem the same time, by spending so much in Prayer, reading of devout Books,
and in seeking the favor of God, and of the Princes of the Heavenly Court; for
by this means the Cross of the evil Thief, may be changed for the Cross of
Christ; I mean, a Cross, which is grievous and barraine, for a Cross which
is light and fruitful.

Most wisely (as S. Austin relates) did a noble Commander in the wars,
discourse with his fellow soldier, touching the commutation and change of his
Cross, his words are these: Dic quaeso te etc I pray thee tell me, where do we
intend to arrive by all these our labors? What end do we project in our
thoughts, or seek after? To what end do we thus war and play the soldiers?
Can there be any greater hope for us in the Court, then to become the Emperors
friends? But what is there, which is not fragile, uncertain, and full of
dangers; and by how many dangers do men there ascend to greater dangers? And
how long shall this our state continue? If I will be a friend of God, behold I
am so made at this instant. Thus much S. Austin records. Lib. 8. Confess. c.
6. Hear we may see, how wisely this worthy soldier (in accounting the labors
spent in seeking the favor of the Emperor, to be most troublesome, and
painful, and often unprofitable) did proceed; and in endeavoring to change
them into labors more sweet, more short, and more profitable, for the
purchasing of the friendship and love of God. And thus accordingly these two
happy Soldiers did presently turn the Current of their life; for both of them
abandoning their secufar Warfare, began to be spiritual soldiers only to God.
And which did more redouble their joy, was, that both of them had wives, who
hearing of this unexpected change of their Husbands, did themselves most
willingly and chearefully dedicate their Chastity to God.

The third Word, to wit, Ecce matter tua, Ecce filius tuus. Behold thy Mother,
Behold thy Son. Joan. 19. is literally explicated. CHAP. VIII.
THe last Sentence of those three, which belong to the Charity of our Neighbor
is this: Ecce matter tua, Ecce filius tuus. Behold thy Mother, Behold thy
Son. But before we descend to these Words, certain precedent words of the
Evangelist are to be explicated; for thus S. John speaks: There stood by side
the Cross of Jesus his mother, and his mothers sister Mary of Cleophas, and
Mary Magdalen. When Jesus therefore had seen his mother, and the disciple
standing, whom he loved, he says to his mother: Woman behold thy son.
After, he says to the disciple: Behold thy Mother; And from that hour the
disciple took her for his own. Joan. 19. Of the three women, which stood
near to the Cross of our Lord, two were most eminent and w^ll known; to wit,
Mary the Mother of God, and Mary Magdalene; Touching Mary of Cleophas, there is
some question or doubt. The common opinion is, that Mary of Cleophas was
German-sister to the B Virgin Mother of God, borne of S. Anne by a second
husband: to which two Mary's, some do add a third sister, called Mary Salome.
But this last Opinion is wholly to be rei^cted, since it is not credible, that
three sisters should be called by one, and the same name. Again, the constant
sentence of learned and pious men, is, that S. Anne was the mother only of the
Blessed Virgin; neither is there any mention of Mary Salome in the Gospells.
For where S. Mark writes: Mary Magdalene, Mary of James, and Salome bought
spices; The word, Salome, is not of the second Case, as if it signifi^d Mary of
Salome, as before it is said, Mary of James; but it is of the first Case, and
of the feminime Gender, as appears from the Greek word (...).

To conclude, Salome was the wife of Zebedeus, and mother of S. James and S.
John the Apostles, as appears out of S. Matthew, and S. Mark: as Mary of
James, or Cleophas, was the wife of Cleophas, and mother of S. James the
yongar, and of S. Jude, or Thaddaeus. Therefore the truth of this point is,
that Mary of Cleophas was called the sister of Mary the mother of God, because
Cleophas was the Brother of S. Joseph, spouse to the B. Virgin Mary: for the
wives of two Brethren may rightly be called sisters between themselves. In
which respect also S. James the younger, is called the Brother of our Lord; to
wit, the sisters Son, as above we said of S. Joseph. This History Eusebius
Caesariensis records, and produces a faithful and most credible Author
Egesippus who lived in the later end of the days of the Apostles. The truth
also of this point is confirmed by S. Jerome.

There is also an other literal doubt, which here occurreth, to be solued; How
S. John can say, that these three women did stand iuxta crucem Domini, by side,
or near to the Cross of our Lord, seeing Mark and Luke, do write, that they
did stand far of from the Cross. S. Austin reconcileth these seeming
different testimonies; saying that these holy women might be said to stand
aloof from the Cross, and near to the Cross. A far off, if their standing
be compared to the soldiers and other Ministers, who were so near to the
Cross, as that they did touch it. Near to the Cross they may be said to
stand, because through their neerenes they might easily hear the voice and
words of Christ; the which the common People could not in regard of their
greater distance. It also may be further said, that those three holy Women,
during the Passion did stand far of the Cross, as being hindered by the
common People and the soldiers; but a little after the Crucifixion was
accomplished, and many departing away, those three women with S. John did draw
more near unto the Cross. But against this may be urged; that supposing this
construction, how could then the Blessed Virgin and S. John understand, that
those words of our Lord, This is thy Son, This is thy Mother, were spoken of
them, seeing a great company of persons were there present, and Christ did not
call either the Virgin, or the Disciple by their proper name, or appellation?

To this I answer, that those three Womon and S. John did stand so near unto
the Cross, as that our Lord might easily design and point out with his eyes
the persons, to whom he did speak; especially seeing it is certain he directed
those words to such as were his friends, and not to strangers. Now among those,
who were his own friends, there was no other man there present, to whom he
could say, This is thy Mother, then S. John; nor any other Woman, who through
death was deprived of her son, then the B Virgin. Therefore he said to his
Mother: Behold thy Son, and to his Disciple: Behold thy Mother; Of which
words this is the sense and meaning I now pass out of this World to my Father
and because I know thou art my Mother, and that thou have neither parents, nor
husband, nor brethren, nor sisters; therefore not to leave thee destitute of
all humane comfort and aid, I do commend thee to the charge and care of John
my most dear Disciple. He shall be to thee in place of a Son, and thou to him
in place of a Mother. Which wholesome counsel, or command of Christ did greatly
please them both, and each of them (as is credible) accepted thereof with a
yealding submission of head and body. And S. John speaking of himself says*
And from that hour, the Disciple took her for his own: Joan. 19. That is, he
presently obeyed the words of Christ, accounting her among those Persons, whose
charge, care, and provision did belong to him, and such were his Parents being
old, Zebedeus, and Salome.

But now here arises another literal doubt, S. John was one of those who
said: Ecce nos relinquimus omnia etc. Behold, we have left all things, and
have followed thee, what therefore shall we have? Matt 19. Now among those
things, which they had forsaken, our Lord himself rekoneth Father and Mother,
Brethren and sisters, House and Lands. And of this S. John himself, and of his
Brother S. James, S. Matthew thus writes, c. 4. Illi autem relictis retibus and
patre, secuti sunt eum etc. And they forthwith left their nets and Father, and
followed him. What? did he, who left one Mother, presently receive another
Mother? But the Answer here is obious and facil: For the Apostles, that they
might follow Christ dismiss^d and parted with Father and Mother, so far forth,
as they might be any hinderance to them for the preaching of the Gospel, as
also so far forth, as might concern any profit or humane delight, to be taken
by conuersing with them. But the Apostles did not shake of the Care, which by
force of Justice they were bound to exhibit unto their Parents, or which
touched the direction and instruction of their Children, or help and succor
of the needy and distressed.

And this is the Reason (as Doctors generally affirm) why a son cannot
ent^r unto a Religious Order, who has his Father, or Mother spent or wasted
through old age, or so oppressed with poverty, as that they be not able to
maintain their life without the sustentation and help of their Son. In this
sense therefore S. John did leave Father and Mother, when they did not stand in
need of his labor and care; But he did undergo the charge and solicitude of
the Blessed Virgin the Mother, at the command of Christ, because she was
deprived of all humane help and consolation. God indeed could easily without
man's labor, have provided by the ministry of his Angels, all things which
were necessary for maintayning of her life: (for to Christ himself the Angels
did minister in the desert) yet it was his good pleasure thus to proceed with
S. John, that so he might leave this means of succor to the Blessed Virgin,
and also thereby honor S John. For God sent Elias to provide and take care of
the Widow, not that he could not nourish and feed her by the Help of the
Crows, as before he had done, but that God might thereby more bless the
Widow, as S. Austin admonishes. So it pleased our Lord to commit the
solicitude of his Mother to his Disciple, thereby to manifest, that S. John
was more beloved of him, then any of the rest of his Disciples. For in this
mutation and change of the Mother, is fulfilled that Sentence: He who has left
his Father and Mother etc. shall receive an hundred fould, and shall possess
life everlasting. Math. 19. For he truly received an hundred fould, who left
his mother, being the wife of a poor fisher, and received to his care, as
Mother, the Mother of the Creator, the Lady of the World, being full of Grace,
and blessed among all Women, and after to be exalted to the Celestial
Kingdom, above all the Quyres of Angels.

Of the first fruit of the third Word. CHAP. IX.
FRom this third Word, or sentence several fruits may be gathered, if all
points thereof be diligently pondered. And first is collected and manifested
from thence Christ's infinite desire of suffering for our Salvation, that so our
Redemption might be made most full and copious. Other men are very wary in
their death, especially in a violent death, being full of dishonor and
contumely, that their nearest friends be not present thereat, for fear that
their own dolor and grief through their friends sight be augmented. But
Christ not content with his own sufferings (and those most cruel, and
attended on with all reproach and contumely) would have his own Mother and his
Disciple whom he loved, to be present, and to stand near to the Cross; that
so the grief of the Compassion of his own friends, might give an increase to
the grief of his Passion. Christ being upon the Cross, resembled (as it were)
four fountains of Blood abundantly streaming; For his will and pleasure was,
that his own Bl. Mother, his beloved disciple, Mary the sister of his Mother,
and Mary Magdalene, who most ardently above all other Women loved him, should
be present at his death, that from them, four fou^taines of tears should
burst out; so as he should be almost no more troubled at the effusion of his
own blood; then he was at that copious shower of tears, which the grief of
them then present did extort, and force from their eyes and Ha^ts.

It seems to me, that I hear Christ saying: The sorrows of death have
compassed me. Psalm. 17. For that sword foretold of good old Simeon, which
should pierce the soul of my most innocent Mother with incredible grief and
anxiety, does even wound my heart. But o bitter death, do thou separate not
only the soul from the body, but also the mother, from such a Son? Therefore
dolor would not suffer me to say: Mother, but, Woman behold thy Son. God
so loved the World, that for the redeeming thereof, he was content to give his
only begotten Son; and the Son so loved the Father, as that for his honor
he was ready to shed, and power out his own most precious blood. And not being
content only with the dolor of his Passion, he added thereto the dolor of
Compassion, that so he might become a most abundant satisfaction for our
sins. Therefore from hence it appears, that both the Father and the Son
do commend their Charity to us after an ineffable manner, that thereby we may
not perish, but that we may obtain life everlasting. And yet man's heart does
hitherto resist so great a Charity, and makes choice rather to try the wrath
and indignation of the Omnipotent living God, then once to taste the sweetness of
Mercy, and to yield to the Charity of divine Love.

Verily we are most ungrateful, and worthy of all punishment, that since
Christ loved us with such an arde^t affection, as that he was content to suffer
for us much more, then necessity urged. From whereas one drop of his blood was
sufficient for our Redemption, he nevertheless would spend it all, and suffer
innumerable other pun^shments besides: And yet notwithstanding all this, we are
loath and forbearing (for his love, and for our own health, and good of our
soul) to endure and suffer even so much, as is but needful. The cause or
source of so great a sluggines and madness is, in that we do not ponder and
meditate on the Passion and Charity of Christ, with that serious introuersio^
of mind, with which we ^ught, and that we do not appoint, or design times and
places, so^ting to so great a business; but only read, or hear the passion of
Christ briefly, negligently, and cursorily. Therefore the holy Prophet
admonishes us, saying Thren. 1. Behold and see, if there be any grief, like
to my grief. And the Apostle says: Think upon him, who endured of sinners
such contradiction against himself, that you be not wearied, fainting in your
minds. Hebr. 12. But the time shall hereafter come, when fruitlesly, and in
vain we shall repent our selfs of so great ingratitude toward God, and of
supine negligence of our own Salvation.

There are many, who at the last day, repenting, and sighing for anguish of
spirit, shall say; The sun of Justice has not shined to us. Sap. 5. Neither
shall they first then begin thus to lament, but before the day of Judgment; I
mean, that as soon as they shall shut and close the eyes of their body by
death, the eyes of their soul shall be opened to them, and then they shall see
those things, the which when time and opportunity was, they would not once
behold.

Of the second fruit of the third Word. CHAP. X.
AN other fruit growing from the root of this Word, may be taken from the
Consideration of the mystery of the three Women, which stood near unto the
Cross of our Lord. For Mary Magdalene did bear the person of the Penitents,
and therein of those, who did begin to serve God. In Mary of Cleophas may be
figured the state of those, who do go on forward and profit in Virtue. In Mary
the Mother of Christ and a Virgin, may be personated the state of those, who
are Perfect; with whom we may deservedly join S. John, who was a Virgin, and
was within a short time to become Perfect, if at that present he were not. All
these, and only these are found to stand near unto the Cross of our Lord: for
those, who live in state of sin and never think of doing any penance for
their wicked lives, stand far off from the Cross, which is the scale or ladder
to Heaven.

Furthermore, all those not without cause stand near unto the Cross, who need
the aid of him, that was crucified; for such as be Penitents and Beginners in
the way of Justice, do wage War with Vices and Concupiscences, and stand
greatly in need of the assistance of Christ our Captain, that they may be
encouraged to fight, whiles they behold him combat^ing with the Old Serpent,
and not descending from the Cross, until most happily he had triumphed over
him. For thus does the Apostle speak to the Collossians cap. 2. He spoiled the
Principalities and Powers, leading them confidently in open show, and
triumphing over them in himself. And a little before: Fastening to the Cross,
the handwriting of the Decree, which was against us.

Those, who do profit in the way of our Lord, signified by Mary of Cleophas,
who was a Woman married, and brought forth sons, which were called ^he
Brethren of Christ; do also need the help of the Cross; lest otherwise the
cares and anxieties of this world, with the which they are necessarily
entangled do choke the good seed; or that they laboring by night, do catch
nothing. Therefore such Persons ought to go on forward in spiritual profit,
and to behold Christ upon the Cross; who not satisfying himself with those
good works (being many and great) which before he had done, would by the means
of the Cross, proceed to works of a higher Nature; from whence he would not
descend, till he had overcome, and put to fight his Enemy. For nothing is more
deadly or domageable to those who are in progress of Virtue, then to become
weary in their course, and to cease to go forward, since as S. Bernard says
Ep. ad Garinum. In via Virtutis non progredi, regredi est; In the way of Virtue
not to go forward, is to go backward; who puts the example of the Lader of
Jacob, upon which all do ascend or descend, but not any do stand still.

To conclude, those who are in state of Perfection, living a single and
unmarried life (especially if they be Virgins) as the B. Virgin the Mother of
Christ, and S. John the Disciple of Christ, and beloved of him above other in
regard of his Virginity were; these perfect Persons (I say) stand in great
necessity of the aid and supportance of Christ crucified; since such, as are
placed in a more eminent and high degree, ought greatly to fear the blasts of
Pride, except they be founded and rooted lowly in Humility. For although Christ
did often show himself to be a Master of Humility, as where he said: Learn
of me because I am meek and humble of Heart: Math. 11. As also in teaching us,
To sit in the lowest place: and where he repeateth so often: who so exalts
himself, shall be humbled, and who humbles himself shall be exalted. Luc. 18.
Yet he never manifested himself to be a Master of Humility in a more high
degree, then when he was seated in the Chair of his Cross. Which point the
Apostle will declared in those words: He humbled himself, made obedient unto
death; even the death of the Cross. Phil. 2. For what greater humility could
be imagined, the^ that he who was omnipotent, should suffer himself to be
bound, and nailed to the Cross? Or that he, in whom are all the treasures of
Wisdom and knowledge of God, should be content to be reputed, as one m^d or
distracted, by Herod and his army, and through scorn to be clothed with a
white garment? Or lastly, that he, who sits upon the Cherubims, should
brook himself to be crucified in the middst of thieves? Truly who will
seriously glass himself in the mirror of the Cross, will prove over
indocible, if he do not learn and confess, that as yet he is most far from
obtaining true Humility; howsoever he may be thought to have made some
progress and aduanceme^t therein.

Of the third fruit of the third Word. CHAP. XI.
IN this third place we learn from the Chair of the Cross, and from the
words of Christ spoken to his Mother, and his Disciple, what is the duty of God
Parents toward their S^^nes, and reciprocally of good sons toward their
Parents. We will begin with the first. Good Parents ought to love their Sons,
yet to restrain and proportion their love to them, as that it may be no
impediment to the Love of the Parents toward God. And this is that, which our
Savior teaches in the Gospel; He that loves his Son or his daughter more
then me, is not worthy of me. Math. 10. This Precept the B. Virgin most
precisely observed. For she stayed near to the Cross with great Grief, and
with great Constancy. Her Grief did witness the extremity of her love toward
her Son, hanging upon the Cross: her Constancy did testify her great
observance and duty toward God, reigning in Heaven. She did behold her
innocent son with great anxiety and care of mind (whom she so dearly loved)
suffering most bitter dolours and pains, yet did she not labor either in
words or action to hinder those his afflictions (though she could) because she
did well know, that her Son was to undergo all those torments, by the
defined Counsel, and providence of God the Father.

Love is the Measure of Grief; therefore the Mother did much lament, to
behold her son to be so cruciated and afflicted, since she loved him much.
And how could it otherwise be, but that the Virgin (the mother of Christ)
should most ardently love her son; since she was well privy, that her son
did exceed all the sons of men, in every degree of Praise, and that her
son was in a more strict bond to her, and did more nearely belong to her,
then any other sons do belong unto their Mothers. The reason why Women do
love their sons, is accustomed to be twofold. The one is, in that they bare
and brought their sons forth into the World; The other in that the sons
become famous for their deportment and good deserts For otherwise there are not
Mothers wanting, who do but little love, or rather hate their sonns, if either
they be of any deformity in body, or do prove wicked, or ungrateful and
vnnaturali toward their Parents,

Now the B. Virgin (the mother of Christ) loved her Son for both these
respects in a more intense and high degree, then any other Mother ever loved
her son. For first, Other women alone do not generate children, but in the
generation of them they have their husband for their Companion in that Act. But
the Blessed Virgin alone did generate her son; Since a Virgin did beget, and
a Virgin did bring forth. And as Christ (our Lord) in his divine generation had
a Father without a Mother; so in his humane generation he had a Mother, without
a Father. And although it may be truly said, that Christ was conceived of the
Holy Ghost, yet the Holy Ghost is not the Father of Christ, but the Effectour
and maker of the Body of Christ. Neither did the Holy Ghost frame the body of
Christ, of his own proper substanee, which peculiarly belongs to a Father;
but he formed it of the most pure blood of the Virgin. Therefore the most Holy
Virgin alone, without the company of a Father, did beget and bring forth her
Son. And she alone does challenge her Son, as whole to herself; and
thereupon did more love him, then any other Mother ever loved her Ospring.

Now so far forth as belongs to the second Reason: The son of the Blessed
Virgin was, and is specious, and beautiful above the sons of men; and does
excel both men and Angels in all manner of praise. Therefore it follows,
that the Blessed Virgin, who loved her Son above all others, did also condole
and deplore his death and passion more, then all others. This point is so
undeniable, as that S. Bernard is not afraid to say, that the Grief of the B.
Virgin, conceived touching the Passion of her Son, might be called the
Martyrdom of her Heart, according to that of S. Simeon; Thy own soul shall a
sword pierce. And because the martyrdom of the Heart seems more intolerable,
then the martyrdom of the Body; S. Anselme writes, that the dolours of the B.
Virgin were more sharp and insufferable, then any corporal martyrdom.
Certainly our Savior, when praying in the garden of Gethsemani, he suffered
his heart to be martyred, and strongly apprehending all the pains and torments
which the next day he was to undergo, and withal giving (as it were) the
reins and liberty to grief and fear, began so vehemently to be cruciated and
afflicted, as that a bloody sweat distilled from his whole Body; The which is
not read to have fallen out in his corporal Passion.

Therefore the B, Virgin doubtlesly suffered most bitter pain, and acerbity of
affliction, through the sword of Dolor penetrating her soul. And yet in that
she was most willing, that the honor and glory of God should over weigh the
love, which she did bear to the flesh of Christ; therefore she stood near
unto the Cross, full of all constancy and spiritual resolution, looking
without any show of impatience upon her Son then suffering. She did not fall
upon the Earth, half dead (as some do imagine;) she did not tear the hair
from her Head; she did not after a womanish manner bewail and cry out; but
she entertained and welcomed with all eauennesse and serenity of mind, what was
to be tolerated, as proceeding from the good pleasure and Will of God. She
greatly loved the flesh of her son; she more loved the honor of the Father,
and salvation of the World; which two points the Son himself did more love,
then the safety and health of his own Body. Furthermore, the assured Faith of
the Resurrection of her Son, to be after the third day (of the which she
never doubted) did so animate her, and minister new spirits of Constancy, as
that she did not ^tand in need of humane Consolation. For she knew well, that
the death of her Son, was like unto a most short sleep, according to that of
the Prophet: I have slept, and have been at rest; and I have risen up, because
our Lord has taken me. Psalm. 3.

All good and pious Christians ought to imitate this Example; I mean, they
ought to love their Children; but not to prefer them in love before God, who is
the Father of all, and who loves them better, and in a more perfect manner,
then we know how to love. And first Christians ought to love their Sons with
a manly and prudent love; not boulstering or encouraging them when they do
evil; but bringing them up in the fear of God; and correcting them not only
with words, but even with strokes, if either they offend God, or neglect their
studies, and learning. For this is the will of God, revealed in the Holy
Scriptures, as Ecclesiasticus speaks, cap. 7. Have thou children? Instruct
them, and bow them from their childhood. And we read of Toby, that, he taught
his Son from his infancy to fear God, and to abstain from all sin. And
the Apostle Ephesians. 6. admonishes Fathers, that they do not provoke their
Children to anger, but do bring them up in discipline and correction of our
Lord; that is, that they use them not as servants, but as freemen. For those
who bear themselves over severely, and austerely toward their Children,
continually checking or striking them for the least fault, do treat them as
bondsl^ues; so causing them either to be of a base and d^iected disposition, or
else to fly away from their Parents. Now those, who are over indulg^nt, do make
their Children wicked; nourishing and bringing them up, not for the kingdom of
God, but for Hell.

The true way for the education of Children, is, that Parents do instruct them
in discipline, so as they may learn willingly and promptly to obey their
Parents and masters; and when they do err and offend, that they do correct
them paternally, that so the Sons may understand themselves to be chastized
out of Love, not out of Hate. Furthermore, if so it shall please God to call
any of them to the Clergy, or to some religious Order, let not the Parents
resist so good a resolution, for fear they may resist God, who is the first
Father of all men; but let them say with holy Job. Our Lord gave, and our Lord
has taken away; The name of our Lord be blessed. To conclude, if children be
taken from their Parents by untimely death (the which thing did c^i^fly happen
to the Blessed Virgin) let them consider and ponder the judgments of God; who
often takes some out of this World by death, to prevent that malice and sin
do not change their good and virtuous mind, and so perish eternally. Certainly
if Parents did sometimes know, upon what counsel and inducements, G d thus
works, they would not only not bewail the death of their C^^ld^^n, but they
would even reio^ce therea^. And if the faith and hope of the R^surrection did
feelingly, and lively work in us (as it did in our B. Lady) we should no more
grieve, when any of our sons or friends do dye before they arrive to old age,
then when any of them begin to sleep before it be night; since the death of a
faithful and pious man is a kind of sleep, as the Apostle admonishes us,
saying, 1 Thessalonians. 4. I will not have you ignorant concerning them that sleep,
that you be not sorrowful, as others are, that have no Hope. Here he
mentions rather Hope, then faith, because he speake^h not of every
Resurrection, but of a blessed and glorious Resurrection, which leads to true
life; and such was the Re^urrection of Christ. That man therefore, who firmly
belieueth, that there shall be a Resurrection of the flesh, and hops, that his
Son taken away by immatu^e death, shall after rise to glory; has no reason
of grief, but rather of joy because the health of his sons Soul is placed
in great security and safty.

I here come to the duty of a Son toward Parents, the which Christ dying,
performed in a most full and ample manner toward his Mother. It is the duty of
children, to render mutual duty to their parents. 1. Tim. 5. Now, Sonns do
render mutua^l duty to their parents, when they procure all things necessary
for their parents being in age: Even as the Parents have provided for their
children being young, or not able to get things touching diet or apparel,
Christ therefore did commit the charge of his mother (growing aged, and having
not any one to take care of her, after the death of her Son) to S. John,
adopting him (as it were) for her Son, saying to her, Behold thy Son, and
to S. John, Behold thy Mother. Now he^re our Lord accomplished the function of
a Son most fully toward his Mother; and this several ways. For first he
assigned to her a Son who being of the same age with Christ (or rather a
year younger) was most fitting to undergo the charge and care of the Mother of
our Lord.

He furthermore out of the twelve Apostles, made choice of him to this
incumbency and labor, whom our Lord himself chiefly loved, and of whom he
also did know himself to be greatly again beloved; therefore he might well
repose greater confidence and trust in him, touching his diligence toward his
Mother. Again, our Lord assigned him, whom he knew was to live very many
years, and therefore without any doubt to over live his Mother. To conclude,
our Lord was not wanting in his duty to his Mother even at that time, when his
thoughts were to be busied, touching his own anxieties and dolours. For at
that time a man might probab^y think, that his cogitations were only fixed
upon the suffering of his corporal dolours, and injuries of his enemies, and
in tasting the most better cup of his near approaching death, so as he could
not turn his thoughts to any other affairs. Nevertheless his charity toward
his mother overcame him, and so little regarding his own state, his care was
touching the consolation and comfort of his mother; neither did the expectation
of the promptitude and fidelity of S. John deceive him; for from that hour the
disciple took her for his own. Joan. 19.

This Providence, which Christ had toward his Parent, ought with greater
reason to be performed by other Sons toward their Parents. For Christ did
less owe to his Parent, then other men do their Parents. Other men are so
obliged to their Parents, as that they are never able to requite it. For they
owe their life to them, for which the Sons cannot make any just satisfaction.
Ecclesiasticus says: remember that thou had not been borne, but for the^.
Eccl. 7. But Christ (and he alone) is exempted from this general rule. For he
received life from his mother (I mean, a humame life;) but in lieu heerof he
gave to her three lives: an Humane life, when with the Father and the holy
Ghost he created her; the life of grace, when preventing her in the
Benedictions of his sweetness, he did justify her in her creation, and created
her in justifying of Her: he finally gave to her the life of glory, when he did
advance her to eternal glory, and exalted her above the quyre of Angels.
Wherefore if Christ, who gave mo^e to his mother, then he in his bi^th had
received of her, would observe the law, to wit, to render mutual duty to her,
as his Parent; how much more then are other men obliged to perform this duty
toward their Parents.

Add hereto, though in honoring of our Parents, we perform no more then duty
tyeth us to; Nevertheless the benignity and goodness of God has added to it a
reward, saying in the Law: Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thou may be
long lived upon the Earth; Exodus 20. And the Holy Ghost adds by
Ecclesiasticus: He that honoreth his Father, shall have joy in Children, and in
the day of his Prayer, he shall be heard, Eccl. 3. Neither has God only annexed
a reward to those, who honor their Parents; but also has adjoined a
Punishment to such, that do not honor them. For we read: God says; He that
shall curse Father or Mother, dying let him dye. Matthew 15. And Ecclesiasticus
adds: He, who exasperateth his Mother, is accursed of God. Eccl. 3 And hence
it appears, that the Malediction, and cursing of the Parents against their
Children, has a great force, in that God confirms the same. Of which point
no few Examples are extant in Histories; of which, one most notorious and
remarkable is recorded by S. Austin, the sum and contents whereof is this: In
Caesaria a City of Capadocia, there were ten Children (to wit, seven sons,
and three daughters:) who being accursed by their Mother, instantly, even by
the hand of God, they were surprised with such a pain and dolor, as that all
of them were horribly strooken and shaken with a trembling of their Members: In
which most loathsome state they, not brooking the daily sight of their own
Citizens, wandered up and down throughout the Roman Empire; Two of these at
the length were cured in the presence and sight of S. Austin, by the Relics of
S. Steven the Protomartyr. Aug. l. 21. de Ciuit. c. 8.

Of the fourth fruit of the third Word. CHAP. XII.
THe burden and yoke imposed by our Lord upon S. John, that he should sustain
the Care of the B. Virgin his Mother, was truly a sweet yoke, and an easy
burden. For who would not most willingly remain and dwell with that mother,
which did bear nine Months in her Womb the Word Incarnate, and which did
cohabitate with him most deuoutely and sweetly for the full space of thirty
years? Or who would not envy the beloved of our Lord, who in the absence of
the Son of God, enjoyed the presence of the Mother of the Son of God? But
if I be not deceived, even we our selfs, through the benignity of the Word
Incarnate for our sake, and through the great love and charity of him, who was
crucified also for our sake, may obtain in our prayers, that he would say even
to us; Behold thy Mother; and to his mother concerning us; Behold thy Son.

Our merciful Lord is no Niggard of his favors, so long as we do approach to
the Throne of his Grace, with faith, confidence, and a true and sincere Heart.
He that is desirous that we should become Coheyres of the kingdom of his
Father, will not certainly disdain to make us Coheyres or Competitours of the
Love of his Mother. Neither will the most gracious Virgin hardly, or
displeasingly brook the multitude of her Sons; since she has a most ample
bosom, and greatly coueteth, that not any of them should perish, whom her
Son has redeemed with his precious Blood and Death. Let us therefore come
with firm and immovable hope to the Throne of the Grace and Favor of Christ,
And let us most suppliantly, and even with tears demand and beseech him, ^at
of every one of us he would say to his Mother; Behold thy Son, and to every
one of us, he would say of his Mother; Behold thy Mother. O! how well would it
be with us, to be under the protection of such a Mother? Who would be of power,
to draw us from out her Bosom? What tribulation could be so potent and strong,
as to overcome us, confiding and trusting in the Patronage of the Mother of
God, and of our Mother?

Neither shall we be the first in the obtaining of so great a Ben^fit: Man^
have gone before us: Many (I say) have cast themselfes into the arms of her
Patronage and defense; and yet not any one ever returned back, confounded or
frustrated of their expectation; but all cheerful and rejoicing, as securely
ankering themselves upon the assistance of so great a Mother. For of her it is
written. Genesis 2. She shall bruys^ thy head in pieces. And those, who trust in
her shall fearelesly walk upon the Adder and Basiliske, betrampling under
their feet the Lion and the Dr^gon. Psalm. 90. Out of a great multitude let us
hear the testimonies and acknowledgments of some few; especially of those, who
have confidently reposed themselves in the protection of the B. Virgin, the
Mother of our Lord; and then we shall credibly conjecture them to be of the
number of those, to whom it is said by our Lord: Behold thy Mother; and of
whom it is said to the Mother, Behold thy Son.

Let S. Ephrem the Syrian be the first, an ancient Father, and of so great
celebrity, as that (as S. Jerome witnesses) his Books were publikly read in
the Churches, after the reading of the Holy Scriptures. This Father thus
speaks: Intemerata, prorsus pura, Virgo deipara etc. Intemerate, and
altogether pure is the Virgin Mother of God. Sermon. de laud. Deipara. And
after: Tu portus procellis etc. Thou art the Haven of those, who are tossed
with storms, the Comfort of the World; the setter at liberty of those who are
in Prison; the Patroness of Orphans; thou art the Redemption of the Captive;
the exultation and Comfort of the sick, and the Health of All. And again: Sub
alis tuis etc. Under thy wings keep me, and protect me, take mercy on me, who
am contaminated and defiled with dirt. And yet more after: Non mihi alia
^iducia etc. There is no other hope for me, O Blessed Virgin; All hayle to
thee, who art the peace, the joy, and health of the World. To this Father let
us adioyne S John Damascene, who was one of the first of those, that worshipped
the most holy Virgin, and placed their Hope in her. This Doctor thus writes,
Orat. de Natiu. B. Virg. O Ioachim and Anna, Filia and Domina, etc. Receive the
prayer of a sinner, yet ardently loving, and worshipping thee; houlding thee,
as the hope of his joy, the defendour of his life, reducing him into favor
with thy Son, a firm and earnest pledge of salvation; unloose and dissolve
the burden of my sins, suppress my temptations, govern my life piously and
holily, and procure, that (thou being my guide) I may come to the celestial
Beatitude.

I will add to the former, two of the Latin Fathers, of which S. Anselme shall be
one, who thus writes, l. de Excel. Virg. c 3. Itaque cui saltem ita concessum
fuerit etc. I do conjecture, that it is a great sign to him of obtaining
Saluateon, who with a sweet cogitation can often think of the B. Virgin. And
after: Velocior est nonnumquam salus etc. Oftentimes Health is sooner obtained,
by calling upon the name of the B. Virgin, then by inuocating the name of our
Lord Jesus her only Son, But the reason hereof is not, because she is greater
or more powrefull then he (for he is not grsat and potent by her, but she is
great and potent by him:) Why then is health often sooner received by the
invocation of her, then of her Son? I will show my judgment of this ^oint.
Her son is the Lord and Judge of all men, discerning the merits of every One.
Therefore whiles he is inuocated (by his own name) of every man, he presently
hears not, and this he does justly. But the name of his Mother being
inuocated and implored, if the merits of him that inuocateth do not deserve
that he should be heard, yet the merits of the Mother do so intercede, as that
he may be heard.

But S. Bernard does after a wonderful manner, describe the pious, and indeed
motherly affection of the most Blessed Virgin toward men devoted to her; as
also the extraordinary and filial piety of such, who do acknowledge the
Virgin, as their Mother and Patroness. Thus this Doctor says, Sermon. 2. super
Missus est. O quisquis te intelligis etc. O thou, who perceauest, that in the
inundation of this World thou art more tossed among the storms and tempests,
then thou do quietly walk upon the earth, do not turn thy Eyes from the
brightness of this star (I mean of Mary the star of the Sea) if so thou
couetest not to be overwhelmed with these storms. If thou be tossed with the
waves of Pride, if of Ambition, if of Detraction, if of Emulation, turn thy
self toward this star, and invoke Mary If thou be afflicted with the
dreadfulnes of thy own sins, if thou be confounded with the guiltines of thy
own Conscience, if thou be afraid through fear of thy Judge, if thou
beginnest to be absorpt in the Hell of sadness, and in the abisse of
Desperation, think upon Ma^y. In thy dangers, in thy straits, in thy
necessities, meditate upon Mary, inuoke Mary; thou following her, do not go
abstray; thou praying to her, do not despair; thou thinking of her do not
err. And the same Father in another Book, thus further discours^th, Sermon de
Not. B. M. sieve de aquae ductu. Altius intuemini etc. Call more deeply into
mind, with what affection of devotion he, who has placed all plenitude of
goodness in Mary, would have Mary to be honored of us; so as if there be any
hope in us, if any Grace, if any health, we are to acknowledge, that it
proceeds from her. And after. T^t is ergo medullis etc. With all the forces and
desires of our Hearts, let us worship Mary, for this is the will of him, who
will have us to receive all, by the mediation of Mary. And again; Filioli,
haec peccatorum scala etc. My Sons, this (meaning the B. Virgin) is the
Ladder of sinners, this is my greatest Confidence; this is the cause of all my
Hope.

To these two most holy Fathers, I will annexe other two holy men, out of the
School of Deuines. S. Thomas Aquinas in his little Work of the salutation of
the Angel thus says, in opusc. 8. Benedicta tu in multeribus etc. She
(meaning the Virgin Mary) it blessed among all Women, because she alone has
taken away Malediction, and has brought in Benediction, and has opened the
Gate of Paradise. Therefore the name of Mary (which is interpreted the star
of the Sea) does well agree to her: for as those who are sailing, are directed
to the Port, or haven by the star of the Sea; so Christians an directed to
Glory by the help of Mary.

S. Bonauenture most fully discourses of this subject, thus writing, in sua
Pharetra l. 1. cap. 5. Sicut, O beatissima, omnis a te etc. O most B. Virgin,
as of necessity every one, that is in mind auerted from thee, and not respected
by thee, must perish; so every one, that is converted to thee, and by thee
regarded, cannot possibly be damned. The same holy Father in another of his
books, thus writes of the confidence of S. Franc^^ ^n the B. Virgin (in vita
D. Fran.) Matrem Domini nostri etc. S. Francis did prosecute the Mother of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with an inutterable Love, in that she made the Lord of
Majesty to become brother to us, and by her we have obtained Mercy. He
confiding in her next to Christ, made her his Advocate; and in her Honor he
did fast most deuoutely from the feast of the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul,
until the feast of her Assumption.

To all these Holy Fathers I will range Pope Irnocentius the third, who was a
great Worshipper of the Mother of God; and who not only in his Sermons did much
magnify and praise her, but also in her Honor did buyld a Monastery. And which
is more to be admired; He stirring the People up to repose their Hope in the
most holy Mother of God, as foreknowing the event of things to come, did utter
many things, which he after confirmed with his own happy experience and
trial. Thus he writes of the B. Virgin: Quis iacet in nocte Culpae etc. He
who lies in the night of Offense and sin, let him behold the Moon, let him
pray to Mary, that she through her Son may illuminate his heart with
compunction: For who ever did invoke her in the Night time, and was not heard
of Her? Let the Reader peruse those things, which we have written of
Innocentius the third, in the second book and nynth Chapter, Of the mourning
of the Dove. Now from all this above set down, it is evidently collected, That
of the signs of Election to Glory, a singular devotion borne to the Mother of
God, the most B. Virgin, is not the last. For it should seeeme, that he cannot
perish eternally, of whom it is said to the B. Virgin, by Christ, Behold thy
Son; So as that man does not hear with a deaf care, what Christ shall say
to him, Behold thy Mother.

The End of the first Book.
OF THE SEVEN WORDS OF CHRIST spoken upon the Cross. THE SECOND BOOK.
The fourth Word, to wit: Deus, Deus meus, vt quid dereliquisti me, my God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27. is litteraly explaned. CHAP. I.
IN the former Book we have explicated the three first words, which our Lord
pronounced from the chair of the Cross, about the sixth hour, when but a
little before he was nailed to the Cross. We will in this second Book expound
the other four Words; which our said Lord after the darkness of three hours,
from the same Chair, and most near to his death, did with a great and
feruerous voice pronounce. But it seems expedient, first briefly to declare,
what kind of darkness that was, how it was occasioned, and to what end it was
directed. The mention of which darkness happened between the uttering of the
former three Words, and the four other Words hereafter to be discoursed of.
For thus S. Matthew speaks. cap. 27. From the sixth hour, there was darkness
made upon the whole earth, until the nynth hour: And about the ninth hour,
Jesus cried with a mighty voice, Eli, Eli, Lamma-sabacthani. That is, my God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? That this darkness was occasioned through the
defect and Eclips of the Sun, S. Luke expressly expressly observes, saying;
Et obscuratus est sol, and the sun was darkened.

But now three d^fficulties are in this place to be discussed, and solued: for
first the Sunn is accustomed to suffer Eclipse of its light, in the New moon,
when the moon is found to be between the Sun and the earth; the which could
not be at the time of the death of Christ; seeing the moon at that time was
not in conjunction with the Sun, which falls out in the new moon; but was
in the opposition which happens in the full moon. For all that time the
Pascha, or Feast of Easter was celebrated by the Jews, which according to the
Law, began upon the foureteenth day of the first Month. Again admitting, that
at the Passion of Christ, the Moon had been in conjunction with the Sun;
yet from hence it follows not, that there could be darkness for the space of
three hours, that is, from the sixth hour to the nynth: since the Eclipse of
the Sun cannot continue long, especially if it be a full Eclipse and such as
may hide the whole: Body of the Sun, so as the obscurity of it may be
accounted darkness. For the moon is more swift in motion, then the sun, in
regard of the moons proper motion; and consequently can darken the sun but
for a very short time. For the Moon instantly does begin to go back, and
leaves the sun free, that so it may illuminate the Earth with its accustomed
light and splendor. To conclude, it can never so fall out, that through the
conjunction of the Moon, the sun should leave the whole Universal Earth in
darkness. For the Moon is lesser, then the sun, yea then the Earth; and
therefore it cannot by the interposition of its Body, so cover the whole Sun,
as that the Universal Earth should be left in darkness.

Now if any here should object and say, that the Evangelist speaking of the
Universal Earth, means only of the universal Earth of Palestines, and not
of the universal Earth absolutely. This Objection may easily be refelled by
the testimony of S. Dionysius Areo pagita, who in his Epistle to S. Policarpe
testifies, that himself did see that defection of the sun, and most
horrible darkness in the City of Heliopolis, which is in Egypt. And Phlegon (a
Greek Historian, and a Gentil) cited by Origin and Eusebius, makes intention
of this Eclips of the sun, saying, lib. 2. Quarto anno ducentesima secundae
Olympiadis etc. In the fourth year of the two hundred and second Olympiade, a
great and notorious defection of the Sun, in comparison of all others which
before had happened, was made; for the day at the sixth hour, was so turned into
darkness, and to an obscure night, as that the stars in Heaven were then seen.
Now this Historiographer did not write in Iudaea, as all affirm. The same
Wounder is testified^ by Lucianus the Martyr, saying: ^erquirite in Annalibus
vestris etc. Reuolue your Annals, and you shall find, that the day was
interrupted with darkness, in the times of Pilate, the sun abandoning the
Earth. These words of S. Lucian are related by Ruffinus, in hist. Eccl. Eusebius.
In fine Tertullian, Paulus Orosius, and all others (touching this Eclypse) do
speak of all the parts and coasts of the World, and not only of Iudaea.

But these difficulties may easily be explicated. For first, where it is said
in the beginning, that the Eclypse of the sun is accustomed to be in the New
moon only, and not in the full moon, this is true, when a Natural defect of
the light of the sun happens. But at the death of Christ, the defect of the
sun was universal and prodigious, which could be wrought only by him, who
made the sun, the Moon, Heaven, and Earth. For S. Dionysius writes in the
place above noted, that the Moon was seen by himself, and by Apollophanes
about the midtyme of the day, after an unaccustomed and most swift motion to
come to the Sun, and lying under it, there remained after this manner, until
the ninth hour, and then returned back toward the Orient, to its own place.

To that, which is added above; to wit, that the defect of the suns light
could not so remain for the space of three Hours, as that during all that
time the Earth should be in darkness; it may be answered hereto, that this is
true, if we speak of a natural, and usual defect of the sun. But this
Eclypse of the sun was not governed by the laws, or settled course of Nature,
but by the Will of the Omnipotent Creator, who as he could bring the moon
after a wonderful manner from the East, in a most rapid and swift motion to
the sun, and after three hours ended, could bring it back to its own place
in the Orient; so also was of power to cause, that the moon should remain
immovable under the sun for those three hours; and that it should not move
either more slowly or more swiftly, then the sun it self.

To conclude, where above is added, that the Eclypse and defect of the sun
could not be observed and seen through out the Universal Earth, in regard
that the Moon is lesser then the Earth, and far more less in quantity then
the sun; I grant this to be most true, with reference to the interposition of
the moon, only. But what the moon could not perform herein, the Creator of
the sun and moon performed, only in not cooperating with the sun in
illustrating and lighning the Earth: For things created cannot work or
perform their functions, except the Creator do assist and cooperate with
them. And whereas some men say, that darkness might the^ be made throughout the
whole Earth, through a condensation, and thickning of black and misty Clouds;
this cannot be truly auerred, since it is evident from the testimonies of the
Ancients, that in the time of that Eclyps and darkness, the stars were seen to
appear and shine in Heaven: But thick^ and misty Clouds cannot only yea they
are accustomed to) obscure ^he sun, but also the moon, and the stars.

Now why God would have this sign of Darkness to happen at the Passion of
Christ, several Reasons are accustomed to be alleged, but two chiefly. The
first may be to demonstrate the most great excecation and blindness of the
Jewish People; which Reason is brought by S Leo Pope, and which blindness of
theirs does yet continue, and shall continue, according to the Prophecy of
Isay, who thus speaks of the beginning of the Church: Surge, illuminare
Jerusalem etc. Arise, be illuminated Jerusalem, because thy light is come, and
the glory of our Lord is ris^n upon thee; because (lo) darkness shall cover the
Earth, and a mist the People. Isa. 60. To wit, most thick and palpable darkness
shall cover the Land of the Jews; and that darkness, which is not so gross,
but may easily be dissipated and disp^lled, shall cover the People of the
Gentills. The second Cause o^ Reason of the forsaid darkness at our Sau^ours
Passion, may be to demonstrate the great off^nce and sin of the Jews, as S.
Jerome teaches. In former times wicked men did persecute, molest, and trouble,
yea and kill good men. But now men are arrived to that degree of Impiety, as
that they dare persecute even God himself, invested with man's flesh and nail
him to a Cross. In former times suites and contentions falling out among
Citizens, they fell to Words, from words to blow^s, Wounds, and murder it
self; But now Vassalls and Bonsl^u^s have entered into insurrection and
^^bellion against the King of men and Angels; nayling, with incredible boldness,
his sacred hands and feet with piercing Nails to the hard wood of the Cross.
Therefore the whole World was amazed, and through horror of the fact trembled;
And the sun it self as unwilling to lend its light to the furtherance of
perpetrating so flagitious a Crime, did with draw in its beams, covering the
whole air with black and dreadful darkness.

But let us now descend to the words of our Lord: Eli, Eli, lamma sabactani,
These words are taken from the beginning of the one and twentieth Psalm, where
we thus read: Deus, Deus meus, respice in me, quare me dereliquisti? O God, my
God, have respect to me, why have thou forsaken me? Where those words, respice
in me, which are in the midst of the Verse, were added by the Septuagint
Interpreters; for in the Hebrew Text, there are no other words, but those,
which our Lord did speak. In this one point the words of the Psalm, and of
Christ do differ; in that the Words of the Psalm are all Hebrew words, whereas
those spoken by Christ, are partly Syriach words, which kind of tongue the
Jews did then much use. For those words: Talitha cumi, id est, puella surge
and, Ephetha, that is, ad apetite, and some others in the Ghospels, are Syriake
words, and not Hebrew. But to proceed. Our Lord complains, that he is
forsaken of God, and he complains crying out with a great and vehement voice;
Both which Points are to be ex^lained.

This dereliction and forsaking of Christ by his Father may be understood in
five several senses or ways, of all waith but one is true. There were five
conjunctions of God in the Son. One natural and eternal; to wit, the
conjunction of the Person with the Person of the Son in Essence. Another,
that is, a new conjunction of the Divine nature, with the Humane nature in the
Person of the Son; or, which is all one, a conjunction of the divine Person
of the Son, with the humane Nature. The third, was the Union of Grace and of
will; for Christ being man was full of grace and truth, Joan. 1. And, the
things that do please God, he did always, as himself witnesses in S. John.
cap. 8. And the Father more then once said of him: This is my believed Son, in
whom I am well pleased. Matthew. 3. The fourth conjunction was the Union of
Glory; for the soul of Christ did see God, even from his Co^ception. The fifth
was the Union of Protection, of which himself speaks, when he says: He that
sent me, is with me, and he has not left me alone, Joan. 8.

Now the first Union is altogether inseparable and perpetual; because it is an
Union in Divine Essence, of which himself speaks: I and my Father are on^
And therefore Christ did not say, my Father, why have thou left me? For the
Father is not called the God of the Son, till after the Incarnation, and by
reason of the Incarnation. The second Union is never dissolved, neither can it
be dissolved; for what God once assumed, he never did leave; for the Apostle
says: He spared not his own Son, but for us all delivered him. Romans 8. And
the Apostle Peter: Christ suffered for us; And, Christ suffering in flesh. 1.
Pet. 2. and 4. All which sacred testimonies demonstrate, that he, who was
crucified, was not pure man, but the true Son of God, and our Lord Christ.
The third Union does in like sort ever remain, and ever shall remain: The
just dyed for the unjust, as S. Peter speaks 1. Pet. 3. And the death of
Christ would have profited us nothing, if the Union of Grace should be
dissolved. The fourth Union could not be dissolved, because the Beatitude of
the Sou^e cannot be lost, since it comprehends an aggregation and heaping
together of all goods. For the soul of Christ according to the superior part,
was truly Blessed; of which Point see S Thomas 3. p. q. 46. art. 8. Therefore
there remains only the union of Protection, which for a short time was
broken, that the Oblation of the bloody Sacrifice should take place, for the
redemption of mankind.

True it is, that God the Father could have protected Christ many ways, and
hindered his Passion; for according heerto Christ said in his prayer, which he
made in the garden: Father, all things are possible to thee, transfer this
Chalce from me; but not that which I will, but that which thou. Marc. 14. And
to S. Peter Christ says: Thinks thou, that I cannot ask my Father; and he
will give me presently more then twelve legions of Angels? again, Christ
might, as God, have protected his flesh that it should not suffer; and
therefore he says, Joan. 10. No man takes my life from me, but I yield it up
of myself, The which Esaias prophesied, when he said. cap. 53. He wat offered,
because himself would. To conclude, the blessed foul of Christ could have
trasmitted, and powered into its body the gift of impassibility and
incorruption; but it pleased the Father, it pleased the Word, it pleased the
Holy Ghost to suffer (for the execution of the common Decree) that man's force
should for a time prevail against Christ. For this was that hour, of which
our Lord spoke to those, who came to take him: This is your hour, and the
power of darkness. Luc. 22. In this manner therefore God did leave his Son,
when he suffered, that the humane flesh of his Son should suffer most bitter
griefs without consolation.

Furthermore, Christ crying with a great voice, did manifest this dereliction,
that all men thereby should acknowledge the greatness of the price of the
Redemption of man kind: for till that very hour he suffered all things with
such incredible patience, and indifferency of mind, as if he had wanted all
sense and feeling: for fynding himself agrieued and wronged by the Jews, he
did not charge Pilate, who prononced sentence against him, nor the soldiers
who nailed him to the Cross He did not lament, he did not bewail, or show any
sign of dolor. Therefore when he was approaching near to his death, to the
end that mankind should understand, and particularly that we (his servants)
should not be ungrateful for so great a favor; and that we should magnify the
price and worth of our Redemption, he was willing that the dolours of his
Passion should publicly, and openly be known. Wherefore those words, My God,
why have thou forsaken me? are not words of accusation, or indignation, or
complaint; but (as I have said) they are words declaring with most just reason,
and in a most fit time, the greatness of Christ his Passion.

Of the first fruit of the fourth Word. CHAP. II.
WE have briefly expounded those things, which belong to the fourth Word,
according to the History. Now we will gather some fruits from the tree of the
Cross. First that consideration does present it self unto us; to wit, that
Christ would drink up the whole Chalice of his Passion, even to the last drop.
He was to remain upon the Cross three hours, from the sixth hour to the
ninth. He remained full three whole hours and above; for before the sixth hour
he was nailed to the Cross, and after the ninth hour, he gave up the Ghost.
This point may be made evident by this Reason; the Eclyps of the Sun began in
the sixth hour, as three Evangelists do teach, Matthew, Mark, and Luke. And
Mark in express words says: when it was the sixth hour, there was made
darkness until the ninth hour. The first tree VVord^ of our Lord were spoken
upon the Cross, before the beginning of the darkness; the other four were
uttered after darkness and therefore after the ninth hour, Furthermore S. Mark
explicateth this point more clearly, when he says: And it was the third hour,
and they crucified him etc. And then after he subioyneth: And when it was the
sixth hour, there was made darkness, cap. 14. Now where he says, our Lord was
crucified in the third hour he signifies, that the third hour, was not then
complete, when our Lord was crucified, and consequently that the sixth hour was
not as then begun. For S. Mark numbreth three principal hours, which are
accustomed to contain three ordinary hours. And according to this acceptance
and construction the Houshoulder called the workmen to his vineyard, at the
first, the third, the sixth, the ninth, and eleauenth hour. Matthew. 20. And we
do number the Canonical hours, to wit, the first, the third, the sixth, the
ninth, and the Vespers, which is the eleauenth hour. Therefore in S. Mark our
Lord is said to be crucified at the third hour, because as then the sixth hour
was not come.

From hence then it follows that our Lord would drink the chalice of his
Passion in a most full and copious manner; thereby to teach us to love better
the cup of Penance and labor; and not to love and affect the cup of secular
consolations and delights. We by the law of the flesh and the world, do desire
and vvish for little Penance and great Indulgence, small labor and much
consolation, short Prayer and long chatting, or discourse. But certainly we
know not what we desire, since the Apostle admonishes us; every one shall
receive his reward, according to his labor. 1. Cor. 3. And: He shall not be
crowned, except he strive lawfully. 2. Tim. 2. Everlasting felicity is
doubtlesly worth everlasting labor; but because, if everlasting labor had
been absolutely necessary thereto, we should never have attained to everlasting
felicity; therefore our merciful Lord was content, that only in this life
(which flies away like a shadow) we should labor according to our strength,
in good works, and in obsequy and obedience toward him. And therefore those
men are without heart or courage, without understanding, without judgment, and
are rather infants, and children, who consume and wast this short time in
idleness, and which is far more detestable, in grievously offending, and
provoking Gods wrath and indignation against them. For, if Christ ought to
suffer, and so to enter into his glory? how then can we enter into the glory of
another, only by disporting, and spending the time in pampering and solacing of
our flesh? If the Gospel were very intricate and obscure, and could not be
understood without great pains, and fatigation of mind; perhaps we might
shadow our negligence by some Excuse: but the Gospel is clearly expounded (as
it were) and explained from the example of his life, who first gave and
promulgated the gospel; so as to the very blind, it cannot lie hidden or
concealed. Neither have we it explicated only by Christ himself; but there
are so many clear Comme^taries of it, which do lay open the sense, as there
are Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins; and finally Saints, whose praises
and triumphs, we celebrate almost every day; since all these with an
unanimous consent cry out, that not by pleasure, good fellowship, and humane
delights, but, by matribulations, we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Act. 14.

Of the second fruit of the fourth Word. CHAP. III.
ANother fruit may be gathered from the consideration of the silence of Christ
in those three hours, which was from the sixth hour to the ninth. O my soul,
what did thy Lord in those three hours? Horror and darkness did inuolue the
universal World: And thy Lord did not repose himself upon a sof bed; but did
hang upon the Cross, naked, full of dolours, and without any comforter. Thou O
Lord, who only did know, and try this, teach thy poor Servants, that they
may understand how much they are obliged and indebted to thee; that at least
they may compassionate thee with their tears, and learn in this their exile,
sometimes to want all consolation for thy Love, if so thou shall think it
expedient.

Say to such: O my Son, Never during the whole course of my mortal life
(which was nothing, but labor and pain) did I suffer greater and more
vehement straits, desolation, and anxiety, then during the space of those three
hours. And never did I tolerate any pains with greater willingness and
promptitude of mind, then I did at that time. For then by reason of the weight
and wearines of my Body, my wounds were more enlarged, and the sharpnes of my
gri^fe more increased. Then, even through the absence of the heat of the
sun, the coldness of the air more insufferably augmented the torments of my
Body, being on each side naked. Then the very darkness it self, which did take
away from mine eyes the sight of Heaven, Earth, and all other things, forced my
soul in a sort, more vehemently and intensly to think upon the pains and
anguishes of my Body: so in regard of these aggravating Circumstances, those
three Hours did seem to me to be three years. But because the ardour and
desi^es of my Fathers Honor (with the which my breast was inflamed) and of
fulfilling my Obedience to him, and of the procuring the health of your souls,
was so great, as that by how much the pains of my Body were increased, by so
much that fire of my desires was mitigated. So as those three Hours (in regard
of the greatness of my desire of suffering) appeared to be to me but three small
moments of Time.

O most Blessed Lord, if the matter stands thus, then are we most
ungrateful, to whom it seems painful to spend but one short hour in
meditating of those thy dolours; when to thee it was not painful, to hang
upon the Cross for our Redemption three whole hours, in a horror of darkness,
in cold, and nakedness, in extreme thirst, and in most bitter and cruel
torments. But, O Lover of mankind, tell me, whether the vehem^ncy of thy
dolor, was so forcible, as to cause thee to desist in heart from prayer, during
thy long silence of those three houers? For we being in anguish and tribulation
(especially if the members of our Body labor with any violent pain) cannot
without great endeavor apply our mind to pray. But I hear thee say; Not so my
Son; for even in the infirmity of my flesh, I disposed my spirit prompt to
prayer; yea during those three hours, in which I spoke nothing, I was still
praying with the mouth of my Heart to my Father for you. Neither did I pray only
in Heart, but even in wounds and blood. For behold, how many wounds there were
made in my body, so many crying Voices there were to my Father for you. And how
many drops of Blood there were, so many tongues they were, beseeching and
begging Mercy for you, at the hands of my foresaid Father, and yours.

But now, O Lord, thou do even confound the impatience of thy Servant, who if
perhaps wearied out with labor, or grief of Body, he do prepare himself to
Prayer, can scarsly lift up his Soul to God to pray for him, or if through thy
Grace he be able to raise himself to so pious an Exercise; yet he is not able
to maintain his attention therein for any long time; since his mind is ever
reflecting back to his labor and pain. Therefore O pitiful Lord, take mercy
of thy Servant according to the great Mercy, that having so great an Example of
thy Patience set before his Eyes, he may learn to tread thy steps, and may at
least overcome his small troubles and molestations in time of Prayer.

Of the third fruit of the fourth Word. CHAP. IV.
When our Lord crying out upon the Cross, said My God, why have thou forsaken
me? he did not so say, as if indeed he were ignorant, why God had left him; for
what could he not know, who knew all things? For answerably hereto S. Peter
answered our Lord thus d^manding: Simon of John, love thou me? (O Lord (says
he) thou know all things; thou know that I love thee. Joan. 2. And the
Apostle S. Paul speaking of Christ, adds: In whom is all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. Collos. 2. Therefore our Lord did not demand, thereby to
learn, bu^ to counsel us to seek, that by seeking and finding, we might
learn many things profitable, or rather necessary unto us. Now why God did
forsake his Son in molestations and most bitter dolours, five Reasons seem
to occur to me, the which I will here produce, that I may give occasion to
others of greater sufficiency, to find out better Reasons of Christ's
dereliction.

1. The first then may seem to be, the greatness and multitude of the offenses
of mankind against God, the which the Son did undertake to expiate in his
own Body. S. Peter says: Christ did bear our sins in his body, upon the
tree, that being dead to sin, we might live to Justice; by whose stripes you
are healed. 1. Pet 2. Now the Greatness of the Off^nce, which Christ did cancel
by his Passion, is in some respect Infinite; to wit, in regard of the Person
offended, who is of infinite dignity and excellency. In like sort, the Person
satisfying (who is the Son of God) is also of infinite Dignity and
Excellency; and by reason hereof every pain willingly endured by the Son of
God (though it were only a drop of blood) might be sufficient for the
satisfaction. This assertion is most true; nevertheless that man's Redemption
might be full and copious; and because it was not one Offense, but almost
innumerable Offenses (for the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the
world, did take upon him not only the first sin of Adam, but all the sins
of all men) therefore it pleased God, that his Son should tolerate
innumerable pains, and those most grievous. And this is signified in that
dereliction, of which the Son speaks to the Father: Why have thou forsaken
me?

2. Another reason or cause was, the greatness and multitude of the torments of
Hell, the which to make more known and evident to us, the Son of God would
abate and extinguish the he^te of those flames with so mighty a shoure of his
own pains. How great and dreadful the fyar of Hell is, the Prophet I say
teaches, saying, that it is altogether intolerable: which of you can dwell
with devouring fire? which of you shall dwell with everlasting heates? Isa. 33.
Therefore let us render thanks to God with all our Heart and powers of our
Soul, who would forsake his only begotten Son being in most great griefs
for a time, that he might free us from everlasting heates of fire. In like
manner, let us render all due thanks and grateful a^knowledgment to the la^be
of God, who had rather be left of God under the killing sword, then that he
would leave us under the teeth of the devouring and infernal beast; who is
ever feeding, and yet is never with feeding satisfied.

3. The third cause is the greatness of the price of the divine grace, which is
that precious pearl, the which Christ (the most wise merchant) with sale of
all he had, did buy, and restore to us, The grace of Christ, which was given to
us in Adam, and which through the sin of Adam we lost, was so precious a
Pearl or Margarite, as that it did wonderfully adorn us, and made us most
aceptable to God, and was a pledge of eternal felicity. There was not any, who
could recover this Pearl, being the sum of our riches, and taken from us by
the subtilty of the Serpent, but only the son of God, who through his Wisdom
overcomes the malice of the devil; but this with most great inconvenience to
himself, by being exposed to many labors and pains. Thus did the Piety and
Charity of the Son overcome, who committed himself willingly to a most
laboursome journey, and most wearisome peregrination, thereby to redeem the
Pearl for us.

4. The fourth Cause was the most eminent greatness of the Kingdom of Heaven,
to the which the Son of God opened a way, and passage for us, by his immense
labors and pains; of which point the Church of God with a grateful
remembrance thus speaks: Tu deuicto mortis aculeo, aperuisti credentibus
regna caelorum. Thou, the sting of death being overcome, have opened to the
faithful the kingdom of Heaven. And that he might overcome the sting of
death, it was needful, that he should strive, and fight in a most cruel War
with death; in which War the Father did forsake him, that with greater glory he
might triumph.

5. The fifth Cause was the immense Love, with the which the Son did affect
his Father; for the Son did wish and covet, that in the redemption of the
World, and abolition of sin, he might satisfy the Honor of his eternal
Father most copiously, and most abundantly. But this could not be effected,
except the Father had forsaken his Son; that is, except the Father had
suffered him to endure all those torments, which could be excogitated by the
Devil, and tolerated by man. Therefore now if it be demanded, why God did (as
it were) abandon his Son, suffering all Extremities upon the Cross? it may
be answered, that this was done to the end, that the greatness of sin, the
greatness of Hell, the greatness of divine Grace, the greatness of Eternal life,
and the greatness of the Charity of the Son of God toward his Father, might
more copiously and manifestly appear.

From the consideration of which reasons, another Question tak^th its solution;
That is, why God to many Martyrs did temper the Cup of their Passions and
death, with so great abundance of spiritual consolation, as that those Martyrs
had rather drink the Cup of their sufferings with the mixture of those
internal Comforts, then without those comforts to want the Cup of their
Passions and Tribulations; And yet contrariwise he suffered his most beloved
Son to drink up even to the dregs (as I may say) his most bitter Cup,
without any Consolation whatsoever? The reason of the disparity of Gods
proceeding herin is, in that in the holy Martyrs not any of the former Causes
did take place; which in the Passion of Christ we have above mentioned.

Of the fourth Fruit of the fourth Word. CHAP. V.
ANother fruit may be added to the former, not so much proceeding from the
fourth Word, as from the circumstance of the time, in which it was spoken, to
wit, of the horrible darkness, which immediately went before the pronouncing of
the said word. Since such darkness is most strong to illuminate and enlighten
the Jewish nation; as also to confirm the Christians themselves in true faith,
if so they will diligently apply their mind to the force of the demonstration,
which we will here set down. The demonstration necessarily resulteth out of
four Truths.

The first Truth is, that when Christ was crucifyd the Sun was so wholly
obscured that the stars were then seen in the Heavens, as they are
accustomed to be seen in the night. This truth is warra^ted and confirmed by
five witnesses, most worthy of credit and belief; who being of several
nations, living at several times, and in several places, when they wrote
their books, could not write what in those times happened out of any secret
conuention or mutual agreement among themselves. The first is S. Matthew, an
Hebrew, who did write in Iewry, and was one of those that saw the Sun
obscured. And certainly this man being grave and wise, would never have
written this in Iewry (and as it is credible even in the City of Jerusalem) if
it had not been most true: since otherwise, in setting down things, which
all men did know to be false, he might deservedly be reprehended, and derided
of all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of all Iewry.

The second witness is S. Mark, who vvrote at Rome; and he also savv the
Eclyps, because then he was in Iewry with other disciples of our Lord, when it
happened. The third is S. Luke, who was a Grecian, and vvrote in Greece; and
he in like sort was an cy-vvitnes of the Eclyps at Antioch in his own Country.
For vvheras Dionysius Areopagita did see the Eclyps at Heliopolis in Egypt, S.
Luke might more easily see it at Antioch, as being more near to Jerusalem,
then Heliopolis was. The fourth and fifth vvitnesses are S. Dionysius, and
Apollophanes, both Grecians, and at that time Gentiles, who in express words
do testify, that the Eclips was seen by them with a stupendous admiration.
These are those five vvitnesses, who do vvarrant the truth of that Eclyps,
even from their eyes, and sight thereof. To these we may adioine the Annalls
of the ancient Romans, as also Phlegon the Historiographer to Adrian the
Emperor, as above we noted in the first Chapter. Therefore this first Truth
cannot be denied either by Jews or Pagans without notorious temerity and
^ashnes. For as concerning Christians, this verity belongs to the Catholic
says.

2. Another Truth is, that the forsaid Eclyps could not be effected, but by the
omipotency of God; and therefore that it proceeded not in any sort from the
devils, or from men seconded with the aid of devils, but only from the
special Providence and will of God, the Creator and Governor of the world.
This verity is thus demonstrated. The Sun cannot fail in its light, but by
one of these three vvayes. ^yther by interposition of the moon betvveene the
Sun and the Earth; or through a most thick and mighty gross cloud; or
through the retraction, with dravving, or extinction of the b^amee of the
Sun. After the first manner that interposition could not naturally be;
because at that time (being the Pascha of the Jews) the moon was found to be
opposite to the Sun; and therefore it f^llovveth, that that Eclypse was
wrought without any interposition of the moon; or that through an unusual
and an astonishing Miracle the moon did move as much in fevv hours, as at
other times it was to move in fourteen days; and again that with the like
miracle it returned back with so great svviftnes that in the space of ree
hours it performed its motion of fourteen days. Now those cu^nts which
proceed from the Celestial Orbs, cannot be accomplished but by God; since the
power of the diue^s is limited under the moon: and therefore the Apostle
calls the devil. The Prince of the Power of this air. Ephesians. 2.

The Eclypse could not be occasioned after the second manner; because (as we
have said above) a thick and gross cloud is not of force to take from us the
sight of the Sun, except with all it take from us the sight of the Stars.
But it is evident from the testimony of Phlegon, that the Sun vvanting its
light at the Passion of Christ, stars were seen in Heaven after the same
manner, as they are seen in the night. Touching the third manner, it is
indisputrbly most true and acknowledged, that the beams of the Sun could
not be drawn back, or extinguished, but only by the Power of God, who
created the sun. From all this it then follows, that this second Verity is
no less irrefragable and certain, then the first; neither can it be impugned
with less temerity and want of Judgment, then the first.

3. The third Verity is, that that da^knes, of which we in this place do
speak, was occasioned by reason of the Crucifixion and Passion of Christ, and
did proceed from the divine Providence. This Truth takes its demo^stration
from the time this darkness continued in the Air; for it continued as long as
Christ our Lord did hang alive upon the Cross; that is from the sixth hour
until the ninth. This is witnessed by all those, who have made mention of this
defection of the sun. Neither can it be ascribed to chance, that this darkness
(full of Miracles*) could casually happen to be at the Passion of Christ; since
Miracles are not wrought by chance, but by divine Providence. Neither has
there been any Author (that I know) that ever would attempt to ascribe this so
wonderful an Eclyps to any other cause. For those, who did know Christ, did
confess this Miracle to be wrought for his sake; and such, as did not
acknowledge Christ, remained astonished at it, confessing their ignorance of
the cause thereof.

4. The fourth Verity is, that this so prodigious a darkness could intimate and
signify no other thing, but that the Sentence of Caiphas and Pilate was most
iniust, and that Jesus was the true and proper Son of God, and the true
Messiah promised to the Jews. For this was the chiefest and most urging cause,
why the Jews thirsted after, and plotted the death of Christ. For in the
Council of the High Priest, Scribes, and Pharisyes, when the high Priest
discerned, that the testimonies produced against Christ prevailed not, nor
proved any thing, he rose up, and said, Matthew. 26. Adiuro te per Deum viuum,
etc. I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us, if thou be Christ the
Son of God. But Christ cons^n^ing thereto, and confessing himself so to be,
the high Priest, rent his garments, saying, He has blasphemed; what need we
any further witness? Behold you have heard the blasphemy, what think you? And
they answering said: He is guilty of death.

And again in the presence of Pilate, who coueted to free our Lord from death,
the High Priests and Ministers said: we have a law, and according to the law he
ought to dye, because he had made himself the Son of Cod. Joan. 19. This
therefore was the chiefest cause, why our Savior was condemned to the Cross.
Which very Point was prophesied by Daniel, saying: occidetur Christus etc.
Christ shall he slain, and it shall not be his People that shall deny him.
Dan. 9. And this was the maine motive, why God at the Passion of Christ, did
power down such dreadful darkness upon the world, that thereby it might be
most abundantly witnessed, the High Priests to have erred, the People to have
erred, Pilate to have erred, Herod to have erred, and him who hanged upon the
Cross, to be the true Son of God, and the Messiah who was promised. The
truth whereof, the Centurion observing the Heavenly signs and wounders,
testified in those words: Vere filius Dei erat iste. Indeed this was the Son
of God. Matt. 27. And again, Inded this man was just. Luc. 23. For the
Centurion did know that those celestial and astonishing Prodigies, were (as it
were) the Voice of God, retracting and condemning the Sentence of Caiphas and
Pilate, and affirming, that that man (contrary to all Justice) was delivered
over to death; seeing he was the Author of Life, the true Son of God, and
Christ promised in the Law. For what other thing could that Darkness, being
acco^pained with the cleaving of the stones, and renting of the veyle of the
Sanctuary, import, but that God was auerted from a People (before his) and that
he was highly offended; in that the People did not know the time of their
Visitation. Luc. 19.

Certainly if the Jews did maturely consider these things, and withal
observe, that they are even from that time dispersed and scattered among many
Nations, not having any King, or High Priest, or Altars, or Sacrifices or
divine Miracles, or the Answers of Prophets among them; they would clerrely
perceive themselves to be abandoned and forsaken by God, and (which is far more
miserable) to be delivered over into a reprobate sense; and that to be
accomplished and fulfilled in them, which Esaias did prophecy, when he introduced
our Lord thus speaking: Go, and thou shall tell this People: Hear you that
hear, and understand not: and see a Vision, and know it not. Blind the heart of
this People, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest perhaps they
might see with their Eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with
their Heart, and be converted, and I heal them. Isa. 6.

Of the fifth fruit of the fourth Word. CHAP. VI.
IN the first three words or Sentences, Christ our Master did recommend unto
us three notable Virtues; Charity to our Enemies, Mercy to the Miserable, and
Piety or duty to our Parents. In the four following Words he exhorts us to
four Virtues, not more worthy, then the former, but to us no less necessary;
to wit, Humility, Patience, Perseverance, and Obedience. Tou^hing Humility. It
may be truly called the Virtue of Christ (since there is no mention made
thereof, in the Writings of the Wisemen of this World) for Christ throughout
the whole course of his life, did really, and in his actions, practice this
Virtue; and furthermore professes himself to be a Master thereof, in plain
and direct Words, saying: Learn of me, because I am meek, and humble of Heart.
Math. 11. But he never more perspicuously and clearly did commend this Virtue
unto us (and withal Patience, which cannot be disioyned from Humility) then
when he said: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? For in these words
Christ shows, that through the permission and sufferance of God, all his
glory and excellency in the sight of men was wholly obscured, the which point
also that darkness or Eclyps did demonstrate. Now our Lord could ^ot without
wonderful Humility and Patience tolerate so great an obscuration.

The glory of Christ, of which S. John speaks in the beginning of the
Gospel, when he says: We saw the glory of him; glory as it were of the only
begotten of his Father, full of grace and Verity. Joan. 1. was placed in the
Power, Wisdom, Probity, Princely Majesty, Beatitude of the soul, and in the
Divine Dignity, which he had, as he was the true and natural Son of God. All
this glory his Passion did cloud, and obscure, and the darkning thereof those
words do plainly signify, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The
passion did obscure his Power; because being nailed to the Cross, he seemed to
be of no power or ability; and therefore the chief Priests, soldiers, and the
Thief did exprobate to him his impotency and weakness, saying: If thou be
Christ, come down from the Cross etc. And again: He saved others, himself
he cannot save. Now how great Patience, how great Humility was required, that
he who was truly Omnipotent, should be wholly silent to such vpbraydings?

The Passion did darken his Wisdom^; when before the chiefest of the Priests,
before Herod, before Pilate he answered nothing to many Interrogatories and
Questions, as if he had been deprived of judgment; by which his silence it was
occasioned, that Herod and his Company contemned him, and clothed him in a
white vestment by way of derision. How great Patience, how great Humility was
here also required for him to tolerate these indignities, who was not only
wiser then Solomon, but was the very Wisdom of God?

His probity and Innocence of life the Passion obscured; who being crucified
upon the Cross, did hang between two thiefes, and was reputed a seducer of
the People, and Usurper of an other man's kingdom. And the splendor of this
his Innocence, that dereliction of God, which himself confessed, saying, Why
have thou forsaken me, might well seem more and more to obscure; Since God is
accustomed to forsake not pious men, but such as be wicked. Certainly haughty
and proud men are very cautelous to speak any thing, whereby those who hear
them, may suspect that they confess any thing against their own Worth: but
humble and patient men (of which sort Christ was the King) willingly take bold
of all occasion of Humility and Patience, so as they speak nothing, which is
false. How great Humility, how great Patience here again is required of him to
suffer these things, of whom the Apostle thus speaks: It was fit, that we
should have such a Priest, holy, innocent, impolluted, separated from sinners,
and made higher then the Heavens. Heb. 7.

Furthermore the Passion did so obscure the Regal Majesty of Christ, as that
it gave to him, for a goulden diadem, a Crown of thorns; for a Tribunal, a
gibbet; for Princely attendance, two Thieues. Therefore I say again; How great
Humility, how great Patience was necessary for him, who was truly the king of
Kings, the Lord of Lords, and the Prince of the kings of the Earth?

Now what shall I say of the Beatitude of the soul, which Christ truly had
from his Conception? And the which he was b^th of power and of Will to
transfuse into the Body? How vehemently did the Passion darken this glory,
since it made Christ, A man of sorrows, and knowing infirmity; despised, and
the most abject of men. Isa. 53. and caused him through the acerbity of his
sufferings, to cry out; My God, why have thou forsaken me? To conclude, the
Passion did so ouercloud the dignity of his divine Person, as that he, who
sits above all (not only men, but Angels) in regard of his Passion, said: I
am a worm, and no man; A reproach of men, and the outcast of the People. Psalm.
21.

To this lowest place therefore Christ did descend in his Passion; but this his
descending was accompanied with great merit and exaltation. For what our Lord
did often promise in words, saying: Every one that humbles himself, shall be
exalted, the same was performed in his Person, as the Apostle witnesses: He
humbled himself, made obedient unto death; even the death of the Cross: for
the which thing God has also exalted him, and has given him a Name, which is
above all Names; That in the name of Jesus, every knee bow, of the Celestials,
terrestrials, and Infernals. Phil. 2. Therefore he, who was the last, is
pronounced and declared to be the first; and a most short Humiliation resolved
into an eu^r^a^ting Exaltation. The which change we also find to have happened
to all the Apostles, and to all Saints. For S. Paul w^iteth, that the Apostles
were, The refuse of the World, and the dross of all, meaning, most base and
vile things, which are cast out by every one, and betrampled upon. This was the
Humility of the Apostles; But what was their Exaltation, S. John Chrysostom
teaches ( hom. 32. in Ep. ad Rom.) and shows it, when he says, that the
Apostles are now in Heaven, and do assist near to the Throne of Christ, where
the Cherubims do glorify Christ, where the Seraphims do fly; that is, they have
their place with the chiefest Princes of the kingdom of Heaven, from whence
they shall never fall or depart. Certainly if men would attentively consider
and ruminate, how honorable a thing it is, to imitate the Humility of the
son of God here upon the Earth; and with all, would make to themselves some
co^i^cture, how great that exa^tation is, to the which humility it self
ad^anceth them, we should find very few proud men. But because most men do
measure all things by the false yard of the senses of the flesh, and humane
cogitation, therefore it is no wonder, if Humility can so hardly be found upon
the Earth, and that the Multitude of proud men be infinite.

The fifth Word, Sitio, I thirst, is explicated according to the Letter. CHAP.
VII.
THe fifth Word follows, which we read in S. John. And indeed it is but one
Word, to wit Sitio, I thirst. But that it should be truly (according to the
present purpose) understood, it is needful to add the words of the
Evangelist, both going before and after For thus S. John speaks: Postea
sciens Jesus etc. Afterward Jesus knowing, that all things were now consummate,
that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, he says, I thirst. A Vessel therefore
stood there full of Vinegar; and they putting a sponge full of Vinegar about
Hysope, offered it to his mouth Joan. 19. Of which words this is the meaning:
Our Lord would have all things accomplished and fulfilled, which the Prophets
(being full of the Holy Ghost) did foretell of his Life and death, and because
all other Predictions being then already performed, this one yet remained; That
is, that he should taste Vinegar in his thirst, according to those words of the
Prophet, Psalm. 68. In my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink; Therefore he
said with a clear voice) I thirst; and those, who were present, did offer to
his mouth a spo^ge full of Vinegar, put upon a Reed, or Cane. Thus our Lord
said, I thirst, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. And why to the end the
Scripture should be fulfilled? Why did he not say, I thirst, because he was
really, thirsty, and desired to allay his Thirst? For the Prophet did not
foretell it to the end that that should fall out which he had foretold; but he
did therefore foretell it, because he did foresee it after to be. And he did
foresee it after to be, because the thing was truly to be, although it had not
been foreseen. Therefore foresight or prediction is not the cause of a thing
after to come to pass, but the thing, which is after to be, is the cause why
it may be foreseen or foretold.

Now a great Mystery is in this place revealed. Our Lord did truly labor with
extremity of thirst, even from the beginning of his Crucifixion; and his thirst
increased more and more; so as it was one of his chiefest torments which he
suffered upon the Cross; since sheeding of much blood does dry the body, and
procures thirst. I knew a Person, who being wounded in several parts of his
body, from which great store of blood did flow, desired nothing but drink; as
if his most raging thirst had been the only evil or pain he then suffered.
The like is read in the life of S. Emmerammus Martyr, who being tied to a
stake, and having received many wounds, only complained of thirst. ( Sur. die
22. Sept.) Therefore how could it otherwise be, but that Christ who after long
wearines, had shed much blood in his whipping; and after being crucified, had
opened (as it were) four fountains in his body, from which great abundance of
Blood did for a long time stream, should be cruciated and vexed with a most
burning thirst? And notwithstand ng he conc^aled in silence this his long
torment for the space of three hours, and could have concealed it even to his
death, which was present at hand: For what other reason then did our Lord hyde
in silence (for so long a time) this his vehemence of Pain, and now being
ready to dye, did manifest it, saying, I thirst; but because it was the will of
God, that all of us should know this torment of thirst not to be wanting unto
Christ? And therefore the same heavenly Father would have it foretold by a
Prophet in the Person of Christ, and did inspire it into our Lord Jesus, to
make this new and most bitter pain known to his faithful servants, for an
example of Patience. He said therefore, I thirst; that is, all my moisture in
my flesh is spent, my veins are dry, my tongue is dry, my palate is dry, my
jaws are dry, all my inward parts are dry; if any man will comfort and
refresh me, let him give me to drink.

Now let us hear, what drink they brought him who were present at the
Cross: Erat vas aceto plenum etc. There was a vessel full of Vinegar; and
they putting a sponge full of Vin^cre about Hysope, offered it to his mouth. O
strange consolation and refreshment! There was a vessel full of Vinegar,
which is pernicious and hurtful to wounds, and is accustomed to hasten death,
and to that end it was brought, thereby to hasten the death of those, who
were to be crucified. S. Cyrill (cap 35. in Joan.) with reference to this
passage thus vvriteth: Pro iuuante and iucundo potu etc. For a medicinable and
pleasant drink, they proffered him that, which was hurtful and bitter. And by
reason hereof that thing is made more credible, which S. Luke vvriteth in his
Gospel: The soldiers mocked him, coming to him, and offering him Vinegar.
Luc. 23. And although S. Luke does write this of Christ lately nailed to the
Cross; yet it is very credible, that the soldiers themselves when they heard
him crying, I thirst, did give him Vinegar in a sponge upon a reed, the which
they before in a mocking manner, had offered unto him. The sum and closure of
all is, that as in the beginning, a little before he was nailed to the Cross,
they offered him wine mixed with gaul; so in the end of his life they brought
him Vinegar, dangerous to his wounds; so as from the beginning to the end, the
Passion of Christ was a true and vehement Passion, as not accompained with any
alleuiation, or comfort at all.

Of the first fruit of the fifth Word. CHAP. VIII.
THe Scriptures of the Old Testament are for the most part explained by the
Scriptures of the New. But touching this Mystery of the thirst of our Lord,
the words of the sixty eight Psalm may well paraphraze, and comment the
Gospel. We do not find clearly in the Gospel, whether those who offered
Vinegar to our Lord thirsting, did it to gratify him, or rather the more to
afflict him; that is, whether this their action proceeded from Love or Hate.
We with S. Cyrill do interpret in a bad sense the fact of those who gave to
our Lord (suffering thirst) Vinegar to drink. But the words of the Psalm are
so clear and evident as that they need not any exposition; And from those we
will gather this fruit, that we may learn to thirst with Christ after those
things, which truly and healthfully are to be thirsted after. These are the
Words of the Prophet: I expected some body, that would be grieved with me, and
there was none, or that would comfort me, and I found not any. And they gave me
gaul for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink. Psalm. 68.
Therefore those men who gave to Christ our Lord a little before he was mayled
to the Cross, wine mingled with gaul, and those who offered to our Lord
afterward Vinegar to drink, were of that number of whom it is said: I
expected some body, that would be grieved with me, and there was none; and that
would comfort me, and I found not any.

But some may here demand, did not the most Blessed Virgin (the Mother of our
Lord) and Mary of Cleophas sister of his mother as also Mary Magdalen with the
Apostle S. John, standing near unto the Cross, truly and from their heart
grieve and lament for our Lord? In like sort, did not those Women, who weeping
followed our Lord to the Mount Caluary, truly condole with him? To conclude,
were not all the Apostles much agrieued, and lamented in the time of the
Passion, when as Christ himself foretold of them. Joan. 16. The world shall
rejoice, but you shall be glad? All these did truly contristate and lament;
but they did not lament together with our Lord, in that there was not the same
reason of Grief in Christ, and in the others. For our Lord says: I expected
some body, that would be sorry with me, and there was none; and that would
comfort me, and I found not any. Those persons abouesayd did grieve touching
the Passion and corporal death of Christ: But Christ did not grieve touching
this point, but only for a short time in the garden, to show himself to be
true Man: Yea he said, Luc. 22. With desire I have desired to eat this Pasche
with you, before I suffer; And in another place: If you loved me, you would
rejoice, because I go to the Father, Joan. 4.

What cause then of grief was there in our Lord, in which he did not find
others grieuing with him? To wit, the loss of souls, for which he did
suffer. And what cause of Consolation, in which he had not another to comfort
and rejoice with him, except the saving of souls, after which he thirsted?
This one Consolation he did seek, this he desired, of this he was even hungry
and thirsty: but gaul is given to him for meat, and Vinegar for drink. For
the bitterness of gaul does signify and figure out sin, then the which
nothing is more bitter to him, that has the sense of Taste not infected, or
depraved; The acrimony or bitterness of Vinager represents obstination in
sin: Therefore Christ deservedly did lament, because he did see for one Thief
converted, not only an other thief remaining in his obstinacy; but also many
others continuing in the like peruersity of mind; And even then among the
Apostles themselves suffering scandal, he saw S. Peter to have denied him, and
Judas to have despayred.

If therefore any man will comfort and bemoane Christ, oppressed with hunger
and thirst upon the Cross, and from thence greatly grieuing; first let him
present himself, as truly penitent, and loathing all his former sins. Next,
let him conceive with Christ a great heaviness and sorrow in his heart, that so
great a multitude of souls do daily perish, since so easily all men may be
saved, if so they will take the benefit of the price of man's Redemption.
Doubtlesly the Apostle was one of those, who deplored with Christ, seeing he
thus s^yth: Psalm. 9. Veritatem dico in Christo etc. I speak the Verity in
Christ, I lie not, that I have great sadness and continual sorrow in my heart:
for I wished my self to be an Anathema from Christ for my Brethren, who are my
kinsmen according to the flesh, who are Israelits, whose is the adoption of
sons. The Apostle could not more amplify and enlarge his desire of saving
souls, then by this exaggeration, of wishing himself to be an Anathema from
Christ; For this sentence, according to the judgment of S. John Chrysostom, is
to be interpreted, that the Apostle was so vehemently troubled and afflicted
touching the damnation of the Jews, as that (if it could have been) he desired
to be separated from Christ, for Christ his sake; meaning herby, he did not
covet to be separated from the Charity of Christ, of which point he had spoken
a little before saying, Who shall separat^ us from the Charity of Christ? but to
be separated from the glory of Christ; as making choice rather to be deprived
of the Heavenly glory, then that Christ should be deprived of that great fruit
of his Passion, which would appear in the conversion of so many thousand of
Jews. Therefore the Apostle did truly grieve with Christ, and did give comfort
to the grief of Christ.

But we have few men in these days, who are emulous, or imitatours of him. For
there are no few Pastors of souls, who more lament, if the annual rents of
their Church be diminished or lost, then if a great number of souls under
their charge, through their absence or negligence do perish. Patientius ferimus
Christi iacturam, quam nostram (says S. Bernard.) We suffer with greater
patience the loss of Christ, then our own loss; We make great search into
our daily expenses; but of the daily losses of the flock of Christ we rest
ignorant; Thus this holy Father l. 4. de consid. c 9. It is not sufficient for
a Prelate if himself live piously, and labor privately, to imitate the Virtues
of Christ, except withal he do make his own subjects (or rather his own
sons) virtuous, and by the footesteps of Christ, bring them to eternal life.
Therefore if such men do covet to suffer, and grieve with Christ, and to
bemoane his dolours, let them watch over their flock diligently, let them not
forsake their poor sheep, but let them direct them by Words, and go before
and lead them the way, by good Example.

But Christ may deservedly complain of private men, that they do not condole
with him, or with his dolours. For if Christ hanging upon the Cross, did
justly complain of the perfidy and obstinacy of the Jews, by whom he saw all
his great labor, and grief to be contemned, and so precious a medicine of his
blood to be by them (as by fanaticall and mad men) rejected and vilifyed; what
now may he say, when he does see (not from the Cross, but even from Heaven)
his own Passion to be valewed at no worth; and his sacred Blood to be
betrampled upon, by those men who do believe in him, or at least say they do
believe in him; and who offer to him, nothing but gaul and Vinegar that is,
who do multiply their sins without consideration of the divine Judgment, or
without fear of H ll? We read in S. Luke c. 15. that; There shall be joy in
Heaven, upon one sinner, that does Penance. But if that Man, who by faith and
Baptism was borne in Christ, and by Penance was recalled from death to life,
do presently again dye by sinning; is not the joy then turned into sorrow and
grief? and is not the Milk changed into gaul, and the Vine into Vinager?

Certainly, A woman, when she trauaileth has sorrow, (if she bring forth her
child with life) she remembers not the pain for joy, that a man is borne into
the world. Joan. 16. But if it happen that the child do instantly dye, or be
borne dead, is not the mother afflicted with a double grief? Even so, many do
labor and take pains in confessing their sins, and perhaps put in practice
fasting and Almsdeeds not without some difficulty; yet because through an
erroneous Conscience, or through an unwarrantable Ignorance, they do not arrive
to perfect Pardon; do not these men even labor in Child-byrth, and bring forth
an Abortiue, and afflict their Pastors with a double grief? These therefore
resemb^e a man that is sick, who hasteneth his own death by taking of most
bitter Physic from whence he hoped for health: Or else a Husbandman, who after
much labor spent in cultiuating his Vineyard, or ground does through an
unexpected Hayle showred down, loose all his profit, that is all his labor
and toil. These Evils therefore ought with great reason to be deplored with
inconsolable grief; And who bewayleth them, and is sorry for them, he does
condole with Christ upon the Cross; And when with fortitude and strength he
laboreth to expel and drive away these Evils, he wonderfully compassionateth
the afflictions of Christ suffering on the Cross, and shall (in recompense
thereof) rejoice with Christ rejoicing in Heaven, and reign with him, there
reigning for ever.

Of the second fruit of the fifth Word. CHAP. IX.
When attentively I ponder and consider the thirst of Christ hanging upon the
Cross, another fruit (and no less profitable) is presented to my judgment.
For our Lord seems to me to have said, Sitio, I thirst, in the same sense,
when unto the Samaritan woman he said, Give me to drink; for a little after
opening the mystery of this his Word, he thus subioyneth. If thou did know
the gift of God, and who he is, that says unto thee, give me to drink, thou
perhaps would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water,
John 4. Now how can he thirst, who is the fountain of living water? Did not
our Lord speak of himself, when he said. Joan. 7. If any man thirst, let him
come to me and drink? And is not he that Rock, of which the Apostle speaks.
1. Cor. 10. They drank of the spiritual Rock, that followed them, and the
Rock was Christ? To conclude is not this he, who thus speaks to the Jews by
Jeremy the Prophet cap. 2. They have forsaken me the fountain of living water;
and have dug to themselves Cesternes, broken Cesternes, that will not hold
water? Therefore it seems, I behold our Lord upon the Cross, as upon a high
Turret, casting his eyes upon the whole earth ^u^l of men, thirsting, and
langiuishing through thirst: who through occasion of his own corporal thirst,
does commiserate the common thirst of mankind, and says: Sitio, that is, I am
truly thirsty, since all the humidity and moisture of my body is already spent
and dried up; but this my thirst will quickly have an end: Therefore I do now
thirst that men would begin to know from faith, me to be the true wellspring
of living water, and that they would come to me and drink, that so they need
not to thirst for all Eternity.

O how happy and blessed might we be, if with a most attent heart, we would
hear this Sermon of the Word Incarnate. Do not almost all men thirst with a
most burning thirst of concupiscence, and with an insatiable thirst after the
fading and troubled waters of transitory and floating things, which are
vulgarly called goods, Riches, Honors, Pleasures? And who is he, that drinking
of this water, has his thirst thereby extinguished? And who ever hearing
Christ our Master, did begin to taste and relish the living water of Heavenly
wisdom and of divine charity, but that (the thrist of terrene things being
presently assuaged, he begun to breath hope of eternal life; and laying aside
all gnawing care of getting and heaping together earthly treasures, did not
begin to thirst after Heavenly? This water of life (not rising out of the
earth, but descending from Heaven) which our Lord (being the fountain of the
water of life, if so we will demand it with most ardent prayers, and a
fountain of tears) will give to us; this water (I say) will not only quench
the thirst of terrestrial pleasures, but also will be to us never fading meat
and drink, during all the time of our Peregrination. For thus the Prophet Esaias
speaks: All you that thirst, come unto the waters. Isa. 55. And to prevent
that thou may think not think it to be plain and simple water, or to be
bought with a great Price, the Prophet subioyneth: Make have, come away, buy
without money, without any change, wine and milk. Water is said to be bought,
because it is not obtained without labor, that is, without a true disposition
of mind; but yet it is bought without money or any exchange, because it is
given freely, neither can any equal price for it be found. And that, which the
Prophet a little before called water, he presently after terms wine and milk;
since it is a most precious and inestimable thing, as comprehending in it self
the perfection or virtue of water, wine, and milk.

This is true wisdom and charity, which is called water, because it does
refresh and cool the heat of concubiscence. It in also wine, in that the mind
of man is therewith heated, and (as it were) become drunk with a sober
ebriety; finally, it is said to be milk, because it nourishes with a sweet
and gentill food especially such, who are but infants in Christ, according to
those words of S. Peter the Apostle: As infants newly borne, desire you milk.
1. Pet 2. This true wisdom and Charity being incompatible with the
Concupiscence of the flesh, is that sweet yoke, and light burden, the which
whosoever willingly and humbly undergo, do purchase true and stable rest to
their souls; so as they shall not need to draw water from earthly and muddy
Wels. This most sweet repose of mind gave way to solitude, to an Heremiticall
life, filled Monasteries, reformed the Clergy; yea reduced married Persons to
no small moderation and continency.

Certainly the Palace or Court of Theodosius the younger, being Emperor, did
much resemble a great Monastery; And the House of Elzearus (the Earl) bare the
show of a small Monastery. For in neither of these two places were to be heard
any contentions, or disagreements, but instead thereof the singing of
spiritual Hymns and Canticles did most frequently resound. All this we owe,
as due to Christ, who has extinguished our thirst with his thirst; and as a
living fountain, has so watered the fields of our Hearts with flowing
streams, as that they need not fear any drought, except our Hearts depart from
the fountain it self (which God forbid) through the instigation of the Enemy.

Of the third fruit of the fifth Word. CHAP. X.
THe third fruit, which may be taken from the words of Christ, is the
imitation of the Patience of the Son of God. For although Humility (conjoined
with patience) did shine in the Fourth word, or sentence; yet in the Fyfth
word, as in its proper and reserved place, the wonderful patience of Christ
seems most eminently to manifest it self Patience is not only one of the
chief Virtues; but among the rest it is very necessary. For thus S. Cyprian
speaks, Sermon. de bono Patientia. Non inuenio inter caeteras etc. Among the
several ways of Celestial discipline, I do not find any thing more necessary
to man's life, or more conducing to true Glory, then that we, who labor to
observe the precept of our Lord with fear and devotion, should carefully
deuote our selfs to the practice of Patience. But before we discourse of the
Necessity of Patience, it is needful, that we distinguish between true and
false Patience.

Well then, that is true Patience, which commands us to suffer the Evil of
pain, or punishment, to the end we may not be forced to suffer the Evil of
Fault, or sin. Such was the patience of the Martyrs, who made choice rather
to undergo the torments of their Persecutours, then to yeald unto an
abnegation of their Faith in Christ, and to suffer the loss of all their
temporal goods, then ^o exhibit worship and honor to false Gods. But
counterfaite and false Patience is that, which persuadeth a man to suffer all
Evils and Inconveniences, thereby to give satisfaction to the Law of
Concupiscence, and to loose everlasting Goods for the conservation of temporal
and momentary. Such is the Patience of the Martyrs of the Devil (so to style
them) who easily endure hunger, thirst, cold, heat, the loss of their
reputation and good name, and (which is more to be admired) the loss of the
Kingdom of Heaven, that so they may increase and heap together Riches, may
glut and satisfy their own Carnality, and aspire to certain steps and degrees
of Honor.

Now this is incident and peculiar to true Patience, to perfect and conserve
all Virtues. And this is that, which S. James even preaches in the praise of
Patience, saying, cap. 1. Patience has a perfect work, that you may be
perfect and entire, failing in nothing. For other Virtues in regard of their
difficulty, except they be supported and governed with Patience, cannot subsist
or continue long; but when they are accompained with Patience, they easily
command and overrule all opposition and resistance whatsoever. For Patience
does convert, and makes crooked things straight, and rough ways plain. Isa.
42. And this is so indisputably true, that S. Cyprian thus discourses of
Charity the Queen of Virtues, Sermon. de Patientia: Charitas fraternitatis etc.
Charity is the bond of fraternity, the foundation of Peace, the knitting
together of Unity; It is greater then Faith, or Hope; It ever goes before
martyrdom. It shall ever remain in us with God in the Heavenly kingdom; Yet
spoil and deprive it of Patience, it becomes desolate, and endures not; take
from it the virtue of sustaining and tolerating, and then you do pull it quite
up by the root. The which very point (I mean the necessity of Patience) the
same S. Cyprian more easily proves to be in Chastity, Justice, and Peace with
our neighbors, for thus he heerof discourses: Let thy Patience be strong and
immovable in thy heart; let not thy sanctified Body, and Temple of the Holy
Ghost be polluted with adultery; neither let thy Innocence (devoted to Justice)
be contaminated with any contagion of deceyt; nor after thou have received the
most reverend Eucharist, let thy hand be dishonored with the sword, or imbrued
in blood. Ibid. Thus this Doctor; who intimates from a contrary sense, that
Chastity without the support of Patience, is not able to resist Adultery, nor
Justice can be void of fraud, nor the taking of the Eucharist can free a man
from Homicide.

This, which S. James above teaches, touching the virtue of Patience, is also
taught in other words by the Prophet David, by Christ himself, and by the
Apostle. David's words are these, Psalm. 9. The patience of the poor shall
never perish. Beacuse it is a perfect work, and in this respect its reward
shall not consume or wast away. Patience also is said not to perish, because it
is recompensed for all eternity, in regard of its fruit: after this manner we
are accustomed to say, that the labors of a Husbandman do perish, when they
bear no fruit; and not perish, when they bear fruit. Now the word, Poor,
is here added, because in this place it signifies one, that is humble, who
acknowledges himself to be poor, and that he cannot either do, or suffer
any thing, without the concurrency and aid of God; and thus is this point
expounded by S Austin lib. de patient. cap. 15. Neither only the poor, but the
rich, and such as do abound with affluency of temporal wealth, may have the
virtue of patience, so that they do not confide and trust in their riches, but
in God; of whom, as being truly poor in all divine gifts, they pray for
Patience, and obtain it.

This said point, our Lord himself signified, when he said in the Gospel,
Luc. 21. In your patience, you shall possess your souls. For he only does
truly enjoy his soul, that is his life, of which no man can be bereaved, who
will tolerate patiently all afflictions, yea the very death of the body, so
that he sins not against God. For although by dying he may seem to loose
life, yet he loses it not, but keeps, and reserues it for all Eternity. Since
the death of the just is not death, but a sleep, and a very short sleep. But
those who are impatient, that so they loose not the life of the Body, fear not
to sin, either by apostating and denying of Christ, worshipping of Idols, by
becoming a prey to sensuality, or by perpetrating any wickedness whatsoever;
these men seem indeed for the time to preserve life, but they loose eternal
life both of Body and soul. And as it is said of those who are truly patient:
Not one hair of your head shall perish. Luc. 25. So to the impatient it may be
said; not one member of your Body shall be free from the incendious heats, and
burning of Hell.

To conclude, this forsaid point the Apostle confirms, saying, Heb. 10,
Patience is necessary for you, that doing the will of God, you may receive the
Promise. Where we see, that the Apostle plainly pronounces, that Patience is
wholly necessary to us, that thereby we may always do the Will of God, and by
doing it may receive the Promise; that is, the Crown of Glory, which God has
promised for them that love him, and keep his Commandments, Iac. 1. For we
read, If any love me, he will keep my Words; He that loves me not, keeps not
my Words. Joan. 14. Thus we observe the whole Scripture (cohering and agreing
in it self) to preach to all the faithful, the necessity of Patience. And
this is the Cause, why Christ going out of this life, would testify to all men
his invisible, most bitter, and most long suffering of thirst, that we being
moved with so great an Example, should be inflamed to keep Patience in all our
Afflictions. That this thirst of Christ was a most vehement pain, we have
above showed in the explication of the word, Sitio. That it continued for a
long time, it may be easily made evident.

And that we may begin from the scourging of Christ; when Christ was whipped,
he was then already spent, and wearied through prolixity of Prayer, through his
Agony and effusion of blood in the garden; Also he was much tired with
iourneys, which that night and the day following he made; As from the Garden to
the House of Annas, from the house of Annas to the house of Caiphas, from the
house of Caiphas to the house of Pilate; from the house of Pilate to the house
of Herod; from the house of Herod back again to the house of Pilate; which
several iourneys contained many Miles. Neither did our Lord (after his supper
the night before) taste of any meat or drink, or took any repose and sleep;
but endured many most grievous afflictions in the house of Caiphas; and then
immediately after all these his pressures, followed the most barbarous and
cruel whipping of him; the which was attended on with a most vehement Thirst,
which Thirst much increased, when his whipping was ended. After all this
succeeded his crowning with thorns, and the Jews mocking him to scorn; which
new vexation was also accompanied with extremity of thirst, so as the same was
very much increased. Then being even wasted with so many iourne^s and labors,
he was next burdened with the weight of his Cross which he bare unto Mount
Caluary: That journey being ended, Wine mingled with ga^le was offered to him,
the which when he began to taste, he refused to drink thereof.

Thus his iourneying to and fro received an end; but the Thirst, which vexed
our Lord throughout all his travail and labor, doubtlesly increased. For
presently his nayling to the Cross followed, and from hence one may easily
conceive, that his Thirst grew greater and more vehement through the defluxion
and streaming of his most precious blood, as from four fountains. To
conclude, during the space of three hours following (to wit, from the sixth
hour to the ninth) in that horrible darkness, it can hardly be believed, with
what fyar or ardour of thirst that most sacred body of our Lord was consumed
and wasted. And although it was Vinegre, which the Ministers of his Passion
offered to him; yet because it was neither Wine, nor Water, but Vinegre (that
is, a sharp and ungrateful Potion) and but small in quantity, since he was to
suck the same by drops out of a sponge, and was most near unto his death;
therefore it is lawful to affirm, that our Blessed Redeemer even from the
beginning of his Passion to his death, did suffer with wonderful patience,
this doleful and most greuious torment. Now of what violence this torment is,
few make trial, since they may easily find water, wherewith to quench their
thirst; but such as travel diverse days in desert places (where small or little
water is to be found) do fully take notice, how great a torment Thirst is.

Q. Curtius writes ( lib. 7. de gest. Alex.) that Alexander the great passing
with his Army through a long and tedious desert, his soldiers after much
drought and thirst came to a certain River, of which they drank with such
gust and greedmes, as that many of them by losing their wynd, or breath in
drinking, did presently dye, and then he thus concludes: Multoque mayor etc
The number of those, by this means dying was far greater, then ever he lost in
any one battle. Therefore the heat of the thirst was so intolerable, as
that the soldiers had not that command over themselves, as in time of
drinking, a little to breath, or take their Wind. And thus the greatest part of
Alexanders Army was extinct and perished. There have been some men, who through
extremity of thirst, have thought water mingled with dirt, oil, blood, and
other more filthy things, to have been sweet and pleasant. From hence then, we
may be instructed, how bitter the Passion of Christ was, and how great Virtue
of his Patience appeared therein. And it was Gods will, that this his Patience
should be known to us, that by our imitation of it, we might so compassionate
and suffer with Christ, as that we may be glorified together with Christ.

But it seems to me, that I hear diverse good and pious souls, earnestly
enquiring, how they might arrive to that height, as seriously to imitate the
Patience of Christ, and to say with the Apostle, I am fastened to the Cross
with Christ: and with the holy Martyr S. Ignatius; Amor meus crucifixus est. My
love is crucified. This point is not so difficult, as many take it to be. For
it is not necessary for all men to lie upon the cold ground; to discipline and
scourge their body with whips until the drawing of blood; to fast daily with
bread and water; to wear continually next to their skin a rough hair cloth,
or iron-chayne; or to practice other such kinds of mortification, for the
taming of the body, and crucifying It, with its vices and concupiscences: these
actions are laudable, and also profitable, when they are practiced by such,
whose bodies are able to bear them; and this by the advice and direction of
their spiritual Father or Instructour. But I in this place covet to show to
the pious Reader, a course or way of exercising Patience, and of imitating
Christ, who was most patie^t; which course may agree to all men, and in which
nothing is unaccustomed; nothing tasting of nouelty, nothing, which may seem
to gain a vulgar praise.

First then I say, that one who is zealous of Patience, ought willingly to be
busyed in those labors which he is assured are grateful and pleasing to the
will of God, according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 10. Patience is necessary
for you, that you doing the Will of God, may receive the Promise. What God
would have us patiently to undergo, is not hard either to learn, or to
teach. First experience and daily practice tells us, that what things the
Church (our Mother) commands to be done, the same (though hard and difficult)
are to be performed obediently and patiently. But what does the Church command
us? to wit, the fasts of Lent, the Ember-dayes, and the vigill of Saints. If
these be performed in such sort, as they ought to be, they then cannot be
performed without Patience. For if a man upon fasting days, will seek after
delicate and curious meats; and at one supper, or dinner eat as much meat,
as at other times is usual to serve him both for dinner and supper; or else
will prevent the hour of eating before noone, and then at night instead of a
small refection or Collation, will devour so much, as may well to be termed a
large and copious supper, certainly this Man will not easily suffer honger or
thirst; neither will he stand in need of Patience. But if he will constantly
and seriously determine with himself, not to anticipate the hour, except some
disease or other necessity force him; and to content himself with ordinary and
mean diet, imposed as i^ were for penance, and (avoiding all full gorging)
to take it in that measure and quantity, as may seem not to exceed one
ordinary meal; and to give, that to the poor, which should be taken at
another meal if it were not a day of fast, according to S. Leo, saying (
sermon. 11. de ieiunio 10. mensis:) Refectio P^uperis, abstinentia ieiunantis.
The abstinence of the faster, is the refection of the poor; and the same
Father in another place: Esurianus paululum etc. Beloved, let us fast a little,
that we may subtract and withdraw so much from our custom of eating, as may
relieve the poor and needy. Sermon. 9. de ieiunio 7. mensis. and to conclude, at
night to make but a small Collation or drinking: This man (I say) has need of
Patience to endure his hunger and thirst. And in fasting after this manner, we
in some sort may imitate the patience of Christ, and his crucifixion. But these
fasts are not wholly necessary, though they be necessary for the exercise of
Patience, and for the imitation of the Passion of Christ.

Furthermore, the Church commands Ecclesiastical, or Regular Persons, to
recite or sing the seven Canonical Hours; and that all the faithful at
least in prayer do read, and recite the Lord Prayer, and the Salutation of the
Angel. This religious Reading and prayer, if it be performed in that sort,
which it may, and ought to be, doubtlesly will stand in need of Patience. But
there are many, who that they may shake of all Patience, endeavor to take away
all difficulties. For they thinking, that a heavy burden is imposed upon them,
do most swiftly run all things over, that so in a very short space, they may
dispatch themselves of the Burden. Next to this, they do not standing or
kneeling, but either sitting or walking, read the Canonical Hours, to the end
that the wearisomnes of reading or praying may be mitigated by sitting or
walking. I here speak of such, who read the hours in private, not of those
who sing or say the same in the Quire. Furthermore, that they may not be forced
to break their sleep, they use often to say their Mattins before the sun
sets.

Touching the attention and elevation of mind in time of prayer, and of
praising God, I say little, since many think of nothing less then of that,
which they sing, or read. Therefore taking away the difficulty of spending
much time in reading, or in Prayer, and of rising in the night to say their
Mattins, and omitting or neglecting the labor of standing or kneeling; as also
not regarding to put a bridle on the mind, that it may not wander in
distractions and unnecessary thoughts, but that it may be wholly intent upon
that, which it reads: I say, that once taking away all these things, it is
no wonder, if many do not seem to stand in need of Patience. But let such
negligent men hear and observe, with what solicitude and care S. Francis did
read or recite the Canonical hours; and then they shall fully see and
acknowledge, that this pious and Religious office and duty cannot be performed
without the aid and support of Patience. For thus S. Bonauentur^ writes of
him, cap. 10. vitae eius. Solitus erat vir sanctus etc. The holy man was
accustomed to pay, or perform to God his Canonical Hours, with no less
fear, then devotion. For although he was afflicted with a pain in his eyes,
stomach, spleen, and liver; yet he would not as much as lean unto the wall,
when he did sing; but ever standing straight up, and without any hood on his
head, or wa^dring eyes he said his hours, and that sometimes not without
swounding with the pain. He did, when he was in any journey on the way, never
omit this reverend custom. He also was persuaded he offended highly, if in
time of prayer he were distracted with any wandering of mind, or vain thoughts;
and when any such thing happened, he presently cancelled the same by humble
Confession: He was accustomed to say the Psalms, as if he did behold God
present: And when the name of our Lord did occur therein, he was wont to lick
his lips, through the sweetness of that name pronounced by him. Thus S.
Bonauenture writes of S. Francis.

Certainly, if a man would endeavor to read h^s Canonical Hours after this
manner, and would rise in the night time for the saying thereof, he would then
find by experience, and confess, that without labor and patience he could not
perform and satisfy the divine Office of Prayer. There are many other things,
which our Mother, the Church, even from the Will of God (manifested in the holy
Scriptures) does prescribe to us, the which without patience cannot be rightly
performed. As for example, to distribute to the poor, what is superfluous in
our riches; to pardon such as offend us, and to make satisfaction to those
whom we offend or wrong; to confess a^l our sins at least once a year, to
communicate and receive the most Blessed Sacrament, which requires no small
preparation of mind. All these require great Pat^ence for the performance
thereof And thus much of these few things prescribed to us, the which I set
down only for an instance,

Another thing, in which the Will of God is seen, and which cannot be
performed on our part without Patience, is all that, which either the Devils
or men do work, to afflict and vex us. For although bad men and the wicked
Devils, when they do exercise their malice against us, do intend no good;
notwithstanding God (without whose permission they can do nothing) would not
permit that their vexation, except he judged it might be profitab^e to us.
Therefore affliction is to be received ^s from the hand of God, and ^s in this
respect to be suffered patiently and willingly. So Job (being a plain and
upright man) was not ignorant, that those Calamities which he suffered, did
proceed from the malice of the Devil; to wit, when in one day, he lost all his
riches, all his sons, and the health of his Body; Notvvithstanding he said:
Our Lord gave, and our Lord has taken away; the name of our Lord be blessed;
because he did know, that these Calamities could not have fallen upon him,
without the will of God. I do not speak this, as if I would counsel men,
who are afflicted either by men or Devils, that they cannot, or ought not to
repair their losses, to seek to cure their Body by medicines or physic, or
to defend themselves and their states: B^t only this I do admonish, that men do
not study revenge against wicked men, nor render Evil for Evil; but that they
do patiently suffer, what God will have them to suffer; that so doing the will
and pleasure of God, they may receive the Promise.

The last way of practicing Patience consists, in that we do understand and
conceive, that all those things, which may seem to happen either by chance or
fortune, as much drought of Weather, over much rain, pestilence, Penury, and
the like, do not come without the Providence and will of God; and that
therefore we ought not to complain of the Elements, or of God; but that we
acknowledge the punishment of God for our sins, that thus being subject to
God, we may patiently bear all aduers^ties with true Humility. For by doing
so, it will come to pass, that God being appeased, will leave to us behind him
his Benediction, and chastize us (as his Sons) with a paternall correction,
and not deprive us (as bastards and adulterate) of our heavenly Inheritance. I
will here adioyne one Example out of S. Gregory, from whence we may gather, how
great the reward allotted to Patience, is. He relates ( hom. 3^. super Euang.)
that a certain man called Steven, was so patient, as that he reputed the^ his
chiefest friends, who had beeene most troublesome unto him; giving them thanks
for their contumelies, and esteeming the losses and detrim^nts offered to him,
to be his chiefest gain and benefit; thus numbering and ranging his
Adversaries among his Benefactours. This man the world (no doubt) would
repute, as mad or foolish; but he listened to the Apostle of Christ not with a
deaf ear, saying. 1. Cor. 3. If any man seem to be wise among you in this
world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise. For as S Gregory vvriteth
in the place above alleged, many Angels were seen to be present at the
instant of his death, who did carry his soul directly into Heaven. And the
holy Father feared not to range this Steven among the Blessed Martyrs, in
regard of his wonderfu l Patience.

Of the fourth fruit of the fifth Word. CHAP. XI.
AS yet remains one fr^^te behind (and this most sweet) which may be gathered
from the word) Sitio, I thirst. For S. Austin expounding the said word says,
That by this word was not signified only the desire of corporal drink; but a
desire with which Christ did burn for the health and salvation of his Enemies.
But now taking occasion from the sentence of S. Austin, we may ascend a little
higher, and say; that Christ did thirst after the glory of God, and the
salvation of men; and that we ought to thirst after the glory of God, the
honor of Christ, our own health, and the health of our Brethren. Th^^^ Christ
was even thirsty of the glory of God, and health of souls, cannot be doubted;
since all his works, all his Sermons or speeches, all his sufferings, and all
his miracles do even preach, and proclaim the truth hereof. Therefore to us it
rather belongs to think, (to show our gratefulnes to so great a
Benefactour) by what means we may be inflamed, as truly to thirst after the
honor of God, Who, so loved the World, as that he gave hit only begotten
Son. Joan. 3. and withal after the honor of Christ truly and ardently, who
loved us, and delivered himself for us an oblation and host to God, in an
odor of sweetness. Ephesians. 5.) As also that we may so truly compassionate with
our Brethren, as most vehemently to thirst after their health and salvation.
But this one thing is chiefly and principally incumbent unto us; to wit, that
we do so truly, intensly, and from the bottom of our Heart thirst after our
own proper health and salvation, as that our thirst thereof may force us,
according to our strength and power, to think, speak, and do every thing,
which may conduce unto the purchasing thereof. For if we do not thirst after
the honor of God, nor the glory of Christ, nor the health of our Neighbors,
it follows not, that God shall therefore want his due honor; or Christ be
d^priued of his glory, or our Neighbors shall not obtain their salvation; but
it follovveth, that we our selfs shall perish ete^nally, if we neglect to
thirst after our own peculiar health and Salvation.

From the consideration of which point, a strong admiration possesses me, to
wit, from vvhe^ce it proceeds, that we knovving Christ so ardently to have
thirsted after our Health and Well fair, and acknovvledging him to be the
Wisdom of God; are nevertheless little moved to imitate him in so great a
matter, which to us is above all things most necessary. Neither do I less
vvonder to observe, how greadily our selfs do thirst after temporal Goods,
as if they were eternal, and yet do so negligently slight our eternal
salvation, and so little thirst after it, as if it were a thing momentary and
light. We may add hereto, that temporal Goods are not pure goods; but mixed
with many evils and inconveniences, yet nevertheless are most sollicitously and
painfully sought after; whereas Eternal salvation is exempted from being
accompanied with any Evil, and yet it is so neglected, and so faintly coueted,
as if it had in it self no worth, solidity, or firmness. O Blessed Lord, so
illuminate my interior eyes, that I may at length find the Cause of this so
blind and dangerous an Ignorance.

Certainly Love begets a desire; and desire, when it begins vehemently to
burn, is called a Thirst. But who cannot love his own salvation, especially
being to remain for all Eternity, and void of all Evil? And if so great a
matter cannot be but beloved, why is it not vehemently desired? Why is not
ardently thirsted after? Why is it not procured with all endeavor and force?
Perhaps the reason hereof is, in that, Eternal salvation does not fall under
our sense, and therefore we have no experiment thereof, as we have of our
Corporal health and prosperity; and therefore this we thirst after, that we
but couldly desire. But if this were the reason of so great an Ignorance, from
whence then did it spring, that David (being a mortal man) did so ardently
thirst after the Vision of God, in which Vision eternal health consists, as
that he cried out, Psalm. 41. Eue^ as the Heart desires after the fountains of
Waters, so does my soul desire after thee, O God. My soul has this sted
after God, the strong, and living; when shall I come, and appear before, the
face of God? Where we see the Prophet as yet remaining here upon earth, did
most burningly thir^^ after the Vision of God, which is eternal health it
self. And this desire di^ not happen to David alone, but t^ many other men,
eminent for sanct^ty; to whom all earthly matters seemed sordide, base, and
unsavory; an^ who most greedily, and withal sweetness did relish, and taste the
remembrance or recordation of God.

Therefore the Cause is not, why we do not earnestly thirst after eternal
Beatitude, in that it falls not under our sense; but by reason it is nor
thought upon attentively, daily, and with a full faith: Now, it is not thought
upon, as it ought to be, because we are not spiritual, but sensual: The
sensual man perceaueth not those things which are of the spirit of God. 1.
Cor. 2. Wherefore O my Soul, if thou do covet to thirst after thy own
health, and the health of others, and much more after the honor of God, and
Glory of Christ, hear then S. James saying Cap. 1. If any of you lack
Wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all men abundantly, and vpbraideth
not, and it shall be given him. This wisdom (being so high and perfect) is not
found in the schools of this world, but only in the Auditory of the spirit of
God; which spirit turns a sensual man, into a spiritual. And it is not
sufficient to demand, or pray for this wisdom once, or twyce, and coldly; but
we ought even to besiege the ears of God with our incessant petitions, and
inutterable lamentations. For if a Carnal Father be not accustomed to deny his
little child moaning, and asking some bread, How much more (says our Lord)
will your Father from Heaven give the good spirit to them that ask him? Luc.
11.

The sixth Word: Consummatum est, It is consummate, Joan. 15. literally
expounded. CHAP. XII.
THe sixth Word pronounced by our Lord upon the Cross, is related by the
foresaid S. John, as almost conjoined with the fifth. For presently after our
Lord had said, I thirst, and had tasted vinegre brought unto him, S. John thus
adds: When Jesus therefore had taken the Vinegre, he said; It is consummate.
Io. 19. And truly according to the letter, the word Consummatum est, signifies
nothing, but that the work of Christ's Passion was then consummate, perfected,
and ended. For two works or labors the Father did enjoin upon his Son; One
was the preaching of the Gospel; The other, his suffering for mankind. Of the
first Work our Lord did spoke in S. John c. 17. I have consummated the work,
which thou gave me to do; I have manifested thy name to men. This our Lord
spoke after his last and longest Sermon, made to his Disciples after his last
supper. Thus he had finished then his first Work, imposed by his Father. The
second Work concerned his drinking the Cupp of his Passion, of which himself
says: Can you drink of the Cup, which I shall drink of? Matthew. 20. and
again: O Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, Matthew. 26. and
yet more: The Cup, which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Io.
18. Therefore of this work of his Passion, our Lord being most near to his
death, said; Consummatum est, It is consummate, and finished; I have drunk up
this whole cup, even to the dregs; nothing is now remaining but to depart out
of this life: And so bowing his head, he gave up the Ghost. Joan. 19.

But because neither our Lord himself, nor S. John (as affecting breuity) did
explain and set down, what that was, which was consumate, and finished,
occasion thereby is given to us to apply that consummatum est, to diverse
mysteries, and this not without just reason and fruit. First then S. Austin
refers the word consummatum est, to the fullfilling of the Prophecies which
were delivered of our Savior; for thus he writes in Comment, huius loci. Our
Lord knowing, that all things were consummate, that the Scripture should be
consummated and accomplished said, I thrist. And taking the vinegre, he said,
It is consummate. That is, that is now fullfilled which did remain to be
fullfilled, From whence we gather, that our Lords meaning was; that all those
things are now co^summate and finished, which the Prophets had foretold of his
life and death: For example, His Conception in those words, Behold a virgin
shall conceive. Isa. 7. His Nativity in Bethleem: And thou Bethleem, the land
of Judah, out of thee shall come forth my Captain, which shall rule my People of
Israel. Micheas 5. The Apparitio^ of the new Star, A star shall rise out of
Judah. Number. 2^. The adoration of the Kings: The Kings of Tharsis, and the Islands
shall offer presents. Psalm. 71. The Preaching of the Gospel: The Spirit of
the Lord is upon me, to preach to the poor he sent me. Isa. 61. Christ
Miracles. Isa. 35. God himself will come, and save us; then shall the eyes of
the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf opened: then shall the lame
leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall be opened. His riding upon an
Ass, or coult of an Ass: Zach. 9. Behold thy king will come to thee, the
Just and Savior; himself poor and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt, the
fool of an Ass. To conclude, the Scene of his whole Passion by parts, is
described by David in his Psalms, by Esaias, Jeremy, Zachary, and others as
abouesayd. And this is that, which our Lord going toward his Passion, said
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things shall be consummate, which were
written by the Prophets of the Son of Man. Luc. 18. Of those things
therefore, which were to be consummate, our Lord now says, consummatum est;
that is to say, all is now consummate and finished, which the Prophets
foretold of me, that so they may be found to be true Prophets.

Furthermore, according to the sentence of S. John Chrysostom, the word
consummatum est, signifies, that all the power permitted to men and the Devils
against Christ, was consummated and ended in the Passion of Christ; of which
power Christ himself spoke to the chief of the Pharisees, Priests, or
Officers of the Temple: This is your hour, and the power of darkness. Luc. 22.
Therefore this hour, and whole time, during the which (God permitting) the
wicked had power over Christ, was ended, when our Lord said, Consummatum est.
For then the peregrination of the Son of God among men, received its end;
which peregrination, Baru^h the Prophet foretold, when he said cap. 3. This is
our God, and there shall none other be ^steemed against him. He found out all
the way of discipline, and delivered it to Jacob his servant, and to Israel his
beloved; After these things he was seen upon the Earth, and was conversant
with men. And the Condition of his mortal life, (according to which he was
hungry, did thirst, did sleep, was spent out with injuries, whipping, wounds,
and subject to death) did take its end together with his peregrinatio^.

Therefore when Christ said upon the Cross, consumutatum est, these words
imply, that that journey was finished; of which he faith in another place: I
came forth from the Father, and came into the world; again I leave the world,
and go to the Father. Job. 16. That laborious and painful peregrinatio^ is
finished, of which Jeremy speaks, cap. 14. O expectation of Israel, the
Savior thereof in the time of tribulation; why will thou be a seiourner in the
Land, and a wayfaring man, turning in to lodge? The mortality of Christ's
humanity is consummate and ended; the power of all his Enemies against him is
consummate; finally the sacrifice (greatst of al sacrifices) is consu^mate, to
which all the Sacrifices of the old Law, (as being but types and shadows) had
necessary relation, as to a true and solid sacrifice. For thus S. Leo speaks
Sermon. 8. de pass. Dom. Traxisti Domine omnia ad te etc. O Lord thou have drawn
all things to thee, because the veyle of the Temple being cut a sunder, the
Holy of Holyes departed from the unworthy Priests; that so the figure might b^
turned into the Truth, Prophecy into manifestation or clearenes, and the Law
into the Gospel.

And a little after: Now the variety of Carnal Sacrifices ceasing, one Oblation
of thy Body and Blood, does fill up and include all the differences of hoasts.
Thus he. For in this Sacrifice the Priest was God and man; the Altar the
Cross; The sacrifice the La^be of God; the fire of the Holocaust, Charity; the
fruit of the sacrifice, the Redemption of the World. I say the Priest was God
as man, then whom not any can be imagined to be greater: Thou art a priest for
ever according to the Order of Melchisedech. Psalm. 109. And trul^ according to
the Order of Melchisedech, for Melchisedech is read in the Scripture so be
without Father, without mother, without genealogy, and Christ was without
Father upon earth, without Mother in Heaven, without Genealogy, For who shall
show his generation? He was be gotten before the Daystar; and his coming forth
from the beginning, from the days of Eternity. Mich. 5.

The Altar of this great Sacrifice was (as above I said) the Cross; the which
by how much it was more vile and base, before Christ was crucified thereon,
by so much it was after made more illustrious, and more ennobled; and in the
last day it shall appear in Heaven more bright and shyning then the sun. For
the Church interprets that of the Cross, which is said in the Gospel,
Matthew. 24. Then shall the sign of the son of man appear in Heaven. In like
sort the Church thus sings: This sign shall be in Heaven, when our Lord shall
come to judge. The which point is also confirmed by S. Chrysostom; who further
affirms, that when the sun shall be obscured, and the Moon not give her
light, then shall the Cross be more splendid and radiant then the Sun.

Furthermore the Sacrifice shall be the Lamb of God, altogether innocent and
immaculate, of whom Esaias thus speaks: cap. 55. Even as a sheep to the
slaughter shall he be led; and as a lamb before his shearer he shall be dumb,
and shall not open his mouth. And the Forerunner of our Lord says: Behold the
Lamb of God, behold who takes away the sins of the World. Joan. 1. And the
Apostle S. Peter: Not with corruptible things, gould or silver, are you
redeemed, but with the precious blood of an immaculate and unspotted Lamb,
Christ: Who also is called in the Apocalypse, cap. 13. The Lamb slain from the
beginning of the World, Because his Price being foreseen of God, did profit
those who went before the times of Christ. The fyar burning the Holocaust, and
perfecting the Sacrifice, is Charity in a high degree, being as it were, a
furnace set on fire, which did burn in the heart of the Son of God, which
fire many waters of his Passion were not able to extinguish. To conclude, the
fruit of this Sacrifice was the expiation of all the sins of the Sons of
Adam, and the reconciliation of the whole World. For thus S. John speaks, 1.
Joan. 2. He is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also
for the whole World. Which very thing is signified by the words of S John
Baptist: Agnus Dei, Ecce, qui tollit peccata mundi.

But here arises a doubt, which is; How could Christ be both Priest and
Sacrifice, since it is the function of the Priest to slaughter that, which is
to be sacrifized? But Christ did not slay himself, neither could he lawfully
so do; since then he should have rather perpetrated sacrilege, then offered
up Sacrifice. It is true, that Christ did not slay himself; nevertheless he
truly offered up sacrifice, because willingly and freely he offered himself to
be slain for the glory of God, and expiation of sin, For neither could the
soldiers and other Ministers have ever apprehended and taken him; neither
could the nails have pierced his hands and feet; nor death could have seized
upon him (though fastened to the Cross) except himself had been willing
thereto. Therefore Esaias most truly sayrh: He was offered, because himself
would. And our Lord himself says. Io. 10. I yield my life; no man takes it
away from me, but I yield my self. And the Apostle S. Paul most evidently:
Christ loved us, and delivered himself for us, an oblation, and host to God,
in an odor of sweetness. Ephesians. 3.

Now what evil or sin, or rather atrocity was in the Passion of Christ, all
that belonged to Judas, the Jews, to Pilate, and the soldiers; for these men
did not offer up Sacrifice, but did commit must horrible sacrilege, deserving
the name not of Priests, but of sacrilegious Persons. But what in the same
Passion was good, religious, and pious, streamed from Christ; who out of the
affluency and abundance of his Charity, offered himself as a Sacrifice to God,
not in slaying himself, but in tollerating most patie^tly death; to wit, the
death of the Cross; and this to the end he might appease the wrath of God,
reconcile the world to God, satisfy the divine Justice, that so mankind should
not perish. Which point S. Leo expresses in most few words, saying: He
suffered at the hands of furious men, who whiles they were busied about their
wickedness, they became serviceable to our Redeemer.

Fourthly, a Great War between Christ and the Prince of this world i^
consummate, and finished in the death of Christ; of which war our Lord thus
speaks in John cap. 12. Now is the judgment of the world, now the Prince of
this World shall be cast forth And when I shall be exalted from the Earth, I will
draw all things to m^ self. This war was judicial, not military: It is like
to the war of those who contend in Suites and Causes, no^ of soldiers who
fight in the field. For the Devil did contend with the Son of God, touching
the possession of the World, that is, of mankind. The devil for a long time
had intruded himself into the Possession of the World, because he had overcome
the first man, and had made him (with all his ospring) his servant, or
bondslaue. Therefore S. Paul himself calls the Devils, the Princes and
Potentates of this World, and the Governors of this darkness. Ephesians. 6. And
Christ himself (as above we have showed) calls the Devil, the Prince of
this World. The Devil would not be content to be ^eputed the Prince of the
world, but also to be accounted a God, according to that in the Psalms: The
devils are the Gods of the Gentiles. Psalm. 95. For the devil was commonly
adored by the Gentiles in engraven Idols, and was worshipped with the sacrifice
of Rams, and Calfes.

Now on the other side the Son of God (as lawful here of all things) did
challenge to himself the principality of the world. Therefore this war was in
the end consummate, and ended upon the Cross, and the se^te n^^ was given in
behalf of our Lord Jesus Christ: because our Lord had most abondantly
satisfied the divine Justice upon the Cross, for the offense of the first Man,
and of all the faithful. For the Obedience exhibited to God, by the Son, was
greater then the disobedience of the servant to his Lord; And the Son of God
was more humbled, even to death, for the honor of his Father then the servant
was puffed up in pride, through his injury of God. Therefore God being
reconciled to mankind by the mediation of his Son, did violently take mankind
out of the Power of the devil; and, did translate us into the Kingdom of the
Son of his Love. Coloss. 1.

There is another reason, which S. Leo is accustomed to bring, which I will
relate in his own words: Si c^udelis and superbus inimicus etc. If the proud
and cruel Enemy could have known the reason of the mercy of God, he would
rather have studied to te^per with gentleness the minds of the Jews; for fear
of loosing the servitude of all his Captives, whiles he did persecute the
liberty of him, who was not owing to him in any thing. Sermon 10. de pass.
Certainly a most forcible reason. For it was reasonable, that the devil should
loose his empire or command over all those whom he had conquered unto him by
sin; because he was not afraid to stretch out his arm even unto death,
against Christ, who was not his servant, and whom he could not induce to sin.

But if the matter stand thus: If the war be consummate and ended, if the
victory be in the power of the Son of God, and he wills, That all men may be
saved. 1. Tim. 2. how then comes it to pass that so many men do remain even
to this day slaves to the devil in this life, and in the next life are sent to
the torment of Hell? I answer this in one word: because themselves will so.
For Christ returning from the war victorious, performed two most great
benefits to mankind The one, that he did open the gate of Paradise to the just;
which from the fall of the first man, was ever shut even to that day. And in
that very day of his victory, he said to the Thief who was justified by Faith,
Hope, and Charity through the merit of the blood of the same Christ: To day thou
shall by with me in Paradise; and heerupon the Church exulting sings: The
sting of death being overcome, thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to
belieuers. The other benefit; that he did institute the holy Sacramnts, which
should have power of remitting sin, and confirming grace, and did send forth
publishers thereof into all parts of the world, who with loud voice did
proclaim and preach, He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved.
Therefore our Lord being victour in this Watre, did open the way to all men for
the enjoying the liberty of the glory, belonging to the Sons of God. Now if
any forbear to enter into this way, they perish through their own default;
not through the impotency, weakness, or negligence of the Redeemer.

Fifthly to conclude, the Word, consummatum est, may rightly be understood of
the consummation of the edifice, which is the Church. That the Perfection of a
building, may be called the consummation of it, Christ himself out Master,
does warrant, saying? This man began to build, but he could not consummate or
finish it. Luc. 14. Now S. Epiphanius, S. Austin and other holy Fathers do
teach, that, that Church was consummate and perfected in the Passion of Christ,
which was begun in his Baptism. They further teach, that Eve being built or
made of the ribbe of Adam sleeping, was a figure of the Church, which is built
out of the side of Christ, whiles he began to sleep by death. And they also
note, that the Scripture said not without some mystery, that Eua was edificata,
non formata, built, not framed.

Now that the Church did begin to be built from the Baptism of Christ S.
Austin proves, expounding that place of Psalm. 71. He shall rule from sea to
sea, and from the Rivers, even to the ends of the World. For the Kingdom of
Christ in which is his Church began from the Baptism of Christ; in which he
receiving the Baptism of S. John, did consecrate the water, and did institute
his Baptism, which is the Gate of the Church. Which point manifestly appeared
from the voice of the Father, heard from Heaven. Matthew. 3. This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear him. And from that time, our Lord
began to preach, and to assemble disciples together, who were the first that
came unto the Church. For although the opening of the side of Christ was made
after his death; and then blood and water came from thence, which signified two
chief Sacraments of the Church, to wit. Baptism, and Eucharist; Nevertheless
all the Sacraments receive their virtue from the Passion of Christ, and the
flowing of blood and water from the side of Christ being then dead was a
declaration of the mysteries, not an institution. Therefore most truly the
consummation of the edifice of the Church was then said to be, when Christ
speak this Word, Consummatum est, It is consummate: because then nothing was
remaining to be effected, but his death, which instantly did follow, and which
did consummate and perfect the price of our Redemption.

Of the first fruit of the sixth Word. CHAP. XIII.
THey are not few fruits, which may be gathered from the sixth Word, if the
abundance thereof be attently considered. And first from that which above we
said; to wit, that by Consummatum est, may be understood the fulfilling of the
Prophesies concerning Christ, S. Austin draws a most profitable doctrine. For
as we are acertained, from the event of things, that those points were true,
which the holy Prophets so long before did foretell; so we ought be assured,
that those things shall infallibly come to pass, which the same men did
prophesy herafter to be, though as yet they be not accomplished. For the
Prophets did speak not out of humane Wit, but from the Holy Ghost inspiring
them: and since the Holy Ghost is God, and that it is impossible, that God
should either be deceived, or lie; therefore it demonstratiuely follows, that
all those predictions are to be hereafter fullfilled, which were foretold by
the Prophets in after times to fall out, and yet are not fullfilled. Sicut
vsque ad hodiernum diem (says S. Augustine in Psalm. 76) Even as to this day all
forwarnings, and speeches of the Prophets have had their Event; so also those,
which yet remain unaccomplished, shall hereafter have. Let us then fear the
day of Judgment. Our Lord is to come; He came in humility, he shall come in
splendor and glory. Thus he,

But we have more forcible arguments, then the ancients had, that we should not
rest doubtful of the Event of future things. Those men, who went before the
times of Christ, were obliged to believe many things without any experiment
aforhand, but we from the accomplishing and fullfilling of things, which
already have happened, may easily believe, that the rest yet remaining, shall be
also fullfilled. Those who lived in the days of Noe, and did hear that the
general deluge was after to be, ( Noe being the Prophet of God and foretelling
this very thing, not only by word, but by causing with such labor the Arc to
be made) could not easily be induced to believe any such future inundation to
be, because they never saw any such deluge before; and therefore the wrath of
God descended upon them suddenly. But we knowing that to have been already
fullfilled, which the Prophet Noe did foretell, why may we not with facility
believe, that a deluge of of fire shall hereafter come, in which all those
things shall be destroyed, which we now esteem and prize at so high a rate? And
yet nevertheless there are very few, who so believe these things to be, as to
withdraw their desire from such matters, as are hereafter to perish, and to fix
their minds, where there are true and everlasting Joys.

But this very Point is prophesied of our Lord himself, that such men may rest
inexcusable, who from the accomplishment of things past, can not be drawn to
believe that things future shall be fulfilled. For thus our Lord speaks.
Matthew. 24. And as in the days of Noe, so also shall be the coming of the Son
of man: for as they were in the days before the flood, eating and drinking,
wedding and given to marriage even unto that day, in which Noe entered into the
Arc, and knew not till the flood came, and over took them all: so also shall
the coming of the Son of man be. VVatch therefore, because you know not at
what hour the Son of man will come. And the Apostle S. Peter says: The day
of our Lord shall come as a thief, in which the Heavens shall pass with great
violence; but the elements shallbe resolved with heat, and the earth, and the
works which are in it, shall be burned. 1. Pet. 3. But men, who slight these
things, say: these are far off, and of great distance from us. Be it, that
they are far of from us, yet thy death is not far of from thee, and the
hour of it is uncertain, And yet it is certain, that we must give an account
of every idle word in the particular judgment, which is not far off. And if
an account must be rendered of every idle word, what reckoning must he made for
false and pernicious words, for perjury and blasphemy which is so familiar and
ordinary to many? and if of words, what account then is to be given of deeds?
of Adulteries? of deceits in buying and selling? of murders and other grie^ous
sins? Therefore it follows, that the predictions of the Prophets being
already fullfilled make us inexcusable, except we may certainly believe, that
all things which remain, are also fulfilled.

Neither it is sufficient to believe, what things Faith teaches us to be
practiced, or to be avoided, except our faith does stir us up efficaciously
to the practizing or avoiding thereof. If an Architect should say; Such a house
is ruinous, and will instantly fall down, and they within the House make show
to believe the Architect, yet will not come out of the house, but suffer
themselves to be oppressed with the ruin and fall of the house; what credit do
these men give to the words of the Architect? Which error the Apostle charge
other like men with saying, Tit. 1. They say they know God, but in deeds they
deny him. And if the Physician shall command, that the sick Patient drink no
wine; and he is persuaded, that the Physician prescribes profitably and
healthfully for him; but in the mean time he demands for wine, and is angry
if it be not given to him: what shall we here say? Certainly that the sick
man is either deprived of his wit and senses, or that he gives no credit to
his Physicians directions. O would to God, there were not many among
Christians, who say,, that they do believe the future Judgment of God, and
diverse other mysteries of Christian faith; but deny them in their deeds, and
conversation.

Of the second fruit of the sixth Word. CHAP. XIV.
ANother fruit may be gathered from the second explication of the words of
Christ, Consummatum est. For we said above with S. Chrysostom that the
laboursome journey of the peregrination of Christ himself was consuumate, and
finished in the death of Christ; which journey of his cannot be denied, but to
have been most painful above all measure: yet the asperity of it is
recompensed with the shortness of the time, with the fruit, with the glory and
honor proceeding from thence. It continued thirty three years; but how can a
labor of thirty three years be compared to a repose and rest for all
eternity? Our Lord did labor with hunger, with thirst, with many dolours, and
innumerable injuries; with stripes, with wounds, with death its self; but now
he drinks of a Torrent of pleasure, which pleasure shall never cease, but be
interminab^e.

To conclude, our Lord is humbled, is made the reproach of men, and the
outcast of the People, Psalm. 21. but in recompense heerof we read of him thus:
God has exalted him, and ha^h given him a Name, which is above all Names, that
in the Name of JESUS every knee bow, of things in Heaven, in Earth, and under
the Earth. Philip. 2. But now to cast our Eye on the contrary side: the
perfidious Jews rejoiced til the hour of Christ's Passion; Judas (being become
a slave to covetousness) rejoiced, till he had gained some fe^ pieces of silver;
Pilate rejoiced till that hour of Christ's Passion, because he lost not thereby
the favor and grace of Augustus, and had recovered the friendship of King
Herod. But now all these have been already tormented in Hell for the space of
sixteen hundred ye^res almost, and the smoke of their flames shall arise and
ascend up for all Eternity.

From hence let all the servants of the Cross learn to be humble, gentle,
patient, and let them ackowledge how good and happy a thing it is for a man to
take up his own Cross in this present life, and to follow Christ his
Captain: neither let them envy those who seem in the Eye of this worrld to be
happy. For the life of Christ, of the holy Apostles, and the Martyrs is a most
true Co^mentary of the words of him, who is the Master of all Masters:
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: Blessed
are the meek; blessed are they that mourn; blessed are they that suffer
percutio^ for Justice, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Matthew. 5 But on
the contrary side: Woe be to you that are rich; because you have your
consolation: woe to you that are filled, because you shall be h^ngry: woe to you
that now do laugh, because you shall mourn and lament. Luc. 6 And although not
only the words of Christ, but also the life and death of Christ (I mean, not
only the Text, but the Comment also) b^ understood of few, and that this
doctrine is banished out of the Schools of this world; nevertheless if a man
would in soul go out of this world, and use a serious introuersion upon
himself, and say to himself: I will hear, what our Lord God will speak in
me. Psalm. 84. And withal would with humble prayer and lamentation, beat at
the Fares of our Heavenly Master (who is both the Text, and the Comment) he
then would not with difficulty understand the Truth, and the Truth would free
him from all errors; so as that should not seem hard to him, which before
seemed impossible.

Of the third fruit of the sixth Word. CHAP. XV.
NOw the third fruit, which we may gather from the sixth woads, is that our
selfs may learn, as being spiritual Priests, to offer to God spiritual
Hoasts, as S. Peter speaks, 1. Pet. 3. Or as the Apostle S. Paul teaches us:
To exhite our Bodies, a living. Host, holy, pleasing God, our reasonable
service. For if those words, consummatum est, did signify, that the sacrifice
of the Chief Priest was perfected upon the Cross; then it is just, that the
disciples of him that was crucified, as coveting to imitate their master to
their small hability, should also offer up sacrifice to God. And certainly the
Apostle S. Peter teaches that all Christians are Priests; meaning, not such as
those are, who are created by Bishops in the Catholic Church to offer up the
Sacrifice of the Body of Christ; but spiritual Priests, that is as himself
expounds, to offer up spiritual Hoasts; not Hoasts properly called, such as
were in the Old Testament, as sheep, oxen, turtles, doves, and in the new
Testament, the Body of Christ in the Eucharist: bu^ mystical Hoasts, which may
be exhibited by all men, as Prayers, lauds, good works, fasting, Almesdeed^
etc. Of which S. Paul thus speaks Heb. 13. By him therefore let vi offer
always the Host of prayer to God, tha^ is to say, the fruit of the lips
confessin^ his Name. But the same Apostle teaches us in his Epistle to the
Romans, most accurately, to offer a mystical sacrifice to God, even from the
consideration of our Bodies: for there were four laws or necessary conditions
of Sacrifices. The first, that an Host be present in the sacrifice, that is, a
thing dedicated to God, the which was impiety to convert to any profane use.
Another was, that it should be a living thing, as a sheep, a Goat, a Calfe.
The third, that it should be holy, that is, clean: for among the Hebrews some
were accounted clean Creatures, others unclean. The clean living Creatures
were sheep, Oxen, Goats, Turtles, sparrowes, doves; and the rest were taken as
impure and unclean, as Horses, Lions, Foxes, Birds living by pray, Crows, and
the like. The fourth, that the Host should be enkindled and set on fire, that
so it might send forth an odor of sweetness. And all these the Apostle does
reckon, when he says: I beseech you exhibit your bodies, a living Host, holy,
pleasing God, and then adds, your reasonable service; to the end we may
understand him, not to counsel us to a sacrifice properly called, as if he did
mean, that our Bodies (like unto sheep sacrificed) should be truly slain, and
burned; but to exhort us to a mystical sacrifice and rational; to a sacrifice
only by resemblance, not proper; spiritual, not corporal. Therefore the
Apostle, persuadeth us, that as Christ for our health, did offer up the
Sacrifice of his own Body upon the Cross, by a true and real death; so ought
we to offer up our Bodies to his honor, as a certain Host, living, holy, and
perfect, and therein pleasing to God; the which Host after a certain
spiritual manner, may be said to be slain, and burned.

Let us explicate in order the several conditions. First our Bodies ought to
be Hoasts, that is, things consecrated to God; the which, not as our own but as
the things of God, we are to use to the glory of God; to whom we are
consecrated by Baptism; and who bought us with a great price, as the same
Apostle says. 1. Cor. 6. Neither ought we to be an Host of God; but vvithall
a living Host through the life of grace, and the Holy Ghost. For those men,
who are dead through sin, are not the Hoasts of God, but of the Devil, who
mortifieth their souls, and much glories therein. But our God, who ever
lives, and is the fountain of life, will not have stinking Carcasses to be
offered to him, which are profitable for nothing, but to be cast out to the
Beasts: Therefore it is necessary, that we conserve the life of the soul with
all diligence, that by this means we may exhibit to our Lord our Reasonable
Service.

Neither is it required only, that the Host be living, but also it must be
holy, as the Apostle says: living, and holy. The Host is said to be holy,
when it is offered of clean living Creatures, not of unclean. Now the clean
Creatures, which are four footed, as above we said, were sheep, Goats, Oxen;
of Birds, Turtles, sparrowes, Doves. The first sort of these living Creatures
do figure out an Active life; the second a Contemplative. Therefore those men,
who do lead an Active life among the faithful, if so they will exhibit
themselves a holy sacrifice or Host to God, they ought to imitate the
simplicity and gentleness of the Lamb, which is ignorant how to hurt its,
fellow. In like sort they are to imitate the labors and pains of the Ox,
which is not idle, nor wandreth here and there; but bearing his yoke, and
drawing after him the plow, laboreth continually in tilling the ground. To
con^lude the promptitude and agility of the Goat, in clym ng of mountains,
and the sh^rpnes of eyes in behoulding things a far of.

Neither those men, who lead an Active life in the Church of God, ought to
content themselves with meeknes, and just labors; but it behooves them also by
their often iterated and multiplied prayers, to ascend high, and to fix their
eyes upon those things, which be above. For how shall they refer their works to
the glory of God, and send up the incense of their sacrifice, if seldom or
never they think on God? If through Contemplation they do not burn in love
toward him? For the Active life of Christians ought not to be wholly disioyned,
and separated from the Contemplative life; nor the Contemplative from the
Active, as presently hereafter we will show. Therefore those men, who do not
imitate Sheep, Oxen, Goats, Doves, and the like, which are daily serviceable
and profitable to their owner or master, but pursue and hunt after temporal
benefits; these men cannot offer up to God a holy Host; but they bear
themselves like to rau^nous Beasts fee^ing upon flesh, as Wolves Dogs, Bears,
Gleads, Vulturs, Crows, who pamper their Bellyes, and follow that Lion, which
roaring goes about, seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 3.

No^ Christian men, who have chosen to themselves a Contemplative life, and who
endeavor to exhibit to God a living and holy Sacrifice, are to imitate the
solitude and lonelines of the Turtle, the purity of the Dove, and the prudence
of the Sparrow. The solitude of the Turtle chiefly belongs to Monks and
Hermits, who labor not to communicate with secular men, but wholly deuote
themselfes to Contemplation, and to the praises of God. The Purity of the Dove,
conjoined with fecundity, is necessary for Bishops and Clergy men; who
negotiate with men, and whose function is to beget spiritual Children, and to
nourish and breed them up. Which men, except they do often by Contemplation fly
up to the supernall Country, as also through Charity to descend down to the
Necessities of men; can hard^y coople and join purity with fecundity, but
either as being given to Contemplation only, they shall become sterill and
barren; or otherwise being wholly busied in the procreation of Children, they
shall be contaminated and defiled, with terrene dyrt and filth; And thus while
they covet to gain others, perhaps (which God forbid) they loose themselves.

Furthermore to both sorts of these men, whether they give themselves over to a
Contemplation life, or to an Active, the Prudence of the Sparrow may very much
advantage and benefit them. There are sparrows, which are bred in the
Mountains; others about Houses. The Mountain Sparrowes do with an incredible
industry avoid and fly the snares or nets of them, that seek to take them.
The domesticke sparrowes do make their nests about the caves of howses; but
they so converse and live nere men, as that they love not the sight of them,
nor will easily suffer themselfes to be caught by them: Even so the prudence of
sparrowes is necessary to all Christians, but especially to the Clergy and
Monks; that they may be caute^ous in avoiding the deceites and snares of the
Devil, and that they so do converse with men, as they may profit them; but let
them avoid overmuch sa^iliarity and acquintance with them, especially with
Women. Let them also eschew all Confabulations, and over much tattle, as also
immoderate eating and drinking; Let them not be spectatours of common Plays,
and other public sights, except they covet to be ensnared by the Devil.

There remains the last law or Condition of sacrifices, to wit, That they be
Hoasts, not only living and holy; but also well pleasing, that is, sending up a
most sweet Odor and smell. This point the Scripture signifies, when it says,
Genesis 8. Our Lord smelled a sweet savor; As also when it speaks of our Lord:
Christ delivered himself for us, an oblation and Host to God, in an odor of
sweetness. Ephesians 5. Now that an Host may send forth a most grateful savor unto
God, it is necessary, that it be killed and burned. This also is performed in a
mystical and reasonable Sacrifice, of which we speak with the Apostle; to
wit, when Carnal Concupiscence is truly mortified, and burnt away with the
fire of Charity. For there is nothing, which does mortify a man's Carnal
Concupiscence more efficaciously, speedily, and perfectly, the^ a sincere Love
of God: for it is the King and Lord of all the Affections of the Heart; and all
of them are governed, and depend of it, whether it be Fear, Hope, Desire,
Hate, Anger or any other perturbation of the mind. Now love it self does not
give place, except it be to a greater love; And therefore when divine love does
inwardly possess and inflame the heart of man, then at the length do carnal
Concupiscences give place, and being mortified, rest quiet. Thereupon fiery
desites and most pure Prayers do ascend up to God, like to aromaticall wood in
an odor of sweetness. This then is that Sacrifice, the which God requires
from us, and the which most promptly and diligently to perform the Apostle
exhorts us.

But because this Oblation is a thing hard, and fraught with difficulty,
therefore S. Paul uses a most efficacious Argument to persuade us to it. The
argument lies in these Words: I beseech you by the mercy of God, that you will
exhibit your bodies etc. Romans 12. But which be they, and how many are the
Mercies, by which the Apostle beseeches us? First, is our Creation, by the
which he made us to be something, whereas before we were nothing. The second,
when he made as his servants, he not having any need of us, but only that he
might be beneficial unto us. The third, when he made us to his Image, and
thereby made us capable of our knowing of him, and of his friendship. The
fourth, When he adopted us his Sons through Christ, and made us Coheires with
his only begotten Son. The fifth, when he made us members of his spouse, and
of his Body, of both which he is the Head. To conclude, The sixth, in that he
offered himself upon the Cross, an oblation and Host to God, in an odor of
sweetness, that he might redeem us from servitude, and wash away all our spots,
and that he might exhibit to himself, A glorious Church, not having any spot
or wrinkle. Ephesians. 5. These are the Mercies of God, by which the Apostle
beseeches us. As if he would say; Our Lord has conferred upon you so great
benefits, you neither deserving nor asking them; Why then should it be thought
greiuous to you, if you offer your selfs, a living, holy, and well pleasing
sacrifice to God? Doubtlesly if one would attentively ponder and consider these
points, it would not be thought heavy and burdensome, but light and easy, yea
pleasant to serve so good and bountiful a Lord with your whole heart and
strength, throughout the whole time of your life; and to the imitation and
example of him, to offer your selves, as an Host, or Oblation, yea an
Holocaust in an odor of sweetness.

Of the fourth fruit of the sixth Word. CHAP. XVI.
THE Fourth Fruit may be taken from the fourth explication of the Word,
Consummatum est. For if it be true (as it is infallibly most true) that Christ
through the just judgment of God did transfer and bring us from the servitude
of the devil, to the future fruition of the Kingdom of Heaven; we are then
diligently to search, and not to desist, till we find, what is the cause that
so great a number of men make choice, rather to deliu^r themselves up again to
the enemy of Mankind, that with him they may eternally burn in the furnace of
Hellfire, rather then to serve Christ, being a most benign Lord, yea most
happily and undoubtedly to reign with him? I find no other reason heerof, then
because in the service of Christ, the beginning is to be taken from the Cross;
and that it is most necessarily in^umbent upon us, to crucify the flesh, with
its vices and concupiscences. This bitter Potion, or cup of wormwood of its
own nature is most unpleasing to a sick Man; and often is the cause, why he
had rather continue in his sickness, then to be cured after this manner. Truly
if a man were not a Man, but a Beast, or else a man deprived wholly of his senses
and wit, it might be more pardonable for him, to seek to be governed only by
sensuality and corporal delights: but seeing man is partak^r of reason, he
understands or ought to understand, that he who comma^deth the flesh to be
crucified with its vices and co^cupiscences, is not ready only to command, but
also to help, yea to prevent with the aid of his grace; and so to direct, that
the skillfull Physician ^ay know, how to temper this bitter cup, as that it may
he taken and drunk up without any fastidious difficulty.

Furthermore, if every one of us were the first to whom it was said: Take up
the Cross, and follow me. Math. 16. Perhaps we might distrust of our our own
force, and not be willing to touch the Cross, as fearing we could not be able
to support it. But seeing many before us, not only men of full age, but even
children, and ^ong virgins, have with great fortitude taken up the Cross of
Christ, and have borne it constantly, and have crucifi^d their flesh with their
vices and concupiscences; why should we be afraid? why should we be disanimated
and dismayed thereat? S. Austin being ouerborne in judgment with this
argument, did master and ouerrule his carnal concupiscence, which for a long
time he thought impossible to conquer. For he proposed to himself before the
eyes of his mind, many both men and Women recorded in history, as most
continent and chaste, and then in the secret of his soul, he said to himself:
Cur non poteris, etc. Why art thou not able to perform, what these men and
women have performed? They were not able through their own force, but through
the assistance of their Lord God. Lib. 8 Confess. c. 11. And what is here
spoken of the Concupiscence of the flesh, the same may be said of the
Concupiscence of the Eyes (which is covetousness or avarice) and of Pride of
life: since there is no Vice, which may not be crucified and mortified, through
the help and aid of God. Neither is there, any danger of the want of Gods good
concurrency therein, seeing as S. Leo says: Just inst at praecepto etc. He may
justly command that, which he furthereth with his own assistance. Sermon. 16. de
pass. Dom. They truly are miserable (I may well say, mad and foolish) who, when
it is in their power to undergo the sweet and light yoke of Christ, and
thereby find in this life rest to the Soul, and in the next, reign with the
same Christ, rather will subject themselves to the yoke of Oxen, at the
command of the Devil, and to be thrall to flesh and sensuality, and finally to
be tormented in Hell (with their Lord the Devil) for all Eternity.

Of the fifth fruit of the sixth Word. CHAP. XVII.
THe fifth fruit is to be collected out of the foresaid Words, Consummatum est;
as they do signify the edification and building of the Church, to be consummate
and perfected upon the Cross, and that the Church it self did proceed from
the side of Christ dying, as another Eve from the rib of Ad^m sleeping. This
Mystery teaches us, that we reverence the Cross, that we honor the Cross,
that we prosecute the Cross with all love and affection. For who is he, that
loves not the place, from whence his mother came out? Certainly all good
Catholics are wonderfully affected toward the most sacred House of Loreto,
because in it the B. Virgin, Mother of God, was borne; and because in it also
Jesus Christ, our Lord and God, was borne, not out, but in the Virginal Womb.
For thus the Angel speaks to Joseph: That which is borne in her, is of the
Holy Ghost. Matthew. 1. And hereupon the Church it self, being mindful of her
own birth or Nativity, does paint and place the Cross in every place, on the
forefront, of Churches, and in houses; neither does she minister any Sacrament
without the sign of the Cross; nor does she sanctify or bless any Creature
without the Cross.

But we then especially do manifest our great love to the Cross, when we
patiently suffer adversity for the love of him, who was nailed, and dyed upon
the Cross. For this is to glory in the Cross; to wit, ^o do that, which the
Apostles did, They went from the sight of the Council, rejoicing, because they
were accounted worthy to suffer reproach for the Name of Jesus. Act. 5. And the
Apostle S. Paul explicateth, what it is to glory in the Cross, when he says,
Romans 5. We glory in tribulations, knowing that tribulations works Patience;
Patience, Probation; and probation, Hope: And Hope confounds not, because the
Charity of God it powered forth in our Hearts, by the Holy Ghost, which is given
us. And from hence it is, that S. Paul writing to the Galathians thus
concludes, cap. 6. God forbid, that I should glory, saving in the Cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the
World. This is the triumph of the Cross, if the world with all its delights be
(as it were) dead to a Christian soul, loving Christ crucified; and the
Christian soul it self become dead to ^^e world, loving tribulation and
con^^mpt (which the World hates) and ^osecuting with contempt^ carnal
^easures, and temporal glory, which ^e world much loves and admireth; and
thus it is brought to pass, that ^e servant of God is consummated and
^^rfected; so as it may be said of him ^so, Consummatus est.

Of the sixth fruit of the sixth Word. CHAP. XVIII.
THe last fruit remaining, is to be gathered from the Example of the
Perseverance of our Lord upon the Cross; since from that word, Consummatum
est, we gather, that our Lord had consummated and finished the whole Work of
his Passion, even from the beginning to the End; so as nothing more thereto
could be desired or wished. The works of God (says Moses) are perfect, Deuteronomy.
32. And even as the Father did perfect in the sixth day the work of man's
Creation, and upon the seventh did rest; So the Son in the sixth day did
consummate the work of man's Redemption, and upon the seventh did also rest.
In vain did the Jews cry out before the Cross, If he be the king of Israel,
let him now come down from the Cross. But S. Bernard says more aptly Sermon.
1. de Resurrect. Immo, quia Rex Israel est, etc. Yea because he is the King of
Israel, let him not loose the title of his Kingdom. And a little after: Non
tibi dabit occasionem etc. Christ will not give occasion of depriving thee of
perseverance, which alone is crowned. He will not cause the tongues to be
silent of Preachers, persuading and comforting the faint hearted and weak, and
saying to every of them: Look thou do not forsake thy Place or Station; the
which doubtlesly would follow, if they might reply, Christ has forsaken his
Place. Christ therefore perseuered upon the Cross, till che end of his life,
that he might so consummate, and perfect his own Work, as that nothing should
be wanting thereto, and that he might leave after him a most admirable Example
of Perseverance.

Truly it is an easy matter to persevere and continue in sweet places, and in
doing pleasing Actions; but to pers^uer, and constantly to remain long in
labor and dolor, is most difficult. But if we did know, what induced Christ
to persevere upon the Cross; perhaps our selfs would learn to bear our
Cross perseuerantly; yea if it were lawful to hang upon it even until death.
If a man do cast his eyes only upon the Cross, the Instrument of so lamentable
a death (being but seen) it cannot but beget an horror in his heart. But if he
look up with the eyes, not so much of his body, as of his soul, toward him
who commands us to bear the Cross, and toward the place, whither the
Cross leads, and to the fruit or benefit, which the said Cross produces;
then it is not a thing hard or ungrateful, but easy and pleasant to persevere
in kissing of the Cross, and perseuerantly to hang upon the Cross.

What therefore moved Christ so incessantly, without complaining, to hang upon
the Cross even until death? The first cause heerof was che love toward his
Father: The cup, which my Father has given me (says he) wilt not thou, that I
do drink it? Joan. 18. Christ did love his Father with an ineffable love; and
with the like love was beloved of him. Therefore when Christ did see that cup
to be prepared for him, by his most good and loving Father, he could not in any
sort suspect, but that it was given to him for a most happy end, and to him
most glorious. Was it then any strange thing if he did drink up all the cup
most willingly? Furthermore, the Father made a mariadge for his Son, and
espoused to him the Church, but then bespotted, and wrinkled; the which
nevertheless if he would diligently wash in the hoate bath of his blood, he
should easily make it to be glorious, Not having either spot, or wrinkle. Ephesians
5 Therefore Christ loved his spouse given to him by his Father^ in regard
whereof it was not painful to him, to wash away all her spots with his blood,
that so she might appear beautiful and glorious

For i^ Jacob for the love of Rachel labored seven years in looking unto the
flooke and sheep of Laban, so as he was almost consumed away with heat and
frost, and want of sleep; and if those so many years seemed to him, but a few
days in respect of the greatness of his love, Gen 2. I say if Jacob little
prized the labor and toil of sea^en years for one Rachel; what wonder then
is i^, if the Son of God would persevere and continue three hours upon the
Cross for his Spouse (the Church)) which was to be^ome mother of many thousand
holy Sons of God? To conclude, Christ did not respect only the love of his
Father, and of his Spouse, when he was ready to drink the cup of his Passion;
but also he had a regard to that most eminent glory, and greatness of Joy never
to be ended, ^o the which he was to ascend by the means and instrument of the
Cross, according to that sentence of his Apostle, Philip. 1. He humbled
himself, made obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, For the which
thing God also has exalted him, and has given him a Name, which is above all
Names; that in the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in Heaven, in
earth, and under the Earth.

We may adioyne to the Example of Christ the Example of the Apostles. Saint
Paul reckoning the Crosses of himself, and of the other Apostpostles, thus
contesteth: Romans 8. Who then shall separate us from the Charity of Christ?
Tribulation? or distress? or Famine? or Nakedness? or Danger? or Persecution?
or the Sword? As it is written, for we are killed for thy sake all the day; we
are esteemed as sheep for the slaughter. And then the Apostle answers: But
in all these things we have overcome, because of him, that has loved us. Thus
the Apostles during their continuing in their punishments, had not their eyes
so much fixed upon the punishments, as upon the love of God, who loved us, and
gave his Son for us. In like sort they had respect to Christ himself, Who
loved us, and gave himself for us. The same Apostle writing to the Corinthians
says: I am replenished with consolation; I do exceedingly abound in joy, in
all our Tribulation. 2. Cor. 7. But from whence comes so great co^so^ation,
from whence so great joy, as that it almost takes away the sense and feeling
of Tribulation? The Apostle answers to this demand in an other place,
saying: Because, that our tribulation, which is momentary and light, works
above measure, exceedingly an eternal weight of glory in us 2. Cor. 4.
Therefore the Contemplation of eternal glory, which he did place before the
eyes of his mind, was the cause, why tribulation did appear to him to be but
momentary and light. Has cogitationes etc. (says S. Cyprian) What persecution
can overcome these thoughts? what torments are able to daunt them? l. de mart.
To all this may be referred the Example of S. Andrew, who beheld the Cross
(whereupon he hanged two days) not as an unpleasant Cross, but saluted it, as
a friend. And when the People endeavored to take him off from thence, he would
not in any case suffer them, but continued hanging thereupon till death;
Neither was this man imprudent and foolish, but most wise, and full of the Holy
Ghost.

Now from these examples of Christ, and his Apostles, all Christians may
learn, how they ought to bear themselves, when they cannot descend from their
Cross; that is, when they cannot be freed of their Tribulation without sin.
In the number of these are first Regular Persons, whose life being tied to the
vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, is reputed like unto Martyrdom. In
like sort married Persons, when through divine Providence the husband has
gotten a harsh, choleric, unquiet (and almost intolerable) wife: or the wife
has a husband of a fierce, and rough disposition; and such was the husband of
S. Monica, as S. Austin witnesses. Again, those that are slaves, condemned to
perpetual prison, or to the Gallyes. In like sort, sick Persons who labor
with some incurable disease. And poor men, who cannot aspire to riches but by
stealth and thieuery. All these (and such others in like case) if they desire
to suffer their Cross, with spiritual joy, and great reward, let them not
look upon the Cross, but upon him who has laid the Cross upon their
shoulders. But he doubtlesly was God, who is our most loving Father, and
without whose Providence nothing in this world is done. Now the pleasure and
will of God is best, and ought to be most grateful unto us.

Furthermore, all men ought to say with Christ; The Cup which my Father has
given me, will thou not, that I should drink? And with the Apostle: In all
those things we overcome for his sake, who loved us. Moreover all men ought,
and may consider who cannot depose and lay aside their Cross without sin,
not so much the present labor, as the future reward, which doubtlesly does
surmount all labor and grief of this present life, the Apostle saying: Romans
8. The sufferings of this time are not condign to the glory to come, that
shall be revealed in us. Who speaking of Moses in an other place, thus writes:
Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches, then the treasure of the
Egyptians; for he looked into the remuneration. Hebr. 11.

To conclude, we may produce for the comfort of those men who are constrained
to undergo a heavy Cross for a long time, the example of two men, who did
lose their perseverance, and thereupon did find incomparably a far greater
Cross. Judas the Betrayer of Christ, when he reflected upon himself, did
detest his sin of Treachery, and not enduring the confusion and shame which
he must suffer, if he would converse with the Apostles and Disciples, did hang
himself. So as he changed only, but avoided not the Cross of the Confusion,
which he did fly; Since greater Confusion shall follow him at the day of
judgment, in the presence and sight of all the Angels, and of men, when he
shall be declared to be not only the Betrayer of Christ, but withal his own
Homicide or Butcher. And how great blindness then was it in him, to avoid a
small confusion among a few persons; who being the Disciples of Christ, were
mild and gentle, and who ever would have been ready to exhort him to hope well
of the Mercy of the Savior of the world; but not to avoid the infamy and
confusion of his betraying of Christ, and hanging himself in the Theater and
eye of all men and Angels?

The second example may be taken out of the Oration of S. Basil in 40. Mart.
The sum whereof is this. In the persecution of Licinius the Emperor, fo^rty
soldiers being resolved to continue in the Faith of Christ, were condemned,
that openly in the air, without any shelter, in a most cold time and place,
they should spend the whole ^ight, and so through a most long and sharp
Martyrdom, should perish through cold and frost, There was prepared near unto
the place when they were, a hot and comfortable Bath, to receive such of the
soldiers, as would deny their Faith. Of the whole number of the soldiers
thirty and nine, setting before their eyes not so much the present punishment
of being frozen to death (which would in a short time be ended) as the Eternity
of glory and happiness, perseuered in their Faith, and received from the hands
and bounty of our Lord, most glorious Crowns, Our soldier, who had his mind
fixed only upon the present torment, could not persevere in his Christian
faith, did thereupon leap into the warm Bath. But he had no sooner gotten
thereinto, but that several parts of his flesh being already congealed, did
fall asunder and the poor wretch breathed out his Soul, and as denier of
Christ, descended into Hell and to perpetual torments. Thus he flying death,
he found death, and changed a short and light Cross or tribulation, for an
everlasting and most grievous Cross.

Now all those do imitate these two most unhappy men who do forsake the Cross
of a religious Course of life; who do cast off a sweet yoke and easy burden;
and when they least think thereof, they do find themselfes to be tied to a
far more grievous yoke of diverse Concupiscences and Passions, which they can
never satisfy; and thus being pressed down with the most heavy weight of their
sins, they are not able to breath, or take wynd. The like reason is of all
those, who refuse to bear their Cross with Christ, and yet through sinning
are forced to bear a far more grievous Cross with the Devil.

The seventh Word; to wit, Pater, in manus tuas commendo Spiritum meum:
Father, into thy hands, I commend my Spirit. Luke 23. is literally explained.
CHAP. XIX.
WE are now come the last Word or Sentence of Christ, which being ready to dye
upon the Cross he spoke, not without great clamor, saying: Pater in manus
tuas co^mendo spiritum meu^, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. We will
explicate in order every word, Pater, he deservedly calls him Father, because
himself was an obedient Son to him, even to death; and therefore most worthy
that he should be heard. In manus tuas, into thy Hands. The Hands of God in the
Scriptures are said to be his Intelligence and Will, or VVisdome and Power; Or
(which is coincident herewith) the Understanding of God knowing all things, and
his Will, being able to perform or do all thinks: For with these two, God as
not wanting Instruments otherwise, does all things; because as S. Leo speaks:
In Deo Voluntas, Potentia est: In God his Will is his Power. Sermon. 2 de Natiu.
Therefore with God, to will a thing is to do a thing, according to that: He
has done all things, whatsoever he would. Psalm. 113. Commendo, That is, I do
commend or deliver up in pledge, that it may be restored with trust, when the
time of restitution shall come.

Spiritum meum, Touching this word, how it is here to be taken, there is no
small Controversy. The word, Spiritus, is accustomed to be taken for the Soul,
which is the substantial form of the Body, as also it is taken for life it
self: and the reason hereof is, because breathing is a sign of life; and who
do breath, do live; and who cease to breath, do dye. And certainly if by the
word Spirit, we understand in this place the Soul of Christ, we are to take
heed, that no man should imagine there were any danger for that soul to go
out of its body: As when other men are in dying, their soul is accustomed to
be commended to God, through many Prayers, and great Care, in that it goes to
the Tribunal of the Judge, ready to receive for its good, or wicked works,
Glory, or Punishment. Such a Commendation as this, the soul of Christ did not
need; both in that it was blessed from the beginning of its Creation; as also
because it was joined in Person with the Son of God, and might be called, the
Soul of God: and lastly by reason, as victorious and triumphing, it went out
of its Body, and was a terror to all the Devils, but they could be no terror
to it. Therefore if the Spirit be taken in this place for the Soul, then these
words of our Lord, Commendo spiritum meum, do signify, that the Soul of
Christ, which was in its Body, as in a Tabernacle, was to be in the hands of
the Father, as in deposito, until it did return to the Body; according to
that, Sap. 3. The souls of the Just are in the hands of God.

But it is much more credible, that by the word Spirit, in this place corporal
life is understood, so as the sense is to be this: I do now deliver up the
spirit of my life, and therein I cease to breath and to live: But this spirit,
this life (O Father) I commend to thee, that within a short time thou may
restore it to my Body: For to thee nothing is lost, but all things do live to
thee; who in calling out that which is not, make it be; and in calling out
that, which does not live, make it to live. That this is the true meaning of
this place, may first be gathered out of the 30. Psalm, from whence our Lord
did take this Prayer. For thus David does there pray: Thou will bring me out of
this snare which they have hid for me, because thou art my Protector; Into thy
hands I commend my spirit. In which place the Prophet by the spirit, most
evidently understands life; for he prays to God, that he will not suffer
him to be slain by his Enemies but that he will preserve his life. Furthermore
the same point is deduced as true, even from this place of the Gospel. For
after our Lord had said; Father into thy hands I do commend my spirit, the
Evangelist did subioyne: And saying this, he gave up the Ghost; For to give up
the Ghost signifies to cease to draw spirit or wynd, which is proper to those
Creatures which are living; the which thing cannot be said of the soul, the
substantial form of the Body; but it is said of the air which we breath,
whilst we live; and we do cease to breath, when we dye.

Last^y the foresaid exposition is gathered from those words of the Apostle,
Hebr. 5. Who in the days of his flesh, with a strong cry and tears, offering
prayers and supplications to him, that could save him from death, was heard for
his reverence. This place some do understand of the prayer, which our Lord made
in the garden, saying: Father, if it be possible, transfer this Chalice from
me. Mar. 14. But in that place our Lord did not pray with a strong cry, neither
was he heard, neither would he have been heard, that he should be free and
exempted from the death. For he prayed that the Chalice of his Passion might
pass from him, thereby to show a natural desire of not dying, and himself to
be true man, whose nature does abhor death: But he added; Not that which I
will, but that which thou let thy Will be done. Thus we see, that the prayer of
Christ in the garden cannot be that Prayer, of which the Apostle speaks to
the Hebrews.

Others maintain, that that prayer of Christ mentioned by S. Paul, is the
same, which our Lord made for his Crucifiers upon the Cross, saying: Father
forgive them, for they do not know what they do. Luc. 23. But at that time our
Lord did not use any strong cry, neither did he pray for himself, that he
might be saved from death; both which two points are evidently expressed by the
Apostle to the Hebrews. For being upon the Cross, he prayed for his
Crucifiers, that that most grievous and heavy sin might be pardoned to them.
Therefore it remains, that those words of the Apostle be understood of that
last prayer, which our Lord made upon the Cross, saying, Father into thy hands
I commend my spirit; the which prayer he made with a strong cry, S. Luke
saying: And Jesus crying with a loud voice, said etc. Where we see, that S.
Paul and S. Luke do clearly herein agree together.

Furthermore our Lord prayed, that he might be saved from death, as S. Paul
does witness, but the meaning her^of cannot be^ that he should not dye upon
the Cross; for therein he was not heard, and yet S. Paul testifies that he
was heard; but the meaning is, that he prayed, that he might not be wholy
absorpt up by death, but only might taste death, and presently return to life;
For thus much is implied in those words: He offered up prayers to him, that
could save him. For our Lord could not be ignorant, but that he was to dye,
especially being then most near to death; but he covered to be safe from
death, in this sense; to wit, that he might not be detayned long by death;
which was nothing else, but to pray for a speedy Resurrection; in which hi^
prayer he was fully heard, since he did rise most gloriously the third day.
This explication of the testimony of S. Paul evidently conuinceth, that when
our Lord said, Into thy hands I command my spirit, the spirit is taken for
Lyfa, not for the ^oule. For he was not sollicitous of his soul, the which he
did know to be in safety, since it was most blessed, and did see God face to
face even from its Creation; but he was sollicitous and careful of his Body,
which he savv was to be depriu^d of life through death; and therefore he
prayed, that his Body might not long remain in death, the which petition (as
above we said) he in a most full manner obtained.

The first fruit of the seventh Word. CHAP. XX.
NOw according to our former Method, I will gather some fruits from this Last
word of Christ, and from his death presently ensuing. And first, even from that
thing, which seems to be most full of infirmity, weakness, and simplicity,
the great Power, Wisdom, and Charity of God is demonstrated. For in that our
Lord gave up the Ghost, crying with a great Voice, his Power and strength is
manifestly discerned; since from this we may gather, that it was in his
power not to dye, and that he dyed willingly. For those men, who dye
naturally, do lose by degrees their force and voice; and in their last agony
and fight with death, they are not able to cry out with any great and vehement
speech or Voice. Therefore not without cause the Centurion seeing, that Jesus
after so much profusion of Blood, with a great and lovvd voice dyed, said:
Certainly, this was the Son of God. Mar. 15. Christ is a great Lord, who
even dying shows his ^ower, not only by crying out with a great Voice at his
last breathing; but also in cleaving the Earth, cutting a sunder the stones,
opening the Monuments, and in rending the Veyle of the Temple, all which
things to have fallen out even at the very time, when Christ dyed, the
Evangelist witnesses.

Furthermore all these strange Events have their mystery, by which the Wisdom
of Christ is manifested. For the concussion of the Earth, as also the cleaving
of the stones did signify, that by the Passion and death of Christ, men were
moved and stirred up to penance, and the hearts of the obstinate were even cut
a sunder, which Effects at that very time to have happened, S. Luke writes,
when he says, that many returning from that spectacle and sight, did knock
their breasts. The opening of the graves and sepulchers does design the
glorious Resurrection of the dead to succeed after that of Christ. The tearing
or rending of the Veyle (whereby was discovered the Sancta Sanctorum) was a
sign that through the merits of the death of Christ, the Celestial Sanctuary
was to be opened, and that all the Saints were after to be admitted to see the
face of God. Neither only in the signification of these Mysteries did Christ
show his Wi^dome; but also in that he did produce and draw life from death; in
figure whereof Moses caused water to flow out of a stone. And Christ himself
for the same Cause said, he resembled a grain of wheat, in that by dying, he
brought forth much fruit. For as a grain of wheat by being corrupted, does
bud forth an care of living Corn; so Christ by dying upon the Cross, enriched
multitudes of Nations with the life of Grace, and S. Peter most manifestly thus
speaks of Christ: He swallowing death, that we might be made heirs of life
everlasting. 1. Pet. 3. As if he would have said; The First man swallovving the
forbidden sweet apple, condemned all his posterity to death; But the second Man
swallowing down the bitter apple of death, brought all those to etern^^l life,
who were borne again of him.

To conclude, Christ manifested and opened his Wisdom in dying, because he
made the Cross, (then the which nothing was before more despicable and
contemptible) most honorable and glorious; so as even Kings themselfes do
account it an honor to sign their Foreheads therevvith. Neither is the Cross
made only honorable, but also svveet to the lovers of Christ; Whereupon the
Church thus sings: Dulce lignum, dulces clauos, dulce pondus sustinuit. The
which very point S. Andrew demonstrated by his own example, when behoulding
the Cross, unto which he was to be fastened said: Salve Crux preciosa etc.
All hail, O precious Cross, which has received honor and beauty from the
members of our Lord; Thou art long desired, and carefully sought after; thou
art loved without any intermission, and comes prepared to a willing mind. I
approach to thee with security and joy, that thou exulting may receive me,
being the disciple of my Master Jesus Christ, who did hang upon thee.

Now what shall we speak of Charity? The sentence of our Lord is this: Greater
Charity then this no man has, that a man yield his life for his friends. Joan.
15. This Christ performed upon the Cross; since no man could against his Will,
deprive him of life. For himself thus says hereof: No man takes my life from
me, but I yield it of my self. Joan. 10. Therefore as above is said, no man
has greater Charity, then he, that yields his life for his friends, because
nothing can be found more precious, and to be beloved, then Life, it being the
foundation of all goods. For what does it proffit a man (says our Lord) if he
gain the whole world, and sustain the damage of his soul, that is, of his
life? And from hence it is, that all things labor to resist with all their
strength (yea above their strength) those, who do endeavor to take away their
life. And we read in Job: Skin for skin, and all things, which a man has,
he will give for his life. But these passages are general, we will descend
to particulars.

Christ did ineffably show by many means to all mankind, and to every one of
us, his Charity by dying upon the Cross. First because his life was the most
precious of all lives; as being the life of man, who was God; the life of the
most potent King of Kings; the life of the most wisest of all the Doctors.
Furthermore he gave his life for his Enemies, for wicked men, for ungrateful
men. Again, he laid down his life, that he might deliver these his Enemies,
wicked and ungrateful men, from the burnings, and torments of Hell, to the
which they were alread^ condemned. Lastly, he gave his life, that he might
make these, men to become his Brethren and Coheyres, and mo^^ happily place
them in the kingdom of Heaven for all Eternity. And is there any man of that
flinty, or savage nature, who from this time will not love Christ Jesus with
all his Hearts, and will not suffer any adversity for his sake? O merciful God,
auert and turn such a stony and iron heart, not only from our Brethren, but
from all men whosoever, either Infidels, or Atheists.

The second fruit of the seventh Word. CHAP. XXI.
AN other fruit (and that most profitable) is, if we learn to use frequently
that prayer, which our Lord taught us, when being ready to go to his Father,
he said: Into thy hads I commend my spirit. But because he was not pressed and
urged with that Necessity, with the which we are urged, since he was the Son,
and Holy, we but servants and sinners: Therefore our Mother and Mistress (the
Church) instructe^h us to f^equent, and often use it, but as it is entire and
whole in the Psalm of David, and not divided, as our Lord pronounced it. In
the Psalm it is thus read: Into thy hands I commit my spirit: Thou have
redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth. Psalm. 30. Christ did omit the later port,
because himself was the Redeemer, and not the party redeemed; but we; who are
redeemed with his most precious blood, ought not to pretermit this part of the
Psalm. Christ also prayed to his Father, as his only begotten son; We pray
to Christ, as our Redeemer: therefore we say not, Father into thy hands I
commend my spirit; But, into thy hands O Lord I commend my spirit, thou have
redeemed me O Lord God of Truth. According to which manner of speech S. Steven
(the first Martyr) being ready to dye, said: Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Act.
7.

Furthermore our Mother (the holy Church) teaches us to say this Prayer at
three several times. First, every day at the Complyme, as those well know
who read the Canonical Hours. Again, when we approach to the most holy
Eucharist, after those words are said: Domine non sum dignus, the Priest first
for himself, and after for the Communicants does say: In manus tuas commendo
spiritum meum. Lastly at our departure out of this life, all the faithful are
admonished, that they say, In manus tuas comm^nd^ spiritum meum. As concerning
the Complyme, it is not to be doubted, but that there is said, In manus tuas
Domine etc. because the Complime is accustomed to be read toward the end of
the day; and as S. Basil speaks, Primis se intendentibus tenebris etc.
As Soon as darkness comes: and because it may so fall out, that in the night
time unexpectedly death may surprise us; therefore we commend our soul to our
Lord, that if so sudden death might happen to us, it might not happen to us
vnforseene, in Reg. fusius explic. q. 37. That at the time of receiving the
most Blessed Eucharist, is said: In manus tuas commendo etc. the reason is,
because that action is very dangerous, and withal very necessary, so as
without peril it cannot often be frequented or intermitted: For he, that
eats the Body of our Lord unworthily, eats judgment to himself. 1. Cor.
11. That is, he eats condemnation to himself. And again, He that eats not
the body of our Lord, eats not the bread of life, and life it self. Joan. 9.
Thus we are brought to straits on each side; being partly like to those men,
who suffer extremity of hunger, and yet are uncertain, whether that which is
brought to them to eat, be meat or poison. Therefore with just reason we say
with fear and trembling: O Lord, I am not worthy that thou should enter
into my house, except out of thy ineffable goodness thou will make me worthy;
therefore, say the word, and my soul shall be healed. But because of this I also
doubt, whether thou will vouchsafe to cure my wounds, I commend my spirit into
thy hands, that so in this terrible business thou may be present to my soul,
which thou have redeemed with thy precious Blood.

If men would ponder these things maturely, they would not so greedily approach
to receive Priesthood, that by daily celebrating: they might maintain their
corporal state; For such men are not accustomed to be much careful (as they
ought to be) whether they come with due preparation, since their End is rather
the meat of the Body, then the meat of the Soul. There are also many, who
attend upon Prelates and Princes, who perhaps do not come rightly prepared to
this dreadful table; yet they approach to it, as drawn through a humane fear
least they may displease their Prince or Prelate, if at the appointed, and
accustomed time, they be not present among, and one of those who are t^
communicate. What therefore is to be done? It may be, it were more profitable
to come to that table more rarely. Yea but it is more profitable often to
frequent that table, so it be with reverence and due preparation: For by how
much one comes more rarely, by so much he is made less apt to participate of
that Heavenly Table, as S. Cyril has wisely admonished. lib. 4. in Joan c. 17.

There now remains the time of near approaching or imminent death, at what
time it is necessary with great fervor of mind, frequently and often to
repeat and say: Into thy hands I commend my Spirit; thou have redeemed me, O
Lord God of truth. That is the time, in which the chiefest business of all is
handled: for if it should so happen, that the soul departing out of the Body,
comes into the hands of the Devil, there is no hope left of Salvation. And
contrariwise, if it have its passage to the paternall Hands of God, no power
of man's Ghostly Enemy is after to be feared. Therefore with an inutterable
moaning, with true and perfect Contrition, with a strong faith and confidence
in the infinite mercy of God, it is again, and again to be iterated and
repeated; Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit: And because at that
instant of time, those who have led a negligent and careless life, do suffer
no greater temptation, then of despair, as if the time of Penance and
repentance were then past; Let such oppose against this temptation the buckler
of Faith, since it is written: In what day soever the sinner shall repent, I
will not remember his sins: Ezech. 33. Let them also take the Helmet of Hope,
which trusts in the boundles Mercy of God, and let them often repeat: Into
thy hands, I commend my spirit; neither is that reason, which is the foundation
of our Hope, to be omitted, to wit, Because thou have redeemed me, O Lord God
of Truth. For who will restore to Christ his innocent blood? who will repay
back to him the price with which he bought us? For so S. Austin speaks,
teaching us in those words, to confide much in our Redemption, which is in
Jesus Christ; which cannot be in vain, and fruitles, except our selves do put
a bar or hindrance thereto, through Impenitency, or Desperation.

The third fruit of the seventh Word. CHAP. XXII.
THe third fruit is placed, in that we may learn, that death near
approaching, we are not much to confide in the Almsdeeds, Fastings, or the
prayers of our kindred and friends. For there are many, who during the whole
course of their life, are wholly forgetful of their soul; busiyng their mynds
with nothing else, but how to leave their wife, children, and K^nsfolks rich,
and of great estate. But when themselfes come to dye, then (and not before)
they begin to think of their own soul; And because they have distributed
and divided their goods and faculties among their forsaid friends they commend
the charge of their souls to them, that by their means their souls might be
helped with Almsdeeds, Prayers, masses, and other good works. Christ did not
teach us this by his example, since he commended his soul not to his kinsmen,
but to his Father. Neither does S. Peter admonish us, that we should commend
our souls to our Children, or kinsfolks, but to the faithful Creator, by
good deeds 1. Pet. 4.

I do not say this, as reprehending those who either procure, or desire
Almes-deedes, or sacrifices of the holy mass to be offered up for them after
their death: But I much blame those, who repose too much trust in their
Children and kinsfolks; since daily experience teaches, that they quickly
forget their dead Ancestors. I further reprehend them, because in a matter of
so great importance, they will not provide for themselves; and that they will
not give and perform the Works of Charity, and Almsdeeds, by which they may
purchase many friends, by whose means as we read in the Gospel, they may be
received into the Eternal Tabernacles. Luc. 16. I also greatly blame them, w^o
do not obey the Prince of the Apostles, commanding us, as is above said, to
commend our souls to our faithful Creator, and to commend them not only in
words, but also in good Works. Since good works sent before to God, are those,
which efficaciously and truly commend the souls of Christians to God.

Let us hear, what voice sounded from Heaven to S. John, Apoc. 4. I heard a
voice from Heaven, saying to me, Write: Blessed are the dead, which dye in our
Lord from hence now, says the spirit, that they rest from their labors, for
their works follow them. Therefore good works performed by our selfs, whilst
we live (and not to be done after our death by our Children, or kinsfolks) are
those, which certainly do follow us: especially if those works be of their own
nature not only good, but as S. Peter, not without mystery has expressed: for
thus he speaks, In been factis commendent animas suas fideli Creatori: let
them commendent their souls to their faithful Creator, by good deeds;
meaning in works well done. For there are many, who can number many good Works
by them done, as many Sermons preached, many Masses daily celebrated, their
hours of prayers for many years, their fast of Lent continued in like sort
for many years, their Almsdeeds, and those not in number few. But when these
come to the divine ballacing and examination, and are precisely to be
discussed, whether they were well done; to wit, with right intentions, with due
attention, in fitting time and place, proceeding from a man grateful to God; O
how many things, which did appear to be gains to the soul, will rather be
accounted, as losses and detriments unto it! And how many things, which seemed
in man's judgment to be gould, silver, and precious stones, built upon the
foundation of faith, will be found to be wood and straw, which the fire will
instantly consume!

The consideration of this point does not a little terrify me, and by how much I
draw more near to my end (for as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 8. That which
grows ancient, and waxes old, is nigh unto utter decay) so much the more
evidently I see, that the admonition and Counsel of S. John Chrysostom is
necessary to me, who councels us, not to weigh and prize to much our own good
works; because if they be good works indeed (that is, works well and piously
done) they are registered by God in his book of Accounts, and there is no
danger, that they shall be defrauded of their due reward: but let us daily think
(says he) of our evil and bad works, and labor with a contrite heart and
spirit, with many tears, and serious penance, to wash them away. For such
men, who perform his advise herein, shall say at the close and end of their
life with great confidence and Hope: Into thy hands I commend my spirit; thou
have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth.

Of the fourth fruit of the seven Word. CHAP. XXIII.
THere follows the fourth fruit, which may be gathered from the most happy
hearing of the prayer of our Lord, that from so comfortable an Event all of us
may be much animated and encouraged to commend our spirits to God with greater
vehemence and ardour of devotion. For the Apostle did most truly write, that
our Lord Jesus Christ was heard, for his reverence Heb. 5. Our Lord prayed to
his Father for a speedy Resurrection of his Body, as above we have showed. His
prayer was heard, so as his Resurrection was no longer delayed, then it was
needful to prove, that his Body was truly dead. For except it could be
infallibly demonstrated, that his Body did truly depart out of this life, both
the Resurrection, as also the whole Christian Faith might be doubted of, and
called into question. Therefore our Savior was to remain in the grave for the
space at least of forty hours; especially seeing the figure of Jonas the
Prophet was to be accomplished, which (as our Lord himself taught in the
Gospel) was to premonstrate and foreshew his death.

But to the end, that the Resurrection of Christ might be accelerated and
hastened so far forth, as it was convenient; and that it might be more
manifestly proved, that the prayer of Christ was heard, the divine Providence
would, that the three days and three nights, during which time Jonas was in
the Belly of the Whale, should be reduced in the Resurrection of Christ, to one
entire and whole day, and two parts of two days; which time not properly (but
by the figure intellectio) might be said to contain three days and three
nights. Neither did the Father hear the prayer of Christ only in shortning the
time of his Resurrection, but also in restoring incomparably a better life,
then before he enjoyed. Since the life of Christ before his death, was mortal;
but it is restored to him immortal: Christ rising again from the dead, now
dies no more; death shall no more have dominion over him, as the Apostle
speaks. Romans 6. The life of Christ before his death, was passible, that is,
subject to hunger, thirst, wearines, wounds; but being restored impassible, it
sta^ds not obnoxious to any injury. The Body of Christ was before death
Animale; but after the resurrection it became spiritale; that is, so subject to
the spirit, as that in a twinkling of an Eye; it might be carried into any
place, where the spirit it self would.

Now the reason, why the Prayer of Christ was so easily heard, is subioyned by
the Apostle, when he says, pro sua reuerentia, for his reverence. The Greek
word here used, (to wit, (...)) signifies a reuerentiall fear, which was
most eminent in Christ toward his father. Therefore Esaias describing the
gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were in the soul of Christ, of other gifts
thus says: The spirit of wisdom and Understanding shall rest upon him: the
spirit of Counsel and Strength: the spirit of Knowledge and Piety; but of
reuerentiall Fear, the said Prophet thus speaks: And the spirit of the Fear
of our Lord shall replenish him. Isa. 11. Now because the soul of Christ was
most full of reuerentiall Fear toward his Father, therefore the Father did
take most great pleasure in him, according to that we read in S. Matthew: This
is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. Matthew. 3. and 17. And even as
the Son did ever reverence the Father in a most high degree, so did the
Father ever hear him praying, and granted whatsoever he desired.

Now from hence may we learn, that, if we expect ever to be heard by our
heavenly Father, and to obtain whatsoever we demand of him, we ought to
imitate Christ herin, in prosecuting our said heavenly Father with supreme
Reverence, and in preferring nothing before his honor. For so it will be
effected, that whatsoever we pray for, we shall obtain, and peculiarly, that,
in which consists the chiefest good of our state; I mean, that when death
shall approach, God may receive our soul passing out of the Body, commended
unto him, when the roaring Lion stands near unto us, as being ready for a
prey. Neither let any man think, that Reverence is exhibited to God only in
genuflection, or in bowing of the knee, in uncovering of the Head, or in any
other worship and honor of such like nature. The word (...), or timor
reuerentialis, does not signify only this external honor, but it chiefly
denotes a great fear of offending of God, and an inward and continual horror
of sin, and this not through dread of punishment, but through love of our
Celestial Father. He is truly endued with reuerentiall Fear, who dare not
think of offense or sin, especially mortal sin: Blessed is that man
(says David) who fears our Lord; He shall have great delight in his
Commandments: That is, he truly fears God (and in that respect may be called
Blessed) who with all bent of Will and Endeavor, studies to keep all the
Commandment of God. And from hence it proceeded, that that holy widow Judith,
timebat Dominum valde, as we read in her Book cap. 8. For she being but a
young Woman, and of great beauty, and very rich, lest she should (after the
death of her husband) either give or take any occasion of sinning, did remain
shut up with her maids in a secret chamber, and wearing a haire-cloath about
her body, fasting all days, excepting the feasts of the house of Israel.
Behold here with what great zeal even in the old Law (which permitted far
more liberty, then the Gospel does) a yo^g, rich and beautiful Woman did
take heed of Carnal sins, for no other reason, then that she greatly feared
our Lord.

The sacred Scripture does mention and commend the same thing in Holy Job. For
he made a covenant with his eyes, that he would not so much as think of a
Virgin, that is, he would not look upon a Virgin, to prevent thereby that no
unchaste thought might creep into his mind. And why did Job so warily and
diligently avoid such allurements? Because he greatly feared our Lord: for thus
it there follows: For what part should God from above have in me? that is, if
an unclean cogitation should in any sort defile my mind, I should not be Gods
portion, nor God should be my Portion. There were no end, if I should insist in
examples of Saints during the time of the New Testament. This therefore is the
Fear, wherewith the Saints were endued, of which if our selfs were full,
there were nothing, the which we could not most easily obtain of our Heavenly
Father.

The last fruit of the seventh Word. CHAP. XXIV.
THere remains the last fruit, which is gathered from the consideration of
the Obedience of Christ, manifested in his last words, and in death it self.
For whereas the Apostle says: He humbled himself, made obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross. Philip. 2. This was chiefly performed, when our
Lord pronouncing those Words, Father into thy hands, I commend my spirit, did
presently give up the Ghost. But it will be convenient to repea^e, and ponder
more deeply what may be said of the Obedience of Christ; that so we may gather
a most precious fru^te from the tree of the holy Cross. Therefore Christ (our
Ma^ster and Lord of all Virtues) did exhibit such Obedience to God his Father,
that a greater cannot be conceived or imagined.

First, the Obedience of Christ took its beginning from his Conception, and
continued without intermission even to his death, Thus the whole life of our
Lord Jesus Christ was but one Act, or Course of a continuated, and
vnintterrupted Obedience. Truly the soul of Christ even in the first moment of
its Creation, had the use of freewill, and withal was replenished with Grace
and Wisdom; and therefore even from that first moment, Christ being as yet
enclosed in the womb of his mother, began to exercise Obedience. Where we read
in the 39. Psalm, in which it is said in the Person of Christ: In the head of
the book it is written of me, that I should do thy will: my God, I would, and
thy law in the midst of my Heart. That, in the head of the book, signifies
no other thing, but in the sum of the divine Scripture that is, throughout
the whole Scripture, it is chiefly preached of me, that I am peculiarly chosen
and sent to this end, that I should do thy Will. I, my God, will, and I have
most willingly accepted thereof, and thy law, tha^ is thy commandment I have
placed in the midst of my heart, that I might ever think thereof, and might
most diligently perform and execute it.

And hither also those words of our said Lord have reference: My meat is to do
tho will of him that sent me, to perfect his work. Joan. 4. For as meat is
not taken once or twice through a man's life, but is taken daily and with
pleasure: so our Lord himself did continually, and with a willing mind practice
all Obedience to his Father. And hereupon he said: I descended from Heaven, not
to do my own will, but the will of him, that sent me. Joan. 6. And more
clearly in another place: He that sent me, is with me, and he has not left me
alone, because the things that please him, I do always. Joan. 8. And because
Obedience is the most excellent Sacrifice of all Sacrifices, according to the
judgment of Samuel; therefore it follows, that how many works Christ did all
the time, that he lived as Pilgrim upon the Earth, so many Sacrifices did he
offer up, and those most grateful to God. This therefore is the first
Prerogat^ue of the Obedience of Christ; to wit, in that it endured from his
Conception, to the end of his life.

Furthermore the Obedience of Christ was not determinable to any one kind of
work, as we commonly see it is among men; but it was extended to all those
things, which it should please God his Father to command him. And from hence
so great variety is seen in the life of Christ our Lord, as that one while he
would stay in the desert, neither eating nor drinking, and perhaps not
sleeping, but living with beasts, as S. Mark not^th. c. 1. At another time he
was in the frequency and sight of men, eating and drinking: Then, he remained
obscure and secret at home, and that for no few years. At an other time
appearing excellent for wisdom and Eloquence, working most great and
stupendous Miracles: Now, with great authority casting buyers and sellers out
of the Temple; At an other time latent, and (as it were) weak, declining from
the multitude and company of men; All which things require and exact a m^nd
free from all proper free will. For neither would our Lord have said: Math. 16.
He that will come after me, let him deny himself; that is, let him renounce
his proper will, and proper judgment: Neither except Christ himself had
performed it before, he would have persuaded his disciples to the perfection of
Obedience, when he said: Luc. 14. If any man comes to me, and hates not hi^
Father and mother, and wife, and chilsdren, and brethren and sisters, yea and
his own life besides, he cannot be my Disciple. Thus according hereto did
Christ himself forsake all things, which are accustomed to be so ardently
beloved, yea his own life; the which he was so prepared to lose, as if he did
hate it.

This is the true root and Mother of Obedience, which shyned most admirably
in Christ our Lord. And who want this, shall hardly ever come to the revvard of
Obedience. For how is it possible that one should promptly obey an other man's
Will, who is wholly devoted to his own will, and his own judgment? This is
the Cause why the Celestial Orbs do not resist or withstand the Angels moving
them, whether they be carried toward the East, or West; because they have not
any peculiar and proper propension either to one part, or to the other. And the
same reason is, why the Angels themselfes stand at a beck obedient unto God,
as holy David sings in the 102. Psalm. To wit, because they have no proper
Will, repugnant and refractary to the will of God; but being most happily
conjoined with God, they are one spirit with him.

Furthermore, the Obedience of Christ is not only largely on each side diffused;
but withal by how much it is depressed down by Patience and Humility, by so
much, through the excellency of its merits, it is elevated and advanced on
high. Therefore the third Propriety of the Obedience of Christ is, that it
descends to an incredible Patience and Humility. Christ being an Infant, to
fulfill the Obedience of his Father, began (though full of knowledge and
prudence) to inhabit in a dark prison. Other Infants, who want Reason in
their mothers Womb, suffer no grief or molestation: But Christ enjoying in
his mothers womb the use of Reason, would have had no doubt a horror to
remain in that strait Prison nine Months, had not the obedience toward his
Father and love to mankind caused him for the setting us at liberty (as the
Church sings) that he did not abhor the womb of the Virgin.

To proceed, no small Patience and Humility was necessary, that Christ during
all the time of his Infancy (who then was more wise then Solomon, since in him
were all the treasures of VVisdome and Knowledge) should accommodate and apply
himself to the manners and weakness of Infants: But tha^ Continency, Modesty,
Patience, and Humility was altogether most adm^r^ble, that during the space of
eighteen years (to wit, from the twelfth year, to the thirtith) he by the
command of his Father, remained so obscurely in S. Joseph's bowse, as that he
was reputed but the Son of a Carpenter, ignorant in learning, and perhaps
indocible; when notwithstanding he did transcend all men and Angels in wisdom.
I may here next allege his great glory, rising from his preaching and working
of miracles, but yet accompained with extreme poverty and daily labors: The
foxes have their holes, and the fowls of the air nests; but the Son of man
has not where to repose his head. Luc. 9 And he being wearied through
^^urneying, did sometimes rest himself by sitting upon the side of a
fountaine^; and preaching the kingdom of Heaven, went on foot to Cities and
Castells. Yet notwithstanding it had been most easy, for him (if so it had
stood with his Obedience to his Father) to abound with all things, through the
help and ministry of men or Angels.

What shall ^now speak of Christ's persecutions, of his reproaches, and
maledictio^s, spittings, buffeting, whipping, and finally of his sufferings and
pains upon the Cross? For in all these his humble Obedience did take such
deep root, as that it may plainly seem to be in-imitable. But yet there
remains a greater profundity and depth of his Obedience, which concerned the
last of all terrible things; and to this Abysmall profundity the Obedience of
Christ descended, when crying with a loud voice, he said: Father into thy hands
I commend my spirit; and saying this, he gave up the Ghost. Luc. 23. The Son
of God may be thought and supposed to speak to his Father in this sort. O
Father I have received commandment from you, that I should lay down my life,
and after receive it, now the time comes, that I accomplish this your last
command. And although the disjunction of my soul from my flesh (both which
even from the beginning of their union to this hour have remained together in
great peace and charity) be most bitter; and also although death, introduced
through the Envy of the devil, be very adverse to nature, and the last of all
terrible things; notwithstanding your commandment being most deeply into the
middst of my heart, does ouerballance all other things. Therefore I now stand
prepared even to swallow down death, and to exhaust and drink up this most
bitter chalice given to me by you. And because your commandment was, that I
should after resume and take it again; therefore into your hands I commend my
spirit, that you may restore it to me in the next conueniency of time. And thus
license of departing being taken of his Father, his head being inclined to
obedience, he gave up the Ghost. Thus Obedience became victorious and
triumphant. Neither did it receive a most ample reward only in Christ
himself, that he, who descended lower then any man, and obeyed all men for his
love toward his Father should ascend above all, and command over all: But it
also obtained, that all men, who would imitate his obedience and humility,
should themselves ascend above all the Heavens, and should be committed and
placed over ^he goods of their Lord, and in the end should be made partaker of
the Cele^^^^l Throne and Kingdom. To con^^^de, Christ did take so remarkable a
Triumph over the rebellious, disobedient, and most proud Spirits, as that all
of them do stand affrighted, and fly at the very sign of the Cross.

All those, who cover to aspire to true glory, and to the rest and peace of
their soul, ought to behold and imitate this exemple. Neither only Regular
men, who through the vow of obedience to their Superiors (who preside in the
place of God,) but also all men, who labor to be the disciples and Brethren of
Christ, ought to aspire to the prize and reward of this most worthy victory,
except they will rather make choice to bewail and lament for all eternity,
with the proud devils, under the feet of the Saints. For Obedience, which is
due by divine precepts, and which God himself commands to be given to those
who rul^ upon Earth, is most necessary to all men. For Christ said to all: Take
up my yoke upon you. Matthew. 11. And the Apostle preaches to all, saying: Obe^
your Prelates, and be subject to them. Heb. 13. And Samuel instructs heerei^
all Kings, when he says: Will (...) Lord have Holocausts and Victimes, (...)
not rather that the voice of our Lord ^t obeyed? Better is obedience then
Victime* 1. Reg. 15. And then he adds to she^^et the greatness of the Sin of
disobedience, Because it is (as it were) the Sin of enchantement, to resist;
meaning to resist the commandments of our Lord, and of those, who do govern
in the place of our Lord.

But for the benefit of those, who willingly subject themselves under the
Obedience of their superiors, I will here add some few points touching their
happy state; and this not out of my private Judgment, but from the words of
Jeremy the Prophet, who guyded by the Holy Ghost, thus says: It is good for a
man when he bears the yoke from his youth: He shall sit solitary and hold
his ^eace, because he has lifted himself above himself. Thren. 3. Certainly
a wonderful felicity is signified by that word, It is good for a man: since
from the words following it evidently is gathered, that Good, in this place, is
taken for that, which is profitable, honorable, pleasant, and on each side
blessed. For he that shall accustom himself to bear the yoke of Obedience
from his youth, shall be (...) during all his life from a most a^^^auy and
servile yoke of Carnal Cubedditi^^ and desires. S. Austin deposes the truth
of this point, showing in his ^. Book of Confessions, how difficult a matter
it is, to cast of the yoke of Concupiscence from ones self, who for diverse
years has been enthralled to the law of the flesh, as on the contrary, how
pleasant and easy it is, to bear the yoke of our Lord, before the soul has
been defiled, or ensnared with Vice.

Furthermore, how great again is it, to merit in every work in the sight of
God? For he, who does nothing out of his own proper will, but from Obedience
to his Prelate and superior, this man in every work performed by him,
sacrifizeth to God a most grateful Sacrifice, because as Samuel speaks;
Obedience is better, then Sacrifice 1. Reg. 15. And S. Gregory gives a reason
of this disparity, saying: By bloody Sacrifices the flesh of an other, by
Obedience the proper will is immolated and offered up. l. 35. mor. cap. 10.
Add hereto, as a thing most admirable, that if so be the Prelate should
fortune to sin in commanding, the subject sins not, but meriteth in
obeying, so that that which is commanded be not a manifest and evident sin.
The Prophet Jeremy does add: He shall sit solitary, and hold his peace. What
signifies here, he shall sit, but that he shall remain quiet, because he
shall find the rest of his soul? For whosoever abandoneth his own will,
deuoting himself wholly to fulfill the will of God, coueteth nothing, seeks
after nothing, is ambitious of nothing; but remaynes free from all Cares, and
sits with Mary Magdalen, at our Lords feet, hearing his word; Luc. 10. And
indeed he sits truly solitary, both because he does converse with those, who
are one Heart, and one Soul; as also in that he affects no man with a private
and peculiar Love, but loves all in Christ, and for Christ. And hence it is,
tha^ he is quiet, as not contending with any one, or having any peculiar
negotiation or business with others. And the reason of so great a tranquillity
and quietness is, because, he has lifted himself above himself, that is, he
has transcended and passed from the Order of men, to the Order of Angels.

There are many men, who do cast themselfes under themselfs, and descend to the
Order of Beasts; To wit, those men, who even breath nothing but earthly
matters, and prize nothing but what is grateful to the flesh, and senses of
the Body; And these are Covetous men, lascivious, and even enslaued to good
cheer, fellowship, and drunkenness. There are others, who live the life of men,
and after a certain manner remain in themselves; such are Philosophers, who
either search the secrets of Nature, or deliver precepts touching manners. To
conclude, there are some others, who do lift themselfs above themselfs; and
this not without a peculiar privilege and assistance of God, leading not an
humane, but Angelical life. These are those, who renouncing all things, which
the world affords, and denying their own will, can say with the Apostle:
Our conversation is in Heaven. Phil. 3. For the Angels are not defiled wi^h any
filth of sin, and they do ever contemplate the face of the Father which is in
Heaven; and omitting all other affairs, they are wholly busied, and intent in
executing the Commandments of God, according to that of the 102. Psalm:
Bless our Lord all ye his Angels, doing his word, that fear the Voice of his
words.

This is the felicity of a Regular life, the which if it do seriously imitate
the purity and Obedience of the Angels, will doubtlesly participate of their
Glory in Heaven; especially if they follow Christ their Captain and master,
Who humbled himself, made obedient unto death; even the death of the Cross.
Phil. 2. And when as he was the Son of God, learned obedience from those
things he suffered. Heb. 5. That is, he experimentally learned, that true
Obedience was tried by Patience. And thus he did not only teach Obedience by
his own Example, but withal taught the principles and foundation of true and
perfect Obedience, which are Humility and Patience. For who freely and
willingly obeys his superior, commanding honorable and pleasing things to
be done, may be much doubted of. whether the virtue of Obedience, or some other
Allectiue draws him to obey: But he, who with all alacrity and therefulnes
of mind obeys in things vile and laborious (where Humility and Patience are
necessary) declares that as a true Disciple of Christ, he has learned perfect
Obedience.

S. Gregory notably shows the difference between true and forged Obedience,
who thus speaks, l. 35. mor. c. 10. Quia nonnunquam nobis etc. Because
sometimes things pleasing to this world, at other times things displeasing are
commanded to be done; therefore we are chiefly to know, that sometimes
Obedience, if it have nothing of it self in it, is no obedience; And sometimes
except it has something of it self, it is less. For example, when pleasing
things of this world are commanded, when the higher and more worthy place is
commanded to be taken; he, who obeys these Commands, euacuateth and
frustrateth in himself the virtue of Obedience, if out of a secret desire he
affects them. For he suffers not himself to be governed by Obedience, who
in undertaking the prosperous things of his life, serves his own humor of
Ambition. Again, When adverse and distasteful matters are commanded, when it
is commanded to receive obloquies, and contumelies; except the mind of it self
does desire these things, the merit of obedience is lessened; because he
descends unwillingly to such things, as are abject and vile in this life. For
Obedience suffers detriment, when no desires of any part do accompany the
mind, prepared to receive disgraces or contumelies. Therefore Obedience
touching things adverse and displeasant, ought to have something of it self;
and again touching things prosperous and graceful, it ought to have nothing
of it self. And Obedience, when the subject of it, is a thing displeasing, is
so much the more glorious and worthy, by how much the desire of him that
obeys is more firmly conjoined to the divine will; As on the contrary, where
the subject is pleasant and sweet, Obedience is so much the more true by how
much the mind is estranged from all vain and humane complacency.

But the weight of this Virtue of Obedience, we may more clearly balance, if
we call to mind the memorable Acts of two men, now reigning in Heaven. Moses,
when he fed sheep in the desert, was called by our Lord speaking to him, by the
ministry of an Angel in the fiery Bush, that he should govern over all the
multitude of the Israelits. Exodus 3. But because he was humble and lowly in
himself, he was afraid of the proffered glory of so great a government; saying:
I beseech thee, O Lord I am not eloquent from yesterday, and the day before,
and since thou have spoken to thy servant, I have more impediment and slownes
of tongue etc. I beseech thee, O Lord, send whom thou will send. Behold here,
how Moses discourses and debateth with the Author of the Tongue; and
acknowledged himself to be of imperfect speech, that thereby he might avoid
the power of so great a sovereignty and government. In like sort, S. Paul was
admonished from Heaven (as himself testifies in his 2. Epistle to the
Galathians) that he ought to ascend to Jerusalem; Who meeting with the Prophet
Agabus in his journey, was aduertized, how great adversity and trouble did
expect and wait for him in Jerusalem. For it is thus written: Agabus took
Paul's girdle, and binding his own hands and feet, he said: Thus the man
whose girdle this is, so shall the Jews bind in Jerusalem, Act. 22. But S.
Paul instantly answered: I am ready not only to be bound, but to dye also in
Jerusalem, for the name of Jesus.

Thus S. Paul through a command of divine Revelation going toward Jerusalem,
knows before hand, what vexations were there to afflict him; nevertheless he
willingly desires them: He hears of troubles, of which he might well be
afraid; yet he coueteth with all endeavor oo aspire to them. Thus Moses has
no part of his own desire touching his command; and therefore he partly
labors against the coommand, thereby to eschew his government over the
Israelites. But S. Paul is drawn to undergo adversities out of his own
desire; who foreseeing imminent evils, boyleth in devotion of spirit to
sustain far greater. The former man was willing to decline the glory of
present Power, though God commanded him to accept thereof: This later (God
preparing for him asperity and molestations) thirsts after more violent
afflictions, yea even death it self. Now from the immovable Virtue of these
two worthy Captains leading us the way, we may be instructed, that if we
desire earnestly to gain the palm and reward of Obedience, we must play the
soldiers, in performing things prosperous only by command though with some
reluctation of our own Nature; but things adverse and distasteful, to execute
even out of our own devotion and Zeal.

Thus far S. Gregory Which doctrine Christ our Lord and Master, even from
his own example most clearly approved. For when he knew the multitude would
come and take him, that they might make him a King, we read; That he fled into
the mountain, himself alone. But when he saw that the Jews and the soldiers
with Judas, were to come to apprehe^d him, and draw him to punishment, then
according to the command, which he received from his Father, he of his own
accord did presently meet them, and suffered himself to be taken and bound.
Therefore Christ not in words did vaunt of Obedience; but in works, and in
earnest, exhibited Obedience unto his Father, grounded in true Patience and
Humility. Upon this example of the most noble virtue of Obedience, all those
ought to have their eyes fixed, who aspire to the high reward, due for a
voluntary abnegation of ones proper Will, and imitation of Christ.

THE TABLE
The first Book.
THe first Words explicated literally. page 14. The second Words explicated.
page 47. The third Word explicated. page 89.
The second Book.
THe fourth Word explicated literally. page 131. The fifth Word explicated.
page 193. The sixth Word explicated. page 238. The seventh Word explicated.
p. 292.
FINIS.

