A SHORT CATECHISM Of Card.all Bellarmine illustrated with the IMAGES.

In Augusta.

With License of Superiors.

1614.

Lectori S.
MAGNORVM and Illustrium viro^um Augustanorum consilio atque subsidio, nouae
quaedam sacrarum maginum formae, non ex^guis sumptibus comparatae sunt, quibus
Catechismus Catholicus, sieve Doctrina Christiana, non vna duntaxat, sed
pluribus linguis, procedente tempore, Augustae in lucem edi posset. Atque huic
pio consilio, non infeliciter rei euentus hactenus respo^dit. Nam intra vnius
anni spatium, quinque linguarum editiones Catechisticae (Germanicae nimirum,
Latinae, Graecae, Gallicae, Italicae) maximo exemplarium numero absolutae sunt,
quibus tamen necdum omnium desiderio satisfieri potuit. Cum autem eodem tempore
a pluribus magni nominis viris, pro pluribus aliis linguis ac nationibus eadem
opera expeteretur, non defuerunt in hac quoque vibe viri primarii, qui
Catholici Catechismi editionem A^glicanam cum ijsdem imaginibus suscipie^dam
iudicarent. Ex illa enim natione plutimi quoque reperiuntur, qui Catholicam
fidem, Rom^ naeque Ecclesiae authoritate^ cum fuis tot seculorum laudatissimis
Maioribus, cum tot alijs Regnis ac Prouincijs, and, quod vere dici potest, cum
maiore Orbis Christiani part, etiam nu^ integre profitentur. Nulla igitur
idonea causa suppetit, cur ab huius (licet exigui) beneficii tot aliis linguis
ac nationibus praestandi co^munione solos Anglos excludamus. Bona autem fide
exemplar Anglicanum ex Italico versum sequi conati sumus. Quod sicubi erratum
fuerit, facile ignoscet is, quilibellum hunc non in Anglia, sed in Germania a
Germanis, Christianae charitatis causa, excusum meminerit, Augustae, 20.
Septembris. Anno 1614.

Georg. Mayr.

S. GREGORIVS MAGNUS, Anglorum Apostolus, lib. 9. epistolarum, lib. 9.
QVod legentibus scriptura hoc idiotis praestat pictura cernentibus: quia in
ipsa etiam ignorantes vident, quod sequi debeant: in ista legunt, qui literas
nesciunt.

A BRIEF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE TO BELEARNED BY HEART.
Of the end of a Christian, and of the sign of the Cross.
Master. ARE you a Christian?


Scholar. I am by the grace of God.


M. What mean you by a Christian?




S. Him that makes profession of the Faith and Law of Christ.


M. In what does the Faith of Christ chiefly consist?


S. In two principal mysteries, which are included in the sign of the
holyCrosse, that is in the Unity and Trinity of God: and in the Incarnation
and death of our Savior.


M. What means Unity and Trinity of God?




S. It menaeth that in God there is one only Divinity, or, as we say, Essence
and divine nature, which nevertheless is in three divine persons, that are
called Father, Son and holy Ghost.


M. Wherefore are there three divine persons?


S. Because the Father has no benning, not proceeds from another person. The
Son proceeds from the Father, and the holy Ghost from the Father and the
Son.


M. Wherefore are these three persons one only God?


S. Because they have one-self essence, one-self power, one self wisdom and
one-self goodness.


M. Wath means incarnation and death of our Savior?


S It means that de Son of God, that is the second person of the most
blessed Trinity became man, and died upon the Cross to save us.


M. How are these two mysteries included in the sign of the holy Cross?


S. Because we make the sign of the holy Cross putting our right hand first
to the head saying. In the name of the Father, then under the breast saying,
And of the Son; finally to the lefth, and right shoulder saying, And of the
holy Ghost. Amen.


M. How then is here shevved the first mystery of the most B. Trinity?


S. Because this word, In the name, signifies the Unity; the other words
signify the Trinity?


M. Show new the second?


S. The figure of the Cross does represent the death of our Savior, who after
he was made man, and had taught the way of salvation with doctrine, with
example, and with miracles, died upon the holy wood of the Cross.


A declaration of the Creed.
M. WHich is the Rule of belief?


S. It is the Symbol of the Apostles, which commonly we call the Creed.


M. Say the Creed.


I.


S. I believe in God the Father almighty, Creator of heaven and earth.


II.


And in JESUS Christ his only Son out Lord.

III.


Who was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Marie.

IV.


Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried.

V.


Descended into hell; the third day he rose again from death.

VI.


Ascended into heaven, sits at the rig hand of God the Father almighty.

VII.


From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

VIII.


I believe in the holy Ghost.

IX.


The holy Catolique Church, the Communion of Saints.

X.


Remission of sins.

XI.


Resurrection of the flesh.

XII.


Life everlasting. Amen.

M. Who made the Creed?


S. THe twelve Apostles, and therefore there be twelve articles.


M. What do these articles contain in sum?


S. All that, which principally and expressie we must believe of God, and of
the Church his spouse; because the eight first articles pertain to God, the
four last to the Church.


M. Declare the first article.


S. I firmlie believe in one only God, who is the natural father of his
only begotten son, and is also father by grace of all good Christians, who
are therefore called the adoptiue sons of God. finally he is father by
creation of all other things. And this God is Omnipotent, because he can do
all that he will, and has created of nothing Heaven and Earth, with
vvathsoeuer is in them, that is the whole universal vvoorld.


M. Declare the second article.


S. I believe also in JESUS Christ, who is the only begotten Son of God the
Father, because he was begotten of the same father eternally, and is God
eternal, infinite, omnipotent, Creator, and Lord of us, and of all things, as
is the father.


M. Declare the third.


S. I believe that JESUS Christ is not only true God bud also true man,
because he has taken man's flesh of the im^aculate Virgin Marie by virtue of
the holy Ghost, and so was borne in earth of mother without father, as in
heaven he was borne of father without mother.


M. Declare the fourth.


S. I believe that JESUS Christ, to redeem the world with his precious
blood, suffered under Pontius Pilate Governor of Jury, being scourged,
crowned with thorns, and put upon the Cross, on the which he died, and
taken down from the same was buried in a new Sepulcher.


M. Declare the fifth.


S. I believe that JESUS Christ, as soon as he was dead, went with his
soul to the Limbo or place of holy Fathers, and the third day, which was
the Sundaie, he rose glorious and triumphant.


M. Declare the sixth.


S. I believe that JESUS Christ, after he had forty days remained with the
holy Apostles, to prove with many apparitions his true Resurrection, mounted
up to the highest heaven, and there sits above all the quires of Angels, at
the right hand of the farher, that is, in glory equal to the father, as Lord
and Governor of all creatures.


M. Declare the seventh.


S. I believe that the same out Lord, in the end of the vvoorld, shall come
from heaven with most great power and glory, and shall iudgeall men, giving
to every one the revvard or punishment that he has deserved.


M. Declare the eight.


S. I believe in the holy Ghost, who is the third person of the most blessed
Trinity, and proceeds from the Father and the Son, and is in all and
every thing equal to the Father, and to the Son; that is, he is God,
Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent, Creator, and Lord of all things, as the Father
and the Son.


M. Declare the ninth.


S. I believe also that there is a Church, which is the Congregation of all
faithful Christians that are baptized, do believe and confess the faith of
Christ ourd Lord, and acknovvledge the high Bishop of Rome for Vicar of the
same Christ in earth.


M. This Church why is it called Holy, and Catholic?


S. Holy because it has the head, which is Christ, holy; and for that it has
many holy members, and the Faith, and Law, and Sacraments holy; and it is
called Catholic, that is Universal.


M. What signifies the Communion of Saints?


S. It signifies the participation of prayers and good vvoorks, that are done
in that Church; even as in a man's body all the members be partakers of the good
of one member.


M. Declare the tenth.


S. I believe that in the holy Cuurch there is the true remission of sins, by
means of the holy Sacraments, and that in the same, men, of children of the
devil, and condemned to death, become the children of God, and heirs of
Paradise.


M. Declare the eleventh.


S. I believe that in the end of the vvoorld all men shall rise, taking again
the same bodies, which before they had, and this by the power of God, to whom
nothing is impossible.


M. Declare the last.


S. I believe that for good Christians there is life everlasting full of all
felicity, and free from all sort of evil; as contrary wise for infidels,
and for evil Christians, there is eternal death, replenished with all
misery, and void of all good.


M. What mean you by Amen.


S. I mean. So is it in truth.


A DECLARATION OF THE Pater Noster, and of the Aue Maria.
M. Having spoken now of that which we must believe, let us see if you
know that which we must hope for, and of whom we must have hope. Know you
the Pater noster?


S. I know it right well, for this is the first thing that I learned, and I
say it every morning and evening, together with the Aue Maria and with the
Creed.


M. Say then the Pater noster.


I.


S. Our Father which art in heaven. Halovved be thy name.


II.


Thy kingdom come.

III.


Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

IIII.


Give us this day our daily bread.

V.


And forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors.

VI.


And lead us not into tentation.

VII.


But deliver us from evil, Amen.

M. Who made this prayer?


S. CHrist our Savior made it, and therefore it is the most excellent of all
others.


M. What is briefly contained in this prayer?


S. All that we can demand, and hope for of God. For there be seven petitions.
In the first four we demand that he give us all good: in the three following
that he deliver us from all evil. And concerning that which is good, we first
demand the glory of God. Secondly our greatest good. Thirdly grace to
obtain it. Fourthlie the means to get and keep the said grace. Touching that
which is evil, we demand that he deliver us first from evil past; secondly
from evil to come; thirdly from evil present, and so from all evil.


M. Declare those words that go before the first petition, that is, Our
father which art in heaven.


S. This is a little preface, in which is yealded the reason, wherefore we have
couradge to speak unto so great a Lord, and hope he will grant our request.
We s y then that God is our Father by Creation, and Adoption, and therefore as
children we have recourse to him; and we add that he is in heaven as Lord of
the universal world. And for this we know that he can grant our petition,
if it so please him, as we do hope he will, seeing that he is our father.


M. Declare the first petition.


S. In the first petition, we demand that God be knovve^ of all the world,
and that so his holy name be honored, and glorified of all, at is becomes.


M. Declare the second.


S. We demand in the second that the kingdom, which he has promised us,
come speedily, which is to say, that the battles ended, which we have
with the devil, with the world, and with the flesh, we may arrive to
everlasting felicity, where we shall reign with God without anny
impediment.


M. Declare the third.


S. We demand in the third the grace of God, with which we may perfectly
obey his holy commandments, as the Angels do alvvaies obey him in heaven.
Because the ladder, to mount up to heaven, is the Obedience of his
commandments.


M. Declare the fourth.


S. We demand in the fourth our daily bread as well spiritual, that is the
word of God and the Sacraments; as corporal, that is sustinance and apparel.
For the word of God preached unto us by preachers, and read by us in
spiritual books, and the holy Sacraments, chiefly of Confession and
Communion, at most efficatious means of their part (that is, if we our selves
be not in fault) to obtain and conserve the grace of God, of which we have
spoken in the former petition. Sustinance and apparel is necessary for us, to
maintain this life in the service of God.


M. Declare the fifth.


S. We demand in the fifth that God deliver us from evils past, that is from
sins already committed, remitting us the debt of the fault, and of the
pain, which for them we have incurred. And we add, As we forgive our
debtors their debts, that is, as we pardon the offenses of our enemies: for
that it is not a reasonable thing, that God forgive us our sins, which ar
most great offenses, if we vvil not pardon the injuries done unto us, which
ar offenses of small importance.


M. Declare the sixth.


S. We demand in the sixth, that God deliver us from tentations which ar
evils to come, or not permitting us to be tented, or giving us grace that we
be not overcome.


M. Declare the seventh.


S. We demand in the seventh that God deliver us from evil present, that is
from al affliction and misery and also from all vail ne prosperity and
temporal advancement, if he see that it be hurtful to our sovvles salvation.


M. Say now the Aue Maria.




S. Hail MARIE full of grace; Our Lord is with thee; blessed art thou amongst
women, And blessed is the fruit of thy womb JESUS.

Holy MARIE mother of God pray for us sinners, now, and in the hour of our
death. Amen.


M. Of whom be these words?


S. They be partly of the Archangel Gabriel partly of S. Elizabeth, and
partly of th Church.


M. Tho what effect do you say the Aue Marie, afther the Pater noster.


S. Tho the end that by the intercession of the most blessed Virgin, I may more
easily obtain that which I demand of God, beacuse she is the Aduocatrice
of sinners, full of mercy, and vvithall is in heaven above all the quires of
Angels, and most acceptable to God.


M. Have not you recourse for help also to other Saints?


S. I have recourse to all the Saints, and in particular to the Saint of my
name, and to my Angel guardian.


OF THE COMMAVNDEments of God.
M. LEt us come now to that, which we must do to love God and our
neighbor, and say you the ten Commandments.


S. I am the Lord thy God.


I.


Thou shall not have any other God before me.

II.


Thou shall not take the name of God in vain.

III.


Remember that thou sanctify the festes.

IIII.


Honor thy father and mother.

V.


Thou shall not murder.

VI.


Thou shall not committ adultery.

VII.


Thou shall not steal.

VIII.


Thou shall not bear false witness.

IX.


Thou shall not desire thy neigbours wife.

X.


Thou shall not covet thy neighbors goods.

M. Who has given these commandments?


S. GOd him-self in the old law, and afterward Christ our Lord has
confirmed them in the new law.


M. What do these commandments contain in brief?


S. All that which we must do to love God and our neighbor. Because the
first three commandments teach us how we ought to behave our selves
toward God, with heart, with mouth, and with vvoorcks. The other feue^ do
learn us to do good to our neighbor, and not to hurt him in his person, in
his honor, in his goods, neither in deeds, nor in words, nor in thought.
And so the end of all the commandments, is the commandment of Charity,
which does command us love God above all things, and our neighbor as our
selves.


M. Declare the first commandment.


S. In the beginning God does admonish us, that he is our true and supreme
Lord, and therefore we are obliged to obey him with all diligence. Next he
commands us, that we must not acknovvlegde any other for God; vvherin the
Infidels do sin, who vvoorship the creatures in steed of the creator; and
also witches and Inchanters, who take the devil for their God.


M. Declare the second commandment.


S. The second commandment forbids blasphemies, which are most grievous
sins; false, or not necessary oaths; breaking of vows; and all other
dishonor that is done to God with words.


M. Declare the third.


S. The third does command the keeping of feasts, which does consist in
abstaining from servile vvoorcks, so to have time to occupy our selves in
considering the benefits of God, visiting the Churchs, praying, reading
spiritual books, hearing divine service and sermons, and doing such other
like spiritual and holy vvoorcks.


M. Declare the fourth.


S. The fourth ordains, that we honor our father and mother, not only
with reverence of words, of uncovering our head to the^; but also with
helping and favoring them in their necessities. And that which we say of
father and mother, we ought also to observe toward other our neighbors,
although there be not so great obligation as to father and mother, who have
given us our being, and have brought us up with their great pain.


M. Declare the fifth.


S. In the fifth it is commanded, that we kill no boddie unjustly, nor do
them other harm in their person: and I say unjustly, because Judges who
condemn malefactors to death, and the ministres of Justice, who put them to
death, as also souldiars in just war, do not sin vvhilest they vvound and
kill.


M. Declare the sixth.


S. The sixth commands that we commit not adultery, that is sin with
the wife of other men: and it is also understood that we commit not
fornication, nor any other carnal sin.


M. Declare the seventh.


S. The seventh commands, that no man take away the goods of others
secreatlie, which is called Theft; nor manifestly, which is called Robbery;
not commit annie deceit in selling, bying, and like contracts; and finally
do no harm to his neighbor in his goods.


M. Declare the eigth.


S. In the eigth is forbidden false witness, murmuring, detracting,
flattering, lying, and all other hurt which is done to our neighbor with
the tongue.


M. Declare the two last.


S. God commands in the thvvo last precepts, that none desire the wife, nor
goods of others; because he that seeeth our hearts, will have us holy and
clean, not only outvvardlie, but also invvardlie, that so we may be
entierlie and truly just.


Of the Commandments of the Church, and of Counsels.
M. ADd to the Commandments of God, those fevve which the Church has added


S. The Commaundments of the holy Church are six,


1.


Tho hear mass upon all the Sundaies, and Holy days of commandment.

2.


To fast Lent, Vigills commanded, and Emberdaies, and not to eat flesh on
fridaies and Satturdaies.

3. and 4.


To confess, at the lest, once a year.

To receive, at the lest, at Easter.

5.


To pay tithes.

6.


Not to celebrate marriage in time forbidden that is from the first Sundaie of
Adue^t until Tvvelfday, and from the first day of Lent to Lovv-sundaie
inclusiue.

M. Besides the Commaundments, which we all are bound to keep, be there
annie Counsels of Perfection?


S. There be three Counsels, by our Savior Christ given to thoase that desire
to attain to perfection.


M. Which be these Counsels?


I.


S. Voluntary Poverty.


II.


Perpetual Chastity.

III.


Obedience in every thing that is not sin.

OF THE SACRAments.
M. We have alreddie treated of all that which we must believe, hope for, and
do; it remains that we speak of the holy Sacraments, by whose means
we obtain the grace of God. Say therefore, how many be the Sacraments?


S. They be seven.


I.


Baptism.

II.


Confirmation.

III.


Eucharist.

IIII.


Penance.

V.


Extreme Unction.

VI.


Order.

VII.


Matrimony.

M. Who ordained them?


S. Christ JESUS our Lord.


M. What effect does Baptism vvorck?


S. It makes a man become the child of God and heir of Paradise: it blotteth
out all sins, and fills the soul with grace and spiritual gifts.


M. What effect does Confirmation or Chrisme vvoorck?


S. It fortifieth a man that he be not afraid to confess the faith of Christ
our Lord, and so it makes us become the true souldiars of our Savior.


M. What effect vvoorcketh the Eucharist?


S. It nourrisheth Charity, which is the life of the soul, and does daily
increase it more. And therefore it is given under the form of bread; though
truly it be not bread, but the true body of our Lord: as likewise that
which is in the chalice, is not wine, albeit it seem wine, but it is the
true blood of the same Christ our Lord under the form of wine.


M. What effect vvorcketh Penance?


S. It forgiueth sins committed after Baptism, and brings again to the
friendship of God him, who thorough sin was beco^me his enemy.


M. What must we do to receive this Sacrament?


S. We must first have sorrow for own sins, with purpose never more to
commit them. Then we must confess them all to a Priest approved by Superiors;
and finally we must do the penance that is enjoined us by the Priest.


M. What effect does Extreme Unction vvoorck?


S. It blotteth out the relics of sins; gives joy and strength to the
soul, to fight against the devil in the last hour; and also helps to
recover bodily health, if it be so expedient for the salvation of the soul.


M. What effect vvoorcketh the Sacrament of Order?


S. It gives virtue and grace to Priests and other ministers of the Church, to
be able to do well their duties.


M. What effect vvorcketh the Sacrament of Matrimony?


S. It gives virtue and grace to those that be lavvfullie joined together, to
live in matrimony with peace and charity, and to begett, and bring up their
children in the holy fear of God, to the end they may have joy in this life
and in the other.


Of Theological and Cardinal virtues.
M. WE have now ended the four principal parts of the Christian Doctrine
which be the Creed, the Pater noster, the Commaundeme^ts, and the Sacraments.
I will now that we talk of Virtues and Vices, of some other things which
do help us much to live conformablie to the will of God. Tell me therefore,
How many be the principal Virtues?


S. They be seven; Three Theological, and four Cardinal.


M. Which be the Theological?


S. Faith, Hope, and Charity.


M. VVerfore be they called Theological?


S. Because this word Theological signifies a thing, that regards or
appertains to God.


M. How does faith then appertain to God?


S. Because it makes us believe all that, which God has reueiled to the holy
Church.


M. Wherefore does Hope pertain to God?


S. Because it makes us put our trust in God, and hope eternal life of him,
by means of our merits, which yet do proceed from his grace.


M. Why does Charity pertain to God?


S. Because it makes us love God above all-things things, and our neighbor as
our selves, for the love of God.


M. Which be the Cardinal virtues?


S. Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and Tempera^ce.


M. Why be they called Cardinal?


S. Because they be principal, and as it were the fountains of Good vvoorcks.


M. Declare unto me the office of these virtues?


S. Prudence makes us considerate and wary in every thing, to the end we
our selves be not deceived, nor deceive others. Justice makes us render unto
others, that which is theires. Temperance makes us bridle our disordinate
desires. Fortitude makes that we fear not annie danger, no nor death it
self for Gods service.


Of the gifts of holy Ghost.
M. How many be the gifts of the holy Ghost?


S. They be seven. 1. Wisdom. 2. Understanding. 3. Counsel. 4. Fortitude. 5.
Knovvlegde. 6. Piety. 7. Fear of God.



M. VVhereto do these gifts serve.


S. They serve for the help of virtues, and to make us perfect in the way of
God, because through fear we abstain from sins: through Piety we are
devour and obedient to God; through Knowledge we are taught to understand
the will of God; through Fortitude we are helped to put the same in
execution; through Counsel we are admonished of the deceits of the devil;
through understanding we are elevated to penetrate the mysteries of faith;
through VVisdome we become perfect ordaining all our life, and all our vvoorks
to the glory of God, because the wise man does know the last end, and
thereunto does direct every thing.


Of the vvoorks of mercy.
M. How many be the vvoorks of mercy of which we shall be demanded account in
particular at the day of judgment?


S. They be seven.


I.


To give to eat to the hungry.

II.


To give to trincke to the Thirsty.

III.


To cloth the naked.

IIII.


To harbor pilgrims.

V.


To visit the sick.

VI.


To visit the imprisoned.

VII.


To bury the dead.

M. These be corporal woorks of mercy: be there any others spiritual?


S. There be other seven that is. I.


I.


1. To give counsel to the dout full.

2.


To instruct the ignorant.

3.


To admonish sinners.

4.


To comfort the afflicted.

5.


To pardon offenses.

6.


To patiently support those that be troublesome.

7.


To pray God for the quick and dead.

Of Sins.
M. TO come now to Sins, how many sorts be there of them?


S. Two, Original and Actual, which is afterward divided into Mortal and
Venial.


M. What is Original sin?


S. It is that with which we at all borne, and we have it as it were by
heritage from our first Father Adam.


M. How is this sin blotted out?


S. With holy Baptism. And therefore he that dies without Baptism goes to
Limbus, and is deprived for ever from the glory of Heaven.


M. What is Mortal sin?


S. It is that Which we commit against the charity of God, or of our
neighbor. And it is called mortal, because it depriueth the soul of her
spiritual life, which is the grace of God.


M. How is this sin forgiven us?


S. With holy Baptism, when a man is baptized in age to have committed sin
actuallie; or with the Sacramento of Penance as has been said before. And who
dies in mortal sin, goes to the everlasting pains of hell.


M. Which is Venial sin?


S. It is that which is not against Charity, and depriueth not the soul of
grace, nor sends it to the pains of hell: but nevertheless it displeases
God, because it is not con^formable to his will, and it diminishes the
fervor of charity, And therefore it is needful to purge it in this vvoorld,
or in purgatory, which is in the other life.


M. How many be the Capital sins and as it were fountains of all sins?


S. They be seven, and to every one is opposite a contrary virtue.


I.


Pride, to which is contrary Humility.

II.


Covetousness, to which is contrary Liberality.

III.


Lechery, to which is opposite Chastity.

IIII.


Anger, to which it opposite Patience.

V.


Gloutonie, to which is opposite Abstinence.

VI.


Envy, to which is opposite brotherly love.

VII.


Sloth, to which is opposite Diligence.

M. How many be the sins against the holy Ghost?


S. They be six.


1.


Despair of Salvation.

2.


Presumption to be saved without merits.

3.


To impugn the known truth.

4.


Envy at an other man's grace.

5.


Obstination in sin.

6.


Final impenitence.

M. How many be the sins that cry vengeance in the sight of God?


S. They be four.


I.


VVillfull murder.

II.


Carnal sin against nature.

III.


Oppression of the poor.

IIII.


To defraude woorkmen of their wages.

Of the four last things, and of the Rosarie.
M HOw mannie be the last things of man which the Scripture calls last, which
being well considered do make vt abstain from sin?


S. Four.


I.


Death.

II.


Judgment.

III.


Hell.

IV.


Heaven.

M. What exercise have you to maintain devotion?


S. I say the Rosarie of our Lady, and do meditate the fifteen mysteries of
the same, in which is contained the life of our Lord Jesus Christ.


M. Which be the fifteen Mysteries of the Rosarie?


S. There be five loifull. 1. The Annuntiation of the Angel. 2. The Visitation
of S. Elizabeth. 3. The Nativity of our Lord. 4. The Presentation in the
Temple. 5. The disputing of the child JESUS with the Doctors.

Other five be sorrowful

1. The prayer in the garden. 2. The whipping at the pillar. 3. The crowning
with thorns 4. The carrying of the Cross. 5. The crucifying and death of our
Savior.

The last five be glorious.

1. The Resurrection of our Lord. 2. His Ascension. 3. The coming of the holy
Ghost. 4. The Assumption of our Lady. 5. The coronation and exaltation of her
above all the quites of Angels.


FINIS.
Errata.
Page 23. expreslie. but. 25. Father. 38. vain. 41. because. 52. com^aund. 53
Two. 56. To. 73 given. 75. Wherefore. 76. of the holy, 97. is. 107. in te sight.

Caetera lector Anglus typographo Germano ignoscet.

BENEFICENTIAE. ET COMMVN: NOLITE. OBLIVISCI.


Augustae Vindelicorum, Excudebat Christophorus Mangius. ANNO M.DC.XIV.


