The Anatomy of Absurdity: Containing a brief confutation of the slender
imputed praises to feminine perfection, with a short description of the
several practices of youth, and sundry follies of our licentious times. No
less pleasant to be read, then profitable to be remembered, especially of
those, who live more licentiously, or addicted to a more nyce stoycall
austeritie. Compiled by T. Nashe.

Ita diligendi sunt homines, vt eorum non diligamus errores.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. Charlewood for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at
his shop in Lumberd street, under the sign of the Popes head. Anno. Dom. 1589.

To the right worshipful Charles Blunt Knight, adorned with all perfections of
honor or Art, T. Nashe wishes what ever content felicity or Fortune may
enferre.
IF (right Worshipful) the old Poet Persaeus, thought it most prejudicial to
attention, for Verres to declaime against theft, Gracchus against sedition,
Catiline against treason: what such supplosus pedum may sufficiently entertain
my presumption, who being an accessarie to Absurdity, have took upon me to
draw her Anatomy. But that little alliance which I have unto Art, will
authorize my folly in defacing her enemy: and the circumstaunce of my
infancy, that brought forth this Embrion, somewhat tolerate their censures,
that would derive infamy from my vnexperienst infirmities. What I have
written, proceeded not from the pen of vainglory but from the process of
that pensiuenes, which two Summers since ouertooke me: whose obscured cause,
best known to every name of curse, has compelled my wit to wander abroad
unregarded in this satyricall disguise, and counsaild my content to dislodge
his delight from traitors eyes.

Gentlemen that know what it is to encounter with ingratitude in the form of
Cupid, will soon aim at the efficient of my armed phrase, for others that
cannot discern Venus through a cloud, they will measure each deformed fury by
the Queen of Fayries, all birds by one Phaenix, all beasts by one Lion. For my
part, as I have no portion in any man's opinion, so am I the Prorex of my
private thought: which makes me term poison poison, as well in a silver piece,
as in an earthen dish, and Pr^taeus Protaeus, though girt in the apparel of
Pactolus. How ever the Siren change her shape, yet is she inseparable from
deceit, and how ever the devil alter his shaddowe, yet will he be found in the
end to be a she Saint, I dare not prefixe a Nigrum theta to all of that sex,
least immortality might seem to have been taxt by my slander, and the
purity of heaven bepudled by my unhallowed speech. Only this shall my
arguments infer, and my anger auerre, that constancy will sooner inhabit
the body of a Camelion, a Tiger or a Wolf, then the heart of a woman: who
predestined by the father of eternity, even in the nonage of nature, to be
the Iliads of evils to all Nations, have never inuerted their creation in any
Country but ours.

Whose heauenborne Elizabeth, has made majesty herself mazed, and the worlds
eye sight astonished. Time, well may thou exult, that in the evening of thy age,
thou co^ceiuedst such a subject of wonder, and Peace, sing io paean, for that
in despite of dissension, she has patronized thee under her wings. Felicity
saw her invested with royalty, and became young again in the beholding.
Fortune ashamed each sorrow should smile, and her face alonely be wrapped with
wrinkles, suited poor Flaunder^s and France in her frowns, and saluted
Englands soul with a smoothed forehead. Plenty and Abundance, that long had
lived as exiles with the utmost Indians, were no sooner advertised of her
advancement, but they made their passage through ten thousand perrils, to
spend their prosperity in her presence. Why seeks my pen to break into
the buildings of Fame, and Echo my amazed thoughts to her brazen Towers, when
as my tongue is too to base a Tryton to eternise her praise, that thus
vpholdeth our happy days.

Wherefore since my words impouerish her worths, my fervent zeal shall be the
incessant attendant on her weal. I fear right worshipful, least the
affection of my phrase, present me as a foe to your important affairs, whose
heart exalted with the eye sight of such sovereignty, as soars above humane
sight, could not but methodize this admiration in this digression of
distinction. But from such intercourse of excuse, let my vnschooled
indignities, convert themselves to your courtesy, and acquaint you with the
counsel of my rude dedication.

So it was, that not long since lighting in company with many extraordinary
Gentlemen, of most excellent parts, it was my chance (amongst other talk which
was generally trauersed amongst us) to move diverse Questions, as touching the
several qualities required in Castalions Courtier: one came in with that of
Ovid, Semper amabilis esto, another stood more stricktly on the necessity of
that affability, which our Latinists entitle fac^tius, and we more familiarlie
describe by the name of discoursing: the third came in with his carpet devises,
and told what it was to tickle a Citterne, or have a sweet stroke on the
Lute, to dance more delicatlie, and revel it bravely. The fourth as an
enemy to their faction, confuted all these as effeminate follies, and would
needs maintain, that the only adjuncts of a Courtier, were schollership and
courage, returning picked curiosity to paultry Scriueners and such like,
affability to Aristippus and his crew, Citterning and Luting, to the
birthright of every six penny slave, and to conclude, dancing and
reuelling, to every Tailors holy day humor. But as for those two branches of
honor before mentioned, they distinguish a Gentleman from a broking Jack, and
a Courtier from a clubheaded companion. This discourse thus continued, at
length they fell by a iarring gradation, to the particular demonstrations of
their general assertions. One would have one thing preferred, because some
one man was thereby advanced, another, another thing, because some noble man
loves it, every man shot his bolte, but this was the vpshot, that England
afforded many mediocrities, but never saw any thing more singular then worthy
Sir Phillip Sidney, of whom it might truly be said, Arma virumque cano. In
this heat of opinions, many hopes of Nobility were brought in question, but
nothing so generally applauded in every man's comparisons, as your worshippes
most absolute perfections: whose effectual judicial of your virtues, made
such deep impression in my attentive imagination, as ever since there has not
any pleasure mixed it self so much with my secret vows, as the vndefinite
desire to be suppliant unto you in some subject of wit. From which, howsoever
this my undigested endeavor declineth yet more earnestly I beseech you, by
that entire love which you bear unto Arts, to accept of it in good part. And
as the foolish Painter in Plutarch, having blurred a ragged Table, with the
rude picture of a dunghill Cock, willed his boy in any case to drive away all
lyu^ Cocks, from that his worthles workmanship, least by the comparison he
might be convinced of ignorance: so I am to request your worship, whiles you
are perusing my Pamphlet, to lay aside out of your ^igh^, whatsoever learned
invention has heretofore bredde your delight, least their singularity reflect
my simplicity, their excellence convince me of innocence. Thus hoping you
will every way censure of me in favor, as one that does partake some parts of
a Scholar. I commit you to the care of that sovereign content, which your
soul desires.

Your most affectionate in all. Vsque (...). T. Nashe.

THE ANATOMY OF ABSVRDITIE.
ZEuxes being about to draw the counterfeit of Juno, assembled all the
Agrigentiue Maids, who^ after he pausing had viewed, he chose out ^^ue of y^
fairest, that in their beauty, he might imitate what was most excellent: even
so it fares with me, who being about to anatomize Absurdity, am urged to
take a view of sundry men's vanity, a survey of their folly, a brief of their
barbarism, to run through Authors of the absurder sort, assembled in the
Stacioners shop, sucking and selecting out of these vpstart antiquaries,
somewhat of their unsavory duncerie, meaning to note it with a Nigrum theta,
that each one at the first sight may eschew it as infectious, to show it to
the world that all men may shun it. And even as Macedon Phillip having
finished his wars builded a City for the worst sort of men, which he
called (...), malorum Ciuitas, so I, having laid aside my grauer studies for a
season, determined with my self being idle in the Country, to begin in
this vacation, the foundation of a trifling subject, which might shroude in his
leaves, the abusiue enormities of these our times. It fares now a days with
unlearned Idiots as it does with she Asses, who bring forth all their life
long, even so these brainlesse Bussards, are every quarter big with one
Pamphlet or other. B^t as an Egg that is full, being put in to water sinketh
to the bottom, whereas that which is empty floateth above, so those that are
more e^quis^tly furnished with learning, shroude themselves in obscurity,
whereas they that void of all knowledge, endeavor continually to publish their
folly.

Such and the very same are they that obtrude themselves unto us, as the
Authors of eloquence, and fountains of our finer phrases, when as they set
before us, naught but a confused mass of words without matter, a Chaos of
sentences without any profitable sense, resembling drums, which being empty
with in, sound big without. Were it that any Morrall of greater moment, might
be fished out of their fabulous folly, leaving their words, we would cleave to
their meaning, pretermitting their painted show, we would pry into their
propounded sense, but when as lust is the tractate of so many leaves, and love
passions the lavish dispense of so much paper, I must needs send such idle
wits to shrift to the vicar of S. Fools, who in steed of a wor^er may be such
a Gothamists ghostly Father. Might Ouids exile admonish such Idlebies to betake
them to a new trade, the Press should be far better employed, Histories of
antiquity not half so much belyed, Minerals, stones, and herbs, should not
have such cogge^ na^ures and names ascribed to them with out cause, Englishmen
should not be half so much Italinated as they are, finally, love would
obtain the name of lust, and vice no longer mask under the visard of virtue.

Are they not ashamed in their pre^^^ed pos^es, to adorn a pretense of profit
mixed with pleasure, when as in their books there is scarce to be found one
precept pertaining to virtue, but whole quires fraught with amorous discourses,
kindling Venus flame in Vulcans forge, carrying Cupid in triumph, alluring even
vowed Vestals to tread awry, inchaunting chaste minds, and corrupting the
continenst. Henceforth, let them alter their pos^es of profit with
intermingled pleasure, inserting that of Ovid in steed.

Si quis in hoc artem populo non nouit amandi,
Me legate and lecto carmine doctus* a^et.
So shall the discreet Reader understand the contents by the title, and their
purpose by their posie, what else I pray you do these babble bookemungers
endeavor, but to repair the (...) walls of Venus Court, to restore to the
world, that forgo^ten Legendary license of lying, to imitate a fresh the
fantastical dreams of those exiled Abbie-lubbers, from whose idle p^ns,
proceeded those worn out impressions of the feyned no where acts, of Arthur of
the round table, Arthur of little Bri^ta^ne, sir Tristram, Hewon of Bur^ea^x,
the Squire of (...), the four sons of Amon, with infinite others. It is not of
my years nor study to censure these men's foolerie more (...), but to show how
they to no Common-wea^^ (...), toss over their troubled imaginations to have
the praise of the learning which they lack. Many of them to be more amiable
with their friends of the Feminine sex, blot many sheets of paper in the
blazing of Women's slender praises, as though in that generation there reigned
and always rema^ned such singular simplicity, that all p^sterities should be
enjoined by duty, to fill and furnish their Temples, nay Towns and streets,
with the shrines of she Saints. Never remembering, that as there was a loyal
Lucretia, so there was a light a love Lais, that as there was a modest
Medullina, so there was a mischiuous Medea, that as there was a steadfast
Timoclea, so there was a traiterous Tarpeya, that as there was a sober
Sulpitia, so there was a deceitful Scylla, that as there was a chaste Claudia,
so there was a wanton Clodia.

But perhaps Women assembling their senate, will seek to stop my mouth by most
voices, and as though there were more better then bad in the bunch, will object
unto me Atlanta, Architumna, Hippo, Sophronia, Leaena, to these I will oppose
proud Antigone, Niobe, Circe, Flora, Rhodope, the despightfull daughters of
Danaus, Biblis, and Canace, who fell in love, with their own Brothers, Mirrha
with her own Father, Semiramis with her own son, Phaedra with Hippolitus,
Venus inconstancy, Iunos iealous^e, the riotous wantonness of Pasiphae, with
who^ I will knit up this packet of Paramours. To this might be ad^ed Mantuans
inuectiue against them, but that pitti^ makes me refrain from renewing his
worn out complaints, the wounds whereof the former forepast feminine sex has
felt. I but here the Homer of Women has forestalled an objection, saying, that
Mantuans house holding of our Lady, he was enforced by melancholy into such
vehemency of speech, and that there be amongst them as amongst men, some good,
some badde, but then let us hear what was the opinion of ancient Philosophers,
as touching the Femall sex.

One of the^ being asked what estate that was, which made wise men fools, and
fools wisemen, answered marriage. Aristotle does counsel us, rather to get
a little wife then a great, because always a little evil is better then a
great, so that he counted all women without exception, evil and ungracious.
Another of them being asked what was the greatest miracle in the world, said,
a chaste woman. One requiring Diogenes judgment when it was best time to take a
wife, answered, for the young man not yet, and the old man never. Pythagoras
said, that there were three evils not to be suffered, fire, water, and a woman.
And the forenamed Cinick deemed them the wisest liars in the world, which tell
folk they will be married, and yet remain single, accounting it the less
inconvenience of two extremities to choose the less. The self same man
affirms it to be the only means to escape all evils, to eschew women's
counsel, and not to square our actions by their direction. The old Sages did
admonish young men, if ever they matched with any wife, not to take a rich Wife,
because if she be rich, she will not be content to be a wife, but will be a
Master or Mistress, in commanding, chiding, correcting and controlling.
Another Philosopher compared a woman richly apparelled, to a dunghill covered
with grass. Socrates deemed it the desperatest enterprise that one can take in
hand, to govern a woman's will.

What shall I say of him that being asked, from what women a man should keep
himself, answered, from the quick and from the dead, adding moreover, that
one evil ioynes with another when a woman is sick. Demosthenes said, that it
was the greatest torment, that a man could invent to his enemies vexation, to
give him his daughter in marriage, as a domestical Fury to disquiet him night
and day. Democritus accounted a fair chaste woman a miracle of miracles, a
degree of immortality, a crown of triumph, because she is so hard to be
found. Another being asked, who was he that could not at any time be without
a wife, answered, he that was always accursed: and what does this common
proverb, he that marries late marries evil, insinuate unto us, but that if
a man mean to marry, he were as good, begin betimes as tarry long, and being
about to make a virtue of necessity, and an art of patience, they are to
begin in their young and tender age. Moreover, amongst the things which
change the nature and conditions of men, women and wine are set in the
forefront, as the chief causes of their calamity.

Plutarch in his precepts of wedlock, alleges a reason why men fail so
often in choosing of a good wife, because says he, the number of them is so
small. There be two especial troubles in this world says Seneca, a wife and
ignorance. Marcus Aurelius compared women to shyps, because to keep them well
and in order, there is always somewhat wanting: and Plautus says, that women
deck themselves so gorgiously, and lace themselves so nicely, because foul
deformed things, seek to set out themselves sooner, then those creatures
that are for beauty far more amiable. For my part I mean to suspende my
sentence, and to let an Author of late memory be my speaker, who affyrmeth
that they carry Angels in their faces to entangle men and devils in their
devices. Valerius in Epist. ad Ruf. has these words of women's treacherous
works, Amice ne longo dispendio te suspendam, lege aureolum Theophrasti, and
Medeam Iasonis, and vix pauca inuenies impossibilia mulieri, Amice det tibi
Deus omnipotens faeminae fallacia non falli. My friend, least I should hold
thee too long with too tedious a circumstaunce, read but the golden Book of
Theophrastus, and Iasons Medea, and thou shall find few things impossible for
a woman, My sweet friend, GOD Almighty grant that thou be not entrapt by
women's treachery. Furthermore, in the same place he says, Quis muliebr^
garrulitati aliquid committit, quae illud solum potest tacere quod nescit: who
will commit any thing to a woman's tatling trust, who conceales nothing but that
she knows not. I omit to tell with what phrases of disgrace the ancient
fathers have defaced them, whereof one of the^ says: Quid aliud est mulier nisi
amicitiae inimica etc. What is a woman, but an enemy to friendship, an
inevitable pain, a necessary evil, a natural temptation, a desired calamity,
a domestical danger, a delectable detriment, the nature of the which is evil
shadowed with the color of goodness. Therefore if to put her a way be a sin,
to keep her still must needs be a torment. Another says: Illud aduerte quod
extra paradisum vir factus est etc. Consider this, that man was made without
Paradise, woman within Paradise, that thereby we may learn, that every one
wins not credit by the nobility of the place, or of his stock, but by his
virtue. Finally, man made better is found without Paradise in a place inferior,
and contrariwise, she which was created in a better place, namely Paradise, is
found to be worser. Another has these words: Diligit mulier vt ^ap^a^,
^ecipit vt rapiat: amat quod habes, non quod es. A woman loves that she may
entrappe, she deceiues that she may spoil, she loves that thou have, not that
thou art. Another writes after this manner: Nulla est vxoris electio, etc.
There is no choice to be had of a wife, but even as she comes so we must take
her: if teatish, if foolish, if deformed, if proud, if stinking breathed, or
whatsoever other fault she has, we know not till we be married: A Horse, an
Ox, or an Ass, or a dog, or what soever other vile merchandise, are first
proved, and then bought, a man's wife alone is never thoroughly seen before,
least she dysplease, before she be married. Viros ad vnumquodque maleficium
singulae cupiditates impellunt (says Tully,) mulieres ad omnia maleficia
cupiditas vna ducit: muliebrium enim vitiorum omniu^ fundamentum est auaritia.
Men's several desires do egg them to each kind of evil, but one only
affection leads women to all kind of wickedness: for covetousness is the
foundation of all women's evil inclinations. Seneca also says thus in his
Proverbs: Aut amat, aut odit mulier, nil tertium est, dediscere flere faminam,
mendacium est, etc. A woman either loves, or hates, there is no third thing: it
is an untruth to say, that a woman can learn to forget to weep: two kind of
tears are common in their eyes, the one of true sorrow, the other of deceit:
a Woman meditates evil when she is musing alone.

Thus you see hawe far their wickedness, has made Authors to wade with
inuectiues in their dispraise, wherefore I shall not need to urge their
inco^stancie more vehemently, resembling them to Battus, who was won with a
Cow, and lost with a Bull: nor stand to repeat that of Plato, who doubted
whether he should put women among reasonable or unreasonable creatures, who also
gave thanks to Nature especially for three things, whereof the first and
cheifest was, that she had made him a man and not a woman. I omit that of
Aristotle, who alleging the inconueniencie of too timely marriages, e^presseth
this as the especial incommoditie, that it is the Author of superfluities, and
good for nothing but to fill the world with women. Read over all Homer, and
you shall never almost see him bring in Juno, but brawling and iarring with
Jupiter, noting thereby what an yrkesome kind of people they are. In some
Countries therefore, the Bride at the day of her marriage, is crowned by the
Matrons with a Garland of prickles, and so delivered to her husband, that he
may know he has tied himself to a thornie pleasure. The Massagets told Pompey
they lay with their wives but once a week, because they would not hear their
scoldings in the day, nor their pulings in the night.

But what should I spend my y^cke, waste my paper, stub my pen, in painting
^orth their ugly imperfections, and perverse peeu^shnesse* when as how many
hayres they have on their heads, so many snares they will find for a need to
snarle men in, how many voices all of them have, so many vices each one of them
has, how many tongues, so many tales, how many eyes, so many allurements. What
shall I say? They have more shyfts then Jove had sundry shapes, who in the
shape of a Satyr inueigled Antiope, took Amphitrios form, when on Alcmena he
begat Hercules, to Danae he came in a shower of gold, to Laeda in the likeness
of a Swan, to Io like a Heyfer* to Aegiue like a flame, to Mnemosyue like a
Sheephearde, to Proserpina like a Serpent, to Pasiphae like a Bull, to the
Nymph Nonacris in the likeness of Apollo. For cruelty they seem more terrible
then Tigers, was not Orpheus the excellentest Musition in any memory, torn in
pieces by Women, because for sorrow of his wife Euridice, he did not only
himself refuse the love of many women, and lived a sole life, but also
dissuaded from their company. Did not merciless Minerua, turn the hayres of
Medusa, whom she hated into hyssing Adders. Therefore see how far they
swer^e from their purpose, who with Green colors, seek to garnish such
Gorgonlike shapes. Is not witchcraft especially vpholden by women: whither men
or women be more prone unto carnal concupiscence, I refer them to Thebane
Tyresias, who gave judgment against them long ago, what their impudency is,
let Antiquity be Arbiter. Did not Calphernias impudency, (who was so
importunate and unreasonable in pleading her own cause) give occasion of a Law
to be made, that never woman after should openly plead her own cause in
Courts of judgment.

Sabina may be a glass for them to see their pride in, who usually bathed
herself in the milk of five hundred Asses, to preserve her beauty. Galeria
also that gallant Dame, which scorned the golden Palace of the Emperor Nero,
as not curious enough to shroude her beauty, yea Cleopatra according to
Xiphilinus judgment, was not slain with venomous Snakes, but with y^ bodkin that
she curled her hair. To conclude, what pride have they left unpracticed, what
enticement to lust have they not tried?

Did they imagine that beauty to be most commendable* which is least colored,
and that face most fair, which seldomm^st comes into the open air, they would
never set out them selves to be seen, ne yet would they covet to leave
impressions of their beauties in other men's bodies, nor the form of their
faces in other men's fancies. But w^men through want of wisdom are grown to
such wantonness, that upon no occasion they will cross the street, to have
a glaunce of some Gallant, deeming that men by one look of them, should be in
love with them, and will not stick to make an ^rrant over the way, to purchase
a Paramou^ to help at a pinche, who under her husbands, that hoddy-peekes
nose, must have all the destilling dew of his delicate Rose, leaving him only
a sweet sent, good enough for such a senseless sotte.

It was a custom in Greece, that every married woman, as soon as she was
betrothed to her husband, should touch fire and water, that as the fire
purges and purifieth al things, and the water is clean, and of nature fit^e
to clarify every part of the body, and to set the face free from any spot,
except it be an Ethiopian blot, so she would reserve herself chaste and
undefiled to her husband her head. In Boetia they will not suffer a new married
wife at first to go over the thresholde, because she should seem unwilling to
enter in there, where she should leave and lay aside her chastity. In the
same place also they burn the Axletree of a Cart before the door of the
bryde, after she is married, signifying that she ought not to gadde abroad, as
though that were removed which might move her to make any errants unto any
other place.

In Rome the bride was wont to come in with her spyndle and her distaffe at her
side, at the day of her marriage, and her husband crowned and compassed the
Gates with her yarne, but now adays Towe is either too dear or too dainty,
so that if he will maintain the custom, he must crown his Gates with their
Scarfes, Per^wigs, Bracelets, and Duches, which imports thus much unto us, that
Maids and Matrons now adays be more charie of their store, so that they will
be sure they will not spend too much spittle with spynning, yea their needles
are nettles, for they lay the^ aside as needless, for fear of pricking their
fingers, when they are painting their faces, nay they will abandon that (...)
which may stay them at home, but if the temperature of the wether will not
permit them to pop into the open air, a pair of cards better pleas^th her
the^ a piece of cloth* her beads then her book, a bowl full of wine then a
handful of wool, delighting more in a dance then in David's Psalms, to play
with her dog then to pray to her God: ^^tting more by a love Letter, then y^
law of the Lord, by one Pearl^ then twenty Pater nosters. She had rather view
her face a whole morning in a looking Glass, then work by the hour Glass,
she is more sparing of her Spanish needle then her Spanish gloves, occupies
oftener her sett^^g stick then shee^es, and joys more in her Jewels, then in
her Jesus.

Is this correspondent to the modesty of Maidens, and the manners of Matrons,
nay, rather it seems that law is turned to liberty, and honest civility into
impudent shamefastnes. Ancient antiquity was wont to be such a stoycall
obseruer of continency, that women were not permitted so much as to kiss
their Kinsmen, till the Troyan D^mes first attempted it in (...), for when as
by the force of tempestious storms they were cast upon the Italian Coaste, and
each man landed upon whom the salt sea ^ome had not seized, the Women being
weary of their yrkesome travail and long and tedious t^yle, abhorring the
sight of the Seas, set the shyps on a light fire, by reason of the which deed,
they dreading the displeasure of their Husbands, ran every one to their
Kinsman, kissing most kindly, and embracing most amiably every one that they
met: from that time forth to this present, it has been taken up for a
custom, not to be sparing in that kind of curteste.

But now crafty Cupid practicing the wonted sleights and shuf^ing his shaf^s,
meditates new shifts, which each amorous Courtier by his veneriall experience
may coniecturallie conceive. Menelaus hospitality moved young Paris to
adultery. I say no more you know the rest, the wiser can apply it. Well
worthy are the Essenians to be extolled for their wisdom, who abhor the
company of W^men, and det^st the possession of gold and silver, and they to be
deemed as soothing flatterers, who spend so much paper about a proposition of
praise, set apart from any appearance of probability. Peradventure they
think, that as the Poets invent that Atlas vpholds the Heavens with his
shoulders, because by an excellent imagination he found out the course of the
stars, even so they by compiling of Pamphlets in their Mistress praises, to be
called the restorers of womankind. But idle heads are usually occupied about
such trifling texts, wanton wits are combred with those wonted fittes, such
busy brains sow where they reap small gains. When wit gives place to
will, and ^^ason to affection, then folly with full sail launcheth forth
most desperately into the deep. Did they consider that that praise is only
privileged in wise men's opinion, which only proceeds from the pen of the
praised, they would have paused a while upon the worthless imputation of such
prodigal commendation, and consulted for their credit in the composition of
some other more profi^able contrary subject.

I leave these in their solli, and hasten to other men's surie, who make the
Press the dunghill, whether they carry all the muck of their mellancholicke
imaginations, pretending forsooth to anatomize abuses, and stubbe up ^in by the
roots, when as there waste paper being well viewed, seems fraught with naught
else save dog days effects, who wresting places of Scripture against pride,
whoredom, covetousness, gluttony, and drunkenness, extend their in^^^tiues so
far against the abuse, that almost the things remains not whereof they
admit any lawful use. Speaking of pride, as though they were afraid some
body should cut too large peniworthes out of their cloth: of covetousness, as
though in them that Proverb had been verified, Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus
opes: of gluttony, as though their living did lie upon another man's trencher:
of drunkenness, as though they had been brought up all the days of their
life with bread and water: and finally of whoredom, as though they had been
Eunuchs from their cradle, or blind from the hour of their conception. But as
the Stage player is nere the happier, because he represents often times the
persons of mighty men, as of Kings and Emperors, so I account such men never
the holier, because they place praise in painting forth other men's
imperfections.

These men resemble Trees, which are wont eftsoons to die, if they be
fruitful beyond their wont, even so they to die in virtue, if they once over
shoot themselves too much with inueighing against vice, to be brainesicke in
works if they be too fruitful in words. And even as the Uultures slay nothing
themselves, but pray upon y^ which of other is slain, so these men inueigh
against no new vice, which heretofore by the censures of the learned has not
been sharply condemned, but tear that peecemeale wise, which long since by
ancient writers was wounded to the death, so that out of their forepassed
pains, arises their Pamphlets, out of their volumes, their inuectiues. Good
God, that those that never tasted of any thing save the excrements of Arts,
whose thredde-bare knowledge being bought at the second hand, is spotted,
blemished, and defaced, through translaters rigorous rude dealing, should
prefer their sluttered suits, before other men's glittering gorgious array,
should offer them water out of a muddie pit, who have continually recourse to
the Fountain, or dregs to drink, who have wine to sell. At scire tuum nihil
est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. Thy knowledge boots thee not a button,
except another knows that thou have this knowledge. Anacharsis was wont to
say, that the Athenians used money to no other end but to tell it, even so
these men make no other use of learning, but to show it. But as the Panther
smells sweetly but only to brute beasts, which she draws unto her to
their destruction, not to men in like manner, so these men seem learned to none
but to Idiots, who^ with a colored show of zeal, they allure unto them to
their illusion, and not to the learned in like sort. I know not how it
delights them to put their Dare in another man's boat, and their foot in
another man's boot, to incur that prouerbiall check, Ne suitor vltra
crepidam, or that or atoricall taunt, Quam quisque norit artem in ea se
exerceat: with the Elephant to wade and wallowe in the shallow water, when they
would sooner sincke then swym in the deep River, to be conversant in those
Authors which they cannot understand, but by the translatour their
Interpreter, to vaunte reading when the sum of their divinity consists in
twopennie Catichismes: and yet their ignorant zeal will presumptuously press
into the Press, enquiring most curiously into every corner of the Common
wealth, correcting that sin in others, wherewith they are corrupted
themselves. To prescribe rules of life, belongs not to the ruder sort, to
condemn those callings which are approved by public authority, argues a
proud contempt of y^ Magistrates superiority. Protogenes knew Apelles by one
line, never otherwise seen, and you may know these men's spirit by their
speech, their minds by their meddling, their folly by their phrase. Uiew their
works, and know their vanity, see the Books bearing their name, and smile in
thy sleeue at their shame. A small ship in a shallow River, seems a huge
thing, but in the sea a very little vessel, even so each trifling Pamphlet to
the simpler sort, a most substantial subject, whereof the wiser lightly
account, and the learned laughing contemn. Therefore more earnestly I agrauate
their fault, because their crime is crept into credit, and their dooinges
deemed devotion, when as purposelie to some man's despite, they bring into act
their choleric motions.

A common practice it is now adays, which breeds our common calamity, that
the cloak of zeal, should be unto an hypocrite in steed of a coat of Maile,
a pretense of purity, a pentisse for iniquity, a gloss of godliness, a covert
for all naughtines. When men shall publicly make profession of a more inward
calling, and shall wax cold in the works of charity, and seruent in malice,
liberal in nothing but in lauishe backbyting, holding hospitality for an
eschewed heresy, and the performance of good works for Papistrie, may we not
then have recourse to that caveat of Christ in the Gospel, Cauete ab
hipocritis. It is not the writhing of the face, the heauing vpp^ of the eyes to
heaven, that shall keep these men, from having their portion in hell. Might
they be saved by their book, they have the Bible always in their bosom, and
so had the Pharisees the Law embroidered in their garments. Might the name of
the Church infeasse them in the kingdom of Christ, they will include it only
in their couenticles, and bound it even in Barnes, which many times they make
their meeting place, and will shamelessly face men out, that they are the
Church millitant here upon earth, when as they rather seem a company of
Malcontents, unworthy to breath on the earth. Might the boast of the spirit
pind to their s^e^ues, make them elect before all other, they will make men
believe, they do nothing whereto the spirit does not persuade them, and what
Heretics were there ever that did not arrogate as much to themselves. These
they be that publicly pretend a more regenerate holiness, being in their
private Chambers the express imitation of Howliglasse. It is too tedious to
the Reader, to attend the circumstaunce of their several shyftes, the
lothsomnesse of their guilefull wiles, the tract path of their treachery: you
know them without my discourse, and can describe their hypocrisy, though I be
not the Notarie of their iniquity. Seeing their works, shun their ways.

Another sort of men there are, who though not addicted to such counterfeit
curiosity, yet are they infected with a farther improbabilitie, challenging
knowledge unto themselves of deeper mysteries, when as with Thales Milesius
they see not what is under their feet, searching more curiously into the
secrets of nature, when as in respect of deeper knowledge, they seem mere
naturals, coveting with the Phaenix to approach so nigh to the sun, that they
are scorcht with his beams, and confounded with his brightness. Who made them
so privy to the secrets of the Almighty, that they should foretell the tokens
of his wrath, or terminate the time of his vengeance. But lightly some news
attends the end of every Term, some Monsters are bookt, though not bred
against vacation times, which are straight way diversely dispearst into every
quarter, so that at length they become the Alehouse talk of every Carter: yea
the Country Plowman fears a Calabrian floodde in the midst of a furrowe, and
the silly Sheephearde committing his wandering sheep to the custody of his
wappe, in his field naps, dreameth of flying Dragons, which for fear least he
should see to the loss of his sight, he falls a sleep, no star he sees in
the night but seems a Comet, he lights no sooner on a quagmyre, but he
thinks this is the foretold Earthquake whereof his boy has the Ballet.

Thus are the ignorant deluded, the simple misused, and the sacred Science of
Astronomy discredited, and in truth what leasings will not make-shyfts invent
for money? What will they not feign for gain? Hence come our babbling Ballets,
and our new found Songs and Sonets, which every rednose Fiddler has at his
fingers end, and every ignorant Ale knight will breath forth over the pot,
as soon as his brain waxes hot. Be it a truth which they would tune, they
enterlace it with a lie or two to make meeter, not regarding verity, so they
may make up the verse, not unlike to Homer, who cared not what he fained, so
he might make his Countrymen famous. But as the straightest things being put
into water, seem crooked, so the crediblest trothes, if once they come with in
compass of these men's wits, seem tales. Were it that the infamy of their
ignorance, did redound only upon themselves, I could be content to apply my
speech otherwise, then to their Apuleyan ears, but since they obtain the name
of our English Poets, and thereby make men think more baselie of the wits of
our Country, I cannot but turn them out of their counterfeit liuerie, and
brand them in the foreheade, that all men may know their falsehood. Well may
that saying of Campanus be applied to our English Poets, which he spoke of
them in his time: They make (says he) Poetry an occupation, lying is their
living, and fables are their mooueables, if thou take away trifles, ^illie
souls they will famish for hunger. It were to be wished, that the acts of the
ventrous, and the praise of the virtuous were by public Edict prohibited, by
such men's merry mouths to be so odiouslie extolde, as rather breeds
detestation then admiration, lothing then lyking. What politic Counsailour or
valiant Soldier will joy or glory of this, in that some stitcher, Weauer,
spendthrist, or Fiddler, has shuffled or slubberd up a few ragged Rimes, (...)
the memorial of the ones prudence, or the others prowess. It makes the
learned sort to be silent, when as they see unlearned sots so insolent.

These Bussards think knowledge a burden, tapping it before they have half
tunde it, venting it before they have filled it, in whom that saying of the
Orator is verified. Ante ad dicendum quam ad cognoscendum veniunt. They come to
speak before they come to know. They contemn Arts as unprofitable, contenting
themselves with a little Country Grammar knowledge god wot, thanking God with
that abs^edarie Priest in Lincolneshire, that he never knew what that Romish
popish Latin meant. Uerie requisite were it, that such blockheads, had some
Albadanensis Appollonius, to send them to some other mechanical Art, that
they might not thus be the stain of Art. Such kind of Poets were they that
Plato excluded from his Common wealth, and Augustine banished ex ciuitate Dei,
which the Romans derided, and the Lacedaemonians scorned, who would not suffer
one of Archilocus books to remain in their Country, and amiss it were not,
if these which meddle with the Art they know not, were bequethed to Bridwell,
there to learn a new occupation: sor as the Basiliske with his hiss, drives
all other Serpents from y^ place of his abode, so these rude Rithmours with
their iarring verse, allienate all men's minds from delighting in numbers
excellence, which they have so defaced, that we may well exclaim with the
Poet, Quantum mutatus ab illo.

But least I should be mistaken as an enemy to Poetry, or at least not taken
as a friend to that study, I have thought good to make them privy to my mind,
by expressing my meaning. I account of Poetry, as of a more hidden and divine
kind of Philosophy, enwrapped in blind Fables and dark stories, wherein the
principles of more excellent Arts and morrall precepts of manners, illustrated
with diverse examples of other Kingdoms and Countries are contained: for
amongst the Grecians there were Poets, before there were any Philosophers, who
embraced entirely the study of wisdom, as Cicero testifies in his
Tusculanes, whereas he says, that of all sorts of men, Poets are most ancient,
who to the intent they might allure men with a greater longing to learning,
have followed two things, sweetness of verse, and variety of invention, knowing
that delight does prick men forward to the attaining of knowledge, and that
true things are rather admirde if they be included in some witty fiction, like
to Pearls that delight more if they be deeper set in gold. Wherefore seeing
Poetry is the very same with Philosophy, the fables of Poets must of necessity
be fraught with wisdom and knowledge, as framed of those men, which have
spent all their time and studies, in the one and in the other. For even as in
Uines, the Grapes that are fairest and sweetest, are couched under the branches
that are broadest and biggest, even so in Poems, the things that are most
profitable, are shrouded under the Fables that are most obscure: neither is
there almost any poetical fygment, wherein there is not some thing
comprehended, taken out either of Histories, or out of the Phisicks or Ethics,
where upon Erasmus Roterdamus very wittily terms Poetry, a dainty dish
seasoned with delights of every kind of discipline. Now whether ryming be
Poetry, I refer to the judgment of the learned: yea let the indifferent
Reader divine, what deep mystery can be placed under plodding meeter. Who is
it, that reading Beuis of Hampton, can forbear laughing, if he mark what
scambling shyft he makes to end his verses a like. I will propound three or
four pair by the way for the Readers recreation.

The Porter said, by my snout,
It was Sir Beuis that I let out.
or this,
He smote his son on the breast,
That he never after spoke with Clark nor Priest.
or this,
This alms by my crown,
Gives she for Beuis of South-hamptoune.
or this,
Some lost a nose, some a lip,
And the King of Scots has a ship.
But I let these pass as worn out absurdities, meaning not at this instant to
urge (as I might) the like instance of Authors of our time, least in laying
forth their nakedness, I might seem to have discovered my malice, imitating
Ajax, who obiecting more irefully unto Ulysses flattery, detected him self of
folly.

As these men offend in the impudent publishing of witles vanity, so others
ouershoote themselves as much another way, in senseless stoicall austeritie,
accounting Poetry impiety, and wit folly. It is an old Question, and it
has been often propounded, whether it were better to have moderate
affections, or no affections? The Stoics said none. The Peripaticians answered
to have temperate affections, and in this respect I am a professed
Peripatician, mixing profit with pleasure, and precepts of doctrine with
delightful invention. Yet these men condemn them of lasciuiousnes, vanity,
and curiosity, who under feigned Stories include many profitable morrall
precepts, describing the outrage of unbridled youth, having the reine in their
own hands: the fruits of idleness, the offspring of lust, and how available
good educations are unto virtue. In which their preciser censure, they resemble
the^ that cast away the nutte for mislike of the shell, and are like to those
which loath the fruit for the leaves, accounting the one sower, because y^
other is bitter. It may be some dreaming dunce whose bald affected eloquence
making his function odious, better beseeming a privy then a pulpit, a
misterming Clown in a Comedy, then a chosen man in the Ministry, will cry
out that it breeds a scabbe to the conscience, to peruse such Pamphlets,
being indeed the display of their duncerie, and breeding a mislike of such
tedious dolts barbarism, by the view of their rethoricall invention. Such
trifling studies say they infect the mind and corrupt the manners, as though
the mind were only conversant in such toies, or should continually stay where
the thoughts by chance do stray. The Sun beams touching the earth, remain
still from whence they came, so a wise man's mind, although sometimes by chance
it wandereth here and there, yet it has recourse in stayed years to that it
ought. But grant the matter to be fabulous, is it therefore frivolous? Is there
not under Fables, even as under the shaddowe of green and flourishing leaves,
most pleasant fruit hidden in secret, and a further meaning closely
comprised? Did not Virgill under the covert of a Fable, express that divine
mystery, which is the subject of his sixth ^glogue.

I am noua progenis coelo demittis alto.
I could send you to Ovid, who expresses the general Deluge, which was the
old worlds overthrow in the Fable of Deucalion and Pirrha, under which,
undoubtedly it is manifest, (although diverse Authors are of contrary opinion)
he means Noes floodde, in so much as there is a place in Lucian in his book
De Siria Dea, by the which it appears, that by Deucalions Deluge, is
understood, not (as some will) that Enundation, whereby in times past, Greece
and Italy was overflowed, and the I Will Atlanta destroyed, but that universal
flood which was in the time of Noe For thus Lucian writes in that place, that
it was received for a common opinion among the Grecians, that this generation
of men that now is, has not been from the beginning, but that it which first
was, wholly perrished, and this second sort of men which now are, be of a new
creation, growing into such a multitude by Deucalion and Pirrhas means. As
touching the men of the first world, thus much (says he) is committed to
memory, that when as they began to be puffed up with pride of their
prosperity, they enterprised all iniquity privileged by impunitie, neither
regarding the observation of oath, nor the violation of hospitality, neither
favoring the fatherless, nor succouring the helpless, whereupon in lieu of
their cruelty, they were plagued with this calamity, the springs brake forth
and ouerflowed their bounded banks, y^ watrie clouds with pashing showers
vncessantlie, sending down their unreasonable moisture augmented the rage of
the Ocean, so that whole fields and mountains could not satis-fie his
usurping fury, but Cities with their suburbs, Towns with their streets,
Churches with their porches, were now the walk of the waves, the dens of
the Dolphin, and the sporting places of the huge Leuiathan: men might have
fisht where they sold fish, had they not by the sudden breaking forth of the
showers been made a pray unto fish: the child in the cradle could not be saved
by the embra^ings of the dying mothe^, the aged Criple removing his weary
steps by stilts, was feign to use them in steed of Oars, till at length his
dismayed gray hairs despairing of the sight of any shore, gave place to death
and was swallowed up in the deep, and so the belly of the Whale became his
grave.

The earth after this sort being excluded from the number of the Elements,
there was no memory left of mankind in this watery world, but only in
Deucalions Arc, who in regard of his prudence and piety, was reserved to
this second generation, who having made a great Arc wherein he put his wife
and children, took two beasts of every kind as well Lions as Serpents, Hawks
as Partriches, Wolves as Lambs, Foxes as Geese, amongst which there was such
mutual concord, that as they were harmless toward him, so they were
hurtlesse one toward another, al which sailed with him till the waters ceased.

Hitherto Lucian an Heathen Poet. Plutarch also records in his Treatise De
industria animalium, that a Dove being sent out of Deucalions Arc, showed the
waters ceasing. By these proo^es it is evident, that by Deucalions Deluge is
understood Noes flood, because the very like things are set down in
Genesis, of brute Beasts received by Noe into the Arc, and the Dove sent
forth by him also. I trust these probabilities being duly pondered, there is
no man so distrustful to doubt, that deeper divinity is included in Poets
inventions, and therefore not to be rejected, as though they were void of all
learning and wisdom.

I would not have any man imagine, that in praising of Poetry, I endeavor to
approve Virgils unchaste Priapus, or Ouids obscenitie, I commend their wit,
not their wantonness, their learning, not their lust: yet even as the Be out of
the bitterest flowers, and sharpest thistles gathers honey, so out of the
filthiest Fables, may profitable knowledge be suclted and selected.
Nevertheless tender youth ought to be restrained for a time from the reading
of such ribauldrie, least chewing over wantonlie the ears of this Summer
Corn, they be choked with the haune before they can come at the karnell.

Hunters being ready to go to their Game, suffer not their dogs to taste
or smell of any thing by the way, no carrion especially, but reserve the^ wholly
to their approaching disport, even so youth being ready to undertake more
waightier studies, ought in no case be permitted to look aside to lascivious
toys, least the pleasure of the one, should breed a loathing of the profit of
the other. I would there were not any, as there be many, who in Poets and
Historiographers, read no more then serves to the feeding of their filthy
lust, applying those things to the pampering of their private Venus, which were
purposely published to the suppressing of that common wandering Cupid. These be
the Spyders which suck poison out of the honey comb, and corruption out of the
holiest things, herein resembling those that are troubled with a Fever, in
whom diverse things have diverse effects, that is to say of hot things they
wax cold, of cold things hot, or of Tigers, which by the sound of melodious
Instruments are driven into madness, by which men are wont to expel
melancholy. He that will seek for a Pearl, must first learn to know it when
he sees it, least he neglect it when he finds it, or make a naught worth
peeble his Jewel: and they that covet to pick more precious knowledge out of
Poets amorous Elegies, must have a discerning knowledge, before they can aspire
to the perfection of their desired knowledge, least the obtaining of trifles be
the repentant end of their travel.

Who so snatcheth up ^ollies too greedily, making an occupation of recreation,
and delight his day labor, may happes prove a wittome whiles he fisheth for
finer wit, and a Fool while he finds himself laughing pastime at other
men's follies, not unlike to him who drinking Wine immoderatly, besides that he
many times swallows down dregs, at length proves stark drunk.

There is no extremity either in active or contemplative life, more outrageous
the^ the excessive studies of delight, wherewith young Students are so besotted,
that they forsake sounder Arts, to follow smoother eloquence, not unlike to
him that had rather have a new painted box, though there be nothing but a
halter in it, then an old bard hutch with treasur^ inualuable, or Aesops
Co^ke, which parted with a Pearl for a Barlie kurnell. Even as a man is
inclined, so his studies are bended, if to vainglory, to eloquence: if to
profounde knowledge, to Aristotle: if lascivious, good in some English devise
of verse, to conclude, a passing potm^n, a passing Poet.

I might have fitted men's several affections with their sundry studies, but
that I am afraid there be many ashamed of their studies, which I will not
repeat least some should blush when as they read their reproach.

It is a thing of no pains or experience, to aim at the practices of the
proud, the secret inclinations of the covetous, the imaginations of y^
incestuous, the hooded hypocrisy of those that pretend purity, which things
being practiced in youth, become trades of profit in age. An usual thing it
is, that the flower of our years should be the fountain of folly, which by
the conduit pype of continual customs conueiante, causes the gray headed to
carry corruption, their souls infectio^ unto their graves. When the endeavor of
youth shall prove naught else but the exercise of all abuses, is it like that a
man's after life shall be without blemish.

There is almost no man now a days, who does not in his secret thought
estimate vice after his vileness, yet security has so blinded many, that
loosing the habit of virtue, they covet to restrain wisdom only to their
wicked ways, concluding that in the imitation of their actions, consists the
high way to happiness, because their humor is such, condemning that state of
life which is an enemy to their vicious appetites. It is impossible for these
men, either by hearing or reading, to profit in integrity of life, whiles in
the one and in the other, they will regard no more then avails to their
advantage. The covetous cares for no more Scripture, then that which
priuiledgeth him to provide for his family, the proud sort are conversant
continually in this Text, They that are in Kings Courts wear soft raiment:
and Thieves read with delight how the Egiptians in Egypt, were by y^ Isralites
robbed of their Jewels. Thus every one makes that sacred preservative, a
pernicious poison unto his sinful soul, nourishing his vanity with sacred
verities, increasing his damnation, by the ordained means to salvation.

If men in their youths best lust, and in the prime of prosperity, would but
cast their eye on the one side to future alterations, and think of a further
felicity, beholding adversity on the other side cladde with follies repentant
Robes, compassed about with contempt in steed of a gyrdle, guarded with feends,
not accompanied with friends, having for momentarie pleasure endless pain,
death without date for a dyssolute life repented too late, they would then so
behave themselves here upon earth, as they might have a Savior in heaven.

Pausanias King of the Lacedaemonians, bydding Simonides to a sumptuous banquet,
instantly entreated him to speak some thing notable which sauoured of learning:
why then (quoth he) remember thou art a man. Which saying, Pausanias scornfully
despised, afterward being in prison in Chalciaeco, was almost ^amished ere he
died, where remembering Simonides speech, with a loud lamentable voice, he
cried, O my friend of Caeos, would God I had regarded thy words.

Good counsel is never remembered nor respected, till men have given their
farewell to felicity, and have been overwhelmed in the extremity of
adversity. Young men think it a disgrace to youth, to embrace the studies of
age, counting their fathers fools whiles they strive to make them wise,
casting that away at a cast at dice, which cost their daddes a years toil,
spending that in their Ueluets, which was rakt up in a Russette coat: so
that their revenues rackt, and their rents raised to the uttermost, is scarce
enough to maintain ones rufling pride, which was wont to be many poor men's
relife. These young Gallants having leudly spent their patrimony, fall to
begging of poor men's houses over their heads, as the last refuge of their
riot, remoouing the ancient bounds of lands to support their decayed port,
rather coveting to enclose that which was wont to be common, then they would
want to maintain their private prodigality.

The Temple of Terminus Deus amongst the Romans, who was supposed to have the
pre-eminence over the bounds of lands, had ever a hole in the roof, for as
much as they thought it unlawful for the bounds of lands to be covered, and
that rich men might learn to know their lands from poor men's grounds. A
strange thing it is, that these men cannot learn to thrive before all be gone,
and that they in the midst of their plenty, should be more needy, then those
that saving their day labor, are naught but poverty. But as the Brook
Achelous carries whole trees and huge stones with hidious roaring noise down
his streams, so the Court is as it were a devouring Gulf of gold, and the
consumption of coin. It fares with the^ as it did with Calchas that running
Soothsayer, who died for sorrow because Mopsus surpast him in science, so if
they see any excel them in bravery, in whose steps at every inche they are
not able to tread, they hang the head as they they were half dead.

How far are these ^ondlings from imit^ting Cra^es the Philosopher, who to
the intent that he might more quietly st^die Philosophy, threw all his goods
into the sea, saying, hence from me you ungracious appetites, I had rather
drown you, then you should drown me. By this that has been already set
down, it may plainly appear, that where pride bears sway, hospitality
decaies, nay this kind of men, will never be saved by their works, in so much
as the poor always mysse, as often as they seek to them for alms, yea they
seem only to be borne for themselves, and not to benefit any ^ls, who with
the woers of Penelope, will by their Porters, prohibit^ the poor from having
access^ unto their porches, terming the^ the marrers of mirth, and procurers of
sadness: but what end do they propounde to themselves in their prodigal
expenses, but the feeding of their Mistress fancy, and y^ fostering of their
^^wlesse lusts, shrouding under their Purple roabes and embroydered apparel,
a heart spotted with all abuses, wherefore they may be aptly resembled to y^
Aegiptian Temples, which without are goodly and great, their walls arris^ng
unto a huge height, with stately Marble turrets, but if you go in and look
about you, you shall find for a God, either a Storke, a Goat, a Cat, or an
Ape. Did they considerthat not vestis sed virtus hominem euehit, they would
reject all superfluity as sin^ull, and betake themselves to a more temperate
moderation in each degree of excess.

When as the outward garment, not the inward virtue must be feign to commend a
man, it is all one, as if a man should love the Snake for his gray colored
skin, or poison because it is in a silver piece, or pilgrim salve because it is
in a painted box. It is loarning and knowledge which are the only ornaments
of a man, which furnishes the tongue with wisdom, and the heart with
understanding, which makes the children of the needy poor, to become noble
Peers, and men of obscure parentage, to be equal with Princes in possessions,
with who^ if you talk of lineall discents, they will lay before you the pence,
being able to fetch their petigree from no ancient house, except it be from
some old Hogstie, deriuing their kindred from the Coffer, not from the
Conquest, neither can they vaunt any notable service of their auncitry in the
field, but can tell you how their Grandsire used to set his fold, neither do
I speak this to the disgracing derision of virtuous Nobility, which I
reverence in each respect, but only endeavor summarilie to show, what goodly
buildings Fortune does raise on virtues slender foundations. I am not
ignorant, that many times the covetous ignorant, scrapeth that from the ^ayle
of the Plowe, which makes all his after posterity think scorn to look on
the plough, they ouerseeing that by a servant, on which their father was as
Tilsman attendant, being translated by his toil from the Parrish, good man
Web in the Country, to a pertly Gentleman in the Court, bestowing more at
one time on the Herralde for Arms, then his Father all his life time ^^ue in
alms. No matter though such vanting vpstarts, which have as little virtue as
antiquity to honest their posterity, become the scoff of a Scholar, and the
stale of a Courtier, which will make them if they fail hereafter in Nobility
of birth, to seek it by learning.

In times past, ignorance in each sex was so odious, that women as well as
men, were well seen in all liberal Sciences: was not Gracchus who was counted
a most excellent Orator, instructed by his Mother Cornelia in eloquence? what
should I speak of Aripithis, the King of Scithias Son, whom his mother Istrina
likewise instructed in the elements of the Greek tongue. But least in praising
of learning in so learned an age, I should bring manifest truethes into
question, and so swerve from the Logicians prescriptions, or by dilating on so
affluent an argument, might seem to gather stones on the sea shore, I will
cease to prosecute the praise of it, and will propound unto you the special
plague that is iminent unto it.

Science has no enemy but the ignorant, who contemn^ it as vile, because
their gross capacity perceiues nothing in it divine. Such an ignorant was
Valentinianus the Emperor, who was a professed enemy to all excellent Arts,
or Li^inius, who likewise termed learning, the plague and poison of the weal
public. Such covetous ignorance does creep amongst the cormorants of our
age, who as the Chamelion which is fed with the air, stands always with his
mouth wide open, so these men which live upon alms, have always their mouths
open to ask, and having felt the sweetness of Abbey Lands, they gape after
College living, desiring to enrich themselves as much with the silver of the
one, as their auncesters got by the gold of the other: much like to him that
having bathed his hands in the blood of wild beasts, proceeds to the
slaughter of men, the one no more satis-fied with money, then the other with
murder. If such goodly buildings were again to arise by the common cost, a man
may easily guess, how backward they would be in giving, who are now so forward
in detracting. Can Commonweals flourish where learning decaies, shall not
felicity have a fall when as knowledge fails? yea, peace must needs perrish
from amongst us, when as we rather seek to choke then cherrish, to famish then
feed the Nurses of it, depriving them of all outward ornaments (as much as in
us lies) who are the only ornaments of our state: but I hope their needy
enmity shall return to them in vain, and not prove the procurement of our
common plague and pain, that the more they oppugn our prosperity, the
greater shall be our welfare, like to the Trees in whom those parts are stronger
that are opposite to the North, then those which bend toward the South or West
wind.

I will not stand to amplify their discredit, which endeavor to turn our day
into night, and our light into darkness, nor yet will compare them to those
that are called Agrippae, who being preposterously borne with their feet
forward, are said to enter into the world with ill fortune, and to the great
myschiefe of mankind, as Marcus Agrippa, and Nero, only this I will wish,
that being dead, the learned may give them such Epitaphes of disgrace, as they
deserve, and that the Chronicles may record their reproach unto all ages. Amen
say all they that are friends to the Muses.

How can (...) hope for any further exhibition, when as (...) men repine a^
that we have already? It ^areth with (...) wits, as it does with the pearl
which is affirmed to be in the head of the Toade, the one being of exceeding
virtue is (...) with poison, the other of no less value, co^past about with
poverty. Learning now adays gets no living if it come empty handed. Promotion
which was wont to be y^ free propounded palm of pains, is by many men's
lamentable practice, become a purchase. When as wits of more towardnes shall
have spent some time in the University, and have as it were tasted the
elements of Art, and laid the foundation of knowledge, if by the death of
some friend they should be withdrawn from their ^tudies, as yet altogether
raw, and so consequently vnfitt^ for any calling in the Common wealth, where
should, they find ^ friend, to be unto them in steed of a father, or one to
(...) which their deceased parents begun: nay they may well bet^ke themselves
to some trade of Husbandry, for any maintenance they get in the way of alms
at the University, or else take upon them to teach, being more fit to be
taught, and perch into the pulpit, their knowledge being yet vnper^^t, ^^rie
zealouslie preaching, being as yet scarce grounded in religious principles,
How can those men call home the lost sheep that are gone astray, coming into
the Ministry before their wits be ^^aid. This green fruit, being gathered
before it be ri^e, is rotten before it be mellow, and infected with Scis^es,
before they have learned to bridle their affections, affecting innouations as
newfangled, and e^terprising alterations whereby the Church is mangled.

But some may object, that I go beyond my Anatomy, in touching these abusiue
enormities, I answer, that I discourse of these matters as they are become the
follies of our time, and the faults of our age, wishing the redress of such
rashness, and the suppression of the forenamed ravenous rabble, these abuses
being as intolerable as the worst, and therefore to be condemned with the
first. I trust there is no man so simple, who can discern wisdom from folly,
and knowledge from ignorance, but his ^^other wit will afford him so much
understanding, that there is necessary use of learning in every calling,
bringing praise to them that possess it, and shame to them that want it,
without the which no external ornament is any whit available to advancement,
but seems rather a disgracing deformity, having dislike his attendant.
Reject then pride, to embrace it to your profit, neglect vainglory, and strive
to attain to the knowledge of Arts, the pathway to honor. Let the lives of the
Philosophers be the direction of youths imitation, who ware no more clothes
then would keep away cold, and eat no more meat then would expel hunger, yea
many of them the more to keep down their bodies, being placed in the midst of
plenti^, have contented themselves with a thin hungry diet, the companion of
scarsitie. Diogenes chose rather to lick dishes at Athens, then to live
daintily with Alexander. Plato had rather ^id Dyoni^ius adieu, then he would be
driven from his philosophical diet. Porus that peerless Indian Prince,
contented himself with bread and water as his accustomed cheer. Age^ilaus
King of the Lacedaemonians, passing through y^ Country of Thasius, being
lovingly met by the nobles, and entirely welcomed by the common sort into the
Country, with diversity of dainties and bravery of banquets, would not taste
any thing save Bread and Water, notwithstanding earnest entreatie to the
contrary, but their importunity increasing, to put by all suspicion of
ingratitude, he willed his slaves and footmen to take their repast with their
provision, saying, that abstinencie and temperancie, not variety of viandes
and delicacie, beseems him that is placed in Chair of authority.
Constantius kept himself so hungerly, that many times he would crave a crust
of bread of a poor woman to expel hunger. The Priests of Aegipt abstained
from flesh and wine. The Persians were satis-fied with bread, salt, and water.
In Rhodes he was reputed a gross braind man, which fed on any thing but fish.
So warily in times past has temperate moderation been observed in all
Nations, that by Zaleucus law, he was put to death, which drank wine without
the Phisititions adui^e. The Matrons and Ladies of Rome, were expressly
prohibited the taste of it, in deed by this counsel squaring their decrees,
that wine is the efficient of heat, heat of lust, lust of murder. Eg.
Maec^nius, flew his own Wife, (as Pliny records) for that she loved wine
too much, and was by Romulus Law saved from death, in which place of Pliny it
is also specified, that a certain Matron of Rome, was adjudged to die, because
she closely kept the key of a Celler of wine. Censoriall Cato, was so curious
in y^ observation of this ordinance, that he customably caused certain men
to kyss^ the women, to know whether their breath smelled of wine, in whose
time, no man whatsoever, whether he were Consul, Senator, Tribune, or Dictator,
might drink any Wine, before he was thirty and five years of age. I do not
alleage^these examples, to the end I might cond^^ne the moderate use of wine as
unlawful, but to show by the comparison, how far we exceed them in excess,
whose banquets are furnished with such wastfull superfluity.

It is a common complaint, that more perrish with the surfeit then with the
sword, which many have followed so far, that to the recovering remedy of
this surfeting malady, they have restrained a healthful diet to two or three
dishes: deeming our disgestion would be better, if our dishes were fewer. Which
opinion, although Sir Thomas Eli^t a man of famous memory, in his book called
the Castle of health, in some politic respects does seem to favor, yet I
do think in his private judgment, he did acknowledge the diversity of
mea^es, not to be so incommodious as he there pretendes. But that I may
answer what they urge, first say they, what say you to brute Beasts, who
being nourished but with one kind of meat, and only after one manner, are
far more healthful and sound of body then men, that diet themselves with
sundry dishes: to this I answer, that either of these assertions are untrue,
for neither do they use only one kind of nourishment, neither are diseases
more distant from the^, then from us. The first is proved by the choice of
Pastures wherein they graze, where there is grass both bitter and sauorie,
sour and sweet, some nourishing cold, some nourishing hot juice, Is then
the substance of their meat simple, who feed upon boughe^ and weeds,
besides so many sundry kind of field herbs, no less diverse in nutriment
then in name. To prove that diseases are no less incident to beasts then to
men, I will stick to Homers authority, who reports the pestilence to be
begun by brute beasts. To show how great the infirmities are of other
creatures, the short life of some of them may sufficiently serve, except you
have recourse to those recorded Fables of Crows and Ra^ens, who commonly sease
upon all kind of carrion, pick up each sort of new sown seed, and are at
host with every kind of fruit in the Orchard. Secondly they add, that there
was never Physician so confidently careless of his Patient, that he would
prescribe the use of diverse meats at once, to him that is distressed with a
Fe^er, whereby (say they) it may be gathered, that one kind of meat is more
available to a speedy disgestion then many, because that Physicians prescribe
but one kind of meat to them, whose disgestion is weakest.

This objection is thus taken away, first there is not the same proportion to
be observed in diet, in s^cknes, and in health. Secondly, in as much as they
are wont to set before them, only one sort of meat, it is not because it is
more easy of disgess^ion, but least the sight of much meat should breed in y^
weak stomachs a lothing of it. Thirdly they object, that the nourishment of
diverse meats is no less noisome, then the drinking of diverse kinds of Wines
is dangerous. Every one knows that he that washes his brains with diverse
kinds of wines, is the next door to a drunken man, and he like (say they) to
be ^ndangered by diseases, who affects variety in his diet. Here do^ I deny
the coherence of the comparison, for what is he that by eating overmuch, does
incur the like inconvenience that he does, that drinks much, he that has
ouerloded his stomach with sundry meats, is pained a little perhaps in his
belly, he that has ouercharged his brain with wine, is no better then a mad
man for the time, which the rather seems to me, because the grosenes of y^
meat remaining in one place, expects the administration of disgestion, and
being thoroughly consumed, is suddenly voided, but Wine being by nature
lighter, ascends higher, and tickleth the brain placed in the top, with the
inflammation of a hot f^me, and therefore diversity of wines at once, is
shunned of them that are wise, least the matter which is ready to possess the
head on a sudden in a moment ouerturne the seat of reason, which danger in
the diuer^itie of meats, no reason can be rendered why we should dread. But
they will perhaps say, that the diversity of juice, framed of the diversity
of meats, agrees not with our bodies, as though our bodies were not compounded
of qualities, as of hot and cold, dry and moist, but he which feeds only on
one kind of meat, sends forth but the juice of one quality, the Spring is
hot and moist, the Summer dry and hot, Autum^^ dry and cold, Winter ^oth
moist and cold together, so also the elements which are our beginninges, what
reason is it then that our bodies should be restrained to one kind of meat.
Thus then we see that diversity is not so inco^modious, but one kind of meat
may be as dangerous, for gluttony may as well be committed by one ^ish as
twenty. May not a man as soon surfeit by eating a whole sheep with Phago, or
an Ox with Milo, as by the sipping taste of sundry dainties.

But why stand I so long about meats, as though our life were naught but a
banquet, or why am I so large in disputing of the diet of our bodies, as though
thereby we should purchase quiet to our souls, what is this but to imitate
the foolish tender mother, which had rather her child should be well fed then
well taught. Wherefore to make use of my Anatomy as well to my self as to
others, I will prescribe as near as I can, such a rule for Students, that
thereby squaring their actions, they shall not be easily attached of any notable
absurdity.

There be three things which are wont to slack young Students endeavor,
Negligence, want of Wisdom, and Fortune. Negligence, when as we either
altogether pretermit, or more lightly pass over, the thing we ought seriously
to ponder. Want of wisdom, when we observe no method in reading. Fortune is
in the event of chance, either naturally happening, or when as by poverty or
some infirmity, or natural dulnes we are withdrawn from our studies, and
alienated from our intended enterprise, by the imagination of the rareness of
learned men, but as touching these three, for the first, that is to say,
negligent ^loth, he is to be warned: for the second, he is to be instructed:
for the third, he is to be helped. Let his reading be temperate, whereunto
wisdom, not wearines, must prescribe an end, for as immoderate fast,
excessive abstinence, and inordinate watchings, are argued of intemperance,
perrishing with their immoderate use, so that these things never after can be
performed as they ought in any measure: so the intemperate study of reading,
incurreth reprehension, and that which is laudable in his kind, is blame
worthy by the abuse. Reading, two ways is loathsome to the mind, and
troublesome to the spirit, both by the quality, namely if it be more obscure,
and also by y^ quantity if it be more tedious, in either of which we ought to
use great moderation, least that which is ordained to the refreshing of our
wits, be abused to the dulling of our senses. We read many things, least by
letting them pass, we should seem to despise them, same things we read,
leaft we should seem to be ignorant in them, other things we read, not that
we may embrace them, but eschew them. Our learning ought to be our lives
amendment, and the fruits of our private study, ought to appear in our
public behavior.

Read that sitting, which may be thy meditation walking, shun as well rude
manners as rude phrase, and false dealing as much as false Latin, and choose
him to be thy teacher, whom thou may more admire when thou see then when
thou hear, Quid faciendum sit, a faciente discendum est. Learn of all men
willingly that which thou know not, because humility may make that common to
thee, which nature has made proper to every one. Thou shall be wiser then all,
if thou will learn of all. Heed what Chrisippus says in his proverbs, that
which thou know not, peradventure thy Ass can tell the^. If thou be
desirous to attain to the truth of a thing, first learn determinate
conclusions before thou dealest with doubtful controversies, he shall never
enter into the reason of the truth, who begins to be taught by discussing
of doubts. Think not common things unworthy of thy knowledge of which thou art
ignorant: those things are not to be contemned as little, without the which
great things cannot stand. Post not rashly from one thing to another, least
thou may seem to have seen many things, and learned few. Nil assequitur
qui omnia sequitur. I am not ignorant, that far more ardent is the desire of
of knowing unknown things, then of repeating known things, this we see
happen in Stageplayers, in Orators, in all things, men have unto novelties, and
run to see new things, so that whatsoever is not usual, of the multitude is
admired, yet must Students wisely prefer renowned antiquity before new found
toys, one line of Alexanders Master, before the large inuectiue Scolia of the
Parisian Kings Professor.

Many there be that are out of love with the obscuriti^ wherein they live,
that to win credit to their name, they care not by what discredit they increase
others shame, and least by the contention, their vaunted victory might be
destitute of all glory, they encounter with them on whose shoulders al Arts
do lean, as on A^las the heavens, thinking that men should thus imagine,
that none except he knew himself sufficiently furnished, with the exquis^te
knowledge of all excellent Arts, durst undertake such a task, as though any
were more ready to correct Appelles, then the rude Cobbler, to contend with
Appollo, then contemptible Pan. But these vpstart reformers of Arts, respect
not so much the indagation of the truth, as the aim of their pride, and
coveting to have new opinions pass under their names, they spend whole
years in shaping of ^ects. Which their pudled opinions are no sooner
published, but straight way some proud spirited princocks, desirous to differ
from the common sort, gets him a liuerie Coat of their cloth, and slaves it in
their servile suits, enlarging the wilful errors of their arrogancy. Nothing
is so great an enemy to a sound judgment, as the pride of a peevish conceit,
which causes a man both in life and belief, either to snatch up or hatch
newfangles. This one thing also deceives many, forsooth they will seem wise
before their time, that now they both begin to counterfeit that which they
are not, and to be ashamed of that which they are: and therein they are most
distant from wisdom, wherein they think themselves to be thought wise.
Others there be that think so well of themselves, that no word can so much as
escape by chance, but they think it worthy of a pen-mans pains, and striving
to speak naught but proverbs, they make their bald eloquence a common by word,
cockering themselves in their own conceits, till they be scorned as
cockscombes. These they be that knowing not how to speak, have not learned to
hold their peace, teaching many times the things they understand not, and
persuading what they know not, becoming the Masters of the ignorant, before
they be the Scholars of the learned. There is no such discredit of Art, as an
ignorant Artificer, men of meaner judgment, measuring often times the
excellency of the one, by the ignorance of the other. But as he that
censureth the dignity of Poetry by Cherillus paultry pains, the majesty of
Rethorick by the rudeness of a stutting Hortensius, the subtlety of Logique
by the railing of Ramus, might judge the one a fool in writing he knew not
what, the other tipsie by his stammering, the third the son of Zantippe by
his scolding; so he that estimats Arts by the insolence of Idiots, who
profess that wherein they are Infants, may deem the University naught but
the Nurse of folly, and the knowledge of Arts, naught but the imitation of
the Stage. This I speak to show what an obloquie, these impudent incipients in
Arts, are unto Art.

Amongst all the ornaments of Arts, Rethorick is to be had in highest
reputation, without the which all the rest are naked, and she only garnished:
yet some there be who would separate Arts from Eloquence, whose oppugn,
because it abhorres from common experience. Who does not know y^ in all tongues
task eloquence is odious if it be affected, and that attention is altogether
wanting, where it is rejected. A man may baule till his voice be hoarse, exhort
with tears till his tongue ache, and his eyes be dry, repeat that he would
persuade, till his stalenes does secretly call for a Cloak bag, and yet
move no more then if he had been all that while mute, if his speech be not
seasoned with eloquence, and adorned with elocutions assistance. Nothing is
more odious to the Auditor, then the artlesse tongue of a tedious dolt, which
dulleth the delight or hearing, and slacketh the desire of remembering, and I
know not how it comes to pass, but many are so delighted to hear themselves,
that they are a cumber to the ears of all other, pleasing their Auditors in
nothing more then in y^ pause of a full point, when as by their humming and
hawking respit, they have leisure to gesture the mislike of his rudenes. To the
eschewing therefore of the lothing hatred of them that hear them, I would wish
them to learn to speak many things in few, neither to speak all things,
which to their purpose they may speak, least those things be less profitably
spoken which they ought to speak: neither would I have them ouershoots
themselves with an imitation of brevity, so that striving to be very short,
they should prove very long, namely, when as they endeavor to speak many
things breefelie. Persuade one point thoroughly, rather then teach many things
scatteringly, that which we think let us speak, and that which we speak let
us think, let our speech accord with our life. Endeavor to add unto Art
Experience, experience is more profitable void of art, then art which has
not experience. Of it self art is unprofitable without experience, and
experience rash without art. In reading, thou must with wary regard learn
as well to discern thy loss as thy gain, thy hurt as good, least being won
to have a favorable like of Poets wanton li^es, thou be excited unto the
imitation of their lust. It is very unseemly that nobler wits should be
discredited with baser studies, and those who^ high and mighty callings do
expect, should be hindered by the inticements of pleasure and vanity. Young men
are not so much delighted with solid substances, as with painted shadows,
following rather those things which are goodly to the view, then profitable
to the use, neither do they love so much those things that are doing, as
those things that are sounding, rejoicing more to be strowed with flowers then
nourished with fruit. How many be there that seek truth, not in truth but in
vanity, and find that they sought not according to truth, but according to
vanity, and that which is most miserable, in the words of life, they toil for
the merchandise of death. Hence comes it to pass, that many make toys their
only study, storing of trifles, when as they neglect most precious treasures,
and having left the Fountains of truth, they follow the Rivers of opinions. I
can but pity their folly, who are so curious in fables, and excruciate
themselves about impertinent questions, as about Homers Country, parentage, and
sepulcher, whether Homer or Hesiodus were older, whether Achilles or Patroclus
more ancient, in what apparel Anacharsis the Scithian slept, whether Lucan is
to be reckoned amongst the Poets or Historiographers, in what Month in the
year Virgill died, with infinite other, as touching the Letters of the
Hyacinth, the Chestnut tree, the children of Niobe, the trees where Latona
brought forth Diana, in all which idle interrogatories, they have left unto us
not things found, but things to be sought, and peradventure they had found
necessary things, if they had not sought superfluous things. Innumerable such
unnecessary questions, according to Philosophy are made as touching the soul,
as whence it is, what manner of one it is, when it does begin to be, how long it
may be, whether it passes not from his first mansion else where, and so alter
his abiding, or shift into other forms of brute Beaste^* whether one soul
serves no more but once and one, what it shall do, when as by us it shall
cease to do any thing, how it shall use his liberty, when as it is escaped
out of this dungion, or whether it be forgetful of former things? what do al
these things avail unto virtue? Wherefore, even as he that enterpriseth to
sail over the endless Ocean, whiles he cannot pass any further, is
constrained to return by the way he came, so these men beginning to sound the
infinite depth of these mysteries in ignorance, are feign to cease in
ignorance: let the^ therefore refrain from such folly, and not seek that which
is not to be found, least they find not that which is to be found. Socrates who
reduced all Philosophy unto the manners, said, that this was the greatest
wisdom, to distinguish good and evil things. Unto which discerning
distinction, is required deliberatiue meditation, in so much as in it, consists
our lives virtuous direction. Neither is it to live well one days work, but
the continual exercise of our whole life, being the best effect that ever
knowledge did afford. When as we duly consider, whether every way leads, or
wisely ponder with our selves to what end we refer each one of our actions, and
exact of our straying thoughts a more severe account of their wandering course,
we shall find no victory so great, as the subduing of vice, nothing so hard as
to live well, no such inestimable jewel, as an honest conversation: let him
that is inclined but to one extreme, secretly try by himself, with what
facility or difficulty he may suppress it in himself, and his own practice
will teach him, that he is led captive by his own inclinations, and overcome
by his wicked cogitations. If the^ so difficult a thing in accomplishment,
seems one sins suppression, how laborious would be the reformation, of an
altogether evil conversation. Since then the only end of knowledge, ought to
be to learn to live well, let us propound this use and end unto our selves,
least after so many years pains, we miss of the mark whereat our parents in
our education aymd. Turning over Histories, and reading the lives of excellent
Orators and famous Philosophers, let us with Themistocles, set before our eyes
one of the excellentest to imitate, in whose example insisting, our industry
may be doubled, to the adequation of his praise.

I know the learned will laugh me to scorn, for setting down such Rams horn
rules of direction, and even now I begin to bethink me of Mulcasters
Po^itions, which makes my pen here pause as it were at a full point, which
pause has changd my opinion, and makes me rather refer you to Aschame the
antienter of the two: whose praises, seeing Master Grant has so gloriously
garnished. I will refer you to his works, and more especially to his
Schoolmaster, where he has most learnedly censured both our Latin and Greek
Authors. As for lighter studies, seeing they are but the exercise of youth to
keep them from idleness, and the preparation of the mind to more weighty
meditations, let us take heed, least whiles we seek to make them the
furthering helps of our final profession, they prove not the hindering harms
of our intended vocation, that we dwell not so long in Poetry, that we become
Pagans, or that we make not such proceedinges in Aristotle, that we prove
proficients in Atheism. Let not learning, which ought to be the Level,
whereby such as live ill, ought to square their crooked ways, be the occasion
unto the^ of farther corruption, who have already sucked infection, least their
knowledge way them down into hell, when as the ignorant go the direct way to
heaven.

And thus I end my Anatomy, least I might seem to have been too tedious to
the Reader in enlarging a Theme of Absurdity, desiring of the learned pardon,
and of Women patience, which may encourage me hereafter, to endeavor in some
other matter of more moment, as well to be answerable to the expectation of the
one, as to make amends to the other. In the mean time I bid them both
farewell.

FINIS.

