THE PALM OF CHRISTIAN FORTITVDE. Or the glorious combats of Christians in
Iaponia. Taken out of letters of the Society of JESUS from thence. Anno 1624.

Hier. ep. 150. Triumphus Dei est passio Martyrum, and cruoris effusio, and
inter tormenta latitia.

God triumphs when Martyrs suffer, and shead their blood, and rejoice in their
torments. With permission of Superiors. Anno 1630.

THE PREFACE.
HEre wrapped up in a few sheets of ordinary paper, the Tra^slatour offers thee,
o England, with a present of inestimable price, with a carkanet of the richest
ge^mes the Orient ever sent into Europe, Jewels of Iaponian pearl within the
sea of persecution, bred of the dew of Divine grace, infused into souls, that
by exact purity of life, and by magnanimous contempt of all earthly objects,
were ever open toward God, and ready to intromit his celestial influences.

This fortunate and thrice happy Church was primitiuely planted by the great
Indian Apostle S. Xauerius, brought thither by the course of his charity, which
had no other bounds but the world; watered by the succeeding labors of the
Fathers of the Society of Jesus, the sole workmen in that holy harvest for
many years, finally manured also by other Professors of Evangelical Poverty,
whom their unquenchable zeal of souls urged to pass thither from Europe,
over many vast worlds of water.

As Religious profession was the parent of these Christians, so by this
narration (the theater of their virtues) you may see they do not degenerate
but show themselves a worthy extract of so noble a stock, a genuine offpring of
so sacred a plantatio^, a pourtraicture of divine perfection corresponding to
the high sanctimony of the Pattern. In the course of their lives so enamoured
of Poverty, so inflamed with Charity, so devoted to voluntary affliction of the
body, to disclplines, wearing of hair clothes, extraordinary fastings, retired
praying, dedicating themselves to the teaching of the ignorant and helping of
souls, shine lively lineaments of more then secular sanctity, and assured
marks of a Religious spirit superior to the world. In their deaths they
blaze forth rare, divine, miraculous examples of heroical fortitude, whereby
the peerlesse luster of primitive Martyrdom is renewed in these days, to show
the never decaying merit of the precious Immaculate Blood, in whose shining
candor all Martyrs, ancient and recent made white their Triumphall Robes.

The light of the Christian Roman Religion, which from thee, o Catholic
Europe, Iaponia received, is here returned back again with interest, and
increase, adorned with glorious victories, which by virtue thereof to the
amazement of Infidels over Paganism she has obtained; by thy Religion, I say,
professing and practicing veneration of Relickes, Adoration of the Cross
prayer unto Saints, devotion unto Pardons, hearing of holy Mass, divine
worship of the Venerable Eucharist, Sacramental Confession of sins, the
saying of Angelical salutations to the B. Virgin in a set number on beads,
finally (to pretermit other points) joint invocation of JESUS MARIA even till
the last moment of their sacred breath; This light of Religion to the sple^dour
of her shining victories improued, she sends thee back, to drive away the
darkness of heresy, that ouershads some part of thy dominions, to discover
the blasphemy of their conceit, who think thy Religion Idolatrous, and to open
their eyes, that by the light of new triu^phes they may discern who be the
heirs of Ancient Truth, and not to doubt, but in that Church is found the
light of Apostolical Faith, where the vigor of Apostolical Fortitude by the
victory of torments and death to the overthrow of Idolatry flameth.

Such barbarous variety of cruel torments they endured, such glorious
variety of excellent virtues in their sufferings shined, such a multitude of
both sexes of all states and of all ages, from above Ninety till under Seven
were by Martyrdom crowned, that this on Ila^d within the space of one year,
may seem to have renewed all the famous examples of former Christian ages.
Here is more then one Laurence roasted in fires without groaning or stirring, or
so much as shrinking, with no other chain then of charity tied to the torment.
Here is more then one troop put into freezing waters starued to death in
winter nights, not so much as one relenting, the fervor of Faith keeping the
frost of infidelity from their heart. Here is more then one Andrew adoring the
cross prepared to be his deathbed, and singing for joy he was to die in the
embracements thereof. Here is more then one Bartholomew fleade alive, or minced
into morcells, enduring as many martyrdomes, as he had members to satisfy the
cruel gluttony of death, that would taste him by peece-meales. Here is more
then one Ignatius fearing nothing more then that the persecutour would be
merciful, the torturer gentle, the instruments of his death dull and not eager
enough of his blood. More then one Eleazarus, willing to die rather a thousand
deaths, then to dissemble once, or to permit the voice of another, though
without his priuitie or consent, to belie the constancy of his faith; More
then one Adauctus, who meeting with the companies of designed Martyrs, going to
the place of their death, by spontaneous ioining increased their number, and
made the joy of the heaue^lie banquet the greater, whilst all heartily
welcome the dear unexpected guest.

And to speak also of the other sex by nature inferior, by faith equal, by
the renown of Martyrdom in a sort superior unto me^, the strength of divine
grace showing it self more admirablie in feeble bodies; behold more then one
Felicitas with dry eyes looking on the martyrdomes of her children, sending
them before her to heaven, as harbingers to prepare a place of bliss for their
mother, that was presently to follow. More then one courageous mother, that
with her daughters entered into deep gulfes, holding each other by the hand as
in a dance, singing the praises of Christ on the waters, as it were Carolles on
the Christmas day of their happy nativity into eternal life. More the^ one
Catherine, by the quality of their birth Princesses, ouercoming the
infidelity of the Paynime priests, being after the victory of many torments
and fearce combats co^summated by the sword. More then one Apollonia charged
with years, but more stored with merits of virtuous life, readier to burn for
Christ, then the persecutour to put her into the fire. More then one Agnes,
that overcame tenderness of age by maturity of faith, lawful witnesses of
Christian truth, before they could be witnesses in any cause of the world, that
received on their tender necks the murdering sword as ioifullie, as if they
had put on chains of gold, holding the days of their martyrdomes as their
marriadges feasts. In a word, here (as I said) within one Island, and in one
year, you shall find in a manner all the memorable martyrdomes and glorious
triumphs of the primitive times revived, and by new glorious imitation
expressed to the quick.

We the Catholics of England, who live in the happy danger of being
partakers of the like crowns, have special cause to behold with joy this
Iaponian Palm Tree of Christian Fortitude translated, and planted on English
soil. The victories of Martyrs recorded in writing be encourageme^ts unto
martyrdomes, that the Christian soldier, as Saint Gregory says, eo minus in
certamine trepidet, quo ante se positos tot virorum fortium triumphos videt, so
much the less doubt of the glorious success of this combat, in that he
beholdes the many conquests of triumphant Cha^pio^s displaied to his sight.
And although you do not want other examples of great force; yet these may seem
more pote^t (besides other respects) because they are more recent. Their sacred
blood newly issued out of the furnace of their ardent breast, does yet still
freshlie euaporate divine love, and by how much nearer they are to our days,
by so much the more efficaciouslie they apply to us their flames. They were
members of the same Church, professors of the same Religion, practisers of the
same devotions, according not only the substance, but also every circumstance,
which yet be variable with the time; and we have Preachers of all the same
Religious Orders, that were their guides and leaders in those victorious
combats.

The vexations we endure compared with theirs, will seem more tolerable; and
if they should grow to greater excesses, we have here comfortable pledges to
make us sure the Faith, we profess, is able to conquer the most superlatiue
rage of the world. As from the uttermost coasts we receive news of rare
cruelty; so likewise from thence is brought the rare prize of the valiant
woman. Here we learn that many waters cannot extinguish her charity, nor any
frosts benumme hearts inflamed therewith. The fires of poverty, of disgrace, of
torment, that rage without, be not of equal force with the burning of her
faith within. Nor continuance of sharp afflictions can be so extended by
length of time, as to outreach her longing to suffer for her crucified Lord.

O fire of heaven! o desire of Martyrdom! possess our hearts, penetrate into
our spirits, consume the dross of humane pretenses, quench in us the flame of
other loves. O that to die for Religion, that to suffer for Christ, that the
crown and purple of martyrdom were the sum of all our wishes, the mark of
all our ambitions, our meditation in the day, our dream in the night, that we
were in all our prayers still seeking to obtain it, in all our actions still
aiming to deserve it, in all our cogitations still longing to enjoy it! O let
us without partiality often view ourselves in this admired mirror, thereby to
take away all dissimilitude from them in life, who^ we desire to parallel in
the felicity of their death.

Of the Temporal State of Iaponia, and the present condition of Christian
Religion.
ALthough the Xogun of Iendo, Lord of Iaponia has deposed, together with his
government, the dignity of Xogun upon his son, he himself stepping to a
greater; yet has this bred no alteration in things touching Christian
religion, as we hoped for, at the change of the Governor. For the Son equal
to his Father in the hatred of Christians, has been the death of many, and the
number exceeds that of former years, since from the Month of December 1623,
unto November of the year following a hundred threescore and five Christians
have ended their lives by several torments. Eight of which were Religious of
S. Dominicke, S. Francis, and of the Society; the rest Lay people, Men, Women,
and Children: which shall be the subject of our discourse.

This Persecution rose first in Iendo the head-citty now of Iaponia, and the
court of Xogun, but soon after so dilated it self, that no corner was exempt
from it, where any Christians were to be found. Great store were slain, many
cast into prison, and others into banishment. Some hid themselves; others
abandoned their own houses, fearing to suffer shipwreck of their faith in
company of Gentiles. And many there were, who like brave and valiant champions
stood it out, even in the midst of a perverse nation, animating some weaker
members, which are ever found in a great body, with the conuincing example of
true Magnanimity in the suffrance of most exquisite torments.

It cannot be expressed what fear and tre^bling occupied the hearts of many,
when this tempest rose, the more for that every day new Ministers were appointed
by Xogun himself, who by all possible means of threats and torments, sought to
extort Religion from the hearts of Christians. Their industry in ferreting out
Religious persons, and hindering their entrance into Iaponia was more then
ordinary. These oppositions, and no marvel, have made our harvest less
plentiful, since some only thousa^ds, have been baptized by the hands of ours,
and others who forward this noble enterprise. But we hope for plenty and
abundance in time to come, the soil being moist and fatned with the blood of
so many glorious Martyrs.

And to begin with the persecution raised in the City of Iendo, in which
together with forty seven Christians F. Hierome de Angelis, Brother Simon
Iempo of the Society of Jesus, and F. Francis Galbe of S. Francis Order, gave
up their lives: you may note, that though for this dozen years and more,
through the implacable hatred of the Emperor, persecution has still been in
force against Christian Religion throughout the whole Empire; yet in the
Cittyes subject immediately to the Tenca ( Nangasachi only excepted) there was a
kind of silence or conniuency touching matters of Religion: not that it was
lawful to preach or make public profession thereof under peril of death or
banishment; but that the Magistrates did either dissemble or neglect to look
after those who embraced Christianity. Whilst we lay under this shadow of
peace, the Emperor unexpectedly by occasion of the new dignity conferred upon
his son, reviving his inuiterate hatred against Christians, and especially
their Preachers, thought it a fit occasion to destroy the gospel, by
renewing the laws of Iaponia, amongst which there is one capital against
Christian faith; the preaching whereof, and the usurping of the Empire are held
in effect for the same things. The Magistrates of Tenca demanded, whether or no
it were necessary to insinuate the same by way of Proclamation to other Prin
es: the Xogun answered no: for that it would be sufficient, they should see how
Christians were handled in Iendo, to make them exercise the like in the Cities
subject to their government: neither was he deceived in his opinion. For no
sooner came it to their knowledge, that fifty Christians had been broiled alive
by command from the Xogun, but straight ways every Prince began to
bestirre himself in his own dominions, banishing, imprisoning, and putting to
death such as would not renounce the faith of Christ.

In the City of Iendo were resident F. Hierome de Angelis of the Society of
Jesus and F Francis Galbo of the Order of S. Francis, greatly fructifying, as
well in the manuring and fashioning the already Christians, as in the
conversion of many Gentiles, whom they gained unto God, carrying themselves ever
with that prudent moderation which was necessary in a time of Tempest.

Among those fourteen Christians which Daisu, then Lord of Iaponia, banished
out of his service and Kingdom the year 1612, was one named John Faramond,
rich and noble, who three years after by command of the same Daifu had the
ends of his toes and fingers chopped off, and a Cross printed in his forhead
with an hot iron; with a strict command that none under pain of death should
receive orlodge him throughout the whole Kingdom of Iaponia.

This Farramond had a servant whom he had brought up from a youth, in whom he
much consided; who degenerating from the exemplar life of his Christian Master
gave himself to play and pastime, and other ensuing vices; and his money
falling short of his designs, to make himself rich with the price of iniquity,
he resolved like another Judas to sell his Master, and with him diverse others;
thereby to obtain the reward promised to such as should discover the
transgressors of the law of Xogun. Going then to the Governor of the City of
Iendo called Ienoquida Cambioie, he told him that Faramond was neereat hand,
persisting in his Christianisme, with many more, and namely the Fathers, whom
he affirmed to teach and preach the law of Christ, contrary to the Edict of
Xogun.

The Governor taking hold of the accusation, straight commanded diverse of
them to be apprehended: who being demanded, whether they were Christians? all
answered with an undaunted courage, Yes. He demanded further, whether they
knew where they Preacher is kept? and having extorted from one by violence of
torments the lodginge of F. Hierome de Angelis. he presently sent officers to
apprehend him; but the Father, having had some inklinge of what had passed, had
changed his aboade. The ministers of justice, prevented in their expectacion,
turned their rage against those of the house, who would feign have satisfied
them with a voluntary confession of themselves being Christians: but when
nothing would serve the turn, they undertook to effect that the Father should
be forthcomminge, and present himself before the Governor: with this they
departed, and the Father soon was acquaynted with what had passed, who
straight resolved like a good Pastor to deliver himself up into the hands of
the Governor, for the safeguard of his sheep, and expose manfully his life
for the preachinge of Christ. No sooner had he put on this holy resolution but
straight the whole house burst forth into tears. For though they deemed the
Father most fortunate in his determinacio^, yet could they not but extremely
feel the loss of such a Master and Pastor; and the more for that, to save
them harmless, he exposed his own life. Many offered to accompany him, though
with the loss of their lives; and he had much a do to find out reasons
sufficient to hinder their resolution and make them stay behind, which he would
feign have persuaded Brother Simon Iempo saying he Would leave him behind for
the stay and confort of those good people. to whom the good Brother replied. O
Father, what means your Reverence to be so cruel toward me? I have betherto
accompanied you, and so will even unto death; and if the ministers of justice
deny me passage, take me under your arm, and carry me with you: for never was
I more desirous to be your Companion, then in the act of dying for Christ.
Well, said the Father, be it so in Gods name. And with that taking leave of
his host, he went to those who had been accused to entertain him: with whom
he spent that night, exhorting them to dye manfully for the love of Christ, as
it after fell out. Next morninge at break of day he departed to present
himself with his Companion to the Governor; who having examined them in many
points, laid them fast in prison.

F. Francis de Galbe having notice what passed, retired him self to Camacure a
days journey of, Iendo: and being about to ship himself for an other place,
was discovered by a spy, bound, and sent unto prison, with many other
Christians, some days after F. de Angelis. The choifest Christian taken in
company of F. Francis was one Hilarie Mongazaiemon of Camacura a man wealthy
and noble. Being taken prisoner he was assaulted by his friends and kindred
with all sorts of stratagems, but all in vain; he resistinge with unspeakable
constancy all kinds of offers, yea offeringe all he had in case of death unto
his servants; in token whereof he forgave them great su^mes of money, which they
were owing him. They demanded he would at least in this entreamity, by words
disguise his Religion; which he disdayning told them; That neither lise non
limme should make him, either in word or deed, belie the Faith of his Redeemer.
His wife being taken with him, put on her best apparel, which Hilarious
misliking told her; The best things should have been left for God, but the
good woman no less generous then her husband replied; in this her intention
was to honor God with her best attire in token of joy and triumph to see
themselves worthy of so great a favor, as to be imprisoned and seal his Law
with their best blood.

Persecution was at the hottest in Iendo when F. Francir was taken at Camacura:
the ministers of justice broke with violence into their houses sending them
before the Governor and he laid them up in prison: so that in a short space
the number arrived to fifty. The Children of the imprisoned were kept as
prisoners day and night in their own houses, all their goods being
confiscated, and consumed by the violence of vnderofficers: so that the
condition of poor Christians grew excessiuely intolerable. The Gentiles persued
them, thrusting them out of doors as persons contagious and dangerous: the
number of spies, and informers daily multiplied. There was no sheltring place
to hide themselves; even those, who had partly yielded, were tormented with the
sting of conscience, and the fear of being taken, notwithstanding their
conformity. The ways were full of Officers employed against Christians; the
gates watched and guarded day and night; in so much that the least afflicted
were the already imprisoned; all things breeding horror and amasement to
those, who were yet at liberty. Many now constrained to sleep in the open air
and sieldes, not finding any that would harbor them; banished even from the
common Innes and Tauernes. whether no sooner a man arriues, but he in examined,
what Religion he professes. and if he prove a Christian, he is sent away with
a thousand reproaches: yea the rigor is such, that all the inhabitants of
Iendo are co^streined to give up their names and profession in writing, and
set down, what Bonzo they acknowledge for Master: Withal the manner and
behavior of Christians and Gentiles are so different and opposite, that it is
impossible to lie hid though they would never so feign. And therefore many
have taken their journey toward the Cami, though otherwise so poor, that they
have been co^stiained to sell their clothes off their backs, to maintain their
wives and children upon the way: choosing rather to endure any inconvenience,
then be false to their Religion. Many also of those, who had suffered shipwreck
of their faith, did also depart for the same end; vndertakinge a ten or twelve
days journey to find a salve for their wounds and wash out their offenses
with the most holy Sacrament of Penance: making profession of Christian
Religion, even before those, who before had been witnesses of their weakness.

The exercise of the Christians in Prison.
IT is the custom in Iaponia to have at the entrance of the Prison, a house
for the Keeper, which is divided from the common iayle, with two strong grates
of wood and some twenty foot distant. In this first placewas kept F. de Angelis
by a particular favor, as being a stranger, yet with Irons upon him; and Leo
his host, as a friend of the Governors.

The rest were in the inward part, but extremely infested with the darkness,
multitude, and other circumstances of the place: their diet being nothing but a
little rice sod in water, with some grains of salt. Now Brother Simon preached
day and night, with so great zeal and fervor that he converted forty Gentiles
to the Faith of Christ; vho were committed for their crimes. And had he lived
ten days longer, God gave him hope that all the rest would follow, and embrace
that Religion, which was for that present so much hated and depressed on all
sides. Thus did the Good Brother assist the Gentiles, by preacheing, as he was
accustomed, being Companion to the Father; yet so, that he neglected not his
fellow Christians, whom he encouraged to die, And the effects appeared in the
chearfullnes of their countenance, and resolution of their hearts. Father de
Angelis, who was without, had less matter to work upon, having eight only
Gentiles in his Company, whom he converted and baptized: and being he was
seldom permitted to visit those within the railes with any comfortable
exhortation, he employed himself in making certain paper couers, thereby to
relieve, the best he could, their corporal necessities, not being able to
affoard them spiritual co^forts: and in this occupation was he found by one
sent from the Superior of the Society in Camai, with his Irons tied up to his
neck in a cord, the less to hinder his work. At first he was visited by
many, who came under color of visiting Leo, but the Governor perceiving it,
and expecting no good effect from thence, caused Leo to be put further in with
his keepers. And to those who resorted unto him, his discourse was only of
heavenly matters; shewinge them the only way thereunto to be true Faith, and
exhorting them to make light of all things save only God. He heard the
Confessions of the Chrstians and filled them with joy, he alone bewailed his
own distaster, who upon the torment had discovered others, and the quantity of
his tears had made visible furrows in his cheeks.

But we must not let pass one thing which befell a certain Christian; who
went to visit F. de Angelis. A certain ge^tleman named Lewis going from Cami
toward Oxu, where he dwelled, chanced to pass together with his son by the
City of Iendo: and hearing that F. de Angelis his old friend was in prison he
determined, for his comfort, to go and visit him: but the case being
dangerous, if he should chance to be discovered, and taken for a Christian, he
thought best to dispose of his affairs before hand, as if he had been going
to die. And therefore calling his son unto him, he acquainted him with his
design; and set down an order which was to be observed, concerning his wife
and the rest of his children, in case any thing should happen unto him. The
young man about the age of two and twenty years replied; Father, I would not
have you think, that I can leave you in this dangerous passage: temporal
respects alone, if all other motives failed, do sufficiently forbid me; I
will go my self and salute F. de Angelis in yours and my name. In the mean
while go home; and hazard not the persons of so many, who depend upon you, by
exposing your self to a personal danger. The Gentleman remained convince and
conquered in this holy contention: but it not being in his power to pass,
without seeinge the Father; offering up his own, and his sons life, they
both went unto the prison resolving to suffer what soever encounter might
befall them. But it pleased Almighty God, that after they had received much
comfort from F. de Angelis and the other Christians, they returned with safety,
and edified above measure with the joy and constant resolution, which they
perceived in the countetenances of those valerous Champions of Christ now
aspiring after death.

How the above named fifty Christians were burnt alive by command from the
Xogun.
The Cubo being returned from Meaco to Iendo, the matters of the Christians
were brought before him, and he required to ordain what his pleasure was
concerning them: he answered they should demand that of the new Xogun his
son, to whom it appertained. The Xogun commanded that as well the Priests,
who had preached the faith of Christ as those who had embraced it, should be
burnt alive. Incredible was the joy of the Christians, when they heard the
tidings of this cruel sentence. F. Hierom de Angelis, who some days before the
persecution began, was heard often to cry out and say; O that I might be burnt
alive for my Redeemer; was now found by a certain friend of his, who came to
visit him, with a countenance, which well made show that he had his hearts
desire. No less was the joyful applause of F. Francis, and all the rest
together with Brother Simon, who ever and ano^ cried out; Cupio dissolus, and
esse cum Christo. Finally upon the 4. of December in the morning the ministers
of Justice came unto the prison, to execute the sentence of Xogun: and the
first they laid hands on was F. de Angelis. They took his Irons off his feet,
and in lieu thereof, cast a thick rope about his neck with which they tied
his hands bekinde him: the same was done to F. Francis and the rest of the
Christians: who being bound, and their number taken, went joyful to the place
of execurio^. The first of this happy troop was F. Hierome de Angelis, who
like their Captain marched before on horseback, with a scrole upon his
shoulders, in which his name was written in Capital letters. There followed him
on foot Brother Simon Iempo, Leo, and others, to the number of sixteen: after
these followed F. Francis likewise on horseback, and with a scrole written
after the same manner accompanied with sixteen more on foot. Then followed John
Farramundo in like manner on horseback, with his name written in a little
scrole, accompanied with all the rest of the Christians on foot. Before and
behind and on every side were many officers to hinder that none should
approach to the condemned persons. And thus with displayed banners they marched
in triumph through the streets of the City of Iendo, where the Faith of Christ
did now ly bleeding. Out of the City in the way leading to Camai appeared
fifty pillars or great stakes planted in the place of Justice. The three first
next unto the city were some what separate from the other forty seven: but all
were compassed about with sagots, placed in such a distance that the fire
being kindled, those who were tied to the stakes were distant from the flame
near about an arms length. The number of people, who came to behold this
spectacle, was without number. For a spacious field and a near bordering
mountain was quite covered over. There were among them many principal men of
note, and Peers of the Kingdom, whom other occasions had called to Iendo, not
without a particular providence of God, to the end they might be eyewitnesses
of so rare an example, and see what strength our holy Faith gives unto them,
that profess it. The generous Champions of Christ being come to the place
appointed, were straight bound unto their stakes; those three only excepted
who were on horse back, whom they forbad to come down from their horses.
There should you have seen them with their eyes lifted up to heaven and their
hearts panting which the love of God, on whom their hopes were fixed, and from
whom they expected succor in this last passage. F. de Angelis preached which
incredible fervor, demonstrating that the only Faith of Christ, for which
they dyed, was true and inviolable; all other being fall and counterfeit. The
same affirmed with his accustomed zeal Brother Simon Iempo now tied unto his
stake; who all the way as he came cealed not to exhort those, whom he met, to
embrace and constantly defense the holy faith of Christ. True it is there went
forth of prison fifty one, condemned to be burnt: but I have only mentioned
fifty, because that unhappy one no sooner was come to the place of Justice, but
he was let go by the Officers as having given signs of a relenting courage,
and a heart eisloyall to his Redeemer. The cause of their death was written in a
great table hanged on high, in these ensuinge words. These men are Christians.

At length sire was put unto the heaps of wood, and there was heard a voice
of all joined in one ecchoing forth those happy names of Jesus and Maria. It is
not to be spoken, with what invincible courage they suffered this horrible
torment. For there was not one among so many, who so much as shrunk,
complained, or gave the least token of sorrow by any outward expression. This
incredible fortitude wrought such admiration in the beholders, that the
Gentiles themselves began to mutter to one another, that it was above the reach
of nature: since men condemned for their deserved crimes, die with quite
different expressions. The Fathers, who stood by on horseback, looked on with
eyes of marble, and hearts impregnable: rendering many thanks to God; but no
way dismayed; which the Judges looked for, leaving them for no other end after
the rest, but to fright them with this bloody spectacle and thereby drive them
unto a new resolution. But so far was this happy death from breeding frightes
in the minds of these goodmen; that two others of the standers by, a man and a
woman, inslamed and encouraged at the sight thereof, ran in have, when the
flames were at the highest, unto the Tribunal sear of the Judges, cryinge
amain that they were also Christians, and professors of the same Faith for
which the forty seven dyed: yet could they not obtain to be cast out of hand
into those burninge flames (which was the top of their desire, who burned
within with flames of divine love;) but were, by order of the Magistrate,
carried bound into prison, where those that saw them, had a continual moving
object before their eyes, declaring what power Gods Law has upon the hearts of
men, and what vigor is bestowed from heaven upon those who desire exactly to
perform his will upon earth.

The above mentioned having breathed out their immaculate souls, the three on
horseback were taken down, and tied each one to his stake. The first next unto
the City was John Faramond, after him in order F. de Angelis, and the third F.
Francis Galbe. Ear the fire was kindled, the three valorous Champions took
their leaves for a moment to meet after in eternity, animating one an other
with great zeal and affection: and F. de Angelis did not cease to put John in
mind of the breuity of the torments, and the eternity of glory, which they
expected. The sior began to dilate it self and mount with fury, so that the
servants of God were seen only by glimpes to sustain with incredible courage
those devouring flames. F. Hierom was first seen turning himself toward the
City in act of prayer for a while, and afterward to that part whence flames
came stifliest upon him seconded with the wind; as well to show that he feared
them not, as to have occasion to speak unto the people, who were there in
greatest number; and from thence forward he stood upright on his feet,
preaching with incredible zeal, till the flames prevailing separated his happy
soul from his body and then falling he light upon his knees and so remained. A
little after Faramond was seen to embrace a cruel flame, which came into his
bosom, as a thing much and long desired, and after that immoouable, ti' his
stake breaking carried him prostrate upon the ground. But F. Francis, who
expired the last, remained upon his feet even after death leaning unto his
stake, which he never abandoned in the time of so cruel torment. Thus ended
this Tragedy. It is not easily conceived, what different affections were
stirred up in the spectatours, at this strange object: yet all generally agreed
that their constancy was worthy of highest praises, and above the rest they
judged remarquable the magnanimity of F. de Angelis, who might well seem to be
their captain both in life and death.

The bodies burnt, some more, some less, were left in the field, with
continual watch upon them for the space of three days: but the Guarde was no
sooner gone, then the Christians took away the bodies of the two Fathers.
Which being perceived, so straight order was taken, that they could not get the
rest, as they had determined.

This execution was performed by Order from the new Xogun the 4. of December:
and the day after in an eminent and conspicuous place at the sound of the
trumpet was recompensed the principal Actour, who had accused them; the crier
pronouncing that to those, who should do the like, like reward should be given,
that is a fair house of one of the dead Christians and thirty pieces of gold,
which mount to fifteen hundred crowns; Thus was the accuser rewarded, but
with so many maledictions, that even the Gentiles themselves, cursed him for
it, and wished he might not long enjoy it.

The names of some of the above mentioned martyrs, according to the order they
stood, beginning from the City.
1. John Faramondo. 2. F. Hierom de Angelis. 3. F. Francis Galbe. 4. Leo
Taqueua gonsichi. 5. Fanzabusi Quaxia. 6. Chosaiemon. 7. Brother Simon Iempo.
8. Peeter Xixabuco. 9. John Matazaiemon. 10. Michael Quizaiemon. 11. Laurence
Cagichi. 12. Mathias Iazaiemon. 13. Laurence Caeuzaiemon. 14. Matthias
Quizaiem. 15. Thomas Iosaeu. 16. Peter Santario. 17. Peter Sazaiemon. 18.
Matthias Xegigemon. 19. Ignatius Choiemon. 20. Simon Muam. 21. Dois Ioccunu.
22. Isaci. 23. Bonauentura Quidairi. 24. John Xinocuro. 25. Hilary
Mangazaiemon. 26. Francis Quizaiemon. 27. Saximonoia Iinxichir. 28. John
Chosaiemon. 29. Roman Goniemon. 30. Emanuel Buyemon. 31. Peter Quiheiemon. 32.
Quizaburo. 33. Peter Choiemon. 34. Andrew Disuque. 35. Raphael Quichaiemon. 36.
Quizichi. 37. Antonio.
The names of the rest are yet unknown unto us.

A breife Relation of the life of F. Hierom de Angelis, and of Brother Simon
Iempo of the Society of JESUS.
F. Hieronyme de Angelis was an Italian, borne in Sicily: he entered into the
Society at 18. years of age: being yet a scholar he obtained license to
embarke himself for the East Indies, with a desire to have passed into Iaponia
in company of F. Charles Spinola. Ear they arrived into that no less dreaded
then renowned Promontory of Buona Speranza, they were forced to give back and
take land in Brasile, where having remained some time, they took their way
into Portugal, and by the way were taken by English Pirates, and brought into
England; on the way the ship being in full speedo F. Hierons chanced to fall
into the sea. The heretics made no great have to help him: but Allmighty God
stretched forth his hand and so ordained, that the Father, who fell in at the
fore-decke passing quite under the ship came up alive at the stern, and was
freed from so great a danger. In England he was for some time prisoner, as
supposed a Spaniard. Thence he was sent to Lisboa, where he took the degree of
Priesthood, and then embarked himself for the Indies, and remaining in China
till the year 1602, finally passed into his desired Iaponia. After a years
study spent in learning of the language, he was sent by Superiors into Cami,
and made Superior of a house of the Society in Fuximi. Here he made his aboade
for some years, taking infinite pains, as well in cultiuating and conseruing
the ancient Christians, as in making new. Hence was he called by obedience to
Surunga the Court of Daifu there to found a residence for men of the Society.
He went courageously, and treading under foot all difficulties and oppositions,
he founded a Residence, which was the first of the Society in those parts. He
endeavored the same ar Iendo. But the day appointed for the buying of a house,
such a persecution was raised that he was forced to retire back to Surunga,
where he remained till all were generally banished out of Iaponia: then by
order of obedience he left his Residence, and went to Meaco.

Thus banished with others he went to the City Nangasachi, and having obtained
leave to live disguised in Iaponia, he gave the bridle to his own zeal, and
like a fiery dart passed through al those Kingdoms and Provinces, and
penetrated farther to preach the Gospel, sleighting all pain and peril for
so worthy and end. Neither was the fruit inferior to his labors. When he
went, there was not in all those Kingdoms above a thousand Christians, in Cami:
but afterward they grew by thousands: he alone for his part having baptized
ten thousand in the time of his aboade, besides many thousands more baptized
since, which may be attributed to the industry of this infatigable workman,
who was the first Priest, setting only aside the countries of Massamune (where
a F. of S. Francis Order labored for a while) who carried the light of the
holy Gospel to Fidandono, Caguicasu, Monganu, Nambu, Sungara, all Provinces
of the great Kingdom of Oxu, and themselves equal to kingdoms: more over he
penetrated into the kingdoms of Yechigo, Deua, Sa^do, Masumai or Yezo, which is
farther then Iaponia. He was the first that visited and comforted those prime
Co^fessours of Christ, who the year 1614. were banished into Sungaru the last
skirte of Iaponia, ouercoming all dangers and difficulties of a most long an
edious journey. His pains, besides those which neceslarily accompany the
conversion of so many, may be the better conceived, if you consider the nature
of these vast and laborious Provinces. The coldes are intolerable, the
mountains frequent and insupetable covered over with deep snowes, the ways
lie often times between craggy and high mountains: and therefore a Iaponese,
borne in any other kingdom, will never come there, at least to make his
aboade. And yet was our Father ravished with this feate, conquering with the
burning zeal of souls, the frozen climat of the country. There was a cruel
tempest against the Christians in the City of Xindai. The good Father straight
made thither, and there more then ever put forth his fervor, fortifying them
with the Sacraments and other spiritual helps, according to their need. The
Christians might not all go to him without danger of discovery and hazard of
their lives, and therefore in a disguised weed he appointed them certain place
toward the evening, where he met them like some ordinary passenger, and there
sometimes standing, sometimes walking, as occasion served he took their
confessions, and gave them, by virtue of the Sacrament, force and vigor to
stand it out manfully.

In this Province he made his aboade, from the year 1615. till the year 1621.
And then by obedience was commanded to go to the City of Iendo, there to
receive the crown of his labors. Here he procured to have a house, though it
cost him dear: for the pains he took to conform himself to the place,
time, and company so plucked him down, that he seemed quite an other man: for
whereas before he was fresh and full faced, he now became lean and altogether
extenuated. He remained in the City the space of two years, for the
incredible benefit of many. Yet could he not refrain from his former missions;
but found a way into the Kingdoms of Iazu, and Cai, where numbers were
converted by the labors of this great servant of God. His zeal was
accompanied with many other parts and graces, which made him gracious to all.
With a certain pleasant affability he came so near the humors of the
Iaponesi, that he won the hearts of all. He embraced all with a smiling
countenance, and a harto that seemed to leap out of it self into others. He
was often with the sick yielding them all comfort and assistance in their
necessities. Finally, to cut of many perticulars, which I could relate, laden
with the merits of 22 years spent in Iaponia, and 38 in the Society,
professed of 4. vows, the six and fifteeth of his age, he was burned alive for
professing the faith of Jesus Christ.

Brother Simon Iempo was borne in Nosu in the Kingdom of Fingo, brought up
from a little one in a Monastery of the Bonzi, and imbued in that tender age
with the doctrine of Camu and Fotoqui. God so disposed that the Bonzo his
Master was converted unto the faith of Christ and Simon following his example,
was baptized with some others at the age of 16. years: at 18 he was admitted
into the house of the Society as Dogicus or Alumnus, and there lived with
extraordinary satisfaction for five and twenty years full of good example and
laudable behavior: his ordinary occupation was to help others in company of
the Fathers, by preaching, teaching and reading unto them spiritual books.

When as the Preachers of Gods word were banished into the Philippins, Simon
was of the number; who the year after returned back to Iaponia, and finding
the Christians sweating under the hearty burden of persecution, it cannot be
expressed with how much application he served them. The last six years of his
life he employed in the Provinces of Quantom and Oxu, with still increasing
labor and pains redoubled. He assisted many Christians and converted many
Infidels, even in the prison it self, as has been already set down;
continuing a ways a faithful companion unto F. de Augelis in his Missions,
sparing no labors neither day nor night, when occasion required. He was ever
desirous of two favors from God; one that he might be admitted into the
Society; the other that he might die for the confession of his faith. Both
requests were signed and granted, he dying in flames at 43. years of age.

How four and twenty Christians were put to death for the confession of
Christian faith in the City of Iendo.
ALl this fire could not melt or molify the hardened heart of Xogun; nor hinder
from commanding a new slaughter the 24. of December of 36. more, men and
women; some were burned; others crucisied; others cut in pieces: in whose death
many circumstances lay open the extraordinary hatred, which he bare against our
holy Faith. Of these 36.24. were Christians; the rest Gentiles condemned, either
because they had lodged Christians in their house, or answered for them to
others. Of the Christians, 6 were burned alive, 5 women and one man, 7 beheaded
and crucisied.

The constancy of Mary Iagea the mother of Leo Faqucia Gonoxichi was above the
rest remarquable, who had lodged in her house Father Hierome de Angelis. The
governor bent all the forces of his wit, to make her relent: and therefore left
nothing unsaid, which the Devil could suggest him; sometimes promising life;
otherwhiles threatening death; then painting forth the dishonor, which her
children and husband would receive, a man so well known, and so much made of
in Court. But Mary slighted all answering, that she could not but yield to a
death which made her way to an eternal life: and for the dishonors mentioned,
she esteemed them worthy the name of honors: and therefore he should not need
spend more words in this behalf. The assaults were frequent; but without
effect: and therefore she was condemned with the rest. The day being come, when
this fatal sentence was to be executed, this generous Matron, bound upon a
horse, marched foremost, with a smiling countenance, and undaunted courage:
which struck deep admiration into the beholders. Four Christian woeme^ were
the next that followed, whose names are not yet come to our knowledge; and then
a man called Francis Cabe. This was he who, whilst the fifty above named were
in the flames of Martyrdom, went and declared himself to the Judge professing
himself to be a Christian. After these followed eighteen little infantes, so
little that they knew not how to fear death; and therefore they went sporting,
and playing, and carrying in their hands such toys as children pass their
time with all. A sight which drue tears even from the Gentiles themselves. Of
these 18, sixteen were Christians.

Being come to the place appointed the first dispatched were these little ones;
against whom such barbarous cruelty was used, that the only rehearsal breeds
horror and amazement: some they beheaded; there is were cloven down from the
head to the foot; others were cut off by the middle; others they held by one
leg and hacked into several pieces. After this slaughter performed in the
very eyes of the Christian women, to strike the greater terror into them,
eleven men were crucified; two of which were Christians the one Peter
Ienzaimon, the other Mathias Buneiemon the cause of their death was written in
a table containing this. That these men were punished with death, for either
letting their houses unto Christians, or answering for them to others: Of which
rank were these two Christians, who pearsed through with lances, sent forth
their last breath together with the sweet names of Jesus and Maria. This
Matthias, before this persecution, had showed some signs of weakness; but
going out of the prison he professed publicly before all, that he was a
Christian, and in that quality desired to die, which he entreated the standers
by to let the Xogun and his Governors understand. The same was his
declaration, being now mounted upon the Cross. To these men's hands being dead
were fastened the heads of the little children slain a little before.

Mean while the six Christians prepared for the flames with diverse prayers
and Litanies, nothing daunted with these bloody spectacles. Francis obeying the
instinct of God became a Preacher, animating his fellows to suffer manfully,
and exhorting the lookers on to embrace that faith, which only can stand with
salvation.

Fire being put, the Christians were seen with their eves fixed on heaven,
incessantly calling upon those holy names of Jesus and Maria, to give up their
spotless souls, not so much as shrinking, or giving the least sign of grief
or pain. The cause of their death was set forth in a table, saying; These die
because they are Christians. The two Gentills, who were separated from the
rest, had also the cause of their death expressed, for having lodged Faramonde
against the Laws.

All these ended their happy lives the 29. of December the same year; by order
of the same Xogun of Iende.

Of other seauenteen Christians burnt alive in the Town of Iendo for
professing Christian Religion.
AMong the Gentills put to death the 24. of December one was a Page of the
Xogun greatly in favor, for having let forth his house unto Christians. This
example wrought so powerfully with the Ge^tils, that straight they deferred to
the Governor all the Obristians they knew, and among the rest the wife of
Laurence, who was not summo^d by the officers, when her hushand was taken, and
with her twenty other Christians, many of which were greatly assaulted, but
remained immooueable. After six months imprisonment, ten men, and seven
women were burnt alive out of the City gates of Iendo, toward the East. They
endured their torment with incredible constancy for only being Christians, as
appeared written in a table over each man's head. Of these we have not as yet
the relation in particular, only we know that one died through the incommodity
of the Prison: so that there were eighteen in all, who suffered for their
Religion.

A Relation of the Persecution raised in the beginning of the year 1624. in
the Cou^treies of Massamune; in which above 24. Christians were put to death,
together with F. Diego Caruaglio of the Society of JESUS.
THe barbarous cruelty exercised by the Xogun upon Christians in Iendo, mooned
all the chief of Iaponia to do the like in their several kingdoms. F. Diego
Caruaglio of the Society was Reside^t for the most part in the City of Xindai
the Court of Massamune, superior over those who were in the Country of Date or
Idate Massamune. He made often excursions into senerall parts to hear
Confessions, and administer the Sacraments unto Christians there abouts. One of
his stations was Miuaque a territory belonging to a noble Christian called John
Goto, known of all, even of Massamune himself, for a Christian, and permitted
to be so together with his Vassals. Hither was F. Diego come to celebrate with
all solemnity the fests of Christinas and the three Kings, with their wonted
peace and freedom: when upon the sudden an unexpected tempest was raised.
Massamune had been present in Iende when the cruel sentence was executed upon
Christians, and understanding by a certain servant of his, there were many in
his kingdom of the same profession, he gave order diligence should be used to
know their number, John Goto only excepted. The servant departed with this
order, who had already kindled the coals, by bidding his master look about
him, otherwise he might incure some disgrace. No sooner was he arrived to
Xindai, but he straight talked with the Governors about the business; and the
conclusion was, that all those, that had any rents from the Tono, should be
commanded to give up the names of the Christians dwelling in their extent. A
chief man among the Governors was one called Moniau Iuami a capital enemy
of our profession, and nothing affected to John Goto: and therefore with many
bitter words he labored to show, that it could not be the intention of
Massamune to except John Goto: yea rather he was to be the first assaulted, if
they meant to root out Christianity: Which an other Governor perceiving,
called Ximonda Daisem, straight gave notice thereof to John, coniuring him with
many reasons, rather to change his opinion, then under go the danger of death,
and endanger the person of Massamune, to whom be was so much beholding. John
made answer, that he acknowledged great benefits from Massamune; but far
greater from the hands of God, to whom he was more bound then to all the
world: and therefore withed him to forbear all contrary pers wasions, which
could never take place. Daisem surcealed for the present; but some days after
inuiting John unto his house, he led him into the most secret rooms thereof,
showing him with great familiarity all the rare and precious things he had,
without so much as mentioning Religion, till upon the sudden there came in the
wife of Daisem, who turning to John with words full of tenderness, the
contured him to for go his belief, even by that love, which had ever been
betwixt her son and him: which if she might obtain she should testisie the
greatness of her obligation by cutting her hair and shauing her head, which was
the greatest offer she could make. But John kept his ground and gave her a
resolute answer, that his faith was more dear unto him, then his life: and
there upon took occasion to lay it down in such lively colors that Daisem in
a jesting manner said, it seems he has little mind to deny that faith, which
he endeauorcth so much to persuade us: so John took his leave victorious.

At his return home he acquainted F. Diego Caruaglio with what had passed;
and from that time they both began to prepare themselves for death. John writ
a letter to the Governors, to be showed to Massamune, wherein he prosessed his
obligations to the Tono to be of that nature, that in counter change he would
willingly bestow his life, when occasion should serve. But as concerning the
deposing his Faith, he craved pardon, if he disobeyed; being other wise ready
to accept either banishment or death from the hands of the Tono for the
maintenance thereof, without so much as conceiving hardly, or complaining of
unkindness.

The Father likewise prepared himself, and heard the Confession of all the
Christians, and to the end his person or presence might be prejudicial to
none, he retired himself after many tears of compassion (protesting he would
die with them and for them) to a place not far of called Oroxie, where being
entertained by a good Christian called Mathias Ifiore, he made unto himself a
little cottage adjoining unto Mathias house and there dwelt. He took him
neither Dogicke nor servant; but was accompanied by two Christians, who never
left him till death sent them all to eternity. There passed not many days when
order came from Massamune to one of the principal Governors commanding him
to proceed with all rigor against Christians, and namly that he should banish
John Goto, unless he denied his faith. The Governor undertook the charge with
no small passion, by reason some months before a kinsman of his had been put
to death, whom he could in no wise divert from professing Christian Religion.
He dispatched presently several messengers into several parts of the Province,
commanding them to send al such Christans, as would not conform themselves,
to the prison of Xindai, there to receive their deserved punishment. At the
same time Massamune writ a letter in his own hand to the Governor Daisem
bidding him use all possible persuasion to withdraw John Goto from the law of
Christ, which not succeeding he should banish him the Country. Daisem took
the letter, and went straight to assault him with all kind of prayers,
promises, and persuasions, coniuring him to deny his faith, at least in secret,
and none should know thereof, but only he and the Tono. The generous champion of
Christ was highly displeased at this proposition; and therefore desired him to
use no more words in the business: the law of Christ not remaining in the
heart of him, who denies it with his mouth. The Daisem having heard this
resolute answer called together all the nobles of Miuaque and the country
about, who laid their heads together, and with common persuasions battered
for a whole night the constant heart of John de Goto, but all in vain. Whilst
this was in doing, the officers of the Governor Suo made cruel war upon the
Christians, as well in the rerritory of John de Goto, as in the place where F.
Diego Caruaglio lived. The poor Christians were greatly astonished, some fled,
others stood to it valia^tly. The Daisem thinking this a sit occasion to work
upon the constancy of John, joining his people together with the foresaid
officers, commanded them to besiege his house, and those of other Christians
there abouts, which they did to the full, stealing all they could lay hands on,
and setting fire on the empty houses: but all this made little to Daisem his
purpose, for John was nothing moved therewith, and the day following he went
voluntarily into banishment, into the Country of Nembu, which borders with
that of Massamune on the Northside. The Christians of Oroxie were in great
perplexity; sixty of which retired themselves into a little valley, near unto
the place, where F. Caruaglio made his aboade, who all this while knew nothing
of the coming of the officers, only careful of the good success of John Goto
his business. But whilst they were burning and spoiling, a certain spy gave
them notice, that F. Diego Caruaglio with many Christians were in Oroxie,
whereupon the Governor sent presently to take them prisoners. The officers
coming to Oroxie searched all the houses of the town, and found neither Father
nor Christian: and being ready to return they chanced to espy that valley,
and suspecting there might be somewhat, they found out the little cottages; and
demanding, what they were that inhabited? answer was made; that they were
Christians retired thither from the fury of persecution. There needed nu more,
for straight they laid hands on them, ouerturning their poor cottages, and
misusing their persons with barbarous cruelty. F. Caruaglio seeing this
outrage, and his poor sheep in distress, for the glory of God and good of
souls, with a sweet and smiling countenance, he issued forth of his little
cabanne and offered himself to the Ministers of Justice, saying, I am he, whom
you look after, the Preacher of the law of Christ the only way to true
happiness, The officers rushed in upon him, and binding him with many others,
whom they had most barbarously stipped starcke naked, they carried them to
Mi^que to the house of the Judges, where they were put of, and made expect from
the morning till midday, with no small incommodity to those who were naked, and
stood in an open place, whilst it actually snowed. At last brought in, the
first examined was F. Caruaglio accompanied with two Christians, Matthew
Magobaius and Paul Quisusque. His name country, quality being asked; they
demanded further, whether he preached the law of the Christians: the Father
answered that he had not only preached it, but was ready to seal it with his
blood. After him the other two were examined, and the one found to have lodged
the Father, the other to be his disciple; upon which they were sent to a
certain house, where the Father spent greater part of the night in prayer and
hearing Confessions. At break of day they were transferred to a place called
Midrusaua, the Governors threatening to take the lives not only of the
Christians but of their wives also. Some of the principal Gentills invited
them to their lodging, but the fervent Christians answered, that no lodging
should be welcome, which could not admit the profession of their faith. And so
they went on courageously: two of the company not being able to travail, by
reason of their weakness and old age, were beheaded by their barbarous guides
upon the way, in a certain valley, the 9. of February 1624. their names were
Alexius Coiemon and Dominique Dosai: their heads being off, they hacked the
bodies in many pieces to try the edge of their swords. It is hard to say what
they suffered in this troublesome journey, being continually covered over with
snow. That day they came to a place, where they were dispersed in several
lodgings. The Father was lodged with the Ministers of Justice, who were curious
to hear some points of Christian doctrine, which he liberally imparted by
explicating the Credo; then they asked whether those rumors were true, that
the Fathers should go about to usurp the kingdom of Iaponia: The Father
answered that Europe far exceeded for silver, gold, precious stones and all
other commodities; and therefore it was a thing unlikely, they should forgo it
upon so uncertain an attempt, and so unequal a change; especially the
distance being so great, that three years are required to perform the voyage.
That it was easy to see, what kingdoms they sought after, that is salvation of
souls; since for the preathing of Christian Religion they suffered all manner
of danger, torment, and death it self. The next day the marched after the
same manner, tied two and two together, with one to guard them, with a writing
upon their shoulders importing this word Christians: and so they came to
Midrusara, where they were made stand in the open streets till it was night,
exposed to the wind and bitter cold, In Midrusara were two principal Officers
called Safaoca Bingo and Faximoto Bungo: the prisoners were not immediately
brought before these, but were examined first by certain Notaries, who set
down punctually in writing all their answers, and namely that they would
rather die, then deny their Faith. The day following the two chief officiers,
informed of what had passed, called for the prisoners before them; and
entreated the Father, to persuade the rest from their Religion; the Father
answered, it was a part of his office to do quite the contrary. Little pleased
with this answer, they tried all the rest one after an other, but found them
all in one tune: at which they storming and turning to the Father, they
threatened to send them to the City of Iendo, there to receive a most cruel
death. The Father answered; He would count it a special favor to be cut in
pieces for the faith be preached: Hereupon the officers against the custom of
Iaponia, caused the wife of Matthew, called Sabina, to be taken prisoner: She
was bound and so led before them. The officers importuned the Father to
dissuade her at least, being a woman, from Christian belief: but he answering
as before, they tried themselves by all means to withdraw her: but she
constantly prevailing was sent a way, and some of the rest were sent to the
house of a principal officer, who by threats and promises sought to over come
them: this not prevailing he caused their legs to be pressed between certain
boards with excessive torment. Leo and Mathias only were put to this torment;
for the officer perceiving them so constant would pass no further, but sent
them to Xindai to the Governor Suo, to the end he might dispose of them at his
pleasure.

They took their journey straight bound and well guarded as before, and upon
the way met with a certain Christian called Michaell, who did all he could to
make the Sargeants lead him prisoner with the rest; but could not obtain his
suite, because he was a stranger: The pains of their iourny were
extraordinary, by reason of continual rain, snow and other incommodities of
the time. The Father did his part to make sweet and easy the difficulties of
the way, by exhorting them to patience and constancy. But above the rest was
admired the courage of Leo, who having had his legs all squeesed with the
torment, outwent them all, never showing so much as the least sign of pain or
feeling: They had not gone far, when they met with an other Christian called
Julian Fiemon, who declaring his profession made suite to be of the number and
led to prison; who obtained his petition, to the no small comfort of the
rest, who hoped Almighty God would increase as well their courage, as their
number. Come at last to Xindai they were put into the common iayle by order
from the Governor Suo, being nine in number. The Father desired much to have
spoken with the Suo, to have vndeceaued him: but neither he, nor any of the
prisoners, could ever obtain to see him.

Before Father Diego and his came to Xindai, many had been put to death with
several torments, brought from several parts. The first, who suffered in
Xindai, were Mark Cafroy and Mary his wife inhabitants of a certain place
calied Omura. His officers coming unto those parts, certain frindes of Mark,
not acquainting him, affirmed to the persecutors that Mark and his wife were
no more Christians: they satisfied with this, were already gone their ways;
when Mark and his wife, understanding how the business had been carried, and
therefore thinking thems lues bound to disclame from the imputation laid upon
them, by discovering themselves and professing their faith openly before he
officers, left their house and gooes to the charge of certain slaves, and
took a long journey to overtake the persecutours, and profess their faith,
though with loss of their lives; Which they did accordingly; neither could
they be drawn from it by any means of persuasion. They placed them both in
public stark naked, for the space of a whole day: but this abating nothing
their courage, they were sent to Suo in Xindai, who straight gave order they
should be burn aline, being first led through all the streets of the town,
with a trumpet before them declaring, that these were so condemned for their
obstinate professing of Christian faith. Whilst they were thus lead up and
down the town toward the fire, they met with new assaults, life being
proffered them, so they would yet relent: but Mark answered in the name of both
that no torments should ever take them from the faith of Christ. Thus came this
happy couple unto the place of execution, where Mark bound to a stake with the
sacred names of Jesus and Maria imprinted in his heart and lips, rendered up his
soul a midst the flames, the first of February. 1624. Whilst Mary on the
other side, in the height of her torments melted into a shower of comfortable
tears, sweetly thanking the divine goodness, for having bestowed upon her
infinite benefits, and this above the rest most dear unto her.

For the confession of the same faith two more were burnt, the Father and the
son, on several days: the Father was called Andrew Camon; and the son
Paul Sancuro. For the same cause another called Peter Chinzo, gave his head,
his body afterward being cut into small pieces. On the 12 of February four
more were put to death John Anzai a Physician 60 years of age, his wife also
far in years, an other kinsma^ called Andrew Icyomon, and a servant of John's
called Lewis. Andrew and Lewis were beheaded and their bodies after hacked in
pieces. But John and Mary ran a more difficult and glorious course. First
were they assaulted in their own houses, with threats and promises proceeding
from their carnal friends, and a bloody tyrant. But Suo seeing his hopes
deluded caused the^ to be put into a great river, which passed through the
town: but many waters could not extinguish their Charity. They suffered this
torment with a merry countenance, though in the deepest of Winter, and a most
bitter frost. Now and then would they thrust them over head and ears, bidding
them deny their faith: but all they could get from them, was an absolute
denial. So that dispairing to obtain any thing this way, they took them out
of the river, and naked as they were set them one horseback, and led them
through the City, with a trumpet before the^ declaring the cause of their
punishment. At the end of every street they made the^ comed wne from their
horses, and asked them a new; whether they would deny their faith? they
persisting in the negative, buckets of cold water were powered upon them. Thus
passed they with incredible constancy through the whole City till they came to
the chief street: there being bound to the gates (for in Iaponia every street
is shut in with railes) they were exposed to the cruelty of all, who cast so
great abundance of frozen water on them, that nature yielding, they died in
the midst of their torment, with a denial in there mouths, laden more with
merits then with years; leaving the Christians with comfort, the Gen ils with
confusion to lee such courage in an age so decrepit.

After these were beheaded Simon Ficoyemone, Monica his wite, and a son of
theires; whose name we know not. These were put to death in Ioioma by command
from the Lord of the place for professing Christian faith. In Vsuquino one
called Gaspar Ichniemon suffered the same death for the same cause.

It is now time to return unto F. Caruaglio and his Companions, whom we left
in prison. these upon the 16 of February, which is the last of the Iaponian
year, were taken out of iayle, and led to a river which runs through the
town; near unto which was a certain lake paled about, being round, and
filled with the water of the same river some two foot deep. Here the
prisoners, being stripped naked, and tied each one to the stakes which were
round about, were compelled to sit down in the water, and there remained for
the space of three hoares. Mean while the tormented persons used no other
language but this Jesus Maria: Praised be the B. Sacrament: Blessed be God for
ever, and (...). F. Diego encouraged them al, not only by words, but by
example, sitting in the water like a body of marble that felt nothing: and when
he left of exhorting, his eyes modestly composed, and as it were vanished in a
profound contemplation, left not of to preach; Those who were present at this
spectacle, impior: with compassion, persuaded all they could those afflicted
persons to abandon Christ; but their answer was that they were ready rather to
endure ten thousand torments. Hereupon they turned their rage upon the Father,
vomiting forth against him many injurious threats; doing him several assrouts,
which he endured with incredible patience, still animating his fellow patients.
Three hours being ended (because the tyrant would not have them die there)
they were drawn forth; but in such pitiful plight, that hardly could they
move a joint; being stark with cold, and half frozen they cast themselves upon
the sands on the river side. Only F. Diego forcing himself, sat down with
his legs a cross (which was his usual posture at home) and his hands joined
upon his breast, his head bowing down, and so put himself into an act of
prayer; with no small wonder to the Gentiles, to see a man in that plight enjoy
such calm and peace of mind. Two there were, Mathias Sifyoie and Julian Iemon
who died as soon as they came out of the water. Whilst they were upon the
sands, comes a message from the Governor to the Father; that he and his
companions should be delivered, if he would only exhort them to deny their
faith. The Father scorning the proposition, made them see that the frozen water
had nothing quenched the flames of divine love burning in his breast: and
therefore answered courageously that he would rather exhort them to ensure a
world of torments, then buy their liberty at so dear a rate: the messenger
returned to the Governor with his message; who raging with spite, sent an
other to assure them they should be burnt alive, without the least spark of
compassion. They all answered with one voice, that they could not receive more
happy tidings. hereupon after many persuasions to small purpose, they were
commanded back to prison, warned to prepare themselves for a hotter element.
So they were curried back with guards upon them; the bodies of the two already
dead, being cut in pieces and cast into the river. The people cried out amain
against F. Caruaglio; which he endured with no less joy then patience. Being
in prison, it is incredible what calamity they endured vatill the 22 of
February, the fourth day of the Iaponians new year: but all was devoured with
invincible courage, preparing themselves with a kind of greedines for the
expected fire. The 22 day in the morning, the year 1624, they were drawn out
of prison, not to end their lives in fire as they expected, but in a contrary
element: for about noone they were led to the place above mentioned, and there
stripped naked were tied, as before to their several stakes. At first they made
them stand upright in the water knee deep, then forced them to nt down so that
the water came up to their breast, and changed their posture from time to time
to increase their pain. The blasphemies and injurious speeches of the people
were intolerable, falling chiefly upon the Father.

The language of those, who suffered, was the same that before Jesus Maria etc.
and thus they perseuered immoouable till the evening. Then began the waters to
freeze, as well by reason of the cold, as the wind which entered on every side,
and the snow which fell from above in abundance: so that the torments of these
servants of God, was increased from all parts. They soon perceined that their
time approached, and therefore with most amorous words and inflamed Charity
taking leave of one an other, they set themselves to implore the help of God,
giving him thanks for the bestowed benefits, and beseeching the most B. Virgin
to obtain succor for them from her son Jesus in this last period. F. Diego
redoubled his encouragements, when Leo Gognemon began to faint and struggle
with the pangues of death; which the Father perceiving, turning to him in
particular cried out, yet awbile, yet awhile: we shall quickly have an end: at
which words Leo receiving new strength seemed to joy in his torments, and
calling upon the holy names of Jesus and Maria gave up his soul unto his
Creator The next were Antony Sazaymon, and Mathias Xoiano; who already dead,
F. Caruaglio not knowing so much, and calling upon him, he answered to the
Fathers call even after death, as was observed by those who were next about
him. Mean while comes a Gentill, and offers to deliver out of the torment any
that would relent, viewing above the rest Mathias Taroyemone his especial
friend, but all answered with a resolute Noe: so that soon after there expired
in the fourth place, Andrew Nigemon with the sweet names of Jesus and Maria in
his mouth. In the same manner finished his course Matthew Mangobioye, who was
the fifth and Mathias Tonoyemon the sixth, who drawing toward an end, called
upon the Father saying farwell Father, farewell: I am at the last; to whom the
Father depart in peace, and so he died without further ceremony, with the happy
names of Jesus and Maria hanging in his lips.

It was now five of the clock in the evening and therefore the people retired,
leaving yet alive the Captain of the rest F. Diego Caruaglio: but he was not
aba^doned of certain Christians, who remained by, till he died: they affirm
that a little before midnight the generous Champion of Christ, with incredible
constancy, repeating again and again the hopeful names of JESUS MARIA, ended
the period of his life and labors.

The constancy of the Christians was commended even by the Gentiles, especially
of F. Diego, who in more then ten hours torment was nener seen so much as to
tremble for cold, the inward fire burning in his soul conquering the outward
cold, which afflicted his body: famous as well for the newnes of his torment, as
the many lost persuasions, spent to withdraw him from his faith. For the
Tyrants commonly use no persuasions to honors, knowing by experience that it
is labor lost, and this was the first time that this torment was practiced in
Iaponia. All these servants of God passed to a better life the 22. of February;
the other two above named on the 18 of the same Month 1624 by order of Idate
Massamune governor of those quarters. In the morning the dead bodies were
taken out of the lake, and chopped in pieces were cast into the river, excepting
the heads of 4 and that of F. Diego; which some Christians found means to have,
and keep them with greater veneration.

F. Diego was a Portughese borne in Conimbra, he entered into the Society at 16
years of age. the year 1600 he went to the Indies with intention to pass to
Iaponia; he suffered much upon the way; and after five years went to Macao;
there he stayed till he had finished his courses of Philosophy and Divinity;
and the year 1609 he entered his so much desired Iaponia. He employed the first
year, as the custom is, with extraordinary diligence to learn the language:
this done for two years he cultiuated Christianity in the Islands of Quamacusa:
thence departing he went to Meaco and to the Country of the Cami, but soon was
chased thence, with the rest, out of Iaponia toward Nangasachi and Macao, the
year 1614, where he preached the Gospel. In the beginning of 1615 he was
sent into Cochinchina in company of F. Francis Buzoni, to found a new that
mission; where he labored with extraordinary zeal: but by a special
providence the year following he came back into Iaponia. He spent the first
year in Omura with excessive zeal and Charity: in the year 1617 he made his
profession of 4 vows and was sent into Ofu: he visited three several times
the Christians sent into banishment into Sungaru the last shire of Iaponia. He
went twice to Iezo and was the first Priest that ever said Mass there. He
truailed over the kingdoms of Oxu and Deua, taking the pains we have else
where specified, speaking of F. de Angelis in the like occasion. He was the
first that resided in Aquita and Xemboun; where he planted in a manner what
there was of Christianity: here he had his part of a persecution raised against
Christians, in which many were sent into banishment; who persuading him to
retire and to save himself for the good of many, he could never be induced to
abandon his flock; which likewise befell him at this time in the Country of
Massamune. He was infatigable in aduauncing and setting forward Christian
Religion: and to conclude he was endowed with extraordinary humility, charity,
affability and other like virtues: after 30. years spent in the Society and
15. in the mission of Iaponia, abounding with merits he gave up his life for
Christ the 46 year of his age.

In the country of Camofidadono, one of the principal Lords of the kingdom
of Onu, diverse Christians were sent into banishment; others taken, and some
also newly converted showed how frail and weak man's nature is: three hundred
and threescore persons of age received baptism before the persecution, which
proved to be so terrible, that F. John Matthew Adam of our Society had much a
do to hide his head, or find sustenance necessary for life.

Of the persecution in the kingdom of Deud and the death of three Christians.
WHilst in the year 1623 the Xogun put so many Christians to death in Iendo,
there chanced to be present in the court Yoxinobu Xataquedone Lord of the
greatest part of the kingdom of Deua; who fearing the displeasure of the
Xogun, gave order unto Fanyemon his chief Governor to make diligent inquiry
after such Christians, as were to be found in his estate, and proceed with all
rigor against them. The Governor complied so exactly with his charge, that in
a short space he cast into prison above two hundred, and the greatest part
persons of account. The first was a gentleman called, John Catauneme, who being
assaulted with all kind of stratagems, persisted notwithstanding so constantly,
and preached Christian faith with such fervor to the standers by, that they
confessed themselves for convinced, and kept back from embracing it with only
fear, This man had a little son of 7. years old, whom he brought up in this
manner to make him constant in his faith. Be sure, would he often say, that
thou under go any death whatsoever, rather then deny thy faith: one day among
the rest ear he was taken prisoner looking upon his chile; well, said he, art
thou resolved rather to be burnt alive by the hand of the Justice, then to
deny thy faith? You Father, replied the little one, what do you resolve upon
in the like case? Why I would burn; says the Father. So would I too, answered
the child; I Will try, says the Father, whether thou be like to resist, when
occasion shall require. Come hither; take this burning coal into thy hand,
and keep it till I bid the cast it away. The child opened his hand, and the
Father said in it a red hot coal; which the child held in his hand till his
Father bad him cast it down; though it had already burnt the skin and singed
the flesh. His Father demanding, whether he found it hot? One, answered the
child, resolute to let himself be burnt alive, as I am, has no great
difficulty to hold a ceale in his hand, for so short a space. I his came to be
known of both Christians and Gentills: these were confounded; and those
encouraged to see so strong an example in so weak a subject. With whole
troops of his friends and kinsfolk was John Fot Cauas Quiemon importuned for
the space of 20. days, who exhorted him, at least in words to deny his faith.
But he true unto Christ, answered, he would not do it for all the gold in the
world, they called him madman but all in vain: wherefore despairing to
prevail with him, they let upon Lucy his wife; who no less constant, would
not be drawn from her resolution with the consideration of goods, children, or
her own life: and therefore John being led to prison with his two sons, she
was left under guarde in her own house, together with her lesser children, as
the custom was in the beginning of this persecution observed toward women of
quality. One of these called Thomas, being under age, and therefore to have
stayed with his mother, used so many stratagems, that at length he found means
to accompany his father to prison; where he became a voluntary servant of those
imprisoned Confessors, who were about some forty in number; nor could any ever
forbid him this work of charity.

An other Christian called Alexius Moiemon being diversely tempted, assured them
that not only the whole City of Cubota, bet neither the Teno Ioxinoba, though
he came in person should be able to remove him one inche from his faith. He was
not alone in this resolution, but had many followers: of which two were
beheaded Lewys Tarogt, and Matthew Xichyemon; these two were in the service of a
noble man in Iendo, when the Christians were put to death, and by him greatly
solicited to deny their faith; which he not obtaining put them out of his
service, giving them warning not to go to the kingdom of Deua: but they,
desirous of a crown of martyrdom, went straight thither, and obtained their
desire, and became with dying for Christ, of servants freemen, the 7. of Febr.
1624.

A certain young maid called Monica of 25 years of age was no less molested:
she had served some later years the wife of Sataquedone who, as is mentioned
else where, not being able herself to receive baptism, persuaded most of her
servants thereunto; of which Monica was one, baptized by F. Diego Caruaglio. Her
mistress, though a gentill, being sont into banishment for the law of Christ,
Monica was forced to leave her, and betake herself to the City of Cubota,
where she had many of kindred. She grew so much in devotion, that to the end
they might not importune her to marry, she cut off her hair, to give her self
more fully to Christian piety. The Governor, understanding that she was
Christian, endeavored by means of his own wife to draw her back; but Monica
stood it out courageously, till one day the Governor in presence of many bid
her resolve either to deny her faith, or loose her head: her answer was, by
stretching forth her neck, and saying, that her faith was dearer unto her, then
her lise: and in the saying, her head was stricken off, in the City of Cubota,
the year 1620.

Notwithstanding all the troubles, there have been baptized in this kingdom
three hundred persons of age.

Of Christianity in the countries of Cami.
IN these countries eight of our Society are resident six Fathers and two
Brothers; having charge of many Christians, and putting their hands to several
missions of diverse kingdoms, as well of Goquinat and others near about, as of
Cugoco and Scigeco. This year eleven hundred threescore and two persons of age
have received baptism, who understanding the news of persecution, made their
recourse unto God more diligently then ever, by frequenting the holy
Sacraments, and other spiritual exercises, and in particular by keeping in
several places the prayer of the quarante hour. In Ozaca there was an order
that all Gentiles, who had Christians in their houses, should dismiss them:
where upon the poor Christians were put to their shifts, suffering great
extrean ity (it being the depth of winter) as well in their own persons, as in
their poor children, not findinge where to shelter themselves, and oftentimes
not permitted to lodge upon the high ways, for fear of displeasing the Xogun:
so that they were often constrained to take up their rest in the middle of the
open fields, exposed to the violence of extreme cold.

Their only comfort was when they met together, entertaining one an other as
if they had been brothers, and drowning their own miseries wi h comfortable
speeches and mutual encouragements drawn from the person of their Redeemer.
When they met with any of our Fathers, their sighs were a preludium to their
tongues and their tears pleaded their cause before their words. Yet God
provided a houle for his servants, which belonged to one of the chiefest
Christians of that city called Paul, whither they all went, and were provide
not only with spiritual helps, but even with temporal. For this worthy Paul
having sent his wife and children into the country stayer himself behind with
two of our Fathers; he helping to the uttermost of his forces their temporal
necessities; the Fathers employing themselves for their spiritual good, arming
them with the Sacraments, with exhortations and the like, and in particular
encouraging them to stand resolutely in defense of their faith. Yet they began
to fear least the presence of the Fathers should increase their persecution,
and that for many reasons so that the Superior resolved to go a good way out
of town and live in a certain little cotrage out of the way. A certain
Christian called Paul, as rich in faith, as he was poor in fortunes, was
extrea^ly set upon by the Gentiles, and not permitted to go upon the ways
(such was their fury to make him deny Christ:) but he that was accustomed to
this kind of sport, having here to fore been banished for the Law of the true
God, took thence occasion to preach and denounce him with greater fervor.

In the territory of a certain Governor called Anabu Auagi many Christians
have behaved the^solues bravely: among the rest a certain Physician, called
Thomas who having been formerly banished for his faith, now again with more
co^stancy then ever giving the nay to his friends and kinsfolk, was sent the
second time, with all his family, into banishment, to show how deeply the name
of Christ was printed in his heart. These afflictions endured with all rigor
four months and more, relenting nothing in the heart of the City, though
somewhat appeased in the Boroughes an Villages near above. Certain Christians
of the kingdom of Fococo eight days iourny from Oxora have greatly edified the
Christians of these parts, taking a long journey to prepare themselves for
this persecution, by confessing and communicating.

There has no wanted matter for other Christians to show their valor and
constancy, for those namely of Sachai, Fuximi and Meaco, where a certain
Gentleman had the greatest part of his goods confiscated, and was himself
sent into banishment, whom not long after above two hundred followed, banished
for the same cause from Sachai.

In Fuximi and Meaco, notwithstanding the persecution, two hundred persons of
age have been converted; diverse in the afforesaid places gave back and began to
yield; who afterward, with public demonstration of true repentance, have
made satisfaction.

Near unto Coquinai the persecution has caused some loss, yet far greater
has been the gain.

In a kingdom near unto Izzu the tempest of persecution carried all before
it, by reason of the neernesse to Iendo; yet the Christians, though otherwise
of late standing, resisted manfully: many enduring banishment and other
calamities. A Father of our Society was sent in Mission; who gathered together
the dispersed flock; a hundred and fifty of age having received Baptism,
before the persecution began.

Another of our Fathers went to the kingdom of Ouari, who set many on foot
again, whom persecution had made stagger. In a certain place of this
kingdeme, called Ichinomiya; Almighty Gods providence was particular in the
conservation of a handful of Christians; The Gentiles conspired together to
work them from their faith; but they, both men, women, and Children resolved
rather to die, then do any misbeseeming a Christian. The Gentiles having tried
many ways to batter the Christians constancy, all others failing took this as
most expedient. They sent unto the Christians, all their creditours to exact
payment on a certain day, or otherwise to have them deny their Faith, which if
they did, their debtes should be pardoned them. It was done accordingly: but
the good Christians, though poor and laboring men for a great part, to help
out one another, that every one found means to pay his debts. The Gentiles
raging here at, began to threaten them death: but they more meek then ever,
went and offered up to their Masters all that was remaining, saying; they had
now need of nothing more, since they hoped to die for Christ. Thus did they
conquer, and not only become victorious themselves; but succored also the
necessities of other Christians, who were banished for Christ, which they did
with invincible Charity, toward those particularly who had been cast out of
the kingdom of Mino; many of which had left their houses their goods, and all
their possessions.

In the kindom of Xefat the rigor was not so great: only there came out of a
proclamation forbidding any one te let his house to Christians. About this time
there fell sick, in the fame place Cagiuata Fayemone a Christian of account;
who made known in the extremity of his sickness, how much he esteemed the
faith of Christ. No sooner was he fallen down but he called for a
Confessarius, and in the progress of his disease, all his thoughts were
e^ploved in making acts of Contrition and piery: which to a certain servant of
his seemed excessive; and therefore said his Master was out of his wits but
Fayemon answered that he knew full well what he did and that salvation could
not be bought with too much diligence. It happened finally that the force of
his ficknesse put him besides himself, and then turning toward the standers
by, he cried out. Who is there? what means this? Is it possible? are we but
only four Christians here? where be the rest? call them, call them: and let
us with hearts united resolve to stand to our faith, when the edict shall be
published against the Christians: and so he dyed, leaving those of that were
present greatly enified, to see a man both in his senses, and bereaft of them,
esteem so much his faith and salvation.

In the kingdom of Iomi has been the like trouble, the Christians of Saoyame
a principal place of that kingdom, armed themselves with the holy Sacraments
to resist their enemies. A certain Gentill inhabitant of the said place, and
brother to one of the Governors had for some time before a desire to be
baptized; and understanding of the persecution, which began, he discoursed
with himself in this manner; If all the Christians be sent into banishment, or
put to death, who shall baptize me? I will therefore take commodity, whilst I
may: and there upon went and received Baptism.

In the kingdom of Fococo the Christians escaped persecution: for though they
were terrified, yet Faxuia Chichuyendono stirred nothing: both because he
judged it time lost to go about to persuade a gentleman and a soldier to
chang their opinions, saying: that he that was not constant in the service of
God, much less would be true to men: and therefore neither he nor other chief
men, went about to divert the Christians from their belief.

A Priest of our Society has taken his journey into the kingdoms of Canga,
Noto, and Iucchi, there to visit and help the Christians with the accustomed
exercises of the Society.

The Christians of the kingdom of Quinocuni have been visited, where the
Merchants only are persecuted and not the Noblemen; F. John Baptista Porro of
our Society has charge of Christians of the kingdoms of Farinia Byten,
Chiungoco, and Schigoco, being continually in Mission visiting and helping now
one part, now another, with great labor and no less fruit. The news of the
persecution coming thither, the good Pastor redoubled his diligence, and
found them also resolute to give their lives for Christ; and to that end he
gave them the holy Sacraments: the effects whereof were such that in their
conflicts they all behaved themselves most constantly a few excepted; the
number whereof almighty God made up with forty two new soldiers, which he
called to his side.

The Lord of the kingdom of Bisaen, though he be not contrary in opinion to the
law of Christ, yet to conform himself to the will of the Xogun, he ordained,
that all the Christians should be banished out of his state. To which effect
the proclamation came out of Ocayama the head City of that kingdom: and least
any mightly close, it was ordained, that every one should give up his name in a
paper, setting down the sect which he professed, what Temple of the Idols he
frequented, and what Bonzo he acknowledged for directour. And straight all
those were put out of the City, who refused to do it; and by a particular
grace from God all, as well rich, as poor; gentlemen, Merchants, Magistrates
or of what profession soever, chose rather to be deprived of all things, then
of God: the officers used extreme rigor in executing their Commissions,
turning away even the meanest pesants; using al diligence not only in great
towns, but even in boroughes and villages; and calling before them the heads
of families, to justify that they had turned away all those that were
Christians: who in great numbers, and with admirable constancy, went rejoicing
into banishment, preferring heaven before the land of Gayama and Bisem. Of
which number was a woman of account, married to a Gentill of her quality, who
was commanded by the Governor, either to turn her away, or make her a
Gentill. Many persuasions were used to this end by all her kindred, which she
manfully resisted; and rather chose in company of her servants a volu^tatie
banishment toward Nangasachs, though in a most unseasonable time, it being the
depth of winter, then to live in continual danger, and occasions leading to
perdition. A certain Page was threatened by his Master, that he would cut of
his head, unless he denied his religion: the Page in stead of answearing
stretched forth his bare neck ready to receive the blow, which yet the Gentill
had not the heart to give, but turned him out of his service.

In the kingdom of Farima, the tempest was not so fierce: yet many were sent
into banishment, some turned away their servants, and others their very
children, for being Christians. In the kingdom of Bithu one of those few, who
followed the law of Christ, hearing the cruelty of the persecution, left a
certain house, he and his whole family, which the Tono had given him, saying
it was not now time to dissemble. He was therefore sent the second time into
banishment, and hartned all the rest, to endure the incommodities, which they
were liable unto by proclamation, by gathering them together in his house, and
arming them with spiritual conference, and reading pious books againsts all
future encounters.

The kingdom of Bingo escaped better the^ that of Aqui. One of our Fathers,
departed a month before from the City of Firoxima, leaving all the Christians
full of courage and comfort: when on the suddene comes forth a proclamation,
that all those, who were Christians, together with their wines and children,
should straight depart the City: it was executed accordingly with no small
cruelty, they being thrust not only out of their houses, but of the highwaies,
and forced in the cold nights (it being the midst of winter) to ly in the
open fields; in so much that many fell sick, and some died thereof, whose
names are not yet come to our knowledge, In all other places there abouts, the
like cruelty was used: but all showed invincible courage, many choosing rather
to stay the^ go, to the end they might be carried to prison and suffer death
for Christ. Among many good, some also were wanting in their duty; of which one
coming to himself again, writ a letter to the Governors, giving them to
understand, that they should no longer misstake his meaning; for that he was
now resolved rather to part with his life, then his Religion. The Governors
dissembled the matter with him: but it passed otherwise with one Francis Ioyama
Sintaro.

The death of Francis Ioyama Sintaro, in the Gitty of Firoxima.
WHilst the Officers went from house to house, to take every man's name, and
belief in matter of Religion; he Steward of Francis, in the name of his
Master, who then was absent, gave up in writing, that no Christian dwelled in
that Palace: which Francis at his return having understood, first reprehended
his Steward, and then sent a note to the officers to let the^ know his Steward
had abused them for that he was indeed a Christian, and so minded to continue
till death; The Gonernours much amazed, to see so great constancy in a youth,
determined to abate it upon any terms. First they employed his kindred, who
together with all the Nobility plied him for thirty days together: neither did
those only, who were present try their skill, but the absent also by letters
and large promises of great preferments about the Princes person, so he would
relent; The brave young Champion had no sooner read the first letter tending to
this purpose, but straight he toare in pieces all the rest of the packet, and
threw them into the fire. At which the messenger amazed, bad him look what he
did; for that the letters were of great importance, and that he might do much
better to change his Religion, to whom Francis imposing silence, badd him keep
his Counsel for some body else. His Father in law did also his best to withdraw
him, and among other persuasions, threatened to take his wife from him, unless
he yielded: at which Francis smiling, replied that neither wife, nor all the
world could yield, should separate betwixt him and his Religion.

Mean while the valorous Champion had recourse to his ghostly Father, arming
himself with the holy Sacrame^ta for greater enterprises. At his return from
the good work, news was brought him that Matthias Xobora Scizaimo^ was taken
and laid in irons for the Confession of Christ: at which felicity envying he
begun to exclame with joy, o happy, thrice happy Matthias! and taking pen and
paper writ him a letter full of spiritual comfort with extraordinary feeling.
Scarce was the letter made up and sent, when behold four soldiers gentlemen
sent from the Tono, to know the present state of his mind, which they soon
perceived to be the same, and made their report accordingly. Hereupon the Tono
gave order, that when it grew dark, three others should goevnto him, and
dispatch him out of the way, unless he changed his mind. The three went at the
time appointed, and having beset the house, they came in upon him, and
demanded; if he would yet change his mind? that thereby he might greatly
gratify the Tono; whereas his obstinacy might peradne^ture cause him a dear
repentance, and no less then death. At the sound of death Francis turning to
them told the^; he could never look for more welcome tidings: and if they
should happen to be the Messe^gers themselves, he would receive them not as
men, but as Angels from heaven; and so saying for reverence kneeled down
before them. The Gentiles were out of themselves at so unaccustomed a manner of
proceeding; and to comply with their command from the Tono, told him plainly
they were come to take his life from him, and that therefore according to the
fashion of Iaponia be might cut up his own belly. This, replied the valient
Champion of Christ, is forbidden me by the law of Christ: but if you have order
to take my head, here it is; I will not refuse it. Only if you please, I Will go
first to take leave of my Mother, which was granted him. Then going by
certain secret doors, he found her in her chamber, and with incredible tokens
of joy he brake forth into these speeches; Behold Mother the neure is come,
which I have so often and earnestly begged from heaven. I am even now to give
my blood for Christ: help me to thank Almighty God for so great a favor: and
in token you sorgiue all the faults and offenses, which I have committed namely
against your self give me your last benediction; and with this, cast himself
upon his knees; The poor Mother with eyes drowned in tears, took him in her
arms, and embraced him, and with a countenance cheered up, answered; God
bless thee, dear son, and give thee grace and strength necessary for so
great an enterprise. I confess, there is no loss in this world so sensible;
for in thee I loose all my support and comfort: yet I am ouerioyed to see thee
die for Christ. Blessed be his holyname for his benefits bestowed on us both,
and this in particulars with that came in his wife, and all the standers by
burst forth into lobs and tears to see them take their leaves. Francis alone
stood undaunted; and left her for a pledge the love of Jesus, whom he desired
for a last favor, she would always keep in her heart, and rather die then
falsisy her faith. This done he returned to the room, where he was expected,
and stretching forth his neck, was beheaded for his Religion the 16. of
February 1624 in the 24 year of his age.

Francis Sintaro was borne in the kingdom of Cai of noble parentage: he was
baptized at 16 years of age, and as he grew in years so grew his love and
fear of God: he received and lodged our Fathers in the kingdoms of Quinocuni
and Aqui, where he allotted a part of his house: his chief delight was in
serving Mass, and discoursing of heavenly matters: his conferences of
spiritual and dinine things was commonly with tears having a tender and most
pious heart: his zeal of souls was in credible; and therefore he spared neither
cost nor labor to assist all, as well Christians as Gentiles: and being
gracious and fluent in discourse, and conversant in the Iaponian sect, he was
heard with exceeding content, and no small fruit of many. When he had of our
Fathers in his house, he would call the Christians round about, and incite them
to Confession: and where by night any of ours went to hear Co^fessions, he was
the man that would accompany them: he often fasted and disciplined himself, but
especially in time of Lent; at which time and many others he deprived himself
of the company of his wife, thereby to give himself more freely to his prayers
and devotion. So great was his desire of dying for Christ, that he was often
minded (had not our Fathers for just reasons opposed themselves) to put
himself Prisoner with certain Religious persons, to the end he might be put
to death in their company.

The death of Matthias Xobora Schizaimon.
MAtthias served a nobleman, who put him in trust with most of his important
affairs; and therefore in time of these troubles, labored by all means, both
by threats, and fair means, to make him leave his faith; and not prevailing,
he gave order he should be bound; which Matthias e^dured most willingly for
Christ's sake. A whole day and night was he tied last unto a stake by the neck,
hands, and elbowes with sharp small cords, a torment of that nature that many
die upon it, the cords entering into the flesh to the very bone. But all this
prevailed little with Matthias; which his Master perceiving, he caused in stead
of cords a great piece of wood to be put about his neck like a yoke for oxen,
usually applied to the most famous delinquents; and thus was he held the space
of 4 days, with his friends and kindred about him to persuade to change his
profession. All this not taking effect, his Master sent a note to the Tono, to
let him understand what pasted; who straight gave se^re^ce he should be
crucified. The Ministers of Justice, going for this effect, brought him to the
place of execution. It is incredible with what joy and gladness he past on his
way, saying his beads; and passing over a bridge, where there was store of
people, he began to preach with great fervor, assuring them there was no
salvation but in that faith, for which he was now to render up his life. Being
come to the place of execution he cast himself upon his knees, and with a
loud voice said the Confiteor, then having made a little mental prayer, he
brake forth into this affectuous exclamation. Praised and ever blessed be the
holy name of Jesus: who would have thought his goodness to have been so great,
as to vouchsafe to call unto himself by way of the cross so unworthy a sinner
as my self! The Gentiles themselves like men distracted looked upon one another,
saying If there be salvation to be found how can this man fail of it? Then
Matthias tooking up to the cross began in this manner; I worship and reverence
thee, o cross with all the veins of my heart, sanctified in the person of my
Savior Jesus. Then praying a little he commended himself to God. and so was
put upon the cross, after which he so much thi^^ted, and there pierced with
lances finished his life at 37 years of age, the 17 of Febr. 1624. The night
following some Christians with danger of their lives took his body from the
cross, and shutting it up in a chest, gave it up into the hands of one of our
Fathers, who placed it near unto an Altar, where he faieth Mass.

This Matthias was borne in Aqui, baptized some 7 years before his death by a
Iaponese Father of ours: he was singular in the practice of devotion and
penance inciting the Christians to Confession, and was an instrument to bring
many Gentiles to receive Baptism by the hands of one of ours, then in prison.
He served with special care the imprisoned, especially Religious persons. He
had passed his word to Francis Sintaro, that he would rather die then deny his
faith, and thus gloriously kept his promise dying on a Cross.

The death of Ioachim Curoyemon in Firoxima.
AS soon as the persecution began in Firoxima, the Gentiles neighbors to
Ioachim began to assalt him severally, and not prevailing, of their own
authority they put guard at his doors and acquainted the Tono with what had
passed. He straight gave order he should be put in prison in the Castle; where
after he had been some days inflexible in his resolutions, he gave sentence to
have him crucified, ordaining with all the cross should be very high, to the
end the Christians might not stealt away the body. Ioachim, having received
these tidings, fell down upon his knees to give thanks to God, for making him
worthy to suffer, and that upon a cross, and that for so good a cause; then
putting about his neck his beads, his Agnus Dei, and a little book of
prayers, with a joyful look he went to meet the Ministers of lustice, who
came to conduct him to the place of execution. Being arrived, he recommended
himself with great deno ion unto Almighty God, and exhorted with extraordinary
zeal the Gentiles to receive the faith of Christ. Finally he was crucified and
pierced from side to side, with a lance, at 60 years of age, the 8 of March
1624. by commaundment of the Tono.

This Ioachim was borne in Aqui, of a singular meeknes and humility, much given
to prayer, and infatigable in assisting and serving the Christians; He was
baptized in Firoxima 16 years before his death by one of ours.

The death of John Tananguia Cufroi.
IN the year 1612, under Daifu, John was banished the city for the first
time: but not long after called for back again. Then again was he tried by
several ways the year 1615; and finally the year 1622 he was troubled anew,
and after many both threats and promises was kept prisoner for a year. The
good servant of God lived there very contentedly in continual prayer, fasting
and penance. He connerted with his good exhortation, and baptized sieve
Gentiles, his fellow low prisoners. At last a year and half being spent in
prison, came the sentence of death, sent from Cata Samonosuque, who lived in
Iendo. Now long before, John had made his confession to one of our Fathers, and
was by his counsel much e^couraged to suffer death for Christ. When he first
received news of his death, litting up his eyes to heaven he gave God thanks
for so great a benefit; then turning to him, who brought the message, he also
thanked him, desiring he would tell the Tono and the rest of the Governors
that he deemed himself highly obliged unto them. Going out of prison, he me
with a great number of people, to whom he solemnly protested; that he was
condemned to death, not for theft or any other crime, but merely for the says
of Jesus Christ; which he exhorted them all to embrace, as the only way to
salvation: and the same did he repeat in several places, according as
occasion was offered. And when he was silent, he went with his eyes fixed upon
heaven continually praying and commending himself to God. Being come to the
place of execution, after he had exhorted all with a loud voice, to receive the
faith of Christ, which he was to seal with his blood, and without which
nothing could be auailable for salvation. He was stripped naked, and stretched
upon the earth, and cut of by the middle, whilst he was breathing sweetly
forth the blessed names of Jesus and Maria: he died the 14 of February 1624.

John was borne in the kingdom of zio: he was baptized and instructed by our
Fathers thirty years before his death, whilst he was in the service of
Augustinus Conises Sunocamidono. He remained always most constant and very
exemplar, incredibly desirous and careful of the spiritual good of his
neighbors. When our Fathers went in Mission he went with them; and having an
extraordinary gift in preaching, he was the conversion of many: in these
exercises did he continue, till a generous death crowned his labors under Cata
Simonosaque Lord of the greater part of zio.

Of Christianity in Nangasachi and the country about.
HEre are occupied six of our Fathers, one Brother and eight Dogici. The fruits
of their labors, being altogether like those of the years past, I omit to set
down. Thirty persons of age have received Baptism; Many who trembled for
fear, and some who fell under the burden, have been set upon their feet
again, and encouraged.

Diverse Missions have been undertaken into Sassuma, the Island of Goto, the
Countries of Omura, and diverse other places of the kingdom of Figen In Sassuma
they found a true pillar of Christian Religion, a Lady called Catherin in other
in law to the Lord of the Country, who in word and action advances Christian
Religion. This Lady has been twice set upon, once by the Bongs, who with
superstitions papers of adoration and prayer sought to raw her to their side;
another time by certain persons sent expressly from her son in law in time of
the persecution of Iendo, to try whether she were a Christian or no. To the
first she made easy resistance by retiring her self from them, and never more
permitting them to come near her: for the second she seeing her self
importuned by many, espied her opportunity, when her son was in the company of
many Nobles of the kingdom, and there in the presence of them all, she
professed her self a Christian, and resolute so to continue whatsoever should
happen. The Gentill and those about him, admiring so great constancy in a
woman, troubled her no more concerning that.

In the Island of Got, one of our Fathers took the confessio^s of more then
ten thousand Christians, and gave the most blessed Sacrament to above three
hundred: ten of those, who were gone back, were reclaimed: and in this and many
other good works, a Brother of ours had great part, who visited the Christians
bordering near about Omura.

In Nangasachi devotion is much increased toward our holy S. Ignatius. A
certain woman in most cruel and long pains of childbirth making a vow to the
Saint, and praying her friends to spend some time upon their knees before his
picture, was happily delivered of a son, who therefore bears the name of
Ignatius. Persecution is also much increased by reason of a principal
Governor, who of a Christian turned Renegat, seeks by all means to get into
his hands the Religious of that City. He has for that end employed secret
spies, promised great rewards, and spared no pains or industry to take them
prisoners: and yet it has pleased. Almighty God to preserve his servants. This
said Governor set forth a proclamation that all those, who had any Religious
in their houses, should deliver them up, under pain of death, not only of the
Master of the house, but even of the whole family. This proclamation struck a
horror into many, yet diverse sent away their slaves, to the end they might
with the more security lodge Religious persons.

The same Governor used an other diligence; which was to set forth an edict
forbidding all, upon pain of death, to read any spiritual books to
Christians; and that the Masters of houses should give up the names of such, as
bad served the church in those functio^s; otherwise the whole Neighborhood
should be punishable. Upon this diverse were banished, who being required,
refused to bind themselves by promise to desist from so good a work. Mothers
could not lodge their children for this reason, without imminent ca^ger to
their neighbors: so that diverse were constrained to retire into the country,
not for fear of death; but for fear of preiudicing others with small either
profit or honor to their Religion. Thus far went the Renegat Governor with
his officers, but the persecution of the Xogun increased much their affliction.

He first commanded that no Christian Iaponian should be capable to traffic
by sea out of Iaponia but only Gentiles and Renegats. A hard and cruel law: for
that most part of the inhabitants live upon the gains of their voyages into
several parts. And it was a wonder to see poor Christians starve for hunger,
rather then offend God, or let themselves be transported with the sweetness of
gain. Among others a certain Captain of a ship, was not only kept off board,
but threatened with death: and though he avoided this danger, yet remains he in
great poverty; which he seasoneth with extraordinary joy since it is for
Almighty Gods cause.

He made also a prohibition to all Iaponians, as well Christians, as Gentiles so
sail to the Philippine Islands; for that notice was given, that in ships from
those parts were conveyed sometimes Religious persons; and for this a certain
embassage from the Governor of the said Islands did not succed, which happened
in this manner.

The Ambassadors coming to the Island of Iaponia with rich presents and
extraordinary charges in a well furnished ship from a certain port of the
kingdom of Farima called Muro 30 leagues of Ozaca; coming I say, to Meaco, were
there demau^deo by the Governor of the City, and the Governor of Nangasachi,
for what end they came? who sent them? what they carried? what they desired?
and the like: The Ambassadors answered conformably to their commissions. The
Governors writ accordingly to the Court: but answer was returned that such
Embassages came not of themselves, but procured by Religious men, dwelling in
those Islands; and that the Xogun Lord of Iaponia would receive no Embassages
from places broaching a law most false, diabolical and seditious turning the
state up side down and deceiving the subjects. That already he had been
deceived in that kind, and that under color of traffic and marchand. Ze this
pernicious law and the Authors thereof had been brought in, whom he now had
banished under rigorous pains and would receive no more. The Ambassadors
alleged their reasons, but in vain, and sinally were constrained to return
having done nothing, and guarded day and night like prisoners with armed men,
which neither permitted them to go a land, nor any of the country to come
unto them, excepting two only, who were to buy necessary provision to live
upon, and all this for sear of Religious men, suspecting the greatest part of
the Europeans to be of that profession though disguised in secular clothes, and
this was the success of that Embassage. And least Religious me^ thus disguised
should ship into Iaponia, they have doubled their guards, examining very
rigorously all strangers, registring the names of all, and obliging those, who
lodge them, to render account of them whenever it shall be required.

Moreover the Xogun has ordained that all strangers be sent away as well
Religious as seculars, so they be Spaniards or Portugheses: the English and
Hollanders only excepted, for that they betray Priests, and are held to be
capital enemies of the Spaniards and Portugheses, and of the law of Christ:
and for this respect they are not only admitted, but made much of; though they
rob and spoil even the Iaponians themselves, when they meet with them by
sea.

This order came to Nangasachi, when suddenly the Ministers of lustice, seasing
upon the streets entered all the houses, where the Europeans lived, and taking
their names, and those of the Coreys, Cinezes and Iaponeses, themselves, whom
they found clad like Spaniards or Portugheses, they set them a certain day to
be gone out of Nangasachi, and all the confins of Iaponia, under pain of
senere punishments for any that should not obey. They could not but feel that
blow exceedingly; yet was it a comfort unto them to be banished merely for
their Religion. The day being come they all shipped themselves (excepting some
few in prison, of whom we spoke in the last years annuals) some for Macao,
others for Manila the chiefest City of the Philippin Islands; but without
either wines or servants, such as had them Iaponeses, whom they could in no
wise carry along with them. The parting was so doleful and full of tears on
both sides, as well of those who went, as those who stayed behind, that all the
lookers on were extremely moved: the mothers wept amain to part from their
children; the husbands from their wives; the Masters of houses from their
families. The very Iaponeses themselves were wounded at the heart to leave some
their friends, others their Masters, others those from whom they gained their
huings and carried in their breasts the law; and proceedings of Xogun. Tears
and lamentations remained in the hearts and eyes of those who stayed behind, the
more when they reflected upon the good deeds done full often by those, who
were sent away; as the setting of their slaves at liberty, whom they might have
made money of; giving to diverse house room, and liberally bestowing both gold
and filuer on persons in necessity.

The last persecution in the City of Nangasachi was against the dead. For the
hatred of the Xogun against our holy faith, which he endeauours by all means
to extirpate, could not sufficiently express it self against the living. The
Christians of Nangasachi had a churchyard, where they buried their dead, and on
certain days went thither in numbers to recommend them unto God: on the
sepulchers, which were some of stone, others of brick, others of wood were put
diverse crosses of several fashions. Against this place the Gentiles spent their
fury butning the wooden crosses, destroying the monuments, commanding the dead
to be buried under ground. The Christians feared so much lest the dead bones of
their friends should be taken up and cast into the sea, that some made deeps
holes into the ground and there buried them; others carried the^ home to their
houses, others tocitties near about and there buried them: thus they went all
day up and down the city, not knowing what way to take, admiring the cruelty
of the Xogun and other Governors, who would not so much as endure, that they
dead should have with them any token of their profession. A certain officer at
this time passing through the streets, found a Christian selling beads;
presently he laid hands on him, for selling forbidden ware and straightly
bound brought him before a Judge, who condemned him and made him stand in the
public view fast bound a whole day and night.

Of the persecution of Christians in certain places of the kingdom of Figen.
THe chiefest man of Figen is called Nobexima Xinanono Cann; who was presers at
Court, when so many Christians were burned alive; terrified which this example,
for fear of loosing the Xoguns favor, he gave order to all his subordinate
Governors, that they should quit his dominions from Christians. The officers
careful to comply with their Masters will and pleasure, put forth a
proclamation, that all should abandon Christian Religion, other wise to be
stripped stark naked and with their ears and noses cut, to be sent to the
City of Sifai together with their wifes and children there to be slaves to the
Tono, who was allied with the said Xinanono Cami.

It cannot be expressed what joy the Christians of Quizicurra conceived at this
Meslage: and by reason diverse torments were threatened in this letter, and
namely that they should be burned aline, they prepared themselves first with
the most precious and holy Sacraments, and afterward with new clothes to
appear at the day of their death, which they both hoped and looked for ear
long. One and thirty were called at once before a Justice, who with fair
speeches exhorted all and every one, to change their minds and not incur the
displeasure of the Tono. But their answer being undaunted and resolute, he fell
from fair to bitter and threat ning terms; commanding them to be carried
away in a most ignominious manner. The day following he called before him their
wines, who for joy put on their best apparel, and taking their Children in
their arms, such as had any (to offer them as immaculate sacrifices unto
Christ) they went courageously to the judgment sear, ready to lay open their
best veins and let forth their blood for Almighty God. The Judge haning only
seen them, commanded they should be sent to a certain house, and there kept
as prisoners, till they heard more of him. The day following a certain chief
person and Christian, went to the Governor entreating, the women might go
back to their howles, and offering for to enter bond for their due appearance,
when it should be required, which was accordingly granted: but the good women
were nothing contented herewith and refused the offer, saying; that
unprisonment for Christ was more dear unto them, then what soever liberty, and
that they would not depart from the prison, unless it were to a stake or gibbet,
to end their lives. Yet finally, giving way to the persuasions of many
Christians, they retired back to their houses. When these women were called
to appear, there were wanting, by reason of the fair distance, those of a
certain town called Occusa. They were counseled not to stifle since the
others had been delivered, but they would in no ways obey, saying the Gentills
should see they were no less courageous, then their neight urs and as desirous
of death, and so they went forward, but were turned back: for the Judge
perceiving such incredible co^stancy in both texes, thought it best to
dissemble all with prudencv, and so the persecution ended in Oquizu; where
torments were wanting to the Christians, not they to torments.

The same day that the persecution began in Oquizu it began likewise in Iagami.
The first assaulted by the Governor were laboring me^, yet in a more mild
manner: for calling before him on of the chief among them, he was earnest with
him to change his Religion; which not succeding, to subsoribe at least a
certain list, which he had in his hand. The honest Cou^treyman answered; if
the subscribing were taken, as a sign of reuolting from his faith, he would
not put his hand unto it, albeit the denial should cost him his life. But the
Governor by reiterated oaths gave him assurance, there was no such thing
meant: whereupon the Coutrey-man, after a thousand protestations, that he was a
Christian, and would die so, subscribed unto his paper. And after this manner,
the Governor soon induced the rest in great part to subscribe: yet some there
were, who made a scruple of it, making choice rather to leave both goods and
houses, then to subscribe upon any terms; so that three score and three men
and women betook themselves to a voluntary banishment: of which there was a
poor feeble woman, through age and sickness almost brought to her grave, who
being asked of her husband; what course they should take? Let us go (says
she) with the rest into banishment; for I had rather die in the tourney, for
Gods sake, then protract my life a few days longer, with living at home, and
loss of my soul: And albeit I am in diverse respects near unto my end: yet if
I should chance to die in the way, at least the good will, where with I offer
my self to death to preserve inviolable Gods holy truth will be acceptable to
his divine Matesty. And so her husband setting her on horseback, and tying her
with cords for fear of falling, brought her by the help of God safe and sound
to the place he determined.

Soon after, the persecution in Iagami ceased without further prejudice to
Catholic Religion. But those good Christians began to have remorse for having
put their hands to that writing imagining that thereby they had been decaued.
Whereupon diverse of them resolved to go back to the Judge, and tell him
resolutely they were Christians, and that he should not for bear to molest
them in regard they had subscribed: which the Judge perceiving answered they
might remain as constant in their Religion; as they would, and for their
greater comfort gane order; that those Christians who were departed the
Country should return again, and all of them enjoy their Religion in peace,
as formerly they had done. There was also near unto these parts a Christian
named Gaspar, much molested by the Lord of Ioysusi, who finally seized upon his
goods, cast him out of doors, and banished him the Country, keeping his wife
and Children in prisons; although she within few days was permitted to go
after her husband; They assaulted Gaspars Mother in law who dwelt in a village
not far of. But his good example had now made her too strong against this
battery. For being solicited to comply wtih the Tono his will, and go to a
Temple of their Idolis; she made answer that all they could do, should never
bring her unto it. Hereupo^ hey threatened to burn her in the forhead with an
iron, and by diverse other means to dilgrace her. But she, with great courage
laughing at their threats, and expecting a whole day and a night the effects
of their meaning, when she law nothing likely to be done, finally other own
accord went into banishment, there quietly to enjoy the liberty of her
conscience. In like manner did a young man named Mansius a neighbor of
Gaspars, who being much molested by a servant of the Lord of that Country,
with his Mother and sister departed thence to free himself from danger of
loosing his Religion. So have many more done, who with great alacrity chose
rather to be ablent from their Native Country, then put themselves in danger
or offending God.

The subjects of the Country called Omuradono living together with those of
Nabexima, all of them were commanded to appear before the Tono of Fucofori,
and answer for themselves. Thirty of them took ship, being accompanied to the
water sine with their wives and kindred, all full of greef for that they
imagined they should meet no more in this world. Yet all that accompanied them,
with one accord exhorted them to spend their blood in defense of their faith,
Being arrived to Fucofori, they were taken and examined each of them a part;
but they like old beaten so ildiers with great constancy suited words to their
profession, answering in such fort as the Judges were little pleased, and
therefore co nmaunded the principal men amongst them to be stripped, and naked
as they were, to be exoosed to wind and weather, the season at that time (as in
winter) being very cold.

There was a young man who had carried himself very courageously, whom the
Judges to make further trial of him, commanded, since he would not conform
himself, and obey their wills, to put one of his fingers into the fire. The
noble Christian zealous of Gods honor, and deeming, that by this act he should
give a pregnant testimony of his faith, undauntedly put his finger into the
fire, and suffered it there to be burned with great admiration of all the
Gentills: who being satisfied much herewith, and contented that the Christians
in things extrinsecall to Religion would obey them, sent the young man and all
the rest full of merits back to their houses. The Christians being returned
joy ull at their good success were now out of farther fear, when the
Governors Lieutenant, being highly offended with a more zealous then prudent
act of a Christian, sent some Gen ills his servants with commission to enter in
upon the Christians houses, and constrain them to subscribe, not alleging
any cause unto them; but adding many threats of future punishments: the
Christians for the most part conformed themselves, some with remorse, some
without any difficulty subscribing; so that their neighbors who had not
subscribed, reprehended them much, and told them that they would not from
thence forward have any communication with them, in regard they held them as
excommunicated persons. Whereupon these poor souls fell into such scruples and
afflictions of mind, that they would neither sow their corn, nor till the
ground, as the season required but like men distracted let all run at random:
which one of our Fathers understanding made ha^ unto them, and bidding them be
of good courage, taught them what they were to do in like occasions for the
time to come. Some were of so tender consciences, that for fear of future
scruples they would by no means subscribe, unless the cause of their
subscription were hrst made known unto them: and therefore, abandoning their
houses, village, and all other affairs went to seek a dwelling place else
where. One there was of that holy company by name John, whose sufferance was
most remarkable, He together with his wife and children (having notice of the
Tonos officers when they came first to make the Christians deny their faith)
retired himself into a great wood, which was under the dominion of an other
Lord, where he made his abode for fifteen days together, in the cold time of
winter: and howbeit he endured very much; yet he was so faue from being
dismayed, that he showed himself most ready to die in that distress, rather
then hazard the loss of his faith. Neither did he want followers of his rare
example, some remaining two whole days, some three, in the woods and deserts
without any food at all to speak of. When the first storm was ouerblowne this
John was called home by his friends. But the forsaid officers returning the
second time with their former intentro^, he utterly refured to subscribe; and
so returning again into the forest, settled himself there in a poor
cottage, made up for him by other charitable Christians, and (as a Father
reported, who contessed him and his whole family) it that wood lived very
contentedly; deeming it far better to suffer all temporal miseries then to
be in danger of denying his faith.

The persecution of the Christians of the City of Firando and the territory
belonging to it, in which eight and thirty suffered death.
MAssura Figendono Lord of the state of Firando knowing how maliciously the
Xogun was bent against Christians, thought good to feed his cruel humor, the
only means, as he conceived, to establish himself in that place of
government. Wherefore he resolved upon a persecution, and began with the wines
and children of those, whom two years before he had put to death by order of
the Ienca, their cause being not yet ended; and he spared neither the
maid-seinants, nor little intants, as it will appear by the following relation.

The death of nine Christians of the house and family of Gabriel, who had
lodged F. Camillus Conitanstius of the Society of JESUS.
Two years ago a Christian, called Gabriel, suffers death in the City of
Firan^o, for having lodged F. Camillus Constanstius of the Society: and ever
since, both his mother, and the rest of his family, had lived in daily
expectation of their turn; their cause yet hanging, and they committed to the
custody of their neighbors. No sooner did the persecution begin, but the
family of Gabriel was given for lost whereupon the Gentiles began to look to
them more narrowly, and to abridge them of their former liberty. One of the
neighbors, the second man of the street, went to visit Grace the mother of
Gabriel and told her after an vpbraiding manner, that the persecution raised at
that present was a punishment sent by tenxo Daygun the chief Cami of Iaponia:
The holy woman resented exceedingly this blasphemous speech: and boldly
replied; that she wondered very much he would offend her ears with blaspheming
God his holy law: and that he might have done much better in exhorting her to
suffer with patience the near approaching death, for the honor and service of
the only true God; then by recounting the fables of the false Idols, to
increase her affliction; wherefore she desired him, if he wished her well, to
speak of something else. And the Paynim thus checked spoke not a word more.
During this time, the Christians of that City gathered together in a
particular house, offered us many fervent prayers to Almighty God, begging of
his goodness force of spirit, and constancy or all, but especially for the
prisoners. Linus the brother of Gabriell was much tempted but he allwaies
answered; that he would follow the steps of his Father, who had perseuered in
the law of Christ until the end. Some days before the servants of God
received the sentence of death they invited to dinner the principal Paynims of
the street, and humbly craved pardon of them for some sharp answers, which they
had given; earnestly beseeching them to speak no more unto them of leaving
their faith. The Physician of the Tono was the first man of their friends, who
had news of their death: wherefore he went to them in a friendly manner, and
acquainting them with what had passed told them, that if they would change
their minds, he would make means that the Tono should recall his sentence.
Linus made answer in name of the rest, thanking him for his good will: and told
him, that all the torments in the world should never make them abandon their
Religion. This news came soon after to be known of the Physicians man, who
out of mere compassion went bewailing their case and spreading the news about
the City. There was presently such flocking of friends and acquaintance to
visit them, that the chief officer of the street thought fit to turn them
all back, for fear of an uproar. About midnight came two of the Tonos
servants, who confilcating all their goods carried them away, scarce leaving
so much as the clothes upon their backs. Then did the condemned Christians
with a loud voice begin ioifully to recite diueise prayers: and when the
standers by would have hindered them, they answered; that, their temporal
goods being taken away, they had no reason to deprius them also of the
spiritual riches of the soul, their only substance and possession then
remaining. The confiscatours, admiring their speeches, let them go on for the
present: but having sent away all the goods, they bound Linus and all the, rest
saving Marie the Grandmother of Gabriell, and the son of a serving woman, who
was so little that one of the officers carried him away upon his back.

Upon the 3 of March, being sunday they were lead forth, many Christians
meeting them upon the way, who in taking their last leave, with many tears
recommended themselves to their prayers, earnestly desiring them when they came
to heaven, where they should be out of all danger, that they would be mindful
of those who remained behind, subject to so many dangers and miseries. Amongst
the rest came one of Graces daughters with her husband, of whom she took her
leave with a cheerful countenance and great peace of mind, charging them to
remain constant in the Religion, in which they had been brought up from
children, and promising to pray for them in heaven. In like manner did Linus
speak to the other Christians, with such a pleasant and smiling countenance,
that he made show of nothing less then going to suffer death. Finally they
arrived at a place distant from Firando a quarter of a league, where they found
four boats expecting them; in two of which were carried the nine Christians
who were to suffer death, and in the other two the executioners of that
injustice. When they were embarked, Grace took a pair of beads from about
her neck, and cast them a land to her son in law; Then lifting up a little
Crucifixe in her hand, this alone, quoth she will serve my turn: and with
saying to she adored, in the sight of all, him who comfort and gives
strength to those that suffer for him, and with humble renerence kissed his
holy image.

After this the waterme^ began to launch forth; and the devout servants of God
accompanying the noise of the oars, sometimes with singing pious hymns,
sometimes reciting several prayers aloud, arrived at Coccidomari the place
appointed for execution. There they all took their places, and Linus the only
man of the company, showed himself a man indeed, thanking the executioners for
his death with a marvelous courage and undaunted mind. Then began they to
recome^d themselves to God Almighty, in which action they remained a great
while. In this time the youngest daughter of Grace, of the age of eleven years
only, was so far from being afraid either of death, or those whom she saw
ready to inflict it, that turning to her mother with a great courage, o mother,
said she, how much are we beholding to these servants of the Tono, who have
brought us hither, and will now send us to heaven, I pray you let us thank
them, and be exceeding joyful. The first, tharknelt down, was the good old
woman Mary, who lifting up her hands and praying a while, then calling upon
the holy names of Jesus and Mary was beheaded by one of her own kinsme^, who
according to the custom of Iaponia, least she should die by the hands of some
basefellow or other, did himself with great respect and reverence cut off her
head at a blow, she being about ninty years of age. The second was the noble
Linus of the age of 21. years. The third his sister Mary of the age of 18. The
fourth the younger sister called also Mary eleven years old, who were all
beheadeth in the same manner by the hands of principal men of the Gentiles,
having first prayed and called upon the holy names of Jesus Maria. Then came
the happy and magnanimous mother Grace, who seeing with the eyes of lively
faith her two young daughters so well placed and esp oused to the true spouse
of their souls, Christ our-Sauiour, and her son Linus so rich with heavenly
merits, yielded infinite thanks to the divine Majesty for so great benefits,
and then kneeling down with her daughter in law, whose name was also Mary, both
of them inuoking the sweet name Jesus Maria, cheerfully offered their heads to
be cut of; the mother in law being of the age of fifty years; and the daughter
in law of nineteen. After these presently followed two woemen-seruants the one
called Cecily, the other Mary, and a little child by name Michaell only three
years old, which being not capable of fear, left him, who had brought him
thither in his arms, and went to Cecily this mother, seated in the place where
she was to die: she tenderly embracing her little one, and devoutly calling upon
Jesus and Mary was beheaded by a servant of the Tono, who at two blows cut off
the heads, first of the mother and then of her innocent child. The last was
the other servant Mary, who nothing daunted with the bloody spectacle of so
many headless bodies, fell down upon her knees, and with much tenderness of
devotion imploring the assistance of Christ Jesus and his Virgin Mother, bowed
her head to the bloody sword, and made up the number of nine glorious martyrs;
being of the age of two and twenty years.

The servants of God having thus happily triumphed over death, the Paynims
covered their dead bodies with mattes, but coming to cover Mary the wife of
Gabriel, they perceived that her head was not quite of, yea, that she still
called upon Jesus Maria: so were those blessed names imprinted in her pious
heart, that her head being almost divided from her body; and she more dead then
living ceased not to inuoke them: unless we will say that after death for
confusion of those Gentiles God, the Creator of all, spoke by the mouth of his
dead scruant. The Paynims were much amazed at this sight, yet nothing relenting
in their cruelty beheaded a new the twice happy martyr, and wrapping all the
bodies in their several mattes, then tying a great stone to each of them, cast
them into the sea, so to prevent the Religious veneration, which the Christians
would have given to their holy relickes.

All these servants of God were borne with in the state of Firando, six of
them in the City it self, the two servants in the Island Igisuqui, and Mary
the Wife of Gabriel at a place called Xixi. Mary that old woman had been
baptized at woman's estate, and was one of the first which received the
Sacrament of Baptism in Iaponia: all the rest had been Christians from their
craule; their Fathers and grandfathers having been so before them. The good old
woman Mary was always much given to devotion and Almesdeedes: Neither was
Grace any whit behind her, having moreover a great zeal of souls, which she
ever showed toward the Christians of that City. She was of the company of
Mercy, of which, as being the head, she had an especial care, and therefore
procured diverse ways to advance Christianity and virtue. She lodged our
Fathers in her house for a long time; she mortified her body with frequent
disciplines, and fasting every friday and saturday thorough out the year; she
visited and comforted the sick; she assisted the poor in what she could; and
at Christmasse and Easter she was wont to feast the Christians, and with all to
give them good spiritual counsel. It happened once upon the Iaponians new
years day that there dyed two sick men, one a Citizen, the other a stranger:
Grace came to know of it, and without making any account of the Iaponians
superstition, who upon that day will not so much as name the dead, much less
talk of burying them, caused the Citizen to be buried, keeping the dead body
of the stranger in her house for some days, to avoid the bruit of the
Gentiles, which afterward she buried in the Churchyard of the Christians.
When the Paynims came to know of this work of mercy, they commended it very
much, and ceased not openly to praise the Christians for it. The two daughters,
both Mary's, imitated very well their mother virtues; and Linus was not
inferior to them. Neither did Mary the wife of Gabriel come behind the rest;
and the two servants, as well in good life, as desire of dying for Christ
might be compared with their mistresses. Finally they all died for the faith of
Christ upon the third of March in the year of our Lord 1624. by commaundment
of Massura Figendono Lord of Firando.

The death of five other Christians in Vsucca.
THe very day that the foresaid nine were put to death, an old man of the age
of seauenty six years, by name Luke Morifebioye, was be headed not far from
his own house; for that he constantly rejected two of the Tonos servants, who
persuaded him to deny his faith: and his son of the age of forty leaven
suffered death in like manner, for the same cause, and by the hands of the
same executioner. The same day an other old man of the age of fourscore and
six, called Anthony Girobioye, inuoking the most blessed names of Jesus and
Mary had his head cut off. These three servants of God were native of the
Island Iquisuqui. Luke in his old age leaving off worldly affairs, as desirous
to attend wholly to his devotions, retired himself to Vsucca. There he
instituted a Confraternity of S. Ignatius; and, as he was very zealous of the
spiritual good of his neighbors, made a separation in his house for our
Fathers to come visit the Christians, where he received F. Constantius, which
was a chief cause of his death. Alexius the son followed his Fathers example
in providing for the spiritual necessities of Christians; for which cause he
was made worthy to follow him also in suffering death for Christ. Antony had
betaken himself to a retired life in the same place, for the reasons which had
moved Luke to his retirement. He was an humble, sincere, and very charitable
man: he did not only visit the sick, but kept them also often times in his
own house, thereby to provide the better for them: he always lodged our
Fathers in his house, and was ordinarily employed in the exercise of either
spiritual or corporal works of mercy: in recompense whereof he was finally
rewarded with the palm of martyrdom The day next ensuing after the death of
these three, was beheaded Mary the wife of Luke, who being from home the day
before at the time of their combat, and returning at night understood what had
passed; and presently resolved to go and present her self to the Tonos
officers. As she was going she met with those, who had put to death her husband
and the other two: she presently stayed to hear what they would say, and their
proposition was the same, which they had made to the rest: to which she
replied: I was baptized being but two years old, and have perseuered in the
Christian Religion seauenty more: can you imagine that I mean to forsake it
now? They left her for the present, because it was night; but the next day they
came again and receiving the same answer, led the good old woman to the place,
where they had beheaded her son Alexius, and told her, that she must either
change her Religion or die the same death. She embraced the latter, and kneeling
down with a cheerful countenance, first recommended her self to our Lord,
then offering her head to the sword died with the sweet names of Jesus and Mary
in her mouth.

The wife of Lucas being thus dead, the persecutours exercised their cruelty
upon the children of Alexius, one of the which Thomas was ten years old, an
other five, and the third an Infant borne three or four days before the
Fathers death, and as yet unchristened. This bloody office was committed to a
servant of the house who by order of Figendonos Ministers cut of their heads.
All these Christians had been baptized by our Fathers, except the little girl
which was baptized in her own blood. A rare case in Iaponia, and which caused
great admiration, both for the infantes littleness, and the cause of such a
murder.

The death of Isabell Mother of Damianns, and Beatrice his wise with their
four Children.
IN the year of our Lord 1622, Damianus being put to death, and all his goods
confiscated, his wife with all her family was kept prisoner in her own house
having continually a double guard upon her, and a cord about her neck. which
was so tied that she might nevertheless stir about, and dispatch her
ordinary business. The keepers weary of that tedious office did extremely
molest her, by urging her to forsake the Christian faith; but she always the
same, not the least daunted with the miseries of poverty and long imprisonment,
answered only this, that she would be her husbands companion as well in death
as life, ready to suffer all trouble and vexation for the love of Jesus christ.
At two years end, order came for the beheading of Beatrice and her children,
which they understanding did even leap for joy: only poor Isabell, whose
sentence was not come, hung down the head, and showed such manifest signs of
true sorrow, that the messenger acquainted the Tonos Lieutenant with it, and he
presently commanded she should die with the rest. At these happy tydinges the
good old woman was revived, and putting one her best apparel, as the rest had
done, prepared for death. Paul a child of eleven years whilst the rest were
making themselves ready with great joy, was very sad and pensive by reason that
some, as he understood, were gone to beg his pardon: but at length word was
brought that no pardon would be granted: Then might you have seen in the face
of this manly child a picture of his joyful heart, so did he on the sudden pull
up his spirits and with marvelous alacrity make ready for death. They departed
al together from their own house, cheerfully bidding adieu to their friends,
who met them upon the way, and signified by their tears how loath they were to
leave them, being no more to meet in this life. Thus they embarked, and being
come within sight of the Island Nacaie, where Damian and his companio^s had
suffered two years before, Beatrice began to offer up prayers of thanks
giving to the divine Majesty for the benefit bestowed upon her husband, and
willed the rest for that end to recite with loud voices such prayers as they
knew by heart. By the way they met with the wife and Children of John, who were
going also to shed their blood for the love of Christ. O happy encounter! Who
can express the reciprocal joy; the cordial greetinges, the zealous
exhortations of these noble Christians? There was no lamenting of each others
hand fortune, but mutual encouragements to constancy and perseverance, which
with united hearts and tongues they begged of the divine goodness, joining
their two devout quires in a consort of melodious prayers. Thus cutting the
ways with their oars, and pearcing heaven with their voices, they arrived at
Gigoco a place of the Island Nacaie. Here the six first went a Land; and
Beatrice to give her children good example, was the first to kneel down,
which she did with a marvelous courage and manly spirit: then lifting up her
hands to heaven, and praying a while offered her head, which with one stroke
was divided from her body. Paul would be the next after his mother, and was
already upon his knees, but the cruel hangman seeing him girt in such sort
with a towell as might hinder his blow, bad him vnty it, which he without the
least sign of fear rising up did very dexterously, and then speedily falling
down upon his knees again, as greedy of death, with hands stretched forth to
heaven, whither he was taking his flight; most devoutly called upon the holy
names Jesus Maria, and at the second stroke of the hangman lost his head, and
got a laurel. John the second son only nine years old, stood all this
while on the right hand of his mother, learning as well by her example, as that
of his elder brother, how to play his part: Wherefore knowing that his
grandmother had chosen the last place, and thinking it no pride to precede his
sisters in such an occasion, full of sweet devotion well befitting his tender
years bowed his knees to the ground, and receiving a mortal blow flow with
his blessed soul to heaven. No sooner were these three dead, but the bloody
butchers, by exercise of cruelty growing more cruel, took the younger sister
by name Isabel only leaven years old, and in most barbarous manner throwing
her down upon the dead body of her mother, cut her in pieces with their
Cimitaries. So did the mother become an Altar for the precious sacrifice of her
innocent daughter, and the blessed child restore her blood and life to the
fountain from whence it sprung. Magdalen the elder sister, and eldest of the
four, yet not above the age of thirteen years was so strengthened with the
vigor of Gods holy grace that no cruelty could abate her courage: wherefore
drawing near to her mothers body she knelt down close by it (with some holy
envy, it may be, to her sisters happy lot) and imploring the assistance of
Christ Jesus and the Virgin Mary, was beheaded, and crowned with glory at the
same time. Now had the good old Isabel obtained the first part of her desire,
which was, as she said; to see those dearest pledges out of danger, and safely
placed in heaven: the second was, to bear them company, of which she was
quickly made partaker, yielding her head to the sword, and her soul to heaven,
full fraught with the merits of many deaths.

Such was the glorious end of this thrice happy company, very suitable to their
virtuous lives. Beatrice was borne of Christian parents in Tachinegama a place
in the Island Quisuchi. She was always religiously devout, and exceeding
charitable: she often visited and served the ficke, imitating in those works
of mercy her husbad Damian, and she allwaies taught her children to open their
hearts to no other love, but of Christ Jesus and his holy law. Isabell her
mother in the law, who died of the age of 74 years, was native of the same
Island, and as well she as the rest had been baptized by our Fathers. She was
allwaies a devout and constant Christian, never regarding the Paynims of her
alliance, by whom she was therefore allwaies ill treated. Her only son
Damianus being dead, she was inflamed with a great desire of dying for Christ,
and so earnestly did she beg this grace of God Almighty, that at length she
obtained it for her self and all her family, upon the fifth day of March 1624.

The death of Marie, wife unto John Sucamoto, and her four sons.
AFter the death of John, the officers held their proceedings with Marie
answerable to those we have already said they held with Beatrice, for they
kept her prisoner, and put a guard over her in her own house; made her drag a
rope about her neck, and vexed her which other torments whereof we have already
spoken. Upon the same day, on which Beatrice had notice given her from the Tono
of her verdicte, was Marie also and her children advertised, that they were to
die. So they made mutual joy, and with leave of the officers, came together
and after many congratulations, they animated with interchange each the other
to a constant suffering in so gloriouse a cause.

Andrew the eldest son of Marie, a youth of singular piety, recounted sundry
examples and miracles which he had red, where by they all found themselves much
encouraged; and for period of this festival gladness, turning himself unto
the Christians, who were there present, he had them be of good comfort, and
continue that constancy, where in they had so laudably hither to persisted;
and rest full of hope that the goodness of almighty God would in short time
alay the present commotion, and give mighty increase to Christianity through
out laponia. The next morning at break of day, clad in most solemn attire,
they embarked for the aforenamed Island; where being arrived, Marie, and Peter
were put to death (after those of the family of Damianus) ending their lives
by the sword. And Peter although he was but ten years of age, yet did he with
example of rare fortitude offer his head to the executioner. There remained in
the ship, three other sons of John, who being carried in to the maine sea,
were by those cruel officers, without any sense of pity or compassion,
thrust into several sacks, which when they had filled up with straw, they
covered also over with others, and having then bundled them up, bad them
dispose themselves for death; these holy Brothers did so, and performed
forthwith many acts of ardent and inflamed devotion: and the time being now
arrived, they were bound fast, and then tossed and tumbled to and fro, as if
they had been woolpackes. It may seem Almighty God was pleased to show an
argument of his power in these 3 yonge-men, for being wrapped up each a part,
as we said, they requested as a curtesy at the hands of the executioners, that
they might be tied all 3 together, to the end they might be hoised ouer-bord
all at once; and as they were already united together by the natural tie of
brotherhood, and yet more straightly by supernatural bond of charity in Christ
our Lord, they might in conformity hereof, be now bound fast together, and
receive their death jointly in the same place, who by the feale thereof, should
be assured to enjoy each other for eternity. Their request was granted them,
and with all a huge stone was annexed unto the bundle. And so soon as these
loving brethren perceived themselves now wrapped up together in such sort that
they were no more to be severed, according to their hearts desire; they
interchangeably did animate themselves to die; and so rejoicing at the arrival
of that fortunate hour, as they with most inflamed hearts called upon the names
of Jesus and Maria, they were thrown in to the sea, where they ended their
lives by a kind of cruelty not yet heard of in Iaponia; save only in the state
of Firando. The eldest of these three, called Andrew, was of the age of 25; the
second, named Mancio, of 23; and John, who was the youngest, of twenty one
years.

The servant of God Marie, was native of Nexima, an Island in the state of
Firando; she was borne of Christian parents, and baptized in her infancy by
our Fathers; she was second wife unto John Quinzayemone who died in a glorious
confession of his faith; and she followed the form of his foot steps, both
in her life and death. Andrew, and the rest of his brethren were borne in
Tacchinosami, and were also baptized by ours. Andrew, was accustomed to read a
spiritual lecture unto the people of his Country, to give them notice also of
such feasts as were of precept, and to assist them, both by his aduite and
instructions, and which is of most consideration, he was unto them all an
example of good life and a mirror of all virtue. This you^gman after the death
of his Father, did so solicit the cause of Christianity, as that he deserved
to have a laurel for his guerdon; how be it our Lord God reserved the
bestowing of it unto this present time.

The death of Mithaell Iamando Fiemon, and Visula his wife, with thee of their
children.
MIchael lived in a seaport of the state of Firando, called Cochi. At such
time as search was made after the Christians, the first whom the Gentiles fell
upon, was Michaell, whom they indeauoured by many allurements to withdraw from
the faith, whereof he made profession. But he did not only (as indeed he ought)
show himself constant and resolute, but addressed himself also unto other
Christians exhorting them, one by one, that they would not in any wise abandon
tho law of heaven, in consideration of any thing which might befall them on
earth. He had bred up his children in such sort, and instilled into them such
singular constancy, that one of them being taken by some of the neighbors, and
for the space of two whole days (all which time they withheld him from his
parents) continually solicited as well by promises as threats, although he was
but a child of 13 years of age, yet did he ever remain most firm in
profession of his faith, replying ever unto their pestiferons persuasions; that
they must understand he was a Christian, and resolved to die such. Michael had
a most generous and nobleminded woman to his wife. This woman, when as sentence
of death was now given against the whole family, was much pressed by some
Gentiles that she would give unto them at least her little daughter, whom they
much desired to reserve from death, and willingly would have taken upon
themselves, the care of bringing her up. But this discreet Matrone made answer
unto thing demand; that although they be able to convert this whole universe
into gold, and had the power to make her Empress of it all, the promise hereof
should not move her to commit her children unto the care of Gentiles.

The day appointed for their death being now arrived, Michael took the bigger
of his daughters, called Clara, in his arms, and a candle, which was lighted,
in his hand: Vrsula, putting her son John before her with his candle also
lighted; threw her little infant Magdalena in to her bosom, and bearing in her
hand an other light, shut up this pious procession. And they went with such
evident demonstration of their solid joy, and namely the child John, that the
very Gentiles themselves affirmed, such comfort and alacrity could not proceed
from any force of nature, were it not succored by some Superior power. Being
now come to the place where they were to die, Vrsula a woman worthy admiration
for her courage, made request, that she might be put to death in the last
place, to the end she might (for these were her own words) see before she
died, the things which were most dear unto her, placed in a haven of security.
Hereupon the heads man to do her the favor, struck off at one blow with a
Simitar the head of Michael, who was now already prepared, and gave with all a
gash into the neck of the innocent child Clara, who was in her Fathers arms,
redoubling therefore his blow, he perfected that cruel act. And thus did the
Father being 37 and the daughter 7 years old, happily end their lives. This
being done, John rose up and went unto his mother, requesting her to binde-vp
his hair which lay down in his neck, least it might be some hindrance to the
blow, when his head was to be struke of: and the good mother did it in the best
manner she could. And then the sweet child, turning unto him who was to be his
executioner, and perceiving him to be very young, said unto him, if I mistake
not you have yet never cut off the head of any one, be therefore advised to do
your office with dexterity; this said, he lifted up his eyes and hands to
heaven inuoking the sovereign names of Jesus and Maria, then bowing down
received a blow, which severed at once his head quit from his body, he being
now, as was said, but thirteen years of age. Vrsula, having observed this
whole tragedy, and understanding right well that the catastrophe thereof was
the placing of her son, her daughter, and her husband in the desired port of
security; elevated her eyes, which were even filled with tears, to heaven, and
said; Blessed he thou, and Lord of mercies, who have made me worthy to be
present at this spectacle, so wonderful to men, and grateful to the Angels:
grant now unto me, that having seen their end, whom I loved so dearly, I may
be toyned with them in my death: refuse not to aid me in this last conflict,
who offer entirely unto she my self, and this pledge of my bowels, this all
which now is left me. And here forbearing to speak any more, whilst she was
tenderly embracing her little infant Magdalena, she received a blow from the
chief executioner who at once beheaded with his persian sword, both the mother
and her little daughter; Vrsula being but thirty four years of age. The
behoulders were all so amazed with this rare example, that for many days
after, their whole discourse was of the constancy and generosity of the
Christians.

Michael was borne in the kingdom of Yamato, and Vrsula his wife in
Chicumgojambes: they were both of them baptized by our Fathers, and so were
their children also. Michael was a man of singular devotion, and much given to
prayer, he fasted also and punished his body by disciplines very frequently:
and his charity toward the poor was very remarkable. Vrsula did not only
imitate her husband, but did both by example, and words, incite and stir him
up to all virtue. Like unto these parents, was their Son John, who (albeit in
so tender age) was devoutly accustomed to fast, not only most saturdaies
through out the year, in honor of the ever immaculate Virgin, but also in
time of lent, 3 days every week performed the like. They perseuered all in
the exercises of a good Christian life, till such time as they were all crowned
with Martyrdo^, which happened upon the sixte day of March, in the year 1624,
by commaundmet of Missura Figendono Prince of Firando. They were buried in the
sea: but we are confident their names shall not lie buried, whom constancy in
ouercomming torments has made worthy of eternal fame.

The death of Catherine, wife to John Yuquinoura.
John Yuquinoura was put to death, as we said, in the year 1622: but
Catherine, his wife was suffered to live; whom in regard of her eminent
nobility, the Patron of the Island of Pisuuo, labored by all possible means to
diuerte from the faith of Christ: and not only he, who was Lord of the Island,
but all the Gentiles in like manner did diversely solicit her without giving any
respit either to her body or mind; so that it was worthy particular admiration
that the constant servant of God should not deliver her self over unto them.
The people all stricken with admiration of her unconquered spirit, sought her
out one day, and having found her, (though indeed all this was done
deceitfully, to make further trial of her courage) they bad her prepare her
self to die, since she would admit no persuasions, and abandon her faith: the
place of justice, the said should be, the cell of a certain Hermit, a famous
Priest of their foolish Idols. This noble-minded woman, imagining all was true
which they had told her, put herself joyfully into the way toward the place,
accompanying her steps with acts of contrition for her sins, and a
continual reciting of her beads: but being come to that desert hermitage the
Gentiles solicited her to offer sacrifice to their Idols, affirming that they
had therefore brought her to that place. Which when she hard, flinging her self
upon the threshold of the door, she besought the B. Virgin, and her dearest
Savior, with many tears, sighs, and ardent clamours, for aid, and supply of
new forces, where by she might ever remain victorious over their wily
stratagems: So that the provost himself, admiring at the inflamed affection,
where with she made her prayer, and moved with compassion toward her,
commanded, that since there was no means to alter her design, they should
surcease to molest her any farther. The servant of God remained that night in
the house of the Mother of that Idolatrouse Priest; who, seeing the great
calamity, which through their persecution, she was brought into, spent most
part of the time in persuading her to have regard unto her nobility, and not to
be so cruel and void of compassion toward her self, as to suffer such abuse
at the hands of the base and vulgar multitude: but her words only flew in the
wind, and were not able to make any impression upon the mind of Catherine,
whole unvanquishable constancy was ever like unto it self. Next day the
officers to take a new assay of her courage bound her fast to a pine tree: but
seeing that this servant of God made no accounte thereof, they then loosed her;
for a complement of their paynim cruelty, having utterly disrobed her of all
garments; behold they tied her fast again, without either sense of humanity,
or regard unto the nobility of this woman, whose ancestors notwithstanding had
been the Lords and sole rulers of that Country. Yet she, well furnished with a
large provision of patience, did not only suffer with great indifferency this,
as I may say unsupportable injury, but thristing for the love of God, after
more and more torments, she rubbed her self so against the rough and craggy
bark of the tree, that there powered out streams of blood of all sides of her.
When the Gentiles perceived this, they unbound her once more, and gathering up
her blood (envying the Christians that pledge, which they knew they would both
take up, and conserve so carefully,) they fastened her unto a stake, and she
punishing her self, as she had formerly done, they led her to an old decayed
and injurious house, and there again being now by the long continuance become
obdurate in their cruelty, they bound her the third time to a post of the said
house: yet in fine, the tormentours were sooner wearied out, then the person
tormented. So that, the chief of those wicked officers, perceauing that there
was no hope to gain ground of this generous servant of God: after many
threats, they left some few to guard her, and themselves went to the Tono, to
give him accounte of what had passed, who upon their relation gave order
forthwith, she should be put to death.

The officers being returned with this commaundment, loosing this our Martyr
from the post, whereunto she was tied, and appareling her again with her own
garments, they objected unto her that she was stiffnecked, and should soon
gather the fruits of her obstinacy. And the servant of God, imagining indeed
what the matter was, rejoiced not a little at their words. And perceauing that
they in mockery hanged upon her shoulders an old ragged banner, which by
chance was found in that forlorn place, turning unto the Gentiles, who were
present, she said with a cheerful countenance; Go to in Gods name, torment
and vex me as much as you please: for all th wrongs and outragiouse iniures
you shall possibly heap upon me, must needs seem light, yea sweet unto me,
when I consider how many and how unspeakable those were, which yet it pleased
my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to under go, for me poor sinner. This being
said, they led her to the place of execution, where being arrived, she cast her
self speedily on her knees, and with hands and mind elevated unto God, gave
thanks with great feeling, unto his divine Majesty, who bad now granted unto
her what she bad long, so ardently desired: Here spent she some time in
prayer; and then undauntedly offered her head unto the sword, which with one
blow was severed from her body, she bei^ng now forty and eight years of age.
She was no sooner dead, but the Gentiles taking her body, put it into a sack,
and so threw it into the sea. Yet, for many days after in all the circuit
there about, men had for sole subject of their discourse the wonderful
courage and constancy of this renowned servant of God: in so much that the very
Gentiles themselves would be raising the trophes of her praises.

This servant of God Catherine was native of Ichibu, The was of noble
extraction, and both her Father and ancestors had been Christians. She was
baptized by our Fathers, and she was accustomed to lodge them often in her
house. She furthered, together with her husband the good of Christians much in
those parts, admitting and entertaining them in all friendly manner, yea she
made an Oratory in her house, that they being there assembled might receive the
most holy Sacraments. The very first time her husband was solicited by the
Gentiles to put off the precious garment of faith; she said unto him with great
courage, that he must also resolve never to come more in her sight, if be gave
any way to their impious persuasions. Which words the Gentiles took in great
disdain, and even then conceived that wrathful fury, which here they vented
forth in so many cruel torments as we have said.

The death of Thomas Mattaichi.
THomas was by edict banished his country for his religion in the year 1622,
after he had been often solicited by the Paynims, though all in vain, to
abandon his holy faith. But for so much as he was found to be in a place not
above two leagues distant, notice was given to the Tono thereof, and that he
continued Christian: whereupon he gave presently order that he should be
beheaded. He who was deputed to see him executed, delivered the message, and
desired him he would not be offended with him, since he did only what he was
commanded. I am, said the servant of God, so far from being offended with
ytu, that I am much pleased with the good will you show, and am sorry the
performance of your command has put you to so great pames. This said, he set
himself in the way to a little Island called Cosima, there kneeling down ready
for death, the executioner told him he must rise once more, and strippe
himself to the gridle. He oboyed, and rising with no less peace of mind then
serenity of countenance, disaraied himself, and then kneeling down the second
time, he was beheaded being thirty five years of age.

He was borne in Xisi, a place among the Islands of Firando. His Father and
auncesters had been Christians, and he had been baptized by our Fathers. He
was very devout, fervent, and much addicted unto spiritual things; he did
attend and serve his Mother, who yet was living, with great humility: he did
help and assist Christians both by example of good life, and counsel; and he
was a mirror of true diligence unto all them of the Sodality whereof he was:
giving evident demonstration by continual exercises of piety, what a true
judgment he framed of the painted foolery of this world. His death happened
upon the third of April 1624, God all mighty calling him to an eternal reward
by a short during combat in defense of his holy faith.

Of four others put to death for Religion in the Precinct of Firando.
THe want of good information concerning the ensuing Martyrs does enforce me to
use breuity in relation of their deaths. John Taousima Fiyrie, and his son
Luke, were borne in Ianoura, of Christian Parents and ancestors, and baptized
by our Fathers. The deputies of the Tono, had quickly there eyes upon these
two, as the principal and noted Christians; and perceiving their minds so
well fortified, that there was no hope to work upon them, they signified unto
our champions that they were to die. The news was most grateful both to John
and his son, who when they had put on such coats as are used by the
Confraternity, and armed themselves each with a rough discipline in his hand,
came stoutly unto the place of justice, where they received a crown of their
co^stancy by loss of their heads upon the 18 day of August, 1624.

At such time as the persecution was raised against Christians in the Island of
Cochs, there was amongst others in that place, a certain Christian woman
called Martha: Her son in law houlding himself nothing safe, so long as she
was in his house, told her that she must either change her religion or seek a
new lodging. It was now the most unseasonable time of all the year, the cold
was excessive, the whole Country was covered with snow, and the chillie winds
powered themselves out on every side: at which time, this ancient and grave
woman, not finding any one, who durst intertaine her (so great was the terror
of the impendent periecution) was constrained to wander over the craggy
mountains and wide fields, where sleeping in the open air, and growinge even
stifle with cold, she ended her days, solitary all alone; save that constant
faith did ever accompany her, and a devout mind which was ever erecting her
hopes unto the gates of heaven, and we are confident the divine goodness has
laid them open unto her.

In the beginning of that persecution a citizen of Firando named Hierom gave
some signs in his exterior carriage, that he had abandoned his religion;
whereat his Father in law being scandalized, who was an ancient and good
Christian, took unto him his daughter, who was also much offended with her
husbands fact, and went to Nangasachi: the young man at first was all amazed
with this his loss; but coming at length to himself he made have after
them, and casting himself at their feet, demanded pardon of his fault;
auowing that he would rather die, then be indaced to the like again. The
Governor had notice of the matter, and thereupon commanded that he should
return with all speed to the state of Firando, that otherwise he would put to
death so many of his kindred as should be found with in his district. Herupon
the you^gman returned to his own country. And he was no sooner arrived, then
assailed even by whole troops of the Gentiles, who pressed him to renounce his
faith. But Hierom, mindful of the promise he had made to his Father in law,
and much more unto almighty God; made always answer, that he would esteem it
a special grace and favor, if he might shed his blood for Jesus Christ: and
finally was beheaded upon the 18 of August 1624 in company of John, and Luke,
of whom we formerly spoke, being but 25 years of age when he shut up the
period of his life.

To conclude in a word, the state of Christianity in Firando; the persecution
which endured for the space of 2 months, was so bloody and cruel, that
Iaponie has not hitherto seen the like; yea such was the strange fierceness
against the Christians, of those bloodthirsty Paynims, that they did not spare
even them, who through fear had renounced their religion: one word was enough
to make them run desperate upon the lives of Christians, without distinction
of them, who courageously resisted their impiety, or through weakness gave over
themselves; notwithstanding there was an express law commanding that such
should be spared as would renounce their faith. In the heat of this
persecution, many worthy Christians were put secretly to death, whose names as
yet are not known, many also were exiled; and some (yet few there were of
these) gave I know not what signification in their exterior, that they had
forsaken Christ our Lord: and yet the Gentiles hanged certain signs or marks
thereof at their doors, obliging them with all to give in security that they
should return no more unto our holy faith. A thing not heard of before in
Iaponia, in cases of that nature: They permit not even unto children to have
any thing about them, which may be either in public or private, a token of
their Christianity: and one for so much as he was accustomed to carry beads
about unto the Christians, was kept prisoner in strait indurance for a whole
year. They have strictly prohibited in all the Cities of the Country, commerce
with other Christians: nor can they endure to hear any thing spoken in favor
of them. Our Fathers, who were some times so well received by them of Firando,
may not now be named: and, as they write unto us, it is almost incredible what
panges those poor Christians ate in, whom fear made seem in the exterior
renegados, finding them selves now destitute of all help: yet they reco^mend
them selves to God, and expect in the longanimity of their hopes, assistance
from his divine hand: and their expectation has been somewhat stre^gthned, by
the death of two chief persecutors, whereof the one was near allied, the
other, brother of the Tono. The kinsman, who indeed was not only a chief Actour
both in the mooning, and continuing this persecution; but sole cause of F.
Camille Costanzo his imprisonment, and the indurance of many others, who have
lost their lives in defense of our holy beleese; was unexpectedly oppressed
with a sudden death: and not long after the brother, fearing the wrath of the
Tono, in regard of some complaints which were made against him; prevented his
indignation, by ripping up his own bowels. The misfortunate chance of these
two was generally thought, even by the Gentiles them selves, to be a just
punishment sent from God. I beseech his divine Majesty to give tranquillity
again unto the Christians of those parts, and open the eyes of those poor
Gentiles that they may see, and lay hold of our holy faith.

The death of Calisto Cambo, a Christian of the Islands of Goto.
GOtodeno, to the end he might make known unto the world, what esteem he made
of such laws as Xogun had set down, resolved to put some famous and more
remarkable Christians to the sword. And for as much as Caliste Cambo, was as
instructour and master of the rest in those Islands, he addressed two of his
own servants unto him; who having tound him out, let him understand, that they
were commmaunded to put him to death, for teaching in those Islands, and
delivering unto others the doctrine and law of Christ, The servant of God,
being nothing troubled at their speeches, made answer cheerfully and said, they
had brought him the best news his heart could wish. And the officers, declaring
that all his goods were forfetted, led him unto the place of execution, a
league from Vacamassu, where he dwelled. His wife, and children, with diverse
other Christians, accompanied him on his way, who streaming forth fludds of
tears; Calistus entreated them they would forbear weeping: or if they neither
would nor could refrain, they should power out tears of joy and thanks
giving unto the majesty of almighty God for that so special favor, he had
conserred upon him. Being arrived at Tabut, the place where he was to die, it
was permitted unto him to write unto diverse of his friends; and he did it in
such sort as it is hard to say, whether his words did show more powerfully, his
great piety, or solid joy. This done he clad him self a new; that his outward
attire might bear better proportion with the inward iubily of his mind: and
then (for he was not yet bound,) he demanded of the Sargeants, that they would
bind him, and the rough fellows did it with such cruelty, that the sole binding
of him, laid open a large field of pains, unto his patience. Finally he gave
thanks unto the chief officer, and so calling upon the sovereign names of
Jesus and Maria, his head was struck of, upon the 19 of April, 1624, in the
fifty seventh year of his age.

Calistus was native of Fiunga. But he was baptized by our Fathers in the
kingdom of Bungo, when he was 15 years of age. After he was regenerated by
those waters of life, he served in our Church as Dogicke for ten years
together; he exercised the same function for some year in the Country of
Arima: and lastly perseuered in it for 27 years in the Islands of Goto, giving
always great testimony of his singular zeal and exactness. He did reside at
Vacamaccu, for as much as he might from thence most opportunely give succor
unto the present necessities of Christians in those Islands, baptizing little
infants, teaching the Christian doctrine, disposing the sick to die well,
burying the dead, inducing the living unto works of piety; in the midst of all
these employments, extending his care unto the Gentiles, he would be ever with
all diligence instructing them at such time as they were disposing themselves
for baptism. At such time as some of our Fathers made yearly visit in that
circuit, he would ever accompany them, procuring that all the Christians should
confess; and those who were fit for it, receive the most blessed Sacrament of
the Altar. In a word for these and the like offices of Christian charity, he
was esteemed by all the faithful, as their master, and a most loving Father.
When the precedent persecution began, he was sent in to banishment, but when
the fury thereof did relent (as indeed he was generally well beloved,) there
was earnest suite made for him, and leave was granted for his return.
Finally, the divine goodness disposing to reward his many labors, made him
worthy to die in defense of his holy faith, by co^maundment of Vquauagidono Lord
of the Islands of Goto.

The death of Michael Sori, and Quinzaiemon in the Islands of Goto.
MIchael and Quinzaiemon were with great fervor employing their best
endeavors to promote the spiritual good and salvation of their neighbors in
the City of Ochicha, when two of the Tono his servants came to Michael, and
solicited him to abandon the faith of Christ, adding that such was the Xogun
his pleasure. And receiving such answer as was meet, and might be expected from
such a servant of God: they full of disdain, intimated unto him that he must
die. At which words, abundance of joy did so power it self down upon, and
redounded even to the exterior in such sort, as it was a pregnant proof of his
undaunted courage. Wherefore, giving thanks unto the^ who had brought him
tidings so agreeable unto his hearts desire; apparelling himself in the attire
he used on festival days, with great cheerfullnesse he made haste unto the
place appointed for his death. And having disposed himself by prayer, he was
beheaded, on the 19 of April 1624 being seventy two years of age when he
suffered. He was baptized by our Fathers, being but a child in Ochicha, the
City he where was borne. He did exercise himself much in vocal prayer, he
fasted all fridaies, and did often punish himself by disciplines. He made
frequent excursions into the near bordering places, not only of the city, but
country all about, to assist his neighbors in their spiritual affairs: he
baptized the children succored the sick, disposing them to a happy passage
from this life; and with great diligence did bestow himself, in burying their
dead corpse. At such times as the solemn supplications of 40 hours prayer were
celebrated, he would be ever first in giving good example unto others; so that
the renown of his singular piety, caused great esteem and veneration toward
him, in all men. But, that which in this servant of God was most eminent, was
an ardent desire of suffering for Christ: and the divine Majesty permitted at
length, that he should be put to death for defense of our holy faith, in the
manner we have said.

Quinzaiemon, a man of great fervor in spirit, lived in the same City, whereof
he also was natine; he was accused unto the Tono, (for, his pious and godly
life had easily made him known) and by his commaundment put to death. A
servant of the Governor executing that most unjust sentence, cut of his head.
We know not the certain day, but sure we are, that it happened the same year.
and by order of the same Tono.

The death of Thomas Nacangaua Mangosuque and Joseph Gonzalo, who suffered in
Omura.
THomas and Gonzalus, were accused unto the Governor, as noted Christians, and
leaders of the rest; and peculiarly, as favorers of them of our Society,
inuiting and lodging them in their houses, where they might administer the holy
Sacraments unto the faithful in Nangaia, a place sieve leagues distant by sea
from Omura. Whereupon Thomas was presently cited to appear. And dispatching
all business with his kindred and frinds, he departed, imagining he was to see
them no more. Being arrived at Omura the officers came to bind him; and he
laying a side his poiniard, offered him self with great humility unto their
bands. Being presented to the judges, it was told him, his life should be
granted him, if he would renounce his faith, but he contemning all such
prejudicial offers, was sent back unto his own house, where he remained with
a straight guard upon him, till such time as he was condemned to die together
with Joseph Gonzalus, who about that time was taken prisoner with diverse other
Christians, upon an accusation given in against them by the Paynims. It is not
possible to relate what sense of joy these two showed at their meeting, to see,
that the providence of allmighty God had aslociated them in their death,
through whose goodness during their life they had been conjoined in the
exercise of good works. They gave thanks with sweet interchange to God, and
blessed the hour in which they had been accused: then animating by courle each
the other, they jointly begged forces of his divine Majesty, for that last
combat. Having passed in this manner their way, they came at last to Mossuiema
where they both lost their heads: each of them being 64 years of age, or there
about. Their death happened upon the 10 of July 1624, by commandment of Massura
Veon and Tobiranga Xirpsaiemon Governors of the state of Omura.

These two servants of God were borne in Nangaia, a fair town in Omura, and
had received holy baptism at the hands of our Fathers many years before. When
the persecution began, the house of Thomas served for a Church, and his zealous
fervor receiving augment, by the increase thereof, he entertained, not only
ours, but also other religious, that the neighboring Christians might have
requisite help in so needful a time. Thomas, was a husbandman, but yet rich
and wealthy. Gonzalus was by profession a fisher man: such was his singular
zeal, that he aided and assisted his neighbors, nor only in temporal, but in
their spiritual affairs. he was much given unto prayer, penance, and fasting:
He fasted thrice every week, and thrice enery week did he severely discipline
himself. He labored much for the poor, and obtained large alms for them: he
visited the sick with great c^^^ity, and helped to the freeing of many from
certain errors where into they were fallen, procuring with all diligence that
the Christians might often frequent the holy Sacrament of Confession. But of
other works of mercy, the burying of the dead seemed to be his proper care,
and peculiar business; so zealously was he intent unto that office. When it
was necessary to the help of Christians, for our Fathers to pass secretly
into any place, he would conduct them in his barge, and he would be sure they
should lodge in his house if it were possible. When as sundry religious men
were kept for a long time in durance at Omura, he succored them with many
things where of they stood in want, and performed his charity with strange
demonstration of the tender affection he bare toward Gods prisoners. When any
would endeavor to get the holy bodies of such as had suffered in defense of
their faith, they would always have recourse unto Gonzalus, and advise with
him, and he would address them to the places, and keep both them and the
sacred pledges secretly in his house: which after, in convenient time he would
pass over to Nangasachi or whither so ever else is was needful: and he did
these things so intrepidly and with such a constant tenor of proceeding, that
there would not appear the least token of fear in his countenance, even in
most perilous times. To conclude, the whole care, and all the thoughts of
Gonzalus were only bent unto the service of allmighty God, who disposing to
reward both him, and that other champion Themas, even in this life, made them
worthy to be enrolled in the resplendent host of glorious Martyrs, who have
shed their blood in his quarrel.

The death of Father Michael Caruaglio, of the Society of Jesus, and of four
other Religious men of the holy orders of Saint Dominicke, and Saint Francis,
who suffered for preaching of the holy Gospel.
PAssing over that, which I could say concerning the virtues of those other
Religious (for as much as the relation thereof belongs unto others;) I will
only touch some things which passed in the imprisonement, and life of F.
Caruaglio; and afterward say a word concerning the death of each of them.

Father Michael was come to Omura to take the confessions of some in that
City; and the whole business was now ended with great secrecy, when a
certain spy discovered him, and gave information of him to the Governor: who
addressed forthwith officers to apprehend him, and having brought him to I know
not what odd house, they kept him there for the space of two days, with a
rope about his neck, and a guard upon him, till such time as they had advised
with Gonrogu, Governor of Nangasachi, to know what should be done with him;
from whom order came that he should be put in prison with the rest. But because
this matter is clearly set down by himself, in a letter to F. Provincial, I
will therefore relate his own words.

I came some few days a go, to Omura, to hear the Confessions of some in
this place, when a spy disclosing me to the Governor, I was taken by his
appointment, and being conducted to a certain particular house, I remained
there for the space of two days, with a rope about my neck and a guard for my
custody; after which time order came from Nangasachs, that I should be
committed to prison with the rest: but in those two days it pleased God I
should not be idle, two of the^ who were put to guard me, being converted unto
our holy faith. In prison, albeit the narrowness of the place was not a little
troublesome, it being but 16 hand full long, and 8 broad, for four others and
my self; yet I was much comforted, as well in regard I might say Mass every
day, as also for that I was in company of four servants of God, of eminent
devotion, and very spiritual, one was a Father of Saint Dominickes Order, an
European Priest; two were Recolectes of Saint Francis, whereof the one was an
European, the other a Iaponese, both Priests; the fourth was an obseruant of
the 3 rule of Saint Francis: these four so soon as they saw me, made have to
embrace me, and rejoiced much to see me brought thither for having made
profession of, and preached our holy faith. Upon Saint Mary Magdalens day
(which B. Saint I have ever honored as my special patroness) began my
imprisonment. True it is we are restrained with in the close bounds of a narrow
place, but not yet like unto our Savior Jesus Christ upon the Cross. Verily I
am not a little comforted to see, that they have taken no man prisoner for my
sake, and that they have not examined me concerning others, so that, there has
been no man molested in my behalf: it was meet that I only should suffer, who
am the greatest sinner.


These were the words of F. Caruaglio in his letter to F. Provincial. He
remained 13 months in this prison, where he endured very much, but with such
sweetness and delight, that in a letter which he wrote to F. Procurator, he
says thus: I was all infirm and feeble of body, but much strengthened, and
recreated in spirit; for God the Father of mercy, when he permits new
molestations, he adds new favors, and forces to support them. I can affirm
of my self, that I feel great sweetness amiddest the travels of my
indurance, nor should I ever have imagined, that to suffer for the love of God
had been a thing so full of delight and pleasure: blessed be ever his divine
Majesty. thus he.

The process of time gave still increase unto his sufferinges, but far greater
to his charity, which in the breast of this servant of God, did kindle a most
inflamed desire of suffering for Christ our Lord. Presaging his passage to a
better life, he took leave of diverse friends by letters from the prison, and
I have thought good to set down one of them in this place, written unto Father
Benet Fernandez: out of which it will easily appeard, how he did even long and
languish with desire to die for Jesus Christ.

I knew well (says he) that I was an unprofitable servant, and that I helped
as much to the co^uersio^ of the world in prison as out of prison. Hence it
has pleased God to shut me up in this restraint, to the end, that doing
pe^na^ce for my sins, imitating the example of these servants of God who are
in durance with me, I may redress the time misspent, and go preparing my self
to death, which I much desire to the glory of his divine majesty, in
satisfaction of my offenses. True it is, that setting my self to a due
consideration here of, I am affrighted even beyond measure, but when I
afterward reflect upon that boundless goodness with makes the Sun to shine
upon the good and bad, the wicked and the just; I can not but take courage, and
put great confidence in allmighty God (whom me thinks I have ever at hand)
hoping, he will impart unto me his holy grace in such abundance, and so enable
my weakness, that I may die resolutely for that law, which at this present so
many valorous champions, amidst most cruel torments, do defend; and of old the
holy Apostles have protected with such abundance of their blood. O my most
loving Father, how happy should I be, to see my self consuming in some hidious
fire for the love of so good a God! How fortunate would I think my self, if
disioyning limme from limme they would cut and shread this body of mine into
small pieces, in honor of that Savior who has prevented me with so many
gifts, followed them with ensuing favors, ever enduring and bearing with me,
who yet knew well my great ingratitude! O most loving Jesus, what shall this
miserable sinner ever be able to do, that may be pleasing to thee? By what
labors may he satisfy? What torments may he suffer to appease thee? What
gibbets have thou disposed, what raging fires have thou prepared? Oh my dear
Lord, what willest thou that I do? Grant what thou command, and command
what thou please. Now is the time, my dearest Father, to assist this your
unworthy servant, with your fervent prayers and holy sacrifices, that our Lord
will give me strength in what soever he pleases, that I suffer for my sins;
and grant me, that for his glory, and in testimony of his holy law, I may
endure many molestations, yea sire, or sword, or what soever else the enemies of
God can invent, to my punishment. The world, its pleasures, riches, honors,
let them by me be all and for ever loathed; and let my whole contentment be to
suffer for Jesus Christ. So that, if his divine Majesty be pleased that I pine
away in this prison, Fiat voluntas eius. Or if he rather will that I live until
the day of judgment in this narrow, and forlorn place oppressed with
continual anguish and infirmity, I freely offer my self unto it. But for as
much as they write from Nangasachi that our end is nigh at hand, I take
therefore with this my last leave of a friend whom I love so dearly in our Lord,
as your Reverence. Pray for me my dearest Father, and I will ever do the like
for you. From the prison of Omura, 10 of Feb. 1624.

Your servant and unworthy friend in indura^ce for his sint Michael Caruaglio.


Hitherto are his own words, out of which may easily be gathered his great
fervor and spirit; whereof he also gives no less remonstrance in an other
letter to Father Provincial: where he writes in this manners.

I understand that in Iendo many have suffered death for Christ. O happy a
thousand times! o blissful marryrs of Jesus, who have not doubted in presence
of the Court of Xogun, to lay open in apparent view, how unjust his laws are,
and how righteous those of our Omnipotent God, for whose honor they have
undauntedly spent their blood, and lives! O bliss! o happiness without
comparison! o holy hatred, a death so much more fortunate, by how much life
seems more miserable to me in this vale of tears. So that I am compelled to
say with Saint Paul, cupie dissolui and esse cum Christo. O me poor wretch,
who for that I am a green them, only stored with sins, am not admitted to
those glorious co^bats, which God reserueth to his elect. Your Reverence, who
are my Father, and are so powerful with our Lord God, pray for me, that he be
pleased, to look down favorably, and cast his eyes of mercy upon me, that as
I am imprisoned for his love; so I may spend my life to the increase of his
glory, and in satisfaction of my sins.


Thus wrote he in his letter to Father Provincial. Finally order came from
Nangasachi, that all the Religious should be put to death, who so soon as they
had understood the certainty thereof, showed extraordinary signs of joy. Upon
the 25 of Aug. they were led forth of prison all five, fast bound, with ropes
about their necks, and accompanied with a band of soldiers. The Priests went
each bearing a cross in his hand, and continually fixed in prayers till such
time as they came to ship, whither they entered with some few of the
officers, the rest continuing their journey by land. They were arrived at the
place appointed for their death, a field called Faco, when giving thanks unto
those who had conducted them, for the pains they had taken they went to land,
and the Priests lifting on high the crosses which they bare in their hands,
they began to recite psalms with a loud voice: when Father Caruaglio
perceauing now a great multitude to be assembled, turning unto them, You must
understand, said he, that we are Christians, and that we die of our free and
voluntary accord, for the faith of Christ our Lord. The admirable serenity of
their countenances put their joy so clearly in view of the beholders, that
amazed thereat, they said, these men seemed to go rather to some feast or
banquet, then unto death. Finally, their desired end approaching the first who
was tied unto a stake, was Father Michael Caruaglio, of our Society, the second
Father Peter Vasquez, of the Order of Saint Dominicke. The third, Father Lewis
Sotello: The fourth Father Lewis Sassaudra both of the same Order of Saint
Francis. The fifth, Brother Lewis, Obseruant of the third Order, a Iaponess.
Being tanked in this order, they were bound in such sort, that after the cords
should be burned, they might yet be able to stir themselves, to the end their
troubled action, and disordered motion, might incite the people to laughter.
Every one was attired in his own habit, with his eyes fixed upon heaven. When
the fire was kindled, which in regard of the small quantity of wood, burned
very slowly, so that, the rope where with Brother Lewis the Iaponese was bound,
being consumed, he might have departed at his pleasure. The rest of his
valorous associats were jointly with loud voice reciting a certain deuote
prayer, and the fire grew to advance it self; when he departing from his
stake, with noble contempt of those raging flames, made have to do reverence,
and kiss submissiuely the hands of the Priests his companions: then exhorting
with a loud voice the standers by to embrace the faith of Christ in which alone
is true safety and salvation, he returned generously unto the stake again, and
leaning him self unto it, without any further tying, (for he was already
sufficiently bound in the bands of charity to Christ our Lord) he endured,
without ever moving him self, the fury of those flames, until at length he
rendered his invincible soul to God. The others were already so oppressed with
the smoke and fire which had now taken possession of their mouths, that they
could nor as they wished, express themselves; yet should you hear them now
and then break forth in to those sonereigne names of Jesus and Marta whose
aid the servants of God implored in their torments. Father Michael Caruaglio,
for as much as there had bee^ more wood, and a more vchement fire about him,
was the second who dyed, after he had given diuerle arguments of his stout
courage, and extraordinary co^stancy, Father Lewis Sassandra, a Ioponese, of
the Order of Saint Francis, dyed in the third place. He, observing that the
cords where with he had been tied, were now consumed by the fire, was
desirous before he breathed forth his holy soul, to go and do reverence unto
the Priests his companions; but making assay, and not being able to move
himself, his feet being already burned, he remained at his own stake; from
whence doing reverence with profound inclination unto those two his companions,
who yet were alive, he dyed with constancy worthy a Religious man adorned with
so remarkable virtue as himself. The other two remained, the fire not well
approoching to them, and in particular to Father Lewis Sotello. The executers
of this cruelly resolved to take some quantity of straw and other dry litter,
and setting it on fire, they divided it into two parts, and yet for all this,
their piles not burning very violently, gave matter of more irksome torment to
these servants of God. They remained therefore 3 hours in the fire, ever
immouable, consuming away in lingering slow flames; after which space of time
they ended the course of a combat so much more glorious, as it was produced
longer, upon the 25 of Aug. 1624 by order of the Governors of Omura and
Nangasachi^. The glorious champions of Christ being dead, that the Christians
might not enjoy their blessed bodies, they burned them even to cinders; then
putting the ashes into a sack, and advancing themselves into the wide sea,
there did those impious officers cast them abroad: yea they set some to watch
the place where they had suffered, lest any bone or small relicke which might
be left, should be taking away. Yet it has pleased God, notwithstanding all
the diligence of the Paynims, that the Christians found certain bones, and
pieces of stakes to which they had been bound, which were taken up, and are
conserved. A man can not explicate how great the admiration of the Gentiles
was, and the confusion of some renegados, who found themselves present at the
spectacle. And they confessed all, that the ordinary heat which the season it
self brought with it being unsupportable, they could not understand by what
forces the servants of God were able to resist so immonably the lingering flames
of the flow fire.

Father Michael Caruaglio, by nation Portughese, was borne in the City Braga:
he entered into the Society when he was twenty years of age, and having ended
his studies of Philosophy, he embarked for Iudia in the year 1602; where he
both heard, and read Divinity with great satisfaction: being 40 years of age
and some what more, he demanded with diligent and earnest suite, that he might
be sent into China, that so he might pass, if it should be possible, into
Iaponia. Having obtained leave, he went to sea in a galley, together with one
more of the Society; but suffering shipwreck in their way, they landed upon the
coaste of Malaca, where continuing the voyage on foot, in great penury and
want, they came at last unto the City of Macao: from hence Father Caruaglio,
by appointment of his Superiors, shipped in secular attire, for Iaponia, in
company of some other Portugheses, and he was permitted to pass under title of
an Indian soldier, Being arrived at Nangasachi, they were all strictly
examined, he only excepted: So that coming to land he procured to find out a
certain Portughese, in whose house he made his abode till such time as he was
sent into the Ila^d: of Amacusa, to learn the language. In that Island he
sundry times fell sick, as well for lack of food and necessary sustenance, as
for the immoderate colds of that clyrnat. The overplus of his time which was
not employed in study of the language, he spent in prayer, which in a manner he
always performed kneeling. He would not say holy mass, till first he had
spent a whole hour either in reading spiritual books or meditating by way of
preparation; in the performance of that dreadful sacrifice he shed tears in
abundance; and having ended it, he would spend an other hour in thanksgiving.
He was much devoted unto the B. Virgin. He disciplined himself every day; and
upon the vigiles of solemn feasts twice, pouring out sometimes by the scars of
hat rigorous instrument, great quantity of his blood. He wore in a manner
always a ragged hair cloth, and sometimes not co^tenting him self therewith;
a frocke of frozen ad hard iron served him for a shirt. He fasted 3 days every
week, but on the eve of chief feasts, and all the fridaies of the year, his
abstinence was in bread and water only. He added alms to his fasting, giving
away for the love of God, now part, now all that where on he should have fed.
In a time of great dearth, he sought for alms with much feeling and
compassion, and having procured some quantity, he divided it all unto the
poor, and needy; and namely to the peasants and country people. Having learned
the language in such sort that he could hear confessions, he dedicated
himself unto the help of souls, with admirable seruour till at length, in
the 27 year of his being in the Society, the 47 of his age, professed of 4
vows, he finished the course of his days, in Omura, having always led rather
an Angelical, then mortal life, as was the constant report of all such as
were conversant with him.

The state of Christianisme in Tacaco.
THere are in sundry Reside^ces eight Fathers and one brother with their
Dogickes, to aid and assist the Christianity of Tacaco: and of the elder sort
of people a hundred and twelve have been already baptized. At what time the
Christians of Tacaco lived in peaceable tranquillity they were unexpectedly
accused unto Massura Bungondono for burying the dead, in the gardnes of their
houses. Bungondono was a great friend of all polished neatnes; so that,
incensed with disdain, he commanded that all the Christians should deliner
the bodies of the dead unto the Bonzi, that otherwaise their goods should all
be forfeited. The Christians understanding thereof began to suspect, this might
be a beginning of some such persecution as was already on foot in Iendo,
wherefore giving notice to our Father who remained there, and disposing
themselves diversely to death, which had been threatened them together with
confiscation of their goods; they testified by giving up their names (as they
were ready to show in fact,) that they would rather die, then transgress the
law of God. The Gentiles, who esteem the Christians for opiniatres and
obstinat people, having understood here of, prevailed so far with the Tono that
he should appease him self and dissemble the matter, notwithstanding those
sharp threats he had published.

There was a Gentile converted by occasion of a Christian child, with only
observing how frequently he would retire himself to prayer: it soeming to him
a thing impossible, that true safty and salvation should not be found in that
law, which was able to imprint such devotion euenin little children, wherefore
he made a long voyage to find out our Fathers, from whom receiving such
instruction as was necessary, he was baptized together with one of his
daughters.

A renegado had adopted to his son a little boy which was Christian: the
child went one day very resolutly unto him, giving him to understand that he
would leave him; the renegado amazed somewhat at this nouelty, (not reflecting
on the Idol he kept in his house, which the Gentiles by troops came to adore)
asked him the reason thereof: and the child with great zeal making answer,
because, said he I will not remain in that house where the devil dwells. And
he spoke this with such efficacy, that the renegado entering into himself,
rouzed as it were from some deep lethargy, reuiewed his error, and utterly
forsaking all Idolla lives at this present, as a good Christian ought to do.

The Residence of Amacusa, and missions of the kingdom of Fingo.
THere resideth in Oiano, one of the Islands of Amacusa, 1 Father of our
Society, who often times, howbeit not without great trouble and dannger passes
into Fingo, to visit and comfort the Christians of that kingdom.

A certain youngman having received baptism, one of the Bonz: did complain
thereof to his Father with great clamor and contention, adding many threats
that he would accuse him to the Governors: but perceaning soon after that the
Christians were accorded by common consent, to adventure their whole estates,
suffer banishment, yea loose their life's if so it should be necessary, for
defense of the new Christian, and their faith; changed his mind: and so the
troubles which were beginning in that place fell to nothing.

At such time as one of our Fathers came into a certain town to visit the
Christians, a principal officer of the Tono, gave notice unto him who was
chief amongst the Christians, that our Fathers might not be lodged, and that
he should be mindful there of, nor presuine to do it, for as much as he would
severely punish the tra^sgressours of that appointment. Whereunto the Christian
made answer; that he was ready to undergo what so ever punishment, and that he
might therefore do what he thought good. The Paynim, having heard that resolute
answer and understanding there by that the Christian was prepared either to be
outlawed or executed for his faith passed no farther in the matter.

Many have been confirmed in their faith, by occasion of a little child, whom
one of our Fathers as he was teaching the Christian doctrine discovered to
bear continually upon his naked flesh a horrid rope straight gilded about him,
to do, as he says, penance for his sins. The same Father found also a
woman, who now for many years had abstained from eating flesh, in satisfaction
of a vow made unto the most Blessed Virgin, unto whom she recommended her
self, begging by her assistance that she might escape the hands of the
Gentiles with whom she dwelt, and had obtained the favor even when she least
imagined. Albeit the Prince of Fingo was not very vehement in persecuting the
Christians, notwithstanding one of his principal attendants in absence of his
Lord, desirous to gratify the Xogun, has caused one Lewis, and Mary his wife,
to be apprehended, whom he holds prisoners in the Castle of Yassuxiro, and
uses diverse means to molest them. They have hitherto remained constant,
assisted and helped by F. Francis Boldrino, who makes diverse excursions to
succor the Christians of those parts. God grant them perseverance: for they
exspect to die, as well as the rest.

The Residence of the kingdom of Chigugen and missions thereof.
THe two Governors, between whom the kingdom of Chigugen is denided, to show
their fidelity to the Xogun, first exiled all Christians strangers, and then
began to put forth cruel edicts against the inhabitants; all which the stout
followers of the law of Christ our Lord have courageously overcome: though
true it is, some few are found who have fallen off from their holy design. One
of these Governors caused to be brought before him a principal and chief
Christian, a man welthy in riches, but richer in faith. This man, being
threatened with death, in lieu of other answer, offered his head ready to the
sword: whereat the Gentill not a little astouished, commanded for the present
he should depart out of his presence, admonishing him, that he should think
better, and that he would afterward call for him again. In an other town
they used the like threats to an other Christian, but not being able to
compass their wicked intents, the Gentiles, having sent him home, they
addressed officers, to apprehend his wife, and confiscate all his goods. The
news was no sooner intimated, when that constant woman turning to her husband,
said, there could no better tidings have been brought us; wherefore take no
further thought of me: and forthwith, taking her little infant in her arms,
with great fervor put her self on the way toward the Judges, to give account
of her self: but a messenger met her soon on the way, who gave notice, that
for the present she was to return, and should be called for some other time
and in conclusion as well these named, as the rest of that place were permitted
to live quietly: their present resolution, giving a clear remonstrance of of
their future constancy.

In Tanaca the Governors experie^ced no less promptness in the Christians,
to suffer either banishment or death; for many having been molested, none were
overcome; and some not to put themselves into further danger, took upon them
a voluntary exile, where they remained poor in commodities, but rich in merits
in the sight of God. A certain Christian coming unto an other City, the
Christians of that place demanded of him, wherefore he had abandoned his own
Country? he made answer, that he might not abandone his faith. But the
Christians inhabitants of this City reprehended him sharply and told him; to
fly was sign of a dastard, and therefore that he should return, and if
necessity should so require, not doubt to spend his life in such a quarrel.
The Christian hearing this, imagining he was obliged to return, without delay
made have unto his Country. Being returned, a Bonzio a friend of his had soon
espied him, and imagining he had renounced his faith began to congratulate the
matter with him. But the Christians let him understand that he was not only,
not changed, but that the reason of his return was, that he might die in
honor of Christ our Lord. Whereupon the Bonzio grew into such disdain, that
he swore, he would find out means to vex him. But it pleased God that all did
fade and fall to nothing, for the Governor how be it he was informed of the
whole matter, yet he gave order the Christian should be no farther molested.

Father Julian Nacaura, of our Society (one of those four Iaponesi, who by
means of our Fathers came Ambassadors to Rome to render obedience, in person
of their Princes to his Holiness) has care not only of this kingdom, but of
those also of Chigugen and Bugen. It has so fallen out that in diverse places
his visits happened in the very time of the troubles and persecution, by which
occasion he has suffered very much: and his weakness sometimes was so great,
either in regard of the toil of his journey, or violent oppression of famine,
that not being able to move himself, he was carried in men's arms. The kingdom
of Chigugen being deuolued unto the Kings sons by the death of their Father,
it seemed good unto the Governors to persecute the Christians, as deeming that
no vnsitt means to conserve the Xogun in good liking toward their new Lords:
but the moderation of the officers has been such, that no great trouble has
befallen the Christians upon this occasion.

The Christians of Aquizuqui have given abundant testimony of their constancy.
A good Christian woman, wife unto a noble Paynim, had heretofore been much
molested by her husband: but now, the rude barbarian proceeded so far as to
clap a hot fire brand to her naked flesh, vowing he would use her yet more
hardly if she would not recant. Yet she not daunted with this cruelty, remains
still constant in confession of Christ; begging (as says a Father of ours)
with great instance, of his divine Majesty, that he will not abandone her: and
the same Father affirms, that she is most ready to suffer all possible
torment, in so holy a cause.

At this present Fosocaua Yeichndono, son to Nangaochayuchu rules in the
kingdom of Bugen, This man is different from his Father, and well affected unto
our affairs, resembling therein rather his Mother, called Grace, whom we have
often mentioned in our former histories, for a woman of good life and great
fervor in profession of our holy faith.

The Residence of the Kingdom of Bunge.
BEfore the persecution began, there were 44 of the elder sort baptized in this
kingdom, besides those, who repenting themselves ran back into the lap of our
holy mother the church. In some of those the just chastisement of God has
particularly appeared. For of many possessed persons, diverse have been found
to be such as had abandoned their faith. The house of a certain Christian
chanced to be burned, and when the fire had consumed all things to ashes he
set himself to seek certain moneys which he had in a chest when the fire
first took. But in lieu of his money, which he looked for, he found what he
sought not: for as much as dispersing the cinders to and fro, he found three
pictures of Saints which were glued upon a board, and yet had suffered no
damage by the fire: he found more over, some payres of wooden beads, which he
knew to be such as had pardons to them, he perceived that others were burned,
which had not the Indulge^ce, as he very well observed. The Christians having
understood the accident, hold those pictures and hallowed beads, in great
reverence, and are much confirmed in their faith.

There do reside in Bungo two servants of the Xogun, for no other respect then
only to give notice under hand of all that passes in that kingdom: and the
Governors are not ignorant here of. So that fearing to be accused they have
began to persecute the Christians in such sort, that in man's memory there has
not been the like, either for political stratagems, edictes, threats, or
troublesome persuasions. Father Ioannes de Costa to whom the care of those
Christians is deputed, has been so chaced from place, to place that not
finding any who durst receive him, he has been forced to retire himself into
the furthest and most remote confines of the kingdom, together with one Dogicke
and one servant; and the persecution hastened so fast after him, that it had
almost driven him out even from those foilorne places. But having overcome all
that difficulty, he incurred imminent danger of his life, through a deadly
sickness, where into he tell, as well through the incommodities of his
dwelling, as continual and toylsome iorneies to diverse places in succor of
the Christians, of whom howbeit some few are revolted, yet far more are they,
who having endured fierce combats for the faith of Christ, remain valiant and
unvanquishable.

Linus, of whom we have spoken in our former relations, after many banishments
formerly endured, has together with many other now latly been outlawed, with
his wife and Children, he has suffered wonderful much, nor finding any one
who would intertertaine him, till at last he chanced upon a Christian, called
John Diogo; who, having friendly received him and all them of his company into
his house, not long after was constrained himself to go into banishment for
Christ our Lord, and travel through many places not finding any one, who ever
would so much as lodge him: such was the fear and terror of Xogun his law.
Yet he endured all with such patience that many understanding what had befallen
him, left their country of their own accord, that they might not be in danger
to leave there faith. An other Christian called Organtinus, of 76 years of age
and more, has already been tried in 5 several persecutions, and remained
ever victorious. This man, as an old soldier, and known for such of all men,
was in peculiar manner molested by the Tono: but all his endeavors were
frustrate: for this our experienced warrier did never show any the least sign
of leuity or inconstancy: whereopon the Tono in great admiration commanded one
day, that he should depart from him, and retire to his own house, remaining
with in doors without taking any sustinance, so that he should starve with
famine. This good Christian remained four days without taking any food, and
his wife did the like, imagining they did an act of high merit: but finding
themselves much weakened through hunger, they sent unto our Father, to know
what they were to do in that case: and having answer that they should take
their food, they did so, and straight recovered there corporal forces: having
already given unto the Tono (who afterwarward molested them no more) an assay
of the interior forces of their mind, to defend, by divine assisistance, our
holy faith.

An other ancient Christian, called John Mangesuqus a servant sometimes of
Iustus Tacayamancundone, has been proved by diverse assayes: but he ever
answers, that Iustus his Lord with diverse others of his company died for
their faith, and that he also would take great comfort, if other by sword or
fire he might in his death follow the footsteppes of those, whom during their
life he so much esteemed. So that for the present he is by appointment of the
Governors kept prisoner in such sort, as no man may be admitted to speak with
him, and expects day by day to loose his life for his Religion.

The death of Leo Miz aqui Xinyemen and of his three sons.
IN one of the persecutions past, Leo gave some signs in the exterior, as if
he had forsaken being a Christian: but he cancelled soon after by penance that
error. At such time therefore as this present storm arose, calling unto him
his eldest son, he told him that this time he would show an other manner of
resolution, and that he was determined, that neither fear of any what so ever
torment, nor mordinate affection and love even to life it self, should be able
to induce him to commit the like fault: wherefore if he, as being but young,
would rather depart, for some other place, then remaining expose him self to
further danger, that he would procure him fit means and opportunity. The
son having understood his Fathers opinion and design, finding it for his
purpose, answered; he would go his ways. The called he his three other
sons, demanding of them whether they would escape away with their brother,
or surely abide with him? Whereunto, Andrew, Thomas, and John, made answer they
would tarry in their own Country; and if it should chance to cost them their
lives, it should only accomplish their desires. The officers of the Tono having
notice that the eldest son was fled, fearing least Leo himself should also
escape away, they took John, and kept him prisoner for a pledge. Whereupon Leo
made have unto the chief officers house, and having found him; it is true said
he, some years past, in the exterior I failed if my duty, but now I am
prepared to die, fear not that I will fly from you. When he said thus, the
Judge not only contenting him self with him who^ he had prisoner, dispatched
some, who should take his other son, Thomas, under the same pretense. Mean
space arrived there a principal officer of the Tono, who examined Leo, very
particularly, concerning the cause of his sons flight, and he would hear
Andrew about the same matter, who yet was not prisoner. The Father being
questioned concerning his faith, behaved himself like a good and valorouse
Christian: but the poor son, I know not how, showed himself fainte:
whereupon he was sent unto a temple of the Idols, to give some sign that he had
abandoned his faith. The youth went, and when he returned, he said the Bonzo
would not admit the sign whereof he made offer: and so the Judge commanded him
to give in bail thereof, and that he would send a servant who should obtain
from the Bonzo what he should desire. The timorous youth did so, imagining
hereby he should be quiet for many years: but soon after coming to him self,
he repented of his fact, and with many tears, demanded humbly pardon of God,
putting himself in prison with his Father, and other brothers, confessing a
new with great courage the faith of Christ. The three brothers were called one
day before the officers to be examined: and many torments were inflicted upon
them, in the place; The first was by water which they enforce men to drink in
excessive quantity; but for as much as this torment, though very painful,
seemed to the Judges, not powerful enough to work their intent, they
commanded that about the calfe or brawny parts of their legs, should be
strait bound certain canes bigger then those which we have, which cutting the
skin in sundry places, draw forth the blood, in great abundance, of such as
undergo the tormer. It is not yet certainly known wherefore they were tortured
in this manner, but the Common voice is, for not declaring the reason why their
eldest brother fled, and for that being solicited to forsake their faith, they
did never give way by any the least word thereunto. The Gentiles remained wholly
amazed, and made known unto the Tonos Father, how the matter had passed; and
he, after diverse conferences and consultations had with his son, concluded,
that they would send unto those servants of the Xegun, of whom I spoke before,
to understand, what was their opinion. They having understood how all had
succeeded, as Paynims, and enemies of our holy law, made answer that it was
meet they should all be executed. All things were presently dispatched
according to the opinions of these men, and so there was forthwith a messenger
addressed unto Leo to intimate unto him the sentence, from the Tono, who
promised him that after his death, his eldest son should be called back and
much honored; Our valorous Leo rejoiced much here at, and gave thanks unto him
who had brought him the news; and he declared what till that time he had kept
secret, to wit, that he had caused his son to withdraw himself, to the end
that being a Christian he might not expose himself to the danger of forsaking
his faith: whence he coniectured that although he were recalled, he would not
return to that place whilst the daungee should continus. He added that he was
sorry for that the officer had been put to those pains about him the time
before, when the Christians were examined; and that he was sorry from his heart
for his having then obaied the Tono: for that albeit, he seemed in his
exterior to have revolted, yet did he ever in his interior adhere unto Christ
our Lord: And I hope said he this day wherein I am to die, I shall purchase and
recover again, what soever then I lost through fear. And having spoken in
this manner, he went forth with his sons, and took his way toward the place
appointed for their death, Leo, accompanied his steps with those divine words
of the Angelical Salutation and so soon as he came with in sight of the place
in which by loss of his life, he was to give in his last evidence and
declaration of his faith, he put of his shoes and stockings, that so he might
go with all possible reverence unto that place where in he was to die for
Christ. Being now even at the goal, where unto they so willingly made have,
the 3 sons stood with eyes fixed upon the heavens, when their Father bad
them give attentive ear unto what he should tell them: You must then
understand, said he, that you are but earth, and that all things contained in
this wide universe, were created as helps for man, to the salvation of his
soul; which at this instant you are to offer unto God, who therefore has
created you that he might confer upon you the bliss of eternal salvation. He
added here unto diverse other edificatiue speeches, when one of the Tonos
sons, a youth of tender years arriving there, the officers that he might
speak no more took occasion to stop their mouths in such sort that they
could not utter any word.

The young youth, who came purposely to be present at this spectacle, was
desirous to see how well their Simitars would cut, and therefore the officers
would not put the condemned persons to death as they were accustomed to do,
but in a more inhumane, barbarous and cruel fashion; to wit, taking their blow
from above the right arm in such sort that the weapon issue forth under the
left, or contrary, not unlike unto the fashion in which our deacons wear a
stole; and to give more content unto the young Barbarian, they tied every ones
right hand unto a stake, and thus prepared they came forth, first Leo, and then
his sons, whilst the Barbarous Paynim recreated himself, with his attendants
to see how sharp those swords or Simitars were, which with one blow pearsing
both flesh and bones would cut the body from side to side, and in an instant
divide a man in two.

Leo was 60 years of age; Andrew 25; Thomas 23; and John twenty: as well the
Father as his sons, were borne in a part of the kingdom of Bungo, called
Togi. They dyed on the 28 of May 1624, by command of Inaba Friocodono, Lord of
Vsuqui a Principal place of the kingdom of Bungo.

THE TABLE.
OF the Temporal state of Iaponia, and the present condition of Christian
Religion. Page 1. The exercise of the Christians in prison. page 10. How the
above named fifty Christians were burnt alive by command from the Xogun. page
13. The names of some of the above mentioned martyrs, according to the order
they stood, beginning from the City. page 20. A brief relation of the life of
F. Hierom de Angelis and of B. Simon Iempo of the Society of JESUS. page 22.
How four and twenty Christians were put to death for the confession of
Christian faith in the City of Iendo. page 28. Of other seauenteene Christians
burnt alive in the Town of Iendo for professing Christian Religion. page 31. A
relation of the persecution raised in the beginning of the year 1624. in the
Countries of Massamune; in which above 24. Christians were put to death,
together with F. Diego Caruaglio of the Society of JESUS. page 32 Of the
persecution in the Kingdom of Deua, and the death of three Christians pa. 54.
Of Christianity in the Country of Cami. page 58. The death of Francis Ioyama
Sintaro in the City of Firoxima. page 68. The death of Mathias Xobora
Schizaimo^. page 73. The death of Ioachim Curoyemon, in Firoxima. page 75. The
death of John Tananguia Cufroi. page 76. Of the persecution of Christians in
certain places of the Kingdom of Figen p 86. The persecution of the Christians
of the City of Firando and the terntory belonging to it, in which eight and
thirty suffered death. page 95. The death of nine Christians of the house and
family of Gabriel, who had lodged F. Camillus Constantius of the Society of
JESUS. ibid. The death of five other Christians in Vsucca. page 104. The death
of Isabell Mother of Damianus, and Beatrice his wife, with their four
children. page 107. The death of Mary, wife to John Sucamoto, and her four
sons. page 122. The death of Michaell Iamando Fiemon, and Vrsula his wife,
with three of their children. page 115. The death of Catherine, wife to John
Yuqumoura. page 120. The death of Thomas Mattaicht, p. 125. Of four others put
to death for Religion in the Precinct of Firando. page 126. The death of
Calisto Cambo, a Christian of the Islands of Goto. page 131. The death of
Michael Sori, and Quinzaiemon, in the Islands of Goto. page 134. The death of
Thomas Nacangaua Mangosuque, and Joseph Gonzalo, who suffered in Omura. page
136. The death of Father Michael Caruaglio, of the Society of JESUS, and of
four other Religious men of the holy Orders of Saint Dominicke and Saint
Francis, who suffered for preaching of the holy Gospel. page 140. The state
of Christianisme in Tacaco. page 153. The residence of Amacusa, and missions of
the Kingdom of Fingo. page 155. The residence of the Kingdom of Chigugen, and
missions thereof. page 157. The residence of the Kingdom of Bungo. page 161.
The death of Leo Mizaqui Xinyemon and of his three sons. page 165.
FINIS.

