November 29.

Numb. 1.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR WEEKLY Intelligence since the 22. of this present
month, to the 29.

The second Part. Containing many notable and very remarkable passages,
amongst the rest, you shall find these,

The strange and unexpected reduction of the City of Prage in Bohemia, to its
ancient liberty and freedom, from the cruel tyranny of the Imperialists,
under the Command of that suparlatiue bloody tyrant the D. of Freedland, and
others, together with the like freedom begun over the whole Kingdom, by a
general revolt and club Law in all parts, where they do but meet with any
Imperialists. The taking whereof (with Gods assistance) was performed by the
old Count of Thorn, and other Bohemian banished Lords, Commanders of some
Swedish and Saxon forces and other, the poor oppressed Natives entertaining
this occasion as sent them from God, etc. The great preparation of the B. of
Collen, the Archduke Leopaldus, the Duke of Bavaria, and other Leagers, to to
join with the Imperial scattered troops, (for now there is no distinction)
to recover if it may be (that by multitude,) what small and weak means has
taken from them.
LONDON Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicolas Bourne. 1631.

The Continuation of our Weekly NEWS.
From Prage the 4. of November, 1631.
THis City is every where exceedingly fortified, and amended. Great fear also
is conceived in this place, wherefore, men transport their goods and fly to
Vienna. For the Duke of Saxons Forces are enquartered in this Kingdom of
Bohemia, and do encroach day by day upon us. As also the Swedish are fallen
into Silesia at least fifteen thousand strong, where they have taken Great
Glogaw of late and diverse other places of moment. Yea they have showed
themselves in a victorious manner, even before Breslau. Which has caused the
Emperors forces mainly to intend against them. Who with all expedition are
marching toward them.

His Imperial Majesty this day, as also diverse times of late himself in
person has been present in the Counsel of War, and with them consulted,
how and by what means a mighty Army may speedily be raised. To this effect
the Lord Questenburg is speedily sent to the Duke of Freidland, and Commissions
are granted from his Imperial Majesty, for the levying and raising of an
hundred thousand men.

The Chancellor of the Duke of Lunenburg, Lord of Eudern, who had with him many
confiscated goods in Ellenboger Country; was surprised in the night, carried
away; and the said goods are restored to the former possessors.

From Ysleben the 1. of November, 1631.
Last week the Imperial Commander Bunnickhousen, with his Cavalleries, fell
upon some of his Majesty of Swedens forces, and defeated them in a certain
Village where they lay. On the other side the Lieutenant General Schassman,
surprised three Companies of Imperial horsemen, and utterly defeated, yea,
slew them all, some few excepted which fled into Magdenburg.

From Rotenburg the 8. of November. In the Country of Franconia.
From Erfort is confirmed that since his Majesty of Sweden has taken the same
City, it is exceedingly oppressed with Garrisons, more then the City is able
to bear. Hereupon those of the City by their Committies, have made humble
suit to his Majesty of Sweden, to the end they might be eased and disburdened
of so intolerable a Charge.

His Majesty intends to send his Queen thither to reside there, whom they
daily expect. Others are of opinion, that the Queen shall keep her residence
in the Castle of Wirtsburg, which indeed is a strong and Royal Castle.

In all parts here abouts, are levied all Soldiers that upon any terms will
bear Arms, both horsemen and foot.

Two days ago we heard a great thundering of shooting. Whereupon we do
presume, that the King of Swedens Army, and the General Tillies Army, have had
some sore encounter near unto Mergenheym, which is very probable to be so.

From Lausenitz the 2. of November.
The Imperial Garrisons in Bautsen, Garlitz, and Sitta, durst in no wise
expect the coming of the Duke of Saxons Army; wherefore they have abandoned
Lausenitz wholly, and have betook themselves into Silesia. Which indeed
happened with great confusion, in so much that they were constrained (by reason
of their perplexity) vto leave the chief of their Ordnance at Gorlitz.

The Prince Elector of Saxony his Army pursued the Imperialists, even at the
heels, and the said Imperialists were overtaken by the Saxons near unto
Hirschbergh. But whereas the Imperialists durst not stand to it, they were
slain by wholes troops of them, and miserably destroyed, as doubtless you
will ere long understand by a more ample Relation.

Out of Franconia the 9. of November.
His Majesty as yet is resident at Wirtsburg, which he has caused to be
exceedingly fortified; in the night he takes up his lodging in the Castle. Some
of Tillyes Soldiers who are imprisoned by the Swedish, affirm, that there is
exceeding great want in the Popish Army, both of Victuals and other provision.
Whereupon the Soldiers do faint, and let their courage sink. They confess
that many impotent forces are aggregated confusedly together, but to no great
purpose, neither in any good order. Neither are they able to furnish their
Army with Ordnance and Munition, etc. since that horrible overthrow near unto
Leipsich. Especially they are weakened exceedingly, because his Majesty of
Sweden has taken (of late) Wirtsburg, and other strong places, furnished with
all manner of necessaries. And does daily proceed in his Victorious and
successful proceedings. Whereas the Catholic League, have not time to
consult of the maine matter, much less to prevent the common danger and
misery, which now comes flowing upon them in full stream, but every one has
enough to do, to shift for his own particular safety.

From Hanaw the 11. of November.
I doubt not but you have heard how this City has been surprised and taken
by the King of Swedens forces. Give me leave briefly to relate it unto you, if
happily you are not acquainted with the manner of it.

In the morning early, November. 1. three thousand Swedish Dragoners (Musketeers
on Horseback) and six hundred Curassiers, came before this City, and entered
and passed through the Kinzing gate, where they patarded the Gate behind the
Castle, and scaled the walls, so that by these means they soon mastered the
Old City. In this furious assault and expedition, only eight Citizens and
three Soldiers were slain, besides some other hurt.

The Earl of Hanaw, (notwithstanding his Countess was then in Labor, or at
leastwise newly brought to bed of a young daughter) was presently taken in
hold. And presently after assaulted the New City furiously, and battered upon
the same with Canon shot. Those within resolved to defend themselves to the
uttermost. But being threatened with sore threats, were at last willing to come
to agreement, appealed to the Earl, and required his consent, who came to them
upon the walls of the City, and spoke to them in the City, in this manner.

My faithful and loving Citizens and Soldiers, to afford you much Counsel
in this extremity, or any assistance, I am not able, by reason I am a
prisoner. Only this I wish you to compound and make your agreement upon the
best terms you can. Which they willingly consented unto, and did so. And those
that would betake themselves into the service of his Majesty were entertained;
the rest were imprisoned. His Majesty of Sweden himself in person was not in
this expedition, but is daily expected at Hanaw, to establish order according
to his Royal Direction.

The forces of the General Tilly which were enquartered at Heuxt, Hofsteym,
and other places hereabout, have abandoned their Garrison, and are fled to
Mentz. The Swedish have also taken Fryburgh.

As many Forces as possibly can be are raised for the Catholic League, in
this their extreme need, and to this end diverse Officers are sent into the
Land of Liege, to levy some Troops.

The Archduke Leopold is now also about to levy an Army of 20000 men. And as
we are credibly informed, the Bishop of Cullen himself in person will come
into the field with his new Army.

We have ty dings that the City of Strasburgh is agreed with the King of
Sweden, likewise Norinburgh, Vlme and other Cities are upon terms of
composition. Colonel Relinger is sent to the forenamed Cities, as Commissary
for his Majesty of Sweden, to agree with them as he shall find it consonant.
The same Commissary met in his journey with a Wagon full of Spiritual Persons,
near unto the City Vlms, all which he took hold of, and ransomed them
afterward for 40000 Rix-Dollars.

From Swynfordt the 10 of November.
Last Wednesday his Majesty of Sweden with 33 Cornets of Horse, accompanied
with diverse Earls, and other great Lords and Peers, departed from Wurtsburgh,
and is directly gone to the Army newly levied near unto the City Carelstadt,
by the River Main, there to adjoyne his Troops with them.

His Majesty took along with him from this place, 4 Companies, and as many as
he could well spare from some other places, by reason he had information that
the Imperial Forces were speedily marching toward Carelstadt, against the said
new raised Army. They are already come near unto Niewstadt, and Rotten, where
doubtless when they meet, something will be effected.

This City, as likewise the Castle of Wurtsburgh is much fortified. His
Majesty causes a new Army of 40000 men to be raised, to which end, both here,
and in all the adjoining Countries the Drums beat, and the Trumpets do
sound continually.

In the mean while it is a great misery that befalls these Countries, and none
without pity or compassion can either behold or hear of the ruins in these
Parts. Men have heavy taxations laid upon them, and great contributions must be
paid; but especially by the Clergy, which causes both Laity and Clergy to
abandon their residence, which is pilladged and spoiled by the Soldiers in
their absence.

Newly we received tidings that the whole Vaunt-guard of the Cavallerie of
General Altringer is utterly defeated, and many of them slain. Insomuch that
no less then 6. Cornets were brought and presented to his Majesty of Sweden,
we shall acquaint you with the particulars the very next occasion.

From Torgan the 9 of November.
The Imperialists not daring to abide the Encounter with the Saxon Forces, have
quite left and forsaken the six Cities in Lusatia, and are fled into Bohemia
and Silesia, there if they can to defend those Countries.

Since that an Ambassador from his Imperial Majesty with a great train of
followers is arrived at Dresden, with very friendly and patheticall moving
Letters to our Prince Elector of Saxony, which Letters sound to this effect,
as namely, That it never was his Imperial Majesty's intention or will, to make
the incursion into Saxony, and that he for his part, has no other cause (but
after great experience) to be well assured of his Majesty's favor and love:
Knowing what a friend his Imperial Majesty has been to him, insomuch, that
he could not expect any emnitie at his hands, only if he would be pleased to
lay down, and abandon his Arms. But since our Elector of Saxony sufficiently
knows his Imperial Majesty's disposition, by woeful proof and experience,
especially since matters are now come to this high pass, the Duke of Saxony
will not trust to his colored protestations, but earnestly add further
proceedings to their good beginnings, and leave the issue to the Almighty.

From Leypzich the 12 of November.
His Highness of Saxony at this present is at Bautsen in person, but his
chief Army is in Bohemia. The Swedish of Crossen in Silesia, have taken great
Glogaw, and slain all the Soldiers there that made any opposition.

It is most certain, that 12000 Swedish more are now speedily marching to his
Majesty about Wurtsburgh, to augment his Majesty's Army.

From Brunswicke the 13. of November.
A few days ago the Garrison of Rostocke came before this City, and required
4. days provision. Which by the Magistracy of the City was refused: they
professed that they would cleave close to the Conclusion made at the Diet at
Leypzich.

To the same Guarrison are adjoyued eleven Cornet more, whether they will now
tend will ere long appear.

The Earl of Gransfield is now leuying of an Army in Westphalia. He is come
into the Byshopricke of Minden with the Regiment of Erwitz.

The Commander Baninghousen Colonel of the aforesaid 11. troops of horse,
(besides the Garrisons of Magdenburgh and Wolfenbuttle) has brought again all
places unto Halberstadt under Contribution, and those that will not contribute,
he puts them to fire and sword. He has also sorely threatened Halberstadt, but
whereas diverse troops of Swedish are newly come thither, he will avail but
little with his enterprise. The same Commander has pillaged 14. Wagons laden
with good Commodities going from Hamburgh to Leypzig.

From Breme the 17. of November.
Our Bishop causes all possible strength to be brought together, to extirpate
Tillyes forces out of these quarters, he has already incorporated two places.
And as it is reported, the Garrison of Staden has again taken Boytsenburgh,
and Lauwenburgh,

From Collen the 16. of November.
Six hundred of Swedish Horsemen, marched near unto Franckfort the 13. of
this Month. These in passing by related, that whereas the Emperialists had
utterly abandoned Lusatia, that the D. of Saxony has taken the 6, Cities in
those Countries, and so is marched forward toward Bohemia. Letters from Leypzig
affirm the same, and moreover that he is now Master of, and has subdued the
whole Country Limaris, and is come within some 7. Miles from Prague, and has
taken the City Litmaris. Which has a bridge over the River Elve, so that now
there is no more resistance but only a plain open way to the City of Prague.
The old Earl of Thurne and diverse other Dutch Lords, have adjoined their
strength to them.

The Protestant Peers have willingly contributed in the Conclusion at the Diet
at Leipzich as here follows.

Strasburgh. 279000, Gilders. N^rimbergh. 478800. Gilders. Worms. 065560.
Gilders. Wirt^mburgh. 043720. Gilders. Lindow. 029760. Gilders. Nordlingen.
054600. Gilders. Swabish Hall. 098443. Gilders. Heylbrun. 644800. Gilders. Vlm.
179000. Gilders. Memmingen. 051163. Gilders. Kempten. 048360. Gilders.
Rotenburgh on the Tauber. 011780. Gilders. Sweinfurt. 054880. Gilders.
Wirtzenheym. 052080 Gilders. Weissenburg. 031000. Gilders. Sum, 2312146.
Gilders.


From Eger in Bohemia, the 5. of November.
Here is great flight in this Kingdom from all parts, and men tremble for very
fear, because the Swedish fall furiously into all places, and have alreedy
conquered many brave Lordships and strong places. It is also most certain,
that Ioachims Valley is taken by the Swedish.

The Lantgrave of Hessens forces have made short work in Paterborne, where
they found but small resistance. Some Spanish troops are passed by Duyren, and
are marched toward the Palatinate. Those of Mentz have taken into their City
4. Spanish Companies, and have enquartered some troops in Ringnow.

From Bergen-up-zoom the 18. of November.
From Antwerpe is written, that 8. Turkish men of war from Algiers, were
fallen into Ireland, and from thence carried away captive 1500. men, which they
thought to have brought into Algiers, and sold them: but 12. Dunkerk men of
war met them by the way, and after a long fight sunk two of the Turkish men
of war, and took 6. more, and threw all the Pirates overboord, so that the
Frish are all rescued from slavery, and landed again in Freland. Which we must
expect some confirmation of, before we assure it true.

Antwerpe the 17. of November. 1631.
For news, by the Letters come this day from Germany: some men have writ
from Norimbergh, that the Duke of Saxonyes forces should have taken in Prague,
it does agree with that one writteth me from Hambrough, how that the D. of
Saxony with his whole Army was entering into Bohemia, and was within 7. leagues
of Prague, (it should seem Count Thurne was the leader of them) the King of
Sweden continues in his late conquered places, where he makes himself strong,
and gathers in great contributions in the Towns and Countries thereabouts;
Tilly has a great number of men, but most of them unexperienced in wars: the
King has sent the Count of Solmes into Franckfort, to have their present
resolution, whether they will take in his soldiers to Garrison; Tilly has
sent one to them to persuaded them to take in the Emperors Soldiers, they
would be happy if they could refuse both and remain neutrall and friend to
both; but it seems they must resolve the one or the other; judge you in what a
predicament they live, for they would feign hold with the strongest, and that
is doubtful, so long as they have both strong Armies in the field: It should
seem, that the Bishop of Breame takes time while time is, and begins to put
the Emperors Soldiers out of his Jurisdiction. Many do write that the nether
Circle of Saxony, will have 12000. men in the field, and the Hance Towns like
to Arm them; so that by all appearance this next Summer all Germany will be up
in Arms: for particular fightings, many write of many, but they are far from
hence, and therefore forbear to write of any of them: It should seem the
French are already marching toward Italy, they say to put into Garrison; I do
believe so till the next Spring, and then will show their intents; for there is
a general opinion they will join with Savoy, and the next Spring go into
Italy: and make a pretended war against Germany, and get Millaine if they
can; the next year is like to be bloody, God send a good peace to prevent so
great a bloodshed as is like to be.

Extract of another Letter of the 18. of November. 1631.
BY Gods assistance the old Count of Thurn, commanding some Swedish forces and
seconded by some troops of the Elector of Saxony, and accompanied with many
Bohemian Lords and Noblemen, that by the Emperor were banished, took without
any opposition the Metropolitan City of Prage, of whose coming as soon as the
Governor of the Castle and the other of the Town had notice, they both with
many more chief Ministers and Officers had no mind to stay for that Earl his
coming, but saved themselves by flight.

They were followed by many Jesuits, Friars and Priests, who all went toward
Passan and into Austria. The Duke of Fridland (Walsteyn) did indeed show great
displeasure at their flight. But soon after he himself and Don Balthazor (who
commands all the milice and garrisons in Bohemia) faining as if they would go
forth to meet and parley with the said Earl of Thurne, they were no sooner
out of town but went also away as fast as they could toward Budwize.
Therefore some of the Swedish Army joining with many Bohemians, who are glad of
so good an opportunity to free themselves again from the insupportable yoke,
both their consciences and goods are under, do follow them, to hinder them to
make any considerable Army. Almost all Towns do openly rejoice and declare
for them, and so all Bohemia does make a general insurrection, in manner, that
wheresoever the people meets with an Imperial soldier, or whom they do but
suspect to be an Imperialist, they presently knock him down.

And how this new conquest does please the Duke of Bavaria and the Emperor
himself, may well be supposed. The said Duke of Bavaria being ready with about
12. thousand men to draw and march toward the Papists Army (for the Imperial
and Leaguish are joined into one, and Tilly does no more appear alive) when
the news of Bohemia did cause him to make a stand and to take new Counsel.
This we understand for certain, etc.

Out of another Letter the 14. of November.
I Do not doubt but you have heard that the Count of Thurne has delivered
again both Prague and many other parts and places of Bohemia from the
oppression they have sighed under these many years. I hope to send you by the
next more particularities thereof.

Meanewhile I will tell you, that a friend of mine writes to me, that General
Tilly fell so sick the very day of his overthrow before Leypsich, that ever
since all the skill of Surgeons and Physicians could not keep him alive. And
so I am sure that he is dead, but I cannot (as yet) tell you when and where he
dyed.

The Roman Catholic Army, lying still for the most part betwixt the Rhine and
the King of Sweden, do by incursions now and then great hurt thereabout, not
against their Enemies, but only upon the poor people, burning spoiling and
sacking all whether they can come. For there is no discipline, nor order, nor
Religion amongst them. They have lately taken some places (of no strength) in
the Marquisat of Onspach, and the very town of Onspach; yea they are not
content to burn and rob the houses and the poor Countrey-people, but they
have of late been so barbarous that they have opened the Monuments and
Sepulchers of the Princes and Marquises of Brandenburgh, that governed at
Onspach, and there robbed the dead and abused the corpse, which some Finlanders
understanding swore to revenge, saying; they were but sorry to have to deal
with such as durst show no courage against them, but were only fit to rob and
boast against the dead Lions, whom they never dare look in the faces whilst
they are alive; And that they being fitter for the gallows then for an Army,
they hoped to meet them once again as they had lately done in their quarter
near Leypsich, where Tilly had chosen his quarter due to his robbers, and
where they received their reward.

Landgrave William of Hessen being come back again out of Paderborn to Fulda,
has brought with him thither many principal and Noblemen of that Bishopric,
as hostages, until all the contributions agreed upon shall be paid.

Bannier (who is now General commanding a Swedish Army in the Country of
Magdenburgh) has blocked up the said City, so that it is hoped he will bring
the same again into the former liberty and deliver it from the Cruel
Vsurpators.

From Antwerp the 27. of November.
This Instant there is a good friend of ours come from Franckford post in 3.
days, who confirms the taking of Hanaw, and says that for certain, Prague
is taken, with all the Cities Towns and places thereabouts, by the Duke of
Saxony. And the King of Swedlands forces are marched from Hanaw to Franckford,
which undoubtedly must also yield unto him, in fine the King of Swedland is
very victorious and in all possibility to conqver all Germany, and the Empire:
when I have any more news, I will not fail to perticipate it unto you.

FINIS.

