A Proclamation or Proscription, set forth and published by the Archduke
Albertus, against his Mutinous Soldiers in the Castle of Hoochstrate. Printed
at Bruxels.

Faithfully translated into English out of the Dutch Copy Printed at
Middleborough, by the first Original.

Wherein is also truly set forth the order of the two Camps, before the
strong town of Grave: With the yielding thereof into the hands of his
Excellency Grave Maurice: and the conditions agreed upon on both sides, the 19.
of September. Stilo Nouo. 1602.

With other accidents since happened.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in
Corne-hill, at the sign of the Cat and two Parrets, near the Royal Exchange.
1602.

A Proclamation, published and set forth at Bruxelles, by the Archduke
Albertus and the Duchess, against their Mutinous Soldiers lying in the Castile
of Hoochstrate.
The Archduke and Duchess.

WE having assembled our boast to reliue ye town of Grave, besiedges by our
enemies where ye soldiers of the said Town do valiantly defend themselves,
winning great praise and honor: And our selves in person endeavoring to
advance the business: understand, that some of the Soldiers of our foresaid
Camp^ (which was approached very near unto the enemies forces) under color of
desire to Mutiny, thereby to obtain that which they falsely pretended to be due
unto them, have in most villainous order, left and forsaken their Auncientes and
Colors, and after many attempts on sundry places, have by villainous and
Traytorous means taken the Castle of Hoochstrate: giving to understand by
many, and weighty arguments, that they deal and hold corespondent with our
enemies, and that by them they will help themselves, which by all reason and
laws is forbidden, and never before used or practiced by any other Soldiers.
But contrariwise, such as have heertofore mutined (at such times as the enemy
besiedged any of our Towns, or if we had any occasion to use Soldiers for our
wars) they came out of such places as they possessed, serving us with great
zeal and obedience. And for as much as the principallest ringleaders of this
treason and villainous act, are such persons to whom nothing, or very little is
owing, being partly but of late entertained, and partly such as were in the
alterations in Deest, Weert and Karpen, where they received their count and
reckoning for as much as was owing unto them: yea, and are such people as are
accustomed to raise Mutinies, by which means they might enjoy such sums of
money as proceed of the contributions, without doing any service unto us: and
also have deluded, forced, and animated others to effect this Traiterous
action, whereby we are hindered from effecting the rescue of their besiedged
fellows (in arms) and brethren: and also from all other exploytes which we
might accomplish (...) our enemies, binding us by these their ^^ings to turn
our sword against them, as against our own and civil enemies: yea, and are
more hurtful then they, in so much as the enemies force is thereby greatly
increased. For as much therefore that this their action is new, the like
before not heard of, vilde, unseemly, and of ill consequence, and deserves
exemplarily to be punished: So it is therefore, that we destring to foresee
some wholesome remedy for the common profit, and welfare of our vassailes and
subjects: do ordain and command all our Soldiers and other persons of their
company, being in the Castle of Hoochstrate, either there or else where, in any
other place assembled under color or pretext of Mutiny, that within three
days after the publication hereof, they return to their Ancients and
Colors, or do present themselves unto the Governors of Leere or of
Herentacls to be sent unto their Colors or Ancients, where they shall be
quietly and joyfully received, as if this alteration had not happened: promising
them in the word and faith of a Prince, that neither now, nor hereafter they
shall not for this offense receive any punishment, nor be farther examined, no
not though they be of ye chiefest and principallest actors of ye said mutiny,
but shall be used favorably and lovingly, rendering unto them al courtesy, as
unto such persons, to whom we wish all good. And if it so fall out that they
accomplish not this our favorable will and pleasure (the aforesaid 3. dates
being expired) we have from hence forth declared all those which presently
remain with them, as also al others with hereafter shall join with them, and by
these Presents do declare and pronounce for Rebels, Traitors wicked villains
and mischievous persons, as having committed crimen lezae Maiestatis in the
highest degree. and for such Rebels and Traitors condemn them to death, and
their goods to be forfeited: which we will and command to be written up, and
brought into our Treasury of Demaines or profit. Giving lycense unto all and
every person of what quallitie, state or condition soever they be, freely and
without any danger of Law, to kill the said Muniters, without respect of any
person, whether the same be done privily, suddenly, or otherwise howsoever, and
as the same may be found most easily, and by the best means to be effected.
And whosoever shall perform this our pleasure, and kill any of these Mutiners,
shall receiueten crowns or every head: and for every head of such as have been
ordenary Officers, 100. Crowns: And for the heads of such others as they
term by the names of Councellers, Sergeant-Maior, Governor of the Cauallery,
etc. two hundredth crowns, and for their Electo five hundred Crowns. And if so
be that any of their own company, shall murder or kill any of them, we
pardon his offense, and will cause the aforesaid sums to be paid him.
Furthermore, we ordain and command, all Judges and Justices of our Camps,
towns and countries, to inuentary and take notice in writing, of all the goods
(as well mooueable as inmooueable) belonging unto the said Mutiners, and what
perticularly appertains to every one: And also of their apparel, and of any
other like thing whatsoever, belonging unto their wives and children all which
our pleasure is, shall be delivered into the hands of our deposetarie Officers
of our Camp, and a certificate thereof to be sent to the Superintendent
Iusticer of our said Camp, to the end that all the same may be brought into
our Treasury of Demaines, whether we appoint the same from henceforth to be
brought. nd further, we charge and command all and every person whatsoever,
which shall have any money or other things belonging to the forenamed
Mutiners, or to their Wives or children, laid to the^ to gage, delivered by
exchange, in Deposito, or to be kept, in what manner soever it be, that they
deliver not the same unto them, but that they open and make known the same unto
us, that the same may be confiscated as is before said, on pain to forfeit
all their goods if any shall conceal the same: and further, to receive
judicial punishment. And for as much as the deformity of the offense, and
wicked consequence that might thereof ensue to other Princes, unto whom the same
might (in time to come) happen in their Camps, if such wicked beginnings and
practices should not be punished: We solicit and desire the Emperor and King
of Spain, our Lords and brethren, and all other Kings, Princes, and
Potentates, in what places or lands the said Mutiners shall be found, or have
any goods, that they will command the same to be arrested, sending them unto
us with the aforesaid certificates accordingly, and to the end as is before set
down: and we will be willing at their request, to accomplish the same in our
Lands and Lordships, ^tall times when they shall request the same of us.
Likewise we prohibit and forbid the said wives, children of the Mutiners, to
go unto the place and where the said Mutiners are, commanding them not to
deal nor meddle with them, either by word or writting, so long as the said
alteration shall continue, on pain of death: permitting all persons whatsoever
to apprehend and spotle them, which shall not be reckoned for any offense, if so
be they go, or that there be any suspicion that they desire to go unto their
said fathers or husbands: but we will and command, that within throe days
they depart out of our countries, and not to return without our cave and
lisence first had, on pain as is before said, Also we command, that no man
(either within our land or wout) under color or pretext of merchants,
victulers, servants or otherwise, shall do any service. assist, or carry any
victuals, munition or other things, unto the said mutiners, nor unto their
boys, servants, or horses, or any thing or things that concerns them, no
not for their money, on pain of death, and other fines ccording to the
discreation of our Judges, weightinesse of the cause, and quality of the
persons: Giving also our consent, that it shall be lawful to kill them,
without offense to our laws, if so be they shall be found Inflagranti. And
further we will and command that the proper names and surnames, shall be taken
out of the Books and Registers of the Pay-masters of our said Camp, with
their marks, and places where the said changelings or mutiners, and parents
were borne: and it more apparent evidence shall seem needful, we will and
command that due information be taken, that it may manifestly be seen what
they be that are condemned: and that the said changelings shall be proclaimed in
our Palace, and in the places where they are borne and inhabit (as well in
these our Counties, as in the Dominions of the Emperor or the King of Spain,
and other Princes our friends and confederates) for wicked villains, traitors
and unprofitable persons, having committed Crimen lezae Maiestatis in primo
casu. And further more, we will and command, to execute against them, their
children and successors, the forfeitures and penalties by laws provided for
all such persons, whereof from hence forward, we pronounce them to be fallen
into, and to be condemn-(e^^e ndall such as shall because of the suppression of
this mutinous rebellion, and deliver into our hands, such as are offenders
therein, we forgive them. and offer to give them an honorable recompense: and
also unto all such as shall be ayders and assistantes therein, although they
be of the same mutinous company, and cheifest ringleaders or Officers amongst
them. And to the end that this our present Proclamation and prescription,
without infringement, may be holden and kept, and that all men may take
knowledge thereof, as well the General of the light horsemen, the Captain of
the hands of Ordinance, Master of the Artilerie, Colonels, Marshals,
Governors, heads, Captains and Commanders, Soldiers and all other men of
war, of what state, condition, quallity, or nation soever they be: as also al
others our vassalls and subjects: we will and command that the same be
published as a public banishment, and copy attentique thereof be sent unto
the lycentiate John de Frias, Councellor to the Kings Majesty, and
superintendent of Justice in the camp in these quarters, that he may put the
same in execution accordingly, and to be observed either in part or wholely,
(...) General, and to other Officers and persons, unto whom it shall
appertain, that all places of Justice as well of towns as villages, may be
advertised of the issue thereof, and himself to impart unto us the
proceedinged herein, that farther insight may be had, and such order
prescribed as shall be needful for the execution and upright ordering of all
matters before specisied. And like wise we will and command, that an
attentique Copy shall be delivered unto Sir John Richarddot Knight, and high
President of our Privy and Secret Council, and of the Council of our Council
of State, to the end that he also (so far as the same both concern him)
cause this our ordinance to be followed and kept, and to command in our name,
all Judges and Officers of our countries in these parts, likewise to perform
the same.

In witness whereof we have caused these Presents to be dilligently dispatched,
and our Seal thereon hanged.

Given at Deest the 15. day of September, in the year of our Lord. 1602. Under
witten. Albert. And somewhat lower. At the ordinance of their Highness. And
subscribed. I. de Mancicidor.

The description of the two Camps, lying before the strong town of Grave,
besiedged by the Noble Prince Grave Maurice.
THe strong town of Grave, in the land of Cuycke, lying on the River of Mase,
is in compass, as great as a man can go about in half an hour, belonging to
my Lord the Prince of Orange, and has of long time remained in the possession
of the Spaniards. This year 1602. the 18. day of August, his Excellency Grave
Maurice of Nassau besledged this town, and the next day following, laid a
bridge over the Mase: they of the town (lisle doubting any such matter) were
(according to the truest intelligence) not above 1500. Soldiers, and about some
300. Townes-men or Burgers, not very well provided of victuals and Muni^ion:
Notwithstanding, the town is strengly Manited with Bulwarks, Walls and
Ditches, for the last year they joined to their Walls such Bulwarks as were
separated from the Town with a ditch, for their greater strength. They lost
also a Fort which lay on the other side of the Mase, called Vain cost or Lost
charges: which in truth was of very small force or strength. Moreover (as soon
as his Excellency approached the town (they made a Trench round about the
Town, strengthened with certain points. His Excellency presently made a
Battery, right against the said Fort, called Lost charges upon the Causey,
and Battered it with the Cannon: whereupon the Enemy forsook it in the night
time, and his Excellency having possession thereof, presently raised a Mount,
and planted seven pieces of Ordinance thereon. At the beginning they of the
Town kept themselves very quiet, shooting little, but made (every night in a
manner) signs and tokens by fire, which they still continue to do. His
Excellency knowing very well that the Enemy (being in the fields) would
visit him, did in an incredible strong manner, entrench himself against his
coming, for he made all his works high and with thick walls. Flancking one
upon the other, and are all doubled, and many three double, with a wide Ditch
round about, and in many places high Batteries. Besides these fortifications,
he has round about him (without the Camp) about fourteen Reduites, wherein
Guard is kept, which lie a Musket shot from the uttermost Trenches, every one
guarded with 50. Musket shot continually.

The order of our Camp is thus, beginning with his Excellencies Quarter, which
lies vpwardes the Maze beyond the Town, where he has placed two Ship
bridges over the River, and a little beyond them are two Iron chains, to
hinder the approach of the Enemies Ships of Fire work: At this place his
Excellency has raised sundry high batteries, to withstand the Enemies approach
behind him, and toward the town he has very strong Reduites made on the
Causey for his defense. In this his Excellencies Quarter, where also the Grave
of Hollocke lies) lie most of the Caualery, with the French and Duch Soldiers:
The outward part of these works lie half an hours goeing from the Walls of
the Town. The second Quarter of Grave William joins unto this of his
Exellencyes, stretching toward the highest of the Heath, where his Honor lies
entrenched upon the high grounds, with diverse Forts and Batteries, and it is a
long half hours goeing from the walls of the Town, to the furthest part of
these works: in this Quarter lie the Vreeses, Scotts, and other Soldiers. The
third Quarter is Sir Francis Veares, lyncked hard unto this other of Earl
Williams, reaching forth downward toward the Town even unto the river of
the Maze, where he has also the Causie or ditch to his advantage: here the
Englishmen lie, and have a bridge also made of Ships, where mighty store of
Ships lie furnished with Victuals and Munition, and is the place where the
Market is kept. Against the Town beyond the Maze is no special Quarter kept,
but that the Soldiers as well of the Caualery as of the Infantery come thither
over the Bridge to guard the same.

On this side, the Ditch or Causey serves his Excellency for a strong Trench,
whereon he has made sundry Reduites. Also he has here made an high
battery, (as before is written) from whence with his shot he may mightily
annoy the Town, which toward this place declineth and lies low: and from
this place has Fire works been sundry times shot into the Town. The
circuit of the Camp from the English Quarter unto the Maze in his
Excellencies Quarter, will ask above five hours go^ing.

Now when the Enemy had assembled his Troops, and had remained some few
days in the land of Claue: the 10. of August he came marching by fair day
light, even within half an hours going to his Excellencyes Quarter, where he
pitched his Tents, and made a Ship bridge over the Maze. They of the town
beholding this, made great joy, and triumphed with their shot: and the said
day, sallyed twice out of the town, on the Quarters of the Vreeses, and some
other days afterward also, but to their small profit.

His Excellency has also greatly approached the Town with running Trenches
out of his Quarter, along the edge of the Maze, where it is high, and has
brought the same even to the Enemies Trenches: The like is done from Grave
Williams Quarter, and from Sir Frances Veares Quarter, along the side of the
Maze, and are all come even to the Enemies running Trenches.

Also, his Excellency has 5. Batteries, from whence he shoots against the
Town: one before the Maze, two in the English Quarter standing upon the Ditch,
and two on the land side.

Between the 12. and 13. of ugust, about 12. of the clock in the night, they
of the Town began wonderfully to shoot, from all Quarters till morning, and
thereupon made a shoute, and forcecible sallye with six hundred men upon the
Vreeses Quarter, but more lustily resisted and driven into the Town, leaving
many of their men dead behind them: At the same instant the Enemy behind also
began to approach both with horse and foot: but after he found himself
annoyed with our Ordinance, he wisely turned back again: The same night was
aworthy Captain of ours (one of his Excellencies Inieners) shot in the
Trenches, called Andreas de Roy.

As Sir Francis Veare was giving order which way the Trenches should be
brought, he was strocke in the face with a small bullet, which remains in his
neck, the wound is (God be thanked) healed though it seemed more dangerous at
the first.

The 15. of August (being our Lady day) they thought to effect some great
matter, the same day at one of the clock in the afternoon they salied out
with great force upon the English quarter, forcing themselves with some 700.
men to break through, but they were stoutly repulsed, ^he fight continuing
almost an hour long but in the end, the en^my was glad to turn his back,
among whom many were slain with our ordinance, which played upon them from
diverse places. In this sally there were Cap^aynes slain on both sides, with
some hundreds of the enemies soldiers. The same time the enemy marched toward
our Camp, but came not very near, yet showing themselves in ample order of
battle amongst the trees right over against his Excellencies quarter, but
(after he had stayed the discharging of some great shot from our Camp) he
turned back: And this was the greatest and fiercest sally that yet happened since
the besiedging of the Town.

Concerning the enemies Camp, the same remained there until the 22. day of
this month of August, now and then showing himself: and many skirmidges
happened between them, and those which kept the watches without the Camp, but
never made attempt with any great force, which our people would gladly have
seen, as well the meanest as the chiefest.

There ran very many from the enemies daily, which came unto our Camp,
declaring that they were forced so to do by extremity of hunger, that great
dearth and pennury was in their Camp, and that they had no money, so that it
was impossible for the Admirant to lie long in that place, affirming farther,
that if the rest of the enemies, had but confidence of like favor to be showen
by his Excellency, as he had showen unto them, very few would remain with the
Admirant, yet his Excellency suffers not any to remain in his Camp, but
gives them pasport to depart.

The 22. day of August in the evening about 10. of the clock the great Admirant
with his mighty camp brake up, having sent away his wagons and baggage before
him and followed with all his forces as secretly as he could, without sounding
of trumpet or drum. His Excellency being hereof advertised, early in the
morning followed him, with 4000. horsemen, and 1200. Musketteeres, but they
were too far passed: Thus the Admirant with his great camp departed, leaving
his friends in their greatest extremity, and the town of Grave to his
Excellency for a pray.


