THE Old man's Dietarie.

A work no less learned then necessary for the preservation of Old persons
in perfect health and soundness.

Englished out of Latin, and now first published by Thomas Newton.

Imprinted at London for Edward White, dwelling at the little North-doore of
Saint Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gun. 1586.

To the right Worshipful, Master Thomas Egerton Esquier, Solicitor unto her
most excellent Majesty.
WERE it not (Sir) that your rare courtesy and singular affability is by
sufficient proof and daily trial generally to the world already known, and
in many a place, to many a man's comfort both felt and tasted: I should have
been at this time much abashed thus boldy to prefix your Worshipful name in
the forhead of this poor Pamphlet. Wherein I have not ambitiously hunted after
any blaunched terms or picked phrases, neither (to confess the truth) does
this Argument either allow or require it. But my purpose was with as much
perspicuitie as I could, to deliver the meaning of mine Author: which (I trust)
in some reasonable measure, and according to such proportion and pittance of
skill as the Lord has endued me withal, I have faithfully performed. Accept
it I beseech you, as the gift of a poor Chesshyre-man (the Country where your
worship was also bred and borne) and as an earnest penny of that unfeigned
loyalty which I duetifullie bear unto you. Assuring your self, that although
many things, far better in valewe, and much finer for handeling, might have
been presented unto you; yet with a more sincere good will and vowed heart,
could not any thing have been possibly unto you offered: As knows the
Almighty, unto whose good protection I do with my humble prayer commend you.

At Little Jlford in Essex, the viij. of January. 1586. Your Worships poor
Countreyman, ever in the Lord to command. Thomas Newton.

To the friendly Reader.
THE godly travails and learned pains taken by sundry our Cou^treymen to
acquaint the noble Art of Physic with our usual phrase, and to inuest it
with English attyer, occasioned me at the first to translate out of Latin
into English, a learned work of Doctor Gratarolus, and to publish the same in
the year 1574. under the title of A Direction for the health of Magistrates
and Studients etc. Which, being of the wise and learned not altogether
misliked, J hoping for the like good success, was afterward easily entreated
by a worshipful Gentleman my very friend, eft soones to tread the like path,
and to translate Leuinus Lemnius his notable work De Crasi: which first came
abroad, under the title of The Touchstone of Complexions, in the year 1576.
Since which time, I have not greatly dealt in any works of this excellent,
Art otherwise then for mine own private study, wherein I have found both
ease and delight. It may not seem strange to have Physic books in English,
neither ought any man in my opinion to be thereat discontented. The very
fathers of Physic Hippocrates and Galene with others being Grecians, wrate
their works in the Greek tongue: which to them was the mother tongue, as the
English is now to us. The Romans wrate in Latin being their proper
language, and the Arabians, as Auicen, in the Arabicke speech: and others of
other Countries, in the language that there was usual. And we cannot (without
the note of more then savage ingratitude) but confess and acknowledge the
great benefit and furtheraunce that we still enjoy by the painful pens
and English treatises of many our own Countrymen, as well in Physic as
Chyrurgerie. As namely, of that worthy Knight Sir Thomas Eliot, of Master
Doctor Turner, of Master D. Record, of Master D. Phaer, of Master D.
Cunningham, of Master D. Bulleyn, of Master D. Caldwell, of Master D.
Johnson, of Master D. Jones, of Master D. Board, Master Traheron, Master
Bright, Master Barowe, Master Securis, Master Lyte, Master Carye, Master
Coxe, Master Hill, Master Gale, Master Baker, Master Banister, Master
Hall, Master Clowes, Master Moore, Master Paynell, M. Vicars, M. Hester, M.
Basebridge. and some others, whose works J either have not yet seen, or at
this present come not to remembrance. If therefore herein I have incurred blame
(which I trust with all indifferent and vnaffectionate persons I have not) yet
should it be to me some mitigation of grief, to march in rank with so
worthy, excellent and painful men. If it be objected, that this study
sits not with my profession: surely I therein rest resolute, that Divinity
as Lady and Maistresse, refuses not (nay of duty, claymeth and chalengeth)
the service of all the other Arts, and Sciences: so as I think the surliest
and waywardest Areopagite will not deny. Howsoever it is, thy courteous
construction and friendly acceptance shall effectually satisfy my desire, and
thoroughly counteruaile my travail.

Farewell. Thomas Newton.

The Old man's Dietarie.
VEry aptly and truly is Physic defined by Hippocrates, where he says:
Lib. de flatibus.
That it is the addition of those things which lack and are too little:
Physic what it is.
and the withdrawing or subtraction of things which do abound and are too
much. For, seeing it has pleased the Almighty Creator in such constitution
to create and make the body of Man; that what through continual wearing away
and passibilitie of substance, it minutely and hourly wastes and decaieth;
and what through outward qualmes, accidents and causes externallie beetyding,
it is soon altered, changed and quickly transposed: it had therefore need to
be supported, guided and directed by the advice of the learned and expert
Physician, who as a wise Counselor and provident Master, may by his skill and
knowledge be able to recover this loss, recure this decay, and in due time to
repair and restore in convenient quality and quantity, the essence and
substance thereof, through daily and continual wearing, forespent and
miscarried. But for so much as there is great diversity in Bodies, as well by
their temperature proper and natural, as also (through their diverse trades and
kinds of life) accidental and casual, whereby (either more or less)
according to the constitutions of their bodies, they be subject to
inconvenient alteration: yet, as it were by a certain necessary and
inevitable law of nature, there is joined unto them, a third kind of body,
which is that, in Old men: the which also in it self greatly differs and is
unlike: and therefore the provident foresight and circumspect care about the
same, must not be small. For, this Age now stands at receipt, bearing,
carrying and sustayning all the misusages, faults, follies, disdietes and
disorders of forepassed Ages: and so now by this reason, of it self is weak,
feeble and unwieldy to all actions of the body. Good diet, and wholesome order
most fit and needful for Old men.
And for this cause a special care for wholesome Diet must be had in this Age,
rather then in any other. For thereby the body now stowping, doting and
tottering with years, is kept and conserved in lusty, strong and healthie
plight, with the perfect and sound use of the Senses, even till the very last
cast of extreme Age.

This profitable, wholesome and necessary Diet for Old men, is termed in
Greek (...), and is in virtue, working, operation and effect, in a manner like
unto that renutritiue and restoratiue diet, that is prescribed unto pueling and
still sickly persons: or to such as have been lately recovered from their
discrasies and maladies, to nourish and comfort their weak bodies, called
likewise of the Greeks, (...). For, these twain (beside that part which is
termed Gymnastique or exercitatiue, serving only for recreation of them that
be strong and healthful) are the chief and special parts of that Physic,
which is principally directed to preserve the body, sound, healthful and
lusty by Diet.

The Physician therefore that is to enter into this charge, and to deal in this
behalf, must be no child in knowledge, neither a raw Scholar in his Art,
but must be able perfectly and at his fingers ends, The Physician must know
the disposition and natures of bodies.
to understand and know the natures of Bodies, and the virtues, qualities and
operations of al Receipts, helps and things both good and bad, wholesome and
hurtful. For it is no small matter exactly to set down and prescribe a
perfect platform of Diet, agreeable and in each respect iumping with any one
particular man's nature, much less for an Old man: seeing the Complexions and
temperatures of men be so diverse, the composition of each of their bodies, so
singular, and to every particular person his self qualities so appropriate,
(over and besides many sudden brayes, and casual happes befalling to them)
that they cannot choose but suffer many alterations, and sundry chaunges.
Nevertheless, we at this time tying our selves to ye opinions of the grave and
ancient Writers in this Art, and following their learned judgments, will
take unto us for a pattern, and set before us as an example to imitate in this
present Treatise and Dietarie, some one such Old man, dealing yet in the
affairs of the world, and matters of the Common wealth, as was Antiochus at
Rome, in the days of Galene: that by comparing the years of that fresh and
lusty Old man, with old men of other Ages: the Physician (dealing in this
charge of cherishing and w^ll dieting Old men) may the better know and the
readier see, what things be best to choose, and what to eschew: s^^h Old age
contains in it self no small Latitude, according to more or less: according
whereunto his diet and fare must proportionablie in convenient quality and
quantity be either increased or abated.

For a more plain declaration therefore of this matter, we will divide the Age
of Old men stepped into years, into three parts. Old age of three sorts.
The first is of such as being yet lusty in body, constant in mind and in
strength serviceable and active, do execute their accustomed business and
deal still in their usual and wonted affairs: and these kind of old men are
very aptly termed by the Greeks (...), that is to say, Green and lusty Age.
fresh, lusty and flourishing Aged men, not much tainted, nipped, or bitten
with years. This lusty green Age may fitly be called the Door, or Entry
into a reverend stowping Age: and it seazeth and catches some bodies sooner,
and some later.

The second is of such, as for weakness and want of strength are grown to be
nummish in their limbs and unwieldy for any bodily travail: Grave, reverent
and honorable Age.
which after some easy exercise, or now and then bayning, do orderly feed:
and after such repast or meat do quietly betake themselves to sleep and
rest: and these sort of fatherly grayheaded men be in Greek termed (...).
And the third kind of Oldage is of them, which being riueled and wrinckled,
and having the skin of their faces and bodies, all crumpled, pursed and
drawn together, Dotage.
are not able any more for very feeblenes and impotencie to use any exercise,
but contenting themselves with some soft walking, lean and stay them on their
staff, or else by others are led by the hand: whom (for that they are now
gooing toward their long home and have the one foot, and almost both, already
in the grave) the Greeks do call (...). Therefore, seeing we have in hand
purposely to prescribe a Dietarie for Oldmen, it shall not be amiss nor
unprofitable to speak first a few words of their natural temperature, and
mutual difference among themselves.

Old men's bodies by nature are cold and dry. For, Old men, cold and dry.
the radical humor and substantificall moisture being in tract of time by
little and little wasted, which (like Dew) is distributed, and interspersed in
and among all the similare and principal parts of the body; together with
the natural heat likewise by little and little waning and drooping away: the
whole body cannot choose but decay withal and grow toward final dissolution.
So that now all the instrumental parts of the body being become too dry, the
whole members must needs weakly, feebly, disorderly, ill and out of frame or
course perform and execute their appointed actions and ordinary offices.
Wherefore the body now first lacking his natural strength and maintenance,
begins to quail and fail in his necessary and convenient nourishment, and
becomes thereby slenderer, thinner and dryer then it was, or the^ it should
be: and thereupon the strength, powers, and faculties thereof are enfeebled,
and to expedient motions or exercises apparently disabled. But, when yet
further and greater store of dryness ensues and grows upon it, like as
Trees and Plants wither away with rottennes and want of sap, eue^ so does the
body drowping with Age, finally wast, decay and consume: yet not in all persons
alike, but sooner or later in some then in other some, according to the
constitution, temperature, quality and complexion of their bodies: and also
according to the unruly, unseasonable, and il diet used, and things (of
themselves good and wholesome) vntemperatly frequented. For, we do not all
consist, neither are we all alike made from our birth in one equal and like
measure of elemental qualities, and therefore neither do we use one only
uniform Diet at al times and in all respects. And hereupon it comes to pass
that some sooner then some, and others later then others, begin to have
Beardes and to be hayrie: some sooner grow to man's state and stature: some
be tresh, lusty, strong, and bear their age gallantly: some wax hoarte
headed and will quickly be old: and so consequently become either weaker and
feebler, or healthier and stronger.

Wherefore, by the number of years to make any certain distinction or
difference of Ages, it is very hard, yea, impossible to do it. For, it is
often seen, that by reason of the natural distemperaunce of some one principal
member, or more: or for that, Why some grow old, sooner then some.
from the very birth, the same be not proportionably mixed and sorted, some
do live all their life time sickly and diseased, and so arriving to untimely
old age, do pyningly languish and dye. Some again, having sound Bodies, and
of as excellent good constitution as might be, through intemperate diet and
ryetous life have hastened Old age, and brought themselves to graye heads
before their time: who, if they had followed the good advise and discreet
counsel of the learned Physician, might have continued themselves in a more
prosperous and longer health, till they had come to the point of extreme
Oldage.

He therefore that exactly and perfectly knows, that Dryness and Coldness
together, do possess Aged bodies: and that of old men among themselves, The
best Physician for an old man.
there is great odds and diversity, whether we respect the course of their
Age and number of their years, or the peculiar temperature and appropried
complexion of every one severally: that person (doubtless) is a fit Phisitio^
and a good Nurse for Old men. For he will quickly devise and find out a
contrary course to qualify and meet with those two qualities: that is to
say, he will altogether apply himself to use such helps and means, whereby to
bring them to be hoate and moist. As touching the quantity and measure of such
remedies as he must use, he may as occasion serves, (accordingly either as
the age of the party, or as his custom and ordinary dealings and fashions do
require) occupy and take: ever regarding and having an eye to the aforesaid
distemperance that reigns in this old Age. For by all these, he shall be much
helped and furthered, to know more certainly the weak and foreworne
disposition of Old folks.

Now, forasmuch as our body is daily affected and continually grows toward
weakness and debilitie: n^edes must it in that respect, feel a double
inconvenience, the one, of alteration: the other of continual decay of it own
substance. For, over and besides the sundry outward means of alteration,
which many ways happen unto ye body, as though they were engraffed and
naturally breeding therein: Do we not see, that through daily and continual
decaying and wasting of some part of the bodily substance, and of the
diminishing and empayring of natural heat, together with the expense of the
spirits and of the simple and similare parts, Age does stealingly creep upon
us, and therewith drines and colones besieges and assayleth us? Whereupon
natural heat being once abated, the ventres and offitiall members serving
for the convenient conueighaunce of humors and distribution of nourishment,
are utterly unabled from accomplishing their offices and performing their
actions: and the power attractiue found either to be very small, or greatly
depraved and out of frame: whereby the body becomes bloudlesse and cold, and
all the strength, comeliness and beauty thereof banished and exiled: it
abounds also and is full pestred with great store of phlegm, and whayish
excrementall baggage, unless it be (accordingly as strength will permit)
discreetely and temperatly dyeted.

In this place therefore, the mark whereat we level and aim, for the good and
orderly usage of Old men in their Diet and trade, be manifest and plain
enough: namely, that there be first a supply and filling of those places in
the body which are emptyed and euacuated, Three ends to be observed in dyeting
old men.
with such nourishment as is agreeable and conformable to the substance
decayed and wasted: secondly, that the distemperature of the body, whether the
same be natural or accidental, be qualified and altered by his contraries:
and thirdly, that there be a convenient and seasonable expelling or purging of
superfluous excrements and noisome humors, by the pores and passages, that
serve to that end and purp^se. All these ends, are sufficiently attained unto,
and all these marks are rightly hit, by expedient receipt and convenient use
of meats and drinks: by wholesome bayning in sweet waters: by moderate
exercises: by gentle rubbings and frictions in the morning with Oil: by
orderly and seasonable sleep: by moderate affections of the mind: and by
using sometime (if need so require) some mild and gentle medicines. Of all
these, we here purpose at this time particularly to entreat.

The sum and effect of all wholesome diet (says Galene) consists in these
four things: Lib. 1. de sanit. tue^. lib. de constitut. (...) Medicinae, and
lib. ad Thrasibulu^.
in taking things convenient to be taken: in doing things expedient to be
done: in drawing out, things requisite to be drawn out: and in such things as
happen outwardly. Which four points the Arabyan Auicen (though not very
learnedly and eloquently, yet (certes) plainly and orderly uttered and
expounded of Old men's diet: his words be these: The effect and sum of their
regiment is, to apply and use that which may heat and humect: namely,
nourishing meats, Bathes or Baynes, Drinks, large sleep, long lying in Bed,
longer (I say) then young men need: continual provoking of urine, expelling
of phlegm from their stomachs by way of the Entrails and Bladder, and
carefully preserving, gently cherishing and mildly maintayning Nature in them.
Tert. primi. doctri. tertie cap. primo.
Thus much out of Auicen.

Furthermore, the apt and profitable use of these wholesome things, especially
consists in these three points: namely, in convenient quantity, expedient
quality, and meet time and manner of using the same. Every one of which, are
briefly and after his accustomed manner appointed and particularly set down by
that worthy Hippocrates: where he says: Exercise, Meat and Drink, Partic.
6. Epidem.
Sleep, Carnal knowledge, let al these be moderatly and measurably used.
Again, neither is fullness and sarietie good: neither long abstinence and
hunger: neither any other things, Partic. 2. Aphor.
failing in the measure that nature requires. And again: Sleep and watch,
as well the one as the other, if they exceed measure, Partic. 2. Aphor. 3.
be hurtful and ill. And appoynting what time is fit and convenient for
exercise, he says in an other place: Let some convenient exercise be used
before meat.

Wherefore, old folks must feed sparingly and moderatly, not inf^rcing them
selves with much at once, but often in a day, as twice or thrice, as their
strength shall seem to require, and be able to bear: and as by custom they
have acquainted themselves. For, if they exceed measure never so little, it
does them much harm. The Constitution of old folks.
Sometime, when as their natural heat is small and weak, they have much
ado, and are not able to concoct and digest much meat and many meals.
Moreover, in this Age, the skin being thick and by reason of the pores of
the body (being now in a manner closed up) subject to obstruction, although
some Old folks that be lusty and strong, do now and then well enough digest
the meat they eat: yet, for that the thin excrements and superfiuities of
their body has no issue or bent to pass out, they can not choose but be much
encombred with ill humors, and have their bodies pestred and surcharged with
abundance of crude diseases, and maladies of no small danger.

We therefore, herein specially imitating Galen (who in his describing of a
familiar and (as it were) a peculiar direction of health for his Countrymen of
Greece, used for an example or pattern, Antiochus the Physician, Telephus the
Grammarian, and certain other Old men that lived till they were of extreme
age) will likewise in this our prescription of the Old man's Dietarie, assay so
to order and deal with him, both for his time, turns and seasons, and also
for the quality and quantity of such things as he must use, that by
conferring our advise and direction, and the means of our usual and familiar
Diet with that tried rule and perfect squire and level of Diet, used by famous
Ancients of old time, we may be able certainly to know and undoubtedly
discern, what is needful to be added, and what is necessary and behoouefull
to be withdrawn and taken away from such Oldmen, for who^ we purposely write
this present Regiment: exactly trying and duly considering withal, the
habit, constitution, plight, disposition, quality and strength of their
bodies: together also with the nature of the Region or country where they have
been bred and dwell, and also the custom or fashion whereunto they have been
most acquainted and enured.

For Aetius words (which he borrowed out of Galens discourse of Antiochus the
Physician being now four score years old) are these: Their meat must be as
it were a little pittance at once, but they must have it thrice in a day. Lib.
4. cap. 13.
Let them have therefore about nine of the clock some new bread well molded
and made, and moderately baked with some excellent good clarified, skummed, and
despumed Honny. About one of the clock: after friction and such exercises as
are fit for old men, and after washing, let them have their diner: and let
them first begin with such things as be good to cleanse and keep the belly
soluble, as Beetes or Mallows: and such Fishes as swim in a clean Sea,
skouring themselves among the hard Rocks, and naturally tossed and beaten
with the wind and Sourges. After they have dyned, let them rest themselves,
taking a quiet nappe a while upon their Bed, and let them walk a little.
When they suppe at night, let them eat no Fish, but choose meats of the best
nourishment, and such as will not easily corrupt and putrify: as namely a
Chicken, or a Bird boiled in a single broth.

This sentence, opinion and prescription of Aetius is confirmed also by Auicen,
and after his blunt and barbarous manner, avouched and set down in these
wordee: The nourishment of Oldmen must be given unto them by little and little,
3. Primi. Doctri. 3. cap. 2.
and they must every day be twice or thryse nourished by little and little,
according as they be of digestion, strength and debilitie: and let them eat at
eight of the clock some bread well made with Honny, and about one of the clock
also after they have been conveniently bayned and washed. Afterward let them
soften, mollify, lowse and make solluble their belly, with such things as we
shall set down: and toward night let them eat some good nourishing meat: and
if they be strong of nature, and have good digesting stomakes, they may suppe
the more largely. And in all their meats, let them especially take heed they
meddle not with any such food as engenders Melancholy or Phlegm: Let them
also beware of al such nourishment as is hoate, sharp and drying, unless it
be purposely used for some special respect of medicine.

Thus somewhat confusedly, disorderly, unaptly and vnrespectively does Auicen
iumble and shuffle up in a heap, as a general rule for every Old man, that,
which particularly and example sake both Galen and Aetius set down only for
Antiochus: Whereas the same Galene, writes not only this: but that other Old
men also lived long, with Milk and Honey alone, with bread and other strong and
solid meats.

By this Ordinary thus prescribed and taught us by Greeks and Arabians,
Supper must be larger then Dinner.
this may we plainly gather contrary to the opinion of some later Phisicions,
that supper ought to be larger, and taken in greater quantity then dinner:
Which thing Celsus (treating of that diet which is best to be observed in
Winter) seems to allow, and in few words to approve. For his counsel is to
eat meat in the day but only once: and if that once, be a dinner, he
affirms it to be so much the better. If he have eaten and drunk but little in
the day, or have fed upon such food as gives but small and weak nourishment,
he may the boldlier eat flesh and other strong nourishing meats in the
evening to supper: for that the nights are at that time of the year of a great
length, and sleep also very long: Whereby their nourishment must by good
reason be then the greater, and the more in quantity. For by Sleep in the
night is digestion and concoction best performed: which in the day time upon
any light occasion, through affection of the mind and unseasonable exercises,
are many times hindered and unorderly done; as by Galene in his seventh Method
of curing the dry distemperance of the Ventricle is notably declared.

But in prescribing of any Diet whatsoever, as well for the whole, as for the
sick, we must ever have a regard (as Hippocrates counsels) to Custom: 1.
Partic. Aphor. 17.
and mark well how a man has of long continuance enured himself. For we see
some, that at dinner will eat more largely then at supper: and contrariwise,
some others that will eat and drink less at dinner, then at supper. Which
custom Galen in many places wills at no hand to be altered or changed in
an Oldman. Custom may not be broken and altered. 5. Sanit. tuend.
And thus much for the manner and order of meats and drinks, as well at dinner
as supper, most agreeable for Oldmen.

It remains now, that we likewise co^pendiously and briefly set down what
Meats be unwholesome, or be of ill juice, and give naughty nourishment. This
therefore must first and principally be noted, that all Meats and drinks in
general, yielding gross, Gross meats of tough nourishment to be avoided
clammy and tough nourishment, are unto old men very hurtful and dangerous: as
Frumentie, Cheese, roasted Eggs, Cockles, Onions, Scallions, Mushromes,
Lintels, Oysters, etc.

Old men therefore must use to eat such meats as be easy in concoction,
quickly nourishing, soon alterable into the substance of the body: of good
juice and commendable nourishment, without any store of excrements. Let their
bread be well baked, thoroughly molded, Bread.
sufficiently leauened, and moderately salted, reasonably boulted and fined
from the Branne.

And let them take heed they eat not bread when it is new, or when it is ill
baked, or unleavened, and that which is made of the finest Wheat Flower and
purest Meal. The bread yt is made of that kind of Wheat, This Zea or Spelta,
is thought to be our Rye.
which is called Zea or Spelt, is better, holsomer, and fitter for them, and so
is Barley bread, although it nourish nothing so much as the other.

Cakebread not wholesome.
They must also forbear and eschew all Pastlarie and Cakebread, that is made
of fine Paste, Butter, Milk, Cheese, Honey and Sugar.

Flesh.
The flesh of such forefooted beasts as for hugeness of body, Oldage,
leanenesse, and hardness of flesh be any way notable, are likewise for the^
noisome and hurtful. The best for the^, is the flesh of a Chicken, of a young
Pullet, or wild birds, breeding upon Hills and Mountains: as again, they
be the worst, that live and feed in Fennes, Ditches, Pondes, Pooles, and
standing Waters.

Fish.
All big bodied and great fishes, rammish in taste and strong in sent, oily,
fattie slymie, tough and clammy in juice, are specially to be avoided. Those
that live about clear rocks, and stony places, and be much beaten and tossed
with the continual Surges and waves of the Sea, (by means whereof they are
not embroyned with filthiness) are greatly commended and accounted the
holsomest.

The best Eggs be those, that are rear, Eggs.
poched, and as it were half roasted, so that they may be supped up. The worst
are, those that be fried, hard and roasted.

All manner of Whitemeates made of Milk, is generally forbidden, Milkmeates
as very hurtful and unwholesome for Old men: for that they engender the stone
in the reins, and otherwise easily and quickly procure obstructions.

But Cheese namely must be forborne, Cheese.
and take heed of, specially if it be old, hard or rotten. For over and beside
the toughness and grossness of the nourishment which it has: there is in it
also a juice engendring much store of corrupt humors. Yet that Cheese that is
made of sower milk, Buttermilk Cheese.
may safely be eaten with a little Honny, so it be before other meat, to louse
and pourge the belly. Likewise, in Summer when the weather is extremely hot,
new milk warm from the vdder, may be given them by it self, without any
other meat joined with it: foreseen, that a little Sugar or Salt, or pure
Honny be put unto it and so stirred together, for fear least it congeale and
curdle in their Stomachs.

Fruictes.
Timely ripe Somer fruits may safely be eaten, so it be before other meats, and
at beginning of meals: as Cherries, Prunes, Peaches, etc. Otherwise there are
none good and wholesome, except ripe grapes hanged up a while before they be
eaten, Damask, or rather Spanish Prunes, and ripe and dry Figs. Dates also,
and Pyne Apples are not good, for that they cause gnawing in the stomach, make
gross juice, and engender obstructions or stoppings in the Liver and Spleen.

Pulse.
All manner of Pulse is also to be eschewed, unless it be the decoction or
Broth of Beans, Peasen and Chiches.

Pothearbes growing in gardens, and good to eat.
Among herbs for the pot, and usual to be eaten, the best in this case are,
Lettise, Malowes, Orange, Blite, white Beetes, Sorrel, Borage, Buglosse,
Cheruile and Parsely.

Wine.
Wine, to Old men is right sovereign and cordial: and to their nature is most
profitable and agreeable, because it does properly heat and moisten the body.
And that Wine is best commended for Old men which is thin and fine in
substance, and yellow or reddish of color. For it heateth all their members,
and it purges by urine the watrie or whayish substance of their blood.

Ale and Beer for Old men's ordinary drink is thought to be nothing so
wholesome. Al water also, either drunk alone, or mingled with Wine, is accounted
unwholesome and hurtful, unless (Custom being to the contrary) it has been
used to be drunk and mingled with some such meats as serve to louse and
mollify the belly.

Old men being much troubled with the Gout, and the Stone, Old men troubled
with the Gowte, or with the Stone.
if now and then in their broths (which they use to provoke urine) they put
some quantity of oenomell or Meade, they shall find a singular ease.

Thus much touching the quality of Meats and Drinks most profitable for Old
men. Let us now semblably set down a few words, and show in what measure
and order it shall be most expedient for them to take them. Order and measure for
Old men's feeding.
For seeing that al Old men for ye most part, are by nature costiue, and have
hard and dry bellies: it shall be good for them, always to eat and send
before their other Meats, such things as have virtue, gently to louse and
mollify their Bellies. 3. Prim. Doctri. 3. cup. 2.
Auicen his counsel tends thereunto, where he says: Such pot herbs and
fruits as Old men should eat, are the wild Carret, the white Beete, Parsely
and a little quantity of Leekes, which they ought to eat, being picked and
condite with Almure and Oil, and specially at the beginning of their meals,
that they may extenuate and cleanse the body, and make it soluble, and cause the
wine to pass well. Thus much out of Auicen: which he, word for word, borrowed
out of Galen and Aetius in the places before recited.

Sundry dishes at one meal hurtful.
In meat therefore, let Old men moderately use themselves, and let them in any
wise eschew sundry Dishes and diverse sorts of meat at one and the same meal:
Let them eat no more at one time then their stomachs can well concoct and
digest.

Neither must oldmen be careless in the choice and ^requenting of their
exercises. Exercise*
For by idleness and sitting still there comes great inconvenience: whereas by
moderate exercise and stirring, there comes very much good and commodity. In
the morning therefore it shall do them much good, before they fall to any
meat, to use some moderate exercise, and some gentle walking abroad.

But after Meat, all immoderate walking and vehement stirring is utterly
forbidden them: and in steed thereof they are to be enjoined to rest, and to
repose them selves, that the meat in their Stomach may leisurely and
conveniently be digested, and not too hastily conueighed into the rest of the
members before they be sufficiently concocted.

If for some weakness, debilitie or infirmity of the feet, he be not able to
walk, let him ride or be carried abroad a while. Fricasies and Rubbings in the
morning with warm Oil, Fricasie and rubbing, or soft stroaking over.
and soft hands while he is yet fasting, may supply and stand in steed of
other exercise.

And this Fricasie or Rubbing must be done downward, that is to say, beginning
at the upper parts of the body, and so bringing the hand downward toward ye
lower parts. But for such as be discrased in the upper parts of their bodies,
as they that have the swimming in their Head, or be troubled with the Headache
or pain in their Neck, or grieved with the Apoplexy, it shall be best to apply
their Fricasies, Rubbings and exercises to their neither parts only. If they
be subject to the Gowte and grieves in their joints, it shall be very good
for them, often to stir and exercise their arms and hands. But as in all
things else: so in this, special regard must be had to Custom: that Oldemen be
not rashly and suddenly drawn by and by to a diverse course and contrary order,
either in their usage of meat and drink, or in any other kind of exercise or
respect whatsoever. For, to alter the habit and long continued custom of an
Oldman, is both hard and dangerous.

Furthermore, Oldme^s bodies through impotencie and debilitie of the nourishing
faculty, are encombred and pestered commonly with watrish excrements, and raw
humors: whereby they have need of such helps as may provoke bryne, extenuate
the clamminesse and toughness of those humors, and also to use such
medicinable meats, as be abstersive, and expel all dangers threatened
thereby. But forasmuch as all such be sharp and hot in operation, it is
therefore required in the Physician, to be therein very circumspect and
careful, that he direct the drift of all his hot Medicines and meats to
this end, partly thereby to help forward concoction, and to make
proportionable distribution of the meat into all the members of the body: and
partly, to open obstructions, and to expel all phlegmatic and clammie
matter: and not flatly to dry up the body, and so consequently to bring the
whole Aged habit into a more coldness and refrigeration: which thing we see
some ignorant Empericks and Practitioners in Physic commonly to do, who
never think themselves to have showed sufficient proof of their dapper skill
upon the bodies of their Patients, unless they straight ways with some strong
solutiue, they make a clean riddance of all that is in their weak bellies.

In Old men therefore, to make them soluble, to purge phlegm and to louse
their bellies, it shall be effectual and sufficient enough to use Olives
condite, and Capers pickled in Oil, or Honny eaten with bread, Mercury,
Mallows, Blite, the decoction of Colewortes or Cabages, a Fig now and then
eaten with a little Seen, and some good Turpentine as much in quantity as two
or three Walnuttes. For, this not only mollifieth and louseth the belly, but
mundifieth also and cleanses the entrails, opens the obstructio^s of the
Lunges, sknowreth the Kidneyes, and drives out gravel: the proportion of his
Receipt is appointed to be one ounce.

Things good to provoke urine.
To provoke urine in Old men, Parselie both root and seed, and Saxifrage are
of a singular virtue. And if they mistrust or suspect the gravel in their
Kidneyes, or be subject to the Gowte and grief in their Joints, it shall be
good for them (says Galen) to use Meade or oenomel: 3. De sanit. ^^en.
so that for the Gowte and joint sickness, they add thereunto Parselie: and
for the Stone and gravel, some Betonie.

Beside the premises, there be yet other things no less to be respected:
namely, such as are outwardly incident unto us: of which sort are these: Air,
Water, Fire, Oil, Bathes, Sleep, and Affections of the mind.

Air therefore must be chosen, Best air for dwellings.
according to the nature and season of the year, and enterchaungeable state of
the weather and air encompassing us, somewhile hot, and somewhile but
somewhat wharme. It must not be near to any standing Pooles, stinking Ditches,
Fennes, Marshes, common Sinkes, Draughtes or Priuies, ye serve for great
multitudes of people: it must be such as has by turns, one while the East,
and an other while, the West wind freely blowing over it.

For uses of the Kitchen: Best water.
the best and wholesomest is Fountain or Well water, pure, clear, having no
evident quality or sensible sign, either of taste or smell, and at the place
of his arising out of the ground, looking toward the East. For if it run on
hard Stones and peebles, and have his prospect toward ye North, where the Sun
beams give no shine nor heat thereunto, it is to be misliked and attoyded, as
raw, hard and unpleasant, engendring windiness and fretting in the Entrails
and hypocondricall parts. Partic. 5. Aphor. 26.
Hippocrates sets down sundry notes and means, whereby to know and try
which is the best Water: for that (says he) is the best water that is
lightest. And the lightest water is that, which will soon be hot and soon
cold. Also that, whereof comes least skumme or froath when it boyleth. Also
dip linen clothes into sundry waters, and afterward lay them forth to dry:
look then which is soonest dry, and that wherein it was dipped, is the best
water, the purest and the wholesomest. The lightest water (says Celsus) is
Raynewater: Lib. 2. cap. 17.
because it is most subtle, and of all others most penetratiue. The next is
that, which gussheth out of a Spring. The third is of a clean running River:
The fourth is Cunduite water: The fifth, the water of Snow and Ice: worse then
that, is the water of standing Pooles and Pondes: and worst of al, is that
which is of Fennie Ditches.

Bathes.
Bathes or Baynes of sweet waters in the Spring, Summer, and Autumn,
enterchaungeably using therewith the decoction of hot herbs and roots, be
excellent good and profitable for Old folks. For they open the pores being
pursed and drawn together through dryness, they do mollify the hard and
stiff parts: they disperse by euaporation the abundance of humors: they
leisurely draw out sweat and excrementall matter: finally, they do humect
and calefie the substantial and solid parts of the body, with a pleasant,
warm, vaporous, and dewie moisture.

In Winter and such seasons wherein the weather is cold, Winter.
it shall be good to keep themselves in a warm Chamber with a Chimney, having
fire: for so do we read that Antiochus at such times used to do.

Competent and measurable Sleep is best, Sleep.
being of seven or eight hours continuance. But at any hand, Sleep must be
forborne and not used immediately after meat, neither must it be either too
much or too large.

Affections and perturbations of the mind, Affections and perturbations of the
mynde^
as they greatly endamage and annoye every Age: so to Old folks especially
they be most hurtful and dangerous. For they alter their bodies, and utterly
dispossess them from their natural consistencie: they dry up the bones, and
banish away the vital spirit. Old folks therefore must by reason, master
their affections, and by discretion qualify all accidents whatsoever: they
must retain a merry mind, and settle themselves in the state of
tranquillity. Let them recreate and solace themselves with Histories of
notable things aforetime exployted, and with the conference and company of
their assured loving friends: that, all dumpish, clowdie, sorrowful, sullen,
lumpish cares, and grieves being utterly put to flight, they may with merry and
cheereful minds the more quietly and fervently addict themselves unto godly
meditations, and to the service of God.

FINIS.
To the Courteous Reader.
TO supply some certain boyd pages, which otherwise at this Impression would
have been blanck, I have thought very convenient, (the matter and argument
considered) to annexe hereunto a brief and compe^dious Abstract of a Physicians
duty, and of such points as by Conscience and Oath are liable unto his
charge and function. The which I have suffered here to pass abroad into ye
world under the name and title of Hippocrates Oath. Marvel not thou at the
heathnish names of those putatiue Gods, by whom he swears, (which
notwithstanding I have here simply and faithfully set down and delivered, even
as I found them in my original Copy:) but rather fear and tremble, and take
thereby occasion to yield most humble and hearty thanks unto Almighty God for
enlightening thee with a better knowledge: considering that in the severity of
his Justice he might likewise have dealt with thee. Frame thy self therefore in
obedience to live according to the squired rule of his most holy word: for
better were it, not to know the way of righteousness at all, then after
knowledge thereof, to turn by profane life from the holy Commandment. These
articles are in number but few, and yet in them (few as they be) there is
nothing lacking: again, they be so sufficiently large, that there cannot any
(without some prejudice to the Art, and discredit to the Artist) be well
spared. As when thou have advisedly perused and read them over, I persuade my
self, thou will frankly and willingly confess.

Farewell. At Little Ilford this viij, day of January. 1586. Thine, in the
Lord, Thomas Newton.

Hippocrates his Oath.
I Take Apollo the Physician, and Aesculapius, and Hygias and Panaceas, the
sons of Aesculapius, and all the Gods and Goddesses to witness: That I (so
much as in me shall lie, and so far as my judgment and skill shall stretch)
will observe and perform all the things contained in this Oath and in this
Book. viz.

That I shall yield and give unto my Master, of whom I have been taught, and
by who^ I have been trained in this Art, no less reverence and duty, the^ to
mine own natural Father that begat me. That I shall be conversant in life with
him: And that I shall to the uttermost of my power and ability, minister unto
him all such things as I shall understand he has need of.

That I shall make no less account of his Children, the^ of mine own Brethren,
and so to repute and take them.

That I shall not be squeimish to bestow my skill in this Art upon the poor
and needy, freely, without either fee or other covenant certainly agreed upon.

That I shall freely, faithfully, and truly deliver all my Precepts and
Secrets unto mine own and also to my Masters Children, and to other such
Scholars as have addicted, vowed, bound, and sworn themselves to the Studies
and Laws of Physic, and not to any others.

In curing of the Sick, I shall use to the uttermost of my power, knowledge,
and judgment, such things as be good, wholesome, sovereign and profitable:
That I shall not defer, ne linger my cure longer then I need, keeping my
Patient thereby the longerwhile in grief and pain: and that I shall not offer
any wrongful dealing to any manner of person.

That I shall not (although I be thereunto required) give deadly poison to any
person: neither counsel the same to any other: nor give it to any woman being
with child, to kill the Infant in her womb.

That I shall preserve and keep both my life and mine Art, free and clear
from just obloquie and slander, and from all such occasions as may justly
disparage and emblemish the same.

That I shall not presume to cut any persons diseased with the Stone, but
refer that action to others skilful therein.

That, unto what house soever I shall go for the practice of mine Art, I
shall only respect and carefully employe my self to relieve and recure the
party diseased, my Patient, unto whom and for whom I purposely go.

That I shall avoid, eschew and renounce all wrong, all lewdness, all
filthiness, al wanton daliaunce and venereous actions, whether they be women's
bodies that I have in cure, or men's bodies: and whether they be the bodies of
Free, or of Bondmen.

That whatsoever during the time of any cure I shall either see or hear, or
otherwise (beside my cure) shall know in any many life, understanding that
thing to be such as requires secrecy and silence, I shall not utter nor be
wray to any manner of person, but shall herein faithfully keep his counsel.

To these Articles comprised in this my present Oath, I protest mine obedience
and assent: the which if I inuiolably and faithfully observe and keep, my
prayer and wish is, that all things as well in my life as in mine Art and
profession, may have prosperous success and happy end; with perpetual fame,
renown and glory: as contrariwise, if I treacherously transgress, or
wilfully herein forswear my self, let all things fall out unto me contrary.

FINIS.

