THE HVMBLE REQVEST OF HIS MAJESTY'S loyal Subjects, the Governor and the
Company late gone for NEW ENGLAND; To the rest of their Brethren, in and of
the Church of ENGLAND.

For the obtaining of their Prayers, and the removal of suspicions, and
misconstructions of their Intentions.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN BELLAMIE. 1630.

THE HVMBLE REQVEST OF HIS Majesty's loyal Subjects, the Governor and the
Company late gone for New England; to the rest of their Brethren in and of the
Church of ENGLAND.
Reverend FATHERS and BRETHREN:
THE general rumor of this solemn Enterprise, wherein our selves with others,
through the providence of the Almighty, are engaged, as it may spare us the
labor of imparting our occasion unto you, so it gives us the more
encouragement to strengthen our selves by the procurement of the prayers and
blessings of the Lords faithful Servants: For which end we are bold to have
recourse unto you, as those whom God has placed nearest his throne of Mercy;
which as it affords you the more opportunity, so it imposes the greater bond
upon you to intercede for his people in all their straights, we beseech you
therefore by the mercies of the LORD JESUS to consider us as your Brethren,
standing in very great need of your help, and earnestly imploring it. And
howsoever your charity may have met with some occasion of discouragement
through the misreport of our intentions, or through the disaffection, or
indiscretion, of some of us, or rather, amongst us: for we are not of those
that dream of perfection in this world; yet we desire you would be pleased to
take notice of the principals, and body of our company, as those who esteem it
our honor, to call the Church of England, from whence we rise, our dear
Mother, and cannot part from our native Country, where she specially resideth,
without much sadness of heart, and many tears in our eyes, ever acknowledging
that such hope and part as we have obtained in the common salvation, we have
received in her bosom, and sucked it from her breasts: we leave it not
therefore, as loathing that milk wherewith we were nourished there, but blessing
God for the parentage and education, as members of the same body shall always
rejoice in her good, and unfainedly grieve for any sorrow that shall ever
betide her, and while we have breath, syncerely desire and endeavor the
continuance and abundance of her welfare, with the enlargement of her bounds in
the kingdom of CHRIST JESUS.

Be pleased therefore Reverend FATHERS and BRETHREN to help forward this work
now in hand; which if it prosper, you shall be the more glorious, howsoever
your judgment is with the LORD, and your reward with your GOD. It is an usual
and laudable exercise of your charity to commend to the prayers of your
Congregations the necessities and straights of your private neighbors; Do the
like for a Church springing cut of your own bowels. We conceive much hope
that this remembrance of us, if it be frequent and fervent, will be a most
prosperous gale in our sails, and provide such a passage and welcome for us,
from the GOD of the whole earth, as both we which shall find it, and your
selves, with the rest of our friends, who shall hear of it, shall be much
enlarged to bring in such daily returns of Thanks-givings, as the specialties
of his Providence and Goodness may justly challenge at all our hands. You are
not ignorant, that the Spirit of GOD stirred up the Apostle Paul to make
continual mention of the Church of Philippi (which was a Colonie from Rome)
let the same Spirit, we beseech you, put you in mind, that are the Lords
remembrancers, to pray for us without ceasing (who are a weak Colony from your
selves) making continual request for us to GOD in all your prayers.

What we entreat of you that are the Ministers of GOD, that we also crave at
the hands of all the rest of our Brethren, that they would at no time forget us
in their private solicitations at the throne of Grace.

If any there be, who through want of clear intelligence of our course, or
tenderness of affection toward us, cannot conceive so well of our way as we
could desire, we would entreat such not to despise us, nor to desert us in
their prayers and affections, but to consider rather, that they are so much the
more bound to express the bowels of their compassion toward us, remembering
always that both Nature and Grace, does ever bind us to relieve and rescue
with our utmost and speediest power, such as are dear unto us, when we
conceive them to be running uncomfortable hazards.

What goodness you shall extend to us in this or any other Christian kindness,
we your Brethren in CHRIST JESUS shall labor to repay in what duty we are
or shall be able to perform, promising so far as God shall enable us to give
him no rest on your behalfes, wishing our heads and hearts may be as fountains
of tears for your everlasting welfare, when we shall be in our poor Cottages
in the wilderness, over-shadowed with the spirit of supplication, through the
manifold necessities and tribulations which may not altogether unexpectedly,
nor, we hope, unprofitably befall us. And so commending you to the grace of GOD
in CHRIST, we shall ever rest

From Yarmouth aboard the Arbella April 7. 1630. Your assured Friends and
Brethren, Io: Winthrope Gov. Charles Fines. Rich: Saltonstall. Isaac Johnson.
Tho: Dudley. George Philipps. etc. William Coddington etc.



