The 14. of September. A RELATION OF MANY MEMORAble Passages from ROME, ITALY,
SPAIN, FRANCE, GERMANY, the LOVV-COVNTRIES, the PALATINATE, and other Places:

WITH Some Famous Exploits performed at BERGEN-VPZOM since the 4. of this
Month, Stilo Nouo.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, Barthol. Downs, and William Shefford,
1622.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

ADVERTISEMENTS From Foreign Parts.
SIR,
I Have (though later) sent you the occurrents of News from diverse places; If
they come not to your hands so soon as peradventure you do expect, impute it
not to any negligence or want of good will toward you, but rather, for that I
would first be possessed truly of the truth of what I send you, which I can by no
means be if I shall post you over News upon the first report, which can
neither be so true, nor so particular, and therefore unless I receive writing
(from each several place, of each several action) from men of the best
credit, I will not offer it to your serious view, neither will I write you the
same things which I writ you before as near as I can; yet peradventure some
passages may be reported again which the circumstance of time may make
different: So for present, commending unto you such things as I have received,
by this Post, do take leave,

From Don Hage, this 6. of September, 1622.
FROM VIENNA the eighteenth of August, 1622.
LAst Sunday, had the eldest son of the late Marquess Edwardsten Fortunatus
of Baden Audience of the Emperor, and solicited very earnestly to be
enstalled into the upper Marquessat of Baden.

His Majesty and the Empress, with the young Prince and Princess, were last
Monday in the Jesuits College with great devotion, where they received the
holy Sacrament.

His majesty caused his Privy Council to sit yesterday, where he himself
was present.

This day they went all together with a strong Conuoy to the Cloister Nieuborgh
to hunting.

The Prince of Lichtenstein, is looked for here daily to receive the Order of
the Golden-Fleece.

Likewise here is looked daily for certain Commissioners, namely, the Lord
Gondtacker of Lichtenstein, the Lord Heghenmuller, the Lord Doctor Mosmuller,
the Lord John Baptista Spindler of Egh, besides the Lord George Mullner the
Secretary of Lucts, which are to be sent into the Country of Enns, to enquire
in all places of the Rebels; And according to their offenses to give them just
Judgment: What further will ensue time will reveal.

From Spyer the 26. of August.
THe 21. of this Month the Enemy shot very fiercely upon Heidelbergh, so that
it was heard here very easily, but they within defend themselves bravely. We
also understand, that those of Franckendall are resolved to resist and defend
themselves.

From Worms the 29. of August.
Certain days ago the Archduke Leopold went from hence again, and left
some of his Forces here, taking with him two Companies of the Towns Garrisons;
his whole Army lies round about this City.

The Crabats pilledge as far even unto Franckendall, all the soldiers which
they light on there abouts, they put unto the sword. Our Citizens were forced
to deliver all their great Underwood unto them to make fagots of them, to fill
up the Towne-dirches withal, for the same Town is given booty unto the
Crabats.

From Hanaw the first of September. 1622.
THe Enemies shot daily at Heidlebergh upon the Schliebacher side, for the
Bauarians have taken in a Sconce beneath the Park, which Count John of Nassaw
did raise, notwithstanding as yet they do little hurt.

The Garrison at Tilpergh did sally forth not long since, and took those
Instruments and Engines, of the which the Bauarians would have made a Bridge
over the River of Necker, and carried them into the Castle.

Even now there was brought from Stein to Laudenbourgh, some 30. small Boats,
whether they shall be used to the making of a Bridge or not, we do not know.

Leopoldus is come to Worms again, but his forces lie at Landan and
thereabouts, and because it is reported, that Count Mansfield is to come up
again, all the passages are strongly beset against his ariuall here.

From Franckfort the 2. of September.
WE have certain news out of the Palatinate, that the Archduke Leopoldus is
gone from Worms toward Spire again, but has left some forces there for a
certain time, whose number increases daily more and more, and the most part
of his Army lies round about the same City, in the next Villages adjoining
thereunto. It is supposed that Frankendale shall be set upon, which Town is
resolved to defend it self to the last man.

Heidlebergh is besieged again by the Bauarians, as already is mentioned, and
play very fiercely with their Ordnance upon it.

From Cullen the 3. of September.
THe last Sunday they began to shoot with two half Cannons on this side very
hotly, upon the Fort Pap^nmuts, but that did not continue long, for they within
discharged their Ordnances from two of their Bulwarks upon the enemies
batteries, and dismounted both their half Cannons, one of them having the
mouth of him shot away, the other burst in the side. And the same battery by
the means of the often shooting is so ruinated and spoiled, that it is thought
the Country people will have a fortnights work before they can repair it
again.

Few days ago they of the Fort went abroad into the land of Berghen, from
whence they took certain Cattle, and carried them into the Sconse with them.

From Dusseldorpe the 7. of September.
THere was carried last thursday from hence two pieces of Artillery more into
the Leager before the Fort Papenmuts, they within as we understand have great
store of provision, and they practice daily, yet in the like manner to provide
for themselves having at this instant such good opportunity, seeing the Sconse
before it upon the cleue side is quite battered down by them within.

From Dordrechtden the 3. of September.
THe 20. of August, in the evening, from seven of the clock until three after
midnight, there was a great assault given before Berghen up zome, wherein were
slain eight hundred of the enemies side, amongst which were many great
persons, besides six hundred of them were hurt, and certain of them taken
Prisoners: of our side there was slain 30. and 80. wounded, and the enemy was
forced to forsake the half Moon, but kept the Liuie.

Spinola did write Letters unto the Arch-dutchesse, the contents whereof was,
that he must have more forces to become Master of Bergen up zome, entreating
her Highness to write to the aforesaid Monsire Tilly, for certain thousand
Soldiers to assist him.

From Gochdan the 2. of September.
THe 30. of August, Count Henry Vandenbergh, arose with his whole Camp before
this Town, with an intent to beat Count Mansfield, with the help of Don
Cordua, but when he perceived that Count Mansfield, and the Duke of Brunswicke
were arrived with their forces in Brabant, he came the same day back again to
Venlo, where he marched over the bridge and quartered his whole Army about six
thousand strong at Venlo, and in certain Villages thereabouts.

From the Fort called Gravenweerdt, or Schen ckessconse the 25. of August. the
old style.
The Prince of Orange, lies as yet here within the Fort, and his Camp on the
other side the River Wael, in their old quarter. Certain days ago, when he
understood, that Count Henry Vandenbergh, was determined to make himself
Master of the Town Griet, he sent in all haste 2000. Muskateers thither, and
other necessaries belonging to the defense of the same Town, and caused it to
be strengthened round about. Likewise we understand that the above named Count
was gone from the Town Goch, taking his way toward Vente over the bridge, yet
returns back again, sending certain of his troops toward our Camp, to
try their fortunes.

Intending to make an assault upon those quarters where our horse men lay, but
this was betimes discovered by some of our forces, wherefore there rose an
Alarm in our leaguer, by reason whereof, the enemy saved themselves by flight.

From the Camp of his Excellency the twenty six of August, there went from
hence, Monsieur Marquet, with four other persons in a boat into Breda, where
he is to stay, six or seven days, the reason whereof is as yet kept secret.

Certain days ago, there went out of our Camp, two thousand Swimmers, but
whether is not known, in regard they are not as yet returned.

The Prince has sent for certain boats from Arnhem Ni^umegen, and other
places there-abouts (as we understand) to break up his Camp. Also we hear
that certain soldiers the 25.26.27. in the night time took shipping, and
that many Officers have shipped their baggage already.

We have certain advertisement that Count Mansfeild and the Duke of Brunswick
are safely arrived at Tilborgh about Breda, where daily comes more and more
unto them, which by the means of their wearines could not follow, so that it
is hoped within few days their Camp will be by the fourth part strengthened,
what enterprise they will afterward attempt, time will disclose.

This week and the next all the Directors and Assistants for the West Indian
Company, shall be chosen in these united Provinces. God grant that the same
Navigation may have a prosperous proceeding and a fortunate return.

From Rome, the 6. of August.
The Persian Ambassador has requested the Pope that he would give way to his
Master, that he might bring in the Greeks Religion into his kingdom. And that
he would be pleased to exhort the Christian Princes to make war against the
Turk, to recover the holy Land which the Pope has promised to consider of,
and to return him an answer.

At Naples are five Galleys prepared and furnished with Spanish soldiers,
under the Command of Don Francisco Mauriques to join with the Spanish Navy:
The Pope has likewise consented that his Galleys arrived at Civita Vecchia
from Naples, should aid the Spanish Navy.

The Council of State in Spain, has concluded that six hundred thousand
crowns should be made over for the defense of Veltolina. And fourteen
Hollanders have fought near Lifebon, with nine of the King of Spaines ships,
where of they sunk seven.

From Venice, the 12 of August.
From Millaine we are certified, that the Fort of Saint Marie in Engedin holds
out as yet, and that eight hundred Spanish, and Leopoldish Soldiers are come
into Veltoline. And the King of Spain was to take his Journey into Italy. The
Ambassador of this Seignory, the Lord Lando, is looked for here speedily from
England.

From Breslaw, the 14. of August.
The Emperor will send three thousand Hungarians and other Soldiers into this
Country to defend the same, And will put one thousand Spaniards in Garrison
for this City, but the Citizens are displeased with it, where upon the Duke
of Saxon will send his Garrisons here again.

Eight days ago, there happened a great fire at Poesen which burned down the
Cathedral Church, with two Steeples.

The Prince of Poland, is marched with certain thousands toward Grotra, to
besiege the City of Riga and to pursue the Swedens. And the King of Pole
himself in person was suddenly to follow.

Yesterday, was held a general Muster, and here passed by three hundred
Muskets which were taken out of the storehouse of the States of Silesia. And
the Imperials intend very speedily with all the force they can to assault
Glats. The young Count of Thurne has raised five sconses before the city, for
the defense of it. And a hundred of his forces went a pillaging toward
Frankenbergh belonging to the Abbot of Coments, And surprising their two
troops of horse, they slew the one, and took the other, with the Abbots
brother, and a principal Gentleman prisoner, and got a rich booty, and
afterward they made themselves Masters of Wunschelbergh, and having pillaged
it, went their ways.

From Vienna, the 17. of August.
The 13. of this month is the Emperor and the Empress received here in great
state and pomp, and the Empress has been presented with many rich gifts,
and principally by the Jews, which presented unto her a silver and gilt basen
and Ewer.

This week are sent again sixty Wagons with munition, and amongst them six
hundred bullets, which waighed 45. pound a piece, going to the surprise of
Glats, and there are to follow yet more, and about four thousand Soldiers,
which the Emperor has at Odenburgh with him, and the Emperor has sent the
Count of Harderk besides a Secretary of the Court, to the young Count of
Thurne, to persuade him to surrender the Town to the Emperor.

From Prague, the 18. of August.
Last Satterday, the Duke of Lichstenteene departed from Vienna, In the mean
time here are appointed certain Lords to be Deputies in his absence.

From Glats, we hear that the Garrisons do great damage by pillaging,
making their excursions as far as Brauna, taking all the booty they can get,
and carrying it into the City, whereupon the soldiers in the Garrisons of
Moravia and Silesia, have order given them to march thither, to make the siege
the stronger. Notwithstanding the Old Count of Harderk had order to persuade
the young Count of Thurne, to surrender the Town, he could not obtain it of
him, but departed with this answer, that he expected aid out of Hungary.

From Lipsich the 21. day of August.
The Duke of Saxons child is Christened, and the feast with great state and
pomp ended, and the company departed with much joy and content.

The Lectorall day appointed at Regensburgh, is to be kept the first of
October; The Elector of Saxon, does purpose to come himself in Person, if the
rest will do the like, otherwise he will send his Ambassador. And he had
rather it had been kept at Nurnburgh.

From Franckfort the 24. day of August.
The Magistrates of Franckfort, considering their fair to be at hand, have
besought Monsieur Tilly, being General for the Emperor, and the Duke of
Bavaria, that he would give command to his officers to keep the ways clear,
of all Robbers and Thieves; That the Merchants might have free access to come
and trade there, it being not only beneficial and necessary for the Germane
nation and the Empire, but likewise for the Elector and diverse States of this
Empire.

Whereupon there was the twelfth of this month, Pattents published by the
foresaid Monsieur Tilly at Laymen, where his chief quarter is, To all his
Generals, Colonels, Captains, Lieutenants, and other officers, that they
shall let pass, and give free access to all Merchants and others, as long as
the said Franckfort Mart is to last, from the nineteenth of September ensuing,
to the thirtieth, more and above eight days before the Mart, and eight days
after, to let them pass freely and securely with their goods and Merchandise
upon his Highness displeasure and penalty of their lives.

Last Sunday the Bavarians took in, Necker ground in the Palatinate, and next
Monday following, Neckerr^u, whereupon yesterday they besieged Heidlebergh.

Last Monday in the evening, the Archduke Leopoldus, with three Companies of
soldiers, was let into Worms, very willingly by the Citizens.

From Cullen the 30. of August.
Concerning the besieging of the Fort called Papenmuts, there is little or
nothing past of any consequence, for they have ceased of shooting into it, upon
the Bergh side, because it was to no purpose, but as yet they work very hard
on this side, upon the battery at Rhynetorpe, further news, time will make
known.

There arrived certain hundreths of soldiers, in the Bishopric of
Halberstadt, who did for a time much hurt in that country, whereupon Count
Mansfeild, who keeps his Court at Weringrata. Likewise the Abbess at
Quodlinburgh, did raise in all have two thousand men, whom they carried into
Halberstadt, where the Citizens shut their gates, and sallyed out upon them.
But when the soldiers entreated that they might pass quietly away, they took
prisoner their General, and Captains, and Commanders, the rest were most of
them destroyed and scattered, and diverse of them, came to Mayden-Burgh, where
they reported, that they will come again, stronger then they were, and fetch
their pay.

From Berghen up Zome the 2. of September.
We hear that of late, the 29. of August. being Monday in the evening, the
enemy made another great assault upon the trenches, but they were always
beaten off again, with the loss of about some five hundred men, being for the
most part almost all Spaniards, In the mean time they short with their Cannon
very fiercely into the Town through certain houses and Turrets, yet without
any great hurt, so that hitherto they have prevailed but little; Moreover, they
fell upon the out-workes in three several places withal their power, so that
the fight continued from five of the clock in the evening, until midnight, so
that many chief Spaniards and men of worth were slain. And they within the
Town got a rich booty, and although the enemy does strive to get near the
haven, yet is he met withal, from the new-workes, so that there is no doubt,
he will likewise little prevail on that side.

From Emmericke.
Count Henry Vandenbergh, lies as yet at a town called Goch, and few days
ago, he had almost his whole Army brought upon the Clevish heath all in
Armor, to what intent, is as yet unknown.

From Nannow the 22. of August.
We hear for certain, that Spiers and Worms are both taken in by Leopoldus,
who has altered the Governance, and disasured the Burges, that Heidlebergh is
besieged and battered; that they cannot long hold out, Frankendale is besieged
also, and none can go out or in, but as yet not battered. Their remains no
more but Mainchem and Densborough vnbesieged, all which is done by the forces
of Leopoldus and Banasia.

From the Hage the 4. of September.
We hear now for certain from Breda, that Mansfeild and the Duke of
Brunswicke, arrived at a place, called Osterwick, in the Lant-state near
Breda, within a mile or two at the most, where they are lodged to refresh
themselves, having mustered 10000 horse, and 4000. foot, in his passage, it is
thought he has lost no less than 4000. Horse and Foot: Gonsalos de Cordua (as
it is upon the best intelligence certified) has not lost of his own and the
country Bores less then 12. or 13. thousand in several encounters with
Mansfield, in his passage through Henault Liege, and Brabant.

From Breda we likewise understand for certain that since Cordua his coming
to Spinola his Camp, they have made several fierce assaults upon the Town of
Bergen-vpzom, and especially the first of September Spinola (after he had been
repulsed at a half Moon in one of the out works of the Town assailed
certain new works lying toward Breda, twixt two Forts of the Town, with
certain Spanish and Walloun Companies of D. Cordua: the which works were kept
by a Walloun Commander and certain Wallouns, and for a long time valiantly
defended, but being over furiously charged by D. Corduas Soldiers, was
surprised and taken.

In the mean time comes Coronell Morgan with certain Companies of the English
of his Regiment, and certain Companies of Scots of Coronell Hendersons
Regiment lately deceased, (which Regiment of Scots are since under the Command
of Sir Francis Henderson being Coronell in his brothers place) and seconds the
Wallouns with such resolution and courage, that they put them all to the sword,
and possessed the works again; In which conflict they killed dead in the place
800. of D. Corduas men, and got great booty by the rifling of their dead men.
Since which time (leaving his former course of surprising by furious assaults)
he has begun another manner of way to gain the same, (and has vowed either
to take it within a short space of Michaelmasse next, or else to lose his whole
Army) by plying 40. Canons against the same to batter it down to the ground;
but how speedily he can do the same, time will show.

Further we understand from Brussels, that Count Mansfield sent a Trumpetter
to her Highness, to desire that all prisoners taken may be rendered or
ransommed, according to the law of Arms.

From Constantinople.
SInce the late relation of Turkey sent by Sir Thomas Roe, It is written that
there is fallen out a great division betwixt the Spahies, which are certain
horsemen, and the Ianisaries, the Ianisaries favoring the present Emperor,
the Spahies favoring the elder Brother of the late Sultan Osman, and do
labor to set him in the Throne, and to displace Mustapha the present Emperor;
so that in the City of Constantinople by reason of these Civil dissentions,
it is very dangerous for all Strangers to make their abode there.

It is likewise reported, that the Basshawes in several countries are
gathering together forces, each one to strengthen themselves, seeking
opportunity every man to possess his own country as principal Lord, as it
fell out after the death of Alexander the great amongst his twelve Commanders,
which possessed every man for themselves, and so ceased the universal Monarke
of the world.

From Rome the 26. of August.
THe Pope having been lately very sick, is recovered again; for the which
there have been great Processions, and singing Te Deum laudamus. His Holiness
being highly offended with the Governor of Naples, for detaining of his
Galleys so long; and the great Princess which he expected should have been
espoused to one of his Nephews: whereupon he has commanded the said Viceroy
of Naples to make his appearance at Rome, and crave pardon, but he refuses the
same in regard of his place; and being the King of Spaines Subject, he cannot
do the same without his leave, so that it is thought there will grow some
discontent betwixt the Pope and the King of Spain, and the rather, for that
this Pope was chosen without the consent of any of the Spanish Cardinals.

From the Hage the 10. of September. Stilo Nouo.
IT is written that those of the Town of Berg, have this week made an assault
upon a sconce or Fort of the Enemies called the Cat. (The said Fort being
planted with many Ordnance did more offend the town then any work besides)
which was so valiantly assailed, that they took it in, and brought their
Ordnance into the town, raised the Fort, and made it leuill with the ground,
in which service there was slain many men on both sides: But of the certain
truth, and of the more particular manner thereof you shall understand more by
the next Post.

The Copy of a Letter received from Vtrech, this present 13. of September.
SIr, I have no news to write to you at present but this; The Noble Hastroke,
Brunswicks Brother, had his arm cut off in two places, to the general grief
of the true hearted. It is also credibly reported (with us) that Heidleberge,
Manhem and Frankendale, ate all at once beleiger'd, so that the poor
Palatinate has not in all his native Country one simple Harbor to shelter
himself in, nor one piece of ground in command whereon to set his foot.

There is a general fast to be observed in all the united Provinces, the 10.
of September, according to the new style, so that we do expect some great
matters to be done suddenly, the Count of Mansfield has well refreshed his
men, and increases them daily, ^o that there is in the field under his command
about 16. thousand brave Soldiers, Horse and Foot, and it is hoped erelong
the passages to Spinola his Camp will be more and more straightened, which he
fearing does with the more violence assault the town daily.

From Middleborough is advised that the 60. men of war of the States, which
are waiting upon the West India silver and gold Fleet, have taken 12. Spanish
ships, coming from Brasilia, very rich^^ laden, and are thought to be worth at
least (...) ^ound sterling.

(...) ^mes news from Alepo, that the Engl^ (...) ^llanders have taken Ormus
from the Po^ (...), being a City of great importance, and of great traffic,
lying upon the borders of Persia.

From Spinolaes Camp, lying before Berghen vpzom the 2. of September. A Letter
printed at Antwerpe.
IT is reported by a Gentleman that came along all the way in Count Mansfields
Army, from Sedan to Gemblours, where the battle was fought between him and
Gonzales, that there were some 2000. of his Horse that did mutine against him,
thinking that it was not likely or possible for him with his Army that way to
pass that he then intended, and is now past, having so strong opposition.
Those never gave a stroke in the battle, and if they had fought as the rest of
Mansfields forces did, Don Gonzaloes Army had bin (as is very likely) quite
overthrown.

We got news the 30. of August, that Count Mansfield, and the Bishop of
Halberstadt, lost in the a foresaid fight above 2000. men. Wherefore upon the
same and the next day in the evening, we made here great shows of mirth,
making of Bon-fires, discharging of our ordnance, the Musquiteres gave likewise
3. volies with their shot, and those which carried Pikes, put bundles of straw
on them, and went so with them aloft, to spite the Enemy, it seems that our
who^ (...) was set on fire, and the Pipes, Drums, (...) ^pets were every where
bravely so^ (...) same was likewise done the next day (...).

The Garrison within Berghen was in (...) mean time very quiet, but the next
day, having understood that Count Mansfield was safely arrived at Breda, with
14000. horse and foots, and that he having slain 3000. of Gonzaloes foreces,
had gotten the field, and taken diverse of his pieces of Ordnance besides his
money and bagage, they began likewise to make signs of joy, and discharged
abundance both of great and small shot, and in the evening they made exceeding
great bon-fires, rejoicing mightily in regard of the arrival of their much
expected friends, Count Mansfield, and the Duke of Brunswicke, who as they
hoped should be their redeemer, and free them from their enemies.

By this precedent Relation or Letter, you may perceive what Mansfields very
enemies do publish of his late battle, which some here in England transported
with affection, will not believe but that he had the worst of it, nay that he
was utterly defeated.

The Printers Aduertisemnet.
THere was printed the 9. of this month a Relation or book of news, wherein
were foisted in (without the Licencers knowledge) certain fabulous passag^
(...) ^ely that Count Mansfield should have in hi^ (...) ^00. women or whores,
and some ot^ (...) only false but also scandalous, to cert^ (...) Neighbors
and friends, which may pe^ (...) ^casion some to think the weekly Cun^ (...)
^ssed without any care or regard what is print^ (...) published (as formerly
when things were d^ (...) ^out order) but I will assure you the contra^ (...)
^atsoeuer is licensed is thoroughly examin^ (...) ^nted according to the high or
low Duch (...) ^opies, or out of Letters of the best credit fr^ ^d the Seas,
and that whosoever has or shall ob^, or put any thing more then has been
iudiciously examined and approved, is liable to be severely punished: therefore
expect no such bold attempt from any of us hereafter. Farewell.

FINIS.

