THE COUNTESS OF MOVNTGOMERIES EVSEBEIA: Expressing briefly, THE SOVLES
PRAYING ROBES.

By To: NEVVTON.

Printed at London by George Purstow, for A. G. 1620.

TO THAT NOBLE ROOT OF HONOR AND VERTVE, THE LADY MARY, COUNTESS OF
PEMBROOKE, AND HER ILLUSTRIOUS BRANCHES, WILLIAM, EARL OF PEMBROOKE, LORD
Chamberlain to his Majesty, PHILIP, EARL OF MOVNTGOMERY, WITH THEIR
HONORABLE LADIES, MARY, COUNTESS OF PEMBROOKE, SVSAN, COUNTESS OF
MOVNTGOMERY, AND HER VIRTUOUS Honorable Sisters; ELIZABETH, COUNTESS OF
DARBIE, AND BRIDGET, LADY NORRIS.
Right Honorable.
LEt it not, I pray you, seem strange, that thus I unite you in this
Dedication: God him self has gone before me, uniting you in blood affinity
and virtues; and I hope it is no offense to follow his example. The subject of
this work is Piety; whereto as the world does witness you All to be adicted,
deuoting your selves most religiously to God, in your own persons, being
patterns to others of it: so still to keep burning that fire of Goodness,
kindled in your hearts, and flaming in your lives, by the power of Gods Spirit
shed abroad in your souls; accept of such helps as here you shall find
drawn out of the Scriptures, Gods Armorie, which if you please to use, you
shall find how potent they are in prosperity to keep you, in aduersirie to
comfort you, and in the day of the Lord to crown you, through the mercy of
God, with Happiness and Eternity: which Blessings, with All else, wishing to
Every One of you, desiring the multiplying of All Graces in you, Honor,
Health, Children, Life to his Glory, Steadfastness in the Faith, comfort and
joy in the Holy Ghost, Patience, Wisdom, Hope and Perseverance in All god
lines to the end, and the quiet Peace of Conscience at your end; I humbly rest

Ever devoted to Your Honors in all duties, To: NEVVTON.
From my House at Gretford in Lincolnshire, May. 20. 1620.
THE COUNTESS of Mountgomeries Eusebeia, expressing briefly the Souls praying
ROBES.
HOw pleasing and sweet, in the sight of our glorious and merciful God, the
service of Prayer and praise is: how comfortable, and profitable likewise to
man, in all estates, and times, whether of Affliction, or Joy, the Scriptures,
which are the words and Records of life, and the experience of such, as God by
his Spirit has sealed unto life, do most exactly, and easily declare.

In the 50. Psalm, God calls Prayer a Sacrifice; and says, Psalm. 50.23.
that whosoever offers it unto him, honors him: And in the 14. verse lays a
command upon his servants, both to praise him, and in the day of trouble to
pray unto him: adding a most heavenly sweet promise to hear them.

Now, Sacrifices in the Law, were that peculiar worship of God, which himself
to serve him with. And they were of two sorts. Either Propitiatory, to appease
God for sins committed, or duties omitted: or Eucharisticall, to praise God
for blessings received. In the first was acknowledged man's guiltiness to God:
In the other, Gods mercy and love to man: By both, man's obligation to God.

Such a Sacrifice Prayer is. A Propitiatory sacrifice of a heart, broken and
pownded with sorrow for sin: which (through the eternal sacrifice of Christ,
Heb. 9.28.
who offered up himself once, a full and absolute Propitiatory Sacrifice on
the Cross, for the sins of all that truly repent,) is made acceptable in
the sight of God. Psalm. 51.17
Wherein in the lips and tongue are the souls Interpreters, to let men and
Angels know the inexpressible and unsearchable groans and sights of Gods Spirit
within us. Psalm. 71.23, 24.
For it is not enough to have the heart smitten through, and wounded with
grief, unless the tongue likewise tell it out to God, Psalm. 32.3.

And as it is a Sacrifice Propitiatory: so is it also an Eucharisticall
Sacrifice of a heart drawn out, like Salomons Curtains, by the mercy of God,
and lifted up, and filled with the joy of Heaven, the presence of the Spirit of
God in the soul, making it dance, Psalm. 28.7.
as David speaks, for joy: and forcing the tongue to break out in songs, and
melodious reioycings, for the pardon of sins past; Psalm. 57.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
for the presence, and feeling of celestial grace; for the assurance of Gods
mercy; for deliverance from instant dangers and fears: for graces, and good
motions internal; as Faith, Hope, Love, hatred of sin, care to keep a good
Conscience, watchfulnes, specially over the eyes, tongue and heart: for
blessings external; as Health, Liberty, Plenty, Peace, Riches, Honor,
Children, Friends, Servants fearing God, a good name, long life: For his works
of mercy general and particular on his children, our selves, our Families: for
his Justice, judgments and plagues upon the wicked.

The Priests that offer this Sacrifice, are not the sons of Aaron alone, as
once it was in the old Law; but All, the children of God euery-where, redeemed
by the blood of Christ, and sancrified through the power of his reviving grace;
for he has made us not only sons of God, John 1.12.
Reu. 1.6.
but given us the honor to be Kings and Priests to God, to sacrifice and
offer, through him, odours, and incense, sweetly smelling, and delightful in
the nosthrils of his Father: yet as Aaron might not offer, Exo. 40.13, 14. Leu.
10.1, 2
but in his sacrificing weeds, and nothing, but that which God commanded; no
more must we, either in the Congregation, publicly with the Saints of God,
where God enioynes us to render this sacrifice; Psalm. 100.3. Psa. 96.8, 9.
Math. 6.6. Psalm. 111.1.
or in our own houses or closets privately, where Christ himself has
commanded us to make it, do it so, but that he that is in heaven may accept
it, and we that are on earth may have comfort of it.

That this may be done, some things are required and necessary, before we
offer, some in the very time and instant of our offering, some when we have
offered this sacrifice to God.

Before it, 2. Chro. 11.18.
go three duties, like David's 3. Worthies, breaking through the ranges of the
Philistines.

The first, is repentance of all our sins: Psalm. 66.16 18.
for If I regard wickedness in my heart (says David) God will not hear me:
Because, indeed, God hears not sinners, Ioh. 9.31. that is, such as repent
not: but refuses their sacrifice, as he did the Jews, Esaias 1.11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16. because their hands were full of blood: and the incense of Sheba, that
is, the best and most exquisite words that can be: Ier. 6.20.
because their hearts were stuffed with evil: yea, the very offerings of the
Priests themselves: Micah 6.6, 7, 8.
Amos 5.21, 22. plainly affirming, that he that offered such sacrifice, is as
he that slayes a man, ugly and abominable in his sight, Esaias 66.2.

Therefore the holy men were wont in ancient time to practice Repentance ere
they came to pray, renting their clothes, in sign of sorrow and detestation of
sin; as did Ezra: Ezra 9.3, 5. and Daniel in the time of Isreal's captivity,
Dan. 9.3. In imitation of whom, it behoue us to rend our hearts, Joel 2.1. that
when we come to him who was rent for us, Esaias 53.5.
we may have assurance to hear that voice, Vade, remissa sunt: Go thy way,
thy sins are forgiven thee. And this is our assurance, 1. Ioh. 3.22. that
whatsoever we ask of him, we shall receive, if we repent and keep his
commandments.

Reconciliation with men: A thing as necessary before our daily sacrifice of
Prayer, as before the holy sacrifice of the Supper. For which cause our Savior
bids us agree with our adversary quickly, Luke 12.28.
whilst we are in the way: either in the way of life to death-ward, as
Chrysostom expounds it, or in the way of devotion to Godward, as Saint
Bernard, or in the way of sin to hell-ward, as Saint Jerome.

And Matthew 5. he also commands us, That when we bring our Sacrifice to the
Altar, that is, offer up our orisons to God, and remember that our Brothers
have ought against us, leave off our offering, and first go and be reconciled,
and when we are at unity, then make our prayers.

And if our hearts be so big, that we can neither find in our selves a
disposition to forgive, nor seek forgiveness at others hands, he spares not
to tell us, that God his Father will sauce us, Mat. 6.15.
as we serve others: If we forgive others, he will also forgive us: but if we
will not, nay, if we do not, neither will he forgive us. A fearful
sentence, that the God of all mildness should be wroth with us, as long as we
are at odds with others.

Therefore that our prayers may pierce the clouds, we must follow Saint James
his counsel, as in hearing the word of God, so in sacrificing praise to God;
Iam 1.21.
and that is, All filthiness and superfluity of maliciousness set apart, with
meekness and pure hands, lift up our hearts; not fraught with gall, as was
Cains to Abel; Genesis 4.
nor filled with guile, as Achitophels to David; Esaias 6.7.
but fired like Esayes, and fixed like David's in the Rock of Unity and Amity
with God and man: Psalm. 108.1.
Else, if there be envying and strife in our hearts, though we pray, yet
rejoice not, Jam. 3.14.
for we are but liars against the truth, witnessing against our selves, that
we do but play the Hypocrites with God And this wisdom is not from above, but
is earthly, sensual, and devilish; for where envying and strife is, there is
sedition and all manner of wickedness: But the wisdom that is from God, is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits, without judging, and without Hypocrisy: And the fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make Peace, seeking to keep fast
the unity of Love in the bond of Peace; when they are to enter into the house
of Peace, to pray to him that is the God of Peace, that whilst they live here,
they may dwell in Peace; and when they dye, may rest and reign in the Kingdom
of Peace.

Eccl. 18.24
that we may be able to speak to God. For God is a King of Glory: Psalm.
24.8. and his Throne is set: Dan. 12. even a Throne of inaccessible glory:
Ezech. 1. from whence he viewes all the thoughts of Men, Amos. 4.12. Ier.
23.24. Eccles. 5.
and hears the prayers of all the world.

For which cause the wisest Solomon advises, that we guide well both our Heart
and Tongue, when we come to sacrifice praise to this God, that we neither be
rash with our Mouth, nor hasty with our Heart to utter any thing before God;
for God is in Heaven, and we on Earth: And therefore when we enter into his
House, take heed to our feet, our affections he means, the feet of our Soul,
and be readier to hear, that is, to have thy heart well prepared, rather then
to offer the sacrifice of Fools.

Now that we may be rightly prepared: and swept of all thoughts and
impediments that may hinder this holy Sacrifice. As Christ cleared the Temple
of the choppers and changers; John 2.15.
so must we our Souls of all thoughts and affections, whether it be of profit
or pleasure And if that cannot be yet at least we must turn them aside for a
time: for worldly thoughts are those floods of Satan, which strive to quench in
us the fire of the Spirit: that veil, that cloud that blinds and hides us from
seeing God. Therefore as Moses put off his Shoes when he drew near the Bush;
Exodus 3.5.
so must we all unholy lets, that with David we may listen what God will say
within us.

Ps. 145.5. Genesis 24.63. Ps. 101.1. Mat. 4.1. Mat. 6.3. Mat. 14.23. Acts 10.
both of the mercies for which we must praise God, and of the blessings for
which we must pray to God. Isaacks walking, David's singing, Christ's often
reposednesse in the Wilderness, in the Mountains, Peter's retiredness, and
Ezechiahs tears, show this to be the way to avoid the offering of the
sacrifice of Fools; and also that fond Pharisaicall babbling which Christ
finds fault with, Math. 6.7. wherewith our prayers are too much defiled.

Psalm. 25.1.
that as Elias fiery Chariot carried him to Heaven whilst Elisha was on Earth:
So the zeal of God wrapping us in a sacred fury, may mount our Spirits on the
wings of desire to the very Throne of God, whilst here they are enclosed in
their house of Clay. The Temple of God was set on the top of the Hill Sion; so
that they that went thither, ascended by degrees: to teach us, that when we
go to pray, we must learn to go up out of our selves, not caring to view
the beauty of Jerusalem; but to look on the glittering golden East gate, and
the Cherubims with the Mercy-feate, the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, that
may bring us as it were into a sacred ecstasy, rauishing our hearts with the
brightness of God: for this is it will make us to dance with David before the
Ark of God, 1. Chro. 15.29.
and to cry out with him, Psalm. 108.1.
Our heart is fixed, O God, our heart is fixed: we will sing and give praise;
crying to the Creatures, the Heavens, the Earth, the Sun, Psalm. 148.
the Stars, the Angels, and all things to praise God with us, as he did,
Psalm. 57.7.

Reverence, Psalm. 5.7.
of the Majesty and name of God, in regard of God, of Angels, and men: Of God,
Amos 4.12. 1. Cor. 11.10.
for he sees our Hearts; of Angels, for they behold our carriage, our order,
our demeanor; of Men, for they are apt to take example: the good to imitate,
the rebellious to scoff, perhaps to revile; yea, and it may be, 1. Cor. 14.25.
(for so Saint Paul says) to be won by.

And this reverence, as it must not be hypocritical (for then God abhors it)
nor superstitious, (for he will disdaime it:) So must it come from a contrite
heart that trembles at his words; Esaias 66.2.
(yet not with a slavish fear, but humbled at the presence of him that resists
the proud:) and a settled gesture and comely carriage of the whole body, that
may express the inward meekness and stayednesse of the mind.

Else shall we do but as the Pharise did, Luke 18.1^
presumptuously come to the Temple of the mighty God, Leuit. 10.1^
and with Nadab and Abihu, offer up strange fire, loathsome and fruitless
prayers to God, who in stead of hearing, will stop his ears, since we are
unfitted to speak to him, and in stead of blessings, will rain down crosses,
if not curses upon us, since we are so impudently bold to abuse him.

The want of due regard to these things, oftentimes makes the house of God, the
house of Rimmon; or as Christ said, A Den of Thieves, where vnrepentants and
relapsers, ill tongued and diuelish-minded Shemeis, railing and blackmouth'd
Rabshaka's, proud and insulting Hamans, unchaste and adulterous Iesabels, false
and damned sly Achitophels, hypocritical Ahabs, murtherous Ioabs, lascivious
whorish Iehu's, hell-bred Nicolaitans, superstitious Micah's, and all the
sinful rabble of men, with eyes full of adultery, with hands full of cruelty,
with hearts full of all impiety, impinitencie; hypocrisy, malignitie,
ebrietie, and tongues tipped with the poison of Asps; open their mouths, and
bend (perhaps) their knees, (which many of them think themselves too good to
do) and power forth like Bells Priests, abomination in stead of a sweet
smelling Sacrifice, heaping thereby, upon their own pates, wrath as Saint Paul
says, against the day of wrath, in that when they come to see and speak to
God, a God hating wickedness, a God dwelling in light, a God whose voice
shakes the very heavens, and whose eyelids read the secrets of their souls,
they have not with Moses put off their shoos, nor with Aaron put on their
sacrificing weeds; but either naked like Adam, Genesis 3.
they appear before God; or, if they be clad, it is but with the rags of
unrighteousness, not with the rich attire of Preparation. And therefore, as he
without a Wedding garment received his sentence from the Kings mouth, at the
Table, in presence of the ghests, to be taken away, bound, and thrown into Hell;
so they, for offering the sacrifice of Fools, fools as they are, that is,
wicked and lewd men, receive the just reward of their sin; which is, that
when they pray, they are never heard, except it be to their further
condemnation; and having prayed, they are never beuered, but rather worse in
their conversation. The undutiful and vnreuerent behavior of many, young,
elder, and eldest of all in the sacred house of God, in the time of public
prayer and thanksgiving to God; some most vnreue re^tly capp'd, whilst others
do, and they should, but do not, pray and sing to God, some not vouchsafing so
much as to bend one knee to God, (a token that their hearts are unfit to bow,)
some whispering and talking to others, some snorting and sleeping before the
Angels of God; some reading and not joining with the Minister and people in
serving God, some not content to be slack themselves, but to hinder others
from coming to God, some speaking evil, like wicked Julian and wretched
Lucian, of the worship of God, some carping at the Minister, some at the
Service, some at the Seats, some at the Ceremonies in the Church of God, some
never publicly nor privately inuoking* God, too plainly gives evidence against
the looseness of the time, and shows us the cause why our Sacrifice is not
accepted of God; because like Cain we are hollow toward God.

First therefore for Repentance, let us learn of David to wash our hands in
innocence and so proceed to the Altar of God, Psalm. 26.6.
remembering with Saint Augustine, De 10. chord. c. 5. Aug. lib. de Eccl. dog.
cap. 48.
that Repentance frees us from the wrath of God, and abolisheth all our sins.
Now if the flesh, which is always unwilling, think it too burdenous, so often
to repent as we pray to God, know that as the same father says, De 10. chordis.
It Is better a little to be punished here, then to be plagued everlastingly
in Hell. Know also that Repentance is the yoke of Christ, Mat. 11.29.
which himself says is easy, and he it is, that by the assistance of his
grace helps thee to bear it. Know it is the chiefest mark of Gods children,
Romans 8.23.
to be groaning and repining, and repenting of their sin: not repining
against God, but their own corrupt heart, that is always betraying the^ into
the power of sin. Know lastly, that whosoever repents not, cannot pray, because the
spirit of prayer, 2. Cor. 7, 10, 11.
and the grace of Repentance, sorrow for sin, detestation of sin, care to
avoid sin, comfort against sin, are inseparable one from another; so as
none can repent, but they can cry, but they can pray, but they can trust, but
they can hope, but they can hang upon the promises of God even with Job, Job.
19.26.
in despite of Hell, relying on God, and with Peter pouring out true tears of
sighs and sobbes unto God. Mat. 27.75
And till we find in some good measure, some of these graces begotten in us,
be not too secure; our case is not so good as we take it for: And therefore
when we mean to sacrifice to God, take heed we first make our agreement with
him.

And for Reconciliation with our Brethren: Since God has resolved not to be
reconciled to us, till we first be recouciled with them, and for that cause
taught us to pray him to forgive us as we do them; Mat. 6.15.
let there be no rancour in our minds when we pray: for as Isidore says,
Lib. de summo bono. c. 27
In vain do they seek to be at one with God, that needs will be at ods with
their neighbor. Therefore, if thy brother have offended thee, go, ere thou
prayest, and be reconciled: if he be far off, and thou can not come at
him, then must thou go (says Saint Austin, De. 10. chord. c. 5.
with the feet of thy heart where thou may find him; prostrating thy
affections humbly to God, craving earnestly pardon at his hands. But if thou
can speak with him, thou must pray pardon of him, whom thou have wronged:
Saint Gregory tells thee how, and so Saint Chrysostom on Math. 5. If thou have
offended by thought, in thinking ill of him, be reconciled in thought, by
thinking well of him: if by words thou have hurt him, by words thou must slake
him: if by deeds thou have wronged him, by deeds thou must make amends; for
thou can not otherwise then by deeds be atoned at him, whom by deeds thou
have wronged. In vain is thy Sacrifice of Prayer of Alms, when thou offerest
that which is wrongfully got: And what can it profit thee, that others pray for
thee, and thou all the while prayest against thy self? The most high regards
not the sacrifice of Cain. I will conclude this point with that saying of S.
Chrysostom upon those words, Mat. 6. Forgive us our trespasses.

Would thou have God to be no otherwise good to thee, but only not to hurt
thee; and yet turn away his face and cheerful countenance from thee, always
setting thy sins in his sight, always thinking of thine iniquities, and not
once vouchsafing to look upon thee? Surely, O man, thou would not for a
world. Such therefore as thou would have God be to thee when thou prayest
for pardon of thy sins, such must thou be to thine offending brother.

Lastly, for Preparation: Since the Church of God is the house of glory; Psalm.
84.1. and 11.
and God in his Church does show his glory, since the Angels of God, 1. Cor.
11.10.
which are full of glory, attend on thy sacrifice and mark all thy deeds;
since the powers of Hell bend and their powers then most to hinder thee, Mat.
4.1.
when thou should pray most publicly, privately, by thy self, with others,
abroad, at home, in all places, as Saint Paul commands: As the Israelites in
the Wilderness at the giving of the Law, were prepared to hear God speak to
them: Exodus 19.12.
and Moses when he saw the unburned burning bush, Exodus 3.5.
put off his shoes: Be thou, when thou come to speak unto God, prepared
so, that neither thine Eye may mislead thy Heart, nor thy Heart may fail thy
Tongue, nor thy Tongue either babble with the Pharisees long, Math. 6.7.
and to little purpose, or lispe like the Ephramites, Judge. 12.6.
speak thy mind imperfectly and unaptly to God: But that the whole man, body
and soul, with a sanctified heavenly reverence of God, in regard of his
blessings, for which thou must praise him, Psalm. 117.
and of his mercies, for which thou must pray to him, as also of his
judgments, for which thou must fear him, and of his wisdom, for which thou
must honor him, may be offered up, together with thy praises, a holy
acceptable Sacrifice to God: And this is our reasonable service of God.

Now as before our Sacrifice-offering, these are the robes more rich and
glorious then those of Aaron, Exodus 39.
wherein our Souls should be arrayed, if when we come to the Altar of God,
we would have our Prayers go up like the incense: So in the time whilst we
are in offering, I find in the Scriptures, and the practice of the Saints, some
other ornaments that must be used, as needful every one in the time of
Prayer, as the former be before.

Psalm. 51.
feeling, and understanding of the want of that which we ask: for example; In
the first Petition, when we pray that Gods name may be sanctified; that is,
that in his Word, works, mercies, judgments, and all the creatures we may
glorify him, except we see and feel how proud and blind, how hard-hearted
and ungrateful we are to God by nature, and also by custom in sin, for his
mercies, for his creatures, for his Word, for his Spirit, etc. we can never
pray seriously for humility, for the true knowledge of God, for zeal, for
love, for care to please God; all which, and more, are included in this
Petition.

In the second Petition, when we pray and say, Thy Kingdom come, who
can-rightly with feruencie of Spirit, request God to renew his soul, his
heart, his will and affections, to sanctify him so, that the spirit that
raised up Jesus from the grave, may raise him from the grave of sin, and reign
and rule in every part of him, making him live in holiness and righteousness
all his life, if first he feel not the bondage and heavy yoke of his sin,
and the slavery wherein naturally he is chained to Satan, being daily led
captive to all kind of vice? Gold and heartlesse is that request, that flows
not from a true touch of want.

So in the third, Thy will be done, except we feel, and that very lively,
our own pronenesse and aptness to rebel against Gods laws, our hypocrisy,
our pride, ambition, contempt of God, his Word and Sacraments, our exaction,
oppression, cruelty, impatience and murmuring against God because we cannot
have our own wills, who can rightly desire to learn that of Christ, to deny
our selves, take up our cross daily, submitting our selves in all things to
God, indeuouring both to know his will and do it?

In the fourth likewise, who can, Pro. 30.8.
with Agur, pray for contentednes in all estates, as well poverty as prosperity,
that first feels not a want thereof through covetousness that is naturally
ingrafted in him, and diffidence that God will not provide for him?

This lively sense of want was in Anna, 1. Sam. 1.10.
when in the anguish of her heart she prayed for a child to God: and in David,
Psalm. 51.
when he roared for the very torture and vexation of heart, because he felt not
Gods presence and comfort, Psalm. 130.1
as he was wont: In Daniel also, Dan. 9.
when with that feruencie of zeal, he prayed for Jerusalem, the Temple, the
Jews and himself, after their long Captivity in Babylon: And this must needs
be in every one of us, if like Elias, we would have our prayers to preualie.

Psalm. 55.17. Psalm. 119.10.
so must our requests proceed also from a lively and fervent desire; such a one
as was in Moses, when he spoke not a word, and yet the Lord asked him, Exodus
14.15.
why he cried unto him? when in his heart he only called on him. The same
was in David, Psalm. 143.
Psalm. 42.1.2. As the Heart pants after the rivers of water; so longs my Soul
after thee, O God: My Soul is at hirsts for God, even for the living God? O
when shall I enter into the presence of God. Esaias 37.16
So in Ezekias that noble King, when with bended knees and tears he stretched
out his hands, and spread Sennacheribs raylings before God.

Esau's, Genesis 27.34.
who felt roard and praid when the Birthright was gone, and that with
bitterness for a blessing: nor like Ahabs, 1. Ki. 21.27.
which was fervent, but yet hypocritical; every request we make to God, must
proceed of a lively faith, by which we must have an assurance to be heard. For
they that pray, must have an affiance that God in Christ will grant their
petitions. For this cause Christ tells us, Mark. 11.24.
that whatsoever we desire when we pray, believe that we shall have it, and
it shall be done unto us. And Saint James bids, Iam. 1.6.
Ask in faith and waver not, and we shall receive our desires. And Christ
again, Math. 7.7. Ask, and ye shall receive. And John 16.23. Whatsoever ye
ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. But always the condition is,
that we ask in faith. I, but you will say, there is all the doubt; for how may
I know that I have faith?

I purpose not here to handle at large the nature and properties of a living
faith: but only to satisfy the weak and wavering in a word or two, I Will
teach you to know faith.

As Saint John says, 1. Joh. 5.8.
There are three that bear witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, and these three are One: And there are 3. that bear witness in Earth,
the Spirit, and Water, and Blood, and these 3. agree in one: So Saint Paul
says, 1. Cor. 13.13.
There are 3. that abide in one; Faith, Hope, and Love, and these 3. give
witness unto one, that Christ Jesus dwells in him. Faith witnesses with the
Spirit unto us, that we are the Children of God, Romans 8.16. And hope and love
witness unto faith, that it is a true and living faith: as breath, heat and
motion witness and approve that the body is alive: so love and hope approve
unto our hearts that our faith is alive. There is a dead faith, Iam. 2.26.
a faith without works, a faith without hope and love, the two infallible
companions of true faith: But true and living faith, which Saint Paul calls the
faith of the Son of God, because he by his Spirit begets it in us, and is the
proper object of it, has always with it hope and love, by which the effects
and power of it appears, to God, to Angels, to Men: to God first; then to man:
To God,

1. In believing his promises made unto us in Christ. Act. 16.31.
2. In seeing our lamentable estate by nature, Ephesians. 2.1.
how we stand subject to his eternal wrath, eternal death, eternal bondage
under sin and Satan. 3. In sorrowing for our sins general and particular. 2.
Cor. 7.11.
4. In confessing them Mat. 3.6.
unto God: 5. Praying for, and hoping of pardon for Christ his sake: Act. 2.37.
6. In hungring after righteousness: Mat. 5.6.
7. In continually endeavoring to hate sin, Acts 2.42.
and please God, Psalm. 97.10.
Again, as it is working by love and hope to God; so also it is approving it
self to Angels and Men, by humility and meekness; Mat. 11.29.
for true faith is never proud: 1. These. 5.14.
by patience and long suffering; for it murmures not: by charity and alms
deeds, according to the talent received from God, either by actual relieuing,
or affectionate desiring to do so, visiting the sick, Math. 25.35, 36.
comforting the comfortless, helping the poor, clothing the naked, and in a
word, never resting to do All good; not envying, 1. Cor. 13.
not boasting, not railing, not speaking il, not disdaining, nay, not seeking
her own things; not covetous, not lascivious, not wickedly angry, not thinking
ill, not rejoicing in any sin; But suffers all things, indures all things,
believes all things, and hopes all things: Genesis 15.16, 17, 18, 19.
with Abraham it is constant in believing and obeying God; Acts 8.13.20, 28.
with Paul it is valiant, in suffering all crosses, all afflictions for God; with
David it is patient, in all calamities hanging still on God: Job. 19.25.
with Job even in the fire of trial, and the boiling furnace of Satan's
sifting, it cleaues fast unto and holds by God; and every day grows from
strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7.
bettered in knowledge, bettered in affection, bettered in obedience, till at
last it come to say with David, Psalm. 23.4.
Thought I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will not fear; and
with Saint Paul, Romans 8.38. Nothing can separate me from Christ Jesus; because
with Job, Job 19.25, 26.
it knows that our Redeemer lives, and that we shall rise up again with him
to glory. This, this is that true and living faith, wherewith we must offer
our sacrifice to God.

But if any find not in their hearts these things, nor these fruits of faith
in their lives, know yet for their comfort, that there is a lesser degree of a
true and living faith; which though it be compared to smoking flax, Esaias 42.2.
and a bruised reed, for the weakness of it, yet is it a most sure Anchor-hold,
and receives perfect acceptance with God.

And this little faith is, when though, we know not Gods promises of salvation
by Christ exactly; neither are able to apply them to our selves perfectly, and
strongly, as Paul, and David, Psalm. 23. Romans 8.38. Acts 16.30. Luke. 3.10, 12,
14. Acts 2.37.
and others did; yet we do earnestly desire to repent, and have our sins
pardoned, seeking by all means of fasting, praying, weeping, wishing, and
conferring with such as are able to help us, to be reconciled to God, hoping
of his mercy, and thirsting after righteousness, Romans 14.1.
and daily increasing in grace, still making better and better progress in
Religion.

Such a faith as this once was in the Apostles, the very attendants, and
continual companions of Christ; who though they believed Christ to be the
Son of God, Math. 16.16. yet they knew not of his Death and Resurrection till
afterward, Ioh. 6.6. Math. 17.23. Luke 9.45. John 20.9.

Such also was the faith of those Disciples at Ephesus, whom Paul found
ignorant of the very being of the Holy Ghost, by whom they had received power
and grace to believe in Christ. Acts 19.2.
And they that have this Faith, though but little and small, as wanting the
fullness of that strength, by which they might be able to say with Paul, that
they are assured there is laid up for them a crown of righteousness, 2. Tim.
4.7, 8.
which God will give them at the last day; yet may they with boldness and
confidence have access to the Throne of grace: For GOD has promised, that to
him that is athirst, Reu. 21.6.
he will give of the Well of the water of Life freely. And our Savior himself
cried it once in the great day of the great Feast of Tabernacles, that All that
are thirsty should come to him and drink: John 7.37.
And if any be laden with the burden of sin, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto him, and he will ease them: For thirsting after righteousness, Mat.
5.6.
and remission of sins, is one of the chief of those mercies of God, which
whosoever has, already is become partaker of eternal happiness, and in the end
shall be fully satisfied.

John says, 1. Ioh. 5.14.
Whatsoever we ask in his Name, according to his will, we shall receive.
Otherwise we may ask, Iam. 4.3.
as Saint James says, and not receive, because we ask amiss; that is, having
neither commandment so to ask, nor promise to receive. And so asked the
Mother of Zebedees children promotion for her sons, Mat. 20.23.
and was repelled of Christ, because she begged she knew not what. And so did
Peter in Mount Thabor to build Tabernacles. Luke. 9.33. Mat. 12.38
And the Jews to see a sign from Christ. We therefore that sacrifice, and
that with faith, must from God look for both a commandment to warrant, and a
promise to fulfill our requests.

And here we must observe two Caueats:

First, that all our requests to God are either for things spiritual or
temporal: And spiritual things are either absolutely necessary to salvation;
as, the knowledge of God in Christ: the remission of sins: Faith, Hope, Love,
Humility, Obedience, a good conscience, etc. or else they are but only such
as are profitable: as the understanding of all Scripture: all knowledge of
Arts: Tongues: power to work miracles, and such like: Those that are of
absolute necessity to salvation, we must ask them simply without condition:
So did Paul, Ephesians. 1.17.
David, Stephen, and others. Those that are but profitable, and temporary, as
health, honor, children, life, etc. must always have a condition annexed,
Jam. 4.15.
If it be for Gods glory: If it be agreeable to his will, Luke 22.42.

Secondly, we must not bind God to any circumstances of time, place, Psalm.
130.5, 6, 7.
means, or otherwise; but leave all free to him, and with patience attend his
pleasure, as David did: Psalm. 40.1.
who waited patiently upon the Lord, till he inclined to him. For so God
commands us, Psalm. 37.3, 4, 5, 6. Tarry thou the Lords leisure, and he will
bring it to pass.

Psa. 99.5, 6 Psalm. 86.7, 8, 9, 10. Phil. 4.6. Esaias 45.5. Ier. 23.24. Deuteronomy.
6.13.
nor stinting God to any time; so this sacrifice must be offered only to God;
since He alone at all times, and in all places, is able, and can hear All men,
which neither Angel, nor Saints can do. Secondly, because Prayer and
Invocation, is from Man to God, a peculiar part of Gods honor: Mat. 4.10.
And his honor he has sworn not to give to another. Psalm. 97.7.
In which respect, the Angel refused adoration, Revel. 22.9. commanding us to
worship God alone. And GOD himself, by David, speaking to all the Nations of
the earth, bids them trust in Him, Psalm. 62.8.
and power cut their hearts before him. And in another Psalm, David attributes
it for a special tithe to God, Psalm. 65.2.
Thou that hear the prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. For which cause
that commandment is in the 50. Psalm 15. Call upon me, not on any creature,
in the day of calamity, and I will help, says God.

And sure if the Angels must not be honored with this sacrifice of prayer and
praise, who are glorious spirits, and more excellent by Creation and Grace than
the Saints, and are ever with us, Heb. 1.14.
and about us for our good, according to that of David: Psalm. 34.7.
The Angel of the Lord tarryeth round about them that fear him, to deliver
them: and that of Christ touching little Infants, Mat. 18.10
Their Angels always behold the face of their Father which is in Heaven; much
less must we pray to any of the Saints, who are neither so excellent, nor so
present with us. Esaias 63.16
Abraham knows us not, says God by the Prophet, and Israel is ignornat of us.
And Saint Paul to the Romans proves by demonstration, Romans 10.14
that we must pray only to God: Thus; He alone in whom we must believe,
must be prayed unto: Only in God we must believe. To him only we must
therefore pray.

And to whom else did the Fathers, Patriarchs, and Prophets, Adam, Seth,
Henoch, Noah, Abraham, David, Daniel, Esaias, Jeremy in the Old Testament, and
Christ himself, the Apostles, and the Church in the new, ever tender this
sacrifice of Prayer, and praise, but to the most Highest God, Phil. 4.6.
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ?

I have cried unto thee, O LORD, Psalm. 130.1. Psalm. 146.1. Psalm. 5.1, 2, 3, 7.
says David, and unto thee will I give thanks, for thou art my God. And when
Ezechia in his straitness and distress, prayed, began he not, O Lord of
Hosts, Esaias 37.16.
God of Israel, which dwell between the Cherubims? Could Moses, or Abraham,
or the Angels have helped them, or had they had any confidence in them, they
might as well have prayed unto them also, as to God.

It is therefore a spirit of error and delusion, that persuades poor
ignorants to pray to, and trust in Saints: And of such spirits we must take
heed.

And if the power of Scripture cannot move such as are simple to beware: hear
a little short discourse of Saint Austens, which word for word, I will set
down, out of his Book of taking care for the Dead: the thirteenth Chapter.

If the souls of the dead could be, or were present, at or about the affairs
of the living, and speak unto us, when we dream in our sleep we see them;
surely, my Holy Mother no night would forsake me, who followed me both by Sea
and Land to live with me. For God forbid, that by obtaining a happier life,
she should now become more unkind then she was; insomuch, as when my heart is
vexed and filled with sorrow, she will not so much as comfort her aggrieued
son, whom she loved most dearly, whom she never could endure willingly to
see sad. But verily, it it as the Psalmist says, My Father and my Mother have
forsaken me, but the Lord has taken me up. If then our Fathers have left us;
how are they present and behold our cares? And if our fathers be not: what
other dead folks are there that know what we do, or what we suffer? And a
little after, The Spirits of the Dead are in such a place, as they do not see
the occurrences and things in this life.

If neither they see us then, nor know not what we do: sure hear us they
cannot: and why then should we pray to them? Let Christ's answer to the Devil
stick in our hearts, when we are tempted to pray to them; Mat. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and Him only thou shall serve.

Heb. 13.15
so we must offer it not in our own, but in the name and mediation of Christ.
Genesis 18.
For we are but dust and ashes: of our selves unworthy to come in Gods
presence. He it is that is that Lamb of God that has taken away the sins
of the world, John 1.29.
in whom alone god is well pleased: Mat. 3.17.
Who ever has this golden Censor to offer upon the golden Altar which is before
the Throne of God in Heaven, Reu. 8.3, 4.
the Prayers of the Faithful, that they being mingled with the sweet obours
of his Intercession and Merits, the smoke of them may ascend up before God,
Reu. 8.3. Therefore Saint Paul gives a precept, Col. 3.17.
that whatsoever we do in word or deed, whether it be praying or praising,
or working the works of this life, or the works of grace, do all in the name
of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father by Him. For he it is alone,
in whose blood the Saints wash their long white Robes, Reu. 7.14.
through whom we have access with confidence unto the Throne of grace; who by
himself has purged our sins, Romans 5.2.
and now sits on the right hand of the Majesty of God, to appear now in the
sight of God for us. Heb. 1.3. Heb. 9.24.


Erroneous therefore and derogatory to Christ is that doctrine, that teaches
other Intercessors besides Christ: 1. Ioh. 1.3. John 14.13. 1. Tim. 2.3. Heb.
7.25. 1. Cor. 1.2. Acts 9.14.
Since there is no name in Heaven, Earth, or elsewhere, but the holy and
reverend name of Jesus only, in which we can expect to be heard. Therefore
Only in his name must this sacrifice be made.

made in the name of Christ, to God alone, according to his will, with a lively
faith, a fervent desire, and a sound sense of want; yet oftentimes we see,
that Gods dearest children receive many put-byes: 2. Cor. 12.8.
as Saint Paul, when he prayed and besought God thrice to deliver him from the
messenger of Satan. And the woman of Canaan, when for her Daughter she
followed Christ, and in all humbleness most lowly besought him, and he would
not hear her, no, nor so much as look upon her: nay, when his Disciples,
entreated for her, and she still continued her request, in stead of Myrrh from
those sweet lips of his, came forth a bitter gall of distaste; insomuch as
he spared not to call her Dog. Mat. 25.26
Therefore in offering this holy Sacrifice, which so tends to the honor of
God, we must have another thing, as it were, to conquer God, when our prayers
seem not to pierce his ears: And that, says Christ, is Continuance and
Perseucrance in Prayer: Luke 18.1, 7, 8. Whereto he exhorts us by a Parable of
a Widow, who by her importunity wrested an unjust Judge, that neither feared
God, nor cared for man, to avenge her of her Aduersary-Which Parable Saint Luke
sets a note upon; That he did of purpose propound to this end, that we ought
to pray, and not wax weary, verse 1. though God suffer long before he hear
us, verse 7. This also he teaches by his own example, in continuing forty
days fasting and praying in the Wilderness, Math. 4.1. and whole nights in
the Mountains, Mat. 14.23.
sequestring himself from all company, Luke 16.12.

By precept likewise: Ask, Seek, Knock: Mat. 7.7.
And by another Parable, of one that made his friend, through his importunity,
Luke 11.8.
to rise in the night to give him Bread: and lastly, by promise, Math. 7.7. Ye
shall have: ye shall be heard: ye shall find: the door shall be opened.

In this Perseverance we have for Patters almost all the Worthies in
Scriptures. Genesis 32.24
Adam and Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who all night wrestled with God in
likeness of a man, and at last prevailed. Exo. 17.12
Moses, that would never give out: but when he was weary, had Aaron and Hur
to hold up his hands. Job, and Danid, Psalm. 69.1, 2, 3. Act. 2.1.
and the Church in Babylon, the Apostles, the Primitive Church, and all the
Martyrs, those Heroic brave Champions, whose mouths, nor flames; Theodoret.
Hist. Eccl. Socrates, Eusebius.
nor Lions jaws, nor any tortures could stop from pouring out prayers, and
singing even in their sharpest pangs, till God and his Christ had gotten
victory.

Saint Augustine reports of his Mother Monica, Libris co^ fessionum, 5.7.8.9.
that Noble, Virtuous, and Religious Matron, that many years together, before
God converted him, she spent whole nights in prayers and tears to God for
him, Lib. conf. 3. c. 11.
who as then was no better than an Idolatrous Pagan, for 9. years together (as
himself confesses) an heretical Manichee: De morib. Ecc. Cath. l. 1. c. 18.
And at last coming to a Reverend Bishop, Lib. confessionum 3. c. 12.
and with many tears often most instantly desiring him, seruently to commend
her Son unto God: He seeing her Tears, her continuance, her holy desires,
cheered her thus up with this Noble comfort: O happy Woman, go on a Gods name,
and be of good comfort, a son of so many tears is impossible to perish. And
not long after, after so many prayers, so many tears, so many years, so much
constancy, feruency and continuance, it pleased God he became a Christian,
and one of the most worthy Fathers of the Church.

Many have I known power out their prayers with tears to God, ten, twenty
years together, and I have heard longer, for the assurance of Gods love
toward them in Christ, and yet all that while have not had their desire. Which
God does partly to try us, if we will expect him with patience; Psalm. 11.5.
partly, to sharpen us the oftener and more fervently to inuoke him: partly, to
Mat. 15.23. to the 28.
to exercise his gifts in us: and yet in the end crowns his children with
unspeakable consolation: in the mean time giving them Humility, and Patience,
and Strength to await him.

Psalm. 70.4.
is the Crown of praise, wherewith every one must be adorned, that will
perfectly offer their vows to God.

A Crown of so inestimable value, that GOD preferres it before all the burnt
offerings of Bullocks and Goats; Psalm. 50.
nay, above the Incense of Sheba, Psalm. 69.31.
and the gold of Arabia. And for that cause it was he so dearly loved David
his Anointed, Psalm. 96.98, 100, 101, 148, 149.
for that the praise of his God was always in his mouth, and his tongue was
ever telling of his righteousness. Every night was he singing of his mercies,
and of his truth and judgments continually.

As there were three persons in the Trinity that blessed him; so there were
three parts in him by which he returned his thankfulness back again: his
heart, his tongue, his hand. And these three, like the Heavens, were always in
motion: his heart musing, his glory singing that was his tongue, his hand
warbling, one while on the Lute, then one the Cymballs, anon on other
Instruments, Sackbuts and Shawmes, Organs and Fifes; and the burden of all
was, Praise the Lord.

The blessing whereof redounded to himself, and his, and crowned him with such
both admiration and commendation, as he rests a pattern to the Saints of God,
of all Piety and goodness, but specially of thankfulness to the worlds end.

In offering whereof, as he had the Spirt of God for his Author, to move and
rowze up his Body and Soul; so he wanted not the examples of Noah, after the
Deluge, Genesis 8.21.
from whom God smelt a savor of rest: Of Abraham, Genesis 14.20
after his victory got of the 4. Kings. Of Moses, Exodus 15.
after Isreal's passing through the Sea: Of Debora and Baruc, Judge. 5.
when Sisera and Iabin were overcome; to teach him how, after his many
deliverances from Saul's malicious and murtherous persecutions, 1. Sam. 21, 22,
23, 24.
from Absaloms unnatural and Achitophels unfriendly and treacherous
conspiracies, 2. Sam. 15.11, 12.
from Gods sharp handling himself and his people for Vriahs wife and life, 2.
Sam. 12.10, 11.
he should with triumphall songs of acknowledgement bless God, and express
the unfeigned thankfulness of his heart for all the good turns he had
received.

Wherein, if we rightly consider of it, we may soon see how God would by his
example tutor us, to let none of all those excellent and rich favors,
wherewith he blesses Mankind generally, and his children in a far more
particular sort, to escape either our attentive contemplation and meditation of
them, or our serious and true acknowledgement of his love, in returning him the
interest which only he expects, and that is, the fruit of our lips,
confessing his name, Hell. 13.15, 16.
which is our Orall Sacrifice of Praise, and the fruits of our Faith, in doing
good, and relieuing the Saints, which is the Real Sacrifice of our lives.

For, as it is true which Saint Paul says of Him, 2. Cor. 9.7.
that he loves a cheerful giver, because he that gives joyfully, shows his
readiness to confess from whom it is that he has means to give; so is it as
true, that he loves as well a thankful receiver: neither does any thing
afflict him so, or causes him utter such bitter complaints, as the ingratitude
of such for whom he does most, yet they least of all others regard him. Number.
11.10. Exodus 14.11. Exodus 15.24. Exodus 16.3. Psalm. 106.15, 26. Esaias. 1, 2, 3,
Hosea 4.


Let the often murmurings of Israel in the Desert, and their often smarting for
this very sin, under so many, so grievous plagues, his often vpbraidings of
them by his Prophets, calling Heaven and Earth to record against them; his many
fearful Judgments powered upon the heads of unthankful men, even Kings
themselves; dethroning Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.29.30.
striking him with Madness, and because he forgate to be thankful to God,
making him forget to be King or Man; 2 Man. 9.10
wounding that proud and ungrateful Antiochus so sore, that he became
loathsome to himself: and vainglorious Herod with such a like disease, Acts
12.23.
causing vile worms to devour him alive, witness unto us the truth hereof.

They therefore whom God has blessed with the fatness of the Earth for their
dwelling, Genesis 27.39
and the dew of Heaven from above, whose names and families he has made
honorable, that their fathers own sons, as well as strangers, Genesis 42.6.
bow down yielding reverence unto them, upon whom he has made the Spirit of
wisdom and counsel to rest, Numb. 11.25, 26.
whose loins he has clothed with health and strength, whose hearts he has
seasoned with immortal grace, whose lives he has saved from the grave, from
shame, who every day still have their portion increased, must remember when
they come, (and come they must often) to set themselves in the presence of God,
to give him most unfeigned and particular thanks for their honor, their health,
their riches, Psalm. 144.1, 2.
their knowledge, their faith, approving it self by love, their all other
heavenly and earthly endowments, lest else they be worse then the very Beasts,
which fed by the hand of some loving Heard, Esaias. 1.3.
cease not in their kind to show themselves thankful.

It Is reported of Plato, that every day he gave God thanks for three things:
Plutarch. in Alcibi.
That he was not borne a Barbarian, Socrates to teach him.

Pamelius and Beat. Rhenanus.
Saint Chrysostom likewise was wont to praise God, for that he had made him a
reasonable man, perfect in the parts of his body and soul, not lame, nor
blind, nor foolish, as many be: for that he had made him a Christian man, no
Pagan nor Jew: and for that he had made him a regenerate Christian man, and a
Bishop among Christians, enabling him to teach both himself and others to live
and do, as our Savior taught us.

Yea, Mat. 11.25
our Savior himself in his own Person, as of all other virtues and religious
obedience, so herein was pleased to become our pattern. Acts 4.24.
And the blessed Apostles, by their preaching and practice, nay, the sensible
and senseless Creatures may move us to care and diligence in performance of
it. Psalm. 19.1, 2.


And surely, if we give but our eyes leave to view, or our ears to hear of
those infinite exceeding mercies, which every day and night are dewed upon us,
like the Manna upon the Israelites in the desert, Exodus 16.14.
dropping as Hermon, upon our souls, deliverance from the bondage of sin and
Satan, comfort against the fear of eternal death, care to live honestly and
religiously in the world, hope of a Crown of glory incorruptible, love of Gods
Word and his Saints here in earth; and upon our bodies, health, strength,
raiment and food; or patience in the time of sickness and want: On our names,
children and goods, preservation and increase; or else in the loss of them,
confidence and comfort, it is not possible, but the most inflexible Adamantine
heart will melt and be dissolved into a Spring of thankful and joyful tears,
to consider of the kindness of our good God.

Seeing then this is the souls rich attire, which makes her more beautiful in
the sight of God, when and whilst she worships before his footstool, than the
glittering stars do the Heavens in the night; let us, in the very instant of
praying; strive against the dullness of our flesh, the unwillingness of
nature, the hardness of our hearts, and the blindness of mind, to be soundly
touched with the feeling and sense of the want of such things for which we
pray, as of the want of

Sorrow for our sins, Psalm. 32.3, 4, 5.
original, actual, lately, or long since done against either God or Man,

Sense of the decaying of saving grace in us, Psalm. 51.12.
the comfort whereof we have 2 These. 3.3.
had, and should still in our hearts,

Faith in the promises of grace and life, Ioh. 3.16. Mat. 14.30


Strength to withstand our own corruptions, Ephesians. 6.10.
the Devil and the worlds assaults,

Patience and dependence on God in the time of trial, Luke 22, 57, 58, 60.
Heb. 10.35, 36. Conloss. 1.11.
when tedious and sharp sickness, poverty, reproach, disobedience of children
or servants, domestic untowardness, unkindness of false-hearted friends,
pressures of mighty enemies, sudden unexpected dangers, imprisonment, loss of
goods, or any other vexation afflicts us,

The Spirit of Meeknes and Humility, Philip. 2.8. Mat. 11.29
proud and towering minds that are ever climbing, Iphes. 4.2.
ever aspiring after earthly things,

Wisdom and knowledge in the mysteries of our Redemption, Ephesians. 3.19 Colosi.
1.9.


Constancy, Apoc. 2.10.
in forsaking and striving against sin,

Moderation in governing the rage of our Passions, Ephesians 4.26 31.


Sobriety, Ephesians. 5.15.
in taming our lusts and affections,

Watchfulness over our whole man, 1. Pet. 5.8.


Care to pray often, Coloss. 4.2.
These. 5.17.

Zeal in Prayer, Heb. 5.7.


Compassion of others misery, Heb. 4.15.
Mat. 9.36.

Observing our continual slips, Psalm. 119.59.


Meditation in the Law of God, Psalm. 119.15.


Attentiveness to the Word preached, Mal. 13.23


Serious consideration of the shortness of our life, 2. Pet. 3.10, 11. Job.
14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Reu. 21. and 22. Esaias 30.33
the vanity of all earthly things, the glory of Heaven, and the terrors of
Hellfire,

Often and deep thinking of Christ's sufferings and love toward us,

Diligence in marking how God deals, Psalm. 119.21.
and always has done with his children, with the wicked, with our selves; 1.
Sam. 17.34. Psalm. 105. and 106.
his boundless pity and mercy to some; his severity and rigor upon others;
his howerly favors upon us and ours, Psalm. 119.101.102.
in keeping us from heinous and notorious sins,

Bettering us by our sins, 2. Cor. 7.11.


Helping us against sins, 2. Cor. 12.9.


Defending us by his Angles, Psalm. 34.7.


Blessing our labors and Families, Psalm. 147.13, 14.


Teaching us to bear the cross patiently, Ioh. 16.33.


Helping us when all means fail us, Exodus 14.12 13, 27.


Thankfulness to God for every blessing. Psalm. 146.1, 2.


For verily, Iam. 1.26.
as S. James says; He that seems to be religious, and refraineth not his
tongue, but deceiues his own heart, his religion is but vain: so he that
seems religious, and prays with his tongue, not having in his heart a true
feeling of his wants, he deceiues himself, and his prayer is but vain: For
the sense of want to prayer, is like the spirit to the body. Iam. 2.26.
The body without the spirit, is dead, feels not the chains wherein it is
bound, the wounds are made in it, the dishonor done to it; so is prayer wihout
sense of want: It shows not that the soul is alive, groaning under the Devils
yoke, the deep wounds of sin; but like one that has drunk much Oppium,
deadly asleep, if not stark dead: nay more; it is idle like the Heathe^s
babbling to no end, Mat. 6.7.
with many fond hypocritical Ohs, and O Father, when it cannot tell what to
ask the Father: Its unprofitable, neither edifying him that makes it, nor
those that hear it: It Is unacceptable, being the Sacrifice of folly, and
blasphemous, rashly taking the most holy Names of God in vain.

Therefore, if we find not in the act of Praying, a quick sense of our wants,
yet, at least, let us have and be deeply moved with the feeling of the want of
feeling, what spiritual helps our souls do need.

And then in the next place; let every Sinner, as he feels himself, either
by nature or custom, most in clin'd to, or tempted with any one sin,
zealously and strongly pray against it:

The Atheist against his blind and unbelieving heart, that he may acknowledge
Gods power, infiniteness, Dan. 4.31.
mercy, wisdom, love, justice, goodness, providence, and presence every
where, seeing and searching all actions, all hearts, yea, the most secret
thoughts of the soul, and so learn both to love and fear him:

The Idolaters and superstitious, Acts 19.18, 19.
against their sottish and senseless worshipping of God in any image or
visible form, or in praying to any save him alone: in seeking to, or
counselling with Sorcerers, Witches, 2. Chr. 33.12, 13.
Wise men (as they term them) or any such Hellish and forbidden Art; that
henceforth they may serve him in spirit and truth:

The blasphemous swearer, against his hearts corruptednesse and Hellfir'd
tongue; Iam. 5.12.
that he may no more, either by fearful soule-tearing oaths, or by mincing
and small slight ones (as they are accounted, but falsely) profane the sacred
Name of God, who will not let that sin escape vnplagued; Exodus 20.7.
but always strive both with his tongue and heart to bless God, confessing
his sin, and crying for pardon and grace to amend.

The careless profane man, Exodus 31.16, 17.
against his wickedness, in contemning Gods Worship, Word, Sacraments, Sabbath,
Church, Prayers public and private, that he may learn to esteem of the
knowledge of Christ, Philip. 3.7.8.
more then all the profits and pleasures of the world, Heb. 13.17.
and love and reverence those that teach it.

The dissembling Hypocrite, that makes a show of Religion, and has none,
against his hollow, perverse and deceitful heart, that he may become a true
practiser of holiness in his life. Jam. 1.22.
holiness in his life.

The Voluptuous and vain men, Col. 3.5, 6, 7
against their lusts, lasciviousness, uncleanness, adulreries, vanity of
speech, attire, company and disports, that they may redeem the time they have
lost, whilst they walked in the ways of their own hearts, and so long as they
live, study to offer up their souls and bodies with Mary Magdalen, penitent
sacrifices to God.

The Gluttonous and Drunkards, Ephesians. 5.18
against their Epicurisme, sensuality, insatiable bibbing, and offensive
abusing themselves, their time, the Creatures, that they may learn in all
sobriety and temperance to watch unto prayer and fasting, lest the unclean
spirit prevail against them.

The Ambitious and high-minded, against their Pride and Surquedry, that they
may learn of Christ to become lowly and meek in heart, Mat. 11.29
and so find rest for their souls.

The Covetous, Ephesians. 5.5.
against their hard-heartednesse and want of Charity, Faith, ans all other
graces, that since they are such, Psalm. 10.3.
as GOD abhorres them, they may be filled with the bowels of compassion, Col.
3.12.
to pity those that want, Luke 19.8.
and restore again their ill-gotten goods; that GOD in Christ may pity them,
and restore them to his favor.

The unmerciful and cruel minded, Luke 6.36.
against their incredulous and dogged churlishness, that GOD would turn their
hearts to become merciful, Jam. 2.13.
lest in the end they want mercy.

The slanderous and lying tongues, Ephesians. 4.25.
against their delight in fals-hood, untruths, reproching and tales, that with
David they may have a vvatch before them, Psa. 39.1, 2.
and that GOD would keep the door of their lips, teaching them to speak the
truth, and detest all leasings.

The murderer against his unbridled rage and passion, Reu. 22.15.
and thirsting after blood, that he may learn to be angry with his sin,
Math. 5.6.
and thirst after righteousness, and the Kingdom of God.

The Thief, Ephesians. 4.28.
against Idleness, Covetousness, and distrust in God, that he may learn to
labor with his hands, providing for things honest lawfully, in the sight of
God, and men, and rely upon the providence of God, Psa. 37.3.
using those just means which God has appointed.

The ignorant, against the sluggishnesse of their nature, Ephe. 4.17, 118.
the darkness and blindness of their mind, that God would enlighten them
with his Spirit of grace, and teach them how to serve him as they ought.

They that live in sin, ^. Cor. 13.5.
and know it, yet repent not, against their infidelity, impenitencie, and
thraldom to their lusts, that being delivered from the power of the Devil,
they may amend their lives, and sin no more.

They that have received great measure of grace, ^. Pet. 2.21, ^2.
and decay in it, or abuse it, against their negligence, coldness,
forgetfulness, backsliding and falling away; that with Peter being raised
through the Mercy of God, they may run on joyfully the race that is set
before them, not fainting any more, nor yielding to temptation, but valiantly
resisting the Devil always.

They that by the abundance of blessings grow proud, Apoc. 3.17, 18, 19.
puffed up with the wind of their own strength, in regard of the greatness
of their Temporal state, or of their knowledge and spiritual abilities in
preaching, or praying, or any other gift, (as this sin of Pride is ever the
sorest, and most frequent assaulter of all men endued with any eminent parts:)
against their innated pronenesse to vanity and vaineglory, self-love,
boasting, and conceiting too highly of their own worth, that they may see from
whom they have received these blessings, and be thankful.

Finally, all sorts of sinners, whom God calls to repentance; let them, after
feeling the misery they are in, and the want of that grace, whereby they that
grace, whereby they must be helped, earnestly and fervently cry for redress,
Acts 2.37.
with a resolution to sin no more; Acts 38.11, 23.
with a full purpose ever after to walk in holiness and newness of life, Heb.
12.28.
for that is to pray with faith: with an earnest endeavor to forsake sin: for
else they do but mock God: referring themselves, and their suite to his
pleasure: for they must limit him no time to answer them: and asking such
things as are lawful to ask, and to a lawful end, for otherwise they ask
amiss, and their suite shall not be granted.

That they may not ask amiss, Jam. 1.5.
let them ask in faith, beholding and believing* the promises of God, of life
and salvation in Christ Jesus: And let them try their faith by their purpose of
never sinning against God again, so far as their knowledge and power will serve
them: for that is an in fallible note of true faith; because purpose of living
and continuing in sin, is clean contrary to the nature of faith.

Thus when the sense of our want has kindled in us a flaming desire to crave
relief, and desire has awakened our sleepie and fainting faith, to behold and
trust in Gods promised mercies; Faith then must have recourse to God, Dan. 9.18.
and sue for help and comfort at his hands: I say, at his hands: not at any
creatures. For creatures, be they Saints, Ioh. ^.37, 38.
be they Angels, are not that Fountain of living waters, wherewith our thirsty
spirits must be quenched: But he alone who is the Father of lights, Iam. 1.17.
from whom comes down every good and perfect gift: who though he be high and
excellent, dwelling in the light and holy place, so that no mortal eye can see
him; yet has he licensed us that be but dust, Genesis 3.19.
to behold him with the Eye of Faith: which how weak so ever it be, so long as
it is true and living, loving God, and desiring still to be at peace with him,
endeavoring in thoughts, words and works to please Him, ever fighting against
inward sins and fears; outward allurements, and both inward and outward
assaults, is not rejected: neither yet received for it own sake, but for the
merit and worthiness of Christ. John 16.23. 1. Cor. 13.12.
For as yet it is imperfect, believing but in part. Therefore in Christ's
mediation let it come, not in the blessed Virgin Mary's, nor any Saints: Heb.
2.3.
for their blood purged us not from sin, neither have we through them, Romans
5.2.
access to the Throne of God, but only by Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 2.18.


And this is that unspeakable Comfort, which frail man, through the riches of
Gods love, 1. Tim. 1.15
has left him, as a sure refuge against all doubts. Of himself, he is the
utter enemy of God, Psalm. 51.5.
borne in sin: full of sin: to be damned for sin, Genesis 2.17.
unless he find a sufficient Surety to make Gods Justice satisfaction: Heb.
12.29.
For God is a consuming fire against sin, not enduring the least darkness of
it to approach him. How then should he dare, since the Holy glorious Seraphims
are said with their wings to hide their face when they praise God, to look
upon the face of his offended Maker? Behold here the bounty and love of God:
He has so loved Man, John 3.16.
that he has given him his own Son to redeem him: His Son has so
redeemed him, that now God is pleased for his Sons sake to suffer, nay, Esaias
55.1.
to command man to come to him. not asking any other satisfaction of him, Acts
2.37.
but only to repent and believe in him. That he may repent, he gives him the
Ministry of the Word of Life, Romans 8.30.
and the power of his Spirit to show him his sins, with the ugliness and
danger of them, Psalm. 119.104.
that he may hate them. And least the grieuousnesse and multitudes of them
should cause him despair of pardon for them; Ephesians. 1.11.
he begets in him Faith, to believe those promises of remission and life, 12,
which in his Son Christ Jesus, he has made him. 13.
He strengthens him to lay hold upon those promises, and apply them
particularly to himself: thus:

Whosoever believes in Christ, John 3.16.
shall not perish, but shall have life everlasting: But I believe in Christ,
therefore I shall not perish, but have life everlasting.

Again.

Whosoever hungers and thirsts after righteousness, Mat. 5.6.
is blessed, and shall be satisfied.

I Hunger and thirst after righteousness. Therefore I shall be satisfied, and
I am blessed.

Again.

He that believes in Christ, John 6.47.
though he were dead, yet shall he live.

I believe in Christ, though I was dead in sin: Therefore though I was dead,
yet shall I live.

Again.

He that believes that Jesus 1. Ioh. 4.15.
Christ is the Son of God, has everlasting life.

I believe that he is so: Therefore I have everlasting life.

When all this is done, God then forces him, though fearful, and backward,
and doubting at first, by the power of his Spirit to come in the Name of his
Son Christ, with boldness, comfort and Hope, before him, receives him to
grace, accepts his confession, puts away his sin, and enables him to grow and
go on in goodness: and all this, for the love he bears us in his Son. O
the infinite vnspeakeablenesse of that love! O the monstrous ingratitude of that
man that will seek to others, and not to God, or if to God, by others, and not
by Christ!

To end this point of our duty in praying; let us, having powered out our
hearts unto God, in such a manner as has been showed, beware we faint not in
continuing to call and cry to him still; though for a while he seem to repel
us: Psalm. 36.8.
for sure he will hear us, though he hold us off: He graciously at last will
turn again, as Christ did to the two blind men, Mat. 20.32 Mar. 10.49 Luke
18.39, 40.
and heal our wounded, diseased souls; infusing them with the life of grace,
speaking peace to our spirits, as he did to David, and make us know he is
become our salvation.

And since the number of his mercies upon us are like the number of the
Stars, Psalm. 71.15.
of the Sands, impossible to be counted for their multitude, or valued for
their worth; let our Praises fly up perpetually to Heaven, like those fragrant
and sweet smelling Odours of Arabia: the sent whereof will so delight him, that
he vvil make our souls, his Sanctuary; our hearts, his holy habitation and
resting place; our names precious; our lives good, and our end happy: when
having loosed the bonds of mortality, under which, we are ever groaning here,
he shall set us with the Angels, to praise him everlastingly, in the
brightness of his presence, Reu. 21.24.
where nothing else is done, but singing, Reu. 4.8.
and blessing of his name for ever.

After we have thus made our Sacrifice of Prayer, we must not so rest, as if
all were done: But that it may be profitable to us,

First, Psalm. 146.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 145. 18, 19, 20.
we must have a particular constant Faith, to believe that God can and will
accomplish our requests. Psalm. 138.7, 8.
That he can; because of his Ominipotencie: That he will; Psalm. 88.13.
because of his Promise: Otherwise, if we waver, if we doubt, if we faint, it
shows our Distrustfulnes, if not of his Power, at least of his Mercy, Iam.
1.5, 6, 7.
and then we shall receive nothing at his hands.

Next, look what Grace we pray for, Psalm. 119.101.
or what corruptions we pray against, Iam. 1.22.23.
we must strive earnestly to attain the one, and carefully watch yo avoid the
other, using all good and lawful means, ordained and allowed by God to that
end.

He that prays for knowledge in the Mysteries of our Redemption, must give
himself to Reading, Study, 1. Tim. 4.16.
Meditation: and if he be unlearned, to hearing of the Preachers, and
conference with such as are able to teach him, Heb. 13.17.
yet not neglecting his vocation and charge. 1. Tim. 5.8.


He that prays against the sins of his heart and life, Psalm. 39.1.
must fly all occasions may make him sin: else he shall merely by praying
mock God, and most fondly delude himself. Amos 4.4, 5.


When David so desired to be saved from his enemies, he ran not
presumptuously into their hands, but warily kept himself out of view: And when
Paul charged the Ephesians to be fervent in Ephesians. 6.18.
Prayer, that they may abound in all grace; he gave them no liberty to company
with such as might withdraw them from piety to sin; but straightly charged
them, and Saint Jude does, Jude 23. Ephesians. 4. and 5.
whereby they might be drawn to offend.

Here, therefore, it is needful, if we would have and good by our Prayers,
carefully to keep these few rules.

First, Psalm. 19.12, 13.
to mark the sins against which we have prayed, and the Devils subtle
practice, either still to continue them, or having forsaken them, to fall to
them again.

Secondly, Psalm. 3.6, 7, 8.
our frailety in resisting, and our readiness in yielding to temptations
offered.

Thirdly, Psalm. 4.4.
the customable disposition of our hearts, in our passions and affections of
Joy, Sorrow, Anger, Fear, Hope, Love, and how they sway us.

Fourthly, Psalm. 11.59.
the effect of those Passions in our lives, publicly in company; privately in
company; privately, at home; with our Wives, Children, Servants, Neighbors;
and more privately with our selves, when we are retired.

To prevent and foil the Devil, 1. Pet. 5.8, 9.
we must use Sobriety, Watchfulness, often and fervent prayers in our heart:
which though they be but short, such as this, O my God, let me not be
overcome of this temptation.

Lord, be thou my help, for I trust in thee.

Forsake me not, O God: leave me not to my self.

Give me understanding and power to do thy will.

Knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy Name, and such like: yet they
are so powerful, that they put the Devil to retrait and foil, at least for a
time.

To take heed our hearts, Psalm. 39.1. Pro. 23.26. Psalm. 119.55.
which beyond measure are deceitful, deceive us not; we must always have a
guard upon them: saying to our selves, O heart, thou should be the Temple
of my Redeemers most holy Spirit: why the^ do thou harbor these wicked
thoughts? and then further say, Cleanse thy house, dear Savior, that thou
may ever dwell with me.

To keep us from notorious and scandalous sins, Psalm. 139.21, 22. Psalm.
119.63. Psalm. 119.101.
we must boldly break from, and leave off all company and occasions to defile
us: If that cannot be, either in regard of command we are subject to, or other
circumstances that cannot be avoided; Psalm. 119.158.
let not our hearts nor tongues give consent, but our eyes be like David's,
gushing out, when we are at liberty, rivers of Tears, and bewail both
their, Psalm. 119.136.
and our own frailetie.

To preserve us from open and secret Atheism, Distrust, Despair, Presumption,
Blasphemy, Superstition, Idolatry, and neglect of serving God, and all sins
directly against the first Table: remember in our Hearts, in our lips, in our
lives, to be holy as our Heavenly. Father is, Mat. 5.48.
knowing he hates the sins of unfaithfulness, abhorres the wickedness of
tongue and lips, Pro. 6.16, 17, 18.
and upon wicked and profane livers will rain down the portion they shall
have to drink, Psalm. 11.6.
storms and tempest, and anguish of Soul, Reu. 20.15.
and fire and brimstone in Hellfire.

To preserve us from unrighteousness in our conversation, and the breach of
charity to our neighbors in our lives, remember always to follow Christ's
rule: Mat. 7.12.
Do as thou would be done to; and what thou would not be done to, do
not. And Saint Paul's, So run, 1. Cor. 9.24.
that thou may obtain a Crown of righteousness. And Saint John's, He that
loves not his brother, 1. Ioh. 4.20.
loves not God: And forget not Saint James, Iam. 2.18.
Show me thy faith by thy works: for, by them, 2. Pet. 1.8, 9, 10.
says Saint Peter, thou must make thy vocation and election sure, Else thy
prayers, and thy faith, and thy self are but dead, and utterly unacceptable in
the sight of God.

Lastly, we must keep our souls in a daily continuance of all these
spiritual exercises, taming the rebelliousnes of our flesh by Fasting, as
Saint Paul did, 1. Cor. 9.27.
when we find our selves pressed with dullness, Dan. 9.3.
and sloth, or unwillingness, 20.
or vanity: so will our spirits grow nimble and quick to call on God, 21.
our hearts soft and tender to mourn, our Prayers so fervent, that God will
hear them, and our Praises so accepted, that he will reward them.

That God which by the blood of his Son has redeemed us, enable us by his
Spirit, through the sufferings of his Son, to practice effectually all these
things. Amen. To him be glory and praise for evermore. ()

FINIS.

