THE CERTAIN AND TRVE NEWS, FROM ALL THE PARTS OF GERMANY AND POLAND, TO THIS
PRESENT 29. of October, 1621.

Published by Authority.

LONDON Printed by F. K. for B. D. and are to be sold by William Lee, at his
Shop in Fleetstreet, at the golden Buck^, near Serieants Inn. 1621.

From Hungary, October. 28. 1621.
IN Hungary, affairs go not very well for Bethelem Gabor, and the Marquess
of Iagendorff, are already in Morauia, and make themselves Masters of the
field, winning one place after another with great speediness: yet
nevertheless the treaty of Niclausburgh goes forward.

The accord between the Duke of Bauaria and Count Mansfield is broken off,
wherefore the Duke of Bauaria follows him foot by foot.

They in Franckendale behave themselves very brave and manfully, and if other
places had done the like, it would not have been in the Palatinate as it is.

Even now, I have news, that Count Mansfield is arrived at a place called
Necker, within four miles of Heydelberg: and it is thought that Franckendale
will be aided or succored by him, next Monday or Tuesday.

At Newenmarik, the Jesuits and Capuchines preach openly in the Castle, and
Parish Churches.

From Pr^staw in Silesia, the 17 of October. 1621.

Although the purposed Diet in Silesia was deferred by the Lords and States of
the Country: yet is it appointed again by the Emperor and Duke of Saxony,
that it shall be kept, and begin ere October be finished, because all manner of
preparation belonging thereunto is in a readiness, and already set forward.

The Marquess of Iagendorff was in Silesia with 20000. taking one place after
another, and so went into Morauia to the Prince of Tra^siluania, to whom came
10000. of Walachia, who spoil and burn all they meet withal, so that it is
reported, that these forces together, are very near 50000. I mean Bethelem
Gabors, and the Marquess of Iagendorff.

Glaty is not as yet taken, but holds out still.

Out of Poland, news is come, that there were slain in the last conflict
between them and the Turks, 20000. Polonians, and at least 40000. Turks and
Tartars.

It is also certain, that the Marquess of Brandenburg arrived in the end of
September last, at Warschan in Poland, whom the King of Poland met, with 500.
Heiduckens, and many horsemen, and so the said Marquess very shortly after
received the feoud of the King.

Out of Prussia the news is, that the King of Sweden has taken in Riga, or
Rigwe, and that the King of Poland is gone for certain, as resolved to meet
with the Turks army.

In Silesia, it is likely it will be very dangerous to live and continue, and
therefore many of them are about to buy land in the Country of Brandenburg,
fearing it will fall out very ill with them in their own Country.

The Lord of Do^n is come unto Iagendorff, with 3. Companies of foot, and 4.
pieces of Artillery, and so put a Garrison the rein, from whence he went unto
Trappaw, and took with him the Ordnance that were in Iagendorff, getting a
great booty by the way.

In Morauia there is like to be an uproar, and the Wallachiens will fall
directly to the Marquess, whereupon they suspect the Marquess in the upper
Silesia, who would march through their Country with 8000. Hungars and 6000.
Dutch, which has caused a great fear amongst the Soldiers on all sides.

From Vienna, 25. October. 1621.

After that Captain Reuber, contrary to his oath, had surrendered up the Town
of Scalitz, Bethelem Gabor went forward with his forces all along Morauia, and
as soon as the Soldiers which lay in Strafnitz perceived his coming, they
made themselves masters over their Captains and Commanders, hurting and
wounding some of them, especially one of Haugenitz very sore, because he would
not yield unto them, and afterward they threw him out at a window.

Thus when they had bound all their Captains and Commanders, they delivered
them and the Castle up unto Bethelem Gabor, who would have put them all to the
sword; but by the means of the Marquess of Iagendorff they were saved: yet a
great fear was raised in the Country by this means, that the treaty of
Niclaus^urgh should have been deferred: but since there arrived 9000. Silesians
in Morauia, it is begun.

In the mean time, the Hungarians did set upon Holl^schaw, the Lord Cantilar
of Bohemia, and the Lord General, with their followers, and took away from
them what they had: notwithstanding, the Earl of Emerid, Titzio, and five
other Hungarian Lords are come unto the Treaty, and shall (no question) have
what the whole country can afford.

Three days ago there was put in prison here, an Italian, called Cro^la,
with his son and servants, for coining certain pieces of money, amounting to
the value of a thousand pound.

Bethelem Gabor and the Marquess of Iagendorff, have taken in most places on
this side the Marsh, and our forces have likewise taken in the best quarters on
the other side all along, till you come to Randisch, where they mean to
remain on both sides, until a Treaty of peace is concluded.

The Bu^lean forces do daily great hurt, continuing burning and spoiling the
Country heereabout Newstadt: and although the chief places are beset with
Soldiers, as Hanbach, Prugg, Altenburgh, Eisenstad, and Newstadt, yet they
dare not venture upon the enemy, either for fear of discomfiture, or leaving
their Towns naked.

Since our forces left the Schutt and Thombia, and went into Morauia, they have
endured great scarcity, and still want necessary provision: for the Soldiers
living by prouant, and getting none, could neither pass through, nor travel
any longer, insomuch that many horses died for want of prouender, and as many
Soldiers for want of victuals, so that they are not able to resist the enemy:
besides, the sickness and dearth which is increased amongst them, does trouble
and affright them more and more.

Out of Prage, 27. of October. 1621.

They in Tabor do hitherto hold out, and have only 50. very expert in
shooting, so that none dare show themselves before it: all the forces which are
heereabouts, were brought together, being about 4000. foot, and 600. horse, who
should have given an assault upon the Town, but finding themselves too weak,
they desisted: whereupon they determined to undermine it: wherein likewise they
failed, by reason of the situation upon a stony and hard ground.

The Prince of Lichtenstein cannot as yet go forwards with his regiment of
foot, and 500. horse, because all the men which can be mustered, are brought
before Tabor. Likewise the Dukes forces go not forward, but lie here and
there on the high ways side, robbing and stealing from all they meet: and
although the Duke of Saxony has been called upon diverse times by the Emperor
to march with his Army into Morauia: yet for any thing we hear, he is not so
much as a going.

The Hungarians all this while are fallen very strong into Morauia, doing very
much hurt, and although the Imperials follow them, to intercept their outrage,
yet are they too weak to do any good upon them.

The Prince of Lichtenstein went yesterday in the forenoone with a few toward
Rundis, where the Archduke Charles is to meet him.

From Neurenbergh, October. 26. 1621.

On Sunday last, there passed by us Monsieur Tilly with 66. companies of foot,
44. troops of horse, 9. Pieces of Ordnance, 1500. waines, and 5000. horsemen,
all which went presently to Forth, where they pitched their Camp and resolved
to remain.

Hitherto they have had provision sent unto them from hence; they did much hurt
by the way, and terrified all the Country: Whether he followed with this Army
after the Count of Mansfield, who then lay at Rottenbergh, is uncertain,
because they suddenly encamped, as (belike) understanding of a new Treaty
between the Duke of Bauaria and the Count Mansfield.

From the Palatinate, the 26. of October. 1621.

The Ritterschaft lies as yet at Neckerhansen, and thereabouts.

The enemy before Franckendale, has got the half moon by Raldenlech already,
and they have been upon the wall at Franckendale, but were forced to a retreat
by the valor of the defendants* they look daily for Count Mansfield, who as
it is thought, will quarter himself about Masbach, and then no doubt, as soon
as he comes, Franckendale will be aided and relieved.

Last Friday there was a skirmish betwixt the Spaniards and Captain Obertrant,
who carried away with him three Pieces of Ordnance, leaving the fourth in the
lurch: all these he took from them very bravely.

At Manhaime the enemy would have taken the Ship-bridge away, but they were
beaten back again with no small loss.

Last Saturday the enemy made another strong assault upon the Sconce before
Franckendale, wherein the English lay, but were beaten off again with the
loss of 700. men, whereof some of them stuck so fast in the marish, that
they were there cut in pieces. There is a rumor that the Earl of
Nederysenburgh was slain with a Piece of Ordnance: some say he was but
hurt: but it is sure, that certain chief Captains were slain in that
assault. About midnight they made another assault upon the half Moon, and
took it with two Pieces of Ordnance, two tun of powder, with certain
clothes: but ere they could go quite away, all was recovered, and they lost
again many men, besides 300. that were wounded. There were found dead of the
English some 80. but it is uncertain how many they brought into the Town with
them. Their hope is now in Count Mansfield: for they have sent the enemy word,
they have nothing for them but powder and shot: in which, they were as good as
their words, as it should seem: for news came presently again, that they
have beaten the Spaniards once more from the wall of Franckendale.

From the Palatinate, the 30. of October. 1621.

That the Count Mansfield marching day and night, is come into the Palatinate,
his forces being 16000. has joined himself with Sir Horacio Vere.

Spinola hearing of it, made toward them with his forces: they perceiving him
willing to fight, joined battle with him, slaying 3000. of his men; and
following him so long as daylight lasted, killed many of them in the flight.

FINIS.

