AN APOLOGY FOR WOMEN: OR, Women's Defense.

Pend by C.N. late of Albane Hall in Oxon.

SOCRAT. Melius est mulieri non omnino nasci, quam conuitijs lacerar^. LONDON,
Printed by E. G. for Ri: Whittakers: and are to be sold at his shop at the
Kings head in Paul's Churchyard. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT EXCELLENTLY Virtuous Lady, MARY, Countess of Buckingham, C. N.
wishes event of all felicity.
MADAM, I need not have a Lantern and a Candle to inuestigate a virtuous
woman, as Diogenes had to find an honest man: they appear like so many
Stars, fixed in this terrestrial Globe. Yet no sooner did the Sun of your
presence enter into the Horizon of my thoughts, but it ouershaddowed all the
fore-appearers Honor seated in your breast, finds it self adorned as in a
rich Pa^ace, making that excellent, which makes it admirable, which caused me
to present unto your Ladyships protection, this my ill-looking Infant, the
maden-head (as I may so term it) of my invention, conceived in my brains, by
the frothy word of many Hyperbolizing selfe-conceitists, who deem it their
greatest grace, to be able to disgrace women. If then (exquisite Lady) an
ouer-speedy or weaning desire of repulsing your sexes wrongs, has caused my
brains with Semele, to bring forth this obortiue Bacchus, or brood. Be you the
Jove to nourish it in the lap of your good liking, that being wrapped in the
swaddling bands of your favor, the cold of contempt may not so easily freeze
it. And if Minerua grant a safe return to my Muse traff^king in her Indies, I
shall, I hope, present you with a more richer Prize.

Your Ladyships unfeignedly devoted in all obseruant service, CHAPTER NEVVSTEAD.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, if thy tongue has not tied thee to a cursed wife, I doubt
not, but the general view of my Subject, will win at the least thy ordinary
acceptance. But when by perusing, thou would espy how it is treated of, if
thou be illeterate, and the Curtain of Ignorance be drawn before the eyes
of thy Judgment, I do not much wey how thou art opinionated of me: if thou
commend me, Misere metui mali aliquid in me admiserim. Petrar. de virt. opin.
I shall esteem (as Antisthenes did, when he was praised of an evil one)
rather worse then better of my self: for quicquid pene vulgus laudat,
vituperio dignu^ est: Whatsoever ignorance commends, most usually deserves to
be discommended. I had rather with Lysimachus the Poet have the approbation of
one judicious Cato, then the applause of a multitude: the judgments of the
judicious, and the vulgar, (...) 2.
do seldom iumpe. But if thou be such an one as (...) lius would have his
Auditour, neither ignorant, nor learned; Because (says he) the one does
understand nothing, and the other more then I do of my self. If thou be, I
say, lukewarm in knowledge, and that the Aurora of Minerua, the dawning of the
day of literature, begins to twy-light thy capacity; Judge favorably of the
faults, that thy Eagle-eyed scrupulositie perceiues, they may be errors of
ignorance seen to thee: but they are an ignorance of the errors, unseen to
me. But if by the Ladder of industry (if any for the subjects sake dare to
credit) thou have ascended the top of Pernassus, I need not tell thee, as the
Poet says of one, Nemo repent fuit doctissimus, (...).
that perfection comes by degrees. Zeuxis his Helena was not suddenly lim'd
forth with one Pensil: Brains to day are as empty, as Tellus his purse of
money, may to morrow, with Midas, be stuffed with the gold of invention.

Qui non est hodie, cras magis aptus erit. Whatsoever thou art, unless thou be
a Brownist, I mean obstinate, I doubt not, but it will perfume thy breath, for
ever tainting women with reproaches But thou will say, thy evil speeches of
them proceeds from mirth: thou may as well say thou do lie with them, as
belie them in test. No intentions can make absolute evils good. Again, jests
should be fecetosi, not acetosi; pleasing, not piercing, neither continual:
therefore they are called sales of the Latins, quasi condimenta; we should use
the^ as Spices, to season our talk, not as the subject of it. But many may say
with Philippus the Iester, that they have got such an habit in speaking ill of
them in jest, that they know not how to speak well of them in earnest. And it
is a shrewd sign he never means well, that speaks always ill. But lest thou
turn from them, to test on me, for my prolixitie, in bidding me (as Diogenes
did the Citizens, that had exceeding ample gates, to a little City) shut the
gates of my Preface, lest the City of my Book run forth, I will leave thee.

Thine, as thou use me. C. N.

AN APOLOGY FOR WOMEN: OR, Women's Defense.
Of Women in general.
QVi alium sequitur, Sen. Ep^. 33.
nihil sequitur, who makes always examples his Copy, shall many times err
from the rules of discretion. Should I tread in the steps of our precisest
Methodists, in defining my Subject, I might seem with Didymus, to write that
which each one knew, and give a new testimony of that old and highway Adage,
(...), to burn Candle at noone day. For what so ignorant a Licinius, whose
dark capacity is not enlightened with this little candle of knowledge, to
know what man is (for every one knows man in general, though few in
particular themselves) from whom woman differs, only in a material
designation, having one and the same specificall essence. Now the golden Ball,
which their deserts do challenge, is not honor, nor riches, nor beauty; but
virtue. I strive not to make them excel men, as Caesar did Pompey in dignity,
or as the Lydeans Dames did their Husbands, in masterie; but as Seneca did his
Father, in virtue: Haec ista honesta contentio; this is an honest contention,
or contentious honesty.

It is true, at first, when there was but two actors, upon this Theater of the
world, woman was the Siren, that allured man unto evil: but now each man with
Tiresias, is metamorphosed into a woman: pleasures and delights, are the
ingendring Serpents, that have womanized their affections: Men were the more
perfect by nature: but women now then they, by industry, (and it is more
difficult to re-obtain virtue, then to keep it.) Eve then tempted Adam, but
now Adam tempts Eve: and it is better to be conquered by Nature, then by Art.
It is Catulus his saying, (...).
that he could in those things, which nature gave to man, suffer patiently
himself to be subdued, but not in those that might be assequuated, and got by
our endeavors. Liu. Dec. 3.
For to be delinquent or faulty by nature, that is not ours, but natures fault;
but to be ill by corruption, that is not natures, but our fault. What if she
were an isntrumental cause of our fall, was she not as much the cause of our
rising? But we all sooner forget benefits, then injuries: we are Eagle-eyed in
espying their faults, but dark sighted Owls, in perceiving their virtues. But
not to make them all alike virtuous, ^i^. Dec. 3.
as Mantuan would have them vicious, there are of women three sorts: The first
are those who have both a Theoreticall and Practical knowledge of virtue by
themselves, Suct. l. 12:
understanding those things that are good, and willingly desiring to effect
them: and these may I condingly entitle, as the Romans did Titus, deliciae
humani generis, the delight of mankind: Paterc. page 125.
each one of these is a Scipio, qui nihil in vita nisi laudandum, aut fecit,
aut dixit, who neither speak, nor do any thing, but which is commendable; so
apt to all goodness, that they seem with Cato to be borne to all actions they
undertake. The second, are those who though not so excellent, yet laudable: for
although we marvel at the greatest, yet we praise those that are less: Sen.
ep. 101.
non statim statim pufillus est, si quis maximo minus est: he is not presently
a Pigmy, that is less then a giant. In transcendent things those are great,
which are next to the best: those, I say, who with Bicinus have need of one to
direct them to goodness; although they know not that which is honest by
themselves, yet they obey others rightly admonishing them, and admoneri velle
secunda virtus, it is a second virtue, to endure reproving: for it argues a
willingness to be good: and pars magna bonitatis est, Sen. Epist. 34.
velle fieri bonum: the next degree of goodness, is the desire of goodness: these
may I term, Diod. de Jamb.
as Plutarch does Alcibiades, Camelions, from their facility of manners, whose
minds bend like the bones of the Iambulans, whither you will force them.
Cereus in vitium flecti, Horat. de Ar^e Poet.
as the Poet says of young men, easy to be drawn either to virtue, or vice.
But natura suis neruis pulcherrimum corpus, Euph. Sat. Apollo.
as perfect there is no so heavenly a body, in which does not hang some clouds
of corruption. Non datur sincerum aliquod sine mali admixtione: Phar. in prada
Mar.
there is nothing so sincere that has not some admixtion of evil. In this
Attica and pleasing field of woman, there grow some Thistles among the
Violets, and these are the third sort, the dregs and scumme (as the Latins
said of the Romans) of woman kind: obstinate Hera^litcs, who neither know
good themselves, nor condescend to others admonitions: Arist. Eth. l. 1. c. 3.
These I exclude (as Aristotle does them from his Ethics) from under the
shield of my defense, although your foule-mouthed Mantuans take occasion to
make these the Axeltree, on which the wheel of their tongues do continually
run: who, because their deserts could never seat them in the favor of any
virtuous women, therefore they empty the dregs of their stomachs upon all, with
the Romans, for one Tyrannical Tarquinius, to hate all Kings, like expert
Logicians, out of particulars, concluding an universal. Ask them what woman
is: and you shall have them speak contradiction ex tempore: they are mala
necessaria, necessary evils: as though evil could be necessary: Since
whatsoever is needful, appertains either to the esse, or been: Esse of man,
and there is nothing necessary either to his essence or perfection that is ill.
But lest if I should suffer the Planet of my wit to wander in the whole heaven
of woman, and run at random in the ample field of their virtues, it might
stray perhaps from the path way of Judgment; I will now teather and confine it
within the ground-plot of each of their particular qualities.

Of their religious Piety.
REligion meritoriously challenges to act the first part of their praise:
Osorius lib. de Christi Nobilit.
and Osorius tells me, that whom we would make immortal, we must prove
religious. Hall.
Our Matilda Sancti Brigit Hildegard, the first accusers of the Romish
Religion; the learned sister of Nazianzen, Paula Saluina Celantia, Fox lib. de
Mar.
Pillars of the Church: Holy Apollonia, whose celestial fire of zeal
extinguished the smart of this earthly and culunary fire: Vrsula, who with
eleven thousand Virgins suffered Martyrdom, seem to object envy unto me, in
concealing theirs and innumerable other pieties: but, alas, I want not the
will, but the power. The Poet bids me look: Horatius.
Quid valiant humeri? And I find the shoulders of my invention too narrow to
bear the burden of their due praises for (...). Hom. ad Il^. lib. 2.
If I had as many tongues as Briarius had hands, I could not enumerate the
praises due to their devotions: and it is better your pieties be concealed,
then insufficiently revealed; whiles we praise by halues, we disgrace: an ill
Instrument may shame a good work: the unworthiness of the agent many times
curses a good enterprise. Caesar his wars had better been inueloped in
obscurity then diuulged by botching Labio; Truth is better hid, then wronged by
telling.

Of their Continency and Chastity.
COntinency is defined by the Prince of Philosophers, Aris^o. Ethi. lib. 7.
cap. 1. Ausoni. hoc solum fecit nobile quod perut.
when we immoderately desire pleasures, and yet abstain from them. This
definition looks like Otho his life, only good in the end: the sweet of it,
which makes continency a virtue consists as the honey of the Be, in the Tail
(for Vbicunque desines, si been desines tota est) too immoderately to desire
pleasures, that argues weakness: but to be able to cast the cold ashes of
restraint, on the burning coals of desires, that the strongest virtue: the
object then of continency is pleasures in general; give me leave to restrain
them only to Veneriall. The first part of this virtue, viz. to immoderately
desire, I doubt not but the greatest Mysogunians will grant unto them: for the
oracle of our belief does testify it, tearming them the weaker vessels: and
weakness always is the most subject to gape after pleasures, and in their
bodies (if it may not seem superfluous) to add the Sun of verity the candle
light of humane reason. Air (says the Philosopher) does predominate, and
where most air is, there is most Humidum radicale: being both of one nature,
indifferently hot and moist, where there is most Humidudum radicale, there is
most ability of body, and where the body is most able, there naturally should
be most desire.

Now if any object as a fault, Tulli. de O ratore li. 1.
the natural pronenesse of their bodies, Ciceroes answer to the Romans
refusing Murena to be consul, because he had lived in Asia, shall be mine,
telling them, that was not commendable in Murena, that he had never seen, but
that he had lived continently in Asia. What if their bodies be an Asia, full of
delights? that is not discommendable: but that their souls, a Murena, should
live chaste in the Asia of their bodies, that's laudable (as Seneca says of
Leuanus) Hoc multo fortius ebrio ac vomitante populo sobrium esse; by this they
are most virtuous, that their minds should be sober, amongst the riotous
pleasures of their bodies. It is the chiefest part of Continency, that it can,
but will not do ill. Now to prove their voluntary abstinence from those their
desires, examples must be my only Medium, which although they be not
demonstrable arguments to prove a truth, yet they are probable, for (says
Cicero) vt habet in aetatibus authoritatem senectus, sic in exemplis
antiquitas: ancient examples to present times should be as venerable, as old
age to youth. Sen. Epis. 18.
Optimum ex praeterito consilium praesentis venit, we may best judge of the
present by things past. Lucretia, being asked of her husband, when Tarquinius
had offered her violence, how she did? answered, Liui. Deca. 12.
Quid salum est multeri amissa pudicitia? What can be safe to a woman, when
she is bereaved of her chastity? The Roman Lady that never kissed man, but her
husband, did therefore deemed all men like unto him, to have obnoxious and
noysom breaths. The Thebane maid, before Nicanor should be the caruer up of
her virginity, chose to be her own boistrous Butcher. Our Matilda, Speed Chron.
ere she would assent to the unlawful suit of King John, fled to a Monastery,
and there suffered death. And what was the reason that the ancients constituted
them the mouths of their Oracles, and governors of their Temples, but for
their chastity and sanctity? and whosoever shall read histories, or look into
these present times, shall find many chaste Orythyas, for one Carneades, many
continent Clea's for one Socrates, and on the contrary many a lascivious
Caligula, for one Messalina, many an incontinent Tiberius, for one Liuia^ but
that which gives the most luster of their continency, is, that men who as I
have proved should be naturally most chaste, are assailants, whereas they
should be defendants: but now custom has made it no fault in them, for
Multitudo peccantium tollit peccatum, the multitude of offenders takes away the
offense, and faults are no longer feared, then that they are rare, but our
English so Seneca tells them, Halt.
that offenses are much greater, as they are more universal. Do they not
observe hours, days, and all occasions, to batter the wailes of their
chastity? And what will not importunity and opportunity effect? which as they
aggrauate the fault in the agent, so they extenuate, though not excuse it in
the patient. Certainly, if they should use the like means, to obtain men, a
Nay would be as seldom as treason in the mouths of most men. Yet so
injurious are the censures of these our times, that if a Jove vanquish but, or
vitiate or in or in vanquishing, viciate a silly Io, a grave Cato, a light or
tender Virgin, black infamy shall ouercloud, and brand her reputation, not once
touching his. Juuena. Sat.


Ille pretium sceleris,
tulit hic Diade^^a.
Of he fault poor she
shall bear the blame,
When he is crowned with
a Diadem.
As sweetly sings a Lady in our English Ovid. Drayton Poet.


To men is granted
privilege to tempt:
But in that Charter,
women be exempt:
Their fault it self
serves for the faults excuse,
And makes it ours,
though yours be the abuse:
And howsoever,
although by force they win,
Yet on our weakness,
still returns the sin.
If women be unchaste, Jncontinem semi-malus Arist. Ethi. l. 7.

Continentia melior Tem. Arist. Ethi. l. 7.


they are but incontinent, and therefore but semi-malae, but half evil: If
man be unchaste, he is intemperate, and therefore totaliter malus, wholly evil,
if they be both chaste, she is continent, and he but temperant, and therefore
more to be praised: Seen Epis.
for Quamuis acundem finem vterque peruenerit, tamen mayor est laus, idem
efficere difficiliore materia: although they both attain the same end, yet it
is the more laudable to effect the same in a more difficult matter.

Of their Fortitude and Magnanimity.
ALthough continency be the best fortitude, and it is the greatest conquest,
when the body is the Chariot, that carries the mind triumphing over its
affections: therefore Laelius told his friend, Liui. deca.
being ensnared with the beauty of Syphax his wife, that it would be a more
noble victory, to conquer his affections to her, then in subduing the husband:
Maximum est imperium imperare sibi, and he is most valiant that conquers
himself: yet because you shall not deem them inferior to you in warrelike
fortitude, take Seneca's judgment of them, Sen. ca. 1^.
Quis dixerit naturam malign cum mulieribus egisse, par illis mihi creed
vigor, etc. who says, that nature has given her favors sparingly to woman,
they have the same vigor, and can, as well tolerate labors, as men, if they
be accustomed to them. To omit the men-conquering Amazons, there is none I know
so obscure, to whom the trumpet of fame has not blown their valors. (...)
Xerxes (he that was always last in the field, and first out) seeing Artemisia
bravely fighting amongst his Captains, said (for even the vicious think well
of virtue) (...): ^s there is in man womanish fear, so there is in woman
virill audacity.

The Romans had no less fight with the women, (...)
then with their husbands, in conquering the Cimbrians Semiramis receiving
ignominious speeches from the King of the Indians, D^^orus de antiqui.
renunciated and sent him word, she intended not to fight with words, but with
swords. Came. Brit.
The ancient inhabitants of this I Will, the Britains, Vaodicia being their
General, shaked off the Roman yoke, and most of their prosperous battles were
when women did lead them. Ya^^tus Anna. 4.
And was not France wholly ouerrunne by our English, Grim. his Fran.
until (as the French brag) that valorous Ioane gave life to the French,
confronted our brave Bedford in the field? And what was the Phoenix of her
time, our ever to be renowned Queen, Elizabeth, at whose frown Kings
trembled? And that fiery-spirited Blanch, Duchess of Orlean^e, when King Philip
had given her disgraceful words, replied, that if (to use my authors words)
she had a pair of (...), Fren. Hist.
he durst not so have reviled her. But thou will ^^y, they may have courageous
minds, but they want force. Oh! men are stronger then they. So are many beasts
stronger then men, Senc.
Corpus si magnas habet vires, non aliter quam furiosi validum est: Valor
consists in the mind, not in the body; not Megasomity, but Magnanimity, is the
virtue: it is the mind that extols dejected things, illustrates base things,
dehonestates great things. They yield to men to have winds like Dionysius that
strong-sided Trumpeter, A^^^us Hist.
who with his breath could puff about Wind-Mils.

So that they have minds able to blow away all base fears: Hom. (...). l. 3.
And what more evident sign of their valor, then their love of it? Homer
induces Helena complaining of Hymen, that he had espoused her to one, who
durst not defend her against the enemy. The Laconians seeing their husbands
fear, lending them wings to fly from the field, asked them if they intended
to obscond themselves in their mothers bellies? Tiphane perceiving her beloved
Bertrand, Fren. hi.
for the sweet of her company, to let his desire of Martial affairs quail
within him; told him she should the entirelier love him, if he did still
prosecute the honor and reputation of Chiualry. Drasm. Rhetor.
Damatria her son complaining of the shortness of his sword, bid him stand
nearer his enemy. Venus did more affect bloody Mars, then timorous and
fairefac't Apollo. And how many Katherines chose rather to be courted with
conquering Lances, then Court-like Rapters? I might here a posteriore (as the
Logicians term it) from the effects infer their fortitudes, women being
the cause of that calor caelestis, the heavenly fire of love, which burns, as
it did in Lepidus, all ignoble, and servile fears from men's hearts, the
whetstone (as one says of Anger) that exacuates and sets an edge on men's
obtuse and blunt affections: the Lapis Alchimicus, the Philosophers Stone, that
conuerts Leaden passions, into any golden sweet content: but that many pens
have testified the same, and I am loath to be a Broker of other men's wits.

Of their constancy and true love.
THere is a greater Sympathy of affections in friendships, (...) then (...),
betwixt man and woman, then man and man. For you shall not read of above four
or five couples of men that were linkt together in the bands of faithful
friendship, when Authors swarm with sexamples betwixt the other. Similitudo
morum, (...). 250.
the similitude of affections, as Otho obtained Neros, is the cause of virall
friendship: but (...), nature it self, is the foundation of conjugal
friendship. It is Iucunda amicitia, that is the cause of this vera amicitia. It
is pleasure, that ties the indissoluble knot of true friendship; delight begins
it, honesty confirms it: for where pleasure is, there is desire of society,
and that's the key, that locks their thoughts together. She then that is
espoused to one whom she does not affect, if she love another, ca^ not be
said to be inconstant, but incontinent. For inconstancy is a negation of
constancy: they must then first love, ere they be inconstant. If then
(courteous Reader) thou do but balance the scales of thy judgment with
impartialitie, duly waying the nature of inconstancy, thou will not hereafter
so rashly accuse them of instablenes. What if there be one Helena amongst all
the Graecians; one Liuia amongst all the Romans; one Cleopatra amongst all the
Egyptians: will thou therefore shoot the arrow of thy fame-wounding judgment
against all, the Graecians, Romans and Egyptians? There is no motion, but
circular, that is always perfect. All are not Stars, fixed in the Orb of
constancy, there must be some straying Planets. Just. l. 18.
Elisa Queen of Carthage, her Husband being murdered, and afterward being
solicited of many for her love, praecipitated her self from a Sky-kissing
Turret, Just. l. 18.
saying, I come, my Sychaeus, I come. Theogena, wife to Agathocles, refused to
depart from him, when all his subjects had relinquisht and forsaken him,
saying, Se non prosperae tantum, sed omnis fortunaeinisse societatem, she was
as well married to him in adversity, as in prosperity. And not to stand
particularizing, Diod.
the Getoi women would not be sent from their husbands besieged: but would
participate of the same fortune they did. D^od.
It being a custom amongst the Indians, that the women should be buried quick
with their husbands, if the thread of their lives were first cut, they so
willingly condiscended unto it, that many times one man having two wives, they
would be at mortal strife, who should be interred with him. Martia, the
Daughter of Cato, being demanded when she would surcease from mourning for her
deceased husband, Cum and vitae inquit: When I cease to live. The wife of
Philo, when she was asked why she did not adorn her self with Jewels at
public solemnizations, answered, It suffices me, that I have for my ornament
the virtue of my husband. The Wife of Po^^pey slew her self upon his dead
corpse, from whom, I think, the Tragedian took his sentence, Sen. Trag.
Mors misera non est, commori cum quo velis.

Pale death to life
is often of those preferred,
Who are with those,
whom they do love, interred.
Should I stand to enumerate all the regular Matrons that move within the
spear of fidelity; I might seem by a Logical Induction, in reckoning up all
particulars, to infer a general. Women, their minds are crystal, which
writ on by the Diamond of love, the slubbering fingers of Time can never
obliterate or blot forth: Like the state of the world above the Moon, where
there is no change. Their minds perhaps, as ( Seneca says) a wise man's, may
waver, but never alter.

Of their contempt, and freeness from Gluttony.
THere is none, I think, Rick. Rhet.
so scrupulously malicious, unless he resemble the Philosopher, who doubted
whether he were a man or a woman, and therefore would have it decided by
disputation, that will suffer any thought to move within the Zodiake of there
imaginations, which does not in this give Woman the preeminence. Peruse thou
all Authors, that have in there writings disgorged and spet forth their
venomous rancour against them: and if thou can find two of them that were
addicted to Gastrimorgisme, I will grant thee to infer that they are all
dishmongers, when the stream of Autors bears floting on their Pageants,
innumerable men's names, who by (...) and (...) have brought both bodies and
purses into consumptions. Philoxenus wished his neck were as long as a Cranes,
that he might the longer feel the sweetness of his meat: and he (qualis vita,
finis ita) having taken a mortal surfeit, by devouring almost a Polypus of the
quantity of two Else, desired to comfort his empty stomach, that death should
separate his lean soul, from his fat body, that he might eat the remainder.
Aclian. l. 12.
Sminderides, whose eyes were six times as long shut with Gluttony, as
Endymions was with sleep, from beholding the Sun, and then forsooth by Love,
being awaked from his sluggishnes, he rode a wooing, bravely attended with a
thousand Cooks, as many Fowlers, and so many Fishers. How many Nero's shall
you find banqueting, and swilling, from midday, to midnight, with Vitellius,
making (as one says) their (...) and (...), their (...): and honestum et parum
est, cui corpus multum, whose belly is his god, honesty most commonly is his
slave.

Of their dextericall Wits.
IF the acuteness of wit do follow, and be seen by the pureness of the
temperature of the body* as without doubt it is: for it here is usually (...),
the most exact sense of feeling and (...), a soft temperate flesh, where there
is a smirke and quick wit: women (being they are most commonly imbued with
those corporal favors) should by a consequent be the best (...), have the
most active, and excelling wits: and when Aristotle prefer's the more obtuse
and melancholy wit, before the dextericall; it is in affairs where there is
time for deliberation: otherways the prae-wit excels the post wit, as actions
performed in season, do those which are out of season. For many times, when
occasion is offered the prae-wit takes it by the forehead, when the other
whiles the time away it: does search the corners of the brains, for the oil
of inventions, stays till the door of answering be shut against it: Like the
messenger that came to tell Cassius of the victory, Paterc. pa. 122.
when he had already slain himself in despair of it: Pers^us.
and elleborum frustra ^umiam cutis aegra tumebat.

In vain we to invention fly,
When occasion's past, for to reply.
Socrates terms perspicuitie of wit, aurum diuinum, divine and refined gold,
whose Mine is the mind of a woman: And therefore the Muses, the fountain of
all wit, were women: The Sybils, quarum quot verba, tot Oracula, whose words as
an Oracle to the Romans, were women. The quintessence, the A per se (as one
says of Poets) of wit: Aeneas Syl.
the even flowing Euripus of faculty, learned Sapho, a woman. The daughter of
Tully being asked in scurrility, by Metellus who was her Father? replied, It
would be hard for thee to answer it, by reason of thy Mother, (for she was
esteemed none of the honestest.) It was a pretty extemporarie sleight of
Semarimus: who, A^lia^^ 7.
when the Indian King caused her to ascend his Throne, and gave her authority
to command the Soldiers, to do what she would; she presently bid them kill
the King himself: and so she obtained his Kingdom. And whose eye is not
blinded with malignitie, may see the flood of their wits still to flow in these
our times.

It is a more then probable sign, that they excel men in the actiuenesse of
wit, in that (as I have proved) they are less incident to Gurmandizing: Lab.
in I^^^.
for (...): and as a modern Poet pithyly Englisheth: Fat panches make lean
pates,
and groser bits
Enrich the ribs,
but bankrout quite the wits.


Of their Wisdom.
PErspicuitie of wit is of the Moralifts made the chiefest part of wisdom,
Mag. in Ar^s. l. 3.
differing solely from it: as pars does a toto: as the part from the whole.
Indeed, wisdom is nothing but a perfected wit, it being only necessary by
nature: the other parts got by experience. If then women have actiuenesse of
wit, reason will tell you, they most easily attain to prudence, which is
(because the knife of occasion, will not suffer me to shred it into all his
parts) either Oeconomicall, or Political. Concerning the first, the whole
multitude cries, as they do to Kings, Regnant, regnant: Let it appertain to
the Sex feminine to govern the house, and so their politikes prudence, who
knows how to guide a little, will quickly learn how to govern much. Our
politic Prudence sprung first, from Oeconomicall. And domus (says Aristotle)
est quasi parua quae dam ciuitas, and ciuitas quasi magna domus: a house is, as
it were a little City, and a City, as it were, a great house. But let one,
who with Diogenes could never afford woman a good word, speak for them,
saying, that nature had denied unto them strength: for other wise, their
courage being corroborated by policy, would be unconquerable. Antipater was
accustomed with his Daughter Phila, to consult of his most serious and warlike
affairs. (...). D^. 3.
Tannaquill, that politic Roman Dame, obtained by the sleyts of her wits, two
Empiredomes. Agrippina, when all the Captains could not assuage the raging of
the people, (...). 6
with her sweet and Nectar-flowing words of wit, calmed and pacified them.
Heluna, the Mother of Seneca, was expert in all Sci^nce: The Armenians expulsed
their King, to have a Woman sway the Scepter of their Monarchy: showing, that
there are women both more wise to judge what is to be expected, (...)
and more constant to bear it when it is happened. But I may say of their
virtues, as one says of vices; (...) 4^.
Multarum latent virtutes, quia imbecilles sunt, the clouds of obscurity, many
times ouershaddow the Sun of their Virtues from shining: and haud distat
inertia caelcita virtus. Virtue concealed, is esteemed little better then
sluggishnes. They may have nature which begins; Art which directs; but they
want use, which per^ecteth. Generosos animos Otium corrumpit: want of
employment, corrupts the brauest spirits; the fountain of their virtue,
corrupts by standing. Want of use, causes disabilitie; but custom, perfection.

Of their Beauty.
ALthough it be a Tenent amongst the Stoics (who would have men impassionate,
Diad. l. de Ant^q.
and without affections, as Diodorus writes of some Arabians) that there is no
external good, adds perfection to a man: Yet the Peripateticks hold them,
although not necessary, yet requisite, as one distinguishes, not absolute:
sed respective, they do not concur to perfection, (...)
as it is perfection, but as it is man's perfection: and of all aduentitiall,
and extraficall goods, Aristotle gives the principality to pulchritude, which
does not cause virtue, but graceth it. Plutarch accuses Seneca of
inconsiderate Judgment, in that he accuses Virgil of error, in saying that
Gratior est pulchro veniens ecorpore virtus.

Placed with beauty, virtue's like
Rich Pearl set in a Margarite.
Non satis est (says Galatcus) been quid facere, Call. de Mor.
nisi etiam fiat venuste. It is not sufficient to perform actions so well,
(...)
unless also decently. Sumus omnes (says Osorius) natura concin^tatis,
appetentes: we all naturally desire neatnes, and concinnity. Beauty is called
of Plato, a prerogative of nature, accidental to few: Of Theophrastus,
silentem fraudem, quod absque verbis persuadebat: a silent fraud, that
persuades without words. Of Carneades, (...): (...)
a Kingdom without a guard; because it commands without compulsion. And
therefore says the Philosopher, If there were any amongst the gods, that did
excel in external lineaments, the rest would deem it meet that they should
govern. (...)
The Catharri chose them to be liberty free, who were of a comely proportion,
the rest they made servile. (...)
And if I may not come within the reach of Iuuenals lash, the primus Motor, the
abstract of fairness, entitled (with reverence be it spoken) his Spouse in
the Canticles, by the name of fair: Intimating the Adamantine and winning
power it has, with mortals. For being the species of each object, and
impressed in the sense, before it be in the understanding, it is a good
consequent, that whatsoever is most delightful tothe Organical senses, the
Intellectual parts are most willing to receive. I need not set invention on
the rack, to prove their Prerogative in corporal feature, as I have in their
internal and mental form, since our sensible eyes do more easily see^, then
our intelligible understand. I have need of a Sapho's wit, to describe the Rose
of their beauty; not an Aristotle's Judgment, to prove it. Let each ones senses
be the glass, in which they view beauty; and then, I think, there will be
none so hypocritical, or false, that will not reflexe some shadow of their
pulchritude, by which they may see them to surpass men. Quantum len. ta solent
inter viburna Cupressi, as much as the lofty Cypress does ouerpeere the limber
shrubbe: or, Achil. Tac. lib. 8.
as one says of Ephesius, (...), as fair not amongst, but above men; as
Rodope, above the Virgins. The Crasis of their bodies, comes nearest to the
Physicians temperamentum ad pondus. Although selfe-tormenting envy, which
always, ^anquam ignis summapetit, a perpetual companion of virtue, seek to
congeale vapors in the sky of beauty, with the noisomnesse of its breath, by
obiecting incontinence unto it, as a Poet sings:

There is no name
(if she be false or not,)
But being fair,
some envious tongue will blot:
As if nature were an Hypocrite, to candie over the bitter Pills of the mind,
with sugared outsides. No, no, their external feature does strive (as
Paterculus says of Victinius) with the excellency of their minds; whose
virtues being a Jewel, inveloped in the silver O^e of their bodies, like
Achilles, of whom Maximus Tarrhus says, Not only to be extold for her golden
looks, but because he was adorned with all virtuous qualities. D^^ge. La^r.
(...)
The cord of society (as Chrysippus nominates it) or pulchritude, is described
to be a proportionable commixtion of the four elements in man's body, and
where no one element does predominate in the body, there no one passion does
captiuate the soul: (...)
for, Cuius in vllo elementi portio praeualebit, inde moris erunt, the mind
deriues his passions from the prevailing clement in the body: where Frigidity
does predominate, their t^morousnes; where Calidity, there choler: wherefore
Plato would have children prohibited, and young men in the hot Meridean of their
age, to abstain from Wine, because by califying the body, it inflameth also
the mind.

And whereas we see many with Lepidus, to have fairer bodies then minds, leaden
Rapiers, in golden Sheathes, like Diogenes young man, a Momus wit in an
Apello's body, like Nereus Beard in a painted Box, it is not by the instinct of
nature, but by the corruption of it: and on the contrary, when we see many
golden qualities placed, as Aesops Jewel, in in the dunghill, in Leaden
bodies, as in Galba, of whom Cicero said, his wit had an ill lodging; nature
does not imbue them with them, but industry obtaines them, as S^ere^^s and our
last Cardinal confessed of themselves, The temperature of the body does but
begin and inchoate our affections, custom and use are of most validity,
wherefore generally we may judge, as an Epigrammatist does of a slow paced
Lordane: Tardus es ingenio,
vt pedibus, natura etenim dat
Exterius specimen,
quod latet interius.
Thy leaden heels
no golden wit do show:
For inbred gifts
by outward limbs we know.


Of their comfort to man.
THere is nothing more oppugnant to man's nature, then solitude: and therefore
he is described to be animal sociale, Ven. epis. 10
a sociable creature: it is one of the two by which he has his prerogative of
beasts, Societas illi dominum animalium dedit: Company hinders from many
offenses, when Omnia nobis mala solitudo persuadit, Solitariness persuades to
all evil. Crates seeing a young man spaciating by himself, demanded what he
did there alone? Mecum (says he) loquor, Seneca.
I talk with my self. Take heed then, replied Crates, lest cum homine malo
loqueris, thou conferrest with an evil one. It is better for a man to be with
any one, then with himself. Art thou with Metelius in prosperity, and does
Fortune, with a prosperous gale of wind, blow the Ship of thy life toward the
Port of riches? thou can never by thy self, without the cords of friends,
cast Anchor in the Haven of contentednes: for Nullius boni sine societate
iucunda possessio est: There is no pleasing possession of any thing without a
companion. Again, art thou with Rutilius in adversity: and does the blustering
Boreas of misfortune, cast thee on the rock of poverty? yet solamen miseris,
the comfort of friends is comfort: it is a sweet thing in adversity to have,
who laments with us our miseries; vt serenitas gratior in tempestate aduenit,
Lip. epis. 62.
sic lugenti amico amicus, as serenity to Mariners after tempests; so the
Sunshine of a friends presence, is most grateful to his correlatiue, in the
tempest of his adversity: Lacrimis lacrimis miscere iu^at. Helena could tell
Hecuba, that her sorrow was light in respect of hers, because she had
coopartners in it: for magis exurunt, quos secretae lacerant curae. Care does
most scorch, when we pen it within the narrow compass of our own hearts. Well
then, there is no true joy, without a friend, and no friend, in respect of a
wife, a woman to a man, who, if thou be iocund, ads pleasure to thy mirth,
and makes the cup of thy heart ouerflow with the nectar of delight. Art thou
sad, and does care gnaw thy perplexed mind? why, Est aliquod fatale malu^ per
verba leuari, by words thou must ease it: and who so convenient as a wife ^o
vnclapse the bosom of thy thoughts unto? who either bedewing her cheeks with
tears for the, bears half thy burden, or else absterging or wiping with her
soft hand tears from thy eyes, as sorrow from thy soul, as ^ocasta did to
Oedipus with a consolatory, Sen^^^^ (...). nal. 3. and (...). pro us, (...).
Deca.
Quid ur uat, coniux, mala grauare quastu^ What helps it, Sweet,
to aggrauate
By sorrow thy
disastrous fate?


What a Patheticall Oration makes Messalinus for women, to associate their
husbands in the wars in foreign regions? Quod honestius, quam leuamentum
vxortum reuertentibus post laborem, etc? what more convenient, then to have,
when we return from our labors, then the comfort of our wives, (...)
as that one eye of Minerua testifies of them?

And thou shall find
in women virtues lie:
Sweote supple minds,
which soon to virtue bow,
Where they, by wisdoms rule
directed are,
And are not forced
fond thraldom to allow.
As we to get are framed,
so they to spare:
We made for pain,
they made, our pains to cherish,
We care abroad,
and they at home have care.
I may say of them, Euri. Trag.
as Euripides says of the just man, They seem non sibi, Pet. de reemr. sortu.
sed alijs natae, not to be borne to themselves, but to others. Dulces
parents, dulces fillij, dulces fratres, dulces amici, sed dulcissimae vxores.
It is a sweet thing to have parents, children, brothers and friends, but it is
most amoene, it is most sweet, to have the comfort of a loving woman, when
parents prove unnatural, children rebllious, brothers unkind, friends
unconstant, wives are only like the Gemelli of Hypocrates, inseparable; the
sweet that must relish all those sour potions: a wife is as a good conscience
to a man, wheresoever she is, there is true peace and joy: a man is never
perfect, until he be married, till then he is defective, he wants a Ribbe, not
vxor fulgit (as the Ciuilian says) radijs mariti, sed maritus radijs vxoris:
She is as the Sun, and he the Moon, the beams of her presence is the cause
of his shining. It may be an Axiom as well as an Adage, Verberat vxorem qui
non habet: unmarried men only beat their wives, who discommend them out of
ignorance for we cannot judge of sweet, until we taste them: but most malign
them, as Appius did Virginia, because they cannot obtai^e them: and married men
dislaude them, because they have them: for Quicquid domi est, vile est: we
always esteem the worst of that we enjoy: praesentium taedio futuri
desiderio laboramus, we are sick always of the present, and for future
things: tardius bona quam mala sensimus, (...).
we are more sensible of ill then good, as Cicero says of his Terentia, that
till he was exilde from her company, he never knew what content it brought
unto him; we never know what pleasures are, till we be bereaved of them:
widdowers can only judge of the comfort of a wife.

That Children are most obliged to their mothers.
EDucing, education, and affection, are the threefold cords that should tie
each child to the love of its mother: first, by educing or inducing to this
world; wherein every mother is as a good Landlord to her child, giving it both
house-roome and nutriment, when it, like an unruly Tenant, does grieve and vex
her, and, which is against the Lease of equity, many times cuts and crops the
flourishing trees of their beauty, and grown too great for their places, as
many men's minds are for their estates, they seek for a more ample habitation,
neither can they have the Lawyers been decessit, for many times (Proh dolor)
they ruinate in their departure, their continents, and yet women show
themselves the truest lovers, they love them that hurt them; and that it is
better not to begin a good action at all, then to desist; having begun,
they persevere in their benefits, giving them that alter a natura, that other
nature, education, nourishing our bodies as the Pellicane, though not with the
blood, yet with the substance of their breasts, and when they are able
instruments to exercise the faculties of the soul, they (and id maximum
beneficium, quod animum reddit meliorem; that is the greatest benefit which
perfects the soul) suckle our minds with the milk of good manners, training
us up, (...).
as Tanaquill did her son, in religion and learning. The two Gracchi reaped
all the flowers of their Oratory, from the Garden of their mothers virtues.
Sucto.
Caesar obtained his eloquence by conuersing with his mother. And Socrates,
that Athenian Eagle, exhausted all his wisdom from the wellspring of
Diol^nna's instructions. (...).
Lastly, by their affection. Rutilia followed her son Cotta in his exile; and
yet when death bereaved her of him, her eyes never showed, her heart loved him,
in expulso virtutem ostendit, in amisso, prudentiam: in his exile she showed
her love, in his death, her wisdom. Two Roman Matrons beholding their sons,
Petrar. de Matter.
whom they deemed to have bin slain in the great battle at Thraceninus, their
souls as incapable of so inexpected joy, took leave of their bodies. But I
need not induce Instances, since they are oftener with Niobe and Satyrus for
ouerlouing, the^ for not loving them, reprehended. Two reasons may be given,
why they do most affect their children. First, because they are certain they
are theirs. Wherefore T^l^machus being asked, if it were true that Ulysses was
his father? answered, Matter quide^^ta hoc dicit, My mother says he was.
Secondly, for that they have most sorrow by them: for emnis amat beneficia sua,
we love that most dearly, that costs us dearest. There is one honor (says
Arist^tle) due to the father, another to the mother: we owe most honor to our
father in a Geometrical proportion, in respect of dignity, but most to our
mother in an Arithmeticall proportion, in respect of desert. For we have of
them principally, (...).
(...), our essence: Secondly, (...), our nourishment: thirdly, (...), our
education: and amor, amoris magnes est, and durus est, qui amorem non rependit:
Love is the Loadstone of Love, and he is the most obdure, that does not repay
it. There is no ingratitude comparable to that which is committed against the
mother. Every man may say with Seneca, (...).
Quicquid praestiti, infra aestimationem materni muneris est. When I have
performed all that I can, I can never recompense her. For he is never
conquered in benefits, whose benefit it is, that he is conquered. I will wind
up the clue of this Tract, with that patheticall saying of Petrarch: Petrar. de
Matter.
Cum nihil sit natis
materno magis amore:
Iam matter studijs
est veneranda pijs.
Since Mothers most
their childrens states do tender:
By obsequious duty,
we them thanks should render.


The Castrophe.
IT is no marvel if the Catharri would rechange three or four men, Diod^. A^^.
for one woman captiuated or taken prisoner: if the Egyptians, and Lycians,
would have them rule both in public, and private: If the Lacedaemonians called
their wives (...), Ladies: Tacide M^r. O^r.
If the Germans paid so dear for their Spouses: If Plat^ held a woman as
necessary in a Family, as a King in a Country; since they do excel in all
the principal passions of the mind; having, as Museus says of Hero, a
hundred graces: In continency, Cato's; in fortitude, Scipio's; in constancy,
Achates; in pulchritude, as the Poet says of Amarintha, all beauty; in wit,
the Marmulade and sucket of Muses: Cordial Nepenthes of comfort to their
husbands: True Pellicans to their children. If Nature, says Plutarch, would
see her self, woman must be her perspectiue, or Looking-glass? Women? What
are they? Natures pride, Virtues ornament, Angels on earth, Saints in Heaven;
memorable to be registered, worthy to be served. In a word, if the world be a
Ring, woman is the Diamond set in this Ring.

And now my Pen will needs take his leave of its fair Love, the Paper, with
blubbering, as you see these ruder tears of Ink. I may say, as Festus says
of himself, Festus hist. Romans init.
Res gestas signaut, non scripsi, I have touched, not handled their virtues.
Wherein I have observed half of Aesops counsel to Solon, Lubin in Ju^e
(...): that his speech should be either short, or sweet. What I want in
suauitie, I have endeavored to supply by brevity: of which, if any one accuse
me, let Seneca give a prick to their Toade-swolne galls with his Nu^quam parum
est, quod satis est. I know, that more may be said of each quality; but I
desired not to say all, but enough.

FINIS.

