Nouemb. 28. Numb. 9.

BRIEF ABSTRACTS OVT OF DIVERSE LETTERS OF TRUST.

RELATING The News of this present Week, out of Persia, Egypt, Babylon,
Barbary, Turkey, Italy, Spain, Germany, Silesia, France, and the Low
Countries, with diverse passages from Sea.

Wherein are remembered the Troubles in the Turkish Empire, the Strength of the
Pirates of Argier, with a touch of the giving up of the Town of Glatz, and the
holding out of FRANKENDALE.

With the Victories of Count Mansfield in the Land of Embden, and the flight of
the Count of that Country; And the going of the Prince of Orange toward
Lingen.

Together with the Sea Businesses of the Spanish and Hollandish Fleetes.

In the end is added something of the French Affairs, with some other
Occurrences.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. for Nathaniel Butter, Nicholas Bourne, and William
Sheffard. 1622.

From Rome October. 18.
We told you before in our News, printed November 7. That the Cardinal
Ludouici had purchased the Duchy of Zaragola, of the Duke of that place, for
800000. Crowns, which is again confirmed by letters from Rome, October 18.
and there is added, that after the Cardinal had gone through with his
purchase, that the Pope himself went from Frescati to see it. At this Frescati
the Pope had most delicate and admirable devices of Waterworkes, as forced
Fountains, Springs, Conduits, and the like, the most curious in the world.

From Rome October. 25.
In regard that the river of Po, has by a late inundation and ouerflowing,
done much hurt in the territories of Bologna and Perrara, with the Bishopric
of Farenza; they have taken order to look to the making up and strengthening
of their banks, and the draining of their Sluices thereabouts: And the
Cardinal Capponi having an intention to lead the said river in^o the water
called Panara, the project is withstood by the neighboring Princes, who are
likely to sustain great loss if it should go forward.

From Rome the same day.
From Messina in Sicilia we hear, That the Prince Philiberto has sent a
Galleon, with eight hundred Spaniards in it, toward Vado, for the State of
Millan: But the people of Medena and Parmegia are up in Arms, to stay the
passage of any Warlike Bands, that should be brought that way; seeing that the
great Duke of Tuscanie will send Forces to the aid of the Duke of Mantua, who
fears an invasion from the Duke of Sauoy, because there is an Alliance
between these two Dukes; the Duke of Sauoy having married the Emperors
Sister, and the Emperor having lately married the Duke of Mantua's Daughter.

In Salerno in Sicilia, the great Merchants, Varnest and Como are broken for
60000 Crowns, and John Baptista for 80000.

Don Lewis di Marades is made Great Master of Malta, in place of the old
Master, lately deceased.

From Venice, October. 22.
Marcus Antonius de Dominis, the late Archbishop of Spalato, having lain at
Antwerpe some whiles, passed from thence homewards: and about the 20 of October
was safely gotten to Millan in Italy, whence he goes directly toward Rome.

From Constantinople, October. 3.
The Letters from thence report these particulars following.

First, That there was arrived there an Ambassador out of Poland, who came
with a stately train of an hundred followers. His Errand was, for confirmation
of the League, and continuation of the Peace, in the Reign of this present
Sultan Mustapha; which was after the end of the late Wars, made between his
King, and the former Sultan Osman.

Secondly, That the purpose of making Wars against the King of Persia holds
still: but that the preparations have been much hindered, and there have
fallen out many difficulties, which cross the Turkish intentions: The chief
of which was, That he having committed most of the preparations unto the
Bashaw of Babylon, because his Government lies next unto Persia; the Natives
and Subjects of Babylon had before made their Bashaw to disobey the Great
Turks Commands in that point: And when he since seemed willing to obey his
Lord and Master, the Babylonians have taken and burnt their Bashaw and Mufti
(the Mufti being their chief Priest or Pope of the Mohammedan Religion) and
have since chosen to themselves new Governors; whom, if the Grand Seignior
shall offer to disturb, or displace, they resolve to defend themselves against
him, and to put themselves, for the more security, under the protection of the
Sophi, or King of Persia; who, for some differences in Religion, is still, and
now especially, the mortallest and powerfullest Enemy that the Great Turk has.

This is also confirmed by other Letters, which came by the way of Venice:
which affirm also, That the Rebellion in Babylon is most certain; and that
the Bashaw there (I take it, they mean the new Bashaw of the Peoples choosing)
holds great correspondencie with the King of Persia.

Thirdly, these disturbances in the Eastern parts of the Turkish Empire, were
also much increased by a Sedition in Egypt: Which Country also being under
the Turkish Dominion, refused to accept of their new Bashaw, and made a most
furious Faction against him; so that the whole Country was also ready to
revolt: but by the persuasion of the former Bashaw, then going out of his
Office, the common people were something appeased, and entertained their new
Governor.

And thus you see the distractions of this huge and vaste Turkish Empire; which
begins to change their Obedience, with the Murder of their former Prince:
Which Seditions in the people, no doubt will be eagerly apprehended by the King
of Persia, who could willingly see every one of the Bashawes (like the
Captains after Alexanders death) catch a share for himself, that so he might
be too strong for any one of them single; and at last, whilst they fight with
him severally, he might overcome them all generally.

From Algier, October. 5.
From Algiers the Letters come by the way of Venice, whence they write; that
the two famous English Pirates, Captain Ward, and Captain Sampson, and diverse
others of their crew, are lately dead of the plague, which is extremely rife in
many parts of Barbary.

From Algiers again they write, that the Ambassador of the States of the Low
Countries Doctor Pinacker, had so well sped himself in his embassage, that he
had obtained an agreement betwixt those of Algier, and the united Provinces;
and that he had gotten liberty for diverse of his Countrymen, whom the Pirates
of Algier had taken at Sea, and made Galley-slaues of, which he having obtained
here, went for the same purpose toward Thunis, to discharge those Dutchmen,
who were there held either in the Prisons, or in the Galleys.

From Algier again they write, that the Pirates had 42. sail at sea,
excellently well provided: And that some of them had lately brought in a most
rich Prize to Algier, which was a Spanish Carrick bound from Lisbone in
Portugal, for the East Indies; whe^ein were found diverse Chests of money, of
Gold and Silver, etc. And they brought in also another Spanish Galleon, with
16. brass and many iron pieces of Ordnance, manned also with 250. Soldiers
and Sailers, and besides both these, they had gotten 4. other ships also.

From Marsilia, October. 27.
Some of the Galleys of Algiers have done great hurt to ours hereabouts, and
have nere to Tarracona taken a Spanish vessel coming from Botri, and another
from Marsilia, both richly laden; but the Mariners saved themselves by getting
a-shoare: But whiles the Pirates were pillaging the Ships, certain Spanish
Galleys came and rescued them out of their hands.

From Rome, October. 18.
By the way of Rome also the news comes from Algiers, that the Turkish Pirates
there have lately taken a ship, coming from Noua Hispania, wherein were to the
value of 20000. Crowns, and 200. men which were found aboard of her, were all
made slaves.

Thus you hear, that though Ward and Sampson, be dead, yet the Turks have
Pirates and Rouers enough to trouble all the Merchants that trade that way.

From Venice, October. 28.
From Madrid in Spain we hear, that the Duke de Alua, is departed the 20. of
the last month toward Barcellona, to take upon him the Viceroyes place, over
the Kingdom of Naples. And that there are some Commissioners of the Kings
privy Counsel appointed to examine the Duke of Ossuna, upon diverse
particulars: This Duke de Ossuna, was the former Viceroy of Naples, and for
some misdemeanors brought in disfavor with the King of Spain.

Hence also they write, that the King of Spaines Master of the lease, or of the
kings game, is declared Viceroy, or Lord Deputy of Barcellona, and Governor
of Millaine. Further they write, that the Duke of Pasterona is made Lord
Chamberlain of Spain. And that the Count of Monteri was to have an Embassage
toward Rome, with the entertainment of 30000. Crowns of yearly pension
during that service.

There is also news, that the King of Spain has given the City of Matera
unto Don Gonzales de Cordua, with the title of Prince, or Duke, as he shall
please to like best of.

From Genoa, October. 29.
Here are arrived 7. Galleys of the Duke de Oria, and 4. others belonging to
our Commonwealth of Genoa, with the Duke de Alua, who is landed at Nissa: from
whence he dispatched a Post to the Governor of Millaine, desiring him to meet
him at Final to confer there together: But the Governor answered him, that
he had yet received no order from Spain to leave Millaine. The said Galleyes
have brought a Million of Royalls of 8. out of Spain.

From Leverno, October. 30.
The good ship called San Pietro is here arrived from Alexandria, with very
rich lading, and also the ship called Sancta Maria, from Algiers, which amongst
other commodities, has brought also two small bales of Diamonds.

From Vienna, October. 26.
On Saturday morning the Persian Ambassador coming hither, had Audience the
next Sunday, his message is, to continue the league with his Imperial
Majesty, which the father to this present King of Persia so much desired: It
seems this King purposes to make himself gracious with the Christians, and to
give certain Christians of the Greek religion, freedom of conscience.

From Breslaw in Silesia, October. 27.
The Plague is still so great and raging in the lower Hungary, that whole
villages dye all up of it.

From Franckford. Nouemb. 12.
We have lately made mention of the surrendering up of the Castle of Manheim to
the Emperor, which being performed, the Garrison marched out thence betwixt
nine and eleven a clock in the forenoone, having 10 Companies of English, and
14 Companies of Dutch, but yet nothing near whole and full Companies. There
were found in the Castle 5000 malter or sacks of corn, and 300 Fuder or Tuns
of wine, and 52 pieces of Cannon; but as for powder, and such other provision,
nothing at all, for the besieged had bestowed that upon their enemies before.

From Franckford. Nouemb. 18.
The siege of Franckendale yet continues, for they in the Town being
indifferently well provided, purpose not to give it over too suddenly, without
honorable conditions. The Enemy has not much dry ground to entrench himself
upon, so that the besieged care not much for him, until the hard frost comes,
when the Enemy may both lie dry, and have firm ground to draw his Ordnance,
if the siege lasts so long, which is expected to be raised before that time.

From Hamborough, Nouemb. 12.
Since our last news printed Nouemb. 21. wherein we told you of the resolute
holding out of the siege of Glatz; we have heard since, that that strong town
is surrendered to the Emperor, by the young Count of Turn, who before so
bravely defended it: But the particulars we yet have not: Only thus much from
Hamborough, that the young Count was there arrived, with intention to go into
Holland, and that he was enforct to give it up for want of powder. But of this,
the next fair wind, will (we hope) bring us the particulars. In the mean
time, you may please to observe this, that the two strong pieces of Glatz and
Manheim, were much about a time given over, not for want of valor, but for
want of powder.

From the Diet of Regenspurg.
Here are also some letters in London, which relate, that the Count Mansfield
has invaded the Count of Embdens country, upon this quarrel (as it is
thought) that he maintained ten Companies for three months space in Spinolaes
Army, against the States and the Prince of Orange: And that the Marquess
Spinola has sent up forces to invade the Duke of Holsteins country.

From Amsterdam, Nouemb. 18.
The Prince of Orange (who we told you before in our last News, was gone up)
is now they say gone to take in Lingen, which Count Mansfield had a far off
blocked up before. That which may make this pass for truth is, for that Lingen
(as we told you) was sometimes the Prince of Oranges own inheritance, which he
now desires much to recover. The Count Mansfield is now got into Embden-land:
He is thought to have near 10000 horse. He demanded, as they say, 200000 Rixe
Dollars, and two principal Towns (the very keys of the country) of the Count
of Emden, in satisfaction to the States, whose enemies he had aided. Whereupon
the Count fled with his household furniture, toward the Bishop of Bremens
country, and sent his two daughters to the town of Embden to be there in more
safety.

It is confirmed, that the Count of Anholt, who has been the Bishop of
Cullens General, has had his town of Anholt taken from him by Count
Mansfield. The country comes in so fast to Count Mansfield, that he cannot
entertain them all, but is feign to thank and dismiss diverse.

The money which should pay those 16000, which the Colonel Kniphowsen is gone
to levy for the Duke of Brunswick, in Bremenland, Wesphalia, and Brunswick, is
made over to Embden by the States of the United Provinces; where it lies ready
for them.

The Duke of Brunswick was conveyed up toward Count Mansfield, by the Count
Henry of Nassaw his horse: which peradventure were those 30 Cornets, or some of
them, which we in our last News told you of, that Count Henry had at
Schencksconse.

We have here in London heard it again reported, that Count Mansfield and
Henry Vandenberg have had some bickering, wherein Mansfield had much the
better: but for that we wonder, how that Count Mansfield should go on so
quietly into Embden-land, and why the Count should fly, if Henry Vandenberg
were so near; as also for that we have heard no further of Henry Vandenbergs
march that way, unless it be he that is gone into the Duke of Holsteins
country; we will not report this as a certainty, till we see better authority
for it, in the Low Dutch relations.

From the Hague the 26 of Nouemb. 1622.
The News here is, That the Count Mansfield is with his forces in the County
of Embden, ransacking the country: And that the Bishop of Collen, and others,
raise also forces to do the like, meaning to revenge themselves upon the Duke
of Holsteins country, or thereabouts.

The Prince of Orange is also ready with 12000 men to march upwards.

From Duynkercke, the first of November.
Our valiant and famous Captain Whitbok is here deceased the six and twentieth
of October., those that employed him have lost much by his death, in the
judgment of the whole world: for he was a valiant and wary Captain. He was
buried with great state and pomp. Burgundy was drawn behind him, his Corpse
were wrapped up, in the habit of a Friar Predicant: the Hearse was followed by
an hundred Musketeers, who gave him three vollies before the Church at his
burial. He has left behind him a Brother of his, who is likewise a very
valiant Captain.

Concerning the tyranny of the Reformed Brothers (so the Dunkirkers here, call
the Hollanders who profess the Reformed Religion) upon those of Captain
Michael Jacobs Ship of Ostend, whom they fisht and gate out of the water, to
hang them, it will breed ill blood, for we are advised from Brussels, that the
seventy Rotterdammers and Emhuyseners, which are here in prison, must cast Dice
for their lives, to make up two and twenty out of them all, to be hanged; which
are just so many as the Hollanders hanged of ours. And our Princess the
Archduchesse shows her self very merciful, seeing she will have but number
for number put to death; and not all of these, which are here imprisoned.

Touching the Spanish Navy, seeing it is not arrived here with the last good
wind, we think that it is returned back again.

From Flushing the 22. of November.
After the finishing of this Letter, here comes certain tidings by a man of
war, that the Spanish Fleet some four and twenty or seven and twenty Sail
strong, is upon the Coast of France, betwixt Boloigne and Diepe, being resolved
to land five thousand Spaniards in Flanders. Whereupon we are here in all
haste making diverse sail ready, ten lying ready in the Haven, went presently
away.

It was some whiles since reported here in London, that the Spaniards had
already landed these five thousand men in France, to go from thence into
Flanders.

And now if you please to see what warlike preparations the Low-country-men
have lately made, against the Spanish Navy, you may read these three
particulars, which though they be not al new, because not all done at once; yet
we thought good to impart them, for that we would show you their whole Fleet,
or as much of it as we know.

From Amsterdam the eleventh of October.
Two days ago all the ships which were appointed at Dordrecht, Rotterdam, and
Ganda, sailed toward the Blaeke, which lies upon the way of Breda, what, and
whither they intend we do not know.

From Amsterdam the 22. of October.
Seeing the news of the coming of the Spanish Fleet continues, they are
arming here diverse great and small Vessels to go meet the same, and to this
effect there are likewise diverse Merchants ships arrested in Texel, and some
East India ships are even discharged, to do the like service.

From the Hage the 28. of October.
It is agreed again that the Poll-money shall be paid in this Country
again, beside the five hundredth penny of every ones estate.

Yesterday there came certain Letters unto his Excellency, and the States
General, whereupon they consulted, and resolved to set presently an hundred
sail forth.

The Harangue or Speech made unto the King, by the Deputed Committies of the
Reformed Churches of France, and the Sovereignty of Bearne.
SIr, We are sent in the name of all the Reformed Churches in France, and the
Sovereignty of Bearne, to beseech your Majesty in all humbleness, to grant
them Peace, Our hearts and minds being more humbled than our bodies do
prostrate themselves before your feet to crave the same; and request most
humbly your Majesty to believe, that the false reports which were spread abroad
amongst us of the designs of your Majesty against our Religion, have cast us
into this present misery and mishap: We intend not to color or excuse our
faults: We confess our selves guilty, and therefore present our selves here
before your Majesty to sue for pardon, and entreat your highness most
gracious favor, beseeching you to imitate God, whose Image you are, and to
consider our infirmities, and to attribute something to the fear which we
conceived by the false presages of the oppression of the libe^ty of our
consciences, and how much the more cu^pable your Majesty shall find us, so
much will your clemency be more gl^rious and renowned.

Henry the Great, your Father, of happy memory, has used our service, did
rely his trust upon us, and loved us We beseech your Majesty most humbly, that
like as you are Heir of his Royal Virtues, you will be so likewise of the good
will, which he bare unto us, and not otherwise to distinguish us hereafter,
from your other Subjects, then by that service, which we shall perform unto
your Highness. For hereby it is, that we hope to show that none can be more
than we, your most obedient, and most loyal Subjects and Servants.

Upon this Oration and submission followed the Kings Proclamation, which being
not as yet printed in our language, we here give you as fit to be added to the
former things, of that subject.


The Proclamation of the King, concerning the Peace, published at Paris the one
and thirtieth day of October 1622.
Printed at Paris by I. Morel and Peter Mettayer, Ordinary Printers to the
King, 1622.

By the King.
IT is made known by these presents, that his Majesty having been pleased of
his bounty and clemency, to grant peace to his Subjects of the pr^^^ded
Reformed Religion (after the assurances m^^^ unto his Highness in their
behalf, for their com^^cie and loyalty hereafter) wills and commands
expressly all his Subjects, of what quality and condition soever they be, to
keep and observe inuiolably the Peace in all places and parts of his Kingdom,
Countries, Lands, and Seigniories within his Dominion: and to live hereafter in
good union, friendship and concord, according to the Edicts and Proclamations,
without any contrauention, or provocation of any, either by deed or word,
directly, or indirectly, either of one side or the other, in regard of matters
past and happened, i^ the late commotions, which his Majesty will have
abolished and forgotten: The infringers and refractory persons shall be
punished as disturbers of the common quiet and Tranquillity, by the Judges and
Officers which are to censure them, and to enquire in such cases, whom his
Majesty commands and ordaines, to use all diligence and good endeavor, to the
said effect. Willing also to the said end, this present Proclamation to be read
and published in all the quarters of his Camp, and in all the Towns and places
of his Kingdom, Countries, and Territories under his obedience. And because
none should pretend ignorance, and that every one may conform himself
hereunto,

This is given in the Camp before Mompellier, the eighteenth day of October,
1622. It was Signed, Lewis, and Lower De Lomenie.
The one and thirtieth day of October 1622. this Proclamation and Commandment
of the King, ^ere abo^e written, has been by me (who have set (...) hand h^re
under) a sworn and ordinary C^ier o^ ^he Kings, read and published with the
sound of ^^^mpet, and public cry thorowout the City, and Suburbs of Paris,
and affixed on the usual pla^^s: b^ing accompanied with Mathurin Noyret a
s^orn Trumpet, and three other Trumpeters.

Signed Le D.
Upon this agreement and the Kings pleasure certainly known, hear what
followed.


From Lions the 23. of October
The gates of Mompellier have been now many days set open, and many sick and
hurt, are out of the Kings Camp, conveyed into the City. Both the Queens are
as yet here, and in health.

Yesterday and the day before are here arrived diverse of the Kings soldiers
ou^ of Champaigne, under the command of the Duke of Angoulesme, who is resolved
to conduct them unto his Majesty to get their pay, but it is thought our
Governor will not suffer them to go further.

They are lodged here in the Suburbs and the neighboring villages, where they
do great hurt amongst the country people, which would they were delivered of
their guests.

FINIS.

