SERENISSIMA ISABELLA CLARA EVGENIA INFANTA HISPANIARUM. etc.
portrait The pourtraicture of the most Illustrious Isabella Clara Eugenia,
Infanta of Spain Duchess of Austria and Burgundy: And Princess of Belgia

R E sculpt


A true Coppie of the transportation of the Low Countries, Burgundy, and the
County of Charrolois:

Done by the King of Spain, for the Dowry of his eldest Daughter. Given in
marriage unto the Cardinal ALBERT, Duke of Austria, with the Articles and
Conditions of the same, signed by the King in Madrill.

Translated out of Dutch by H. W. November. 1598.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Paul Linley, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard,
at the sign of the Black Bear.

The Coppie of the transport done by his Majesty, to the Infanta his Eldest
Daughter: of the Netherlands, Burgundy, and the County of Charolois in the
year. 1598.
PHILL. Rex.
To all present and to come, which shall see or hear these presents: greeting.
WHereas we have found to be most behoouefull not only to our Provinces of
the Low Countries, but also, unto all Christendom in general, no longer to
delay the marriage of our dear and beloved eldest Daughter the Infanta, Isabel
Clara Eugenia, being moved thereunto, as well for the conservation of our
House, as diverse other good respects: as also, for the great good affection,
which we bear unto our beloved Brother, Nephew, and Cousin, the Archduke
Albert, (a^ this present) Lieuetenant, Governor, and Captain general, for us
in our Netherlands, and Burgundy, we have cast our eyes on him, and choosing
him for the future Husband of our said Eldest Daughter, the whole, as well with
the consent and pleasure of our holy Father the Pope, who condiscendeth, and
grants the dispensations thereunto belonging, as also with the agreement and
consent, of the most high, excellent, and puissant Prince, our beloved Brother,
Nephew, and Cousin, Rodolph, the second of that name, Emperor of the Romans,
together with our well-beloved Sister the Empress his Mother: which being
considered, and to the end that our said Daughter might be furnished with
reasonable means, such as are required for her great calling and merrits. Also
to show and make known, the love which we have and do bear, unto our said
Netherlands and Burgundy, we have resolved (to the aduanncement of the said
marriage) to give and transport all those said Countries, unto our said
Daughter, and all thereunto belonging, in the manner which shall be specified
heere-vnder. The whole, with the consent and good will, of our dear and
well-beloved good Son, the Prince Phillip, our only Son and heir: according
to the advertisement, which (by us and our said Son) has been given unto
the principal Lords and Knights of our order, Governors and Estates of our
said Netherlands, which are in our obeisance, together with those of our
Country of Burgundy. All the which have witnessed and declared by their
answer, the joy and contentment which they received at our so kind
resolution, which they know and confess, to be for the rest and tranquillity
of our said Netherlands, and that it is the true and right course to attain to
a good and firm peace, and to be delivered from such a troublesome war:
which quiet and tranquillity, we have always wished unto them. And
considering that (which unto all is most manifest) the greatest felicity which
may happen to a Country, is to be governed by the sight and presence of their
natural Prince and Lord, God is witness of the trouble and care which we have
had, because we have not been able in that sort to do it personally, as
(truly) we well wished, if other great and important affairs of our Realm of
Spain, had not forced and constrained us to make a continual residence
therein, without moving any thing from thence: as also at this present they
constrain us. And although the age of our said Son, seem more fit to
travail then does ours, notwithstanding, it has been the pleasure of the
Almighty, to give so many other kingdoms and Counteies, for the good
government of which, there will never want affairs of great importance, for
the which also his presence shall here be needful. We have then found most
convenient to take this resolution, to he end that our said Low Countries be
not left in the fore-passed inconveniences, together with the reason that we
have to appoint the portion of our said Daughter the Infanta according to her
merrits, and the greatness of her birth. As also perticulerly, that next unto
the said Prince our Son, (unto whom God confirm with long years and
prosperity to his service) our said eldest Daughter is the first and nearest
heir unto the said Countries, and therefore, by virtue of the will and
pleasure of our said Son, she may from this time be constituted in the same.
The more because we have chose these means, hoping that thereby our said
Netherlands may return, to their ancient flower, rest, and prosperity, which
heretofore they have had.

Wherefore we make known, That desiring at this present to put in execution,
that, whereon we have so ripely considered, and in respect of the voluntary
consent, which our said Son the Prince has so liberally given thereunto,
after he had understood, the submission wherewith our said Countries did
confirm our will and intention, we have resolved and decreed, to cede and
transport to our said Daughter th'Infanta, and to the advancement of the said
marriage, all our said Provinces of the Netherlands and Burgundy, in the
form, manner, and conditions heere-vnder expressed.

I.
THE first condition is, and not otherwise, that our said Daughter is to take
in marriage th'Archduke Albert, in virtue of the dispensations which our holy
Father the Pope, has granted to that end, that she shall accept for her
Dowry, the said Low Countries, and the County of Burgundy. And in case that
the said marriage were disturbed for any cause whatsoever, the said donation
and cession, shall be void and of none effect: as in such a case (at this
present) we recall and anullate the same.

II.
Item on condition and not otherwise, that the Children and descendents of the
said marriages, Males and Females, ligitimates, and borne in true marriage,
(and not the unlawful) although by subsequent it were in marriage, the Elder
proceeding the Younger, and the Male the Female: in like degree they shall be
Heirs, from hand to hand of all the said provinces, conioyntly without
eclipsing or seperating them, declaring that the Son or Daughter, of the
Eldest Son or Daughter deceased, during the life of their Father: the same
shall be preferred unto the Uncles, or any other of the collateral line.

III.
Item on condition, and not otherwise, that in case (which God defend) that
there were neither Son nor Daughter of this marriage, or that they should be
deceased, in the time of the decease of one, either of ye said Archduke Albert,
or our Daughter th'Infanta, which shall be married: The said donation and
concession shall be from hence-forward void and of no effect. In which case if
our said Daughter remain a Widow, she shall be furnished with the lawful
portion from the Fathers side, and the Dowry of the Mothers side, such as
appertains unto her: Over and above, what we or our said Son the Prince,
might do in such case in her behalf, for the love which we bear her. And if
the said Archduke our good Nephew suruiued our said Daughter th'Infanta, he
shall remain Governor of the said Netherlands, for, and in the name of the
Proprietary unto whom the said Countries (as then) should be due.

IIII.
Item on condition, and not otherwise, that if all the descendants, Males, and
Females, procreated of the same marriage in such sort, that none (of those
which should be called to those goods) should remain in such case. They shall
return all to the kingdom of Spain, unto him who shall be descended from us,
which make this donation and concession: As in such case at this present we
give it him.

V.
Item on condition, and not otherwise, that neither our said Daughter
th'Infanta, nor any other of the Successors, shall not (for any cause or
prete^e so over) transport, give, nor allienate the said Countries without our
consent, or the consent of our Heirs, and Successors in these kingdoms.

VI.
Item on condition, and not otherwise, that she which shall be Princess or
Lady of the said Low Countries, shall marry with the King of Spain, or with the
Prince his Son, which as then shall live, keep always furnished with the due
dispensations, in what shall be needful. And if (as then) they had no mind, or
means to make the said marriage, nor to have them Countries in Dowry, (in such
case) the said Lady may not take any other husband, nor bring him in Dowry any
part of the said Netherland, except it be with our advice and consent, and of
our Heirs or Successors in the said Kingdom of Spain, which shall be
desenceded from us, and in case of contrauention: All which shall have been
given and granted, shall return unto them: as if this gift, concession, and
transport, had not been made.

VII.
Item on condition, and not otherwise, that each and every one of the Princes
and Lords of the said Netherlands, shall not marry his Sons nor Daughters, but
with our advice and consent, or of our Heirs and Successors Kings of Spain.

VIII.
Item on condition, and not otherwise, that neither our said Daughter
th'Infanta, her Husband, nor any of his Successors (unto which the said
Countries shall be due) shall not in any wise make any Trade, Traffic, nor
Contract to the East or West Indies: neither send thither any sort of Ships,
under what title, color, or pretext soever: on pain that the said Countries,
in the case of the said contrauention shall be confiscated. And if any of
these Subjects should (against this defense) trade or travail to the said
Indies, the Lords of the said Countries shall punish them with pains,
confiscation of goods, and other more severe, yea with death.

IX.
Item on condition, and not otherwise, that if the said Archduke Albert our
beloved Nephewe should survive our said Daughter the Infanta leaving a Son
or Daughter, he shall have the government of the said Son or Daughter Heirs,
and the use of all his goods, as if our Daughter the Infanta were yet alive:
And over and above, our Nephewe (in this case) shall enjoy (during his life) all
the said Countries, and shall be Vsufructier of the same, so far forth, that
he entertain and nourish (all such Children) honorably according to their
calling and quality, and that unto the Elder, (be it Son or Daughter) he give
the Duchy of Luxembourgh, and the County of Chime, which depends thereon to
have and enjoy the same during the Fathers life, after the which, he shall have
all, as his universal Heir. Being here expressly declared that this clause of
the Vsufruict be only understood in favor of our good Nephew th'Archduke
Albert, and that it may not be drawn in consequence, that none of his
Successors might allege any example, nor pretend any right thereunto in any
such like case.

X.
Item on condition, and not otherwise: This being above all others the
principal and chiefest obligation. That all the Children and Desendants of the
said marriage, following the piety and Religion which shines in them, shall
live and dye in our holy Catholic faith, as our holy Roman Church teaches,
and before they take possession of the said Netherlands, shall thereof take
their oath in the form and manner as is expressed after this Article. And in
case (which God defend) that any of the said Desendants, should go astray from
our holy faith, and should fall in any heresy: that after our holy Father the
Pope shall have declared him for such:) he shall be deprived of the
Administration, Possession, and propriety, of the said Provinces, and that the
Subjects and Vassals of the same, obey him no more: but that they receive and
admit, the nearest Catholic, following by degree, who in case of decease, or
such fault, ought to succeed him: and the said Heretic shall be reputed, as
if he were deceased by natural death.

EGo iuro, ad Sancta Dei Euangelia, quod semper ad extremum vitae meae
spiritum, Sacrosanctam Fidem Catholicam, quam tenet, docet and predicat Sancta
Catholica and Apostolica Romana Ecclesia (omnium Ecclesiarum Matter and
Magistra) constanter prositebor, and fideliter firmiterque credam, and
veraciter tenebo: Atque came a meis subditis teneri, doceri and predicari
(quantum in me erit) curabo. Sic me Deus adiuvet, and haec Sancta Dei
Euangelia. The translation of the above written oath.
I Swear, by the holy Gospel of GOD, always, even to the last gasp of my
life, steadfastly to profess, truly and assuredly to believe, and unfeignedly to
maintain, the holy Catholic faith, which is held, taught, and preached, by
the holy Catholic, and Apostolic Romish Church, (of all Churches the mother
and mistrisse.) And to take care (as much as in me lies) that the same shall
be used, professed, taught, and preached to my subjects. So help me God, and
his holy Gospel.

XI.
Item on condition, and not otherwise, that the greatest stabilitie of peace,
the love, and coresponce, which ought to be between the Kings of these
kingdoms, shall be between our descendants successors the Princes, and
Lords of the Countries on the other side. Also our descendants and successors,
and every one of them, which in time shall enter into the possession and
demaine of the said Low Countries and Burgundy, shall praise, approve, and
ratify of superaboundance, all what is contained in this article:

XII.
And being, that our intention and will is, that the above written conditions,
shall be fully accomplished, together with the same we give, cede, abandon,
trans-fer, renounce, agree, and consent, indowrie, feeft, or reedefeeft, (and
by what better way or form by right may or ought to be done, without that
the forcelesse form, may be any way prejudicial to that which is forcible,
profitable, or aduantagious) to the said Infanta, Isabel Clara Eugenia, our
dear and well-beloved eldest Daughter, all our Netherlands, and every Province
thereof, and the County of Burgundy, therein comprehended the County of
Charrolois, and the Dukedomes, Principalities, Marquisats, Counties, Barronies,
Shieres, Cities, Castles and Forts, which are in our said. Netherlands and
Burgundy, together with all regals, leanes, homages, rites, liberties,
freedoms, rites of patronage, rents, revenues, domaines, aids, confiscations,
and forfeitures, with all and whatsoever rites and actions, which we may or
might pretend in the cause of the Netherlands, and County of Burgundy,
together with all preheminences, prerogatives, privileges, exemptions,
^dnoueries, jurisdictions, resorts, and other superiorities whatsoever, and in
what sort they may be, or for what cause and occasion they may appertain unto
us, be it of patrimony or otherwise in any title or howsoever it may be. To
enjoy them wholly, and in such sort as we have enjoyed them, without any
exception, so far forth (always) that they be kept inuiolablie all and
every one of the above specified conditions. And the conditions made by the
immortal memory the Emperor, my Lord and Father, in the month of November,
Ann. 1549. touching the union of the said Low Countries, not any way consenting
nor agreeing any division, or separation in ye same, for what cause, nor in any
manner whatsoever.

XIII.
And our intention is, as we declare and expressly ordain by these presents,
that notwithstanding this our gift, concession and transport, our said
Daugther the Infanta, and her future husband, the Archduke Albert, shall be
bound to pay and to satis-fie to all such debts and obligations, contracted by
us, or in our Name, or by the late Imperial Majesty, upon our patrimony and
domaine of the said Netherlands and County of Burgundy. And that also they
shall be bound, to sustain, bear, and maintain, all such rents, pensions
for life, and all others whatsoever gifts, recompenses, and others, which his
said Imperial Majesty, us, and our Predicessors, has, or do give, grant,
and assign unto any persons whatsoever. And also we make, create, constitute,
and name (by these presents, in the form and quality above mentioned) our
said Daughter the Infanta, for Princess and Lady of the said Netherlands, and
the County of Burgundy, together with the aforesaiyd County of Charrolois.
Granting moreover, unto our said Daughter, that over and above the particular
titles of each Province, of the said Netherlands and County of Burgundy, she
may name and entitle herself Duchess of Burgundy, although that we have
kept for us, and the said Prince our Son, (as long as it shall please us) the
same title of Duke of Burgundy, with all the rites which thereby are due to
us: together with the name of chief and sovereign of our order of the Golden
Fleece, with full power and authority to dispose thereof in time to come, as
we shall find most convenient.

We also further consent, agree, and grant unto our said Daughter the
Infanta, and give her absolute power and vnreuocable, of her own private
authority, without any other requisition or consent of her said future
husband, or other, to take, and ceise, the entire and full possession, of all
the said Netherlands, and County of Burgundy and Charrolois, and to that
effect, cause the general Estates of the said Countries to be assembled, and
the particular Estates of every Province. Or to use any other order or form,
which she shall find most requisite and convenient, to declare this our
concession and transport. As also to do the oath which shall be needful unto
the said subjects, and Estates of the said Countries, and to demand inuesture
of the pieces and signiories which shall be needful: and like-wise to receive
of them the due oath, and to bind them unto all, according to all whereunto by
their precedent oaths they were reciprocally bound.

And until such time as our said Daughter shall have taken, (or cause to be
taken in her name) the full possession of the said Netherlands, County of
Burgundy, and Charolois, in the form and manner referred by these presents, we
set and pose our selves as Possessors of the same, in the name and behalf of
our said Daughter: In witness whereof we ordain, and command these Letters
Patents to be delivered unto her: consenting and granting (moreover) unto her,
to detain, commit, and institute, in the said Netherlands, and Burgundy:
Governors, Judges, Justices, and Officers, either for the Guard or defense
thereof, or for the administration of Justice, policy, receite of the Demaines,
or otherwise. And for the rest, to do as a true Princess and natural Lady,
and Proprietary of those Countries ought, either by right custom, or
otherwise, to do, as we have done, and might have done. Notwithstanding,
always observing the said conditions above inferred. And to this effect we
have and do quitte, absolve, and discharge by these presents, all Bishops,
Abbots, Prelates, and other Churchmen. Dukes, Princes, Marquesses, Counts,
Barrons, Governors, Chiefetaines, Captains of Countries and Cities,
Cheefetaines, Presidents, and other of our Counsel. Chauncellors, and other
Justices and Officers. Captains, men of War, and Soldiers, of Forts and
Castles: their Lieuetenants, Knights, Squires, and vassailes: together with the
men of law, Citizens, inhabitants of Cities, Boroughs, freedoms, and
villages, and each and every one the subjects of our said Netherlands, County
of Burgundy and Charroloies, and each of them, respectively of the oaths of
fidelity, faith, homage, promise, and obligations, which they ought to us, as
to their Lord and Sovereign Prince. Charging, willing, and commanding
expressly unto them, that they swear and receive the said Infanta our
Daughter, for their true Princess and Lady, and to swear unto her, the due
oaths of fidelity, faith, homage, promise, and obligation, in the manner
accustomed, according to the nature of the Countries, Lands, and Signories, and
that (moreeuer) they bear unto her, and her said future Husband, all honor,
reverence, affection, obeisance, fidelity and service, as good and loyal
subjects ought, and are bound to do, to their true and natural Princess, and
as until this present they have done to us. And with supplition and
amendment of all and every defaults, as much of right as deed, the which might
happen between this our domiation, concession, and transport. And of our own
moving and incitation, full and absolute royal power, (which herein we will
and do use) have and do derogate, unto all and any laws, constitutions, and
customs, which may or might contrary here against: for such is our express
will and desire.

And to the end that all what is above said, may be plain, and manifest
matter, and which may continue, always fast, sure, and stable, we have
subsigned the same with our own Name, and caused our great Seal to be hung
thereat. Willing and ordaining, that inregistration be made hereof, to be held
in great estimation and value, in all and every our privy Counsels, and
Chambers of account where it shall be requisite. Given in our City of
Madrill, Realm of Castile, the sixth day of the Month of May, 1598. and of our
reign of Naples and Jerusalem, the 45. of Castile, Arragon, Cicile, and
others, the 44. and of Portingall the 19.

Paraphed thus. N. D. V.
Subsigned, PHILLIPPVS.
And more under, By the King.
And under written, A. de la Loo

Approbation, Aggreation, and the Oath of the Prince of Spain, in the
transportation of the Netherlands and Burgundy.
PHILLIP by the grace of GOD, Prince, only son and heir to the Kingdoms,
Countries, and Dominions, of the King PHILLIP, the second of that name, my Lord
and Father.
Unto all present and to come, greeting.
MY said Lord and Father, having resolved to espouse my Lady the Infanta
Isabel Clara Eugenia, our dear and well beloved Sister, with the Archouke
Albert, our beloved Uncle and Cousin, and that according to the same, his
Catholic Majesty has also determined in our communication and with our
consent, being thereunto persuaded through great respects of the common good,
yea, to the rest and tranquillity of all Christendom in general, and
perticulerly to the rest and quietness of the Netherlands. As also to the end
that our said good Sister, be furnished according to her qualities and highness
of her birth. To make a gift unto our said Sister of the Netherlands, and the
County of Burgundy, in the form and manner appearing by the open Letters which
my Lord and Father to that end dispatched: signed with his own hand, and
sealed with his great seal, whereof the tenor follows from word to word.

Phillippus etc. Make known, that after having perticulerly understood, what
is above said, and mentioned every point of the matter, considering the common
good, (which is like to proceed thereof,) unto all Christendom. Yea, the same
by reason of the particular love which we owe and bear unto our beloved Sister
the Infanta, through her great woorthines: We strengthen, approve, and
confirm, for good by these presents, notwithstanding any prejudice which might
belong to us, our Successors now present or to come: and for the same reasons
we consent, and agree by these presents, that the said Netherlands, and
Counties of Burgundy and Charloys shall be ceded, transported, and given unto
our beloved Sister the Infanta, in the manner as my aforesaid Lord and Father
has done it, and as it may best continue, and for the more security,
coroboration, and assurance of what his Majesty does dispose and ordain, in
the favor and furtherance of our beloved Sister. Even so do we dispose and
ordain thereunto (if so it be needful) by these presents also in favor of
the same, in the same form and manner in all: the whole, proceeding of our
own free will, without that we have any way, thereunto been incited,
compelled, either by deceit, falshoode, nor any respect of paternall
reverence, nor any fear, or other, but justly and truly: being our intention
that the said Countries shall belong and appertain to our dear and beloved
Sister the Infanta Isabell Clara Eugenia, and her Successors, in the form of
the said disposition of the King my Lord and Father. And to the end that all
may have his full enteere effect and perfection, and remain for evermore
faster, and more stabler, we have renounced, and renounce by these presents (in
favor of our said beloved Sister) for us and our Successors, all Benefices
which may or might be, by right, given or assigned unto us, or them, which
might contrary unto these: nor although it were by right of restitution in
Integrum, in the which we have likewise renounced, and by these presents do
renounce. For our concluded and determined will is, that no manner of things
shall have any force or power against this donation, concession, and transport,
which is done of the Netherlands, in the form and manner before written.

Wherefore we have done and given our oath upon the holy Euangilan Gospel,
which we have touched with our hands, to hold and observe, maintain, and
accomplish: and to cause to be held, observed, maintained, and accomplished,
all what is aforesaid, without ever to bring there against any manner of excuse
or exception: nor to suffer that any shall bring them in our name, the which we
affirm and promise with princely words, and that we will give any aid and
assistance, to the fulfilling of what is said. Such being (as is said) our
earnest will and desire: In witness whereof, we have dispatched these present
open Letters, the which we have subsigned with our own hands, and caused to
be contrasigned by the Secretaries infrascripts of the estates of the King my
Lord and Father, in the said matters of the said Lowcountries and Burgundy, and
caused them to be sealed with the great Seal of Arms of his said Majesty,
hanging at a golden string, being present (and as witnesses thereunto
requested) Don Gomes de Auila Marquis of Velada, our Governor, and great
Steward Don L. H. t. a p. de mora Earl of Castle. Rodrigo G tand Commander
d'Alcantara Gentleman of the Kings Chamber, and Cupbearer to our own person,
Don Iehan d'Iiaques great Commander of Lean, al three of the Counsel of
Estate, and Messire Nicholas d'Amant Knight, likewise Counsailour of Estate and
Keeper of the Seal of his Majesty, in the matters of the aforesaid
Netherlands, and Burgundy, and Chauncelour of his Country and Dukedom of
Brabant. Given in the City of Madrill, the Realm of Castile, the sixth day of
the month of May: in the year of grace, 1598. Paraphe N. e. r. t signed
Philippus. And more under, By order of my Lord the Prince: subsigned A de la
Loo, and the said Letters were sealed with the great Seal of Arms of his
Majesty, in red wax, hanging at a golden string.

Procuration of th'Infanta to her future Spouse, to receive the Netherlands in
her name.
ISabell Clara Eugenia, by the grace of God Infanta, of all the Kingdoms of
Spain, Duchess of Burgundy, Lorrayne, Brabant, Limborch, and Artoys, Countess
Pallatin of Haynault, Holland, Zealand, of Namen, and Zutphen, Marquess of the
Romish Dominion, Lady of Freesland, of Saliues, and Machelen, of the County,
City, and Country of VVtrecht, Oueryssel and Groeninghen.
To all present and to come which shall see or bear these Presents.
KNow that, as well for the welfare of Christendom ingeneral, as the
particular of the Netherlands, and for other good considerations, it has
pleased the King my Lord and Father, for the furtherance of our future marriage
(by the dispensation of our holy Father the Pope) with our beloved Cosen the
Archduke Albert, and with the consent, agreeation, and agreement of the high
and puissant Prince our dear and well-beloved Brother: to make us a gift,
concession, and transportation of all the Netherlands, and Burgundy, by the
open Letters thereof dispatched, and respectively subsigned by their own
hands, she sixth day of this present month of May, with other open Letters,
touching the acceptance of the transport and donation, to the end that the
said Netherlands and Burgundy should (by us) be held and possessed: also our
Heirs and Successors in form and manner, and according to the conditions
perticulerly expressed by the said open Letters: And that by the same his
Majesty has consented, agreed, and promised us, and gives absolute and
inreuocable power of our own authority, (without taking any other consent) to
seize our selves, (or by sending of procuration to our said future husband the
Archduke Albert,) the whole and entire possession of the said Netherlands, and
County of Burgundy and Charoloys, and to do in the said effect all what
perticulerly is said in the said open Letters.

MAke known that we for the causes above specified, and in every thing to
follow the will and ordinance of his Majesty, to the furtherance of the same,
all what in regard of the above written, is needful for our voyage to the
said Netherlands, have of our own mind, and absolute power, authorized, and
given full, and inreuocable power and commission with all faculty, (so general
as particular) to our future husband the Archduke Albert, for, and in our name,
and in our behalf, to do, either through himself, or through others, which he
shall appoint thereunto, or shall find lawful by virtue of these Letters,
once, or at more times, all and in particular the things, as much as in our
name and behalf, as in the behalf of all the Provinces of the Netherlands,
and County of Burgundy and Charoloys in general, and through the Estates of
every Province in particular shall be required, and needful there to be done:
for (respectively) to take, seize, to have and to hold in our name, the whole
and entire possession of all the said Countries, and of every Province thereof,
with all what thereunto belongs, to use them, wholly, quietly, without any
contradiction, obstract, or hinderance, and to that end to assemble the
Estates of the said Countries, be it in general or particular, to do (in our
name) the requisite oaths: as also to receive of the aforesaid Estates and
others, their usual oaths. And over and above, shall be done by our said
future husband the Archduke Albert, all what we (to that end) in proper person
ought to do if we were there present: and although that there were any matter
which should require more especial commandment, then is in the said Letters
mentioned. We then suffer, by Princely words, and by our Honors, to find
agreeable, to keep fast and sure, and to observe, and cause to be observed,
and inuiolably accomplished, and in good faith always: all what soever by the
said Archduke our future husband, or by those which he shall have appointed or
commit, by virtue of the said Letters, shall be done, or passed in regard of the
said entire, full, and accomplished possession, of the said Netherlands and
Burgundy, according to the form and manner mentioned in the said open
Letters, of the said donation, cession, and transport: to the which we refer
our selves without ever, to contrary the same, or suffer the same to be
contraried, directly, or indirectly, in what manner soever, for such is our
will. In witness whereof, we have signed with our hand, and caused to be
contresigned by the Secretaries Infrascript, of the Estates of the King my Lord
and Father, in matters of the said Netherlands and Burgundy: and sealed with
the great Seal at Arms of his Majesty, hanging at a golden string. Given in
the City of Madrill the Realm of Castile, the xxx. day of May, the year of
grace, 1598. Paraphed thus N. d. i. t. and subsigned the Lady Isabell, and on
the fold, By order of my Lady the Infanta. And more signed A de la Loo. And
were the said Letters sealed with the Kings great Seal, in red wax, hanging
at a golden string.

Demonstration of the Archduke Albertus, done to the general Estates.
ALBERT by the grace of God, Cardinal, Archduke, Lieuetenant, Governor, and
Captain General.

Dear and well-beloved, the two Letters heerevnder joined, are of the King my
Lord, and of the Prince his Son, for assurance in our behalf: to declare
unto you a resolution which his Majesty has taken, to the welfare and
consolation of these Countries, by the accord and consent of the said Lord the
Prince. And because we cannot personally accomplish, the same being a weighty
matter, unless we absent our selves from hence, we are therefore by these to
give you understanding of our great charge, which in effect is: that his
Majesty has found good, as well for the general welfare of all Christendom,
as especially for these Countries, no longer to prolong the marriage of the
worthy Infanta his Eldest Daughter, as well for the conservation of his house,
as diverse other respects: he has (to this effect) cast his eyes on our person,
and that by the consent of our holy Father the Pope, of the Empress our
honorable Lady and Mother, and of the Emperor my Lord and Brother: And that
moreover to give better commodity unto his Daughter and us, to manifest the
particular inclination which he bears these Countries, will transport them
over, as a gift to his Daughter, to the furtherance of the said marriage,
together with the County of Burgundy, without detayning or parting any thing
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, assuring himself, that you and al others
will rejoice of this his kind resolution, being the same, stretches to the
common welfare, and rest of the said Countries, as being the only way to
attain to a good and sure peace, and to come out of this miserable war,
which is the thing which his Majesty has so fervently desired. Wherefore for
our parts (since it touches us) we are to esteem it greatly, as also we
greatly esteem the great honor and good which (by these) his Majesty does to
our person, choosing us above all other persons, and only for this respect,
ought we to receive an incredible contentment. And so much the more do we
rejoice, that (by these occasions) we may show the effects of our good, and
cordial desires: In following the paths of the Princes of Burgundy and Austria
our Predicessours, laboring for the welfare and rest of the said Countries to
the which we have, and do bear a particular inclination, esteeming thereof
since our coming hither) to have made a reasonable proof, although not wholly
such as we desired, by reason of diverse troubles and mishaps which are befallen
us: We know full well the heavy and burdensome charge, which by this
resolution will fall on our necks. But assuring our selves that we shall
(through you and others) be counseled, aided, and assisted, we hope that (by
the grace of God) the matter will have a good and prosperous success: and that
we shall see these Countries to return in their ancient flower, greatness, and
prosperity, as they were in the days of our Predicessours, and they seeing
with what courage the worthy Infanta and I shall employ our selves thereunto,
our persons, minds, and our means, we shall keep the same amity, the which
their Fathers (until now) have held: This is the sum of that which (by
virtue of the said credence) we desired to declare you, and we shall be very
glad (with the first) to receive your Letters of answer, as well to his said
Majesty as to the said Prince, to the end they may be sent them, and that
thereof may be double and triple Coppies, to shun the perils which are abroad,
to ye end that they be not lest by the way. And here we beseech God (dear and
well-beloved) to have you in his protection. In Brussells the 5. of December,
1597. Paraphed R. i. c. h. V. And subsigned Albert.

The Letter OF THE KING.
Dear and well-beloved, you often have been able to perceive the good will and
affection which we always have borne to our patrimoniall Netherlands, and
unto each Province of the same, through the great care we have always had, and
incessantly bear, for the welfare, quiet, and tranquillity of the same, and
also through the pains and troubles, which therefore we have undertaken:
moreover, the great costs and charges which we have been at to maintain them,
without sparing any thing to defend the same, against our enemies, and to bring
under our subjection and obeisance, those which withdrew themselves from you,
rebelling against us, their natural Prince. All which shall yet more at large
be manifested unto you, through the kind resolution which we have taken for
your proper welfare, the which our good Brother, Nephew, and Cousin, Albert,
Archduke of Austria, shall make known unto you. Unto whom, we desire and
command you, to give belief and assurance, as unto our own person, since it
is a matter which touches you so much, and likewise the common good. And
assuring our selves that you will do it accordingly, and that you shall reap
pleasure and contentment, in that which he shall declare unto you, we will
not say any thing more thereof. But dear and well-beloved, the Lord take you in
his holy protection. From S. Laurens the tenth of September. 1597.

Paraphed, N. D. V.
Signed, PHILLIP.
And more under, A. de la Loo.


The Letter OF THE PRINCE.
Dear and well-beloved, as I have endeavored and endeavor my self to follow and
imitate the greatness and excellencies, virtues, and paths of my Lord and
Father, in like sort I have also reformed my self in the inclination and love
toward you, for the welfare and contentment which I wish unto you, as the
effects shall clearly manifest the same: by that, which shall be declared unto
you (in my behalf) by our good Uncle and Cosen Albert Archduke of Austria,
unto whom you shall give full belief and trust, or assure your selves on him,
governing and using your selves according to that which he shall declare unto
you, wherein (over and above the pleasure you shall do me) you shall your
selves gather the chiefest fruits thereof. Heerewith, dear and well-beloved, our
Lord take you in his holy keeping.

From S. Lawrance the tenth of September. 1597. Paraphed. W. V. S.
Signed. PHILLIP.
And more under. A. de la Loo.


A coppie of the Kings Letter to the Archduke of Austria.
MY good Brother, Nephew, and Cousin, at the return of the poast, Frans vanden
Berghe, I advertised you by my Letters of the 17. of March last past, how at
his arrival were received, certain pacquets with Letters of answer, the
which the Lords and Knights of the Order, Counselors, and Governors, as also
the Estates of the Provinces, (which are under my obeisance) have respectively,
rendered and given up, upon my Letters of the month of September, the year
past, according to the matter therein touched, the which I sent over to be
declared unto the^, to your assurance. And afterward to have confessed (by
their said answer) the great joy and especial content which each one of
them says to have received of my kind resolution, I have been yet moved and
occasioned to proceed further, without forgetting, to further that which I
have so ripely intended, in making a gift cession, and transportation, to my
beloved Daughter the Infanta, of all my Netherlands and County of Burgundy,
but have moreover (the sixth of this Month, in presence of my beloved Son the
Prince, with his express consent and aggreation, and through the acceptance of
my good Daughter being present) passed the dispatches of the three patents,
which by these I send you, to the end you may be particulerly informed of all
what they contain, in favor of the marriage of the said Infanta my good
Daughter with you. And by virtue of her procuration sent unto your own person,
(the which you shall find enclosed with the three patents) you may seize in her
name, and in her behalf, the whole and enteere possession of the said
Countries, and every Province of the same, in the form as the said procuration
contains, putting the same to effect at what time, and when you please or
think good. And to the end that this my intent may come to his full effect,
and that all this may be done with great content of my vassailes and subjects
on the other side, so in general as in particular, I write again to the said
persons and estates, as also does my beloved Son, in the substance as you
shall see by the coppies joined hereunto, by reason of the answer they have
made respectiuelie on the said my first Letters.

And although until this time no aunswers have been received, of the Governor
Parliament, nor from the three Estates of my County of Burgundy, (upon my
Letters sent them in the said month of September, in the year past) I have
found good to send them others, the which (with the coppies) you shall find in
this packet. It shall be very agreeable unto me to be advertised (by the
first commodity) the receipt of all the aforesaid Letters: and in what sort you
shall have dealt therein, and how all the matters on the other side will pass.
Heerewith, (my beloved Brother, Nephew, and Cousin) the Lord take you in his
holy keeping.

From Madrill the last of May, 1598. Paraphed M. D. V. Subsigned, Your good
Brother, Nephew, and Cousin, Phillip.
And more subscribed, A de la Loo.

The superscription was, To my good Brother, Nephew and Cousin: The Archduke
Albert,Lieuetenant Governor of the Low Countries, and Burgundy.

THE KING.

Dear and beloved, by the contents of your Letters of the xxi. of December,
the last year past, we were rejoiced to have understood the great joy and
contentment which you received at our kind resolution touching the matter, the
which (in our behalfs) was caused to be declared unto you, by our good Brother,
Nephew, and Cousin, the Archduke Albert, by virtue of our letters of credence.
And because our intent does tend only to the reducing of the Low Countries to
a peace and tranquillity, through the marriage which we have appointed,
between our dearly beloved Daughter the Infanta, and our good Brother,
Nephew, and Cousin, we therefore have thought good, (as to the furtherance of
this good work) to give, cede, and transport, to our said Daughter, all our
said Netherlands and Burgundy, according to the open Letters which
(there-unto belonging) were sent to our good Brother: as likewise those of the
aggreation and consent, of our dearly beloved good Son the Prince, and
likewise of the acceptance of our said Daughter. Whereof we assure our selves
you will rest contented. And moreover, acknowledge the love and affection,
which we always have borne the said Countries, as the same shall be more
manifestly shown (by Gods grace) by means of the said marriage, and the
sending over of our said Daughter thither, as soon as time shall suffer it. As
also, through the assistance which we shall continue to do, to the said
Countries, at all occasions being needful, since our intent is not any wise
(as some indiscreet might construe it) to abandon them: but to the contrary, to
succor and defend them, as of old we have done, until such time as they shall
be (by peace or otherwise) secure.

Dear and well-beloved, remain in the Lords keeping. From Madrill, the 31. of
May, 1598. N. D. V. Signed, Phillip.
And under, A. de la Loo.

The superscription was. To our beloved, the Sherieffe, and other Magistrates
and Counselors, of the City and County of Machlen.

THE PRINCE.
Dear and well-beloved, your answer of the xxi. of December the last year,
upon my Letters of the precedent Month of September, in credence of that which
(in my behalf) my good Uncle and Cousin has caused to be declared unto you,
have given me full satis-faction and content: such I also expect, according to
the obedience you bear, to the good will of the King my Lord and Father. And
because the intent of his Majesty, refers it self on the great good which
shall happen to the Countries of the other side, the same serving for the
furtherance and conclusion of the future marriage of my dearly beloved good
Sister the Infanta with the said Archduke, with my interuention, express
consent, and aggreation, unto the gift and transport, which his Majesty
intended of the said Countries, as more at large you may understand it by his
Letters. Moreover, he will continue his affable and favorable affection,
which at all times you have felt: and his said Majesty shall not now cease
the same, but at any need, proffer his assisting and defending hand for the
said Countries, until such time, as by means of a sure peace, they shall
find themselves wholly assured, (the which of my side) I will likewise procure
for the said causes.

Dear and beloved, our Lord have you in his keeping, Madrill the tenth of
May. 1598. N. D. V. Signed, Phillip.
And more under, A. de la Loo.

FINIS.
Demonstration of the Estates of the Provinces to his Altere.
1. INprimis the first Article contains of the Aggreation of the transport,
and gift of the Netherlands, and of the marriage. 2. Secondly, to receive the
Provinces, and to do his oath. 3. That his Altera shall show and manifest
within seven months, the accomplishment of the marriage. 4. That his Majesty
shall give an Act, that the twelueth Article (comprehended in this transport)
shall not be hurtful to these Netherlands, Viz. that which is written touching
the feesle and Reere-seeffe. 5. That all contributions, lodging of Soldiers,
and other charges, shall be taken away, and that hence-forward his Altera shall
help himself with the Domaynes and loanes. 6. That the Strangers from
hence-forward shall remain to the charge and payment of his Majesty, and that
they shall be employed in the field, on the borders of the Enemy. 7. All
Soldiers, Germaynes, and such like of the Country shall be maintained and
paid of the said Loanes, as much as shall be possible, and the rest shall his
Majesty pay. 8. That all Offices and Gouernances of the Provinces, Cities, and
Fortresses, (at the furthest) within one year shall be set in the hands of the
natural Lord of the Country. 9. All extraordinary Counsels shall be reformed
and set on their ancient foot. That likewise the Provincial Counsel of
Machelen, as also that of Brabant, and the Counsel of Estate, shall be
replaced by men of these Countries. 10. That all the Provinces, Countries, and
Cities, shall be mayntained in their old Privileges. 11. His Altere shall
endeavor himself to return to these Netherlands, within the next May now next
coming. 12. His Altere shall set in his place (during his absence) a Governor
of his blood, who shall be bound to swear to all what his Altere has sworn.
13. That it shall be lawful to the General Estates through interuention of
his Altere, to join in communication with those of Holland and Zealand, to
make peace. 14. And since that the Countries are furnished with natural Lords,
there shall be three deputed to go with his Altera to Spain, to the end to
thank his Majesty. 15. That his Altera shall be bound to keep all what is
above said, and that he in his return, with the Infanta, in all Provinces
shall do the usual oath. 16. That all Governors, Captains, and men of
war, shall not enterprise any new thing, during the absence of his Altera.
17. That his Altera after his return, shall be bound to assemble the General
Estates, to the end (to gather) to labor, to bring the matters of the
Netherlands in a good estate.
FINIS.

