A TRVE AND FAITHFVLL RELATION, PRESENTED TO HIS MAJESTY AND THE PRINCE, of
what has lately happened in Constantinople, concerning the death of Sultan
Osman, and the setting up of Mustafa his Uncle.

Together with other memorable occurrents worthy of observation.



Imprinted at London for Bartholomew Downs, and are to be sold at his house
near Fleet-bridge, and in Popes head Alley, by William Sheffard. 1622.

THE DEATH OF SVLTAN OSMAN, AND THE SETTING UP of Mustafa his Uncle.
THe Grand Signior Sultan Osman discontented since his disgrace in Poland, as
soon as he came to Constantinople, pretended a journey upon the Emir de Saida,
who was reported to be in Rebellion, having taken Arms to other ends. But
being diuerted from this purpose by the great instance of the Viziers, and that
it would not so well serve his secret designs, because he must then keep an
Army on foot; he gave out that he would visit Mecha, the tomb of his false
Prophet.

To make this voyage the more secure, in appearance, he seemed content to accept
of any Treaty with the Polacks, even to conditions both of disadvantage and
dishonor; for his estates in Hungary, he reenforced the frontiers with diverse
troops, and though he were much troubled at the league between the Emperor
of Germany and Bethlem Gaber, yet he dissembled it so, as that he would not
displease the Transiluantan, but rather offered new succors, and forbearance of
his Tribute. From the incursions of the Cossacks, he hoped to assure himself,
by the treaty of the Poles, and in occasion of breach, he had the Tartars
ready to requite them (it being both their trades to live upon spoil and
robbery) and for more security he appointed twenty Galleys to keep the black
Sea. The common people and Uiziers that loved rest, and knew not the design,
were much troubled and discontent at this journey, who made many Remonstrances
to him of the inconvenience and danger to leave the seat of his Empire to the
trust of a Deputy, in a time when Bethlem Gaber was newly reconciled to the
Germane Emperor, and therefore not to be trusted, and the Polacks newly
reconciled to him, and therefore to be mistrusted. Diverse other reasons were
made to him, many Petitions delivered from the Churchmen, Lawyers, and from
all estates. But Melancholic revenge had wholly possessed him, so that by no
means he could be persuaded to desist. The Soldioury pasted so far, as to
threaten publicly, and to protest, they would not follow, but rather set up
another King in his absence that should stay among them. In conclusion, carried
by his own fate to destruction, the seventh of May having first commanded away
all his Galleys to the Leuant, and thereby disposed away many of his Soldiers,
he began to pass over his Tents and Pauilions to Asia side, with great
quantities of Treasure: The Ianizaries and Spahees, who had also secret
intelligence upon the King, his own words and actions betraying some further
design then a Pilgrimage (for he made preparations to carry away all his
Jewels and Treasure, even defacing his Palace, and taking from Churches, and
his Wardrobes, whatsoever could be converted to Bullion) suddenly met at the
Hippodrome in the City upon a word given; and from thence ran to the
Seraglio in tumult, but without Arms, and there according to their barbarous
mutinies cried out for the King (having first taken order to stop the passage
of anything upon the water) who appearing to them, asked what this insolency
meant, and what they pretended. They then by the mouth of a multitude (for they
had no head but that of the monster) demanded first that he should not proceed
in his purpose to go to Mecha nor into Asia, but that he must abide in the
City; Secondly, they would have delivered to their fury the great Uizier
de-lauir Bassa, the Hoia or Confessor of the King, the Cashariaga governor of
the women, the Tefterdar or Treasorer, the Caddee Leskar, or Chief Justice,
and some others, as enemies to the State, and consenting to this Voyage, which
they pretended would be the ruin of the Empire. The first, after a little
dispute, the King granted unto them; promising to give over his journey, but
they not content, exacted it in writing. To the second he replied that it was
dishonor to him to have his Servants so used without order of Justice: but
persuaded them to have patience to stay until Saturday, the next Diuan or
public Council, where they should all appear, and if they were found
culpable, they should receive punishment; not meaning to perform any of this,
but to get time and allay their present fury. These fellows not content with
this moderate answer, undertook to know that they were guilty, and therefore
that they needed no other witness, trials, nor Judge, but themselves, and with
extreme clamor called to have them delivered. But the King refusing to give
them any other satisfaction, and they unprepared for force, returned into the
City, which now was all in fear, every house and shop shut up, expecting a
general sack. But they followed the way of their own hatred, and first went
unto the house of the Hoia, which they brake and pillaged: but not finding him,
they proceeded to the great Uiziers, who made some defense, and (they being
unarmed) beat them off; and so they separated being now evening, but yet kept a
Guard in some parts of the Town.

This night the King made an attempt to send over to Asia side, but was
prevented; and to fortify and defend his Seraglio, which is walled strongly
about, and has always in it of household Servants about three thousand, but it
seems no man would Arm in his cause: For the next morning the Mutiners
assembled again, and taking their Arms, went first to the Mofti, or
Archpriest among them, and forced him and diverse others to accompany them to
the Court, where they anew demanded these men, but with more instance and
fury. In the mean time the Hoia, Caddee Leskar, and Tefterdar fled, and were
yet never heard of. The Uizier retired to the King, and persuaded him earnestly
to go over in person in his own boats (which from his Garden he might
easily do) to Asia, and there to take Horse, and he would secure him from all
peril; but the King would not move, bidding him stay confident and assured
that he would punish these Rebels.

The wise old man seeing this constancy or obstinacy, desired leave to shift
for himself, which he either took or obtained, and so got away to the
Hermitage of a Saint renowned amongst them, who (like himself) betrayed him to
a Captain of the Ianizaries; yet did him the favor as not to deliver him to
the multitude, but carried him back to the Kings house. At this time it was
disputed in the Seraglio about the delivery of these Officers, the Emperor
refusing, the Rebels clamouring and threatening, in so much as he began to fear
they would break in, and in their rage do worse then was yet pretended.
Whereupon, whether by the Kings order, or by his own consent (willing to be
the peace offering) the Uizier went out to them, and with a good assuredness
demanded what they sought of him, and wherein he had offended: But they
answered him with their swords, and suddenly cut him in pieces.

The Emperor seeing their fury so outrageous, had now more cause to doubt, and
retired himself then too late, when he had lost his brave Counselor, would
have fled into Asia, and could not, but conveyed himself into a private place
prepared by his Bustengi Bassa, or chief Gardener. The Rebels continue without
in their madness, asking for the King, and for more sacrifices. But the
Servants protesting they knew not where he was, they said they must have a
King, and if he would not appear, they would make another; and having a while
attended, they resolved to enter the Palace (but first took a general oath
not to sack the Imperial Throne, which they called their house and their
honor) and there seeking for the King, not able to find him, they extorted by
confession the Caslariaga, and slew him, and then they demanded for Mustafa,
Uncle to Osman, by him formerly deposed, a man esteemed rather holy (that is
frantic) then wise, and indeed fitter for a Cell, then a Scepter. The King
the first day of this tumult had put Mustafa into a vault with two Negro women,
without bread or drink, in which estate these new Electors found him almost
naked, and half pined. At first sight, he thought they had bin the messengers
of death: but that fear passed over, he begged of them a cup of water. Whom
they took, and instantly proclaimed their Emperor, which he was loath to
accept, vti pudebat aucti nominis; How unstable are the estates of the greatest
Princes. Quem dies videt veniens iacentem, hunc vidit dies fugiens regnantem;
He that was now in the Jaws of death, naked, starued, and dying for thirst, is
become the Emperor, and may drink gold, or the blood of men.

They as yet not knowing what was become of Osman, and loath to trust Mustapha
in the Palace, carried him in triumph to the old Seraglio, and there left him,
departing to the sack of the Viziers house, and so in the evening to their
Rendeuous, where they kept both good guard, and good order in the City from
fires and other Insolences. Sultan Osman amazed with these news, so soon as
they had left the Court, came out, and called to Council in the night, Huzein
Bassa, late Uizier in the Polish war, and the Aga of the Ianizaries, both
faithful to him, and demanded their advice, first, having sent to the old
Seraglio, to practice the women there, to strangle Mustafa; but some taking his
part, a new uproar began in the house between that sex: and the Soldiers
that kept watch, taking the Alarm, entered in, and rescued him, and from thence
removed him to the Chambers of the Ianizaries, where they guarded him for that
night, in an ill lodging. All this while Osman consults what course to take.
These two his friends, and some others, tell him that the case was desperate,
and could not be cured but by a desperate remedy. And therefore they agreed
that the Aga should go and persuade with the Mofti, and that the King in the
morning should suddenly present himself to the Soldiers at their own door,
and make experience, what his Presence, his submission, and his benevolence
promised could work, to move them to Loyalty, or compassion; which counsel
early in the morning they put in practice. The King accompanied with the Mofti
(who never consented to his deposing, though he favored the Soldiers against
the Vizier) with Huzein Bassa, and about twelve Horsemen, went directly to the
Ianizaries College where Mustafa was kept, and there in tears made them an
Oration, offering great recompense, repenting of his error, and finally inuoked
them by the merits of his father and all his Ancestors to have some pity upon
their true Master. The multitude (tam prona in misericordiam, quam immodica
saeuitia fuerat) now knew not what to do; a silent murmr ran among them, and
they were half converted: But the Aga of the Ianizaries, thinking to merit of
the King, and beginning to plead unseasonably for him, with some harsh words of
vpbraidure, vt natura Maris omni flatu ventiturbida, anew moved their fury, so
that they creid out Treason, and fell upon him and Huzein Bassa, and cut them
into pieces, every man taking a part of their flesh to satiate their revenge.
The Mofti would speak, but is withdrawn by some, for respect to his place,
and with difficulty is conveyed away. Now the poor Osman sees his friends
slain, and knows not which way to convert himself, but binding up his eyes
with a napkin, expects death as the last of their fury; But they carry him
first before Mustafa, and accuse him as the disturber of the Peace of the
Empire, and demand sentence against him, more vulgi suum quisque flagitium
alits obiectantes. The forsaken Prince pleads for life, and the new King knows
not how to condemn, but nods and agrees to all that is propounded. At last
they consult with themselves, and put him upon an horse (an insolent Spahee
changing Turbants with him) and sent him away prisoner to the seven towers
under good guard, and then returned to their new Master, and placed him in the
Seraglio and Imperial Throne, where he has need to have good broths and
nourishment to restore his decayed body.

The Soldiers think all is done, and (only sacking the houses of Huzein
Bassa and some others their conceived enemies) return in quiet to their
several lodgings, and have no further malice. But the new Uizier Daout Bassa,
made by Mustafa, knew well, if Osman lived, that this storm might pass over,
and he would as easily and by the same means return to his estate, as he
fell from it, Uulgus vt mos est, cuiusque noui motus cupidum. Therefore he
consulted with some few interessed in Mustafaes preferment, and thereby
obnoxious to Osman, to search how many of the Royal blood were left alive, and
resolved if there remained two, to make an end of Osman. Two of his brothers
were found, the one about twelve, the other about seven years of age: and
thereupon the Uizier went himself to the prison with a pack of hangmen, and
gave order to strangle the unfortunate Prince: who now having had no rest in
two nights, and thinking himself secure for a season, was newly fallen asleep:
but awaked by the coming of these Messengers, asked what news, saying he did
not like their sudden intrusion. They at first stood amazed, and the King
made show to defend himself; but a strong knave struck him on the head with a
Battle-axe, and the rest leaping upon him, strangled him with much ado. Thus
one of the greatest Monarkes in the world, is first affronted by mutined
troops, his own slaves, almost unarmed, and few in number, no man taking up a
sword to defend him: and they who began this madness, not meaning to hurt him,
by the increase of their own fury, which has no bounds, depose him against
their own purpose, and at last expose his life against their will, to the
counsels of other men, whom they equally hate. And now they mourn for their
dead King, as freshly as they raged unreasonably, knowing they have stained
their honor, being the first of their Emperors they ever betrayed, and that
they have set up another that in all likelihood they must change for
disability: Nonunquam tulit documenta sors maiora, quam fragile loco starent
superbi.

This is the last act of the life of Sultan Osman: but his intents and great
designs, which drew upon him this fatal blow, I suppose will not be unworthy
the communication, the practices, reasons, secrets and counsels of all actions
being the soul of history, and res gestae but the bare carcass: and I am
persuaded, as many ages have not produced so strange an example of the
incertainty of humane greatness; so in the disposition thereof, and in the
ways leading thereunto, there is seen evidently the wonderful providence of
God, in confounding of the counsels of the worldly wise, who had laid a
foundation of new greatness, whereby he aspired the universal Monarchy,
ambitious of the honor of Traian, in whose time the decayed Empire was said
primum mouere lacertos and senectutem Imperit, quasi reddita iuuentute
reuiuiscere. And lastly, the world may see upon how weak foundations this
Monarchy was at first builded, but it is now shaken and corrupted; how their
Kings are subject to the rage of a few Slaves, how Anarchy has prepared it an
easy prey to any able hand, that would attempt it. From the Invasion of Poland
all these changes took their beginning. Sultan Osman advanced to the Throne in
his youth, full of heat and blood, being of a great and haughty spirit, very
courageous, strong of body, and a mortal hater of Christians, envious of the
glory of his Ancestors, and ambitious to raise his name above any of theirs,
had proiected in himself the Conquest of the remains of the bordering Europe.
But to so great designs he had one vice that resisted all hope of prosperity,
which was extreme avarice, and he fell into the latter times and decrepit age,
vbi vires luxu corrumpebantur, contra veterem disciplinam and instituta
maiorum, apud quos virtute quam pecunia res militaris melius stetit. His first
enterprise was that of Poland, moved by the incursions of the Cossacks, which
yet he undertook of his own head, without the counsel of any his Uiziers
(who in a Monarchy grown to the height by ease and wealth, and perhaps longa
dominatione inertes, are ever corrupt and lazy) and against the liking of all
the Soldiers, who now contrary to their institution being married, and fathers
of a family, entered into trades, receiving nothing in war more then in peace,
praeter periculaet labores, are not easily drawn from their own chimneies.
This action he thought so easy, as he had disposed of his conquest, and
divided the live Lions skin. But being met upon the borders with a poor Army
in comparison, he was first arrested at Chotyn a little fortress, which he was
feign to leave behind him untaken; And then seeking to advance into the plain
country, by forcing the trenches of the Chancellor of Poland opposed against
him, he could never procure his Ianizaries to fight, though engaging his person
once or twice beyond the regard of his quality, and his own Troops ready to
mutine against him, or to forsake him, he was at last enforced to raise
shamefully his Camp, and to accept of any treaty to save his outward honor.
In this attempt he lost above 100000. horses for want of fodder, and 80000. men
for want of fighting: for they would rather die, running, or pillaging, or
eating, then in the face of the enemy. For this disgrace he conceived so
inward and rooted an indignation against the Ianizaries, and so justly, that he
often lamented himself, and complained he was no King, that was subject to
his own slaves, upon whom he spent great treasures, and yet they would neither
fight in war, nor obey in peace, without exacting new bounties and
privileges. Delauir Bassa a man of great wit and courage, lately called from
the Eastern parts, where he had long governed with honor, who came in, though
late, yet in a very brave and warlike equipage, above all other his Captains,
was suddenly made great Uizier, the former Huzein Bassa being in the same
disgrace, common with the soldier, though not in the same fault. This man was
never bred at Court, but had lived many years in Action, and so had neither
faction nor dependence here, but stood upon himself and his own merit: And
being now unlooked for, and advanced to this high dignity, he wrought upon the
Kings discontent, and nourished it: and in conclusion, brake with him, that it
was true, he was no Emperor, nor could be safely alive, while the Ianizaries
had the power which they lately usurped: Informing him, that they were
corrupted from their ancient Institution, and were lazy Cowards, given over to
ease and lust, et animo per libidines corrupto, nihil honestum inerat. But if
this Majesty would pull up his spirits, and follow his advice, he would
provide him a new Souldioury about Damascus, and from the Coords, of men ever
bred in the fro^tier, hardness, and war, of great courage and experience, and
that of them he should erect a new Militia, that should wholly depend of him,
entertaining only 40000. in pay, which should always be his Guard, and that in
the distribution of every Province, he should constitute that the Beghler begh
in his Government should train some of the Inhabitants, who in all occasions
of making a great Army, should be in readiness, and hereby he should spare
infinite treasures spent upon these Drones that eat up his estate; And with
men of new spirits and hopes, he should be enabled to do greater matters,
then any of his Ancestors: but withal he desired the King to communicate this
counsel to no man, nor to trust his life upon another secrecy. Delauir Bassa
never reueling himself to any but the King, who extremely pleased with this
advice, that flattered his own humor, consented, and remitted all to the
Uiziers direction, who was a true soldier, and a very wise man, able by his
credit in Asia, to perform all he had undertaken: for he was exceedingly
beloved in those parts, very rich, and had kept Damascus, whereof he was
Governor, for himself in the last rebellion. Upon this conclusion between
them, it was first agreed, that the king should pretend to go in person
against the Emir de Zaida, who was moved to take Arms really to assist in the
design: but they used it, to color the departure of the Emperor; which when
it was welwaighed, itwas found, that then the Army of the Ianizaries must be
kept together, which could not agree with their ends. Hereupon the journey of
Mecha was divulged, that the King might, under the shadow of an holy
pilgrimage, go out with a small train, and disperse those who were suspected
to him. And for this, preparation was made, but somewhat to grosely, by melting
of all the Plate, Saddles, Furniture of house, Lamps of Churches, and
whatsoever could more easily be conveyed away in metal, with all the Jewels
and Treasury. This gave the first suspicion, which was confirmed by diverse
unadvised words let fall from the King, of disdain against the cowardice of
the Ianizaries, and that he would shortly find himself soldiers that should
whippe them; and lastly, dismissing all his household, except some few elect,
the discontented observed and betrayed him. Delauir Bassa kept his own secret,
and in the mean time prepared by his friends in Asia 10000. about Damascus,
10000. from the Coords, besides those in readiness of the Emir de Zaida, and
all upon pretense of defending the borders of Persia, who having Intelligence
of some change in those parts; And gave order that all these should meet the
King at Damascus, where he would presently cut off his Guard and stay there,
until he had regulated his new Army, and Discipline, and then to return
triumphant to Constantinople, and utterly root out the order of Ianizaries,
Spahees and Timariots, and to exauctorate all their Captains and officers to
settle a new government, and to change the name of the City. And these things
succeeding, he then resolved with his new Soldiers to attempt the recovery
of his honor in Christendom: in the mean time to hold a dissembled
friendship there in all parts. Certainly this was a brave and well-grounded
design, and of great consequence for renewing of this decayed Empire,
languishing under the insolences of lazy slaves, if God had not destroyed it:
It being very true, that the Turkish Emperor stands at the devotion of his
own troops for peace or war, life or death, and is in effect nothing but
the Steward or Treasurer of his Ianizaries. If this project had taken effect,
what events it might have produced by a Civil War, is not easy to judge.
For doubtless, the Souldioury here would have set up another King, and
maintained him as well as they could, and this European part had been in
danger to have been torn away by the division. Besides, Delauir Bassa having
the King and the Treasury in his possession, and his own credit so great, and
his inclination velle imperare once discovered, it may well be thought that
he had some ends of his own to share a part of this mighty estate: If on the
other side the Uizier had proved true and faithful, the reformation and new
erection of the Discipline of War, and the increase of Treasure consequent to
the dismission of the old Militia, would have been fearful to all
Christendom: But, Ubiest sapiens? Ubi disquisitor saeculi haius? Nonne
infatuauit Deus sapientiam mundi huius? Perdam sapientiam sapientum, and vanam
reddam intelligentiam intelligentium. It is a great question whether is the
wiser wish, that these Counsels had succeeded or not: for either division and
subversion, or a new prosperity and enlargement of their Dominion had
necessarily followed.

Some observations upon this occasion, will not be very impertinent to those
that desire to know as well the disposition and use, as the things themselves.
First, in the purpose of the Soldier, not at all to violate or hurt the King,
much less to depose and murder him; but only to take away those about him,
whom they thought assistants in this project: yet the fury once on foot, they
proceeded by missensible steps, to the uttermost of outrage, against many
innocents in that business, though otherwise obnoxious, and against the Throne
and life of their own Emperor, vbi furor ingruat innocents ac noxios iuxta
cadere. Secondly, in the degrees, that yet the King had not fallen thus low, if
first he had not lost that awe and reverence which always attends upon
Majesty, by unseemly offices, done by him in the streets and Tauernes,
apprehending many soldiers for petty faults, like a Constable, making his
person common, cheap, and despised among them which were wont only to be
seen and feared, as somewhat supra humanitatem. And this he did also in hatred
and disdain of those that had in the war forsaken him. And now in this last
act, if his own obstinacy had not plunged him into destruction, but that he had
softened them by a seasonable yielding to time, he had prevailed only by time.
Thirdly, in the order, That these Mutiners having no head, or direction, kept
that Reglement, that they took oath in their fury, in hot blood, in the Kings
yard, not to dishonor, spoil nor sack the Imperial Throne, neither
committed nor suffered any insolence nor violence in the City to the Neutrals,
but rather proclaimed peace and Justice. Fourthly, in the consequents, that at
the third days end, all was at quiet, and all men in their trade, as if no
such thing had happened; Only the Ianizaries suffered no Diuan nor Council,
until they had received a Donatiue, as Guerdon of their Iniquity; In which
also the infinite waste of Treasure is worthy of consideration, which must of
necessity be exceedingly exhausted by three changes in four years, and by the
late wars in Persia and Poland: For every Ianizarie in the City, absent or
present, whose roll is about 40000. receive 25. Chequins gold, besides Spahees,
Iamoglans, and other orders at every Alteration, which amounts in all near to
two Millions. And now these fellows all living, that have tasted the sweet of
prosperous mutinies, haud ignari summa scelera incipi cum periculo, peragi cum
praemio, they have taken such a head as cannot safely be suffered on, nor
securely be taken off. Fifthly, of certain presages that fore-ranne, it being
related to me from the mouth of a Cadee, inward with the King a month before
the tumult: That Osman dreamed in the night, that he thought to ride a Cammell,
and being mounted, he could not force him to go by fair means nor stripes,
and that then he descending in a rage, the body of the beast vanished, and left
the head in the Kings hand. Who next day troubled at this fancy, sent to a
Learned man, familiar with him, for the interpretation. He excused himself as
unfit to give opinion in a matter of that Consequence, but persuaded Osman to
send to the Mofti. He also craved pardon, but withal said, there was none so
fit to interpret it, as Mustafa the Kings uncle, and now Emperor, who is
esteemed a holy man, that has visions, and Angel-like speculations, in plain
terms, between a mad man and a fool. The King repaires to Mustafa, who
briefly tells him, The Cammell signifies his Empire: his riding, abuse in
government: his descention, his disposition: the vanishing of the body, the
revolt of his Subjects: the head remaining in his hand, only a bare title; and
that he should shortly dye within few Months, and lose his Kingdom, but the
empty name of Emperor should accompany him to his grave.

A second of less consequence in the Uizier Delauir Bassa, from whom the Lord
Ambassador having received particular friendship about six days before this
uproar, he went to visit, and having no other business but to persuade him to
stay the King from this intended Pilgrimage, the Ambassador gave him many
reasons in the present estate of their own affairs, especially the Treaty of
Poland yet depending. To which the Bassa replied very gravely. Then the
Ambassador urging the fear of some tumult, collected from the licentious
speeches rumored in the Town, and he was bold to deal plainly, sincerely
and friendly, That if any such thing should happen, the fault would be imputed
to the Bassa, as being of authority to persuade the King, whom his quality
and youth would excuse, but all the fury would be discharged upon the greatest
Minister; desiring him to consider the event, at least, to take his affection
in the best part.

The old Renard stayed a while from reply: at last, smiling to himself at the
Ambassador, who persuaded him against that which was his own counsel, he
gave him a final answer, that there was no remedy, he durst not hazard
himself to oppose the Kings resolution: but assured him, he would so order the
matter, as this journey should not proceed so far, as was expected. The
Ambassador concluded for himself, desiring then that he would leave him a
particular recommendation to the Chimacham or Deputy as his friend. To which
he suddenly replied, Trouble not your self, nor fear; I will never remove
so far, but that I will leave one of my legs in this City to serve you:
which the poor man fulfilled; for being murdered in few days after, one of
his legs whole and entire, was hanged in the Hippodrome, the most public place
of the City. Lastly, in things yet to come, and probably to be suspected, That
the Soldiers in Asia, who have now lost their hopes, will not sit down by
this affront, but rather will attempt some Revenge, for the death of that king
who was their Martyr; Or that some great Bassaes far removed from Court, will
apprehend this occasion, not to obey an Usurper, set up by treason; And upon
this color ground their own Ambitions, or that all every where will fall into
Combustion and Intestine war; For I dare not hope, that God will open the
eyes of Christian Princes to see the littleness of their own uncivil
quarrels, while this mighty Monarchy inuiteth them to Concord, and to divide it
as a prostituted spoil.

FINIS.
THE CONTINVATION OF THE STORY, PRESENTED TO THE KINGS MAJESTY from the same
Person.
ON Saturday evening, the first of June following, the Capiaga or Mayor Domo of
the Seraglio, having received a secret order to remove the brethren of osman
from their lodgings, and in the night to strangle them: as he was performing
his command, aided with a few of his Carnifices to carry away the Princes, they
cried out: the Pages running to the noise, and encouraged by the Casliaraga,
who had some suspicion, without further examination kill the Capiaga, now
almost every order having risen against their own head. That night they sent
secretly to the Ianizaries and Spahees, to inform them what they had done, and
in the morning early hanged his body in the Hippodrome for a public spectacle.
The soldiers returned in fury to Court, in favor of the Pages, and demanded
justice against those that had consented to this wicked order; which had made
an end of all the Ottoman race, only this Mustafa being left alive, who is so
holy a Saint, that he will not people the world with sinners, nor endure any
women about him. The innocent King protests he knows nothing of this purpose:
and if his command were procured, it was gotten by subreption, and he is easily
believed. But his mother another Liuia, and the new Uizier, Daout Bassa, who
had her daughter to wife, were vehemently suspected. It was a day of Diuan or
Council; But these Soldiers would suffer none, until they had an account of
this treason. The Vizier denies all; the mother is a woman, and hidden in the
house: yet it is very likely, they both were guilty to uphold and secure their
own authority: It being rumoured, that the Uizier determined to place
Subdititiously, in the room of the elder Prince, his own Son, and very like
him, and so to govern Mustafa for a time, and by his remove to establish
himself and his Race for ever. But now somewhat must be done to appease the
people; Therefore Daout Bassa is degraded from his office, and one Huzein Bassa
newly arrived from the government of Cairo, advanced to his place, with promise
of further examination. Since, the fury once over, there has been no great
search nor discovery made. I think the Sultanes Chequines have quieted the
matter. This new Uizier, a man here without friends, yet very rich, of a
stubborn and obstinate nature, reported just in his ways, but peremptory and
inflexible; audax, ferox, and prout animum intendit prauus aut industrius eadem
vis one from whom almen may expect much good or much ill; Begins his
government roughly, undertakes to punish Insolences early, and professes a
reformation, or to be a Sacrifice. A man fit for these times that are
desperate: For the worst will be, that he must at last endure their fury: In
the mean time he procures a little awe, and has restored the face of Justice:
yet I am persuaded it cannot last long, the Ghost of Osman will not be at rest,
until there are some parentalia made unto him; The nature of this Vizier is
unsupportable; But if he prevail, and once settle, he will a new change the
King, and lay an obligation upon the Brethren of Osman; For he will never
think himself secure under a man governed by an insolent woman, Dominandi
auida: And what assurance can he have in that Prince, cui non iudicium, non
odium est nisi indita and iussa? And though I cannot foresee the particulars,
and where the Sore will break out, yet I am sure the whole body is sick; And
Princes of Christendom shall have breath three years, before they shall have
cause to fear this state, whose present King is mentis inops, and the next in
expectation, a Child, unfit for action, and all the great men and Soldiers
decayed, mutined and corrupted.

FINIS.

