Expicedium. A FUNERAL Oration, upon the death of the late deceased Princess
of famous memory, Elizabeth by the grace of God, Queen of England, France and
Ireland.

Written: by Infelice Academico Ignoto.

Whereunto is added, the true order of her Highness Imperial Funeral.

LONDON Printed for E. White, dwelling near the little north door of Paul's
Church, at the sign of the Gun. 1603.

Epicedium. A Funeral Oration upon the death of the late deceased Princess,
(of famous memory) Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England, France and
Ireland: written by Infelice Academico Ignoto.
IF the sighs of the heart were converted into eloquence of the tongue (as in
the instruments of breath, the spirit is exchanged into soun'd) I would desire
(right worthy Auditory) that all those sighs which are assembled together in
your breasts, might be centered in my heart: to the end that my defect of
eloquence to express this fatal accident, might be supplied by my increased
sorrows, so happily converted into discourse. But since this my conceited
desires may not be reduced to act, my wish were that this flood of tears, that
makes his channel through our eyes, might like a river of fit discourse, flow
from out my lips; to the end that the forecible weight of the same being
inritched by these supplies, might plant amazement in your ears, to hear the
flowing eloquence of my tongue; and the boundles number of her praises. But why
spend I my breath in wishes? or to what end fashion I my desires to be greater
then my power? since your reverent silence that attends my discourse is
sufficient to give worth to the weakness of my performance, and her virtues
work wonder in the meanest Orator. But because a good life makes only the
grave happy, and the glory that is derived to after ages, depends on the
actions of fore-passed years: Let us discourse a while on that Elizabethes
life, whose death we lament with such hearty complaints.

She was borne of a father of famous memory, Henry the eight, derived from a
mother of great virtue, Anne Bullem; and descended so royally, and from so
mighty Princes, that Europe knew not her equal, either in birth, beauty, or
perfection: Greater then Alexander she was, for the world which he subdued by
force, she conquered by love; her beauty was so great, that it rather was
envied then equalled; beloved then praised, admired then described. Her power
so great that whole kingdoms were affrighted at her name, and many rich
countries made happy by her protection; her learning so admirable that as from
east and west many nations resorted to Rome: not for any wonder they expected
in the City, but only to behold Liuy: So many from all parts repaired to
her kingdom, where either they were inchaunted with beauty, amassed at her
greatness, enriched by her bounty, confirmed by her wisdom, or confounded in
their Judgments. Her chastity so great, that the question is whether the
conquest of her enemies wrought her more fame, or the continence and
government she had in her self, more merit: In a word, she enjoyed so much
grace, as all the graces possessed not together; and he that had the grace to
see her grace accounted it his happiness to be so graced.

The desires her beauty kindled, her modesty quenched; the attempts which
ambition intended, her constancy overcame: The peace which al kingdoms
affected, her policy effected: and her state which her greatest foes envied,
her wisdom maintained: her country was the fostresse of banished men: the
sanctuary of the distressed: the harbor of the wronged, the enricher of her
allies the bane of her enemies: in aword, the world had nothing more
praise-worthie in it, then that it knew her. I will not rip up the rare
perfections of her youth, neither her fatal danger before her coming to the
Crown, nor her sundry good fortunes in the government of her kingdom, nor
the continuance of her peace, nor the prosperity of her wars, least the
memory of these things added to her loss, should make our sorrows stronger
then our sufferance could admit of. But for my own part I may say this of her,
that if this Sovereign Princess had dyed among those ancient Thracians, who
wept at the birth of their children, and sung and feasted at their deaths: they
would have changed their custom, and bewailed her infinitely. For by her
death, alas what misery are we not acquainted with? we lost that head
whereof we be the members; the gouernesse of our fortunes and felicity, the
life of all our peace, the death of all our joy.

Since her departure, Justice scale is distempered, prudence mirror is dimmed,
strength's pillars are shaken, Temperance vessel is emptied the Olive (that
peace bare) is leaueles, the oil of mercy is wasted, liberalities hands are
closed; the head of magnificence droopeth, pity has her smiles changed, the
laws are silent, and pardon tongueles. Alas what should I say? if Petrarch
knew not in what Sphere of Planets to lodge his Lawra, how should I guess in
what order of Angels I should pla^t our Elizabeth? dead she is, but so dead as
she is pitied by death himself; who being senceles and passionles toward all
other creatures, yet has afforded her this privilege, to live in our sorrows.
And to give her place in heaven, what mortal apprehe^sion dare presume* since
in earth our best hopes are wrapped in fear and trembling, and no man can
beget that being for another which he cannot assuredly hope for himself? what
she was whilst she lived, we judge, but by the outside, the sense must
inform the intellect before he can determine: what she is, for the earth we
know, for the soul we leave it with the Platonists, to infinity; wherein, God
that knows best of truth can inform truth. When Pelopidas the Theban, after
he had manfully combated against Alexander Pheraeus, was unfortunately and
mortally wounded; the report is that the Thessalians that were present at that
battle, never laid aside their armor nor drew the reyne from their horses,
neither tied up their wounds, until they had lamented him, armed and heat in
the conflict, they ran to comfort him; half breathles they clipped their
horses manes, they shaued themselves: if cold made them chill, the fire of
their zeal would not suffer them to kindle fire in their tents: their sorrows
shut up their stomachs from receiving meat: silence and mourning possessed the
whole army. And they that had gotten a victory over fame by their conquest,
by the loss of their general, became slaves to their affections; when the
Cities heard of his loss, the magistrate and mean men, the Prince and
Plebeian came out to meet him: they fixed Crowns on his Hearse, cast flowers
on his coarse, and strove how to honor him being dead, that had so faithfully
fought for them in life: yea his enemies contended with the conqueror for
Funeral, thinking it a blessing to enjoy his bones, whose valor had
restrained their ambition. If for Pelopidas the warrior, the Greeks were so
passionate, what should we be in the loss of Elizabeth our peacemaker and
Princess, whose perfections are entombed in her enemies tears: whose loss
has made the mighty weak, the prudent diffident, the rich suspicions, the
poor amazed, and all sorts hardes? Pelopidas virtues were only the objects of
Greece, Elizabeth's the wonders of the world: he only a subduer of a City or
province, she the terror of many kingdoms: he only wonderful in an Angle,
She famous in the worlds fair Anglia.

But alas, why talk I of death in so divine a subject? she lives as yet in the
hearts of her grateful subjects, because they might not dye with her; living,
they keep her alive in their loving hearts, the memory of her death in their
tears, her name in their tongues, her words in their ears, her lively Image
in their lasting imaginations: her mightines in her is an admirable miracle,
where nobility in the vicious is a grievous infamy.

Here like a true Joseph has she lost this cloak of mortality, to obtain
an immortal Crown of glory, and to escape the embracements of the lewd
world. How happily has she cast off the prison of her mortality? how happy
is she by death, that is delivered from the troubles of life? The enamoured
Thisbe to fly from the jaws of a hungry Lioness, cast off her veil that
shadowed her shoulders; so this beloved of Christ, to escape that Lion of
perdition, that raging wandreth to seek whom he may devour, has disburdened
her self of her earthly ornaments, has choakte the ravenous enemy of
mankind, by casting her earth in his teeth: Happy happy Elizabeth, that has
forsaken the Babylon of this world, to obtain her Country the heavenly
Paradise.

The Moon (as the Philosophers write) is ecclipsed by the shadow of the earth,
and nothing more obscureth the soul then this prison of the body. Since
therefore our Elizabeth has cast off her earthly veil to get a heavenly
Privilege; let us moderate our passions by imagining her felicity, since what
she lost was not in her possession to keep; and what she has, is a greater
purchase then conjecture can apprehend.

The generous young man Crates, forsook his possessions to buy an heritage in
Philosophye. Diogines left his Country and house. Democritus lost his eyes, to
apprehend knowledge. How far better a match has our Sovereign made, that
for her possessions in earth, has got the Paradise in heaven? that for her
earthlye prison, has attained a heavenly mantion? that for her eyes that
beheld the vanities on earth, has gotten the means to behold the paradise of
heaven? Plato in his law, interdicted the use of lamentation in Funerals,
neither thought he it requisite to lament publicly, or convey the Coarse to
his Tomb with tears and sorrowful exclamations, because (as the Philosophers
say) tears yield no remedy in tribulation. But had Plato lived to behold
these times, and considered the blessings we possessed whilste she lived; how
carefully she guided the helm of commonweal, and faithfully defenced her
Country from nouations; how prouidently she fore-stalled the audacious
designs of her enemies; how constannly she with-stood her greatest dangers; he
would doutles have remitted a great part of his austeritie, and saluted her
Hearse with some lamentable Elegy.

There is a Lake (as Aristotle reports) near unto the river of Eridanus,
wherein (if any Poets fiction may bear credit of faith) proud Phaeton being
strooken with lightning, was finally drowned. The water of this Lake is in
quality hot, in odor grievous, fearful in beholding. Heerof no creature
drinks, but he dies: heer-ouer no bird flies, but he is drowned. Of the
nature of this river, is her loss we lament for: The proudest enemy that
beholds it is drowned in confusion: The tears that are wept on it, blind
the eyes with their scalding.

The odours that perfume her Hearse, are of the nature of vapors drawn up by
the Sun, which ascend in fume but desend in shewers. He that beholds this
Hearse, how can he choose but fear, since over it he may meditate on the
uncertainties of life? what brutish or sauadge nature, beholding this sight and
feeding his eyes on her Monument, but will dye with sorrow? or what soul
houering in the air over this disconsolate Hearse, dissolueth not into tears?
(if exempted souls may be subject to passions.)

I am amazed and can no more, and your judgments shall require no further
discourse at my hands: the reason is, because others glories may be expressed
in words and writings, whereas hers cannot be aptly described but in wonder and
silence. I will therefore supply with my tears, what I fail in my words: and
if any ask why I end so abruptlye: let the Poet answer who can truly judge of
passion, Curae leaves loquntur ingentes stupent.

A true Subjects sorrow, for the loss of his late Sovereign.
I Join not hands with sorrow for a while,
To soothe the time, or please the hungry cares:
Nor do enforce my mercinarie style,
No feigned liuerye my Invention wears.
Nor do I ground my fabulous discourse
On what before has usually been seen:
My grief does flow from a more plentious source,
From her that died a virgin and a Queen.
You Cristall Nymphs that haunt the banks of Thames,
Tune your sad Timbrils in this woeful day:
And force the swift winds and the sliding streams
To stand a while and listen to your Lay.
Your fading Temples bound about with vewe,
At every step your hands devoutly wring,
Let one notes fall another height renew,
And with compassion your sad Naenia sing.
Graces and Muses wait upon her Hearse:
Three are the first, the last the sacred Nine:
The sad'st of which, in a black tragique verse,
Shall sing the Requiem passing to her shrine.
An Ebon Chariot to support the Beer,
Drawn with the black steedes of the gloomy night:
Stooping their stiff Crests, with a heavy cheer,
Stirring compassion in the peoples sight.
The Pyle prepared where on her body lies,
In Cipresse shadows sit you down forlorn:
Whose bows be dew'd with plenty of your eyes,
(For her with grief) the Branches shall adorn.
Let fall your eyelids like the Suns clear set,
When your pale hands put to the vestall flame:
And from your breasts, your sorrows freely let,
Crying one Beta and Elizas name.
Upon the Alter, place your Virgin spoils,
And one by one with comeliness bestow:
Dianaes buskins and her hunting toils,
Her empty quiver and her stringles bow.
Let every Virgin offer up a tear,
The richest Incence nature can allow:
And at her tomb (for ever year by year)
Pay the oblation of a maiden vow.
And the tru'st vestall the most sacred liver,
That ever harbored an unspotted spirit,
Retain thy virtues, and thy name for ever,
To tell the world thy beauty and thy merit.
Where Is Collin Clout, or Rowland now become,
That wont to lead our Shepherds in a ring?
(Ah me) the first, pale death has strooken dombe,
The latter, none incourageth to sing.
But I unskillful, a poor Shepherds Lad,
That the hye knowledge only do adore:
Would offer more, if I more plenty had,
But coming short, of their abundant store,
A willing heart that on thy fame could dwell,
Thus bids Eliza happily farewell.
FINIS.
THE True Order and formal proceeding at the Funeral of the most high,
renowned, famous and mighty Princess, Elizabeth of England, France and
Irealnd, late Queen: from White Hall to the Cathedral Church of Westminster.
The 28. day of April. 1603.
BEfore thou read, prepare thine eyes to weep,
If that thine eyes contain one liquid tear:
Or if thou can not mourn, fall dead in sleep,
For naught but death such sorrow can out-weare.
Twill grieve hereafter souls as yet unborn,
That one souls loss, did make so many morn.
Did make so many mourn? oh heavy time
That brought a Period to her happy life.
But cruel death, the fatal stroke was thine,
Her loss is ours, heaven thereby gains a wife.
Yet had not sin bin hugged in the arms of Pride,
England had smiled, and heaven had lost a Bride.
But now, oh now, our mourning weeds are on,
And many thousand blacks for her are worn:
Which do demonstrat that Eliza's gone,
For whose untimely loss so many morn.
What these sad mourners are, good reader see:
And seeing read, and reading, weep with me.
Queen Elizabeth's Funeral.
These persons heer-after named, came in their place and order as was
appointed. Also the names of such Noblemen and Gentlemen, as carried the
Standerds and other Ornaments at the Funeral.

First, Knight Marshals men to make room. Then followed 15. poor men. Next,
260. poor women. four and four in a rank. Then, Servants of Gentlemen,
Esquires, and Knights. Two Porters. Four Trumpeters.
Rose, purseuant at Arms.
Two Sergeants at Arms. The Standerd of the Dragon. borne, by the worshipful
sir George Boucher. Two Querries leading a horse covered in black cloth.
Messengers of the Chamber. Children, Of the Almondry. Children of the Woodyard.
Children of the Scullery. Children and Furners of the Pastry, Scalding house,
and Larder. Then followed Grooms, being: Wheat-porters. Coopers. Wine-porters.
Conducts in the Bakehouse. Bel-ringer. Maker of spice-bags Cart-takers, chosen
by the board. Long Carts. Cart-takers. Of the Almonry. Of the Stable, Woodyard.
Scullery. Pastry. Scalding-house. Poultrye. Caterye. Boyling-house. Larder.
Kitchen. Lawndrie. Ewerie. Confectionary. Waferie. Chaundrye. Pitcher-house.
Grooms. Buttrie. Seller. Pantrye. Bake-house. Counting House.
Then, Noble-mens and Ambassadors servants. and, Grooms of the Chamber. Four
Trumpeters.
Blewemantle.
A Sergeant at Arms. The Standerd of the Greyhou^d borne by Master Herbert,
brother to the Earl of Pembrooke. Yeomen: being Seruitors in the Hall.
Cart-takers. Porters. Almonrye. Herbengers. Wood-yard. Scullery. Pastrye.
Poultrye and Scalding-house. Purueyers of the Poultrye. Purueyers of the
Acatrie.
Yeomen. Stable. Boyling-house. Larder. Kitchen. Ewerye. Confectionarye.
Waferye. Purueyer of the Wax. Tallow-Chandler. Chaundrye. Pitcher-house.
Brewers. Butterye. Purueyers. Seller. Pantrye. Garneter. Bake-house.
Counting House. Spicerye. Chamber. Robes. Wardrobe. Earls and Countesses
servants.
Four Trumpeters.
Portcullis.
A Sergeant at Arms. Standerd of the Lion, borne by M. Thomas Somerset. Two
Querries leading a horse trapped with black velvet. Sergeant of the Vestrie.
Gentlemen of the Chapel in Copes, having the Children of the Chapel in the
middle of their company, in surplices, all of them singing. Clerks. Deputy
Clarke of the market. Clerks extraordinarye. Cofferer. Diet. M. Cook for the
household. Pastrie. Larder. Scullerye. Wood-yard. Poultrye. Bake-house.
Acatrie. Stable.
Sergeants. Gent* Harbenger. Wood-yard. Scullerye. Pastrye. Caterye. Larder.
Ewerie. Seller.
Sergeants. Pantrie. Bake-house.
M. Cook of the Kitchen. Clerks of the Equerrie. Second clarke of the
Chau^dry. Third Clark of the Chaundry. Second Clark of the Kitchen. Third Clark
of the Kitchen. Super-visors of the Dresser. Surueyer of the Dresser for the
Chamber. Musicians. Apothicaries. Chirurgians. Sewers of the Hall. Marshall of
the Hall. Sewers of the Chamber. Groom-Porter. Gent. Vshers quarter wayters
Clarke. Marshall. Auenor. Chief Clark of the wardrobe Chief Clark of the
Kitchen. Two Clerks Controllers. Clerks of the Green-cloth. M. of the
Household. Sir Henry Cock Cofferer.
Rouge Dragon.
The Banner of Chester, borne by the Lord Zouch, between two Sergeants at
Arms. Clerks of the Counsel. Clerks of the privy Seal. Clerks of the
Signet. Clerks of the Parliament. Doctors of Physic. Q Chaplains.
Secretaries, for the Latin, and French tongues.
Rouge-Crosse.
The Banner of Cornwall, borne by the Lord Herbert (eldest son to the Earl
of Worcester) between two Sergeants at Arms. Chief Officers to the Lord
Mayor of London. Aldermen of London. Soliciter. Attorney. Sergeants at Law. M.
of the Revels. M. of the Tents. Knights, bachelors. Lord chief Baron. Lord
Chief Justice, of the Common Plees. M. of the Iewell-house. Knights, which
have been Ambassadors. Gentlemen Agents. Sewers for the Queen. Sewers for
the body. Esquires of the body. Gent. of the priuye Chamber. Gentlemen
Pencioners, holding their Pol-axes heads downe-wards, covered all with black.
Here Reader stay: and if thou ask me why.
It Is to entreat thee bear them company.
But if the high spirit cannot weep so low,
Weep with these flowers of honor that drooping go.
Lancaster.
The Banner of Wales, borne by Viscount Bindon. Lord Mayor of London. Sir John
Popham. Sir John Fortescue. Sir Robert Cicill, Principal Secretary.
Controller of the household. Treasurer of the household. Masters of Requests.
Agents for Venice and for the Estates.

Windsor.
The Banner of Ireland, borne by the Earl of Clanricard. Barons. Bishops.
Earls eldest sons. Viscounts. Dukes second sons. Earls. Marquesses. Bishop
of Chichister, Almner, and Preacher at the Funeral. Lord Keeper. Archbishop
of Canterbury. French Ambassador. Four Sergeants at Arms. The great
imbrodered Banner of England, borne by the Earl of Pembrooke, assisted by the
Lord Howard of Effingham.
Somerset and Richmond.
York, Helm and Crest. Chester, Target. Norrey, K. at Arms. Sword.
Clarenciaux, K. at Arms. Cote.
Art thou yet dry, as if thou had not wept?
Read further then, and thou will force a tear.
But had thou scone her figure as she slept,
In memory, thou would her semblance bear.
Whose dear remembrance would so touch thy mind,
That in thy passion thou no mean could find.
The lively picture of her Majesty's whole body in her Parliament robes with a
Crown on her head, and a Scepter in her hand, lying on the corpse inshrin'd in
lead, and balmed covered with Purple-veluet: borne in a Chariot drawn by
four Horses trapt in Blacke-veluet.

Gentlemen Vshers, with white rods. A Canopie over the Corpse, borne by 6
Knights. Six Earls, assistants unto the body. On Each side the Corpse, 6.
Banerols, carried by 12. Noblemen. Footmen. The Earl of Worcester master of
the horse, leading the Palfrey of Honor. Two Esquiers and a groom to attend
and lead him a way. Gentleman usher of the privy Chamber.
Garter K. at Arms.
The Lady Marquis of Northhampton, Chief mourner: assisted by the Lord
Treasurer and the Lord Admiral: her train carried up by two Countesses, and
Sir John Stanhop, master Vicechamberlaine. Two Earls assistants to her. 14.
Countesses assistants. Countesses. Ladies of honor. Viscountesses. Earls
daughters. Baronesses. Maids of honor of the privy Chamber. Captain of the
Guard, with all the Guard following, five, and five in a rank, holding their
Holberds downward.
Lo here are all that in black weeds do mourn,
And now me thinks I so thy countenance turn:
What trill thy tears? nay (Reader) then a don
The firmament contains but one cleore Sun.
And since that Delia is from hence bereauen,
We have an other Sun ordein'd by heaven.
God grant his virtues may so glorious shine,
That after death he may be crowned divine. Amen.
The 12. Bannerols, were carried by 12. Barons: beginning at the youngest first.
The first Banner, was of King Henry the second, and Elenor of Aquitaine.
Carried by the Lord Norris. The second, of King John, and Isabel of Angolisme:
carried by the Lord Compton. The third, of King Henry the third, and Elenor of
Arragon: carried by the Lord Chandois. The fourth, of King Edward the first, and
Elenor of Castillia: carried by the Lord Compton. The fifth, of King Edward the
second, and Isabel of France: carried by Lord Darcy of the South. The sixth, of
King Edward the third, and Philippa of Haynolt: carried by Lord Cromwell. The
seventh, of Edmond of Langley Duke of York, and Isabel of Castil: carried by
Lord Windsor. The eight, of Richard Earl of Cambridge, and Anne Mortimer:
carried by Lord Darcy of the North. The ninth, of Richard Duke of York, and
Cicely Neuill: carried by Lord Dudley. The tenth, of King Edward the fourth, and
Elizabeth Wooduile: carried by Lord Gray. The eleventh, of King Henry the
seventh, and Elizabeth, daughter to King Edward the fourth: carried by Lord
Cobham. The twelfe, of Henry the eight, and Anne Bulleine, Father and mother to
our late deceased Queen: carried by the Lord de la ware.
Viuat Iacobus: Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae et Hiberniae Rex.
FINIS.

