A TRVE COPPIE OF THE ADMONITIONS SENT BY THE SVBdued Provinces to the States
of Hollande: and the Hollanders answer to the same.

TOGETHER WITH THE ARTICLES of Peace concluded between the high and mighty
Princes, PHILLIP by the grace of God King of Spain, etc. and HENRY the Fourth
by the same grace, the most Christian King of France, in the year 1598.

First Translated out of French into Dutch, and now into English by H. VV.

EDINBVRGH Printed by Robert Walde-graue according to the Copy Printed in
LONDON. 1598.

To Holland.
O Noble and high minded Holland, which act so exalted and esteemed, because
Fortune smiles on thee: how long will thou live in this thy wanton foolishnes,
and begine yourselfe to force and strength? have thou not yet enough followed
the trace of disquietnes? have thou quite forgot the bond of a^mitie? is it
upon nothing but blood, murder, and fire that thou studiest? has Mars wholly
possessed thy heart? will thou have all according to thy own mind? Do
thou think that this will all, way run before the wind with thee? Do but
think from whom thou art severed? and wherefore hate thou them that loved
thee? Thou art our flesh, our blood (in times passed in a good mind) but now
cruelly bent against us. I cannot imagine whereupon thy foundation is grounded:
twenty five years thus in strife to continue, will there be no end? does
peace go against thy stomach? Do thou not seek rest and tranquillity in thy
time? Let the common misery move thee.

No Christian is he who in harm takes delight.
2 Will thou perpetually cry and braule, and like savage beasts remain wild
and furious? be these thy reformed manners to stir up mutinies and rebellion?
what will thou? what seek thou? what is thy grief? wherefore have thou
taken arms? for thy privileges this was the first play: but truly that was
not it: you sought something else, as now we may plainly see: for the
experiences lighteneth thy darkness: thou have rejected all duty: and seek
(against God) a liberty to thy own mind. Open thy eyes, mark if the
scriptures teach such rules to subjects: What has S. Paul laid before the
Christians under the idolatrous potentates, that they ought to be obedient unto
their superiors according to Gods laws. This lesson had also been good in thy
behalf.

For where pride is, Gods spirit cannot abide.
3 It seemed that you would banish tyranny, and with free hearts defend your
patrimony: but you sought to set aside and suppress your superiors, and to
live according to your own fancy. The show was fair, but it had another
meaning then some thought: but by your works is apparently perceived that yet
at this day your heart is against subjection, you think to strengthen your
selves with your own force, and despise the Prince whom God and nature has
given thee: He calls, he watches, but thou will not hear him: He entreates,
he admonishes you, and you do not respect it: He will join himself to you,
and you refuse it: his goodness augmenteth your rebellion: he desires no
revenge, nor cruelty: he will receive you with grace: he w^ede thee as^ (...)
of his body, although thou have somewhat estranged thy self; return, return,
and refuse not your own good.

He despises God who takes that which belongs to his Prince.
4 Do not with scorn reject his proffers, but prepare your troubled and
scattred nunds to peace: for though fortune be now on your side, yet (according
to her wonted vnsteadfastnes) the case might change, and then your happiness and
good luck were soon destroid: even as snow and^ce melts before the sun,
even so melts prosperity when God will show his anger: this is manifest, and
daily seen in diverse persons in this exchaunging mortal life, yea in many
kingdoms and countries, which are seen to fall through their own default: It
is folly to trust on moveable things, if to day you are happy, to morrow your
state may alter: and he that trusts upon himself is often deceived, before
he does imagine that the wind will blow against him. O Hollande be not too
proud, although thou art in a moment capsed up to the top of fortunes wheel,
for the foundation is naught, how sure soever you think it.

Nothing can dure which has no good ground.
5 Thou art mercifully admonished, but with cruelty thou stoppest thy ears,
and your conceived fury remains so obstinat that thou will not listen to any
reason. Is there nothing that can abate your high mind, nor quench your bloody
thirst? the Omnipotent God does perceive your obstinacies and how wilfully you
hate peace: No doubt he will visit thee: his hand does threat thee, as not
long since he has miraculously shown unto thee, by the great Whale which was
seen at Scheueling upon the strand, who before your eyes like a thunder did
burst with great rumor and bloodshed. Mark and ruminate upon this, as an
especial token, and think that this does signify some wondrous thing. Let
each one that hears this, take warning thereby. And if thou can taste truth
take warning hereout. Open thy eyes and unlock thy stony hearts.

God always does warn before he does punish.
6 Thou art threatened, that's a thing manifestly known: for each one can judge
what such monsters betoken. Gods mighty and heavy hand is over your heads to
plague you: with grief and misery he will feade thee, yea with adversity,
ruin and poverty. Thy joy he will convert to sorrow, thy laughing to laments,
thy riches to nothing, as is seen: he alters kingdoms: and that which
stands high he does abase. This will befall thee unless thou will
acknowledge thy sovereign as good subjects. Sheath thy murdering blate, let
peace shine in thy heart before your destinies fall. Thy neighbors of whom
you hope to reap comfort, and upon whose alliance you so peremptorily stand
will forsake thee, for every one looks to himself when they are in need. Of
this assure your selves, for it is no fable.

It is commonly said, Danger parts friendship.
7 Your bad pretenses do war against God: ye are as in spite of nature it
self: although other princes do their profit with thee, yet
(notwithstanding) they hate these your tricks, thinking their subjects might
also rebel: and reject their magistrates: for soon are found many colors to
revolt, when once the mind is that way bent, your regiment is scandalous to
all nations that know it, because you despise superiority: for they that reject
their Princes (says S. Paul) withstand Gods ordinance: you are like unto the
monster which to the amazement of each one came beatles upon the shore of
Scheueling, and there (to your learning) remained dry upon the land:
wherefore learn obedience before the punishment come: for this same looking
glass was not planted in vain.

Where grace is, there is always time to repent.
8 Yet for all this I imagine you will mock at this admonishment, and (as you
are wont) say it is nothing but the prating of Friars, or babbling of Nuns: No
medicines will serve to your sore, for always the malicious mocks with Gods
secrets: True it is, we are neither prophets nor children of prophets: we are
far removed from the knowledge of the divine hidden secrets: yet our
admonishment is not without foundation: believe if it so please you, for of
pure zeal we open unto you your estate: a wonderful change is ordained unto
you: choose the best while you have time, you are warned by the highest Regent.
Give place to reason, you are expected with grace. O Noble Holland quench your
turbation. Join with your brethren: follow the counsel of friends and
believe no strife makers which will ruin you.

Unwise is he that follows a blind man's trace.
Is seen and allowed to be printed.

Datum Bruxellae 12. Martij. 1598. Petrus Vinck Louannij,
Ioannes Masius excudebat.

The Answer of the Hollanders to the seduced Provinces upon the former
Admonition.
Upon the first.
Divinely and manly Noble Holland is exalted, for God does of his mercy accept
the same as his child: besides the defense of our paternall freedom, is the
root from whence nobility springes: These urge us Hollanders, and not the
blind idolatrous Goddess, whom we refer to them that do serve her.
Prouidentia is our leader, for we find that she does exalt us above all
estates. Such as sooth up their enemies, and hate their defenders. Judge if
they be not to be esteemed as wanton fools: Thie is our meaning to endeavor
to withst and you andour enemies with force and strength: And we will, to the
end, as long as need shall require defend our common liberty does day and
night, whilst God gives us strength to abide it to fight for our selves and
our neighbors who feed their deadly foe in their bosom, which is a dangerous
and pitiful thing.

For no Christian is he that does bad, and to strengthen others therein.
More upon the first.
YOu blind Netherlanders reproach us that we have quite forgot the band of
amity: neither has blood, murder, nor fire possessed our hearts, neither do
we acknowledge Mars otherwise then for a blind idol, but only the God of
boast who has imprinted in our hearts a steadfast thought of reconcilement, and
peace, as well appears by diverse our mintes, who outwardely show our inward
mind: we do our best to reioyne you, that are wrongfully severed from us, to
the end that the Spanyard do not hurt thee: for needful defense of our
liberty and goods is the rule of our pretenses, and the bulwark of our war
as long as Gods grace does help us, if we did otherwise we should shame the
Netherland blood. And Christ has warned us to be against Lions and Foxes
ravenous and craft.

Simple as Doves, and subtle as Snakes.
Upon the second.
YOu cannot compare us to Bears or Wolves, who are full of cruelty subtle
Foxes nor Dragons who long for blood, for we are tame as Lambs, guarded by
Dogs, whose teeth defend us from the wild beasts, (because we are reformed)
such is to us not forbidden, we use it to our defense. Our will, our seeking is
that we do inuit, seek and procure, through the commandment of Christ your
safety with ours both of body and soul: Our grief is that you feel not
your loss nor the dead: the cause of our taking arms is to defend our
lawful privileges, together with the liberty of mind, and this is the only
way to get the same, as in these our countries is apparently to be seen, that
this is the only mark we shout at, which we also will with deeds show unto
you, if you will join with us, and withstand the Spanish pack.

Whose pride is unto God and man an horror.
More upon the second.
THe obedience which we show unto our superiors is willingly without force,
yea with just desire, as our contraries see and praise, although it do spite
them, and shows that we seek nothing but to obey according to the teaching of
the wise: it appears by that which we have done, and suffered so long, for to
remain under the kings regiment as our Lord but not as a tyrant: we could do
no less: we seek but the liberty, which no Christian Prince ought to refuse
to obedient Christians, without the which we could not continue, nor be
esteemed good Christians. For according to the scriptures (which we read more
then you do) for they are forbidden your sights as a thing nothing touching
your vocation: we find that our faults are agreeing together, therefore he
that is not content to do mischief himself, but exhorts his neighbor
also, their ambition verily shows that God has wholly pulled his grace from
him.

For God to the proud does ever give a fall.
Upon the third.
IN effect, we seek to expel tyranny, and with a joyful heart defend our
native soil from your incursions: and (through Gods help have preserved some
part thereof to your good) hope to persevere further therein: we never yet
desired to live headless, or without Magistrates, for we account them unwise
which desire it. But it is wisdom to take a care thereof, and to have
Magistrates of our own nation. As God has always exhorted his people. We
stand not upon our own strength, but with heart and mind put our whole trust
and defense in Gods hands. Our Prince we do not scorn, but fear the tyrant,
who (according to Gods laws) has lost his right. His entreaties makes us
sigh, perceiving nothing in him, but the fruits of the sick Lion, to whom the
Fox for all his flattery would give no relief, for his deeds to others show
the intent of his heart.

He that uses his right does no body wrong.
More upon the third.
YOur Prince calls and watches, as a Wolf wounted lies a bed, requesting
the Lamb to give him some drink, saying that afterward he would provide
meat himself. To whom the silly Lamb ^reth (...) doing: yea marry you
would make me your ^de: I per^ your drift So the remembrance of his Lyon-like
and Wolfe-like cruelty, does make us to esteem his calling, and entreating of
no worth: you boast much of his goodness: you mark not the place nor person
to whom you speak, where scarce there is a step but his cruelty has been
showen, to what end will you excuse him? he has manifestly showed the same
lately at Brussels upon the body of a silly maiden. Why? you speak it to
Hollanders, who yet smell the fire of their late destruction of goods and
blood, yea whose wounds are yet bleeding, his mercy which has showed us his
sword, fire, and halter, never yet did he reach us a fatherly hand, and yet he
bears a very smooth face: but as the old Proverb says, which teaches us.

He has or will deceive him where he can.
More upon the third.
WE can soon judge what mercy we should find at the hands of him, who
esteems his highness wronged in the highest degree for these four points
against his majesty. As Arms against him, new religion, to be sworn against
him: traffiking with other Potentates. Do you call this but some what
estranged? what mercy can we expect of him who esteems the resignement of a
small request of state a great disgrace to his highness. He whom with
unmerciful tyranny has not used (the unknown. West Indian Amercians,
together with the wronged countries of Granada and Arragon) as subjects, but
more like a ravening Wolf, and all because they had but desired their wonted
liberty, their tears could not move his stony and wretched heart, but other
hardened the same: what can assure us not to be used in like sort. Wherefore we
trust in our God, h^ (without doubt will strengthen us, upon him as upon a
firm rock is our war grounded.

Against God, neither money, counsel, nor friends can p. euaile.
Upon the fourth.
Never Letter or messenger has been sent to us, but they have been read, and
every word understood and answered: insomuch that they might well perceive that
we sought nothing better then a good peace. Hartius with his can witness the
same your idolatrous fortune (where withal in your admonishment you there
twice threatened us) we esteem her not a fig. Let Heathens and their like
adore her, we acknowledge the steadfast providence of God, who alters the
kingdoms. Them that have taken their dwelling places in the heanens, and made
their nestes in the clouds. To his will and not to fortune do we give the
honor, where under only do we sub^ our selves. This is seen by the Spanish
king your Lord, w^ if he had taken this for a warning should never have come to
this his diulish pride, whereby he has greatly begi^ to descend.

God strikes down the proud, and rayseth the humble.
More upon the fourth.
THe chiefest things which do ruin a kingdom are, idolatry, which of God is
hated: tyranny to their subjects, and wrong to their neighbors: for these
offenses does God punish kingdoms: but Holland shall yet rejoice, and as a
lamb standing upon Gods tower, laughes at the Wolfes threats, being assured
that nothing can hurt him. What token, what fruit of marcie, whereof you boast
can thou show us of his merciful deeds, and yet lately you would have
murdered our Prince: these be your dissembling admonishments: away away with
them. The unquenchable blood thirst of those diuilish grasshoppers your
Jesuits, ye cuffians who govern your King, do teach us not to trust your
dissembling words.

The kingdom grounded upon murder cannot stand.
More upon the fifth.
WE have bin often cruelly awakened when we did not sleep, that those which
were awakened never rose again, insomuch that they that heard the knocks were
astonished, yet never had we any warning thereof by those that could have sent
it us. But of you who acknowledge to have no strength, because you are bent
under the Spanish yoke, and the Governor whose force is enclosed by the
Spanish Counsel, and show their commissions to pleasure their masters:
therefore it is good to admonish where one may have thanks for it: but our ear
is so surely stopped that we can hardly hear, for we have Batauam aurem, an
ear which is thick, which will not be tempted, but as the Snake goes
subtly, stopping her ears to the deceivers note, so will we not harken to
your Syren-like words.

The birders whistle is sweet, when the birds he will intrapt.
More upon the fifth.
GOd (for a while) has fatherly chastised us, both to punish us and to rueine
us, and not alone perceauing our sins, but also our miseries, which always
have cried vengance unto heaven upon the Spaniards heads, who (as it seems of
his mercy) has heard our clamors. If God did prophecy any thing by the whale
which appeared upon our shore: what that may betoken we know not, for it may
well be such things may come to pass without any signification, much less
know we what God does hereby mean: yet your exposition as full self wise
secreetes we esteem too foolish and rash: but we do not wonder, for the text
of the matter is either falsely reported unto you, or by you falsely contrived,
for the fish was not headless, as in your seventh verse you say, but
contraryly he had more head then was proportionable to his body, the same
being measured: but what may this signify.

For Gods tokens commonly threaten Gods enemies.
More upon the fifth.
Now this is our exposition which you cannot comprehend. This Whale is the
great Spanish Leuiathan, for he and the fish in nature are like, for as that
fish of other fishes is the deuourer, so he also of other kingdoms is the
deuourer and destroyer. The fishes head was above his proportion, and so is the
Spaniarde, unsatiably greedy to ouer-gape all, though it cost him his life. It
is manifest in England, France, and the Netherlandes: By the Whales bursting is
meant that the Spaniard directing his force toward England, for to subdue
that with his neighbors, is there also run aground, burst and spoiled, to the
joy of all, and especially of us, who hope that God will cause him to run
himself dead, if he will not cease to persecute the innocent.

He that persecutes another does often fall himself in trouble.
Upon the sixth.
IF ever there was any people threatened and crossed by their enemies it is we,
and by you watched, wherefore we reject your sugared words, which you began
with us even against God, as by your vnaduise exposition of the fish which was
driven upon our shore, without hurt or danger to any: yea which is more, was
profit for the country, wherefore we esteem that Gods tokens and threats are
more stronger then many Wolves and Bears, who both hurt men and cattle, the
swarming multitudes of dying beasts, who vex and destroy the fruits of trees
and growth of the earth: they are most Gods plagues. So that this fish passes
without prophesying any punishment to us.

But Gods wrath over them that seek to hurt us.
More upon the sixth.
WE acknowledge and confess that we have deserved Gods just punishment, but
we hope that his wrath will persecute the Spaniardes until such time as they
leave persecuting the just. The example we shall see upon thee O King, who
were raised to the top of the clouds shall fall down without stay until thou
acknowledge God in his force. We have long enough to the loss of our blood
held him for our Prince, till at length we have rejected him and forsworn his
alliance, which pure need has caused, the verdite whereof we remit unto our
Lord God. Upon England and France we will not boast, the human arm is weak
and to no effect: but God is our, fortress and that we conioyne with our
neighbors, wh^ are coparteners with us in like woes, is no shame, and their
revolt with your threats does not make us shrink.

The fear of common ruin binds friendship faster.
Upon the seventh.
IDolatry does war against Gods learning, and that you reproach us. God and
nature does ordain Princes for their subjects defense and profit, when now
the Prince through envy and tyranny does abuse his power, and his vassalles,
then does God take away from him the virtue and right which he had given him
by nature, yet not all princes, but those that suppress their people with
injustice. England and France are out of thy reproach, for their kind
government commendes our deeds. The scandal which you spoke of have we not
given: but if any hypocrite does scandalize himself, it is his own folly, to
trouble himself with that which is not worth a myte. You also do call us
rebels: whereof we are comforted long since, for our patience does change
the minds of diverse, who offer us of love a furthering hand.

If so be we do not herden our selves to begin mischief
More upon the seventh.
THose that according to their country laws do defend their countries right,
are lawful Magistrates, which we not refuse, nor yet reiects them, as you
spitefully reproach us. We resist the tyrant, according to the judgment of any,
yet do we not transgress the ordinances of God: neither do we reject the
admonition of S. Paul. But the word of God teaches that lawful magistrates
are placed by him to keep their people in peace and quietness and to chasti^
the wicked: When now they begin with tyrannous suggestions to opp^se their
subjects, with just cause may they be deposed, as breakers of these
contractes, and their subjects are not baunde to show them any more obedience.
Because now this Spaniarde is like unto the monster in every degree: we ^e
fly his bl^ thirsty tirranny.

Unwise is he to seek mercy where none is to be found.
Upon the eight.
THe unadvised discourse, fiered out of the mouth of a mad man without ground
or meaning is mocked and scoffed at every where, as foolish words, but they
that be any way allied unto him by kindred or friendship, and that do love him,
are grievously sorry, for thereby they know the incurable madness where
withal he is possessed. Even thus is it with us toward you, who mocks others,
giving us no other hope to cure your madness: you are wholly unapt to take
good counsel: we love truth, but your feigned discourse interlarded with
diversity of fine phraised lies, does make us assure our selves, that either
you are possessed with madness, or with Spaniards, to yours and our ruin, and
destruction of your patrimony.

He that persueth ruin, shall soon overtake it.
More upon the eight.
YOur accusation is better: your admonishment to peace and obedience is without
ground. That you do it of pure zeal we believe the same also: But your zeal
is foolish and blind: you say that a wonderful change is ordained for us,
this you ground upon your peace with the French Nation: What more hurtful
mutation can befall then to be in a league with Wolves? But if you are no
Prophets, whithertended then your oration, for the Lamb for although he had
pleadges dares not commit himself to the Wolves mercy, he rather would devour
both Lamb and pledges, then he would let the Lamb live. We know the decree
given in the Popes Council: That one ought not to keep faith unto heretics.
We have seen it in many to whom it has cost their lives. But indeed you
have your wish, joining your deeds with ours, not listing to strife-makers: for
he is unwise that reputes his friends his enemies.

And a more fool is he, who his foes for friends takes to be.

Vigilanria and fidei 1598. Printed at Amsterdam for Laurence Jacobs Stationer,
upon the water in the bible.

Articles and conditions of the peace and perpetual lyance concluded between
the high and Mighty Princes PHILLIP by the grace of God, Catholic King of
Spain etc. And HENRY the Fourth of that name by the same grace most Christian
King of France Anno 1598.
Whereunto are annexed the Articles of the Peace concluded in the Castle of
Cambresii, Anno 1559. between the Catholic King of Spain, and the late Henry
the second most Christian King of France.
First tran^lated out of French into Dutch, and now into our vulgar tongue by
H. W. In the name of God the Creator.
BE it known unto all men present, and to come, that as the Realm of France
and the Netherl^ndish Provinces, have endured great loss and damage, by reason
of the civil and foreign wars, who have continued these many years, which
the kingdoms of England and Spain, and the countries of Sauoy have well
known and felt, while in the mean time the common enemy to Christendom and
the Christian name, marking his welfare o^ our ruin, procuring to surmount us
through our strife, has gotten a perilous proceeding, in his unlawful
suggestion of the Christian Provinces, the which being considdered by our Holy
Father Clemene the eight of that name, and desiring with all diligence to
Prevent the same, and to cut asunder the root of this mischief, and has
through his Messenger dwelling at (...) a drill, and other done, and
pronounced diverse demonstrations, and exhortations unto the high and mighty
Prince Phillip the second, by the grace of God Catholic king of Castile,
Aragon, Leno, and both cities of Jerusalem, of Portingall and Granada etc. to
the end to bring him unto an amiable peace and accord, with the most high and
mighty Prince. Henry the Fourth by the same grace most Christian King of
France and Nauare, unto whom h^s holiness had sent the illustrous and reverend
Cardinal of Florence Alexander de Medicis Legatte to him and to the
Apostolic Seat, to pronounce like exhortations unto the said most
Christian king, and according as our said Holy Father has been advertised
that the said Catholic king had given full power and instruction to conclude
this peace unto the high and mighty prince Albertus Cardinal, Arch Duke of
Austria. his nephew, and also for the great good trust which be had in him,
and affection which he has always had to the said peace, had sent unto him
the reverent Father I. Bonauenture Cala^agirono. General of the order of S.
Frances, to the end he might by him understand his meaning in this matter, and
also to give him further knowledge of the meaning of the said Catholic king
touching this peace, having presented all what is aforesaid unto the said most
christian king according to the order which he had received of his holiness, the
said kings incited through a godly zeal, pity and grief which they conceived
and felt in their hearts, of the long heavy and burdensome misery, which
through continuance of the said wars their kingdoms, countries and subjects
have and yet endure: in^ending not to let slip an occasion which consists in
the power of God fea^ing Princes, and that love their subjects, to bring and
perpetually place an assured peace and tranquillity in this land, and especially
in the provinces over ^he which it has pleased God to constitute them as their
keepers and defenders, and deeply considering (as their duty is) the grave and
wise considera^ions and exhortations of our said holy father, and being
thereupon agreede have requested their friends, and allies, with them to
understand and resolve a good peace and union, to the rest and quietness of all
the Christian provinces, and to the reviving and tranquillity of all the
subjects, and to begin the said treaty have b^ appointed, to wit by the
said Cardinal arch Duke, for and in the name of the same catholic king, and
by virtue ^d expres^ power which he has of his majesty. The Lord John
Richardo^ knight and head president of the privy counsale of estate, the Lord
John Baptist de Taxis knight commander in the Saints of the war like order of
S. Jacob, and of the said counsel of estate, and counsel of the war: and
the Lord Lewis Vereylen knight audiencier. and chief Secretary, and Tresurer
of the Briefs and of the foresaid counsel of estate, and of the side of the
most christian king, the Lord Pomponius de Bellieure knight, Lord of Grigon,
Counsaylor of his counsel of estate, and the Lord Nicholas Bruslart, knight,
Lord of Sildeny also Counsaylor of the said king in his counsel of estate and
President in the court of Parliament of Paris all furnished with sufficient
power, the which at the end hereof shall be inferred, which lords deputies by
virtue of their power in proof of the said Cardinal who has long time
labored to the furthering of this present peace, have concluded and agreed
upon these articles following.

1 Inprimis it is concluded and agreed, that the treaty of peace shall
continue resolved and concluded, between the Lords, Kings, Phillip the 2. and
Henry the 4. confirming in approbation of the articles comprehended in the
treaty of Peace made upon the castle of Cambresis in the year 1559. between
the said Catholic K. Phillip the 2. and of high and lautable memory Henry King
of France, all which said treaty the said deputes have again newly confirmed
and ratified in all points, in such order as if it were her inferred, from
word to word without renewing any thing in the same nor in any other before,
which all shall continue whole and entire, except that which shall be annulled in
this present treaties.

2 And according to the same, that from the date of these presents between the
said Lords, Kings, their children present and to come, their heirs and
successors, their kingdoms, countries, and subjects, shall be a good, sure,
stable, and inviolable peace, confederation, eternal alliance and friendship,
shall also love one an other like brethren, seeking and procuring with all duty
the others welfare, honor and reputation, and shall faithfully shun (for so
much as shall be possible) the one the others hurt, not entertayning nor
favoring any persons whatsoever, which should be any ways subject to the hurt
or damage, of the one or the other, and shall from this day forward cease all
enmity, forgetting from this day all things, that may have been evil done
how and whatsoever they be, they shall put in oblivion and annuled without at
any time after the same shall be any wais raised, or mentioned, rejecting by
this present treaty, al practices, or inteligences which in any sort should
be to the detriment, the one of the other: also promising not to do, pursue nor
procure through any to be done any thing that might tend to the hurt the one to
the other, not also suffer that their subjects shall either ^ectly or indirectly
do the same, and if so be any of the of what quality or condition soouer,
should from the date hereof chance to do any thing to the contrary, either by
sea or land, or otherwise assist or help in matters that might be any way
hurtefull unto the said Lords, Kings, the other shall be bound to oppose him
self there against and hinder the same, and severely to punish them as
breakers of this peace, and disturbers of the common quietness.

3 And through virtue of this peace and amity, the subjects of both sides
whatsoever they are, so far forth they keep the laws and customs of the
country shall be suffered, to go, come, remain dwell, converse and return in
the one and others country, using the trade of merchandise, or as best shall
^ike them, as well by sea as by land, and upon the fresh waters frequent and
trade together, and the said subjects shall be defended in paying reasonably
the rightes and duties in all places used, and others which by their majesty's,
or their successors shall be imposed.

4 And all letters of repriualles which might have been given for what cause
soever shall be suspended, and from this day forward there shall be none more
given, by any of the said Princes to the prejudice of the others subjects,
except only against the chief offenders, their goods and of their accomplices
and that yet in case of manifest denegation of justice, of which and of the
letters of reformation and requisition of those which shall pursue the said
letters repriuals shall be bound to make appear in manner and form as injustice
is required.

5 The cities, subjects citizens and inhabitants of the counties of Flanders
and Artoiis, and other Provinces of Netherland, together with the kingdom of
Spain shall enjoy the Privileges, and freedoms which have been granted
between the kings of Frances predicessors of the said most Christian King:
and also the cities subjects, and citizens and inhabitants of the kingdom
of France shall likewise enjoy the liberties and freedoms which they have in
the said low countries and kingdoms of Spain, and as every one of them has
heretofore enjoyed them, and as they do enjoy them by virtue of the treaty of
the year 1559. and other precedents.

6 Also it is couenanted and agreede, that if in case the said King Catholic
do give or transfer by testament, or what title soever it be unto the worthy
Princes the Lady Isabella his eldest daughter or to any other the provinces of
the Lowcountries with the countess of Burgondy and Charlois, that all the said
Provinces and counties do understand to be comprehended in this present
treaty as they were in that of anno. 1559. together with the said Princes or
he to whom in favor the said king Catholic shall dispose the same without
being needful that to this effect there should be made a new treaty.

7. And may return the subjects and servants of the one side and the other,
(...) not with ^g that they ^d in the ^t^ary p^ty at (...) and ^e^c^ of the
which they were pro^ided before the end of December 1588. except Ecclesiastical
^ng^ which should be found to ^e Can^ally provided together with the enjoying
of each and every one their good^, (...) and perpetual ren^es, which they by
rea^ of th^se (...) begin in the end of the ^de year of 1588. have (...)
enjoy (...) received, shall now again use ande may after the publication of
this peace, and in like sort of those which since the said time may be dew
unto them by right of succession or otherwise without any contradiction, but
notwithstanding without any right to demand of those which have possessed the
said ^oueable goods, the p^, and benefits proceeded th^reo^ (...) the said
(...) until the publication of th^se presente^ nor also the debts which have
builde^ in the said time, and shall be held for good and valliable the
reparation which the Prince, his Lieu^tennant, or deputy has or shall do
under the jurisdiction of whom the said a^rest shall be made, neither may any
creditor of the said deptes or any their ^atu^eyes never be received to
pursue the said deptes, in what order or (...) against those to whom the said
gifts have been made nor against those that by virtue of such gifts and
confiscations have paid them, for what raises soever the said deptes may be,
notwithstanding any bills of obligation which the said deptes may be,
notwithstanding any bills of obligation which the said creditors ^ght have
thereof, the which through effect of the said con^atio^ ar and shall remain by
this present treaty, cancelled, ann^led and without fear.

8 And the said subjects and servants of both sides shall return unto their
said vnmo^eable goods and rents aforesaid notwithstanding at gifts con^embs,
declarations, confiscations, and commissons sentences reneued by continuance
and in absence of the parties, and those not heard by of the said ^ares,
howsoever it be, which sentences and all judgments given as well in civil as
criminal matters shall remain void and of no worth as if they had not been
pronounced, thereof wholly increasing the said subjects, ceasing all hindrances
and contradictions unto the rightes which they had at the time of the opening
of the said war without that any one may be charged for charges public or
entermises which he had how beit for the victuals, maintainment of money, or
otherwise during the time and occasion of the said wars, whereof they should
have made account unto such as then had power to dispose thereof, so far forth
that the said subjects and servants be not found guilty of any other crimes,
then to have served in contrary party, and not nevertheless, retire themselves
into the countries and Lordships of the said kings without they have first
thereof obtained permission, and letters patents sealed with the great seal of
their Majesty the which they shall be bound to verify before Commissioners and
officiate of their said matter.

9 Those which should have been provided by the one or the other side with any
benefices, standing to the collation, presentation, or other disposition of ^he
said Lords, Kings, or any other ^aymen shall remain in the possession and ^se
of the said benefices as be well and duly provided.

10 In favor and regard of this peace, and to the end that the said Princes
give ^ntentment one to another, is concluded and agreed, that they shall render
and ^estore the one to the other effectually and in pure faith, that which
shall be found ^o have been taken, feised, and occupied by them, or others having
any charge of them or in their name, in each others country, vz. the said
most christian ^ing shall render unto the said king Catholic, the pussance and
possession of the county of Charlois, his appurtenances, and dependances, to
join the same by him and his successors wholly and peaceably and retain the
same under the ^ueraintie of the Kings of France, and if it be found that any
place, have been ^cised since the said Peace of anno 59. by the said most
christian King, or his shall also be restored, and all within the term of two
months to reckon from the day and date of these presents.

11 And likewise the Catholic king shall render and restore unto the most
christian King those places which shall be found to be taken by him or his
since the said peace made in the castle in Cambresis. vz. Calis, Ardres,
Monthullen, Dourlens, La Chapel in Le Chastelet in Picardie, Blauet in
Britanie and all other places which the said catholic king, either there or
in any other places of France detaineth since the said treaty.

12 As for Calis Ardres, Monthullen, Dourlens, Chapel, and Le Chasteller,
they shall be rendered by the said catholic king, or his deputies, effectually
and in good faith, without any prologatio^, or difficulty for what occasion or
pretense soever, unto him or them, who shall be thereunto deputed and ordained by
the said most christian king within two months precisely to account from the
day and date of these presents in the state wherein they are at this present,
without breaking, weaking or endam^ging them in any sort, and without
pretending nor demanding any rembursement, for the fortifications, made in the
foresaid places nether for the pay which might be due unto the soldiers or men
of war there residing and in the aforesaid restitution shall first be
delivered the city of Calis, Ardres, and the rest s^ following in such fort
that the foresaid restitution shall wholly be effected in the said term of two
months.

13 Touching the restitution of Blauet the same shall also in good faith be
effectually without any prolongation, or ^fficultie for what cause soever
executed unto those who shall be thereunto appointed by the said most christian
king, and that within 3. months after the date of these prese^ts, and the same
Catholic king may cause to be broken down the fortifications by him or his made
in the said Blauet and other places which shall be by him rendered in Britanie.

14 Restitution being made of the said places the said king catholic may cau^
to be carried away all the artillary, Bullets, armor, victuals and other
munitians of war which shall be found in the said places at the time of the
restituton, also it shall be suffered unto the soldiers and other people, which
shall depart^ out of these places to carry away all their goods and moueables
unto them appartayning, without that it be lawful to ask any thing of the
inhabitants of the said places or plain or flat countries, nor any wise to
endamage their houses, or to take any thing away from the said inhabitants.

15 And to the end that the soldiers remaining in the same Blauer, may
conveniently depart toward Spain, the aforesaid most Christian king will
provide them with ships and mariners, in which vessels they may lade their
artillery, victuals and other munitions of war with their baggage, they in the
aforesaid Blauet, and other rendered places in Britain in giving security of
restitution of the said ves^ls and convey of the said mariners wtin the term
which shall be ordained.

16 Moreover the said deputise promise, for security of restitution of the
said places as soon as this present treaty should be ratified by the most
christian K. to deliver 4. pledges, such as he will choose, subjects unto the
said Catholic K. the which shall be honorably kept and entertained as their
qualities require. The restitution being made and really accomplished, the said
pledges shall be rendered and set at liberty, in good faith without any delay, but
must be vnderstoodde that after the accomplishment of the 6. places in Picardy,
but two of the said pledges shall be delivered remaining the other two until the
restitution of Blauet.

17 And for the matter contained in the aforesaid treaty of 1559. which were
not accordingly executed, the same shall now be wholly executed and ended, in
that which rests as well respect of the county of S. Paul, the limets of the
countries of the said two Princes which he held in surueyans and exemption of
customs and foreign imposition pretended by these of the county of Burgundy
Bishop Therouane, the abbey of S. John, at the mountain of the Ducchie of
Bouilon, restitution of any pretended places of the one side and the other
ought to be rendered, by virtue of the said treaty, and the other differences
which have not bin void or decided, as it was then couenanted there shall to
this effect be na-Arbitrators of the one and the other part the which shall meet
within 6. months in the appointed place if the parties consent, else shall chose
some other place.

18 And as in the partition of the countries ordained unto the Bishopriks of
Arras, Amiens, S. Omer and Boloigne are founded certain villages of France
attributed unto the Bishops of Afras, and S. Omer. Also other villages of the
countries of Artoyes and Flanders unto the Bishop of Amiens and Bologne whence
often rises discord and confusion, is couenanted and agreed that after the
consent of our holy father the Pope: commissioners shall be appointed by the
one and the other side which shall assemble within a year in such places as
shall be appointed, to resolve upon the change which may be done of the same
^ssages, to the commodity of the one and the other side.

19 All prisoners of war being detayned by them or either party shall be set a^
^bertie, in paying their charges, and that which otherwise they may lawfully
^w, without paying any ransom, except they had thereof agreed before the date
^f these presets and if in case that complaint be made of the excess thereof,
there shall ^e taken order by the Prince of the country where the said
prisonersar detained.

20 And all other prisoners, subjects, unto the aforesaid Kings, which through
the calamity of the wars may be detayned upon the Galleys of their
Majesty's, shall immediately be released, and set at liberty without any delay,
for what cause soever and without demanding of them any thing of their
ransomes, or their charges.

21 And are reserved unto the said catholic king of Spain, and the said
worthy Princess his eldest daughter their successors, or deputes, al their
rights, actions, and pretentsons, which appertain unto them of the said
kingdoms, countries, lordships or others for what cause soever the which he
nor his predecessors have not been expressly renounced, thereof also to make
pursuit by amiable means or justice and not with arms.

22 And in that which by the said deputes of the said catholic king is
demonstrated for to obtain to a good and perfect peace, his majesty
requesteth that ^he most excellent Prince the Duke of Sauoy may be comprehended
in the said peace, because the aforesaid Catholic king does tender the
welfare of the said Lord, Duke as his own, for the great kindred of blood and
near alliance which is between them, the which is also declared by this
Gasper of Geneua, Marquis of Bullen, Councellor of estate, Chamberlain and
Collonell of the guarde of the said Lord Duke, his Lieuetennant and governor
of the Duchy of Austria, and the City of Jury, his Deputy, as appears by
his power and procuration, who in honor of his name, said that his said Lord
was issued from the brother of the great grandfather of the aforenamed most
Christian king, and of the cousin german of the Queen his mother and that
his intent is to give contentment unto the said Lord, king, and as one of his
most humble parentage, to acknowledge him with all the honor, duty, reverence
and observance of friendship, he may possibly, to the end to give occasion in
the time to come to think better of him and his actions, the passed occasions
would suffer him the said king promissing to acknowledge his good affection,
and that he will use unto him, of like bounty and declaration of friendship, as
the 4. last kings have used unto the the late most excellent memory of my Lord
the Duke his father.

23 It is therefore agreed that the said Duke shall be received and
comprehended in this treaty of Peace. And to manifest the desire which he has
to content the said Christian King, will render unto him the City and castle
of Berre, within 2. months to count from the date of these presents, in good
faith and meaning without delay or difficulty for what cause so ever. And the
said place shall be rendered to the said king, within the said term
directly, in the estate wherein she is at this present, without breaking down,
nor endomaging them in any wise, without that any remburseme^t for the
fortifications made in the said city and castle may any wise be pretended,
neither for that which might be due unto the soldiers and men of war. Also
leaving there all the ordinance which was there, at the taking of the same with
the bullets, and may only withdraw those which sithence he brought thither, if
any there be.

24 Also it is conuenanted and agreed that the said Duke shall wholly disauow
and abandon, in good faith, the Captain la Fortune, being in the city of
Suerre in the country of Burgundy, without giving unto him nor any other (which
he unlawfully detaineth the said city against the will of the said most
christian King) directly or indirectly any aid, support or favor.

25 And for the surplus of all other differences, the foresaid most Christian
K. and Duke of Sauoy, the aforesaid deputes, in the aforesaid name, consent
and agree for the good of the peace, that they be remitted unto the judgment
of our holy father the Pope, Clement the 8. for to be judge and decided by his
holiness, within one year to account, from the day and date of these presents
according unto the answer of the said king given in writing the 4. of June
last past, and to keep, execut, and maintain all what shall be by his holiness
ordained, without delay, prolongation or difficulty for what cause or pretense
soever, and mean while and until such time these things be otherwise disposed
of by his holiness, they sha^ ^emaine in the estate and conditions, as at this
present, without either changing or renewing, and as they are possessed by the
one, and the other party, so shall it not be lawful to impose or require any
contribution nor other things without the territories of the places which are
held by the one and by the other.

26 And therefore it is now couenanted and agreed, by the one side and the
other that from this day forward shall be sure peace between the aforesaid
kings and duke, their children, present and to come, heirs, successors, and
inheritors, their kingdoms countries and subjects, without they may make any
enterprise upon the countries or subjects, the one of the other, for what cause
or pretense soever.

27 The subjects and servants of either side, as well ecclesiastical as secular
notwithstanding that they have served in contrary party, shall return wholly in
the possession and enjoying of all and each their goods, offices and benefices,
as have been said above of the subjects and servants of the said kings, but
not to be understood of the gouernements.

28 As for the prisoners of war they shall be used as is above written, and
by the aforesaid Princes is agreede.

29 And ar confirmed in all points and articles the treatise hertofore made with
the late most christian K. Henry the 2. and Charles the 2. and Henry the 3. the
said deceased duke of Sauoy, in the year 1559. in the castle of Cambresis,
except such things as are by this or other treatises annulled, and accordingly
the said Duke of Sauoy his countries, cities, and subjects shall continue a
good newtral Prince and common friend, unto both the said kings, from the day
of the publication of these presents, the traffike between this countries and
subjects, shall be free and assured as is said in the said treatise, and as in
times past have been used, and the points therein comprehended shall be observed
in regard of the officiares who have served the said kings so far forth it be
not annulled by other accordes.

30 Are yet notwithstanding reserved unto the said most Christian king of
France, and his successors all their rights, actions and pretentions which they
know to appertain unto them by reason of the said kingdoms, countries,
lordships, or others, for what cause or pretense soever, unto the which shall
not be neither by him or his predecessors, expresely renounced, thereof to make
pursuit by friendly means of justice, and not by arms.

31 In this peace and amity shall be comprehended by common accord and consent of
the aforesaid most christian king, and catholic king, if so be they will be
comprehended in the same, and chiefly on the side of the catholic king, our
holy father the Pope, the Apostolic seat, the Emperor of the Romanies, the
Lords the Arch Dukes, his brethren and cousins, their kingdoms and countries,
the Electors and princes of the Cities and estate of the holy Empire, under
whose obeisance the duke of Bauaria, the Duke of Cleue, the bishoprike and
county of Liege, the sea-bordering cities, and counties of east Freeseland,
and the said Princes shall renounce unto alpractises and promises never
hereafter, to make an^eneither with christendom nether without, whenever, which
may any wise be prejudicial unto ye said L. Emperor, elector or estates of the
said holy Empire, but to the contrary shall procure with all their power and
industry, ye good and quietness thereof, so far forth that the said Lords,
Emperors and the said estates, shall be have themselves amiably unto them, the
said kings catholic, and most christian, and commit nothing in prejudice of
them, and in like sort shall be comprehended in this Peace, the Lords, the
conferats of the great cities of Germane, and the lagues Grises wc their
allies, the K. of Polland and Sweed, the K. of Scotland, the K. of Denmark, the
Duke and Signorie of Venice, the duke of Lorain, the great duk of Thuscane, the
Republiques of Genoa, and Luca, the Duke of Parma and Plaisance, the Cardinal
Farnese his brother, the Duke of Mantua, the Duke of Vrbin, the chief of the
houses of Columna and Vrsine the Duke of Salamoneta, the Lord of Monaco, the
Marquess of Final, the Marquis of Masla, the Lord of Plombin, the Earl of
Sala, the Earl of Colorino. For to use and continue this present peace with
exprsse declaration that the aforenamed most Christian King may neither
directely nor indirectely labor through himself or others to prejudice: and
it the same most Christian Prince pretend any thing against them, may only
prosecut the same before co^petent judges and not else in any manner whatsoever.

32 And on the behalf of the most christian king shall be comprehended in this
present treaty (if in case they therein will be comprehended, our Holy Father
the Pope the seae apostolic the Emperor, Elector, and Princes
ecclesiastical and secular, cities, comminalties and estates of the holy
Empire and especially the country Pallatine Elector, the Marquis of
Brandenburge, the Duke of Wittenbergh thee Landgraue of Hessen, thee Marquis of
Hamsbach, thee Earls of east Freesland, the Seabordering cities, according to
the ancient alliances, the king and kingdom of Scotland according to the
aneient alliances and confederations made between the kingdoms of France and
Scotland, the kings of Poland, Denmark and Sweede, the Duke and governors of
Venice, the three Cantons of the leagues of Switsers, the Lords of the 3
leagues Grises, the Bishop and Lord of the land of Vallay, the Abbote and
City of S. Gall, Cloutem bergh Milhouse the country Neufcastle, and other
allies and confederates of the said League, my Lord the Duke of Loraine, my
Lord the great Duke of Thuscane, my Lord the Duke of Mantua, the Repuhlique
of Luca, the Bishops Chapters of Metz Tibold and Verden, the Abbote of Gozze,
the SS. of Sedan, the Earl of Admirande, is to be understood notwithstanding
that the consent which thee catholic king gives in the comprehension of East
Freesland, be without prejudice unto the right which his Catholic Majesty
has over the countries thereof, like as contrariwise are reserved, the
differances, rightes and exemptions of the said counties, al which declaration
that the said king catholic, may neither directly nor inderectly labor
through himself or any other, to their prejudice, but if the aforesaid
catholic king pretend any thing against the^ may only prosecute the same
before competent judges, and not by force in what manner so ever.

33 Also shall be comprehended in this present treaty all others, who by common
consent of the said kings may be chosen so far forth that within 6.
months after the declaration of these presents they shall deliver their
obligatorie letters and declarations, as in such cases is required.

34 And for more security of this peace and Articles theirin comprehended,
shall the said treaty be verefied, published, and registered, in the court of
Parliamentes in the Realm of France, and Chamber of accountes, of the said
city of Paris, as likewise verified, published and registered, in the great
counsel chamber, of accounts, of the catholic king in the Low countries, all
according to the te^or of the treaty of anno. 1559. which shall be dispatched by
the one and the other si^e, within 3. months after the publication of this
present treaty.

35 In which points and articles above named, is fully comprehend the treat^e
and articles, which have been agreed and passed, between the said deputies,
and in the names as is aforesaid, the which by virtue of their power and
commission, have and do promise under obligation, of all and each their
aforesaid masters goods present and to come, that they shall accomplish, and
inuioably observe this present treaty, as also to cause them to ratify the
same and to deliver the one to the other authentic letters, both signed and
sealed, which in present treaty shall be from word to word inserted and that
within a month of the day and date of these preents in regard of the said
Lords, most Christian King, Cardinal of Austrie and Duke of Sauoy: which Lord
Archeduke has promised within three months to procure like letters of
ratification of the same king Catholic. Moreover the said Deputies have and
do promise by virtue and in the name aforesaid (that keep the said Letters
of ratification of the abouenamed most Christian King, Cardinal, Archeduke and
Duke of Sauoy) furnished the said Christian King Cardinal, Archeduke and Duke
of Sauoy, shall solemnly swear and take their oaths upon the Cross, holy
Evangelists, Canon of the Mass, and upon their honors, in presence of such as
it shall please them to appoint: to obs^rue, accomplish, wholly and reallie
the tontents of the said treaty: and like oathe shall be done by the said
catholic King within three months after or when it shall be required. In
witness whereof the said Deputies have subscribed this present treaty with
their names, in the place of Vreuin this second of May, anno. 1598.

The Articles of the peace concluded upon the Castle of Cambresis, between the
most high and mighty Kings, PHILLIP by the grace of God, Catholic King of
Spain etc. And the late HENRY the second of that name most Christian King of
France.
Confirmation of the agreement made and concluded at Ryssell and Cercamp.
INprimis, that the above named Kings inuiolably observe these Treaties, and
assist one another in common counsel.

1 Belonging to the restitution of the places of both sides unlawfully
possessed, that the King who first does render them, choose out of the others
country four such personages for pledges as he shall think good, until such
time as restitution of the other side be likewise ^ff^cted.

2 Don Charles son to the King of Spain shall have in marriage the eldest
daughter of the King of France, and for her dowry shall have four hundredth
thousand Crowns.

3 Emanuell Duke of Sauoy shall take in marriage the Lady Margaret sister unto
the King of France, and for her dowry shall have 300000. crowns, and render
unto the King his brother the Dukedom of Berry during his life.

4. All places cities and freedoms, which the King detayneth shall be restord
to the said Duke, except, that the King of France shall hold for the space
of five year, five cities in Piemont, viz. Turryn, Anguerry, Chinas, Quiers.
and the new city Dast with the fortresses and iurisdictictions of the same,
within which time the king shall yield up all his rights of the said Cities.

5 Likewise shall the king of Spain hold two places and cities in Piemont
viz. Vrsell and Aste: the which he shall redeliuer with their jurisdictions and
rights, when the king of France does render his.

6 The King of Spain shall render unto the king of French S. Quintin. Han, and
Chastelet, in such sort and estate as they are, except the artillarie and
victuailes: where against, the King of France shall render Didenhouen, or
Theonuille, Mommedy, Mais, and Marienborgh, with like conditions.

7 He also shall render unto the Bishop of Luic, Billo, with what else he
detayneth belonging to the said Lords.

8 Touching the city of Iuois, the king of France shall cause the walls and
fortresses thereof to be pulled down in recompense of Turrouane, and there
shall be no more fortresses built there.

9 Terouan is rendered to the king of France, in all liberty as was before,
except that no fortresses may be built upon the ground.

10 The county of Mountferat returns to the Duke of Mantua and the places
shall be returned unto him in the behalf of both the kings, except the
artillery and victualles shall be carried out, and if they think good, they may
pull down the fortrasses which they have made therein.

11 Those of Charlois render themselves again under the king of Spain.

12 The Baliage of Hesden with all rights and freedoms return again under
the king of Spain without that the king of France have any jurisdiction
therein with all fortresses.

13 The county of S. Poll shall be held by the Lady of Tuteuile, the two kings
notwithstanding keep their rights, the which laying aside, king Phillip shall
have the souerannity thereof

14 The French shall hold Calis for eight years, and after give the same
again unto the English, and for pledges thereof shall the king of France set
sureties for a million of gold, and beside send any of his Lords into England,
whom they will choose, who shall remain there until the restitution of the
said city of Calis and the king of France shall there with all quite renounce
all the right which he might pretend thereto.

FINIS.

