A CONTINVATION OF ALL THE PRINCIPAL OCcurrences which has happened to the
Leaguers lying before Breda, showing into what great extremity and necessity
the Army of the Marquess Spinola is likely to fall into for want of provision
and pay: for which causes he has already lost above 12000 Men. With a relation
of the Forces that are now a leauying under, and for the command of Count
Mansfield, and the Duke of Brunswicke, by Collonell Smith, and Captain Daniel
de la Riue, with expectation to receive the Forces now dismissed by the Kings of
Denmark and Sweden, intending to adventure their fortunes once more together.
The resolutions both of the King of Spain, and the States of the united
Provinces, for the sudden leuying of two great Armies more, to bring into the
Field against each other, with the great strait the King of Spain is lately
put to for want of Shipping and Mariners, and what hinderance it is to his
present affairs. Likewise herein is related the last proceedings of all
Christendom.

Printed at London by B. A. for THOMAS ARCHER, and are to be sold at his shop
in Popes head Alley, over against the sign of the Horse-shooe, 1625.

From Vienna the 2. of October.
THe invasion which the Turks made lately in Hungary is confirmed again with
the last letters that came out of the same Kingdom, from whence they write
likewise those particulars, namely: how that they have fired several villages,
and defeated many Imperial soldiers, and almost the whole regiment of the
Lord Palsy: that there were many Hungarians revolted, and would stick to
Bethlem Gabor, who is preparing a great Army to set upon some of the Emperors
dominions: That Bethlem Gabor had invited to his wedding, with the daughter of
the Lord George Setsdhi, many of the Lords and States of Hungary, and made
great preparation to come down with many Noblemen and Courtiers.

From Vienna the 2. of October.
To day arrived here the Chancellor of Bethlem Gabor, and brought some horse and
other presents with him to bestow upon the Emperor as it is rumored. But for
all this, we cannot conceive any hope that Bethlem Gabor will make a peaceable
end with the Emperor, seeing that he leauieth daily more and more soldiers.

And for as much as concerns the treaty of peace with the Turks, we cannot
believe that it will take any good success, seeing that they make many inrodes
upon the Emperors dominions, and compassed lately with their horse, Nouigrad,
Setshin and Palamha. And we have here tidings how that the Turks are resolved
to pitch a camp betwixt Offen and Newhensel, and that Bethlem Gabor is
marching up with many thousands of men.

A Commission or Patent being lately sent into the land of Ens to depose all
the Protestant Preachers which are there, the States of the land offered to pay
to the Duke the twelve* hundred thousand Florins (which he is pretending from
the Emperor for his warlike expenses, and keeps the land of Ens as a morgage
or pawn) if they might conti^^e there with the free exercise of the Religion
as they did before.

From Prague the 12. of October.
The Horse of the Duke of Holstayn which were lately dismissed, are now again
taken in the service of the Emperor, and getnew Cornets seeing they rent the
other from their Lances as soon a^ they were dismissed: and it is rumored that
they shall be sent into Hungary angainst the Turks.

There is both in this kingdom and other places such plenty of grapes, that
we doubt whether we shall be able to get vessels enough to bring the wine in
the sellers*

From Frankford the 8. of October.
We have here tidings received how that the Duke of Baueria has denied for
weighty reasons to send such aid to the Infanta at Brussels as she desired
to have of him.

From Cullen the 14. of October.
In many parts of Germany are now soldiers leauied for Spain. The three
Regiments of the Baron of Anholt are not as yet dismissed for want of pay.

They write from Mentz that there are daily many soldiers leauied for Spain
by the sound of the Drum.

From Venice the 1. of October.
There are three Galleys gone from Genu^ to fetch money in Spain for the
Spanish Ambassador and ^o leauie men for the State of Millaine. And we have
tidings out of France how that the king is there still increasing his warlike
troops.

They write out of Switzerland, that the thirteen Cantons were met at
Solothorn to make a firm resolution upon the proposition made by the French
Ambassador for the recovery of the Grisons and Valtolina.

From Vienna the first of October.
The 14. of this month, departed two of the Imperial Commissioners hence,
going toward Offen, and the Count of Altheyn who is chief Commissioner,
followed them on the 17. of the same Month. The Bark which carried the Count
was very stately adorned and painted with red, white, black, and yellow
colors: the two other Commissioners that went before him are two Barons:
namely, the Baron Marn-Weckh, and the Baron Galler. On the Bark of the Count
were diverse colors displayed, with the Arms and Motto of the order of
Knighthood, which is called, Militia christiana. The soldiers which attend
upon the Count are all in a lively, (which he has given unto them,) and
covered with red cloth, with a green lace upon it. The Commissioners which are
appointed for Hungary to conclude the peace, are the Count Ester Has^^ Governor
of Newhense^l, the Count Frangipan (who is one of the Imperial Council of
war, and the Lord S^^sky, besides some other. God grant that this trea^ie of
Peace may ^end to the propagation of his holy name, and to the general good of
all Christendom. But they write out of Hungary, that the Turks are still
very proud and obstinate, and have yet lately slain some Imperial horse,
which were under the command of the Lord Forgatsch, and lay in a market town
which the Turks pillaged, and fired, after they had taken thence a good
booty, and many poor christian souls which they carried afterward with them.
Some are here of opinion, that they have done it by reason that they know that
our soldiers which lie in Hungary, may not meddle or skirmish with them,
being bound to the contrary: or otherwise that they think to make us afraid,
thereby hoping by such means to obtain with more speed that which they desire.

And it is again confirmed from Offen, that the Turks will not dismiss our
Ambassador, the Lord Curth who is there, unless we restore first the money,
which some Imperial soldiers took from them, when they were carrying it to
make payment to the Turkish garrisons.

Bethlem Gabor is (as they write out of Hungary) resolved to go in person to
Offen, and makes great have that he may be there at the beginning of the
Treaty.

The Lord Stanislaus Turzo, who is Palatine of Hungary, is very sick and
likely to die.

The taxation which is here made in regard of wars, commodities and labors,
is yet very strictly kept, and there was lately one of the wine pressers
streiked at the Cross because he said, that he would rather forsake the
country, then labor for so little money, as is allowed unto them of his
profession by the before mentioned taxation.

The Protestant states of Austria, perceiving that the Magistrates of this city
proceeds very rigorously with the Protestants, (who were gone as they were
used to their divine service, not regarding the Proclamation by the Borough
master, and Aldermen of the city made,) and had already some punished of
them, which they had arrested and put in prison, they sent some Commissioners
to the Emperor to beseech his Imperial Majesty, that he would be pleased to
give order that the Proclamation before mentioned might be called back again:
They have not as yet received their answer, but it is generally thought that
the Emperor will not hinder the Proclamation or the proceedings of the
Magistrate.

To day there were some twenty six houses, which stand over the pull-bridge,
transported to the Jews for a sum of one and thitrie thousand florins in
ready money, and they are to go to them on the next Thursday, unless some
alteration happen in the mean time. The Burgers which dwelled there before may
there remain still, but the company of soldiers is to be inquartered in this
city.

The Emperor is yet at Ebersdorf, and as we understand he is not likely to
remove thence before Saint Martins day.

From Vienna the 22. of October.
Some five days ago departed hence the Count of Altheyn going toward Offen
about the treaty of Peace with the Grand Seignior.

Here are lately some Commissioners appointed to gather alms to redeem the
poor Christians, which are made slaves by the Turks, and Tartars.

There are here lately many persons, both called in question and arrested, for
going to the exercise of the Protestant preachers, against the proclamation of
the Magistrate of this city; the most part of them are women, and must pay
great sums of money: there are yet two hundred to come in, besides them which
are already questioned.

The fourteenth of this Month caused the Commissioners of the country, both
for themselves, and in the name of the Protestant States, an insinuation to be
made to the Magistrate of this city, to give them thereby to understand, how
they dislike both their Proclamation and proceedings, and sent moreover on the
fifteenth of this month two Lords to his Imperial Majesty: namely, the Lord
Ferdinand of Herberstein, and Christopher Leisir, to complain about the
proceedings of the Magistrate, and to request his Majesty that he would stay
such suits, and maintain them of the Protestant treligion according to his
word and promise, and sent thereby a short petition to receive thereupon his
Majesty's gracious answer.

From Amsterdam the 19. of October.
They write out of Spain that the King has charged all Officers of his
Kingdoms of Spain, seeing that he can hardly get Mariners ^now to send to the
Bay of Todos los Santos, that they should keep all the soldiers together
which shall come with the fleet of Noua Hispania. And that he has written to
the Infanta at Brussels, that seeing the Hollanders do trouble him in several
parts by water, that she must for a time maintain the wars in the
Low Countries, with the aid of the Subjects which live under her command.

The kingdom of Portugal is likely to decay, seeing that the Merchants lose
daily many of their ships, and that they want the traffike which they had in
Brussels.

There go likewise daily many Mariners of Biscay to Marisibia and Rochell, for
fear that they might be pressed to go to the Bay of Todos de la Santos.

We understand that the King of France, besides diverse other Princes and
Potentates is to contribute a great sum of money to the raising of a great
Army.

The king of Denmark is with some ships gone to Gotland to treat about matters
of great importance, either with the king of Sweden, or with some of his
Commissioners: but many are of opinion that they are to meet there both in
person.

The Marquess Spinola receives yet daily more men in his Camp, seeing that
many are run away, and (as it is rumored) the fourth part of them which came in
his Camp, forsaken it: and his horse begins now likewise to forsake it, seeing
that there is great dearth and little money stirring: He is likewise raising
some batteries at ter Heyden, with an intention to hinder the approaching of the
Prince of Orange.

They of Breda keep themselves very quiet, according to the order given by the
Prince of Orange, and keep in the mean time strong watches: and the Governor
and the other chief Commanders sit many times in Council upon the affairs of
the Towns. Both the townsmen and soldiers are still of a good carriage, and
long mightily to get leave that they may set upon the enemies.

Our horse lately surprised a Post of the Marquess Spinola, who was sent to
the Infanta at Brussels by him, to give her Highness to understand that he
must have money with all speed, or that he was not able to keep the soldiers
in his Camp.

By reason of the boisterous wind that blew upon the twelfth day of October,
the waters grew very high in the Low Countries, and they have done great hurt
about Geertreydenbergh, for there were drowned many Beasts, and the violence of
the water carried some bridges away, which stood without the Town, and drowned
also some of our works about the Camp of the Marquess Spinola. But the
Prince of Orange is now daily approaching the quarter of the Enemies about
Tetteringen, and consults many times with his Brother the Duke of Brunswick,
and other chief Commanders and skilful Ingeners, how they may annoy the Enemy.

And we have received tidings that the Count Henry of Nassaw is sent with 8000
Foot, and two thousand horse toward Rosendael to fortify that place, and to
wait upon the conuoyes of the enemies.

The Count Ernst of Nassaw was lately very sick but God be thanked is now at
the mending hand.

There are daily many Materials, Fago^s, and great store of Ordinance,
Victuals, and Munition, brought to our camp, and it is thought that there shall
shortly some great enterprise be made by the Prince of Orange.

His Excellency before mentioned is raising two Forts near the high way, called
the long street, to prevent that no victuals out of the Dominions of the united
Provinces be any more brought to the enemy, by some covetous persons as has
bin done before.

The enemies coming lately at Oosterhout, pillaged the village, and took all
what they could get of the poor country people.

We expect here daily, many soldiers which are dismissed by the Kings of Sweden
and Denmark, and lie now about Hamburrough, and tarry there only for their
chief commanders, which are to canduct them into these united Provinces. And
it is rumord that Count Mansfield, and the Duke christian of Brunswyck, are
likewise to get some of them under their command to employ them else where.

On Thursday last was the governor of the Baye, of of Todos los Sanctos with
his son, some Jesuits and other prisoners brought to the house of the West
India company at Amsterdam.

They write out of Spain, that the Friggers have undertaken, to send into the
Low Countries by letters of exchange, the sum of six hundred thousand
Crowns, for the use of the Marquess Spinola.

Out of the Camp of the Prince of Orange, at Made on the 18. of October.
There came yet daily many Italians Albanese, and other Nations in our camp,
having forsaken the Marquess Spinola, (as they say) by reason of the great
dearth, and the small pay which is in his Camp.

They report, how that the Marquess Spinola got yet lately four Regiments in
his camp nam^ly, two of Wallons, one of Italians, and one of Germains, besides
some troops of Horse. And they are of opinion that the Marquis Spin^la will not
be able to lie long before Breda, seeing that the ways grow so deep, that the
Victuals can not be carried to the camp, without great difficulty, and that
there is almost no money stirring in the camp: And they say, that every soldier
gets no more then fifteen stiuers a week, which they can easily bestow upon
three pound of bread, and one pound of cheese.

The horse which came with the last conuoy to their camp, were not able to ride
upon their horses, seeing they went so deep in the mire, but were compelled to
go a foot, and lead them by the bridle. And they report moreover that the
Marquess Spinola, hearing that the Prince of Orange has given order to some
Commanders to meet with his conuoy: had given directions that no conuoy should
any more go or come without eight thousand foot, two thousand horse, and some
pieces of Ordinance. But the way is grown so deep (as they say) that the horse
go in some places unto their be^lies in the water, that they will hardly be
able to march.

The Marquess Spinola is daily viewing his camp: and strengthened lately his
Quarter of Tettering, with some soldiers which he took out of the other
quarters, and planted there nine pieces of Ordnance upon a battery, to hinder
the approaches of the prince of Orange with his forces, seeing that he drew
daily nearer and nearer to that Quarter.

A mus^ering being lately made in the Camp of the Marquess Spinola, it was
found out that there wanted twelve thousand of the soldiers, which were come
to his Camp, many of them being run away, and the rest slain or deceased.

Yesterday there came yet some persons out of the town of Breda, and brought
letters with them of several Commanders and Captains, which relate that there
is no difficulty within the Town: and that all manner of Victuals are there
very good cheap, for as they write the Quarter of Corn cost there but five
Gilders, the Kan of the best beer two styuers, the Kan of their beer of three
Gilders the Barrel* one styuer, a pound of Butter, fix styuers, a pound of
Bakon, five styuers, a pound of Cheese, three styuers, a pound of fresh flesh,
four styuers, and all other things are sold accordingly.

They which came out of the Town, told likewise that there were yet a thousand
six hundred Oxen and Kyne kept within it in several stables, and it was
thought to be provided yet for a year and a half. Concerning the plague
there are none almost sick of it in the Town: And there were at the same time
yet seven thousand resolute soldiers within the town and the outworkes.

We have received from several places tidings, how that our enterprise upon
the Castle of Antwerps took no effect: by reason of a horse of our men, which
made such a great noise, that a Sentinel of the Castle looked thereupon over
the walls of it, and discovered our men which came about it. The Drost of
Borchem who was the chief conductor of this enterprise marched on the twelf
day of this month of October, about four of the clock very early in the
morning out of the Town of Bergen up Zoome, with a thousand foot and four
troops of horse, and came about elenen of the clock in the night time before
the Castle, and had before twelve of the clock laid some of their floates or
bridges on the water, which runs about the Castle, fastened some Petards,
and erected several ladders against the walls, and were likely to speed well,
if they had not been discovered by the means of the before mentioned horse.

There comes yet daily many Troops of Horse and foot in our Camp, and on the
thirteenth of this Month arrived there the Regiments of Frize-land, besides
diverse other Companies which came from Gerchum, B^mmel, Tiel, and out of some
Towns of Gelderland; and were presently inquartered close under the trenches
of the enemies at Tetteringen.

The Commander Smeltsing, is sent with fifteen Troops of Horse and some
foot, to make an enterprise upon the enemies.

They which came out of the Spanish Camp, relate how that the Marquess Spinola
has told, that although he was compelled to raise his siege before Berghen up
Zoome, notwithstanding he had used great violence against the Town: he thought
to get Breda without using of any violence.

And they say likewise, that he is yet leauying for the service of the King of
Spain many Regiments, both in Germany and in the Low Countries, with an
intention to accomplish the last resolution which was taken at Brussels by the
Spanish Council of War; namely, to raise yet another Army, and to threaten
the united Provinces, both by the sword and fire.

On the other side we hear that the general States of the united Provinces
have concluded to bring yet another Army in the field, which is to be as
strong as that which they have now in the field, to raise the Spanish Camp
before Breda which are now, as they say, come out of it, even ten thousand
horse and thirty thousand foot. And it is certain that there are already
many chief Commanders and Captains appointed to leauy both horse and foot,
and that there are some thousands of soldiers which have served the Kings of
Sweden and Denmark daily looked for to come by water in these united Provinces.

By the last letters which came from Paris they certify us again that the
King of France is still resolved with the aid of his confederates, to raise
such Armies as has been concluded upon.

And they report, that it is certain, that the before mentioned King has
furnished Count Mansfield already, with great sums of money, to leauie an
Army wheresoever he will.

And they say, that the Colonel Smith is now leauying at Sedan two thousand
fouldiers for the same Count, and the Captain Daniel de la Riue: likewise a
thousand five hundred horse: So that there is no doubt more to be made of the
raising of the Army of Count Mansfield: But the time will learn where it
shall be employed.

The four ships which arrived here lately, coming from the Bay of Todos los
Sanctos, brought with them these following prisoners and prises: namely,

The Viceroy. His Son. The Provincial of the Jesuits. 14. Other Clergy
men. A Sergeant Mayor. 2516. Chests with Sugar. 35. Barrels with Sugar. 20.
Chests with leaf Tobacco. 1. Chest with Tobacco, in rowles. 24. Small Barrels
with confited Ginger. 128. Barrels with Sirupe. 125. Pipes with Spanish wine.
5. Vessels with Tobacco. 59. Teeth of Oliphants. 1182. Pieces of Brasil-Wood.
4525. Oxen Hides.
FINIS.

