February 8. Numb. 10.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE, since the 3. of the last to
this present.

Containing many remarkable passages, amongst the rest these following.

A more exact Relation of the fearful burning of the hill Soma nere Naples
then the former, with the effects it has wrought in that City upon the
public Harlots as well as other people.

The adventure of the Imperial General Pappenheim to relieve (or rather to
ruin) the City Magdenburg, with the success thereof, as much as we have yet
received of Credit.

The late proceeding of the King of Sweden forces in Wittenburg, and what
Towns he has taken; his preparation and mooving, to meet with, and to prevent
the designs of the Imperialists nere Erford, and elsewhere.

The state of the French K. in Lorraine, and how he moves.

The late arrival and royal entertainment of Monsieur the Kings brother at
Bruxsell.

LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicolas Bourne. 1632.

The Continuation of our Weekly NEWS.
From Lions the 3. of January, 1631.
OUR King has sent to Paris for his royal Ornaments, either to hold his Enter
at Nancy, or to visit his Majesty of Sweden. Some think it is for an Election
of a Roman King. We think therefore his Majesty will not come to Paris
again, before he has quite subdued the Dukedom of Lorraine. And it is
certain, that the Duke of Bavaria, Archbishop of Mentz, and other Catholic
States, make earnest suite for assistance from his Majesty. And we think they
will surely obtain so much of him, that he will intercede with the King of
Sweden to use no hostility against the Catholics, and if he will be induced
thereunto, we shall in time hear.

They be very busy in France in levying of Soldiers, and there be more
commanded into Provence and Marselles, whence it appears, that the next
Summer there will be some war in Italy.

From Regensburg the 4. Ditto.
Many people retire themselves from the upper Palatinate hither; for that the
Elector of Saxon is above eight thousand strong about Eger: And certain
Commissioners are arrived here, who place diverse Soldiers along the river of
Danuby, and make their Quarters as far as Passau, which the
Bavarian-Countrymen much dislike. And many unmarried men are pressed to the
wars.

In the Land beyond the river of Ens, diverse Imperial Companies of foot and
horse are already inquartered, and more expected. Wherefore the Boores there
are very unruly, and it is to be feared a Rebellion will arise among them.

General Tilly is returned from Amberg to Nordlingen, to gather his Soldiers,
to what intent time will declare.

From Leipsich the 5. Ditto.
Coronell Bannier used great force before Magdenburg, but the besieged defend
themselves valiantly, in hope that Pappenheim (who already is arrived at
Wolfenbutle with fifteen hundred men, and has taken out of the Garrisons here
and there about eight thousand men) would without fail relieve them. He is
marched already with diverse Regiments toward Halberstadt.

Wherefore the Duke of Weymar his Soldiers about Erford do rise to join
themselves with Colonel Bannier. Also the Duke of Lunenberg and the Bishop of
Bremen, gather their Soldiers together, to join with the said Bannier to
prevent Pappenheim.

From Hamburg we understand, that thereabout are arrived diverse thousands of
Swedes, who take their quarters about the river Elbe, and daily expect more,
and then will pass over the Elbe to besiege Staaden, and Boxtehut; To which
purpose the King of Denmark has gathered a great number of men, and the said
Cities have been already demanded to surrender themselves. And so they intend
to ridd the Bishopric of Bremen, and land about the Weser, of the Imperialists.

The Imperialists are not yet gone out of Wismar and Domitz, the cause whereof
is thought to be, that the Comissioner they sent unto Collonell Tieffenbach
concerning their departure is not yet returned.

From Franckford the 6. of January.
The King of Sweden is yet (as we understand) at Mentz gives daily audience
unto those Princes, Earls, and Ambassadors that be there with him.

Those of Franckford have obtained of the King not only that they may retain
their old Imperial privileges and Jurisdiction. But also Proclamations have
been published by the King, to let all men know, that all and every Merchant
of what Religion or Nation soever they be, which desire to traffic thither,
may with their Merchandise at the time when the Mart is kept, or whenever
they shall trade thither, pass and repasse without any molestation. And his
Majesty has thereupon given especial charge to the Officers and Soldiers
not to hinder the same.

The spiritual Electors are yet levying Soldiers, and thrust themselves into
the King of France his protection, and especially since there is a French
Ambassador with the King of Sweden, who requested that his Majesty would
restore unto the spiritual Electors and Princes their Lands again, and much
insisted upon the alliance between his King and the Duke of Bavaria. But it
seems the King of Sweden does not much regard it, and will nevertheless not
too soon restore those Countries again: And it may happen, that the King of
Sweden in recompense of his expenses will detain them and others the longer,
for the better security of the Protestants.

From Vienna the 7. Ditto.
The Imperial Army is now distributed into the hereditary possessions,
although many complaints there have bin made, yet all is referred unto the Duke
of Friedland; and most of the new levied Soldiers run away, especially the
Hungarians, of which 16. Companies ran away together at once, and have done
great hurt with pillaging in Moravia.

From Leipsich the 7. Ditto.
It is here reported, as if Colonel Pappenheim (who is about eight thousand
strong) should have brought into Magdenburg an hundred men foot and horse, and
above three hundred Wagons with provision, but no man will give credit unto
it, because Colonel Bannier lay near unto it with diverse of his Regiments,
and the Weymarish Soldiers who being about 6000. lay about Erford, marched
toward Franconia, to join themselves with him.

Also the Landgraue of Hessen is arrived with his Army about the Weser to
follow Pappenheim, and therefore it is thought, they will rather bring
Pappenheim into the middle of them, then that he should have succored
Magdenburg.

From Franckford the 10 Ditto.
The King of Sweden passed by this way yesterday toward Hanau to receive his
Queen (as is said) who is daily there expected, and has not seen the King in
19. months.

And the Swedes have taken Germersheim, Cronweisen, Speier, and diverse places
more, they speak also of Heydelberg, but it is not believed. The Marshall of
the field Horn has blockt up Schorndorfe in the Dukedom of Wirtemberg: and
the Boores there are in Arms about 8000. strong, to hinder the threatened
Invasion of Colonel Altringer.

The French Forces are said to lie 7. miles from Strasburgh still, and we hear
nothing of their marching.

The Governor of Zaberne has fortified himself strongly, has taken the
Imperial Soldiers into pay, that ran out of the Bishopric of Mentz.

From Naples, the 6. of January.
Upon Tuesday morning about one of the clock, being the 16. of December, the
Mountain of Soma about 6. miles from Naples brake forth into a very strange
and marveilous burning, wonderfully astonishing the Inhabitants round about;
and continued with great violence for the space of two days covering, or
rather burning the neighboring Towns round about with ashes thereof: many both
men women and children burned, multitudes leaving their habitations, escaped
only with their lives, fleeing with their children to Naples for refuge, where
indeed those of this City have not wonted to extend their Charity toward the
distressed in such abundant measure. The horses, oxen, sheep, and other
annimals left behind them, were all destroyed by the fires extremity; the
which evaporated forth most hideous noise, much like Thunder, or the noise of
great Ordnance, which we of Naples heard as easily as if we had been close by
it. The force of this fire was such, that it sent forth pieces of the Mine
weighing above an hundred weight two miles distant from the place. I spoke with
them that out of curiosity went within 3. miles of the Mount, but such pieces
fell near unto them, checking their hardiness, that fear caused their retire
with great astonishment.

But that which has administered most terror, was the continuance of
Earthquakes ever since the Mount began to burn the most violent were the first
two days, which happened once in a quarter of an hour, which so far
affrighted the Neapolitants, that they greatly feared the sinking of the City,
or the falling down of their houses upon their heads. Many therefore fled out
of the City into other remote places, the Viceroy purposing to do the like was
prevented, because not thought fit of the Collateral. Many through fear
sought out vacant places, where they might repose themselves in their clothes
in the night season, others building sheds of boards to shelter themselves: for
the space of two hours the Levant winds, that is the East, blew the smoke
toward the City, which much obscured the air, and the streets almost an inch
thick with ashes which came from the Mount: and if the wind had continued, it
would have driven, or caused all the people to have fled out of the City; but a
Ponnent wind that is a West happened, thanked be God it has not much annoyed the
City, but has burnt up a great part of the Country. The ashes I am credibly
informed extending to Burletta, which is above 60. English miles from the
place: since the first two days the Earthquakes are not so frequent, neither
so violent, but do still continue. Evident are the demonstrations of their
humiliation. It were incredible to relate the number of their processions, for
their great and numberless transgressions; and that by the people of every
condition, in diverse manners. Some by the Viceroy and Nobility were performed
in most solemn manner; so also by the Cardinal on his bare feet, with other
of the Clergy: great quantity of men most grievously whipping themselves up
and down in token of their humility. Many were the men also that in
pennitentiall habits went bare footed in their processions: so in like manner
women with their hair hanging loose about their ears; and of these the
greatest part were whores, which for number are more then a good many, being
estimated to be above 40. thousand (some are of opinion many more) thirty
thousand are registered, and pay the Gabella. Their processions were day and
night, grieveous and doleful were their cries in general. By the command of
the Viceroy all shops were shut in for four days, and every one to devote
themselves to fasting, praying, and pious actions: and that if any should be
found in the house of a whore, to forfeit 2000. Ducats, and the whore to be
whipped about the City, and banished the Kingdom. Men not able to pay the
penalty, to be sent to the Galleys; (as a thing most rare) the whores confess
themselves in great abundance, some retire into Monasteries, many converted,
and great hope of reformation expected. In fine the hill is much consumed, and
continues burning, the vent being much enlarged, and Earthquakes (God be
thanked) ceased.

From Regooza the 17. of December.
The 17. of this present in the morning was found here in Regooza, and the
Territories thereof, ashes which covered all the ground over half an inch
thick, and had a burning-sent, and that day continued darkish, with some small
rain, and about two of the clock in the afternoon began to darken more and
more, so that about half an hour after two it was as dark as midnight, which
made all the people for fear fly into the Churches, where they remained till
somewhat past three, for then it began to clear, and suddenly appeared light
again. As yet we do not hear whether it has been so in other parts
hereabouts.

Extract of a Letter written at Sultsbach the 12. of January.
General Tilly arrived yesterday at Ambeg, accompanied by about 50. horses,
he came thither in his Coach from Newmarke. It is said there are following
after him 2000. horse. With whom he intends to go to Weyden. wherein there is
already a great Garriso n thence to view the convenience for forming thereabout
of a Camp, and perhaps to visit the Saxonian forces that lie enquartered
about Eger; To which end this very night the horse that lie hereabout have bin
commanded to march toward Neustadt near Weyden, to be mustered.

General Gallas, who does now command some Imperial forces in Bohemia, lies
at this time with his forces about Plau, Daus, Cladra, Darhaw and Heyd which is
but one days journey from Weyden. Therefore the Saxonian forces have need to
be watchful and ready when these guests shall come to visit them.

Among Tillyes forces, that lie in their winter quarters in the Country called
Ries and about Donawert, the plague begins to be very fierce. But yet we
hear they are not so much affrighted thereby as they are only by the name of
the Swedes, of whose coming they cannot abide to hear.

The Maiestrate of VVeyden having kept in their custody the keys of their
gates (although they have an Imperial Garrison with them) have been forced to
deliver the same up unto Collonell Linloch, who commands the said garrison; But
because it was feared the inhabitants will take it ill and perhaps undertake to
beat the said garrison out, the keys were restored back again to the
Maiestrate: But to assure the fearful garrison, the burgers and inhabitants
are this very day to deliver up their arms.

From Mentz the last of December.
I forgot in my last to tell you, that there was found in the Castle of
Konigstein (which as I told you formerly was last week surrendered to
Land-grave William of Hessen) such store of all sorts of Victuals, Munitions
and fair brass pieces of Ordnance. That we cannot marvel enough that the
garrison that was in it did deliver the same, since they had all manner of
provisions of all necessaries both for man's sustenance and recreation,
sufficient store for more then a whole year. On Christmas evening there
arrived here to the King, Palatine Augustus and Duke Adolph Frederic of
Meckelburg. And there are many other young Princes here Who for the most part
take commissions to leavie forces for his said Majesty. And verily the leavies
do very well go on (as we understand from many brave and valorous Colonels)
and there have also been lately given special Commissions unto some whom I
may not as yet name here, to have general Command over certain forces this
coming spring, at which time his Royal Majesty hoping to bring into the field
(besides the army of the Elector of Saxen which is to consist above thirty
thousand men) at the least three hundred Cornets and five hundred Ensigns, the
entertainment whereof you may think will amount to an exceeding, yea infinite
expense: Seeing the Army which his Majesty does at this time maintain, does
cost about 150. Millions of dollars a year.

In Amsterdam 4. February, 1631.
Letters from Cullen arrived this day, do certify us that Pappenheym the
Emperors General had brought into Magdenburg 2. or 300. Wagons, and in
marching out of the City again, were encountered by the Commander Bannier, who
has rooted them and taken the said General Papenheym Prisoner, upon which the
Garrison which was within Magdenburg fled. But the truth hereof we must expect
with the next.

From Hamborough here arrived passengers yesterday, who have not been long
from thence, which do affirm, that before their departure from thence, they
had certain tidings, that the Garrison which was within Magdenburg, were fled
from thence, having left behind them but 4. pieces of Ordnance, that were
serviceable, the rest they have nailed, and cast into the Elve.

The King of Sweden was in MentZ, having been with his Queen at Hanaw.

We have tidings that the Bishop of Trier is agreed.

From Antwerp.
Monsieur the French Kings brother arrived at Brussels on the 28. of January in
the afternoon about 4. of the clock, and was received with great
magnificence, the Burgers went in their Arms about one league and a half to
meet him.

He made his entry on horseback, being clothed in gray, and a buffe-coller.

The troops to receive him were of 3. sorts. The first were with Gentlemen
with whom went the attendants of Monsieur.

The second consisted of the Marquis Mirabell, Marquis E^^yton. Marquis de
Balanson, Prince of Brabanson, Simey, and all the Nobility of the Court.

In the third came Monsieur himself, accompanied by the Marquis de la Cruce,
(...) Don Carlos Coloma, with some Nobility and her highness guard.

From Leypsich the 15. of January, 1632.
The Imperialists have quitted Magdenburg, but before their departure they did
all the spoil they could, they pulled down all the steeples, brake the
windows, and also the goodly Organs, and took away the pipes, set the roof
on fire but it would not burn. They also under-mined the bulworke called the
Deck, they brake with a petardo, the Ducer and Sudenberger gates. Diverse pieces
of Ordnance which they could not take along with them, they nailed up, and cast
some of them into the river Elbe. And now three Companies of Swedish Soldiers
are put into the remnant of the City.

And while Papenheym withdrew himself to Wolfenbuttle the Swedish Army
followed him at the heels. And it is reported they have had already an
encounter. And VVolfenbuttle they say is blockt up.

The Country people on both sides are very much wasted, but seeing the passage
of Lower Saxony unto the VVeser is free again, the pooore people recover
again.

In Bohemia the Soldiers dye apace, but daily supplies come hither again.

His highness the Duke of Saxony with two Dukes of Saxon Altenburg are here,
with many Officers more. But they will depart hence within these two days.

From Franckford 21. Dito.
His Majesty of Sweden with his Royal Consort returned safe hither from
Gelhenhausen yesterday in the evening, and were received with pieces of
Ordnance; His Majesty is daily waited on by diverse Princes and Ambassadors from
great Potentates.

Leypsich 18. Dito.
This day were sent from hence ten pieces of Ordnance to Torgaw, among which
were four half Canons, with ten horses to each piece, and four to each of
the other, and many Wagons with munition, which were taken from Tilly. And it
is reported, that on Thursday last the garrison of VVismar departed. And that
Pa^penheim, Count VVolffe of Mansfelt are in VVolfenbutt^e.

Laus Deo Franckford 25. January 1632.
On Twesday last at night the Queen of Sweede came unto Hannaw where the King
of Sweed met her and stayed two nights and so both marched forward toward
Erfort and some say toward Bamberg who did take out of every Regiment certain
forces, and some out of this City to the value of 600. Men so that his Army
will be that marches with the King some 25000. what should be the cause that
he marched away from us, is as it is reported that Pappenheim is with 10000.
men marched and has releeved Magdenburg and that the Marquis Hammilton with
Banier, were compelled to leave the siege, and to retire to some advantage and
so Magdenburg was releeved, but some report since that the Marquis Hammilton
with the Duke VVeymar and Banier has beaten Papenheim but at large of this day
the letters does come; certain Crabats had an Enterprise of Prague but the D.
of Saxe his forces having notice of it met them at the VVelssenberg and cut
them off and took 4. Ancients and at Eger Coronell Merodes regiment did think
to do some enterprise but was beaten by the Duke of Saxe his forces before
Eger, the forces of Tilly lie in the upper Palatinate sometime in one place
sometime in another place.

Bobenhausen is with all accord taken in by the Count of Jsenberg, many French
Ambassadors has been with the King of Sweed but what was the matter I know
not, but it is spoken that the King of Sweed is gone against Bamberg because
the Bishop did not keep his accord with the King of Sweed.

News is yesterday that Papenheim is beaten and has lost all his baggage and
that the King of Sweed is returning back toward Hannaw again.

From Stetin the 30. of December.
Both Wismar and DamitZ (as you know towns of great consequence in Meckelburg)
are now delivered from the Imperialists, having been delivered up this week.
So that the forces that were employed in the siege thereof may now be elsewhere
employed by the King of Sweden.

A letter written at Prague the 25. of December, still. vet.
I would often have written unto you, but that I know no letters could pass.
Now understanding the posts are again established, according to the former
course, from hence to Dresden, I will again return to my wonted course and
write unto you every week. And to make a beginning, you may be pleased to know,
That on the thirteenth of this present Month there arrived sevearll troops of
Crabats here before the gate called the gate of Wissenberg (or white-hill) and
intended to surprise or take the Town by force, whereupon three pieces of
Ordnance (which is the token or warning of the enemies approach) being shot
off. The Colonel Commander of the Town, a Baron of Hofkirk, sent out some
companies of horse which sell on the enemy, who quickly betook himself to
flight, leaving many dead and some prisoners behind them. The next day (the
14.) the enemy arrived again in good earnest, having placed behind the
Crabats, about 1000. Musketeers, and about 1000. Dragons to flank them. There
the enemy approaching near the Town, found presently ready to receive him.
The two Companies of horse of Arnheyms his guard, and some other troops, who
had placed some Musketeers into some low ground. Now the said two horse
Companies of Arnheym having met with the enemy, turned quickly back and fled,
and the enemy pursuing them eagerly, pass near the place, where the
Musketeers lying hidden, saluted them so suddenly, that a great many tumbled
down from their horses, and the rest began to fly back; Whereupon the enemy
with a reasonable Army appeared on the high ground, and made show as if he
intended to take the Town by force. Then our forces were brought back into the
Town, and all things prepared for defense. Every one taking his appointed
places both in the new Sconces and in the fortifications, and the Governor of
the little Town, being a Count of Solms caused two field pieces to be placed
upon a high house in a Garden, whereby he did so trouble some troops of the
enemy that came near; that seeing all was to withstand him, he made again his
retreat. Now when we saw that he was turning back, our horse being ready to
fall out upon the enemies Reere, then presently the Jesuits began to ring the
bells of their Church. Whereupon the enemy had a mind to come again on, but our
Ordnance doing great harm amongst him, he went quite away; And the Governors
and Magistrates taking all possible and speedy pains to know the reason of the
Jesuits ringing, they found out that the Jesuits had had an intelligence and
conspiracy with the enemy. Whereupon their College being visited, there was
found great provision of munition and of Arms, for many hundred men, which
were ready to be used both by the Jesuits themselves and others their
friends, who endeavored to make some troubles and would have made a great
uprore, (had the enemy gotten one gate or any entry into Prague) to favor his
design, and to help to kill those within the Town. Thus God having delivered
us, and discovered their treason, there was presently on the very same day
published a prohibition that no Bell at all should more be rung in the three
Towns of Prague, and that none should be suffered to go out or to come in,
until further order.

On the 15. of this, there were put certain companies of soldiers, as for
Garrison into the two Colleges of the Jesuits in Prague, the one whereof is
built in the old Town, and the other in the little Town.

On the sixeteenth the Magistrates visited the said College, and found many
warlike provisions and Instruments. Whereupon it was consulted and concluded
they should be sent out of the Town yet that Evening: And indeed there were
already diverse Coaches and Wagons ready before their College, for the
transport of those irreverend Fathers and Traitors which I saw my self. -- But
it was delayed until the next morning. And so (...)

On the 17 very early executed, and all Jesuits sent away, so that now we are
rid of that plague. Their College of the little Town is now given unto and in
the possession of the Carmelites, who dwelled before in the Dutch Church, given
to them soon after the battle of Prague, and the Jesuits College of old
Prague sell to the share of the Franciscan Friars, who are very well content of
it.

Thursday last the Lord of Hofkirch caused the first Sermon to be preached
again in the Dutch Church of the old Town, and after Sermon his Lordship and
many Noblemen, Officers and great multitude of people received the Communion.

The foresaid Count of Solms, being a very provident and wise man, caused the
ice of the River of Mu^da to be broken up, that there is no passage neither for
root nor for horse, he has also caused some Ordnance to be placed upon the
White Tower, which he has caused to be mended, whereby we hope to withstand
the enemy, and keep the Town.

The Boores are very resolute in the Country, and they discover and search out
all such as are affected toward the enemy, some they Dill, some they take
Prisoners and bring them to be examined. Yesterday they brought a Prisoner who
had tied certain Letters under his privy parts, which Letters I know not what
they contained, but the carrier is to be hanged.

Now we receive news, that the Imperialists endeavoring to take Brande^s have
been well beaten for their labor by our Garrison that lies there, consisting
only of three hundred Musketeers of the yellow Regiment.

Thus much for this time, the next Week I hope I shall send you yet better
news, but I wish to know whether or no you receive my Letters

FINIS.

