THE BEGGARS APE.



LONDON. Printed by B. A. and T. Fawcet. for L Chapman. 1627.

THE BEGGARS APE.
ABout that Month whose name at first begun
From great AUGUSTUS, that Romes Empire won:
When the fierce Dog of Heaven, begun to rise
To bait the Lion in the Olympian skies.
Whose hot fire-breathing influence did crack
With too much heat our aged Grandames back,
Lapping up Rivers with his blaring tongue
T'allay the thirst which his proud stomach stung.
Then did each Creature languish pant and beat
Under the influence of this horrid heat,
And I that often in my low seated Cell
Had felt the burning of his fury fell:
Upon a time Aurora shining fair
Went forth to take the solace of the air.
And in those Meades beyond the lofty Towers
Of that white Palace, where the nightly hours
Have often bin spent in sounds of Music sweet
And active motion of the nimble feet:
Where earthly sons by night were seen to move,
Whilst many hearts were fired with flames of Love.
There I made choice to walk before the Sun
Had shown his face, within our Horizon;
But on those banks by which each turning tide
Thames lovely Isis with calm streams does glide,
I had not walked long ere Days bright King
TO Olympus top his golden Carre did bring:
Whose Steedes with sting of his free lashes driven
With such swift speed did gallop through the heaven,
That Natures fair productions here beneath
Did seem to melt under their burning breath,
The winged inhabitants both of earth and sky
That too and fro in the open air did fly
To Thickets, Woods, and Groves, swift concourse made
To shroud themselves under their leauie shade,
The bleating Lamb and little wandering Sheep
That in the open fields before did keep,
Forsaking their ^ree laice, all flocking came
To seek for shelter against Sol's burning flame.
And l'mongst the rest compeld by heat
Which on my head did violently beat
To seek some covert shade straight took my way
Unto a Grove which near confining lay.
Where when I came the lofty trees, I clad
In Summers pride did cast a cooling shade,
Under whose leaves from Phoebus burning rays
Sweet birds sat singing their Melodious lays,
There sat I down upon the grassy ground
A midst those silent shades encompast round
By leauy trees that Arbor wise did spread
There goodly arms thick brauncht above my head,
But as I there my self did closely shroud
The cheerful voice of many laughing loud
All suddenly did penetrate mine ear
Which did apall my sense with sudden fear
And casting round about my rolling eye
Without the wood I chanced to epsy
A ragged crew of folk all set around
About a sunny bancke upon the ground
They all were clad in rags of Beggary
Taking no keep of any faculty
Or honest calling to rely upon,
For trade or true profession had they none;
And now to pass the tedious time away
With pleasant tales as in the Sun they lay
Each one in course the other did succeed
Which much content amongst themselves did breed
And I to be partaker of their mirth
Being closely hidden with a hill of earth
Unheard or seen conuey'd my self so near
That all their chat I vn-espied did hear;
Some told of battles and of bloody fights,
And some of Ladies and of loves delights
And some of dire events and Tr^gicall
And some of lests and loves sports Comicall:
But amongst the ^out one well I wot there was
That all the rest in fluent speech did pass
Who with good utterance that became him well
A pretty story of an Ape did tell.
All which for that it seems unto me
Worthy their view whose thoughts delighted be
In morrall discipline I will unfold it
And in those terms in which the Beggar told it.
Not many years (quoth he) are past and gone
Since heavens fair Virgin in her silver throne
From forth her lap such golden blessings threw
As if the old Age again she would renew,
And at that time the vast worlds Forest wide
Decked in the Summers coat of Aestas pride
Did flourish and grow proud in lusty prime
Beneath the Sunshine of sweet summers time
There many Iouiall trees shoot up on high
With threatening heads did seem to veil the sky
Beneath the shade of whose protecting arms
The Birds sat singing free from sea efull harms,
The Beasts likewise might all securely go
About the Forest roaming too and fro,
For with the Eagle that ^e climing bird
And his consorts they late had made accord,
And unto peaceful state all things to bring
As meet it was they made the Lion King;
And at that season many beasts found grace
That lived obscure before and in mean place.
Amongst whom a beast that was of Secrops brood
Whom of a man Jove in his ir^ull mood,
Detesting his deceitful guile did make
So foul a beast that no man could him take
To Have bin a man, yet was it with such skill
That being a beast a man he favored still.
His limbs in lesser space then man's are knit
Beneath his Eyes his Nose more flat does fit
And like the face which c^abbed age does spill
Deep wrink^ frowne-like his front did ^l;
There to his Apish limbs ^re every where
Thick over grown with sallow colored hair,
And (...) in land of Apes I Will, love did place
There to abide and never show his face
Amongst us men, where he not long did stay
Eree' among the beasts lewd prankes he began to play;
For in the golden Age the worlds first spring
Even in the palace of the Forests King,
His witty was he often in practice put
Them to deceive; for which his tail w^ cut;
Exiling him for evermore from thence
To the Ape I Will again for his off^e.
But he that long time there l^'d all a mort
His tail being ^ut, for coming to the Court
Of better fortunes now began cogitate
And forth he comes to mend his mean estate,
His way unto the For^est straight he takes
And in his journey this observance makes
Who lived disgraceful, who in favor were
And 'bout the Ly^n who chief Place did bear;
The golden fleeced Sheep he first did spy
Pattern of patience, and simplicity
Grasing obscurely amongst the meaner sort
As being a stranger in the Lions Court;
"For who so bears simplicities true badge
"To live in Princes Courts do seldom fadge.
And though the silly Sheep contented were
For that plain honest life, which he did bear
Yet for his golden Fleece against his will
He was acquainted with the Courtiers still.
Fast by the Sheep the humble Ox did graise
Who for he sought not his estate to raise,
Was held in base contempt for his meek mind
"Meekness in Greatness we so seldom find.
The Ape being glad to see the Sheep bad case
And plain simplicity in such disgrace
Thought with himself as true it was indeed
That wily wit would stand him in best steed,
And on his way he forth began wend a pace
Hoping at Court to find such future grace;
That in the end he doubted not to bring
Himself in favor with the Forest King.
Where when he came himself he did apply
T'obserue all fashions with an heedfull eye,
The first on whom he any notice took
Was that high horned beast who in his look
Bears signs apparent of his secret mind
To wit the Goat, a lover borne by kind
For he the habit had of all chief sleights
In wanton loves and Ladies Court delights.
On which most Gallants now their wits do prove
To serve their Ladies and their Lemmons love.
But he surpast them all for he could sing
In chaunting songs, and on the warbling string
Of Vyoll sweet thereto divinely played
The sound of which would charm the chaistest Maid,
For which he (...) of Females so approved
That they above (...) the rest him chiefly loved;
Yet he with whally eyes and shaggy beard
And welked horns so Satir-like appeard
That such a grim faced fellow would affright
A lewd Faustinaes self in darkest night,
Thereto his body did so ranckly smell
That he himself might not abide it well;
But he that fault did hide with pleasing sent
Of sweet perfume when ere abroad he went,
The Ape him often beheld in passing by
And in his service would his fortune try
By means made by the Monkey, his near friend
Who on the Goat chief servant did attend.
But lo not long he stood thus all a mort,
Ere he beheld at entering of the Court
A troop of Gallants, rushing in the way
All proudly clad in strange and rich array,
With wide-big-bason looks they all did gape
In passing by upon the silly Ape.
For mickle pride (full well I wot) they took
To daunt a stranger with a scornful look;
Thereto, from fullest mouths they took delight
With horrid Oaths, the golden Stars to smi^e,
Ne gave they due regard, or Reverend love
Unto the King of Gods the thundering Jove,
But all their Paeans consecrated be
To drunken Bacchus on low bended knee.
The chief amongst these that bare supreamest sway
Was the fell Bore, who with the least delay
Even for a look misdeem'd, would hazard life
In any furious broyle or bloody strife.
With him came many Beasts that did delight
In sternefull rage, debate, and bloody fight:
And therefore loved ever for to be
Together with the Bore in company.
There came the Tiger, who withouten dread
Was into any danger headlong lead.
The wrathful Bear, whom in his fiery rage
Naught else but blood and vengeance might assuage,
The Bull and Ram, who both courageous were
But wanted wit in fury to forbear.
Amidst this Crew a simple beast there was
To Court being newly come, to wit, the Ass,
Whom they with fawning speech and threats withal
So wrought unto their will, that at their call
They had both him and his, and sooth to say
Inricht with golden store, he was fit pray
For such in Court whose credit waxed bare,
So witless was he and so void of care;
For he of late had lest his Country home
His Sire being dead, and now to Court was come,
Where all a flaunt, he ryots and consumes
In gold, in silver, silk and sweet perfume^
His old Sires, ill-got-goods now goes to wrack,
Farms, Forests, Fields, he bears upon his back,
And never deemes what Fate will him betide
When all is spent by his unseemly pride.
The Ape that had observed with heedfull eye
The stout demeanor of this Company,
Took little liking to this kind of life,
For he ne loved for to be in strife;
Ne favor would he with such peril win,
"But thought best sleeping in the soundest skin.
Long did he lurk about the Court in vain,
Before his close intent he could obtain:
"But he that does his Fate with heed attend,
"Seldom but finds good Fortune in the end.
And at the last good Fortune being his guide,
An old acquaintance he in Court espide;
To wit, the Fox, who found in Court such grace
That he about the King had gotten place.
For the Dread Lion loathing Luxury
"The Canker-worme of true Nobility,
T'allay the pride that in the flesh bears sway
And banish loathsome Idleness away:
To spend his golden hours did still devise
In Kingly pastime and fair exercise,
There to rich gifts, Prince-like he gave to those,
That did themselves to exercise dispose;
Thereby to purge his Court to case inclined.
And base floath banish from the Noble mind.
In which the Fox, his Sou^aigne did so please,
Seeming the common Enemy of ease:
That he himself in mickle grace did bring
With the bold Lion, his dread Lord and King.
But he soul Carle (not as his King) did make
This use of exercise for virtues sake,
But gave himself thereto with this intent
To c^eepe in favor with foul blandishment
To him the Ape in humble manner came
To scrape acquaintance and make known his name;
But the proud Fox, though him he well did know,
Like a true Courtier began himself to show
With Elboe pride, and cast of scornful eye
He stoutly stalk't upon his tiptoes high
Disdaining to the Apes words to lend his ear
Though he of yore his old acquaintance were.
And in such proud contempt he passed by,
That the Apes former hopes began to dye;
Being in despair his mean estate to mend
For saken thus of his old fellow friend.
But the slye Fox aduising all this while
How the Ape being witty, prompt, and full of guile,
"And that two working wits will soon prevail
"In any plot when one may chance to fail;
Straight sends unto the Ape and greets him well,
Bidding him come to him his case to tell.
The forlorn Ape being almost in despair
With double diligence did make repair
Unto the Fox, to whom obeisance made
These famous words in humble wise he said.
All hail (grave Sir) quoth he, good fates attend
Your steps in Court, still Fortune be your friend
And in sweet showers, th'auspicious heavens down-shed
Their bounteous blessings on your reverent head.
The Fox him thanking, answered in this sort.
But say (Sir Ape) what wind brings you to Court?
Seems you have lived in some barren place
And want life's need m^nts for to do you grace;
For you be grown so meager lean and wan,
That scarce your legs your limbs vpholden can.
For which, I ween, you want that wonted wit
And judgment sharp, that seemed of yore to sit
In th'^lke same head, by which you could at need
Both help your self and stand your friend in steed.
Ah me (Sir Reynald) said the wretched Ape
Of all the Forest hardest is my hap
That I unhappy wretch, thus as you ^e
Am made the scorn of other beaats to be;
Yet ne'rthelesse Sir, if of your grace you please
You of your bounty may my fortunes case,
And set my wit in the old working way
"Want of employment makes best wits decay.
Now certes (said the Fox) y^e say right well,
"For custom does in power so excel;
"That virtues self in the most liberal mind
"For want of it often times decayed we find
"And use being common made in useful things
"Vice to inseparable habit brings.
Then pity it were, so ripe a wit you have
The want of good imploiment should deprane.
Read then, Sir Ape, what course you do intend
And if in it my help may you befriend:
Doubt not to find for old acquaint^ce sake
My furtherance in any course you take.
To this the Ape, deep fighing, thus did say
Ah (noble Sir) y blessed be this day,
That with such hap good fortune did me greet
As with your self so happily to meet;
For well I ween, I only hope to rise
By sage instruction of your sound devise.
Then read (fair Sir) of favor I you pray
What custom in the Court now bears chief sway
To what thing most is that Her^icke mind
Of our dread Sovereign chiefly now enclind,
"For well I wot the subject that will bring
"Himself in favor with his Lord and King,
"What his Lord likes at least must seem to love
"And of his fancy must always approve.
Surely, said Reynald, this which you have spoken
Of your grave judgment gives sufficient token,
And know, that now the Lions chief delight
Is to behold those that in nimble fight,
Can best pursue the wilder beasts in chase
And such as they be now in special grace;
For he with idle ease may not away
The obstacle to virtues best assay.
And therefore least good days may be misspent
To noble exercise he still is bent:
Ne do I doubt but you by pregnant wit
To any exercise your self can fit,
And though of foo^manship you be not slow
Yet none amongst the best of beasts I know
In all the woods with you compared may be
For nimblenes and swift Agility.
By which you may in frowning Fates despite
Purchase you favor in your Sovereigns sight.
Ah (dear Sir) said the Ape, yble^ed be
Your life with length of days for Charity
To me poor wretch. But say Sir, I you pray
By what step shall I make my best assay
To gain the Forests King unto my friend
"A good beginning makes a happy end.
To this the Fox replied, Sir Ape, said he
Well have you said, yet that my business be
Mean while your wits for my employment frame
For in the Forest we will find good game.
"Let Drudge^ by base toil there living get
"The generous borne will only live by wit;
This said, the subtle Fox in secret wise
The Ape began counsel with such sound advise
That in short space in Court he g^t much grace
When those of more desert could find no place.
"For few there be, that for good gifts of mind
"Or virtues bare regard do favor find
"Only they rise that can by guilefull wit
"Serve their own turn with gainefull benefit,
"The honest mind from thence is made to fly
"When shameless ribaulds are advanced high
"The simple-hearted are accounted base,
"When bold and impudent are most in grace,
"Vain boasting Thrasoes, soothing Flatterers,
"Sly cogging Gnatoes, secret whisperers,
"Tale-bearing Fl^erers, and false accusing lackes,
"There bear best shows upon their golden backs.
Among whom the Ape did bear himself so well
That he in rich attire did far excel;
And eke his sides with flesh so filled were,
That not a bone did any where appear.
Ne, few him knew that knew him well before
To Have bin the wretched Ape he was of yore,
For never more did Proteus change his shape;
For to deceive, then did this wily Ape
At first with lowly looks and humble mind,
Himself in great States favor he did wind,
With Sycophantlike tricks, he took delight,
With every lack to play the Parasite.
To sooth, to cogge, to fawn, to lie, to swear,
To crouch, to gloss, and patiently to bear
All gross abuse, to take up every word
Fallen from the lying lips of some great Lord:
To laugh, look sad, to like and dislike both,
To say and unsay, swear and forswear troth.
But when by humble service and long suite
In Court he came to be of some repute,
He many subtle sleights did quickly find
T'exhalt himself when others came behind:
Then waxt he proud, and bent his guilefull wit
To turn all things to his own benefit;
False of his faith, yet prodigal in word,
Dark in his talk, yet seldom would afford
Poore' Suitors hearing; but unless they came
With golden warrants signed for the same:
Yet if that Suitors means for suites would use,
Whom better, then Sir Ape, could any choose;
For many a Canker-worme of common state
Some farming Huckster, or Sea runagate.
To Increase their prinate good by public ill,
Might through his help with ease obtain their will.
Thus the slye Ape with natural wit endowed,
Grew great in wealth, by wealth grew wondrous proud.
"For costly wealth even to the basest wight
"Gives golden wings to soar a losty flight.
Now while the Ape did study more and more
By daily begging to increase his store,
The Fox that idle was, but by his wit
For the Apes turn still laid foundation fit,
And on a time I ween, above the rest,
To the Ape he comes with a merry lest.
(Sir Ape) quoth he, if you my friend will stand,
We will not want to have gold at our command;
For I in Court have found a gallant gull
Whom of his gold, (of which he yet is full)
We well may sleece, if you will lend your aid
To which in have, the Ape this answer made.
Say in good sooth, Sir Reynald, I you pray,
In what my word and deed you helpen may
And of what Mister wight make you report
I know him not? spends he his days in Court?
Yes, quoth the Fox, to Court he came of late
And well I wot he is a Jolly mate;
It is to wit, the Ass, whose aged sire
Did toil himself and drudge for daily hyre
And left his thrifty gain unto his son
To gentilize it here when he was gone.
Said then the Ape, foul shame such fools betide
That to maintain their sons vnthristy pride
Will bow their laboring backs and take no pleasure
For all their pains upon their hardrackt treasure.
The Fox replied, you seem to be a Foe
To gentle kind; for if it were not so,
How should the Forest in a moment space,
Breed so much gentle-blood of meaner race,
And sooth to say, this Ass though meanly borne
Yet through much wealth, made wondrous full of scorn.
An humor strange in his conceit does feed
That by descent he comes of Noble breed.
It was my chance the other day to be
With th'horned Goat, and him in company,
Who both were clad in goodly rich array:
But in attire, the Ass was far more gay.
His head with plume of Feathers was bedight,
His trappings all with Bells and Bosses bright
Was richly furnished, which with more pride
Hung down unto the ground on either side.
These lusty Gallants to increase their fame,
In their conceits at Knighthood both does aim.
Which if for them we can by friends obtain,
We shall not sail for meed to have double gain;
For the A^e so vain appears, that he will give
His whole estate, ere he vnknighted live.
And for the Goa^, we shall have golden fee
Of Female kind, that they may Ladyed be.
Being dubbed by him; Say then (Sir Ape) I pray
Good gain is often times lost by long delay.
Sir Reynald, said the Aye, my forward mind
Brooks no delay, where I a mean may find
To work my will: but know that your intent
Makes me much doubt, the sequel of the event:
For this high Order is to those assigned,
That famous be for virtue of the mind,
Or for some high atchiuement; for their ^eed
Have purchased it, to glorify their deed.
How may we then bring such a thing to pass,
As purchase Knighthood for the golden Ass.
Tush, quoth the Fox, the world now does not see
The thing that is, but that which seems to be.
And he whose tongue the tail of Grea^nesse lickes
If he will thrive, his Conscience never sticks
To ouergild, and lift up to the skies
With deepest o^hes, inventions blackest lies;
And that we may our purpose bring to pass,
We must obscure the folly of the Ass.
The virtues rare that beautify his mind,
We must applaud, thereby the world to blind;
And say and swear, that he amongst the best
Of all the Forest is the hopeful'st beast;
So to the world they both shall seem to be
For virtues sake, much worthy this degree.
Now certes, said the Ape, this is good leasing
And to the Lion it will sure be pleasing:
When in the Forest he shall hear the fame,
Which in their high applause we can proclaim.
Mean time, Sir Reynald, back return with speed
Unto them both, and tell them it is decreed,
That worthy they shall wear the golden Spur
Like two true sons of Mars, and never incur
The hazard of the Field, but only this,
To have our fee before, we may not miss.
Tush, quoth the Fox, be confident in me,
A fool he is that will behind hand be:
If that our purpose have but good event
The gain is ours, near think your pains misspent.
This said, themselves they both began t'apply
To Effect their purpose, all their friends they try;
And such applause^ daily they impute
To the Ass and Goat, for whom they make this suite
That in the end both twain in pomp and pride
Were dubd Knights errand, of the Forest wide
Of whom in guerdon of their mickle pains
The begging Ape and Fox had golden gains,
So both think well themselves apayd to be
They with their Knighthood, the other with their Fee.
But let not such base Lossels that account
All merit vain, and only hope to mount
Themselves with golden wings to such degree
That seek to purchase it with baser Fee;
And think a silver silken vestiment
A gilded Spur, or strange acoutrement
The fruits of brainsicke fancies fond delight
The only means to make a perfect Knight.
Let not such dunghill brood of Kestrill kind
That unto honor never cast their mind
Dismay the noble spirit that assayes
Through deeds of Arms his name on high to raise;
For bare degrees that want true virtues merit
Shall in fames golden book no place inherit.
When Honor, Meede, and noble virtues praise
In Swan-white age finds fresh and youthful days;
Then let not fond Sir Ass, disgraceful seem
To those that for their worth and high esteem
In virtues bare regard exalted be
By Princes grace to place of such degree;
Let boasting Bragadochioes of our time
And golden-handed Churles, that seek to clime
To places of such high credit, inly burn
And with the vain Sir Ass, the Beggar spurn;
So shall the Ape their follies still deride
And fleece their store for their aspiring pride.
Who tasting once the sweet delights that came
By this his Begging trade, himself did frame
With golden fees of daily Begging base,
Shamelight on gain got with so foul disgrace;
Yet shameless he continued begging still
To glut the gulf of his unsatiate will.
Which many noble beasts did soon epsy
On whom the Lions safety did rely,
To whose great wisdom and fore-casting cares
Committed were the Forests chief Affairs.
But amongst them all, that most illustrate beast
That worthy Counselor from heaven yblest,
The noble Elephant took special heed
That out of Court such Beggars he might we^d.
And sooth to say, as Greeks do well recite
With crooked Trumpet he could truly write,
And by the working of his prudent mind
Could often obscure the wits of human kind;
For on his care the Kingdoms happiness
Did most depend, and for her worthiness
To him committed was in custody
The keeping of the common Treas^rie.
This worthy Peer, who daily did behold
The shameless begging of these Beggars bold
In wisdom diverse ways did cast about
To find the wily Apes soul knavery out.
But the Ape so well him bore that long it was.
E^e the Elephant could bring his will to pass;
Mean time like as the Leach upon the store
From greedy sucking never desists, before
The place be bloodlesse left exhausted dry
So did the Ape to the Ass himself apply.
For when the doultish beast yeleped was
Through all the Court (by name of hight Sir Ass)
Pust up with pride, he thought himself to be
The fairest beast that ever eye did see,
He learned had to praunce with stately pace
To rain his Asses head with losty grace
And in each point himself so high to bear
As if that he some noble Pal^ray were;
Which pride of his, was laughed so to soorne:
Of every beast that knew him to be borne
Of base descent, yet he through want of wit
Swollen proud by wealth, such folly did commit,
That he their common Gull accounted was
And bore the title of the golden Ass.
Which the Ape did well peroeiue, and with vain shows
Of fained friendship began with him to gloss,
With soothing tongue his folly he did feed
And gave him counsel by some glorious deed
To amplify his name in every place,
He knew he was not come of Asses race;
But racher sprung of some such noble breed
As swift winged Pegas^ that heavenly Steed.
He wished him therefore in a single race
To challenge the Horse, thereby to get him grace
Ne did he doubt but he should win the day
If he with courage bold but gave the Assay.
Sir Ass, with self conceit being mo^'d in mind:
To hear his praise, forgot himself by kind
To Have bin an Ass, and in this humor sent
A challenge to the Horse with this intent,
To run with him before the Forest King
In hope himself in favor for to bring.
The day was set and chosen was the place
Upon the open Plain to run this race;
Where the dread King of beasts stood to behold
The stout Sir Ass, perform his challenge bold;
The time being come forth came the lusty Horse
With comely grace to run the expected course,
Who by his stately gesture began to show
Stout signs in proud contempt of his base foe.
His crested neck he often bowed to ground
With foaming mouth as if he would confound
The earth at once, and from his nosthrils came
A fiery breath as from a furnace flame;
His pricking Ears stood startling on his head
And of a common custom inlye bred,
In iollity of pride which did abound,
His hollow hoof still played upon the ground;
At last from his strong neck in neighing shrill
With sound thereof the Forest he did fill,
Seeming thereby to call upon Sir Ass,
That in this challenge the appellant was.
Who vainly vaunting with a gallant traync
Came proudly prauncing on the ample Plain;
Where when he came beholding well the Horse
His comely grace, brave shape, and wondrous force:
Half in despair he did himself repent
Of his proud challenge and bold hardiment.
Yet with the vain applause of flattering mates
Being proudly pricked, with Courage bold he waits,
The time appointed to begin the race
Before the Forest King being then in place:
The sign once given, Sir Ass, began to run
With greedy hope great same thereby to have wo^.
But the brave Horse in pace away did go
Like winged shaft shot from a Tuscan bow,
Or like a Swallow in the welk in bright
That sheeres the subtle air with nimble flight,
Leaving the sluggish Ass with ^ame behind
To know himself to be an Ass by kind.
With mickle laughter bred in e^y place
Amongst the beasts that stood to see the race,
Which the Ape did well observe with slye intent
As he that knew, what would be the event;
For when the Ass, amongst the better sort
Was held in base contempt throughout the Court,
And left for lorne for his stupidity
The Ape alone, did keep him company.
Whose doltish nature by his cunning wit
In all his actions done he did so fit,
That in the end by craft and c^ening fly
He gulled the simple beast and sucked him dry.
Who left for lorne returned all a mort
Unto his Country home, from Princes Court.
There helpelesse to be wail in woeful wise
His lavish will and wanton rioti^e;
O wretched end of idle vanity,
Of misexpence and Prodig^ity.
You younger wits that spend your golden hours,
Your selves and substance in great Princes bowers;
That quaffe down Court delights, and daily swill
The seeming sugared Nectar of your ill;
That wear your large left patrimonies bare
In Drink, in Dice, Dancing and dainty fate.
That up and down in Antic shapes do jet,
And on your golden backs do bear your debt,
And with a vain bewitching hope struck blind
Of idle fame do watch to catch the wind,
Yet think your selves all others to surpass
In reaching wit. Behold this forlorn Ass,
Who amongst the best, once jolly blithe and trim
In deepest waves of sweet delight did swim;
Now of his golden good he being berest
And driven home, when scarce no ho^e was left:
In stead of stately bower, where he had bin
An homely Cottage gladly enters in.
Where with sad sighs his wretched eyes do fill
In stead of Arras and sweet paintings skill,
Upon the broken roof and slender walls
Sticks smoakie black and Spiders dusty coals,
In stead of sweet perfumes, the bitter smoke
With foggy clouds his tender sight does choke,
In stead of Silver plate, or purest Glass
He with the Beggars dish now pleased was,
In which for Wine to glad his woeful heart
He takes cold Whey and water in good part,
His Courtly diet fraught with many a dish
Of diverse kinds of dainty Flesh and Fish,
Is now become the alms of some good house
Or homely morsel of some hungry Mouse.
The ground his board, green grass his Carpet makes
And for his Bed a pad of Straw he takes
In which distress, by his own folly bred
He weeps, he sighs, and shakes his woeful head;
Blaming his bitter Fate, but all in vain
Since of his wealthy store naught does remain.
Mean time the Ape that lived upon his loss
Seeing the wretched fortune of the Ass,
Did laugh to scorn his woeful misery
And pitched his nets with fraud and subtilty;
To circumvent the weak and simple sort
That used to frequent the Princes Court.
But thus while the Ape such things to pass did bring
About the palace of the Forest King
The greedy Wolf his part did also play
In woods abroad t'obtaine his wished pray,
Who was a bloody beast of wicked brood
And sought to live by spoil of others good.
Yet had he large possessions of his own,
And in the woods was mighty wealthy grown,
Whereby he daily sought in Cruel wise
Upon the poorer Beasts to Tyrannize,
The Woods in Common, and th'adioyning Plain
He did convert unto his private gain;
And meaner beasts that nigh his Den did dwell,
He from their own abodes did often expel.
Amongst whom the Urchin and the Squirrill hight,
By the Apes help, he robbed of their right:
For in close thicket far from sight of Sun
Where in his darksome Den the Wolf did won,
The industrious Urchin in his little Cell,
Not far from thence alone did chance to dwell.
At whose good hap the Wolf did much repine
And daily did behold with envious eyne,
How he in sharpest Winter did enjoy
The fruits of Summers toil without annoy;
For when Pomona did in winters soorne
The Woods green heads with golden fruit adorn,
When fields do seem to laugh, when flowers do spring
When Beasts do play, and Birds do sweetly sing;
Then would the Urchin watch with curiou^ eye.
When Bore^ blast^ did cuffe the Clouds in sky
And shake the Tree when like thick showers of rain
The Fruit would fall, the which with mickle pain
Upon his brisled back, the Vrchin bore
Home to his Cell to make his winters store,
Whereby from winters thrall he lived secure,
When other Beasts much sorrow did endure.
Now at the entry of the stern Wolfes den
The place of his abode had long time bin;
That against the State naught could be done or said,
But by the Vrchin it might be bewrayed.
The Wolf likewise out of his greedy mood
Did seek t'inlarge the place of his abode,
By proud incroaching of that little Cell
In which his neighbor, the Vrchin used to dwell;
Wherefore he sought by death or some disgrace,
To dispossess the Urchin of that place.
And on a time from home as the Vrchin went
Abroad into the Forest with intent
As was his wont, to get such labors meed,
As Fortune in the Forest had decreed.
Lo in the way the ravening Wolf did watch
This silly beast within his paws to catch,
Whom he did often think to make his prey,
Yet durst he not at that time give th'Assay,
So well the Vrchin did his body arm
With coat of proof, against all intended harm.
The Wolf therefore perceiving force to fail
Did seek by flattering falsehood to prevail.
For in the way finding occasion meet
With fawning words, thus the Urchin he did greet.
Now neighbor, quoth the Wolf, you be well met
Upon what high atchieuement be you set,
That you thus armed be, seems you do stand
In dangers doubt, and fear some harm at hand.
Nay certes, quoth the Vrchin, naught I fear
Of harm t'ensue, this armed coat I wear
For no such cause; but that with pain I may
Upon my brisled hide, such fruit convey
To my poor home, which in the woods I find,
Least with the sluggard unto ease inclined,
On Summers pleasure I do fondly feed,
And want in Winter to sustain my need.
The Wolf replied, y blessed be thy pain
And labor, that deserves to reap good gain;
Yet let me now dissuade thee to disarme
Thy self this once, and fear no future harm,
This day desist from toil and go with me
Unto our friend, where we will welcome be;
For to all Beasts, this day is by the Bore
Kept festival, where we shall find good store
Of diverse dainty Fruits, of which at will
Withouten labor thou may est have thy fill.
This said, he used such kind courtesy
Mixed with such friendly Importunity;
That the poor Vrchin, thought his meaning good
And would with him unto the neighboring Wood,
Whereas the Bore should won; but lo at need
A friend was by, to help him at that steed.
And sure the silly Vrchin that same day
Unto the Ravening Wolf had been a prey,
But that the Squirrill from the leauie Tree,
Unseen to them the Wolfes intent did see;
Who to the Vrchin, called with loud exclaim:
Fond fool said he, what madness is this same?
How dare thou credit that same cruel Beast,
That on thy Carcass seeks to make his Feast.
Take heed, by his seducements be not led,
If thou disarme thy self thou art but dead.
For hence I did behold how in the way
In secret couerthid, he^ lurking lay,
And had thou not with stiff quill'd pointed hide
Been armed about; by him thou sure had died.
The Vrchin hearing this, upon his ^hin
Did set his feet and drew his brisled skin
About his body round, as any ball
To shield himself, and shun his fatal fall.
Which when the Wolf perceived, he went his way
Intag'd in mind, and vowed without delay
To act a swift revenge upon them both,
And for his cause, unto the Ape he goes;
To whom, Complaint against them he does bring
To be preferred unto the Forests King.
He told, how the Vrchin like a theeuish wight
Did steal abroad indead of darksome night,
Using to suck the full-fed Kine unkept,
While the poor Neatheard all securely slept:
And how the Squirrill to augment his store,
Did rob the Forest of the Fruit it bore;
And to his will, that he might better shape
The greedy fancy of the Begging Ape,
He wished him beg the forfeit of their Goods,
Since none amongst the Beasts about the woods
There was, with whom such treasure could be found
As with them twain which chiefly did abound
With Nuts, and Aples, which the Wolf could tell
Above all things, the Ape loved wondrous well.
And sooth to say these tidings did so please
The Apes greedy humor, that with little ease
The Wolf obtained his wish for in small space
The Urchin and the Squirrill wanting grace
Of friends to back their cause were from those Woods
Exiled for aye, and forfeited there goods;
Whereby the Wolf possession did obtain
Of the Vrchins little Cell, and the Ape did ga^e
By begging Nuts and Aples which of yore
By others pains were hoarded up in store.
Thus daily did the subtle Ape obtain
Pleasure and profit both withouten pain,
By which I ween compared to all the rest
"Amongst all Craftsmen Beggars are the best:
For cu'n the proud'st that thinks pains taking's base
To turn often Beggar thinks it no disgrace.
But whilst the Ape lulled in security
Did swim in pleasures and felicity
Not wanting ought, for seldom did he crave
The gift of ought but he the same might have,
The noble Elephant that in the Court
Did bear chief sway amongst the supreme sort
Like a true Statesman, for the Forest good
Against the Apes incessant begging stood.
Whereby the Ape did stoop his gallant mind
For though by information he might find
Ought worthy begging, yet the Princes grant
He did not crave; because by the Elephant
Often to revoke his grant the King was moved
If to the state it prejudicial slood;
Therefore the Ape that lived before secure
And thought his golden begging would endure
For ever certain: with a heavy cheer
Now hung the head; for well it did appear
He might go sw^ke and sweat to get his living
Since that the Forest Prince did cease from giving,
Sir Reynald likewise that same crafty mate
That did in the Apes begged gifts participate
Now wanted means, whereby he might support
His bravery amongst the gallants of the Court
For long he watched had and cast about
By his fine wit to find some purchase out
Some ancient Ruin of Antiquity
Or ought that might be termed invtilie,
But naught he found that in the Forest stood
That was invtilie for common good,
Which when he did perceive: half in despair
Unto the Ape his friend he made repair
Who to each other often though in vain
Their sad mishap in secret did complain.
Yet in the end the Fox did find a fetch
"For dire constraint, the wit at large does stretch,
He well remembered that if any beast
Were found offensive to the Kings beheast
Or did infringe the Law through all the Woods
By penal statutes lost both Lands and goods,
The which without control, as lawful gain
The Ape for a boon by begging might obtain,
This once being thought upon the wily Ape
As careful of their good this speech shape.
Sir Reynald (said the Ape) we be in case
To be undone unless by Jove's good grace
Against the storm, in time we do provide
"Time runs away and no man stays the tide.
You see that we be needy and in lack
And in the Court, the eyes of every Jack
Are fixed upon us, and these garments old
Cannot in Court our countenance long uphold.
Then say (Sir Reynald) as ye be right wise
What hopeful course for us can you devise
We must provide for help without delay
Or bonelesse leave the Court and run away.
The Fox replied full little did I ween
That in this case-so witless you had been
So long as hope remains; why should we doubt
Have we not working wit to cast about,
Then have good hope, for we in little space
Will work our selves again in Fortunes grace,
We know right well the Ox and silly Sheep
Though they themselves from Court in private keep
As being but tusticke Chusses of base account
Yet they in wealthy substance far surmount
Whom if by subtilty we can but draw
Within the compass of the Princes law
To stop our mouths we shall have golden fee
So much they fear in danger for to be.
And if this fail; yet we upon our oath
As loyal subjects can appeach them both
For speeches spoken against the Government
Or other trespass, which we can invent,
Which that we may to better purpose bring
We can disgus'd, talk of the Forest King
And ask what tidings in the Princes Court
What vioc in common they do most support
And in their speech if we them tripping take
We by addition can the matter make
To seem far worse; by which if they in the end
Convicted be; then that which we intend
We have obtayn'd; for we their goods have won
In recompense of our good service done.
This said, the Ape approving Reynald wit
In that he at a pinch, could help with it
With speed in some strange habit, both disgis'd
Would put in practice what he had devised.
They both agreed themselves forth with to clad
Like stranger Countrymen of late decayed;
Whose habit and demeanor had you seen
You would have though the wretched Ape to have been
Some sturdie Clown that late had left the Carre
And in this strange disguise had come from far,
He was y clad all in a Russet gray
Of coursest stuff, yet with such mean array,
He seemed well appay'd as did appear
Being well contented with his Country wear,
His russet Ierkin, many years y worn
Was waxen bare, and at the elboes torn:
His Breeches of the same made scanty wise
So close did sit unto his brawny thighs,
That his fat flanks that plumpe and jolly were,
Like two round Balls did through the same appear;
Thereto, his blew round Cap him well became
With a plume Feather pendant on the same,
Which of the one side of his head he ever wore
As if in mind some high conceit he bore.
A rusty Sword he carried by his side
And at his back a Dagger well ytide,
For many hackes therein made long ago
Sufficient proofs did of the metal show,
His woollen Hose were of the purest white
Of thick strong knit, and yet in open sight
Were broken above the heels, and both his Shoes
Worn with long travel out about the to^s.
And thus he trauayl'd with his fellow Fox
About the Forest for to find the Ox,
And silly Sheep, whom the Ape had first espide
In Field far off, fast by the River side,
And said unto the Fox; Behold I see
In yon same field, where they both grasingbee:
Now prone your wit Sir Reynald, if you can,
Begin you first, you are the grauer man.
This said, they came where the Ox and Sheep did grase,
Whom thus the Fox did greet with fawning phrase
All hail (Sir Ox) said he, full glad am I
To see you bear your lofty head so high,
It seems to us by this your goodly port
You are in favor in the Princes Court,
You can inform us of some tidings there
And 'bout the Lion who chief place does bear.
"The Ox replied, (good Sir) you deem ami^.
"For your conjecture goes astray in this,
"Seeing Courtly favor is no cause that I
"Seem thus to bear my branched head so hie,
"But humble thoughts, which wounded hearts do heal
"In sweet content, is cause of all weal,
"Pale envy poison to the Statesmans good
"Nere g^awes my heart ne suckes my vital blood,
"Nor greedy Avarice of others shares
"Disturbes my sweet content with boundless cares;
"These pastures bounds my thoughts do ever bound,
"Ne do I joy to feed in stranger ground,
"But with my Fate sufficed I still abide
"Not fearing any ill that may betide,
"Of Musickes rarest skill I take no keep
"At any time to summon timely sleep,
"But sweet voyc'd Birds, and mild Streams gently
"My wear^ limbs, in restfull quiet Hushes. (gushes
"The oft^ h^d sounds of Court Alarmes
"N^'^e ^le ^e from sleep for fear of harms,
"But sleeping till the mor^e secure of fears,
"The Birds sing sweet Bon-jours about mine ears:
"Thus live I happy in content of mind,
"Which we in Courtly greatness seldom find.
Certes, said the Ape, it seems ye be right wise
That can of worldly weal so well advise,
And yet in this me seems you have dig^est,
For amongst the best you being a goodly beast
To great advancement, may your self soon bring
And authorize high Service for the King.
"Alas, (quoth the Ox) How vulgar is affection
"In vainly seeking after fond promotion,
"As well the Ignoble as the Noble blood
"Deem vading pomp the happy man's chief good.
"Yet view the Court and mark the misery
"Of those that swim in Court felicity,
"Whose wretched steps in Princes Courts attends
"His slau^sh will on others wills depends.
"His turn-coat thoughts more light then lightest feather
"Turned with the wind and returned with the weather
"Even as his Masters changing humor is,
"Must turn and Change to like of that or this
"Against his Conscience, praise impietic,
"And sooth soul sin with fawning flattery.
"And yet suppose thou should exalted be
"To some place past Court-crouching with the knee,
"And by the help of Greatness find such grace
"As near the steps of Majesty to have place,
"Yet mark (fond fool) and see what unseen woe
"Would follow thee though thou in Gold should go,
"To be a Partner in the Priuitie
"And close concealment of Authority,
"Though to thy second self thou show the same
"Often winnes thee Death, and never dying shame;
"Yet in thy Conscience to conceal such things
"When life is gone, Death worse then death it brings.
"Oh then how blessed and happy a wight is he
"That lives from Court though nere so base he be.
T'enlarge this Theme the Sheep did silence break,
"Dear neighbor Ox (quoth he) the truth you speak,
"Yet more then this, do many undergo
"That in the Court do make a goodly show,
"For many there that bear so bold a face
"And deem all vulgars beggarly and base,
"That strut on Tiptoe, and with Elboe pride
"Aspire to reach the square from side to side,
"Often sloope their gallant minds and prove I ween,
"Worse Beggars far then those that Beggars been;
"With fawning tongue and Court eclipsing guile
"They claw the Great in vices more then vile,
"And then of this or that in daily begging,
"They still solicit them with tedious gaping.
"But lo alas, what proves this hardracket store
"Got by encroaching on the pined poor.
"Life's bitter curse, while here on Earth we dwell
"And Souls sad burden bearing down to Hell.
"Why then do those that tediously importune
"The royal Lyo^ to advance their Fortune,
"Thus base and Begger-like solicit still
"To Increase their profit by a general il^:
"They knew the noble Lions Royal mind
"To humble Suitors is by nature kind,
"Nor stearne nor statefull to the Subjects base,
"But full of ^enitie and Gentle grace.
"They know he strives by his benignity
"To i^itate the Gods in charity,
"Which they will still abuse, being Begger-lipt,
"Till from his Court such Beggars base be whipped,
This speech so touched the Ape, that with much pain
He could himself in quiet mood contain.
But Reyn^ thus replied. "Well have you spoken
"In this beha^e, for these your words betoken
"Your common care, which nature ties us to,
"Not for our ^elues being only borne to do.
"Yet you (me seems Sir Ox) without such shift
"By merit may your self to honor lift,
"Seeing every where true merit has her place
"At least it can no where receive disgrace.
The Ox replay'd. "I would thy words were true
"Would merit every where might have her due,
"Then should I not behold unto my grief
"The meritorious want without relief.
"But lo, Ah less, behold the noble Horse
"That even has spent the utmost of his force,
"'Against the Aegle and the Dragon his proud mat^
"Who both of late made war upon our State,
"How often have I beheld him with delight
"Preparing of himself for bloody fight,
"Who never feared what might by foes be done
"With H^, ha, ha, the Battle has begun,
"The eyes of Gorg^ burning in his head
"With fear has made his fainting foes half dead.
"And proudly prauncing with a side-long pace
"Lifting his fetlockes up with nimble grace,
"All Rainbow-like he bore his crest decked neck
"In proud contempt of any Counterchecke,
"Then on the hard ground having made some proof
"Of the strong battery of his ha^dy hoofo,
"With nimble Capers in a stately dance
"He toward the battle bold would proudly praunce,
"And being come in sight of th'Armed foes
"He snuffes, he puffes, he Boggles, snoarts and blows,
"And neighing with shrill voice, he seems to cry
"And call for Combat with the Enemy.
"Then like the Lightning from the Eastern ay^o
"O^ swiftest whi^lewind, in his fierce repair
"To fly amongst thickest troops he has bin seen
"To lose his life, or worthy Conquest win,
"Where in a moment, from the dusty ground
"Into the air he up would lightly bound,
"And falling down again, with sine wie shankes
"Would bent and batter down the thickest ranks,
"From whence he oftentimes (though wounded) came
"With Conqu^sts high renown, and endless fame.
"But now where is the meed of his true merit?
"Who now yields comfort to his fainting spirit?
"Live not the sons of Mars in every eye
"The perfect maps of Ragged beggary,
"As often as their wounds they do behold
"The which they took their Countries cause t'vphold,
"Their eyes, lips, hands, and hearts, to heaven do go,
"VVishing pale Death to end their helpless woe;
"Which being denied dire need does them constrain
"To do the thing their souls did once disdain,
"Even Begger-like one single Mite to crave
"Poor life within his halfe-staru'd house, to save.
This said, the Fox forthwith with winking eyne
To the Ape as was decreed gave privy sign.
Who stepping forth with countenance fell, thus spoke
"Friend Fox quoth he, your witness here I take
"Of their disloyal words, which intimate
"Their tro^cherous thoughts against the Prince and State.
"Sure said the Fox, their speeches do import
"As much as Treason, if 'twere heard in Court,
"But they perchance will happily repent
"Let me d^swade you then from your intent,
"For if the Council of the Lyo^ dread
"Be certified of this, they are but dead.
"They shall compound with you, and 'twere not good
"For you ^o seek the shedding of their blood.
With this intent the Fox thus spoke, as he
That thought thereby to gain some golden fee
To stop their mouths, but both the Sheep and Ox^,
Perceiving well the knavery of the Fox,
As they that guiltlelle were, withouten doubt
Defied both Fox and Ape with courage stout.
The Ape perceiving this swore by his head
For those their words, they should ere long be dead.
And so enraged to Court he went again
With Reynald his slye copesmate to complain.
Where when they came, such Treason they detect
Which against the Ox and Sheep they did object,
That with swift summoning they cyted were
Before the Lions Council to appear.
The time was set, and lo those Royal Peers
That on their backs the Forests burden bears
Ioue-like in Council, each one took his place
To give their judgment in so weighty a case.
The Guard attendant on the Forest King
The Ox and Sheep, unto the Bar did bring;
Then with shrill voice, the Crier amongst them all
A general silence through the Court did call,
Which every where aduisefull audience bred
While thus th'Inditement by the Clerk was read.
"Come forth Sir Ox (^yd he) stand at the Bar,
"And thou Sir Sheep, ye both Indicted are
"For Treason, against the Lion our dread King
"Which the Ape and Fox of late to light did bring,
"And for lewd Speech used amongst the vulgar sort
"Seeking thereby for to de^ the Court;
"Intitling those by names of Beggars base,
"That for desert are in the Princes grace:
"And which is worse for your disloyal: hate
"And treasonable grudging against the state
"Of all which treasons worthy vengefull wreake
"If you be guilty or not guilty speak?
"To this, the Ox not guilty did reply
"And there withal he craved liberty
"With humble suite that he might answer shape
"'Against this Indictment of the Fox and Ape,
"Which granted after humble reverence made
"Unto the bench, these words he boldly said.
"Right honored Lords, Peers of a peerless King
"From whose sole care our common good does spring,
"The greatest part of treason urged here
"As by the indictment read may well appear
"Consists in words which as our foes report
"By us were spoken against the King and Court:
"But daigne dread Lords, to mark what we have said
"And what construction thereof they have made;
"Naught against the Court or Courtier did we say
"But against such Vice as in the Court bears sway.
"The Court where wonnes so many a Iouiall spring
"Made famous by the influence of a noble King,
"As like Jones Palace above the sta^ry sky,
"Rather to be admired, then judged with mortal eye;
"Yet as in a Paradise of sweet delight
"With rarest Fruits and fairest Flowers bedight,
"N^rethelesse the care the cunning Gardener takes
"His hooks, his sythes, his pickaxe, spade and ^kes,
"Some fruitless weeds are growing on the ground:
"So in our Kings own Palace may be found
"Amongst the number that praiseworthy be
"Some wicked Beasts of more then base degree.
"And against such Vice, as they do there support
"We did inueigh; and not against the Court:
"Ne did we say, that such have Beggars bin
"That by desert do Grace or favor win:
"But such as daily use with restless gaping
"With cloaked falsehood and with tedious begging
"^f our dread Sovereigns golden gifts to crave
"Although no merit in themselves they have;
"This is the sum in brief of what we spoke
"And this is it which they would treason make.
This said, dumb silence for a certain space
Did shut the lips of all that were in place
Till at the last, that great Hero^ rose
Who of the Forests treasure does dispose
The noble Elephant, who as he stood
From his sweet mouth powered forth a fluent ^ood
Or honied eloquence, which wanting skill
If I express the same, soon should I spill
With sharp inuectiue, first against that sort
O^ hungry Beggars that frequent the Court
He did inueigh, then by his powerful wit
He showed since he in Counsels seat did sit;
How many prinate States had changed bin
Which by observance he had marked and seen,
Supplanted all by cousenage of the Ape
Or by some falsehood which the Fox did shape.
Then 'gan^ the Ape, his speech he began to frame
He showed ^t Beast he was and whence he came
How Jove at first, for his deceiptfull guile
Made him, of man a Beast, and in that Isle
Called Ape Isle of his name, alone him put
And how his tail at length for craft was cut.
Then questioned he the Fox, to know if he
Against the Ox and (...) would witness be
And what true depositions he could bring
That they intended treason against the King.
The Fox though half amazed with sudd^ine fear
To hear such words from such a mighty ^eere,
Yet that his witness might seem more to have troth
He did unbidden seek to take his oath.
The book was brought; but lo the Eternal Jove
Who by his power protecteth from above
The cause of Innocence, with dreadful frown
From Heavens high Palace cast his countenance down
And as the Fox his oath began to take
As Jove but stirred, he made Olympus shake,
And thundering horribly above the sky,
Through the air he made a sulphu^ie flash to fly,
Which fell upon the Fox, for his foul sin;
And for his judgment strange, so syng'd his skin
That since, All Foxes smell of it and bear
A synged color ever in their hair.
This sudden change, amazed the standers by
Who all with one consent, began glorify
The name of Jove, and's judgment forthwith gave
Against the Ape, who now no wit could save
From punishment; For 'bout the Forest wide
They whipped him well, and soundly lasht his hide.
So did the Beggar bluntly end his Tale,
In which (your pardon I crave) if ought I fail
And if in reading, Beggarly you hold it,
Dislike it not, because a Beggar told it.
FINIS.

