A Proclamation or Edict. Touching the Opening and restoring of the Traffic,
and Commerce of Spain, with these Countries: Although they have severed
themselves from the obeisance of the Illustrous Archduke, As also with all
Vassals and Subjects of Princes and Commonweals, being their friends, or
Neutrals.

Faithfully Translated out of the Nether-landish tongue according to printed
Copy.

Imprinted at Brussels.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Archer and are to be sold at the little shop
by the Exchange. 1603.

By the Archduke.
To our trusty and wel-beloued, the Chancellors and Persons of our Counsel
in Brabant: health.
IT is so manifest, with what desire, zeal, and care, the King (our beloved
Lord and brother,) has ever and yet does seek to further our help and
assistance of the good will which we bear to the furtherance and welfare of
our good Subjects: for, as much as in us lies to redeem and discharge them of
the miseries, inconveniences and suppressions which they have and do endure
through the continuance of these long-lasting wars, procuring them all
benefits and easements, in acknowledgement of their fedilitie. We then
desiring like wise the quiet and advancement of the other our Vassals of the
Isles of Holand and Zeland, and other Provinces, separated from the obedience,
which as their Sovereign and natural Princes they owe unto us, being deceived
and seduced by some ill-willers, who for their own benefit have and do yet
hold them in so great oppression.

And marking the miseries and oppressions which they endure, with all the
intolerable taxes which they wring from them, under the false color of
war, into the which they have cast themselves, under the pretense of the
preservation of their Privileges, taking away their substance and means, and
reducing them to an utter poverty and despair, over shadowing and concealing
the good will which we have to the furtherance of their welfare and quietness,
and to draw them out of the bondage and oppression wherein at this present they
remain: for it is certain, that all the evils and mischiefs which are
hapened by reason of these said wars and disobediences (together with the
bloodsheades which to our great grief has ensued thereon, and as yet are
continuing) do not proceed from the will of our Vassals, but from the bad
hearts of such as have taken and usurped all authority and Sovereign
government, as also from the subtilties and lies wherewith they entertain them,
sucking and drawing all their means and substance from the^: therewith to make
their own private benefit and gain, to the great disaduancement of the
Comminaltie, and to maintain themselves in the aforesaid authority.

To the end therefore that they may manifestly see and perceive, what love and
affection we bear them, we have resolved to suffer and permit them the trade
and Navigations which we heretofore have prohibited them, in the Provinces of
our obediences: As also at our request and in our favor and respect, they have
been done by his Majesty in his Realms of Spain, according to the
Declaration, published by his certain command and Edict, and sent unto us in
the spanish tongue: whereof the translation follows from word to word.

By the Kings Majesty.
Whereas I have taken regard that through the continuation of the wars risen
in the Neither-lands and Provinces of Flanders, by some subjects, the which by
bad counsel are withdrawn from their due obedience, drawing to them a great
number of the good and obedient Vassals, there have ensued great hurtes and
effusions of blood since these 36. years past, and that thereby has been
introduced great and dangerous mutations in the Policy and good government.
Also that the old and ancient train and course of trade has thereby been
greatly broken and inuerted, drawing the same out of the hands of the good and
obedient subjects of the said Provinces: whereas heretofore was used to be
the greatest trade as well of the marchandises which were brought out of these
our Realms, Lands, and Dominions, toward the North parts, and others: As
also for those which from the aforesaid parts were brought into the said
Neither-lands: and these our said Realms, Dominions, and others whereout are
sprung manifest disorders and inconveniences.

And as we desire to restore and renew the Commerce, and to set it in his
form, train, and order as heertofore it has been in the said Provinces, and
especially, in the havens and towns as yet remaining under the due obedience
of the illustrious Archduke, Albertus, and the Infanta, Lady Isabella, my
brother and Sister, to the welfare and profit of their obedient subjects as
for the good and welminded love of the common good: seeing herein the
clemency and kindenes unto which I am bound by the place whereunto it has
pleased the Almighty GOD to call me. And by the effects, to show the desire
which I have always had, to the welfare of the common good, and especially of
the aforesaid Nether-lands: having communicated all the same unto my abouenamed
Brother and Sister, and thereupon received the advice of our Counsel of
State, I have resolved to open and again to raise up, the aforesaid trade of
Merchandise, upon the conditions and manner following.

1 INprimis, I am content and ordain, that all persons of what quallitie and
condition soever, as well of my Vassals and Subjects, as of other Princes and
Commonweals, my Friends, Allies, and Neutrals, although they were borne and
dwelling in the Isles of Holland and Zealand, and in the other Provinces, which
are fallen from the obedience and allegiance of my before-named Brother and
Sister, which still come to trade, traffic and negotiate in my said
Kingdoms, and in the Havens thereof (the East and West Indies and the Isles of
Barlouent, with others by the Laws forbidden excepted) may quietly and
merchant like come to use their trade and traffic, according to the laws and
customs of these Kingdoms, in paying for the wares which they shall bring
thither, such duties as have been imposed thereupon until they day of the
publication hereof, conditionally and upon express charge, that they have not
nor shall not pay directly, nor indirectly any duties to the enemies of this
Crown, of my said brother and Sister, nor also to these of the Countries of
Holand and Zeland, and other Provinces their adherents, fallen from their
allegiance: upon pain, that if at any time it shall be proved, that they
have paid any duty to the said disobedients or to our enemies, such
marchandises shall be forfaited: and if in case they were sold or made away,
the factor or person to whom they should have been directed, and that should
have sold the same, shall be forced to repay the worth of the same, without
any acquitting, nor exception of persons whatsoever.

2 In like sort, I will and ordain, that all Marchandises not prohibited,
which shall be carried forth of these my Realms, whether by Strangers or by the
Naturalls thereof, toward any Country whatsoever, the places here-vnder
specified only excepted, shall pay me 30. in the 100. The which I impose for a
new duty of that which they shall convey out, without any exceptions of
persons nor Marchandises, and this over and above the ordinary duties
established upon them until the day of the publication of this my Edict, all
which Marchandises that shall be conuayed out of these Realms, shall be of
such, as by the laws thereof shall not be forbidden or prohibited.

3 As for the Traffic and Comerce with the Kingdoms, Countries, and Estates,
bordering upon the Mediterranean-sea, as well mine, as of my Friends and
Allies: my will is, That there be no Novelties nor change made from that which
has been heretofore used, as well in regard of the Marchandises, as for the
duties which are accustomed to be paid: upon this condition always, that all
such as shall lade for those Countries and Kingdoms, shall be bound to put in
security, within six Months after the day of their departure from the Ports
of this Realm, to present certificate of the Consuls and persons thereunto
appointed, or to be appointed in the Ports of the said Realms, Countries and
Estates of mine, my Friends and allies, bordering upon the Mediteranean-sea,
to have liuered and discharged the said Marchandises in those parts for the
which they had laden them, by means whereof they shall be discharged of their
said suretieship or caution, without paying ought but the ordinary duties,
imposed before the date hereof. And in default of presenting the said
certificate, the said sureties shall be bound to pay 20. in the 100. of all
the Marchandises which they shall have remained out. And to the end therein be
no fraud used, it is declared that the Navigation and Commerce of the said
Kingdoms, Countries and Estates of the Mediterranean-sea, and of my Friends
and allies, shall be from the Streights of Gibraltar, toward the parts of
Leuant, and from them of the North until the said Streights, for that if those
of the said Medite^ranean-sea, do pass above the said Streightes, and do
lade in these Realms of Spain and Isles thereof, for the North Countries, they
shall not enjoy the said Freedom, but shall be subject to the charge declared
in the former chapter.

4 In like manner, shall be free from the duty of 30. in the 100. the Iron and
Steel which shall be shipped out of the Province of Guipuzcoa, and Lordship of
Biscaye, the Mountains and Kingdoms of Nauarres for France, paying only the
ordinary duties, at the charge always of the self same caution declared in
the Chapter above.

5 My will and pleasure is, that all and every person and persons, which in the
form above said manner shall come to trade in these my Kingdoms with their
Ships and Marchandises, and shall bind themselves to conduct and discharge
those which they shall lade in them, in the Ports of the towns under the
obedience of my said Brother and Sister, without paying any thing directly or
indirectly to our enemies and disobedient Subjects, shall be free and exempt of
the said duty of 30. in the 100. without that they shall be bound to pay
any other but the ordinary duties.

6 And to the end that they may more easily do it and enjoy the said freedom,
without paying the said 30. in the 100. I command and ordain, al Officers of
Justice of these my Realms and Lordships, freely to suffer all persons to ship
without paying any other then the ordinary duties, for all sorts of
marchandises, those only excepted which by the laws of these Realms are
prohibited, upon condition that they set good and sufficient caution or
security before such persons which hereunto by me shall be ordained in my
Ports: to present certification from the persons which my said Brother and
Sister there unto shall appoint, to have discharged the said Marchandises
frank and freely, in the said Ports and Towns of their obedience, or such
part thereof, as they shall have unladen there, and that within six months
after their departure from my said Ports: that then by virtue thereof, they
shall remain freed and absolved of the said caution or security: By reason
that by the said certificate shall appear that only they shall have discharge
there, and for the remaynder their Sureties shall pay the aforenamed duty of
thirty in the hundred, which Certificate, shall be given unto them by the
aforementioned persons without any trouble, or without demanding any duty of
them for the same.

7 I defend, and ordeine expressly, that in these my Kingdoms by what means
or way soever, be not brought either directly or indirectly, the Marchandises
here under declared, unless they be made and wrought in the obedient
Provinces of the Nether-lands. (To wit:)

Hondscote Says, and all manner of Sayet wares. Little Cushions to sow, or
otherwise.
Points, and pinnes. Starch. Buratoes, and Taffatyes. Cow-hydes, Mokadoes.
Tryplt-Veluets. Sarges, or Worsteds.
And other works, the which are made at Lille, and Tournaye, Carpets.

Kettels, and Basens.
Which are made in the said Neither-lands, and at Axe, so far forth as they
bear the mark of my said Brother and Sister.

Red Copper wrought. Cambricke. Woolen Stockings. All manner of Knives. Chests
or Coffers. Pewter. Wire of Iron, and Copper.
Linen Cloth, with all sorts of Linnen-drapery counterfeit to those which are
made in the said obedient provinces.

Fine thread, called Spinall. Sowing thread, of all colors. Table-clothes, and
Napkins. Woollen clothes. Al manner of Pictures, either in oil or water. Lace
of thread, or Silk. Narrow canuases, and Tapistries of al sorts.
All manner of small Haberdasherrie-wares, counterfeit to those yt are made in
the obedient provinces.

Tykes, or Quiltes for bed and feather.
And to th'entent the said wares be known, to be the workmanship of the said
obedient Countries, they shall be verified by signs of such persons, as by my
seal, and my said brother and sister thereunto shall be deputed which shall be
given to the^ yt shall require it, without paying any thing therefore, upon
pain that those which shall be found to be without ye said my sign or mark, or
known to be other countreywork, shall be confiscated and made good lawful prise.

8 I Ordain, that in my said Kingdoms shall not be suffered to come nor be
brought in those Marchandises following, without the Seal of my Brother and
Sister, and the Pasport or Warrant of those which we shall appoint thereunto.
But it is withal to be understood that the said Seal and Pasport shall be
given them gratis, and without any cost.

Buckarums. Bays.
Dyed and dressed in the said obedient Provinces, the which above the
aforesaid Seal, and Pasport, shall bring with them a private Seal from the
place where they are dyed.

Nails, and all manner of Iron-works.
Molten Wax. Sheep Skins. Buff-skinnes. Fustians.
All manner of Marchandises, and small wares, coming from Norinbregh. (To wit:)

Of all sorts. Spangles and grain work of Glass. Copper curtain Rings.
Sail Needles. Al manner of Spectacles. Scalles, or Balances. Buttons.
Pincers, and Nails for Shoomakers. Chafing-dishes of all sorts. Horn for
Lanthornes. Glue of all sorts. Matches for Gunnes. White wax. Claspes and Eyes
of all sorts. Tape of all fashions. Strings for all Instruments. Tallow
Candels. Wax to seal Letters. Chamblets of all sorts. Bed-pannes. Clockes.
Broken clockes. Belles of Metal. Hogs Bristles for Shoomakers. Small Bells of
al sorts of metal Pad-lockes of all sorts. Nails of metal. Shooing-hornes
of all sorts. Candlesticks of all sorts. Sawes. Whissels of all sorts. Pens
or quilles to write. All manner of printed Images upon Paper. Looking Classes,
of all sorts. Tinne-foile, Writings, Boxes, or Cabinets of all sorts.
Inck-hornes of all sorts. Brus^es of all sorts. Horn bottels of all sorts.
Buckles for Girdles, of all sorts. Carved Images of all sorts. Wire of metal.
Wire of all sorts. Instruments of all sorts. Copper in rolls. Flax of all
sorts. Table-bookes. All manner of Fyles. Maskes of all sorts. Wrought English
Alabaster of all sorts. Metals wrought of all sorts. Millan scenes. Gold, and
Silver to guild. Counterfeit gold, of all sorts. Lace of Cruel, of all sorts.
Lead wrought of all sorts. Presses, and wooden listes, or edged of all sorts.
Horse-haire. Weights of mark of all sorts. Watches or small clocks of al sorts
Beads of all sorts. Wheels of all sorts of metal. Small nails for stools
or chaires. Steeles of all sorts. Cabidge-seede. Caffas, and of all sorts.
Hatbands of all sorts. Toonges and shoouels of all sorts. Bone wrought of all
sorts. Broken metal of all sorts.


And my will is, that these Marchandises that shall come with the said Seal
and Pasport, shall be free and exempt from the said duty of 30. in the 100
and all such as shall show themselves with the said Pasport and Seal, before
my Justices, Customers, or to the persons which I shall appoint thereunto, in my
Havens and Ports, may freely traffic upon the sale of such commodities,
paying only the ordinary duties, without that any hinderance shall be done
unto them by any, but rather shall be given unto them all assistance, at the
hands of the Justices. And all Merchandise that shall not come with the said
Seal and Warrant, shall pay the aforesaid duty of 30. in the 100.

9 And to yield the trade of Marchandises the more easy our will is, that the
Captain or Master of what Ship soever, as soon as he shall be aryued, shall
immediately deliver up, his cargazin, or contents of his lading, of the
Marchandises or Packs which he shall have brought, with their marks and
declaration to whom they are directed, unto the Justices of the Havens for the
which he shall be fraighted, the which being done, he shall be permitted to
discharge his Marchandises and deliver them unto their owners, or unto whom
they shall belong. And if in case any deceit or trespass be found to be used
against my orders, those which shall have received such Marchandises, shall be
constrained to make good the vallew thereof, without that in this behalf any
hinderance or molestation shall be done unto the said Ships, Captains, or
Masters of the Ships, the which shall freely be suffered to lade and re^urne,
unless they have themselves concealed the same and been participant in the
deceit and falsehood.

10 And to the end that there be a difference, and a distinction between our
enemies and those which are withdrawn from their lawful obedience and will
still continue in their errors, and between our good Vassals and Subjects of
the said Neitherlands: and of all others that will trade freely and securely
within thse our Realms, and that desires in sincerity without fraud or guile
to enjoy this grace and benefit.

And to the end that the Ships, Shipper, Merchants, and other persons of
like sort and quality, at this presence holding their residence in the
aforenamed Prouices of Holand and Zeland, and other being out of the obedience
of my aforenamed Brother and Sister, may be known by my Captain, Generals of
the Armies, Gallyes and all other sorts of Ships of War, I am content and
command: That in bringing Pasport in due manner and form, from my aforenamed
Brother and Sister, or from the persons which we, and they shall appoint
thereunto, in the aforesaid Lands, shall freely, and frankely pass, enter,
remain, deal, and quietly and freely exercise their trade, according to the
Laws and customs of these aforenamed Realms, by virtue of the aforesaid
Passeport, without offering them any let or hindrance, but that all aid,
favor and assistance begiuen them, and that they be defended against all
enemies, as well Pirates as Armies at sea which should seek to disturb this
their free trade, and that as well in these my said Realms, as in the said
obedient Provinces of my Brother and Sister, and the said Pasports shall be
given unto al such as shall require them, without any delay, or without taking
any duty or other thing whatsoever.

11 And to the end that it may be known with what assurance they shall
remain and exercise their trade, in these my said Realms, all such as shall
intend to remain and trade therein, by virtue of this present Edict, and how
well they shall be received, and how secure their persons and goods shall be
therein: I promise upon my Kingly word; that over and above the accomplishment
of all the Premises above written, that if at any time it were found
convenient, or that unto me it might seem good to change, or recall this my
ordinance, they shall be warned thereof a year before hand, that within the
said time they may depart freely and securely with their goods and dispose of
their matters, and to transport themselves to such places as they shall desire,
and those which shall be absent from thence, may be able in like sort, to
dispose of al their goods within the aforesaid term of one year, as to
themselves shall seem most meet and convenient, without that either in the
one or in the other any let shall be done unto them.

12 And for the accomplishment of what is aforesaid, touching the aforenamed
trade of Merchandise, I command and ordain all Justices and Officers of these
my Realms, that they suffer to enter in all the Havens thereof all sorts of
Ships, Shippers, and Marchandises of the aforesaid Provinces of Holland and
Seland, and other their adherents, also of the Subjects of all Princes,
Potentates and Commonweals, my Friends and Neutrals, which shall come with
Pasport from my said Brother and Sister, or from the persons which I, and they
shall appoint thereunto, and that they permit them to enter, remain, and
exercise their trade, freely and frankly, following the orders and customs of
my aforenamed Reamls: maintaining and framing themselves in all things,
according to the tenor of this my present Edict, without doing there against in
any manner: the which I command to be proclaimed, and published with the
accustomed solemnities, as well in my Court, as in all the Cities, Towns,
Villages, and Havens of my aforenamed Realms of Spain, and the Islands
thereof, to the end that it may come to the knowledge of every one.

And all what therein is contained, be perpetually to be mainetained,
performed, and observed, as the like shall be done by all persons to whom it
may appertain. Upon pain of falling into my heavy indignation, and others
reserved to my arbitration, whereof I have caused these presence to be made.

Signed with my own hand, and Sealed with my Privy Seal, and Subscribed by
Andreas de Prada, my Secretary of State.
Given in Valladolid, the 27. of February. 1603.
By the Archdukes.
ANd delivering of our presents, to follow and put in execution, the good and
merciful intent of his aforenamed Majesty: We grant, and give leave and
license, to al and every one, as well our Subjects, (although there were of the
aforenamed Isles of Holland and Zeland, and other Provinces, withdrawn from our
allegiance) as also unto all others, of what Princes and Commonweals, and of
what quality, Nation, or condition soever they be, our Friends, or Neutrals,
after the publication hereof, to bring and discharge in our Lands on this side
being under our obedience, either thorough the Havens thereof or through the
Havens, which at this instant are held and occupied, by those of our aforenamed
Islands, or by the way of France, and Germany, as well by themselves, as by
interposition of persons, all sorts of Marchandises, and all other things
whatsoever or howsoever they be brought, or that they shall draw out of the
Kingdoms and dominions of Spain, the which we declared, as well in entering
as in going out, to be free and francke from all duties, which have been
raised, imposed, and augmented thereupon, within these thirty years, so far
forth that they have not neither shall not, either directly or indirectly pay
any impositions, customs or other duties, in what nature soever, unto ye
aforesaid disobedient Provinces nor unto our enemies, upon the pain yt having
paid any such duties, they shall be forfeit and co^fiscated to wit, only such as
shall have paid the same.

In like manner, and upon ye same condition, we give leave and license unto al
persons of what Nation ^euer of our friends, and Neutrals with the same
freedom and liberty, to bring into the Havens of our o^ bedience, and also to
transport from thence thorough what place soever all manner of Marchandises:
only excepted these, which his Majesty by his aforesaid Edict does prohibit,
because they are not made nor wrought in these obedient Provinces, being those
same which are specified in the seventh Article of his royal Commandment
above inserted, forbidding, and interdicting, that neither directly nor
indirectly, nor by any means whatsoever, they be not brought in the aforesaid
Lands of our obedience: Upon pain of confiscation, and that the transgressors
of this Ordinance shall be punshed with all rigor.

And to the end that each one, the better may enjoy this grace and benefit of
his Majesty, and of us, and make their voyages toward the kingdoms of
Spain: We will at all times cause to be given and granted the Pasports, which
they shall need for their security, at what times they shall require them
free and francke, without paying any duty therefore.

In like manner, touching the Marchandises, which his Majesty by this his said
Edict are comprehended, and forbids not to enter in his realms, unless they
were made in the Lands of our obedience, or have passed there thorough with
cer^ification from the persons, the which in his Majesty's, and our behalf
thereunto shall be appointed, according to the tenor of the aforementioned Edict,
to the en^, that the same do not disturb the course of the trade, and that
all such persons, freely man come without any peril or danger, in the
aforenamed Realms, the said Certificate, or Warrant shall be granted unto
them, yea, without paying any thing for the same, by the hands of John de
Gauna, or of such other persons, as we shall name there unto, to the assistance
of those which his Majesty shall depute, and appoint thereunto, and being the
said certificate or Warrant signed by them both, it shall be valeable, and
other ways not.

And to the end that, that is above written have his whole and lawful effect,
and that each one, so much the better, may know our good heart and affection,
we give leave and license, to all trading Merchants, Shippers or their Factors,
Officers, Handecrafts-men, and all other persons of ^he lands withdrawn from
our obedience, to return into these of our allegiance, and there to live and
enjoy these goods being in the hands of the Fiscall, in such manner as at this
present they are, without power to sell or allienate the same, unless with our
consent, so far forth they maintain the Laws of the aforesaid Lands: and
such persons as shall come in this manner, we will receive them into our grace
and mercy, with utter abolishment of all forepassed matters, the which is to
be understood, to be done, in regard of such as shall have absented themselves
by reason of the wars, without any other private offense, and that shall not
preseuer nor intermeddle further therein.

Therefore, we will and command you, that immediately and without delay, you
are to publish these presents with all solemnity, throughout all the Towns
and places of our Countries and County of Artoys, where the Proclamations and
Edicts are usually published, to the end they may come to the knowledge of
each.

Ordaying and Commanding, unto all Governors, Iusticies, Officers and men of
Law of your iurisdicting the strickt observance, and mayntenance thereof,
using all good entertainment, and kind usage, unto all such as shall be
willing to accept of this ordinance and favor, receiving them in their Towns
and Offices respectively, although that at this present, they do hold or have
held their residence, in the Provinces distracted from our obedience, or in
any other places, so farrefoorth as they behave themselves according to the
Laws and Customs there used, even as the like is done by these which are
resident in the places of our said obeissaunce, and upon the charge, that
before hand shall present themselves, unto the Magistrates of the Cities, and
Towns where they shall desire to dwell, without that they shall need at any
time to show any other diligence nor duty, neither before nor after.

And all this to be effected, without doing of suffering to be done unto
them, for the fore passed matters: any trouble, disturbance or hinderance, upon
pain that the trangressors shall endure our heavy indignity and to be
rigourously punished, for that such our pleasure is.

Given in our City of Brussels, vn^ our Counter-Seale: Imprinted thereon in
form of Edict. The fifth day of April. 1603. Signed, by the Archdukes and
their Counsel, and subscribed.
And thereon stands imprinted their Highness Counter-Seale, in form of
Edict.

The like Edicts, mutatis mutandis, have been dispatched in the
Netherlandish-tongue, for Gelderland, Flanders, and Malynes: And in the French
tongue for Luxenbrough, Artoys, Hainault, Namur, Lille, Douay, and Vrchids,
Tournay, and Dournesay, and Valencienne.

FINIS.

