THE SECOND Admonition, Sent by the subdued Provinces to Holland, thereby to
entice them by faire-seeming reasons, groundless threats, and unlike examples
to make peace with the Spaniards.

With the Hollanders answer to the same.

Translated out of Dutch into English by H. W.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop within the
Popes head Alley in Lombard street 1598.

To Holland.
PEace, O peace, O sweetest estate, never was a sweeter word heard. Peace enemy
to strife, contention and revenge, thee I seek and desire from the bottom of
my heart: thou art the most precious jewel that ever was found, the spring of
welfare and delight. Thou healest that which controversy has wounded. Thou
causest the scattered things to be relied. Thou causest and createst joy and
pleasure in every place. Where peace is, there are our years doubled: there
life is long, and all our life is sweet: there is riches and plenty at full:
there fortune is not seen so unsteadfast. Thou art the treasure where all good
is enclosed, and the beautifying of the world, to whom all honor is due by
common accord.

Happy are they that seek peace says the word of the Lord. 2.
PEace dwells in the kingdom of God. Peace Christ has recommended unto all
believers. With peace are gloriously rewarded and sweetly crowned Gods people.
Peace is the principal testament which the Lord before his death bequeathed
and recommended us. Peace is the bond and perfect image, where through we
deserve the heavens, and without peace all would vanish to naught, for through
discord each thing decays. Peace hinders destruction, desolation, and
grief. Peace makes kingdoms and countries to flourish. Peace is every where
greatly esteemed: nature forces all men to love peace. And what is there more
delectable then peace, to agree and continue in amity to the end.

Woe to him who is a friend to strife. 3.
THou O Peace art pleasing unto all nations, and full of consolation, yet
nevertheless in these broils, we see thee inhumanelie excluded out of the
Hollandish limits. Whence does this proceed O Hollandia? insooth it is a
strange matter, that thou hate the thing which every one naturally desires.
Art thou blind? art thou so senseless that thou chusest mortail poison rather
then dainty and exquisite food? will thou never rise out of this thy
obscurity, and lay aside this pernicious discord. Thou art like unto a sick
person, or the frantike, which madly reject the good and wholesome things
proffered them. Compare the passed time unto the present, before thou did
reject thy obeisance, was it not far better then to live in this sort
imothered in strife and contention, and like beasts shedding the blood of thy
members?

Where peace is hated no mercy can dwell. 4.
THou art molested and pilled with taxations, and give the soldier the
substance, whereon thy people should live. The common traffic does melt and
consume, for it must be used with force and might. And as long while as thou
do embrace this pestiferous contention, thou shall find no rest nor quiet in
no place: yea finally every one will forsake thee: for all Europe (for thy
sake) endures great misery, thou must know that each thing has but his time,
and thy doing cannot continue long. Oh that thou would once consider thy own
good, thy heart would turn and be moved. What profit is it always to
continue the wars? what pleasure in mischeeuing one another? thy successors
shall hereafter feel the smart, unless thou change thy hate

One otfen knows his fault, but repents too late. 5.
ACcept peace, believe the counsel of thy friends: bow somewhat thy head, and
cease thy obstinacy: reject passion who bereaueth the fences, and apalleth the
spirit, but let his light shine. Peace is at hand if thou can but affect
her. Thy Prince (O Holland) is neither rigorous nor cruel. I fought be passed
which any grieve thee, think thy self has been cause thereof, each thing
may easily be amended, if in case thou will be ruled by reason, his lap is
open, his goodness is ready, seek peace, and all will be well: Thou shall be
help, appeased and disburthened, and fed as a limme of the patrimony: Turn
to thy wonted obedience, acknowledge thy superiors.

All shall be well, and things past forgotten. 6.
It Is time, it is time, that thou should perceive thine own welfare, and
hasten to peace before it wax too late, for although thou do abound in
wealth and content, whereof thy courage swells, yet think how others in like
case have been served when they refused the peace, it is wisdom to take
occasion when it is proffered, and help himself with fortune when she
smileth. The Athenians because they once subdued and governed the Spartans,
Athens.
thought to govern all with their might, and would hearken to no peace, but
what happened unto those which they thought to suppress, they became their
subjects. This is the worlds course in all human affairs, which to day
exalt, and to morrow will make a slave.

Wise is he who at others harms does warning take. 7.
WHen the unwise Romans rejected the sweet peace which Caesar kindly offered
them, Rome.
and that (as the history says) Pompeius with his armies thought to withstand
Caesar's might, a fire was kindled, which consumed the earth and ruined Rome ye
mighty people lost his former liberty: Pompey was murdered, and all the
nobility subdued: and in that sort that monarchy which whilome ruled and
swayed over the world was subdued and brought to naught, where (if they had
accepted peace) they might have continued in their former estate. Consider
this, the time is the manifester of all hidden things, mark then what profit
occasion well taken does bring.

Unwise is he who the uncertain before the sure does prefer. 8
Carthage.
ALso if Carthage had held, and not violated the true peace which was granted
them by Fabius, they might very well have shunned the destruction which after
befell them, when the Romans the second time raised their standards against
them. Had Mithridates accepted the alliance which was kindly proffered him,
Mithridates.
he had never fallen into those dangers, nor in the wars which dured forty
years, but because he could not fancy peace, he spoiled his kingdom and lost
his life. Iugurtha
Also had not Iugurtha through evil counsel rejected the peace offered him,
he had never been carried captive to Rome, where he ended his life in misery
and thrail.

He never fared well, that on the war him founded. 9.
WHen Israel departed out of the deserts, traveling with great pain toward
the land of promise, they requested king Sehon to let them pass peaceably,
Sehon.
they not desiring to hurt his realm, but he proud and unwise rather chose
war, then peace with love, wherefore obstinacy had her reward, being cause
that he lost both kingdom and life. Also when the Beniamites evil minded,
Beniamites.
had sinned and disturbed all Israel, might at the beginning of the broils
with small amends have ceased the wars, but no, they came into the field
against their brethren, by which they were pitifully discomfited, and 25000.
of them were slain, and their City burnt all within three days.

He that neglects occasion proffered, needs not complain. 10.
Never had been seen the heaps of murdered Troianes and floods of their
blood, nor yet that flourishing kingdom spoiled by the valiant Greeks, who at
the first proffered them conditions of peace, but alas they were bereaved of
their former wits, not being able to love peace. Had eke the victorious
Persian Cirus accepted the peace in Scithia, which Tomyris son proffered him,
he had not been discomfited and slain in that unlucky battle, where all his
host (though great) was put to the sword, and his severed head was (by
Tomiris) bathed in his own blood, O mischievous and unlucky chance. But yet
more, O the mischievous and wicked works of men which do cause them.

He that is provident, may beware in time. 11.
THe City of Siracusa so highly renowned, that she was compared to Carthage,
is not she likewise come to the like mishap, Siracuse.
and by the war pitifully spoiled? for they also rejected the peace which
Marcelles was willing to give them, they stood very stoutly upon their
instruments, which Archimedes made them, wherwithall in the Romain Camp they
did many wonderful exploits to their advantage, yet notwithstanding their
triple wall, all their courageous soldiers, nor yet their strange devises did
any whit profit them against the Roman wrath, but were overthrown and made
pillage, where they lost both their honor, and freedom.

He that lets a good opotunitie escape, may after want it. 12.
HAd Judea (when she was kindled with anger and desire to deliver her self
from the Roman subjection) with providence shunned the peril which hung over
her head, Judea.
and learned to break her high minded and rebellious courage, before Vespatian
came, who (as is known) brought them all into desolation, she had never felt
that grievous smart, whereof whole histories are scarce able to tell the
misery: she might have had mercy and been conserved, where to the contrary
she has aboade more misery then any people on earth. O how wise is he, who
seeks rest and tranquillity. why choose you the badde rather then the good?
is not unity far better then dissension?

What reason will not do, experience teaches. 13.
Cosroe.
THe king Cosroe that mighty potentate, who continually raised the Persian
estate, had he kindly accepted the peace, which unfeignedly was by the Emperor
proffered, he had had fortune so his wish, and her wheel would not so soon
have turned. Heraclius sought peace, as the thing most beneficial unto both:
but Cosroe was therewithal not appaid, he thirsted after war, and he was
suffised, with three sundry battles, which all went against him, had not he
scorned the Emperors kindness, and refused peace, he had not had that
reproachful discomfiture, nor brought himself and his people in that
distress. Mark then what negligence does cause, when in time one cannot
foresee his own good.

What strife does spoil, does bind the peace. 14.
1519. 1521.
HOw fared in old time the Spanish band, which also knew not their superiors
counsel, they were offered peace to end the broils, but they rather chose
the war, and the miseries of the same which was the cause that they were
persecuted, banished and slain, he who refuses peace proffered, does not
deserve to have it afterward. N^ples. F^s^a.
And how often have the Neapolitaines been distressed? Moreover read what of
Friesland is written for they being in strife with the Saxons, refused peace:
yea more came in the field with the Emperor. Wherefore O Holland take care to
deal wisely, accept peace, strife has endured enough.

The whole body greeues at the discord of the limbs. 15.
BOth Cleueland and Gelderland can record what profit the war bringes, when
peace is refused, had they somewhat abased their high minds as they were
counsayled, they had not fallen into the destruction which has ruined all the
land. Moreover call to remembrance O Holland what issue the broiles in North
Holland took, North Holland.
when thy communaltie rebelliously were risen up against their Magistrates, and
as enraged people ran about, all their minds being bent to murder and
bloodshed, they also were proffered peace, but they desirous to live at
liberty and rule all things to their own fancy refused the same, where
through at last they were well punished for their foolish pretense.

It seldom goes well where the people does rule. 16.
O Friend, let this be a looking glass unto thee, these examples are manifest
and known. Shun strife, and desire peace: let none spare himself to that
sweet and delectable estate, visit thy prince, send thy ambassadors, not to
nourish the war, nor to exile peace, but endeavor thy self to unity, for
concordia is the sweetest treasure on earth, thy neighbors and allies desire
the same, give ear unto the^: thy superiors expect thee and will hear thee,
and their hearts are bent to thee, depart from this wicked resistance,
whereunto some counsel thee, but the crafty and subtle seek more their
own profit thereby, then thy preferment, or thy countries good. It is always
good fishing in troubled water, and cutting broad girdles out of other men's
leather.

A feigned friend ought to be shunned as an enemy. 17.
THou art fed with lies and dissimulations, thou art persuaded to exclude the
truth, and that thy virtues and praise shall be extolled in the places where
the earth is full of veins of gold, thou art every where greatly esteemd,
because thou can so mightily rule Mars himself. In the East and North thy
fame is spread, by reason whereof thou think all the world will adore thee,
thou persuadest thy self to be invincible, but surely it will fail thee, for
God does always abate such high minds: thou will neither stoop nor obey, but
seek to become a common wealth of some new manner: consider I pray what a
man does in his wantonness when ease and pride has possessed his heart: are
all thy deeds allowed? will thou no more harber after subjection.

Where force is a counsailour, wisdom is forgotten. 18.
But finally (Holland) thou shall find thine error: there were never yet found
rebels, which in their faults were not confuted and overthrown, with plagues
as is every where seen and known: take examples in Gods house it self, where
an Angel raised himself against the Almighty God, yea an Angel who in glory
and beauty far surpassed all the rest, as scriptures do unfold, fell he
not and the rest with an incurable wound? because against their sovereign they
rebelled: from the most highest he was made the basest, from the fairest to the
ouglyest, from great glory to eternal confusion: a short pleasure brings
great grief, an example to all subjects.

What rebellion winnes is no victory. 19.
Israelites.
HOw often has Israel been plagued of God, brought in need and chastised, when
the commandment of Moses did not like them, and did still transgress the
same: also how wonderfully God punished the 10. tribes which were rebelled from
the royal seat and subjection of Judah. Absolon.
Also Absolon with his accomplices very shamefully rose up in arms against David,
and a thousand others (too long to rehearse) the which God has punished.
Rebellion is an infection, a stink, a thing hated, an ouerruled malice, and
injustice, the picture and image of hellish discord. A poison of a deadly
composition, a tree bearing deadly fruit.

A common wealth is spoiled where strife is begun. 20.
THe heathen histories do also record how severely the City of Thebes in
Grecia was punished for her rebellion, being revolted from the Macedonians, but
they had loss in stead of profit, and in stead of liberty were brought in
more servitude. Capua. Numatia.
Capua also lost her glory, when she began to rebel: how dear did Numatia
buy her foolish rebellion, and the Italian vassalles which rose up against the
Roman estate? Bellum sociale Bataui.
How fared the Batauians (thy first seed) in their rebellion during Vespasians
raygne, the beginning was luckie, but the end desolate, as Tacitus shows in
his Roman Chronicle.

He that seeks to raise himself falls often in the dirt. 21.
HOw much blood has Italy shed when the enraged people set their mutinies
abroach, and (as we find written) the German Emperor appeased them. What
Germany endured in that time, when Carolus Quintus reigned, Germany.
is manifest, the Magistrates were exiled for their liberty, the beginning had
a fair gloss, but the end proved bad: In sum all people and nations have
been destroyed by their rebellion, the books are full of their doings, and the
memory thereof will never perish: wherefore O Holland take example by them
then, accept concord which is offered thee, behold the truth, put off that
ougly mask, behold another wounds and heal thy self.

A peace seeking heart does find peace every where. 22.
WHereupon do thou put thy trust, and whet thy claws to show thy strength?
do thou think no body shall hinder thee, and yt thou shall use thy
superiors power, he will at some time escape, although thou passest not
therefore) and as a Lion show thee his grinning teeth. Of thy great traffic
thou art very proud as though thou only could rule the same, and make it
continue, but no, not so, for that stands not in human power, only in God,
who does it give and take: that floode would soon be run dry, those
incommes which now does fill thy Casse will soon melt, the maine foundation
whereon thy common wealth does live is of people diverse of minds and humors,
and a variable thread who so thereon does weaue, shall be subject to many
mutations.

Where the communaltie is mad can be no stable estate. 23.
THy common wealth is unsteadfast, it cannot endure, whom to day they raise, to
morrow they pull down: the favors of the people are neither rocks nor walls,
but continually wavering as the leaf by the wind, they will be grieved and
become wanton, as then look for a mutation. They which now reign and rule,
and by their computation sit fast, shall fall in indignation, and what then shall
follow is known to God. But this is always the end where such tumultuous
people bear any sway. Is it not better to have peace, while as yet thy case
seems sure and stable, then to stay until occasion does turn from thee, and
fortune change, according to her variable and ever changing use.

When one stays too long the sore waxes incurable. 24.
O Hollandia that feedest thy self with strife and contention, and blindly
love war and trouble, we admonish thee, and God shows thee tokens to the
end thou should rise out of this entangled net to thine own good, why do
thou hate peace? why do thou shed the blood of thy brethren? what are we
Barbarians, man-eating Caniballes or heathens forsaken of God? Oh no, but
think that thou do it for christians, thy own country men and nearest
friends: drive Mars from hence, and let us with a christian like mind, knit our
forces, strength and treasures together, let us oppose our selves against Gods
enemies in Hungaria, where now Christendom prospers, and drive out the
Turk, who intendes to devour us: there is a rightful war and well founded.

He fightes well who Gods praise does exalt. 25.
LEt concordia descend, let the fire be quenched which every where flameth.
Discordia does sell her bait dear: we can find no liking in her, a lovely
union would please us far better then thus to drink Mars his bittter revenge.
Come Holland, cease thy ire, the sweet Dove presents unto thy hands an Olive
branch. In peace is joy, rest and ease: in peace we shall become amiable. The
war makes all things feeble and weak: Peace feeds and heales: discord and
contention does banish all good: Peace breeds good success, union and love.
Come O Holland, let peace shine, for in sure peace consistes thine and my
safety.

Where peace dwells good luck is manifold. All is well that ends well.
The Hollanders Answer to the seduced Provinces upon the rehearsed Admonition.
1.
THat the bloody war does destroy and spoil all things, and that the sweet
peace is a great treasure and highly esteemed, that know I better then thy
self, although thou admonish me. But sithence that peace is so much by thee
desired, why then do thou not preach the same unto thy Idol Phillip of
Spain, who what with hanging, strangling, murdering, and burning, destroys
(in a manner) all the world, as to all is manifest, for he continually does
not only plague me, but also Barbary, the East and west Indies, him you do not
correct, but allow it all, whereby we manifestly see that among the meat which
thou proferest, us, is mixed mortal poison, which with reason we hate: wary
consideration shows and explaines me thy meaning, and that thou seek
nothing else but to hang a net over our heads, thou have at more times
deceived my subjects: thou shall not as now effect any thing, for we know thy
old tricks.

Know ye that it is bad taking one Fox with an other. 2.
Yet all peace is not good, for a fained peace which should be hurtful, or
which might cause loss of lawful liberty or privileges a rightful war is to
be preferred before such a peace.
THe lauds of a true peace I cannot enough pronounce: my pen is too quick, my
tongue too unskillful: one that were far more enriched, yea with heavenly skill
were not able enough to express the same. All places in the world are seen
(through peace) to farewell and the countries to flourish. A right peace
defends both the land and people from trouble: an unfeigned honorable peace is
the best thing that one can desire, but think not therefore that I will with
thee consent to accept any peace, as if they were all in one degree: No, I
assure my self, that any war to withstand an enemy is both laudable and
honorable, and to the contrary some peace hurtful and naught: wars
undertaken for honorable causes tending for himself and his, their goods or
life, for freedom or in defense of Gods laws are honorable, but peace which
threatens the loss of all these may (with right) be refused: against such one
may make a rightful war.

It Is an accursed peace which destroys Gods word. 3
Which peace is good and to be desired.
WHen peace does free from care and trouble, when she diminishes the dangers
and perilles, when by her means great costs and charges are forborne: when she
yields quiet and tranquillity of life and mind: as then it is a holy work
to make peace with our enemy. But when as one stands in doubt and fear,
Which peace is naught and to be shunned
least under the peace her fair veil lie not hidden some secret mischief,
then she is mortal venom mixed in a wholesome potion. One ought always to be
bent to peace, (so far forth she be clear from deceit and danger) we are
naturally given to seek peace, but not in such sort that she should be worse
then the war: for without security of life goods and conscience what is it?
That the name of peace should only be unto us a deceitful pleasure: a peace
whereby one does leese freedom and liberty is a detestable plague in the
ears of the wise.

A rightful war is better then a feigned peace. 4
WHerefore we have here wisely to consider if it be not damageable to make
peace with every one, if that with procuring a peace we subvert not our selves
into an eternal slavery, in such sort that we had better to endure the
war, then to live in a peace which breeds servitude. Many have by wars
won their liberty, and maintained the same: others by bad peace have made
slaves, A true liberty is to be preferred above life.
Thou show us the disasters of the peace with many examples, as if with
(trusting therein) did seek after it, but yet many have in choosing peace won
their welfare and exiled tyranny: others have through peace lost their
liberty, and through their light belief been made slaves. Liberty is the
chiefest thing during ones life, her we ought with our life to maintain: in
the defense of life and goods one will endaunger himself, but yet above all,
liberty is to be preferred.

It is honor to expose his life in defense of his liberty and patrimony. 5
IN the defense of our liberty and security, Which to attain the war were
enterprised, and to keep them they must be continnued, expecting by the grace
of God a good issue. Saguntines. Athens. Our desire of peace has always
appeared but has been but badly recompensed.
which we will not miss: we are altogether zealously bent, which our burning
zeal shall not be quenched, nor is there any one in that respect, which shall
turn our minds, we hate them with our hearts which herein contrary us: we
fight courageously and willingly, the arms shall not easily be pulled out of
our hands, neither yet do we rejoice in bloody battles, we hope the best,
being always ready rather to abide the hardest brunt, then to be made
slaves. The noble Saguntines, have in spite of their foes rather chosen to die
by famine and misery, then by a slavish peace to save their lives. The
Athenians too weak for the might of the Barbarians, have rather suffered their
city to be overthrown and spoiled, then to be brought under their
subjection.

An honorable death is to be preferred before a slavish life. 6.
The treatise of peace at Breda was dearly bought by those of Buere^ Leerdam.
Ouwater, Shoonhouen, and Zieriezee. The pacification of Gaunt was of the
Spanish side most trecherously violated, as it was concluded before the
treatise was made as apeared by diverse letters. By means of the treatise of
peace of Cullen, was Mastricht, Artoys, Haynalt, and Flaunders, severed and
rent from the other united provinces, and brought again under the Spanish yoke.
Anno 88 when with the Spanish Armado all seemd to be conquered, as then the
peace was also spoken of. Anno 94. when Ernestus so flatteringly, profferd
peace by Ieronimus Coema^s, and Otto Hartius.
THat I have sought to bring all things to an unfeigned peace, has appeared by
my peaceable dealing: but you have always, sought (under thy peace) to cover
deceit. In the treatise of peace at Breda, appeared thy deceitful tricks.
Bueren Leerdam, Ouwater, Shoonhouen, bear yet the marks of thy peace:
Immediately after Ziericzee was beset. The pacification of Gaunt thou did
violate: thy pretense appeared by the letters of Escouedo. Also by the letters
of ye Baron of Selles which he brought with him at Mechelen, from the Spanish
counsel. The violation of Don Ian against honor, oath and law manifestly
appeared: it may be said without fear, that nothing but treasons and surmises
were intended in all thy fair shows of peace, stretching to the annulling and
exiling of the virtuous. It Is in vain, thy faults are no more to be favored.

But untruth has yet hitherto paid his master. 7.
HOw deceitful, shameful, and pernicious was the treatise of peace of Cullen
unto me, the time has taught. The siege of the good City of Mastricht with
many other subtle devices have also bewrayed the same, Artoys and Henalt with
others were thereby seduced. The dealing with Flaunders (to my loss) and to
what peace thou and thine were inclined, when the Prince of Parma proffered
peace to her Majesty, was manifestly showed by the Spanish Fleet. More what
peace Ernestus brought who sought to murder his excellency, as if there by
all matters might be pacified. More, the head of the Inquisition, Lieuetenant
unto thy holy father, (yea when it was least suspected) shows his cruel
nature, which (not a year ago) buried a silly maiden alive.

A fool is he that will be a slave if he may choose. 8.
IF so it were that we desired peace, yet there is no means to recover the
same of the Spaniard, the ground and foundation of truth to bind peace,
depends on the faith, this may not be forsaken: without faith or trust no
accord is to be made which one may trust on, or that will dure, or ought to
forbear any alliance with those which kept not their word, faith, nor oath:
fear of unthankfulness causes an unquiet mind. The faith is the only thing
whereon peace must be built, and where she is absent (whereon we ought to build)
we must like an Ox stand in fear of the axe: this is even the true
exposition thereof. Let the peace defend us from the evils present and to come,
for by a broken peace, to run again to the wars it falls crueller then
before, and brings far more grief and trouble.

Alliance without truth, breeds fear of life and goods. 9.
NO Wolves Bears, Lions, nor Tigers never so over cruel are not so pernicious
as unfaithfulness, for if so be that they intend to assail any one they will
roar and bray: before the wrack the sea and tempest will toss the ship to
and fro, Perfidie is the highest mischief in men's dealing.
and before it raynes the clouds will frown: but unfaithfulness seeks by
all subtle and deceitful means and fair shows to cover the intended
mischief, thereby to draw his allies into danger. There is nothing more
perilous then an enemy supposed a friend, for we are careful of our known
foes, with arms, regard and watch to prevent them. Also courage, unity, and
invincible strength asist us, but the enemy who is a supposed friend, Embden.
has means to mischieue us both night and day. Embden is our glass by which
we have seen what lurketh under false friendship.

Wise is he who by his countries harm is taught foresight. 10.
THe Spaniards peace are mere lies and deceit, It is impossible to make a
firm and true peace with the Spaniard.
a very Judas kiss wherewith they seek to betray us, yea even the peace which
Ioab gave Amasa, even so they intend with fair words to ruin us. Thou that
seek peace give us occasion to refuse thy peace, It appears by thy
reasons, though they are cunningly covered: for thou praisest thy prince to be
full of mercy, that his lap is open, his goodness ready. But thou say
presently after: If he were cruel and severe, it were no marvel, for he has
reason, being that we are cause of our own hurt. This is enough, we are
content: but sooner shall heaven and earth be joined, sooner shall water and
fire (through art) be mixed together, then I will enter into such peace with
thee, which would in no way be beneficial unto us.

He that sees another burn, let him beware of ^indging. 11.
The first proof. The use of princes.
THis I prove by the nature and use of many Princes: the old adventures and
experiences do also teach the same, that they should never enter into alliance
or make peace, unless we know it to be to their furtherance and profit, that
also they should not keep the same no longer (without brabling) then it
should be to their good and profit. Machiauell their master does also give
this precept, Machiauels doctrine. Julius Caesar.
that any promise which a prince might have made, he need not to hold, if he
find any damage thereby. Julius Caesar also used to say, if one may break a
promise or a right against any living, Lysander.
one may do it to govern or rule. This is also Lysanders opinion: with bables
(says he) one deceiues children, but those of ryper years and judgment with
oaths, either to revenge an injury, or to hinder and repulse the intent and
might of ones enemy.

Great trust gives the faithless means to work mischief. 12.
Julius Pope.
IVlius the second of that name Pope of Rome said that neither with Spaniards,
Dutch, or Wallons (whom he named Barbaros) he never did enter into peace, but
only to withdraw them back out of Italy. Maximillian Phillips grandfather
was also wont to say, Maximilian.
that he never made peace with the French but to revenge his former wrongs,
which he supposed to have received. Antiochus Illustris deceived Jerusalem by
false peace.
We find how Antiochus Illustris with a deceiptful intent made peace with the
Jews, and immediately after sent his General Apollonius, who utterly
destroyed and burned Jerusalem: the people he made captives, and constrained
them to forsake their God. Those which circumcised themselves, he crossed and
murdered, the women he strangled, and killed the children about their necks.

Mistrust is the best weapon against tyrants. 13.
ANtiochus Empator through the counsel of Lysias besieged Jerusalem, and
begirt the same with his troops: Antiochus Empator deceived the Jews by false
peace.
but perceiving he should not take the same by force, he sought to deceive them
with a false peace, makes an agreement with them, permits them to use their
laws and religion with their liberty, but having entered the city, he neither
respected oath nor honor, but caused all the walls and fortresses of the
City to be pulled down. Through his command was many a man drowned,
captiued, Alcimus to his own kindred.
and murdered. Alcimus did great mischief in murdering and strangling, when
he desired peace with his own lineage, he being of the Tribe of Aron, no harm
was suspected in him, in so much that this great trusting has been dear unto
the Jews. Tryphon. Jonathan.
Jonathan had never been betrayed by Tryphon, had he not given credit to his
words, but should rather have prepared himself to the combat with him.

Unwise is he who by peace expeecteth any good of the wicked. 14.
THat we have reason to fear can we farther explain, A more particular use of
Princes toward their subjects.
in that a mighty prince or potentate being displeased with his subjects; and
must favor them for some occasion, cannot wholly depose his wrath, but well
dissemble the same for a while: insomuch that when he finds opportunity there
is no punishment, no revenge, so unmerciful or cruel, which is badde enough
(in his opinion) for the former committed offense: and although he swear to
keep inuiolably the peace, yet ought one nevertheless to fear, because who
now keep their word so little as princes to their subjects, for they esteem
it a small matter, being we see they seldom make peace with them (being in
contention) unless they be thereto (by extreme need) compelled. Then
follows (as they esteem) that any oath taken through compulsion may be broken
when they will. And to verify this, we cannot find any example that a prince,
who though he have never so solemnly sworn truce.

But finding opportunity has not revenged his wrong. 15.
LOdouicus the second King of France, Jews the second.
was forced to conclude and make a peace with his subjects which had deposed
him, the which he solemnly swore, but yet afterward he made them all
subtly away. The Duke of Nemours, Burgundy, and Arminiac lost their lives,
yea he was so much bent to revenge, that he poisoned his own brother Charles:
A kings cruelty cuts all through, The king of Feza.
and nothing can resist the same. The King of Feza being lately besieged by his
younger brother was compelled to crave a peace, the communaltie obtained
reasonable conditions between both, whereunto they were sworn. The king being
escaped this danger, his brother coming to embrace him, he strangled him and
caused him to be cast out of the window. Many one thinks himself secure when
he is in most danger.

Under the greenest grass lurks the most venomous snake. 16.
Henry the 6.
HEnry the sixth of that name King of England, was forced to make an agreement
with Rychard Duke of York, whereunto he firmly swore and promised the said
Richard and his heirs the succession of the crown after his death, but
notwithstanding all that, he was afterward slain in the field by the
kings procurement. Anthonius Caracalla.
Anthonius Caracalla in revenge of some flout or mockery done to him, by
subtle practices put to death all the youth of Alexandria in a place where
they were assembled, not doubting of any such mischief. Ferdinandus of Arragon
also broke his oath, Ferdinandus.
and promise done unto his nobles who had conspired against him, for he caused
them all secretly to be made away, although notwithstanding diverse Princes
were as sureties unto the said promise.

It is bad going as a guest under sureties into a Lions den. 17.
THe mercy which we are to expect, should 100. years after the day be bemoaned
by our successors, An especial cause why of the Spaniardes we expect neither
pardon, nor oblivion of our factes.
for they esteem us worse then Jews, heathens, or Turks, yea we are all
condemned to lose both our lives and goods, for we have rent the yoke of the
tyrant from our necks, and have openly taken arms against him, his false
idolatry we have exiled, and wholly changed the same according to the
scriptures: renounced the king, and proclaimed him an enemy, as the cruel
Spanish brood which has sworn our spoil: against the Inquisition no means
have been spared, and all done what was possible to smother their cruelty.
We have chosen other Potentates, this is treason to his Majesty in the
highest degree: wherefore we assure our selves that all hope of mercy is lost,
and that thou seek to deceive us with thy sweet words.

He that belieues easily, is cause of his own harm. 18.
WHat belief or faith ought to be held unto them who have sinned so grossly, An
example of his deeds and nature, Granada.
what pardon we should have (God be praised) we know it is a mockery yt thou
tellest us our offenses shall be pardoned, by them who are more inclined to
revenge then pardon: we remember how pitifully Granada was used, the
inhabitants exiled, and the country planted with Castilians, their goods
confiscated and themselves made slaves, going with a mark burnt in their
foreheades. Arragon.
Also how he handled Aragon against the laws and privileges of the same
whereunto he was sworn, he condemns the right, slays it as a foe, as soon
as he had got the land in his possession: mark but the couenantes whereunto
the country had sworn him, and how they were performed to many a ones grief:
he that will not learn by all these examples, let him prepare himself to die
or to be made a slave.

A reuengefull heart respects not honor nor oath to have his will. 19.
HE that most will seek to know the kings kind, let him see what servants he
uses, and let him call their valiant deeds to mind, and what commissioners of
his have been in this country, Granuelle, Vergas, Roda, and the Duke D'Alba
their master in cruelty: Don Ian with Escouedo, and others which were not to
be glutted with blood, and were (without faith, truth, or honor) prompt to
spoil, rob, burn and destroy. Don Ian said that a king were fitter to
inherit woods, trees mountains, beasts, water or other senseless things, then
to be Lord of a mighty country, wherein he should suffer so much as one
rebel, or any one of contrary religion, which at his pleasure he might not
put to death. The Marquisse of Kisbrooke had rather flowen (with his) to the
Devil then to leave persecuting the Heretics: that they had such intents they
were not ashamed to show not only in this country, but through all the world.

The man does purpose, but God does dispose. 20.
THe West Indians much commend the Spaniard, in (...) it appears by the
country, which was wont like an Ant (...) to abound in people, which now by
the Spaniards bloody hands are all murdered, falling on them without reason
or occasion: within these few years they strangled and murdered above 180.
times hundredth thousand living souls. In Castile are not by the thousand part
so many bloodthirstie roagues, as in the land guiltless have been smothered:
who ever heard of more horrible cruelty, no tongue so learned that can fully
set forth the same. He that desires to know further hereof, let him read
Bartolomeus de las Casas, who writes that they have rent ye infants from the
breasts of their mothers, taking them by the legs dashed out their brains
against the stones, cut in pieces and thrown to the dogs: many hundrethes
have been by the dogs devoured, many roasted, sodde, and inhumanely devoured.

The commemoration hereof would wound a stony heart. 21.
IF yet thy king esteem his honor above revenge, yet in his religion he will
never budge, His religion.
which concludes (as by the counsel of Constance was decreede, whereon we
ought to consider) that one needs not keep any oath unto Heretics: this
gives us occasion enough to mistrust, for though the king had sworn unto us a
thousand oaths, An. 1080.
when it pleases the Pope (on whom more then on God they trust) he may be
discharged of his oath. Pope Gregory the 7. was the first that made this law
against the Emperor Henry the fourth, who displeasing him, he put him in the
banne, The Bishops of M^nts and Cullin.
and egged and incited Rodolphus of Swaben against him, after he had given him
a dispensation of the oath, which the said Rodolph had done to the Emperor.
But so it happened yt in the conflict Rodolphus lost his right hand, wherefore
he said unto the Bishops his counsaylors: Lo there Gods just punishment we not
respected. There lies now the hand which swore homage unto Henry my true Lord.

It is lost labor to seek to deceive God. 22.
Tom. 3. Consil. fol. 860.
THe counsel of Constance not only concluded, to keep no faith unto
Heretics, but moreover constrained and commanded, to break, rent and
annullate the sworn oath. It appears by the Emperor Sygismundus who was
very loath so shamefully to break his oath, done to the king Laodislaus,
Johannes Hus Ieronimus de Praga. Eccius in Lutherum, counsels the Emperor to
break his oath in putting the^ to death.
Hus and Prage contrary to and against his safeconduct were thrown in the
fire. Eccius practiced also to use those tricks against Luther in Worms as
above is said, maintaining these decrees very stoutly to the Emperors
prejudice, that he should retire his given conducte, yea more that he was
bound to do it by the councles decree, if he would be reputed a true son unto
the holy Church. The Spanyard is named thus, as in pardons are seen, he being
very obedient to work after that order.

One refraines often from evil through diligent consideration. 23.
BY this Constantish and holy fathers decree, Iulianus,
was the Cardinal Iulianus sent into Hungary to give knowledge unto Johannes
Huniades that he might break the truce between the Turks: from which thing he
would feign have refrained as unlawful, for he resisted the same a great
while, but was by the Council forced, wherefore he refused the Turkish peace.
The Hungarians began the wars very stoutly: but the Turks greatly displeased
with that faithless deed, assembled a mighty host, with which they fell in
Hungary like hungry Wolves, beating all the Christians wholly out of the field.
There died the Cardinal and Laodislao: here it appeared that unto them, and
not unto God their faithless behavior is a pleasure, for he that brake the
sworn truce, trusting on his strength in stead of hoped victory they had a
shameful discomfiture.

Untruth and pride never remain unpunished. 24.
SEcondly this is a Maxim of the Papal doctrine that one may do evil if good
proceed thereof, The second part of his religion. Jesuits.
especially if it be to ye furtherance of the holy Church, and enterprised to
that end, the Jesuits those murderers of Princes, say and affirm, that one
may bereave kings, princes, and Lords of their lives, dissemble any manner of
way to deceive the Heretics, and that any evil is good, so it proceed of a
good intent. Thirdly the Popes authority.
Thirdly such might is given to the Pope, that he can bind and unbind any
thing which is in the compass of the world, that is, he may cast down or
raise Empires and kingdoms, and discharge or keep oaths: the Pope is all
above all, he may always above and against right do what he will: he has
the right of the king of kings, for no man how great soever may say, The Canon.
why do thou so.

The Pope (with you) is no man, but a God on earth. 25.
The faithless never wants occasion.
FInally the perfidious (when he espies opportunity to revenge his wrongs)
whereunto they are generally addicted, wantes no excuses and occasions to
break his oath. They will keep their oaths in small matters, to the end,
that when time serves, they may through their dissimulations work their will
the better: this was showed unto Scipio Africanus by Fabius, saying did thou
not once trust to Syphacius, The counsel of Fabius.
and Numidis, let it be a warning unto thee not to be deceived again: for the
trothlesse keeps his word and oath in small things, thereby the better to
attain the good opinions of every one, by the which he may with less peril
and more profit work his treason. He then that refuses Gods manifest aid
against the sword, must be seen to be deceived with the Olive branch and
fair show of peace.

Once deceived one has the more cause always to mistrust his foe. 26.
OVt of these above written examples and reasons, is to be perceived, that
Holland and her allies are well informed and resolved not to enter into peace
so unadvisedly with the proud Spaniard, but continually mistrust his wonted
treachery; the more having considered that many nations have been through
their easy believing and too much trusting deceived, and almost spoiled:
others to the contrary, mistrusting, and by their diligent foresight have
eschued their approaching perilles, preserved their liberty, and defended their
common wealth: it is bad to stand at another mercy, and especially of his
enemies who^ one has injured Magdenburge, and Rochel, Magdenburge Rochell.
chose rather to dye in the desence of their liberty, then to trust to those
which are wicked by nature, whereby they have preserved themselves, who else
were now overthrown.

Through stedfastnes the Crown of victory is won. 27.
THe Admiral of France had he not rejected the many aduertisementes and
counsels given him, The Admiral of France trusting to the many oaths of the
king was with many thousands pitifully murdered. Parthes Artabanus.
he had not been so pitifully murdered: the dissimulations of Charles the 9.
had not been so hurtful unto him: at Paris had not happened such a massacre
where the streets were strawed with murdered bodies of 10000. Protestants,
besides many thousands in other Cities: Who would not abhor such cruelty,
and rather choose an honorable war, before such treacherous agreements. Had
Artabanus not put too much confidence in his enemy, the Parthians had not
been by Bascianus Caracalla so cruelly murdered, had he not given consent to
the match of his daughter, he had protected the people from that destruction
for when Caracalla more like an enemy then a friend, with his men came for his
bryde, the Parthians coming in amiable sort, weaponlesse to receive him, he
in a moment fell with his men upon them, Artabanus hardly escaped, he saw his
people massacred.

The unexperienced must often times learn to their damage. 28.
THe plagues which thou preposest unto us, which thou say fell upon these
which scorn peace, we neither expect nor fear the^, because that the estates
nor causes of such as thou namest are not to be compared to ours, the example
which thou show us of Julius Caesar, is without sense, and not any way to
the purpose; Julius Caesar. Example showing also that the greatest potentates
ought to keep themselves within their own limmits, and to know God.
for Caesar sought (through ambition) to be chief of Rome, thereby to bercaue
them of their former liberty, he sought thereby to transport (at his pleasure)
the armies into Italy, to bring his paternitie to slavery, yet in the end he
bought it with his life, wherefore the example is in our behalf, and shows us
in that as Julius Caesar bought his paternity in slavery: even so has done the
king of Spain, seeking to suppress these countries, yet God punishes his
pride, by that little Province which he little doubted, insomuch that his
punishment is no less then Caesar's.

As the deed is so deserves it like punishment. 29.
Carthage.
CArthage did often make peace with Rome: but they broke it again, setting
aside al honor and oaths, whereat the Romans being justly moved, because
they esteemed their oath so much, and yet were used contrarily, they made
toward Carthage with all their powers, and recompensed them for their
treachery: the deed deserved no less, for falsenesse and perjury are commonly
requited with loss, and that thou comparest us unto Mithridates, that has no
resemblance, neither any way Mithridates intendes to subvert Asia and Europe
under his subjection: Mithridates.
murders many Romans, yea will ouer^^^ow Rome it self, for which cause the
Romans with a great host resisted him, vanquished and punished him
accordingly, Phillip (like Mithridates) meant to ouerrunne all the earth, and
become a Monarche, shall if it please God find like fare,

For they that covet all, commonly loose all. 30.
Iugurtha.
EVen as Iugurth wrongfully ruled over the Numedians, so have Phillips
Predicessors against all right tyranized over many kingdoms, as Cicilia,
Naples, the Indies and such like, but they shall yet with right, withdraw
themselves from him, yea through Gods just judgment rise up all against him,
as we with reason have abandoned him, for as it is won so it will thrive.

Sehon.
As the Israelites desired Sehon to let them pass peaceably, and quietly
through his land, which he refusing, the Israelites had good occasion to fall on
him and destroy him even so have we only sought as obedient subjects
according to our paternall right to enjoy our liberty, this not only is
refused, but also those which sued for the same, and many others were slain:
This unmeasurable cruelty moves and compels us to resist and hate the Spanish
brood.

It is lawful to resist force, when necessity constraines. 31
Paris.
PAris most trecherously bereaved Menelaus of Helena his dear wife, who first
in friendship was by the Grecians asked again, but the denial incited them to
anger in such sort, that they assembled a mighty host, and finally the Trojans
as they deserved were ruined: so also the king of Spain shall not easily
clear himself from these countries, because he has ravished our Helen, which
is our liberty, the which to recover, we will not fear to adventure our lives
and living, until the last drop of our blood, for who would live content
being bereaved of so sweet a blessing, and to live in bondage of life and
conscience? that is no ways our intent nor desire, God through his mercy will
strengthen us all in our pretenses.

It is honorable to love liberty above life. 32
IT is not in our power; nor we may not make any covenant nor peace with our
Prince, since you name our war a causeless rebellion, we ought therefore
the^ belike (as obedient subjects) to cease the war, to render al our
advantage, forsake al our right, acknowledge our Superiors again, set our
selves in the first estate, if so be we will not taste the punishment due to
rebels, we must couch to his command, return to our old customs, deliver up
all the land, give our Prince power to do and leave at his pleasure, he is our
superior, our war is meare wantonness and pride, which we to our power
maintain stoutelie and without license, what all this would be we have been
taught by the Gallows, sword, water and fire, for in the time of obedience
those cruelties were used, above 80000. have in the Netherlandes been put to
death byforme of justice, only accused of Heresy.

This thou namest peace, but it is a miserable slavery. 33.
ANd that our war is no rebellion, nor madness, we manifest clearly with
cittizenlike and godly laws, we acknowledge a Lord, but none that shall rule
over us in such sort, that at his pleasure he shall make us slaves, except he
can show and prove that our liberty may be hindered and subverted to slavery
at the command of thy king: but this is manifest, the people choose a Prince:
but he swears first at his crowning, to be unto them, their laws and
liberties an eternal defendor, and to maintain them and augment them with all
his might, then swears the people in recompense of his promise to be true to
him (so far forth he keep his oath and word) he then that preferres one to
an estate is more to be esteemed, then he that is preferred, although this
will seem ridiculous to the flatterers, also one which is exalted to some
estate believes for sure that he that has raised him has the power in his
misdemeanor to pull him down again.

He that on condition is raised, may with condition be abased 34.
THat the king of Spain has not conquered us with the sword (but that he was
made Earl upon condition, we can easily prove, the order of electing or
crowning does show the same: for he swore first to us, and afterward we to
him, we also see the manner of the swearing in Arragon when they elect any one
to the kingly estate, we have also chosen thee for our Lord and king on
condition, Trala^s.
that thou should keep inuiolably our rightes and privileges otherwise
not. Traianus is also of this mind, when he puts the sword in the hands of
his cheifest ruler, saying, hold and justly use this thy geuensworde, if in
case I am valiant and true against my enemies in the field, but if otherwise,
use it against me with all force, hereby follow that when a Prince swears, and
then goes from his word, that as then the oath of the subjects is also of no
worth, but may justly compel and force the Prince to do justice.

He that will be truly dealt with, must first be true himself. 35.
THe Prince that is sworn to the countries privileges to keep and defend
them, not to diminish but to augment the^, and that afterward by all subtle
and deceitful means, will spoil the country of the same: may he not justly
be declared a Periure of all his subjects, and deposed from his rule, without
that the same be accounted rebellion, and especially since that our
Predicessors in their privileges concluded (necessity excepted) never to
resist their Princes actions, all the while they were just true and good,
keeping their oath, and defended us as they ought, all that while we have
obeyed them with life and goods. as much as any people on earth. The history
of Carolus Audax sufficiently shows the same, ^aro^s Audax.
how true and willing his subjects were, sending him in diverse wars great
assistances of their free will, and how he was esteemed and loved of little
and great.

It is more security for a Prince to be loved then feared. 36:
WHen Kings will rule over consciences and minds, and will be obayed, against
Gods laws in such respect, one may with all godly and worldly right, withstand
them, without therefore using any rebellion, whether it be right in Gods sight
to obey you rather then God judge you, Act. 4. v. 19.
this appeared also in the Hebrew midwiues, which in the killing of the babes
did not effect the kings command, Exodus 1. v. 17.
Gods mighty hand preserved Sydrach, Misach, and Abednago, Daniel 3. v. 28.
Dan. 6. v. 16.
from the scorching flames of fire, because they spurned at the kings command,
and trusted in him. And Daniell refusing to offer unto Bell was cast into the
Lions den, from the which by Gods miraculous power he was saved. Mathias with
his 5. Brethren rejected the kings command, nay more raised an army against
him, God blessed their war, praised and furthered their pretense, and through
his help they recovered their freedom.

Against tyranny all God-fearing people may fight. 37.
SInce this our Prince has sought to use us not as good subjects but as
vanquished slaves, nor yet would not cease his persecutions, by no good
persuasions, nor grant liberty of conscience, but moreover such as sued for
it, has he condemned as Traitors, and put them to death, the country being
moved, urged, and forced, through extreme necessity, which according to her
privileges was lawful, to procure means to disturb, and hinder such like
tyranny, to live in her wonted liberty, has not of any desire of gain, nor
treachery, but of mere need and necessity exposed her self to the war,
therein following the example of many nations, the which had received nothing
so much injury as we, yet have they exiled and driven their Princes away,
neither were they reputed rebels, nor yet received any damage thereby.

He does no body wrong who defendes his own right. 38.
Edward the second Edward ^e second
Englandes king through bad counsel puts certain of his Barons to death,
without either reason or lawful cause: but the other Pears of the land moved
by that cruelty assembled together an host of men, took him prisoner, and
declared him unworthy, Christern. Tarquinius Superbus. Caius Caligula Nero.
Domitianus C^mmodus Maximus.
Christern of Denmark was imprisoned after that he was e^led, and Tarquinius
Superbus for his cruelty was deposed by the Romans the which he had plagued,
and altered their government, insomuch that they displeased them. Caius
Caligula a monstrous tyrant, was also therefore murdered by the Romans: Nero
for his filthy and horrible factes was declared a foe, and his life persecuted,
and Domitianus, Commodus, Maximus, and more, others of like cruelty were used
accordingly, for they that seek the spoil of the commonwealth, are always
seen to buy it dear.

No Tyrant that ever could escape Gods punishment. 39.
BEing then that our war is no rebellion, as manifestly appears, and
sufficiently proved by true examples, and infallible arguments, thou do us
great wrong to compare us to rebellious Absolon, or to the wicked Israelites:
for no comparison can be made of it, we are in no wise to stand in fear of ye
punishment, which rebels have endured, but since we put our trust in the
almighty God, we will continually expect a good issue of our just quarrel
although thou seek through thy threats to quench our courages, vanting of
thy masters Lyonly teeth, with all his forces, steadfastly trusting on our God,
thy threats we let fly, remaining coniunctly in our intent, esteeming far
better to have just war, then a dissembled peace.

Who so trusts on Gods aid, is never put to shame. 40.
(...)
IT seems that thou have learned the bragging of thy master Rapsace, who also
cried, wherein do thou rely, wherein do thou trust? but what God did, and
commanded in the next chapter, thou have not read or perhaps but badly
remembered: he shall not enter the city, nor endamage the same, for I will
defend and keep it, (...)
for my servant David's sake who trusted in me, I will protect her against the
tyrants pretenses, Baldeus also boasted before Leidiz, that one should sooner
touch the stars then the city be rescued, but God displeased at this
blasphemy sent them unnatural floodes, whereby his pretense was disturbed.
Thou that through false peace seek to bring us in thy net consider the
matter: for if thou art not blinded through thy wilfulnes, thou must of force
confess that our resistance which thou see is no humane work.

God favors our case, for the defense of his Christ. 41
Assure thy self that I trust not so much on the help of my neighbores and
allies, as on the just and upright dealing which we daily use: for when with
diligent care I consider the forepassed, and balance the issue thereof, it
gives me a great cause of hope, that this will end well, and that I shall want
no means, while I feel Gods hand, his bounty, aid, and blessing which are
the infallablest tokens of a good issue of the unsteadfastness thereby, thou
make a great discourse, that it hanges in no men's hands, and that it is
daily seen, but I know they are steadfast, and never deceived any, except he
displeased God through our great sin: I trust and believe assuredly that
they are bound to me, as long as I shall with zeal prosecute this just cause,
and will through Gods mercy, and in spite of the Spaniarde as a young bud
flourish, which thou with all thy force shall not hinder.

Gods blessing will dwell always fast with the God-fearing. 42.
ANd finally when thou come forth with thy Princes power, name him with a
common name, because thou know not thy right: yet for reasons to your
advantage, do not name him: nevertheless we perceive thy deceit cunningly
cloaked there under, as the Ass of Cuma covered with the Lions skin: but
through his long cares he was known: so thou also with thy peace, masked with
a Foxes skin: we perceive thy intent: for thou show thy master in form
of a Lion, of whom we fear to be deceived in the end: because we see many
footesteppes inward: but none outward, whereby is seen his malice is not
only to us: but also to them that never injured him, out of thy own words we
construe his meaning, and what a happy peace we should have: we are Lambs,
thy Lord a Lion, those two kinds never agree, besides we are nations of diverse
humors.

Contrary humors do quickly break unity. 43
IF then you, our neighbores, of the seduced Provinces, so much and so
seruentlie desire peace, the way is open, a good s^ peace is at hand, which
thou now may attain, in following our good counsel, it being impossible
for you to continue in Peace when you should be contracted unto God with us:
and the proud Spaniarde, open thy eyes, know thy enemy, when thou may drive
him away, which through Gods help and thy neighbores, may easily and in short
space be effected, then peace will yield us traffic, welfare, and plenty, the
peace shall be sure without false show, the more since we are a nation of one
kind and condition, who also though to their damage keep their oath and
respect their honors, endeavor thou to do this rid thy self from the
Spanish venime, trust on Gods mercy, and not on thy kings great Forces.

He that puts his trust in God, never comes to shame. 44.
IF not, then you Batauians, which have undertaken the defense of your
privileges, let not the fear of death daunt your invincible courages you shall
not only thereby recover infinite praise, but also hereafter an eternal life:
but if you faint, and will seek to shun the perils, you bring your selves
and your successors in great disquietnesse: wherefore then take courage, and
for the defense of thy patrimony (in recompense that she has nourished thee)
and for your liberty spare neither life nor goods, let not any ways the desire
of this fickle life expel the wonted courages from your hearts, let not the
praise and renown of the Battauians) which hitherto has continued, any way be
blemished nor diminished, although dangers are at hand, show that this meaning
is deeply imprinted in your hearts.

Far better to endure a war that should never cease, then to be deceived
by a false peace. FINIS.

