The fourth of September.

NEWS FROM SUNDRY PLACES, BOTH FOREIGN AND DOMESTIQVE.

From Venice, Rome, Spain, France, Naples, the Palatinate, and the
Low Countries.

A RELATION OF COUNT MANSFEILDS Progress, (his battle with Gonsalo in his
passage) till his arrival at Breda, with the Duke of Brunswicke his valiant
pursuit of Gonsalo, (being wounded) and the slaughter of 500. of his men, and
the taking of certain Wagons, and Gonsaloes own Coach.

Whereunto is added, A TRVE AND CERTAIN REPORT, OF THE LAMENTABLE SHIPWRECK
which happened at Plimoth in Devonshire, on Monday the 19th. of August last past,
with other great harm done elsewhere, by lightning and thunder on the same day.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Sign of the Pyde Bull, at Saint Austins Gate. 1622.



FROM VENICE THE thirtieth of July, 1622.
THey write from Millane that the Spanish soldiers from diverse places of that
State, were commanded to meet at a certain rendeuou's, whereupon many of them
were instantly charged to march toward Bormio, to oppose themselves against
the Grisons, a troop of them being seen at Chiavenna intending to take a
Spanish Post, but he was succored by a 150 Musketteeres, of the company of
Captain John Serbelliona, which skirmishing with the Grisons aforesaid, slew
14 of them and lost but five of their own.

They had news that the Grisons having invaded the higher Aguedina, many of
them had besieged the Fort of Sancta Maria, and the rest making their
excursions upon the Frontiers of the County of Tyroll, drove great store of
cattle from thence, into their own territories.

And that there were daily held private consultations, touching the departure
of the Duke of Feria, (Governor of Millane) toward Veltolina: as likewise
that his Excellency having notice that from the said Veltolinat were fled and
yet daily did fly about 60 soldiers at a time, and that (as they say) both for
want of victuals and pay, he had given notice by a Proclamation that both
Spaniards and Italians that here before abandoned the service of the king of
Spain, under whatsoever pretext or color, should have their pardon, returning
into the same within the space of the next ensuing 15 days after the
Proclamation. And those that came not in at the prefixed time, shall be
banished and condemned to be hanged, and every officer as well of lustice as
War shall be authorized both to take and to kill them, not exempting them
that were fled themselves, and afterward reconciled.

That the Count di Monterei being there arrived, was royally lodged and
entertained, at the charges of the said Governor: And going to view the Castle,
the Ordnance was at his approach bravely discharged: As soon as he shall have
visited all the principal places of this city, he intends to go on with his
journey for Spain.

That the Grisons went from Town to Town, to confirm their new established
union at Coyra.

And that upon the confines of the Canton of SinZ, the Catholic Suissers which
have beset the passages to stop the troops of their Enemies, had incountred
one another, so that many of both sides were slain.

By particular Letters from Veltolina, we understand that the 26. of July 30
companies of Grisons and Swissers, arrived in the territory of Chiavenna, and
assaulting suddenly the Fort raised by the Spaniards (about a league distant
from the Town aforesaid) after they had killed seven sentinels of the Spanish
Garrison before they were aware of them, they took it presently, and having put
in the same 2000 men for Garrison, they sat down before Chiavenna and gave
two assaults to the town, but were repulsed, seeing that a little before their
coming, 9. companies of foot, and 3 troops of horse were received in the
town. And that upon the same day arrived at Bormio, 130 Mule asses with
Matches and Gunpowder, which were sent from Millane for the service of the king
of Spain. As likewise that six Citizens of Berganio were taken prisoners in
the Veltolina, intending to buy wine.

From Lions we hear, that the French King had sent Monsieur de Clandibront
toward Piemonte, to persuade the Duke of Sauoy (as they said) to desist of his
design and enterprise upon Momferat.

From Genua is advised, that the said Commonwealth having promised unto the
Catholic King 4. Galleys (to assist his other in the safe keeping of the
coasts of Spain) took order to send them thither.

From Vienna they write that the Diet at Odenburgh in Hungary, went well on in
the behalf of the Emperor. But that there was a rumor that Bethlem Gabor
leauied new forces, none knowing there to what purpose. The Marquess Gonzaga
is not dead as we were informed lately, but in good health and well disposed.

From Prague.
FRom Norinberg we hear, that through the Bishopric of Bambergh, and the
Marquisat of Anspach were passed 6000 Cossacks, 1000 Hungarians, 1000 of the
Regiment of the late deceased Dampiere, as many of the Walstaynish Regiment,
1000 Saxons, and 1000 of the Holstaynish Regiment, being all on horse, and sent
to the Palatinate.

From Rome the 23. of July.
LAst Sunday went the Pope to the Church of Saint Paulino, near unto the
barefooted and reformed Carmeliton Fathers, and said there a still or silent
Mass, in the presence of twenty Cardinals, besides two Ambassadors, one of the
Emperors, and the other of the States of Venice, and afterward they sung Te
Deum Laudamus, to give his sacred majesty thanks for the victory obtained by
the Bauarian Camp, and their Catholic league against the Bishop of Alberstadt.

The Signior Rinaldo Ariosti who attended the Cardinal Goradino in his
Chamber, is made by the Cardinal Lodovisio, great Master of his horse, in the
place of Signior Philippo Malucci, who was returned into his own Country.

Signiar Anastasio Chianderoti of Terni is made a Collonell at Ferara, where
he was General before, which place was now taken from him.

The Prince of Saint Gregory, extraordinary Ambassador of the Duke of Parma,
had wednesday last audience by the Pope, and took his leave to return to his
own Principality and Lands, and from thence to the Duke dome of Parma.

The Bishop of Monte Marana in the kingdom of Naples who was come here to be
examined and questioned, is lately deceased.

Thursday last about the evening arrived here the Auditor of Monsieur Donabeto,
Vice legate of that State, but we can not learn the occasion which moved him to
the same: And it is related that at his departure the Marquess of Maletefia
(General of the Camp) was very sick.

There was of late a dissension risen betwixt the Viceroy of Naples, and the
Prior Aldobrandino, General of the Galleys of the Pope, which happened by a fray
or tumult, betwixt the Spanish watch, and some of his, who seeing that one of
the Galleys was taken prisoner; they rescued him again. Whereupon the Counsel
of state being called, it was presently ordered, that as many as could be
gotten of them should be clapped up.

And happening afterward that a Captain and thirty six soldiers, were taken and
put in the prison within the Castle, three Sicilians had the Stroppa de Corda,
and were condemned for ten years upon the Galleys, but were presently within
the space of few days dismis'd with the rest by a warrant of the Viceroy, and
went to their Galleys, sailing soon after their relaxation to Messina.

But there was a Post dispatched from hence, with a commission to cause them to
return instantly to Civita Vecchia: Seeing they were informed here, that this
year the Turkish Galleys of Biserta were not able to set forth, all their
slaves and great store of their soldiers being dead, whole Barbary being
likewise mightily invaded with the plague: And seeing the Turks were not to
bring any Navy this year at Sea, it should not be necessary to send any from
Sicilia.

Here is arrived the Persian Ambassador coming lately from Spain.

The Copy of a Letter from Brussels, dated the 23 of Aug. concerning the
Progress and Resolution of Count Mansfield, since his being in Lorraine. With
his last Conflict and Victory with Gonsalo, the 19. of Aug. in Brabant.
SIr, I know you cannot be ignorant of the various reports spread abroad
(throughout all these parts of Christendom) of Count Mansfields being for
these two months past: Some affirming that he is very weak; others, that he
is very strong: some, that he should be entertained by the French King, and
that he should be fallen off from the Duke of Brunswicke, upon a breach betwixt
them; and that there should be a mutiny in their Army, whereupon they should
be utterly dispersed.

Count Mansfield being passed through Loraine, (where he paid for what he
took, and commanded his Soldiers to forbear doing any wrong, or taking any
thing from any of the Duke of Loraines Subjects; notwithstanding, at a place or
two his Soldiers offered some violence.) ariuing in Champaigne, made his
Randeuow upon the Frontier thereof, almost for this two months. In the mean
time the French King made great preparation, as fearing lest he should invade
his Country: but upon trial he found him to come not as an enemy, but as one
who intended to do him service, and did thereupon give command to Duke
Deniuers to treat with the said C. Mansfield upon certain Articles or
propositions, namely, on the Kings behalf: Deniuers propounded unto him both
honors and profits, as that he would make him a Marshall of France, and a
General of certain forces which he would send for the recovery of the
Valtoline; that he would give him 200000. Crowns in hand, and 20000. Crowns
per annum. Mansfield on the other side was to bring to the Kings service of his
Army 6000. foot, and 2000. Horse, which should presently receive pay of his
Majesty. But Mansfield having a farther reach (as by the sequel appears)
intends nothing else by the said treaty, but to get himself more advantage,
and to prevent suspicion in the matters which he directly intended, namely, for
the joining with the Hollanders: For being at a town called Mosoon, on the
Frontiers of France, he gave out of purpose that Brunswicke and he were fallen
out, and that he was fallen from the said Duke of Brunswicke: and had secured
himself in the strong Town of Mosoon, and would join with the French King;
by which policy, the way to Brabant was the more secure, and his enemy Gonsalo
made the less haste after him: For this treaty of his with the French King,
did so amaze his enemies that they knew no other but that he would have
concluded with him, on the contrary you shall understand, about the 16 day of
this month, in the night (having before selected out 6000. of his best horse,
whereof 2. thousand are Carabins or light horse, and 3000. special footmen:
which said foot he likewise provided horse for the most part of them) marched
away from Mosoon unexpected, toward Mouns in Henalt, where he arrived the 18 of
this month near the River of the Mozel with the D. of Brunswick, leaving behind
8000. foot, and 1000. horse, with all his Canon, and the most part of their
baggage to the command of the Duke of Bulloin, and those of the religion. On
the way before they came to Mouns, they burnt and pillaged diverse villages, and
sacked two rich Monasteries in the Archdutches dominions.

From Brussels.
IT is likewise advertised by other Letters on Saturday last, that they were
come to a Castle called Montemaria on the borders of Brabant, and that coming
through Henalt the people of the Country made all the powers they could on the
sudden to resist them; those which resisted him were by the Mansfieldians put
to the sword, a great number of them, and the rest forced to fly for their
lives.

That Cordua with 8000. foot and 2000. horse, most being Spaniards and Italians
do follow them, but are not within two days journey of them: Besides, they
cannot march half so far in a day as Mansfield does with his horse, being
quit of his Canon and Baggage. Gonsalo had thought to have waylaid his passage
through Henalt, by joining his ten thousand old Soldiers which those of the
Country, had not Mansfield dealt the more politiquely in the business; as by
this following Letter may appear.

The Letter.
Dear and much respected friend, all the News that I have to send you, is
this, That Count Mansfield is come down into Brabant, and burns and spoyleth
the country, marching his Army which consists of 6000. horse, and 3000.
Musquiters on horseback, for the speedy dispatching of his business.

The manner of his fight is thus; The tenth man of the Musquiteers, holding the
horse of the rest, the rest set themselves in battle: the 6000 horsemen first
gives the assault, and the footmen powder upon them with their Musquiteers,
whilst the horsemen wheel about and come in again: and then if there be need,
the Musquiteers return again for their succor: if otherwise the business be
dispatched, they all on horse back get them gone with the prey that they
devour and spoil, no army of foot being able to do any thing against them:
and Spinola with all his horse being not able to make such an army.

Brunswicke comes slowly forward with a great army; Mansfield having made way
in removing the Obstacles for his safe passage: they are within 6. Leagues of
Brussels.

He that reported this, says he saw Mansfield with his own eyes, being a
Gentleman that came from the Palatinat.

A LAMENTABLE RElation of a great and fearful storm and Tempest, of Wind,
Thunder and Lightning, Which happened in Deuon and Somersetshire on Sunday and
Monday the 18. and 19. day of August last.
TO collect out of Stories the many and wonderful judgments of God from time
to time showed and executed upon the sons of men, is a labor beyond my
purpose at this time to undertake, and therefore I will only relate unto you a
story of a late wonderful and lamentable accident, which happened in
Devonshire, and there in chiefly of a shipwreck in Catwater rode by Plymouth,
on Sunday night and Monday morning the 18. and 19. of August last. There being
floting in the Rode of Catwater diverse ships, some newly arrived, others bound
out for several places; among the rest, two Merchants ships hired by Mounseur
Sabesa to transport certain men for Rochell, both which ships being preparing,
and partly provided of their men, the one was cast away with other ships and
barks riding in the said Rode aforesaid: The other only buldge. But before
this storm arose, I will not omit to set down a strange accident which
happened in one of the ships, there being in her both Mariners and Soldiers.
About some three days before the storm, one man in her seeming to be
frantic or sick of some violent disease, required leave to go a shore, for
his time was come and he must away. The Captain notwithstanding would not
suffer him; insomuch that the fellow said, If they would not let him go it
would be the worse for them all; for, said he, do you not see two devils
yonder, and pointed with his finger; nay, said he, there will come three more
anon. They notwithstanding caused him to be bound and put in the strongest hold
of the ship, under hatches, the hatches being close kept down: but about the
evening when they were at prayers, he came up and walked on the hatches a
while, whereat they were much amazed, till on a sudden he leaped over board,
and after him seemed to leap a thing like a great mastiffe dog; whereupon did
arise such a tempestuous storm of wind, thunder, and lightning, that the ship
wherein this miserable wretch was, left her anckers, and was split on the
Rocks, and all her men except about 8. were cast away; some of them being cast
up upon the rocks, and a proper Gentleman amongst the rest, was for certain
days standing upright betwixt two rocks, as though he were alive, and
impossible to be got out unless the rocks be beaten away. In the said rode
were likewise cast away seven other Ships and Barks, one whereof was driven with
the violence of the storm, upon the top of a hie rock, not much impaired, so
strangely that it is thought a thing impossible it should come there, and is as
impossible to be gotten off again without spoiling, being driven so far
from the water: In this storm is reported to be lost out of these 8. ships
300. men, besides the Ships and goods. At the same time in diverse other places
besides, were many ships cast away, so that it is thought the loss by
shipwreck in the west parts of England is 40. or 50000. pounds.

Now concerning the hurt done by land, by thunder and lightning the same time
through Devonshire and Summersetshire; in many places whole fields of Corn
blasted, stackes of Corn blasted and scorched, nay the violence of the wind
and thunder was such, that is scatttered and dispersed the Corn as if it had
been sown again, and as if God would not suffer us to reap the fruits of
the earth, but would scatter it again, nay out of the ears, as if the flayle
had been upon it. Let us compare the mildew and blasting sent upon our fields
in general, in the prime of our hope, before our harvest, and now in harvest
(upon that little remainder) with this sudden judgment of wind and lightning,
and consider whether we have not cause to repent and to fear lest God may
punish us in greater measure hereafter.

From the Hage the 18. of August.
That his Excellency the Prince of Orange has prepared Stables and all other
provision for 8000. horse at Breda, against the coming of Brunswicke and
Mansfield, and has appointed his brother Count Henry 6000. chosen foot, and
1500. special horse, to make al speed by marching Night and Day till he meet
and be joined with the Duke of Brvnswicke and Count Mansfield, the better to
encounter with Spinola or Gonzales forces.

It is certain that Mansfield, Brunswicke, and Gonzalo have met, but none as
yet can truly report any particulars, whether has had the greater loss, but
howsoever Mansfield is Joined with the Prince of Orange at Breda.

That Heidelbergh, Mainbeim, and Franckendale, in regard of the Country being
wasted, and through fear of want of Victuals within the Towns and doubting
least the Enemy Monsieur Tilly (who lies near them with 20000. men besides
4000. Cossackes, Polackes, and Hungarian Horsemen) should besiege them again,
are forced to turn out of their Towns all superfluous people as well
Inhabitants as others, and to leave them to the merciful hand of their
gracious God, without whose miraculous preservation they are like to perish for
want of sustenance, this is all the comfort that we at this present can afford
them, nor any other assurance have we that our selves in short time shall not
follow them.

Leopoldus the 12. of this Month, with an Army 12000. besieged Germishem or
Germstadt, wherein were 500. Dutch and 200. Switzers, being the last Town
(except the 3. former) which has stood out untaken, and having taken the same
put them all to the Sword.

The Duke of Saxon hearing of some stir arising in Sitesia and some part of
Bohemia, in the absence of the Emperor, is gone up with Forces to prevent all
danger that may happen in those parts, before the return of his Majesty from
Vienna, he has likewise caused 4. pieces of Cannon to be sent from Prague for
the besieging of Glats, which yet holds out for the King of Bohemia.

From Vienna.
That the Emperor is upon his return from Hungary, where he has received
reasonable good content. In the mean time Bethlem Gabor and the Lord Budiany
are leauying of great Forces, and as some think it is by reason of the stir
of the Turks in nether Hungary, others think their forces are preparing to
join and to assist the Marquis Iagersdorp and the Count of Thorn, and to give
the Emperor his welcome home at his return to Silesia and Morauia.

From Rome.
That Sir Robert Sherley has been sent from the Emperor of Persia to diverse
Princes, and that he is arrived here from Spain, and from hence he is to go
to the Princes of Jtaly, and so to the Emperor, for soliciting them to a common
League and combination against the New Turk, to join their powers together
for the Inuading his Dominions, now at this time having so fair an occasion,
there being a great Division now amongst them.

From Venice.
That there are certain Viceer Bashawes revolted, and come away as far as
Adrianople, with a great number of Ships and Gallyes toward the Black Sea,
where they are to join with certain Cossackes and other to make a head of
Rebellion against the now present Emperor of the Turks.

It is likewise written, that the great Aga Governor of the Saraglio, has
plotted to take away the lives of Osmands two Brethren, the one being a Youth
of a 11. years old, the other of 12. but the Mother of them having
intelligence of it, caused them to be conveyed away, by which means she
prevented the Conspiracy, and caused the said Aga with diverse Confederates, to
be taken and Executed.

There cease not daily to be fallings out amongst the Janissaries and other,
which the Musti seeks by all means to appease. The new Emperor the better
to establish himself, has made choice of the Bashaw of Cayro to be his
chief Viceer Bashaw, unto whom he has given his Sister in Marriage, being a
very discreet experienced man, and on who is like to settle Peace and quiet in
the City of of Constantinople, if not in all Turkey besides.

From Genoway the 15. of August.

The King of Spain has taken up the 15. of this Month, 300000. Crowns more,
and caused it to be sent to Antwerpe for the payment of Spinola his Soldiers.
Those of Genoway have likewise granted to lend the King of Spain 4. Gallyes
furnished under the Command of Prince Doria, with other Gallyes from the Pope
and the Duke of Florence, with those of Malta for the assisting of him against
the Pirates of Argier, who are said to be Joined with the Hollander, and have
made a great Navy, wherewith they have invaded some part of the King of Spaines
Territories, over against the Coast of Barbary, rather then the Island of
Mamora, as was formerly suspected.

From France.
His Majesty having (himself in person) taken the Town of Louening in
Lanquedocke, betwixt Castres and Mountaubon, The chief Citizens coming forth
of the Town and meeting the King with the Keys of the Gates in their hands,
being upon terms of Composition, did for their resistance cause them to be
Hanged, and likewise caused a great number of the Town to be put to the
Sword, upon the yielding up of the same.

Likewise it is said, that he has taken in the Town of Semers, a Town of
great consequence to those of the Religion, since he has made Duke Dediguires
General of his Army, and Governor of Dolphin, who before was but Lieutenant,
and in his place is his Son in Law Monsieur Criki made Lieutenant of
Dolphini, who is now gone to besiege Mompelier with 20. pieces of Cannon.

The said Dediguiers treating with Duke de Roban, offered him very Honorable
conditions, if he will lay down his Arms and come unto his Majesty, who as
yet bides constant and his Army increases daily, and that he prepares for the
removing of the Siege.

It is certainly written from France, that Monsieur Chatilion is revolted to
the Kings side, being before Commander of a Town called Egremorts belonging to
Protestants, which he has delivered up, and whereupou he is made one of the
Marshals of France, and is at this present in the Kings Army with Dedigueirs,
at the siege of Mompelier, or rather of Castres, being hard by Mompelier, and
more easy to be taken.

From Rochell the 8. of August.
A French Merchant arriving here in London on Saturday last, reports as
follows: That when he came from thence it was the 18. of this instant Month,
he left in the City of Rochell 5000. brave Soldiers of several Nations,
besides the Inhabitants and those Soldiers of the City, viz. of English,
Scots, Dutch and French, over whom Monsieur de Favors is Commander, a man of
great Experience and Valor, in the former Kings wars, who does daily salley
out of the Town both with horse and foot, defeating the adverse part, and
bringing in Cattle and other provision daily.

The Count of Soysons being Commander of the Kings Army, has built a Fort and
mounted a piece of Cannon thereupon, whereby he has annoyed some of the
highest built houses in the Town, but through often shooting off, 4. or 5. of
the said Cannons are become unserviceable, being broken.

The Town on the other side have done the Kings Army greater hurt, and have
themselves taken and made unserviceable diverse of the Kings Cannon, and have
poisoned all the Fountains round about the City near the Army, whereby the
Soldiers of Count de Soysons dye daily, but they have (in regard of the
respect and Honor they bear him) advertised the said Count thereof, that be
may the better avoid the same.

The same Merchant reports what he likewise saw? coming from Rochell in the
said River were 16. Ships (accustomed to go to New found Land) prepared and
furnished ready for Warliike service, and were appointed to go and encounter
with the King his Gallyes wheresoever they shall meet, and sailing further
some 10. Leagues from Rochell near the I Will de Deu, came by the Kings Fleet
consisting of 46. Sail of Ships, besides 13. expected from St. Malloes, with
10. Gallyes of Burwayes, all which Ships makes 59. Sail, the 10. Gallyes being
appointed to meet with the 16. Fisher Ships, as aforesaid, The Rochell Fleet
at the same time being but 40. Ships joined, but expected 20. more hourly from
the I Will of Rees to come to them, and being within 8. Leagues of the Kings
Fleet, since which time there is news come to my Lord the French Ambassador,
that within 4. days after this Merchant passed by them, the two Fleetes met
and had a cruel Fight, but the particulars where of and who had the better are
not yet known, for within 3. days after, the Secretary of State at Paris had
notice of the same, but could not understand the particulars, nor who had the
better of it.

The Copy of a Letter from Breda.
Count Mansfield having intelligence of Don Cordua's Approach, sent certain
Troops to possess some passage to hinder his March, but these loosing the
direct way were defeated and put to flight by the Forces of the Bishop of
Liege, whereupon Count Mansfield resolved tosolued to march with his whole Army
to the aforesaid passage, being there arrived, the Enemy appeared in sight,
presently Count Mansfield burned his Baggage and prepared to the Battle,
which continued long and furious, in the end Don Coraua was forced to retire,
and in the retreat the Duke of Brunswicke was shot and hurt, whereat being
enraged the more in regard he was wounded in the Enemies retreat, he disarmed
himself and shifted his Beuer, thus only with his Hat and Cassocke he made
choice of some Regiments, and with them resolutely assailed the retiring Enemy,
slew 500. of their men, and seized upon sundry Wagons richly laden, and also
took Don Cordua's own Coach, wherein the Duke made to the Hage in Triumph.

It is also certified from a Commander in Borgen, that Count Mansfield having
surprised two pieces of Cannon of the Enemies, he afterward took a Coach of
Don Cordua's wherein was a good quantity of pieces of Silver of value 5.
shillings Sterling, wherewith Count Mansfield in a Brauado charged their own
Ordinance, and slew many of them with their own Coin.

FINIS.

