The Oration and Sermon made at Rome, by commandment of the four
Cardinals, and the Dominican Jnquisitour, upon pain of death. By John
Nichols, lately the Popes Scholar. Which Sermon and Oration was presented
before the Pope and his Cardinals in his Consistory, the xxvij. day of May.
1578. and remains there registered. Now by him brought into the English
tongue, for the great comfort and commodity of all faithful Christians.Heerin
also is answered an infamous Libell, maliciously written and cast abroad,
against the said John Nichols, with a sufficient discharge of himself from
all the Papists lying reports, and his own life both largely and amply
discovered.

Domine, quam multi sunt qui tribulant me: multi consurgunt aduersum me: multi
dicunt animae meae, Non est salus ipsi in Deo. Imprinted at London by John
Charlewood, servant to the right Honorable, the Earl of Arundell.

1. Peter. 2. c. Deum timete, Regem honorate.

Cic:

(...). blazon or coat of arms E R
HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE Gaddelu Ladonai itti vnromema iachdau scemo.

Darasti eth adonai veganani vmiccol hizzilani megurothai.



(...).

Augustissimae serenissimaeque Principi, cunctis honoris disseminati
dispersique sermonis celsissimae sedis dignitatis, summae amplitudinis atque
amplissimorum graduum maiestatis titulis dignissimae, Elizabethae Dei gratia,
Angliae, Franciae, et Hiberniae Reginae, Catholicae et Christianae fidei notis
veritatis inustae, inclytissimae conseruatrici, clarissimae fautrici, atque
nobilissimae patronae, clauum huius nostri Anglicani Regni, terrae vndique
aquis cinctae, iure recteque tenenti, cum in causis ecclesiasticis, tum in
temporalibus, summum in hac vita splendorem, bonorum subditorum circumfluens
incrementum, praeclaram et triumphantem in hosts victoriam atque tropheum,
splendidum aeternae beatitudinis diadema, in Christi denique regno vitae
perennitatem, atque gloriae haud fluxae et interiturae splendidam et radiantem
coronam.
CVM PEDEM PONO, ET ME infero in debitam animaduersione^ (Christianissima atque
pientissima Princeps) faustae tra^quillitatis huius tuae ditionis pacatae, omni
perturbatione carentis, atque cui omnia prospere foeliciterque procedunt. Cum
econtrariodiabolici et Antichristiani imperij memoriam habeo, sub cuius
dominatus potestate teneris flauescens annis in Italia, duorum annorum
curriculum perfide nequiterque transegi, non minus mihi dolet impietas mea,
quam subditi violata fides. Dolor mihi accidit, cum in animu^ induco me verae,
solidae, et eminentis religionis naufragium inconsiderate, inco^sulte, et
temere fecisse. Eodem animi cruciatu, dolor, et moerore afficior, cum ratione
animoque lustro, me meam erga te obseruantiam deseruisse, et subiecti fidem
perfidiose prodidisse. Tamen exiguae aquae pluuialis guttae saepe cadendo durum
terunt saxum, et os quodcunque in aceto positum, paruo temporis interuallo, ad
omne artificium subeundum aptum et appositum erit. Perinde misericors ac
clemens Domina, spero me non ficta poenitentia ductum, tandem quam tetigi,
extinguere posse culpam, cum in religione veritati euangelicae repugnanti, tum
a pietate remota, (...). O Deus immortalis, cum a te auersus eram, tenebris
immersus, et erroribus innumerabilibus implicatus, quam grauiter tibi peccaui,
quam impie deliqui, tota Anglia sciat.

Christianam pietatem, euangelij puritatem, religionis castissimae sanctitatem,
coelestem disciplina^ spreui, contempsi, neglexi. Homo nihilominus eram, et
falsae opinionis colligatione detineri facilime poteram. Qua dear vt meo
delicto venia concedatur rogo postuloque. Mihi durissima rebellionis meae
seruitus necessario patienda, extremaque miseria subeunda fuisset, si in
erroribus turbulentis, et superstitionibus poene anilibus perseucrassem. Sed
iam tutior est anima mea quam antehac, cum sim ad eam conuersus religionem,
quae verbi tui praescriptione fundata, diuinisque tuis opibus firmata et
stabilita est, quae hominem corporis natura fragile^, co^cilij temeritate
praecipitem, rerum omnium casu calamitosum, ad omne malum funestum procliuem,
repent reddit inuictum, viribus concilioque diuino praeditum, foelicissimoque
rerum omnium euentu in omni aeternitate florentissimum. Quae inquam religio
animum languentem ad salutem reducit, stabilit vires, mentes collustrat, opes
elargitur, voluptatum effectrix est, ad diuinitatem et immortalitatem ducit,
postremo Deum hominibus deuincit: humanumque genus cum diuina mente, bonorum
omnium communione consociat. Cuius neque forma et species liberalis corrumpi,
nec fructus iucunditatis contaminari, nec opes auerti, nec honores attenuari
possunt, nempe cum sit coelesti praesidio septa, et contra omnia mortis et
inuidiae tela, armis diuinis armata. Licet igitur altissimu^ Dei domicilium
concidat, terra incendio deflagret, mare ardoribus exustum intereat, omniaque
tandem quae intuemur oculis ad nihilum redigantur, Euangelicae veritatis
professio decus et gloriam retinebit, opibusque diuinis aeuo sempiterno
perfruetur. Illius iam compos sum religionis, in qua si persistam, beatissimus:
si ab illa deserar, miserrimus cro, aeternaque poena cruciandus.

Concedat Deus optimus maximus, ad numen suum placandum, diuinamque gratiam
retinendam, aeternumque praemium conseque^dum, huius religionis diuitias atque
magnificentiam mecum animo reputans, illius studio et cupiditate flagrem, omnes
vitae curas et cogitationes ad cultum illius conferam, vt prae amore illius,
nec laborem fugiam, nec periculum metuam, neque mortem reformidem, neque
cruciatum exhorream: vt eam fidem rite colam, vt semper studio diuinae legis
incensus, me nec vllus ardor exurat, neque turbo aut tempestas vlla conuellar,
neque vllum denique tempus, quantumuis grave et metuendum multis, me aut
Christianae religionis laudibus et ornamentis, aut oportuno fructu virtutis
spoliet. Cum enim altissima veritatis stirpe nitar, et nunquam sim munerum
diuinoru^ affluentia destitutus: euenire opus est, vt non modo salutares
fructus, atque sempiternos proferam: sed sempiternis laudibus illustrer. Vt his
bonis frui possim, te imploro vt praesto mihi sis. Si defueris mihi vnquam,
versabor in tantis tenebris atque caligine, agitabor tam aduersis tempestatibus
atque procellis, vt per me non valeam vitae cursum recte instituere, aut
institutum ita tenere, vt non tandem fluctibus obruar.

Si tuo praesidio subnixus non fuero, ad verum tui cultum aspirare non potero.
Spes mea fallax erit, conatus irritus, labor inanis, et assiduis et infinitis
cruciamentis torquebor. Concede Domine, vt insistere possim vestigijs sanctorum
Euangelij professorum, ad perfruendam eandem gaudij consolationem: concede
denique, vt mea men's erecta sit ad audiendum, animus alacer et expeditus ad
exequendum quicquid mihi erit a te imperatum. Sic autem sim fide stabilitus, vt
omnia humana contemnam, et diuina tantum ardentissime concupiscam. Ad te
florentissima Virgo, atque illustrissima Regina iam nunc redit oration. Iniquo
me scelere astrictu^ inficias non eo, cum a te (Princeps clementissima)
defeceram ad Antichristum. Sed tunc temporis nequitia perditus, amentia
praeceps, aduerso fortunae flatu oppressus, et prauae tentationis poenis
excruciatus eram. Fideli subdito co^sentaneum, et bonitati decorum nihil
quidquam feci. Ei, in quo superbia late dominatur, obedientiam praestiti, et
illum Christi vicarium asserere no^ verebar. Tibi vero, cum sis Regina Domini
huius mei patrui soli, obedire nolui: si me ad obedientiam promptum atque
paratum exhibuissem, patriam meam minime deseruissem. Sed nemo mortalium rectum
vitae cursum perpetuo tenere potest, vt non interdum de via deflectat, et iram
in se Dei atque Principis haud indigne prouocet. David Propheta, in quo, vt
sacrae testa^tur scripturae, cluxit diuinum illud admirandae sanctitatis
exemplum, perpetuum vitae cursum sine graui aliquo lapsu conficere non poterat:
vis libidinis eum a sanctitudinis studio semel dimouebat, et ab inchoato
pietatis cursu retardauit. Solomon sapientia praecellens, in su^ma erroris
caligine versabatur, atque miserandae tenebrae animo suo offusae erant, cum sua
ratio fuerat obscurata, criminibus cum turpitudine et dedecore co^iunctis, et
impedita sceleribus, atque libidinis indomitae vinculis alligata. Ruptis
pudicitiae claustris, et castitatis repagulis perfractis, in peccati sordibus
remota poenitentia iacebat, et deos alienos sibi colendos proposuit.

Su^mo totius sanctimoniae architecto, et veritatis lumine deserto, David
regius Propheta, ob sceleris sui perpetrati conscientiam, lame^tis, gemitibus,
atque lachry mis continuo se dedit. Quae delicti detestatio erat piacularis
hostia, victima salutaris, ardore charitatis infla^mata, quae intima coeli
penetrauit, diuinumque numen a seuerirate ad misericordiam flexit. Aditum sibi
in coelum aperiebat, et magnum suum peccati contagium expiauit, atque gratiam
Dei in aeternum sibi conciliauit, pacemque impetrauit. Si Solomon Rex, vt
ingenij acrimonia, et iudicij preastantia, et doctrinae vbertate erat
praeditus, sic virtutis dotibus cumulatus et ornatus extitisset, a se flagitia
suscepta proculdubio lamentatus fuisset, et ex ergastulo corporis sui ad coelos
emigrasset, piorum animoru^ coetibus intersuisset, suum decus omnes coelites
intuiti fuissent, nomen suum summus ipse Deus, qui eum sibi adoptasset,
amplexus esset, et chorus angelorum diuinis laudibus illu^ extulisset: atque
postremo* quod caput est, summo illi coeli dominatori, nutu omnia regenti,
purasque mentes immensa luce collustranti, et summis aeternisque laudibus
cumulanti, perpetuo copulatus fuisset. Si Deus nostrae culpae condonabit,
quando admissum flagitium detestamur, crimina cum pudore et dolor confitemur,
a libidine ad continentiam, e flagitijs ad honestatem traducimur, ab odio ad
charitatem conuertimur, in nouamque vitam ingredimur, et sanctis operibus
exercemur, cu^ hominu^ inuenta co^temnimus et abijcimus, et illorum placita,
decreta, et instituta, su^mae sapientiae disciplinam, et sanctissimam vitae
legem minime omniu^ existimamus, Deus, rerum omniu^ creator, atque imperator
celsissimus, remittet nobis peccata nostra, et placabitur, atque praemijs
coelestibus nos afficiet. No^ dubito, si es talis (Domina et Regina eximij et
acerrimiingenij prea dicatione multu^ cealebrata) quale^ existimo, et multi
dicu^t esse te maxim, quin tuam misericordia^ et benefice^tiam experiar maxim
mi sericorde^ et benefice^tissimam. Oblata iam est mihi occasio flagitandi
veniam concedendam culpae meae contra te commissae (vt paulo ante satis abunde
verbis explicaui) et petendi aliquam beneficentiam et liberalitatem mihi
elargiendam. Haud secus facio quam peccator, qui non modo vt sua culpa
ignoscatur quaerit, verumetiam vt gaudij sempiterni eleemozynam adipisci
possit, omnipote^ti Deo manus supplex tendit, et precibus obnixe seduloque
elaborat. Quod in tuae May. offensione^ incidebam, non inco^gruum esse
putaui in hac Epistola dedicatoria, et meam culpam explicare, sum contendere,
et vehementer petere a tua Regia dignitate, vt huius incompti libelli
suscipiatur patrocinium: temeritate forsitan ductus, magis quam prudentia
fretus: non sum nescius, neminem extitisse vnquam, qui non doctissimu^ quemque
tuae Maiestati dedicauerat librum: quamuis autem id preastare nequeam, hanc
tamen voluntatem meam non ingratam tibi fore spe atque animo incubo. Solent
enim magni heroes atque sagaces Principes, non tam muneris oblati dignitatem
expendere, quam offerentis animum atque fidem ponderare. Cum Xerxes Greciae
Imperator imperium suum perlustrasset, pauper quidam subditus, qui nihil
opulentum habuit ad defere^dum Imperatori, aquae manipulum offerre ausus est:
prudens Imperator, non donum, sed voluntatem expendebat. Quod oblatum erat
grato animo accepit, et Sinaetem pauperem subiectu^ magno affecit beneficio.
Cum enim maximum Regiae honoris amplitudinis praesidium et insigne, sit in
hominum beneuolentia atque fidelitate constitutum, quomodo potest id illis
iniucundum et ingratum accidere, quod intelligunt esse ex egregia voluntate,
atquesingulari fide profectum? Non rumores de tuae bonitatis preastantia
dissipati iudicia afferunt, sed experie^tia (Domina serenissima, et huius
nostrae insulae Anglicanae foelicissima Regnatrix) docet et demonstrat, Deum
varia virtutis dona tibi elargitu^ fuisse. Tyrannis Traditorum, insidiae
Rebellium, malitia impiorum, coniurationes Papistaru^, et cla^destinae
proditiones aut tibi nocere non potera^t, aut ardorem verae religionis
extinguere, aut egregios conatus frangere, aut vt tui officij et muneris
obliuiscereris, aut ab instituto cursu deducereris, aut animum tuum heroicum
reflectere non valebant. Mitis tua patientia, continua perseuerantia,
imperialis authoritas, acumen ingenij, cognitio literarum, animus excelsus, et
Christiana tua pietas, inimicum vicit, copias hostium domesticorum fudit
fugauitque, subegit Traditores, expulit Papam, suos confudit pupillos, et huic
tuo Regno Anglicano pacem et quietem peperit. Non plus scripsi quam veritas
concedere potest, neque igitur potest quisquam just affirmare, simulationem in
me cecidisse. Hanc pretiosam gemmam, hanc Dorninam nostram Elizabetham
conseruet Deus, ad eius religionem pure atque sancte colendam, et audacter
defendendam, ad Diuinum spiritum diligendum et timendu^ charitatis satorem,
altorem, et pare^tem, cuius numine, concilio, et voluntate, regna nascuntur,
augentur, atque retinentur: cuius mente atque ratione gubernantur: cuius
denique offensione labuntur et concidunt, atque delentur. Precibus contendamus,
vt totum regni pondus sustinens, summa cum laud gubernet, qua ire via coepit
ea pergat, ad immortalem gloriam consequendam: curam et cogitationem esse in
religionis studio ponendam nunquam inficietur: sic enim omnium virtutum opibus,
et ornamentis magnificentissime redundabit: et gloria ingenti nullis vnquam
saeculis interitura circumfluet: presidijsque diuinis in omni rerum discrimine
munietur: et ex his terratum angustijs, in illam coelestem regionem euolabit:
illius autem splendoris cupiditate incensa rapietur, quae non peruulgata
virtutis claritate, aut praedicatione hominum continetur.

Qui ad veram custodiendam religionem, et ad pauperum Scholasticoru^ inopiam
subleuandam, incredibili animi studio contendunt et incumbunt, remunerationem
vberrimam obtinebunt. Precationibus denique nostris diuinum numen inuocemus, vt
Elizabetha Regina, et Domina nostra, latissime, diu, et fortunatissime in terra
dominetur, et post extremum vitae diem, sedibus illis beatissimis diuinisque
domicilijs fruatur, in quibus homines praestantes locati, nec vitijs infici,
nec deformitate maculari, nec tormentis conuelli possint; sed expertes omnium
malorum, aeternisque praesidijs et ornamentis magnificentissime redundantes,
gloria immortali circumfluent. Ipsi soli demum sunt beatissimi iudicandi,
diuinis opibus exculti, summis bonis affluentes, aeternis gaudijs triumphantes,
quorum vita est omni bonorum copia cumulata, quorum laus emori non potest,
quorum nomen nulla vnquam obscurabit obliuio. Vt in illam coelestem ciuitatis
conditionem Domina amplissima, atque splendidissima huis imperij Regnatrix, tua
Maiestas accipiatur, diuinis laudibus abundans, splendore diuinae lucis
illustrata, et diuina gloria florens, Iehouam supplex deprecor. Christus
optimus maximus te, cum summa dignitatis exaggeratione, multis annis saluam et
incolumem tueatur atque conseruet. Papista tacet, Christianus dicit Amen. Sic
concluditur Epistola: det Deus bonum euentum.

Tuae Maiestatis obedientissimus subditus Ioannes Nicholaus Camberbritannus.

To the courteous and well disposed Reader.
Four things (good Christian reader) have caused me to be circumspect in
vvriti^g this Book, to wit, Fear, Care, Necessity, and Affection. Fear
afflicted me: Care compelled me: Necessity bound me: and affection vvounded
me. Fear afflicted me because the greef of coming into infamy, reproach and
troubles, caused a great circumspection in me, to mark diligently what I
vvrote, and to put the same down in vvriting without any spot of hypocrisy
and double dealing. Care compelled me to be circumspect in my doings, lest
that the Papists should find a bone to gnavv there upon. Necessity urged me
both to answer to the infamous Libels written against me, and to satisfy
(if that I might) the honest request of certain zealous Christians, in vvriting
the Oration and Sermon which were done at Room. And as necessity caused me
to purge my self of the false reports of lying Papists: so does necessity
provoke me to be circumspect in all my sayings, affection stirs me up to
write those things, which are no less true then profitable. But if my
vvritings be never so true, yet notvvithstanding, some or other busy headed
fellovv vvilspeak against the^: I have not their tungs in keeping, let them
speak what they list, and I shall arm my self with patience. And heerin
vvil I follow the steps of Zenocrates, who for his patience was much
commended: for though he were of his Master Plato unjustly accused of
ungratefulness, yet was he nothing moved there with all, and being asked why
he did not answer Platoes defaming of hi^, made this answer. That which I do
is good and profitable for me. So I say, that which I have written in this
Sermon made at Room, now I confess to be true, and I hope this confession
shall be good and profitable for my souls health. And as for the words of the
Papists, as they are but vvi^de: so let them pass as vvinde, as they proceed
from a malicious heart, so I conster them, and so I accept them, not with
malice but with patience. The patience of Eusebius teaches me so to do, for
when a wicked woman, infected with the heresies of Arrius, had vvilfully
thrown astone at him, and therewith all had vvounded him to death: he was
so far from taking revenge, that he swore his friends upon his death bed, not
to punish her therefore. O noble mind, O virtuous act worthy of eternal
memory, he forgave her that was his enemy and did him great injury. The
like patience GOD grant unto me, that whatsoever the Papists say or do
against me: I be not angrye therefore, but take all things in good part, and
pray for them, that they may have a penitent heart, to be sorry for their doings
and sayings, against them which vvish them no otherwise, then to them selves:
one faith in Jesus Christ, and brotherly love one tovvard an other. God be
merciful unto them and unto us all, and show us the light of his
Countenance. God increase the number of his Elect* God convert his enemies
unto the truth of his sacred Gospel. God grant amendment of life unto us
all, for surely as yet God is not served aright, our words and deeds do
greatly differ in effect, our words are heavenly, our vvoorks are vvorldly,
wicked and deuilish. God grant us effectually grace, vvherby we may be
saved, Grant this O Lord for thy dear Sons sake. Amen.

Thine in the Lord, John Nichols.

To the worshipful company, of Merchant Adventurers, at Emden, and at
Antwerp, grace, and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.
AS I was desirous (worshipful Company) to satisfy the request of diverse, and
sundry zealous Catholics, so am I not forgetful, of your tried freendship
in a foreign Country, constrained at that present time to crave the same, and
to show my self, no less thankful, then mindful of your proved courtesy.
Duty binds me to send unto you this Oration and Sermon, made at Room,
written then in Latin, but now in English, for the profit and commodity of
the ruder sort (who understand not the Latin tongue) which Oration and Sermon,
notwithstanding, I purpose God willing, by the permission of my Superiors, as
it was once written and registered at Room in the Latin tongue, so to write it
again, and bring it to light. My intent and purpose is not, in writing this
book, to gape for popular applause, and to hunt after praise: but to signify
to the world what I have been, and what I have done. I have been a member of
the Romish Church, as it is well known to many, who both knew me, and were
conversant with me at Room. And at my first coming to that Babilonicall
City, I was suspected to have been an Heretic (for so term they Christian
Catholics) wherefore by the means of an English man, named Solomon Aldred,
sometime a dweller in Birchen lane in London, who was married, and had been in
my company in France, I was brought by Doctor Morice, prouider of the English
Hospital at Room (for his own discharge) to the house of the Romish
Inquisition. Where being examined in matters touching Religion, I confessed
what I had been in time past, an enemy to their Religion. When as by the
process of my words, the Dominican Inquisitour had intelligence of my former
state. He commanded Doctor Morice to bring me before him the day following,
which was the.xxvi. day of April, in the year of our Lord. 1578. So the
morning after I came unto him, with Doctor Morice: then the sentence of the
four Cardinals, which are appertayning to that office, was this, that I
should write what I could (with free liberty of speech and pardon granted)
against the Pope, and against his Religion. Being thus commanded, as I would
avoid the Popes indignation and displeasure, to write what I could against his
swelling title and presumptuous name of supremacy: I spared neither him,
neither yet, his unstable Religion, as hereafter in the Sermon made at the
commandment of the four Cardinals and this Dominican, it shall appear.
Which Sermon and Oration were brought before the Pope, and the rest of the
Cardinals, being then in the Consistory, When the Pope understood how that
I had been reconciled to his Church before the time I came to Room: he
pardoned my trespass, and gave me a Signatura, not forgetting to give me
thanks, and professing freendship, he willed a Letter to be written to the
Rector of the English Seminary, that he should ascribe me to the number of the
rest. And the Letters being delivered and read, both of him and Cardinal
Morone, Protector of the English house: I was admitted the.xxviii. day of May,
to the Society of the English Students. For so much as the Religion of the
Papists is grounded upon lies, so can they do nothing else but lie, and report
untruely. Whereas a Masse-monger, who writes that he did not only know me,
but also lived with me, falsely reports in his Lybell set out against me,
That I was recommended from Cardinal Paleote of Bolonia, to Doctor Jews, that
by his means I might find some relief at the Popes hands: this report is
as true, as now I am in Wales.

As touching Doctor Jews, there was not so much as one word spoken, much less
a Letter written unto him: But this is ye only fruit of their Religion, to
speak more then truth is, to slander him wrongfully, that does degenerate
from them, to hate him undeservedly, that finds out their treachery,
maliciously to backbite him yt has forsaken the dregs of their idolatry.
For that I have with an unfeigned heart, renou^ced the Romish faith: what
slanderous reports, the Papists have had of me? in what hatred they have me?
how maliciously they speak of me, God knows, from whom no secret is hyd?
and so do I, acknowledging my self clear and free from those crimes,
wherewith I am unjustly accused, these their malicious and slanderous
reproaches I have procured against me, for telling the truth. And for the
breach of the fowrth decree of Pope Leo, which was no crime in deed, for that
the decree is unlawful. Should I excuse the murder by this Pope committed, as
the murders of Sampson? Should I commend the deuillishe practices, and cruel
attempts of this Pope Gregory, to have the lives of the true Christians in the
low Countries abreuiated, their country spoiled, their houses burnt, their
Cattle slain, their Daughters ravished, their Sons murthred, even in the
sight of their Fathers, and the Parents either made slaves, or else
constrained before the due course of nature, to yield up the ghost? Of all
this calamity, injury, and murder, the Pope is the only cause and author.
This I know to be true, this I am able to avouch, this I am not afraid to
write. Should I praise your Pope being an adulterer? or should I cloak his
fault, as the adultery of Jacob? Should I think your Pope to be a holy
Virgin, having two Bastardes, the one made a Cardinal, the other a Marquess?
the one a ruler of his Castle, Santo Angelo, the other Grand mon Signior of his
abiding Palace. Should I coullour his robberies, as the robbing of the
Egiptians? what robberies has he done in the Churches of Italy, to mayntaine
the English Seminaries, both at Room and at Rheimes in France? he has
compelled the most part of all Abbottes, and Priours, and other Ecclesiastical
men, to disburse him about a twelve month past, a sum of money.

Because I have spoken truly, both by your Pope and by you Papists,
therefore you maliciously slander me: but in the Book of Pilgrimage, I will
blaze out your arms, and so discover your treacheries, the lives of your
Monks, and Jesuits, among whom I have lived, shall be known to all England:
the hypocrisy of your Cardinals, and Bysshoppes, with whom I have been
conversant, no man there is but shall know.

The Sodomiticall life of your Prelates, repeat Monks, Theatines, Jesuits,
Cardinals, and Bishops, and others, I will sound out with the larum bell: The
discention of your College, the emulation of the English Students, the
orders of the house, their manner of living, their canckred hatred toward
their native Soil: all these things recited in the Book of Pilgrimage, shall
be truly and not maliciously handeled, for the greater detestation of your
forged and feigned Religion, sproong up from covetousness and ambition.

I will have an especial care to the words which I shall write, least that in
misreporting ought of you rashly, I incur deservedly, the displeasure of
almighty God, and may not be free of infamy, and the hatred of such as have
been travelers, who knew them selves many things to be true, which I intend to
bring to light, justly I should procure. I would thou Papist had the same
mind, not to have exceeded the bonds and lymittes of truth, because they
thought to bring my name to discredit by their untruths, they thought it good
to scatter abroad their lying Lybels, to the end that some, who are weak of
belief, and others which are inclyning to Papistrie, might reject my writing,
and make no accoumpt of my sayings: how false their Lybel was, you may read
as follows.

The first untruth is this, that where as be untruly reports: That I was
brought up in Popery, and therein continewed, until for poverty, passing
over the water into the Weste parts of England, I became a Minister: Which is
as true, as thou art a true subject to the Queens Majesty, which is nothing
so, for thou art an enemy to her Majesty, and to her proceedinges. It is well
known that none of my friends are Papists, or that they should bring me up
in Papistrie: It is not doubtful to a hundred and not so few, that before I
went to the West countries, I studied at Oxenford, and remained in White Hall,
otherwise called Jesus College, one year, and from thence I went to
Brazennose College, from the which College I departed, and came to my
friends, and there in mine own Country, I taught a certain Gentleman's
children, for the space of one year and a half, and afterward I was made a
Minister, and so passed over the waters, and served a Cure which is named
Withiecombe, under one Master Jones, Vicar of Tauntone, and from that place I
went to Whitestauntone, and there continewed until the time I passed over the
Seas. And where as thou writest, That by learning three or four of Master
Northbrookes sermons without book, I got me some credit for preaching: With
Master Northbrooke I never had conference, neither received any Sermon that
ever he or any other made. Neither were my words such at any time, that the
people took me for a young Tobias, and a second Jonas. Neither spoke I at any
time, that by means of simmony, I got me two Benefices. Your Religion
consists on lies, and you follow that Religion whereof the Devil is Author,
the father of all lies: You have Letters Patents, and you have the Popes
dispensation, to do with an Heretic (for this name you attribute to every
Christian) what your list, and what your pleasure is, to discredit him if you
may, or to hurt him if it lies in your power, or to subvert and overthrow the
truth of the sacred Gospel you will not cease. I know what you be, I have
lived amongst you, you can not further one good word to him that means
uprightly, and speaks truly. Call to remembrance, have you not used the like
railing speech, and the like slanders against a godly and learned defendour
of Christ his truth, John Iuell Bishop of Salisbury? you were not ashamed (so
impudent you are) to say, that being mad, he preached at Salisburie, and was
commanded to come down from the Pulpit, for that he rayled on the people.
Moreover, that he wrote against his conscience, and dyed a Papist: that his man
had told him, that he cited a wrong place of the Doctors: notwithstanding he
lightly setting by his words, would needs cite a thing which was not expressed
in the Doctors. What they speak of others, with silence I pass over, and how
falsely they accuse them, all the world may judge, read their books against
the lives of faithful and learned Ministers of God his holy word. I am not
grieved very much, for that they have unjustly reported of me, I arm my self
with patience. I know their canckred stomachs is ready to do me what
displeasure they may, they are not able to prove the least jot of their
Lybell. How can they prove that I have had two Wives? here be some in London,
and not few in number, that lived in that Town where I lived and was borne:
And besides that, knew me wheresoever I dwelt in England.

But neither they nor any other, knew that ever I was married, if they can
prove that I was married once, I will be their bond man as long as I live. If
they can prove that I had two Wives, I seek but the extremity of the law,
yea, require death it self. I will tell them the places where my cheifest
abode was in Wales or England. In the common Schools that were in that Sheere
where I was borne, I was brought up, until I was of the age of sixteen
years, and at that age I went to Oxenford, and from thence I returned back
again to my Country, and abode at a place called Dunreuen, and from thence I
went to Summerset, and stayed at Withiecombe, from the which place I departed
and came to Whitstantone, and from thence I departed and came to London, took
shipping, and arrived at Antwerpe, where part of your Company abides, I lodged
at an Inn not far from the gate that goes to Macklin.

In lying, he proceeds farther: He says, that I became a Soldier against
the King, and uttered to the Prince of Orainge, part what possibly I could
devise, or what I heard in England against the King, and attempted many most
malicious things that way: And that I reported not so, of my self mine
Hostess (who is an English woman) may remember, that there was a Scholar at
her house, but not a Soldier, such a one that gave her Daughter a thymble in
silver, which I found in a Church: there I stayde not above five or six days,
but dyrectly took my voyage to Dowaie. And whereas you say, That I found
relief at Cambraie, in deed of certain Flemmish Prelates, I received some
bountifulness, but of English men found no relief, for scarce they were able
to relieve them selves, so little esteemed they were of Citizens, who for the
greater part were Christians. And for that you falsely say, That I fell into
the hands of the Kings side: That is as true as you say, that you pray for
the Queen of England, where as you pray rather for the Queen of Scotts, as
hereafter it shall appear. And where as you say that I reported at Rheimes,
That I was driven out of England, for my conscience sake. Who would think
that I reported thus? where as before some of the Scholars, I feared not to
pronounce our Queen supreme head of England, and being examined of what
Religion I was, I answered, a Protestant, for speaking the which words I was
banished the Town. And Doctor Allen, with the whole Seminary, were commanded
to appear before the Consuls, and Captains of the Town, and were like to be
banished out of the Town, only for that they thought that the English men had
succored me, being a Christian. As for relief, I found not as much as a
farthing, except a dinner amongst certain English Priests, who kept such a
railing against my Lord Bacon who is dead, and whom they said should frit in
hell: and against Sir Frauncis Walsingham, and against my Lord Burley, and
against diverse others, whom they said, God would condemn and judge to
everlasting pain. This dinner did me but little good, for they were in a
pelting chafe against the wise and faithful believers of Christ his Gospel:
they were angry also with me, for that I had sworn by the Mass, and had
spoken a word or two in defense of Christian Religion.

From this City I went to Granoble, and there stayde with an Archbishop three
months, and from him I traveled to Italy, and dwelt with the Bishop of
Vigeuena, whose name is Alexander Cazalis, ye Popes Protonotarie, and kept all
his Plate in custody, and who would have given to me a Canonship if I would
have staid with him during life: which thing to be true, you your selves know
that were Priests at Room, for thereof the Bishop wrote a Letter, and sent
his man with me to Millaine to Doctor Parkar, who also wrote a Letter to the
Scholars of the English Seminary. This his love toward me, did I not
obtain in speaking untruth, but for that he had been a traveler himself to
foreign Countries, and had tried adversity him self, as he fell into the
hands of his enemies, upon which consideration he took compassion on me,
being a stranger, and in poverty.

Moreover, whereas thou writest, That I slaundered the lives of the Bisshops,
Ministers, and other professors of England. That is as true as they say, that
it is lawful to rebel against our Sovereign, for I never misreported of any
Bishops Chaplains: how could I tell how Bishops and Ministers lived? I never
was conversant with them: As for other Ministers, I must needs confess thus
much I spoke, that in the beginning of this Queens reign when Ministers were
somewhat scant, through occasion well known, then there were certain honest
zealous me^ of occupatio^, who supplied the room for a time, but afterward by
ye godly care of the Bishops, were otherwise provided for, and learned me^
placed in their room, which being so near driven by casualty of the time,
upon the great godliness and earnest zeal of such men, did so order it while
til they were better provided for.

But whereas thou saydest, That I of mine own freewill went to the
Inquisition, to obtain greater credit: This is as true as thou say, That I
presented my self, and accused my self that I had been a Papist: Where as it
is well known, I was taken at Islington, and brought by a Pursuinant to the
right honorable Sir Frauncis Walsingham, and by his commandment was sent to
the Bishop of London, and from him I was brought by the Pursuinant to the Tower
of London.

So, as before I have deelared, I was brought suspected an Heretic at Rome by
Doctor Morice, to the Inquisition. But where as thou say, I never ceased
very spytefully, to detract and speak evil of the Protestants: this is as true
as the rest. But this I confess, that I much disco^mended the lives of such
who outwardly bare great show of zealous Protestants, and inwardly were
crafty and dissembling Papists, when they came in company with any
Protestants, then they were as zealous as they themselves, but when they came
in conference with Papists: they were as earnest in conscience as they
likewise, carrying in one hand both fire and water, to deceive the ignorant
that did not mistrust them, and to seed the Devil with that he would have,
against this enormitie I did not a little inueigh, for that I thought it worthy
of all reprehensiou. But as for otherwise defaming the Protestants, thy words
are most untrue, and I never opened my mouth to use any such speeches.

Moreover, whereas you say: That I delighted in flattery. This you speak of
malice, and not of truth, for I seek to flatter none for preferment sake, as
thou say I do. Because I speak the truth by thee, and such as thou art,
therefore thou say I flatter: I gape not for preferment, neither for any
worldly pelf, I will be contented with Gods providence, as he has or dayned,
so shall it be with me: hap well, or hap ill, the Lords name be praised. To
flatter any man for exhibition sake, I intend it not, let them do as they
list, and as God shall put in their minds.

Whether I live in myserie, or else otherwise, Gods will I am not to resist, but
accept all things patientlye, and speak well of the name of the Lord, who
scourges whom he will, and fanoureth whom he will.

And moreover: Thou countest me no better then half a fool, as others may
easily perceive, if they make trial of me. Truly, I confess I had rather
be counted a fool, and profess the truth: then be named a wise man, and
commit idolatry. The time has been, that both thou and thy fellows had
good hope of me, that I should be an instrument to mayntaine your idolatrous
and superstitious Religion.

And where as thou say: That I was unable to go foreward in Logicque, or
Philosophy. This proceeded not of the rudeness of my capacity: but of the
malice which Father Ferdinando, (the Prefect of the English Seminary) bare
to the Welshmen: There were Batchelers of Art, not permitted to begin their
course of Logicque or Philosophy, which is an usual thing at Room for
Batchelers, yea, and Masters of Art, either to be permitted to hear
Rhetorique, or to begin Logicque. And whereas thou writest, that I wrote in my
book: That I preached before the Pope. I wrote no such things, the book is
extant, who that will may read it. And there he shall find that my words are
thus in effect: Gentle Reader, to excuse the fault of the Printer, and to
discharge my self of the Papists objection against me in this point: l give
you to understand, that he mistook him self, in printing a Sermon preached
before the Pope, whereas I vvrote it, a Sermon presented before the Pope.
Wherefore I desire pardon for his offense, and mine own negligence, in not
using more respect in that place.
I made an Oration and a Sermon at Room, which was presented before the Pope
and all his Cardinals, with diverse other in the Consistory. And the same
Oration and Sermon (which was my Recantation called) and for the which the Pope
gave me thanks, and registered it in three great volumes, in the house of
Inquisition. These words I spoke, and these words are true: and there is one
in London, who was at Room then, and knew of this my doing, and knew me
also, who will affirm the same to be true. Thou writest moreover: That with
vain brags, I extol the Sermon which I made at Room in the English
Seminary, upon Saint Peter's day last, Advincula. Thou art deceived, I brag
not thereof, I made mention thereof only for this cause, to signify to the
Readers, how within three days after, I became sick, and dispayred of my
salvation, for that I mistrusted many points of that Romish Religion, and could
not tell whether they were true or false. And where thou say: That it was an
exercise that Grammarians use. I studied positive Divinity, and not Grammar,
nor never did at Room, and it was an exercise which the students in Divinity
used. And where as thou say: Thou know who was at it, and laughed to hear
such ridiculous stuff as that was. To speak a word or two to make laughter:
it is the part of an Orator, and it is the part of a Preacher.

But the same Latin Sermon did so content them at that present time, that they
doubted not to say, but that I should pervert many in England, and should
become a profitable servant to the Pope, and his Romish Sinagogue. How father
Minister, a grave and learned Jesuit, commended my doings, and said I was one
of the best Orators among all the whole rowt of Students: And as for to speak
Latin, I taught yt most part of them all to speak true Latin, although they
were far from any Ciceronian phrase. They have such blockheads that study
Philosophy, that in talk they use an Accusative case, in steed of a
Nominative, and the Masculine, in steed of a Feminine gender, and I will name
them for your sakes, Master Dodipol Oliuerius, Master Douter, Doctor (I would
say) Mushe, with twenty more: they are not able to make a true construction,
betwixt the Nominative case, and the Verb, the Substantive and the Adjective,
the Relative and his Antecedent. Yet for all that, by means of their deep
Philosophy, they think to ouer-crowe our Students, here in England. They
that study Divinity (when they are commanded to make such an Exhortation as
I have done often, in your Seminary of mischief, for I can not say of
learning, or yet of virtue. I would I could,) they ascend up to the Pulpit with
a brazen face, or a fools vizarde: but they descend with shame, and with
discommendation, some have I seen of your company iollie Champions, went about
to preach, but were not able to prosecute their matter: Wherefore they came
down from the Pulpitte, and left half their Sermons vnsayde, for that they
had forgotten the residue of their Sermon: either for that they quafte too much
Wine, or else that they had supt too much pottage. Except two (according to the
report of Father Minister) of whom I spoke, and who soon after Saint Peter,
ad Vincula, his day dyed: There was not one amongst three score, that could
preach as well as our common Tailors and Shoomakers in England.

In deed, they excelled them in one point, for that they observed more guyle
and deceit in their preaching, to entrap our English men in the snares of
idolatry: then men of Occupation in persuading the people to decline from
papistrie.

And whereas very impudentlie thou say: I was a common game to the rest of
the Students, who made me often to mount on a stool, and to preach to them
the Sermons, which I had uttered in England. Thine own fellows, such as are
taken, deny the same to be true, as they do the rest of the cheifest points
of thy infamous Lybell: he that was my Chamber fellow, may report this to be
a lie, as the rest of thy Articles.

If he report truly, this is all, that he or any other is able to avouch: That
being merely disposed, I once (but never afterward) stood upon a stool,
(as the Jesuits do when they preach, standing upon bulks, or else upon
stools) and demanded of him, who is now prisoner in ye Towze, to give me
what Theme he would, and so be did, and thereupon made a discourse Extempore.
Wherefore it is untruth, to report that I preached a Sermon, uttered once
before in England, and to say that I did it oftener then once. The like thing
many of you have done, whose names I could recite: but because ye matter is of
no more importance, I will not name them at all. Good man liar, (I know not
thy name, for that thou have not written it, belike thou were ashamed to name
thy self, least thou might be taken, and thy treacheries espied.)

Whereas thou say, That I lingered behind my fellows, at a Town in Vmbria,
called Fuligne. That is as true as the Pope has made thee a Cardinal, for I
left them and their bay Horse, ouerladen with the Popes blessings: having a
grievous disease, and not able to go, in the plain feeldes I forsook your
company. And if so be that this sickness had not chanced unto me: yet had I
occasion offered me to forsake their company, for they made me pay eleven Iulyes
for seven, and caused me to pay for their man's charges as well as they. What
charity you pelting and wandering Massemongers have, I will declare.

There came this last Summer, a Northren Scholar to Room, who could not be
admitted to the College, but the Rector taking compassion on him, wylled the
four Priests (whereof I suspecte thee to be one) who went in my company (for
three days space) to give this poor Scholar a Crown a piece, among whom
also I gave him a Crown. But how uncharitably they used him in the journey
for three days, you may read as follows.

They caused him all the way to lead their Horse by the bridle, or to drive
him forwards, yet would they not pay for the man's meat, nor suffer him to
ride, being very sick, and scarce able to stand on his feet, and paid
more then a Stranger would have paid unto them.

The third day of our journey, it so befell when I departed from them, that
this youth was so faint, that he laid himself down on the ground, in the
middle of the feeldes, not able to move a foot farther. When they saw that
he was able to lead their Horse no longer: they forsook him, not bydding him
farewell, neither giving him so much as the value of one small penny.

Behold what charity Papists have, behold their inhumanitie, to their own
countryman: Here in England, they show such counterfeyt holiness, that a
man would scarce think that they would play the Varlettes, they deceive the
people wounderfullie. But if our English men had been so much conversant
among them as I have been, and had tried their manners as I have done: they
would beware how to give credit to such hypocritical fellows. But if our
country men, will bestow the reading of the book of Pilgrimage, I will
lyuelie paint forth the craft and subtlety of our English Students beyond
the Seas, I will describe the horrible abuses crept into the Church of Room,
which I have seen with mine eyes, and understood of many that were credible
persons.

And whereas thou say: That the first Sunday after my coming to the Tower, I
refused to repair to the Church. I grant it so to be. But whereas thou say:
The second Sunday following, I pronounced this Recantation of mine, which is
now in print: That is as true as a Catte brings forth whelps, for Master
Lieuetenant and my Keeper, with many more, know that to be untrue.

And whereas thou say: That if I shall want preferment here, I will go
beyond the Seas again. Who will believe this to be true: where as I have been
once pardoned already, for that I have been of the contrary Religion, all men
know that the Popish laws are against them that reuolte twyse from their
Religion.

If I returned unto Room again, or to the Popes dominions: I should be
condemned, either to the fire, or to the Galleys. Wherefore I mean to abide in
England, hap well or hap ill, England has no fellow, better it is to live in
poverty, then to be whipped on the Seas, and to be taught to row, having
thereunto as good towardness, as Tom Collier thy fathers man.

And where as more impudentlie then an Ass thou writest: That the most part
of my reports, touching your treacheries and malicious practices, against the
Queens Majesty, and her honorable Council, is untrue. If I wrote any thing
otherwise then the truth was: why dydst thou not make mention thereof, that I
might have purged my self of infamy, and untruth? But I wrote no more then
truth gave place: but in the book of Pilgrimage I will discover, God wylling
more at large, your treasonable attemptes, against the Crown and dignity,
against her honorable Council, and against her common weal. I have spoken,
and do speak, and will speak nothing else but truth of you: But it is as
hard a thing to hear truth of you, as it is for the Pope to give his Miter
away to poor beggars. And finally, where as thou concludest thy Lybell with
these words: That there shall never want vacabounds and runnagates for gain.
If thou wylt have these words to have relation to thy self, and to thy
brothers (who in deed are Vacabounds and runnagates from Tavern to Tavern,
from Town to Town, from Shiere to Shiere.) Thou say well and truly, and I
go not about to disprooue thy words: but if thou meanest of me, I am no
runnagate, I stay in one place, and am not affrayde to show my face, in the
presence of you all, if I could tell where to find you. But you are not far
unlike to the thieves, who in the day time sleep or lurk in Caves, and in the
night time raunge abroad. I think you meet both together on the plains of
Salisburie: the thief he seeks but the purse, but you are not contented with
the purse, but seek to bereave a man of his body and soul. We had more need
by a great deal (if we have respect to the safety of our bodies and souls)
to take heed that we be not deceived, by the crafty iugling of these
wandering Popish Preests.

Thus have I answered to every particular Article contained in the infamous
Lybell against me written, and I thought it good to contain the same in this
Epistle written unto you worshipful Company, for this cause only. For that
they say: That I attempted many most malicious things, between the Prince of
Orainge, and the King of Spain. If you hear and understand it of credible
persons, that I was such a fellow as they report me to be: I desire you, as
not compelled, to make mention thereof in your Letters, and convey it to
London. I am sure and certain, that there is no man can avouch that I was such
a fellow, as they make me to be. I confess my life has been wicked and
lewd, but never so wickedlie and lewdlic bent, as the Papists do report. They
say, I am irreligious, I am altogether given to ungodliness, God has forsaken
me, there is no hope of my salvation. This is but their rash judgment, God
forgive them, I wish them well to do, God grant them a penitent heart, and a
tongue to speak truth. I am not the first that has been wrongfullie
slaundered, nor shall be the last.

There is a Popish Priest here in England, that reported that he knew him
self, both noble men, worshipful, and Preachers here in this Land, to be of
the householde of Atheism: But as I told, so tell I again, that Papists can
do nothing else but lie, and falselie report.

I leave here to trouble you any farther, being otherwise occupied with
waightier affairs, then to obtain fit opportunity and leisure to peruse
this rude Letter of mine. Pray that I may stand fast to the glory of his name,
and the good example of others, whose like conversation I do heartily wish in
the Lord.

And so desiring your good prayers to Jesus Christ (worshipful Company) to
assist me with his grace, that I may persenere in this his gracious calling, to
the end, and in the end: The Lord Jesus govern and guide you, in true
obedience of his glorious Gospel, to the glory of his name. Amen.

Your fellow servant in the Lord. John Nichols.

The Oration made at Room, before the four Cardinals of the Inquisition,
and the Dominican Inquisitour, presented also before the Pope, the.xxvii. day
of May. 1578.
YOu commanded me ( most illustrious, and most reverend Cardinals) to write
what I could against our holy Father the Pope, and against the Catholic
faith. What your meaning is herein, I know not, if you seek to know what
learning I have, I confess I have none: the time of my studies in the
flourishing Universities of England, has been but short, my maintenance in
other common Schools dured but for a small space of time, wherefore neither in
the Universities, neither yet abroad in the country, could I reap any sound
and vnconfused knowledge in good Letters, therefore you may easily be
persuaded, that if you require of me that which you would of a learned Scholar
demand, my want of learning, and rudeness of invention is such: that I can
not sufficiently, whereas I gladly would accomplish your request according to
your mind. If your desire be to understand, how in times past living in
blindness and error. (Mark here, I counted the bright and shining beams of
Christ his Gospel blindness, and the preaching thereof, the preaching of
error,) I subverted, corrupted and profaned as much as I could, the doctrine
of our holy mother the Church, Scilicet. If you are desirous to know wherein
I have offended our holy Father the Pope, and wherein I have more tashly the^
wisely, spoken against the catholic Religion: to obey your commandment, I
did what I could, to put in writing such words as I used against him and his
Religion, and trusting to your woonted clemency in forgiving my trespass, I
write as boldly, as if I were in England: if I did not so, your commandment
should not be accomplished. Wherefore, how so ever I speak, be not grieved,
and turn not therefore your fatherly favor from me: the fault is not in me to
write the thing commanded, I write what I spoke, whiles that I lived in
England, and I spoke as I was taught: now I write that which I hate, but spoke
then that which I lyked. This is a new metamorphesis, of a Collier, to become
a Scholar, of a plowman, a Preacher, and of an heretic to become a
catholic: there are colliers that have gone to school, and have read there is
but one God, one Baptism, and one faith in Jesus christ, and why are they not
scholars? There are plow-men that can teach their household, to love God
above all things, and to love one another as god loved us, and gave his only
begotten son, to reconcile us unto him being his enemies, transgressors of
his holy law and commandment, and are they not Preachers? Heretics will
become catholics, if they consider and examine the corrupt living of babbling
Preachers, their usurping of Ecclesiastical liuinges, their ambition to higher
degrees of promotion, their insatiable and inordinate covetousness, their
proud and stately going in ruffian-like apparel, their too much pampering of
hungry gorges, their excessive lavishness in riotous expenses, their
unstableness of promise, their swearing and forswearing themselves, for the
value of a straw, their wanton and lascivious songs upon ale-benches: and
finally, po^dering of their dissolute behauior, in words and gesture: If they
teach the people one thing, and do an other, what hope can the people have to
be saved? what comfort do they receive? what confidence are they bound to give
to his preaching, or to his glorious words? how can he abolishe sin,
overthrow God his enemies, tread down Satan, root out idolatry, confound
hell, and establishe truth? how can the Gospel increase, righteousness
shine, God have the glory? if Ministers should be the example of all evil, to
whom (as they say) the word of God is committed, to instruct the people how
to please the Lord, and maker of heaven and earth, in all holiness and
righteousness all the days of their lives.

Is it marvel that the people do amiss, and swerue from the truth?
truly, I am thorowlie persuaded, that as they are far from God, in life and
conversation: so far they are from him in faith and good Religion: if their
Religion sauoured not of heresy, would God punish them as he does? What
contrariety in Religion is there amongst them? one professes this doctrine,
and another professes that: one cries, Ecce hic est Christus, Ecce ibi est.
Behold here is Christ, says one, and we have the best Religion, though the
Pope say naie. But the other says, no, they have not the truth on their side:
this faith whereupon we build, this Religion whereunto we trust, every man of
what degree so ever, high or low, poor or rich, noble or ignoble, joyfully
ought to embrace, and gladly receive. By this Religion we shall be blessed,
and inherit an everlasting crown of heavenly glory. One says, he is a
Zwinglian, and an other says, he is an Annabaptist, one says he is a
Lybertine, and an other says, he is a Puritan, one says, he is a Caluinist,
and an other says, he is a Lutherane. Good God, how many Religions be there?
if there were many Gods, I would not wonder at their variety in Religion.

But seeing there is but one God, who made all things, has ordained all
things in a dew order, the Sun to rule by day, the Moon by night, the
earth to bring forth her increase, and the waters not to pass their dew
bounds, who rules all things, and at whose beck all things do appear, in
whom we have our life, our being and essence: Why should there be such
diversity in Religion, such variety in opinions, such contrariety in matters
touching our salvation? There is but one GOD, there ought to be but one
Religion. There is but one truth, what needs so many dissentions, so many
controversies, and so many alterations from the truth? But their life is so
wicked and profane, so rechlesse and lewd, that they will have their Religion
correspondent and agreeable to their conversation.

He that is rocked in the cradle of sin and security, he that is nusled in
wantonness, and brought up in delights, he that is choked with worldly cares
of this life, he, whose belly is his god, he, whose money is his only joy,
and he, whose land is his only trust: regards more these corruptible and
fleeting vanities, then the incorruptible and immutable trea sures of heaue^lie
Paradise. He, whose whole trust and confidence is in sensible pleasures, must
be deprived of insensible delights. He, whose care is greater to become rich,
and stately in the sight of the world, then to become poor in spirit, and
meek in conversation: passes not much what Religion to profess, so that his
state be not impaired, but rather to higher dignity promoted. How esteems
he Religion, which obstinately persisteth in sin, walloweth in sensuality,
and lives in wickedness is he religious, which carefully observes not the
laws of the most righteous and almighty God, but lives securely without all
fear of his majesty? In very deed, the life, deeds, and conversation of
heretics do plainly show, that they more abhor and fear the odious name
of an Epicure or Saduceie, then they do the nature. For what think they the
soul to be immortal, who live not far better then the brutish beasts, which
follow nature, but they degenerate from nature, and are by reason of their
corrupt life, inferior to the beasts of the feeld? Be they persuaded, that God
rewards the godly in heaven, or punishes sinners in hell with endless
torments? In every trifling thing they dread not to violat the commandments
of God, and run headlong into sin: even as though they did either think that
God were but a vain and fay ned thing, or believe that when the body dies, the
soul likewise perishes, and comes unto to nothing. They live so idle,
careless and secure in their callinges: that GOD must surely plague them at
length, and bring them to confusion. They respect the safety, and prosperity
of their bodies here on earth, rather then the salvation of their souls, in
the kingdom of Christ. They rather obey the words of Cambyses, for temporal
gain, then the warning of Christ, for eternal happiness. Whereby it comes to
pass, that they have commonly fair bodies, but deformed souls, much goods,
but little goodness: and glorious they seem in the sight of men outwardly,
but odious inwardly in the eyes of God. For it is hard to find a man (says
Aristotle) Lib. 2. Rhet. 1. ad The odetem. Cap. 10. which in prosperity is
not proud, disdainful and arrogant: of which sort are they, whom clients,
whom authority, whom favor of men has exalted: and so enjoying their
hearts desire, they are of mind, that no adversity can hurt them. And, what
is that as David said? The ungodly has said in his heart, tushe, I shall
never be cast down, there shall no evil happen unto me.

But the fairest Oak, is soonest cast down: the fattest Ox, is readiest for
slaugher: And the felicity of fools, is their own destruction (says
Solomon.) Prouer. Chap. 1. Psalm* 73. For how suddenly do they consume,
vanishe, and come to fearful end? yea, even as a dream are they, when one
awaketh. Lord, when thou raysest the dead, thou wylt despise their Image.

Thou wylt punish them, and reward them according to their deserts, if they
will not amend, and timely be converted to the truth, and hartelie embrace
the Decrees, and constitutions of our holy Mother the Church.

God will surely one day be revenged on them, not only in hell with
everlasting pain: but also in this life with infinite miseries, and a laborinth
of intricate euyls. What do I say? one day, yea, God already for their
wickedness and sliding from our holy Mother the Church, has greeuouslie
afflicted them, and brought them to extreme calamities, wretchedness and
desolation? With how many troubles, with how many vexations of mind, and with
how many sorrows, has God punished the heretics in Flaunders? for their
hautie stomachs, and disloyalty to their natural King, for their stubbornes
in not receiving clemency offered unto them, and for their wilfulnes in
rejecting the same: for their contemning of the Catholic faith, and for their
following, I cannot tell, nor they them selves: what Religion, so unstable and
unconstant their opinion is, in matters of faith. God has stirred up the
Catholics against them, their strength is feebled, their fair buildinges
made even with the ground, their coffers are opened, and their gold and silver
fill the purses of their adversaries: their costly household stuff, their
hangings, their trim attire, their cloth of Tissue, and whatsoever thing else
they have, is taken away. Their cattle is driven from them, their corn is
burnt, and in sum, they them selves, are either justly made bonde-men and
slaves, or else wretchedlie and rufullie slain. So that now after Gods just
reuengement, they are become the outcast, and the very scum of the earth: they
are banished out of their own country, and can find no abiding place to
rest: they are a fable unto all the world for their new invented heresies,
their state and condition is not far better then the Jews, and their
punishment does not much differ the one from the other: the heretics, and the
Jews are hated a like, are persecuted a like, and are punished here in this
world a like. But herein, the Jews and the Heretics do differ in sin:
the Jew sins ignorauntlie, and obstinately, but Heretics sin not
ignorauntlie, but obstinately, and wilfully. The Jews never knew Christ,
never believed in him, nor never took him to be the savior of the world: The
Heretics acknowledged Christ to be the only begotten son of GOD,
believed in him, and took him to be their Messiah or Iesuah. But in sweruing
from the Catholic faith, they have lost the knowledge of Christ, their faith
is frustrate, and in vain: Their taking of Christ to be their savior, can
nothing avail them, can stand them in no steed.

And why? they have denied the Pope to be Supreme head, they have renounced
the Traditions of the Apostles, the Councelles they despise. the aucthorities
of the grave and learned Fathers, they disallowe: and to be brief, the Laws
of our holy Mother the church, they have contempned, and contrary said them.

Wherefore their sin is not excusable, and more greeuouslie to be punished
in hell: then the obstinate ignorance of the Jews, for not receiving Christ
to be their redeemer. If this faith, whereby we hope to be saved, which is the
Catholic faith, were not the true and substantial faith? whereof mention is
made in our Creed, where as it is said: I believe in the holy Catholic
Church. And what church is this? is it not that, for the which so many
Martirs, ended their vital breath, before the due course of nature?

So many in wilderness lead a most austeare life, lived in penury and
scarsitie, glad they were to sustain their lives, with roots and water: they
forsook the world, with all the pomp and glistering shows thereof, they
bridled their carnal affections and sensual lusts: the devil with all his
subtle temptations, they overcame with fasting and prayer. What? do they
believe, that these holy Hermites are all condemned, for that they have
believed the church of Room, to be the holy catholic Church, and the Pope
to be the head and chief Shepherd thereof?

Have so many Monks, so many Friars erred? who wrought so many charitable
deeds, so often fasted, so often prayed, so often called unto God for grace
and help, so brotherly exhorted the wicked to amendment of life, so
friendly harbored the harborlesse, clothed the naked, fed the hungry,
visited the sick, helped the poor prisoners, and redeemed the captives,
forsook their lyuinges, and gave them selves only to contemplation.

Were all these reprobate? do they all suffer torments in hell for ever,
never to enjoy the glorious contemplation of Gods heavenly countenance? is
this the reward which they have for all their holiness, for their upright
dealinges, for their timorous conscience to offend their neighbor, and being
by some mischaunce offended, to ask him forgiveness, and to render a
satisfaction? Shall good works reap no better reward, then among the dampened?
should this their reward, be everlastingly to rue in hell? If, as the
heretics say, their faith was Antichristian-like, and contrary to Gods word.
Believe this who that will, and let him be an heretic therefore: I believe
they were holy men, and for their holiness and catholic Religion, were
crowned with an incorruptible crown of perpetual bliss, in heavenly joy.
If the Religion of our holy Mother the Church were naught? then in vain have
so many Saints served the Lord, honored him, and kept his commandments? in
vain have so many Virgins, intruded themselves to Monasteries, sequestring,
and estraunging themselves from the society of seculer women? in vain have
they reserved their virginity, forsaking wealthy and rich marriages: in vain
have they chastised their bodies, subduing and bringing them to subjection? in
vain have they lived, and in vain have they believed, if for the confession
of the Catholic Church of Room, damnation both of body and soul should be
then their reward? So many Preests, so many Leuits, so many Kings, so many
Princes, so many Potentates, so many Magistrates, have lived in vain, and in
vain was their faith, who were no happier then the Gentiles in Cicero his
time, to be condemned with the heathen Gentiles, since the beginning of the
faith of Christ. Only perishing in soul and body, for that their faith
depended of the Catholic faith, of our holy Mother the Church. Empires,
Kingdoms, Provinces, Islands, Cities, and Towns, believed in the Church of
Room, which is the holy Catholic Church: and are they all condemned
therefore? and have they all lived in blindness, and error? and has Christ
been so unjust of his promise, never to fail his Church? and have his words
been so untrue, that the holy Ghost should direct the Catholic Church in
all her dooinges? how was the Church directed, if all the people erred?

How should Christ being the way, the truth and life, never fail his Spowse:
if he suffered her to decline from him, who is the truth? Christ his words
are true: Coelum et terra peribunt, sed verba eius remanebunt vera in aeternum.
Heaven and earth shall perish, but his words shall remain true for ever.

Though the heretics prate, or speak never so much against the truth,
Christ has evermore instructed the church of Room. Though Martin Luther,
and John Calvin write to the contrary, who make themselves more familliar
with Christ, and more privy to his secrets, then ever the Apostles were, who
were conversant with Christ living on earth. But Luther and Calvin not so:
they make men believe that their Forefathers lived in blindness and error,
even from the time of the Apostles, until their days. O happy mothers, to be
conceived, and to be delivered of such fortunate children, and to bring them up
in such good lytterature, that they should become the lamps of the world, the
Teachers of the ignorant.

I have written I can not tell what: naie, I say, O unhappy mothers, to have
such unlucky children, good it had been for them, and for their children, if
they plaide upon one string, that they never had been borne. Their children
were the instruments of Satan, to seduce the foolish and worldly people,
they were the cause, why that many lost their lives untimely, here in this
world: As in France, thousands were slain, in Germany four score thousand
at once: in Flaunders, I know not how many: besides other Countries,
infinite was the number of them that were slain, drowned and burnt: I know
not for what Religion, nor I think they themselves knew, but why they were
thus cut of, their pride abated, their malice assuaged, and their devises
confounded: I partly know, it was, for that they denied the supremacy of our
holy Father the Pope, God would needs give the overthrow to his enemies,
and grant victory to his general Vicar here on earth. If his title had not
been good, he had not prevailed thus against his enemies, he had not so often
gotten the feelde, and brought his enemies to shame and confusion.

What shall I say of England, my native Soil? it contemns, despises, and
little embraces the truth, little regards the Catholic faith: blind
ignorance, and a Chaos, or a heap of all kind of heresies, greatly there
preuayleth. How many be there that wot not whom to believe, whom to call
upon, or what trade of life they ought to lead? Wickedness, iniquity,
cogging and couzening, and the corruption of this monstrous Realm, are
horrible great: the blessed doctrine of God (the only true food) nourture,
direction, and rule of man's life, is little known, little set by, and little
followed.

God is long before he punishes, but when he comes: he punishes with an
iron rod, and sharply scourges them for their sins, unless they repent,
while it is time. They may look for the like punishment, troubles, and
myseries, as were laid upon the Jews, and which they suffered deservedly,
for the hardenesse of their hearts, and for their unbelief.

Least that I weary your chaste cares (most worthy Cardinals) with
tediousness, I make an end, craving pardon for my grievous trespass, and
heinous offense against our holy father the Pope, and against our holy mother
the Church.

God preserve your Graces, to the holding up of his Church, to the vanquishing
of your enemies, who at the first as bubbles of the water, rise up and flourish
for a while: then by and by fall down and appear no more. Who at the first
rule the roast in many places, as Arrian the heretic did: but I am affraide,
their end shall be as Arrians was, if not in this life, yet in the life to
come: for Arrian avoided his guts, as he went to avoid the excrementes of
his body.

If our heretics die not thus, yet they may die after a wursse sort. If God
in this life plagueth them not, let them tremble and quake for fear, least
both bodies and souls abide the greater torments in hell. They have but a
time to raygne and rule, and believe what they list.

The Pellagians had a time, and prospered for a while, against the Church of
Room, but by little and little, their heresy decayed: The Marcionistes fought
for a while against the Church of Room: but in continuance of time, it got the
upper hand, and the heresy of the Marcionistes was quite forgotten, abolisht
and blotted out.

Thus time will deface the heresies of John Calvin and Martin Luther, with all
the whole rabble and route of Arch-heretiques. God grant your Graces, what
heart can wish here in this world, and in the life to come, perpetually to
reign in bliss, joy, and quietness.

Thus, I have ended.
By me John Nichols, submitting him-self under the Popes correction, meaning
henceforth to be a true Catholic member of the Church of Room.
Amen (quoth the Cardinals) with all the company: And so the Oration ended at
Room, in the year of our Lord. 1578. In the month of May, the.xxv. day,
and presented the.xxvii. day of the same month, before the Pope, and all his
Cardinals, in his Consistory.
A Sermon made at Room against the Pope, in the year of our Lord. 1578.
the.xxvi. day of May, and presented before the Pope in his Consistory,
the.xxvii. day of that Month.
MAny there be (well belooued) who more rashly, then wisely, confess the Pope
of Room, to be Christ his general Vicar here on earth, to be supreme head
over all Churches, the world throughout, and to be the cheifest Shepherd of
Christ his flock. They take the Church of Room to be our holy Mother the
Church: that her we must serve, upon her we must wait, in her we must believe,
in her rests our salvation: and the slyding away from her, is our
condempnation. She is the Church (say they) that cannot err, for she is the
spowse of Christ.

I will prove both by the testimonies of the Scriptures, and by the
aucthorites of the grave and ancient Doctors: that the Pope is not supreme
head, and that the Church of Christ is neither in Room, nor in the Capitol of
Room: no more then it is in Egypt, or the high pinacled Churches in Egypt. But
in every Nation, and in every Country, the men that fear God, and work
righteousness, they are the house of God, they are the Church: Every chaste
body is his holy Tabernacle, and spirit and truth is his heavenly worship:
They are the Church of God, if they do hold, and shall hold, the rejoicing
of their hope, constantly and faithfully unto the end. That such are the house
of God, Saint Paul shows in. 1. Cor. 3.16. Nescitis quia templum Dei estis,
et spiritus Dei habitat in vobis. Do you not know that you are the temple of
God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you? And again. 1. Cor. 6.19. An
nescitis quoniam membra vestra templum sunt spiritus sancti qui in vobis est,
quem habetis a Deo: Do you not know, that your body is the temple of the
holy Ghost which is in you, and which you have of God? And again. 2. Cor.
6.16. Vos estis templu^ Dei vini: sicut dicit Deus, Quoniam inhabitabo in
illis, et inambulabo inter eos, et ero illorum Deus: et ipsi erunt mihi
populus. You are the temple of the living God, as God has said: I will dwell
in them, and I will walk in them, and they shall be my people, and I will be
their God. And again. Ephe. 2.19. Iam non estis hospites, et aduenae, sed
estis Ciues sanctorum, et domestici Dei. We be no more strangers and
forreiners, but fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the famillie of God.

In these and all such places, we be taught that the house of God, is not any
buylding of wood or stones, nor any City, or any material Temple: but man is
the house of God, as hereafter more manifestly it shall appear, when I come
to entreat of the Church.

But first I will begin with the Pope, who arrogantlie names him self the
universal Shepherd. And his Scholars or subjects are not afraid to say,
that he being Bishop of Room, is the visible head of the Church in
Christ's steed: But this they cannot show by Scripture, neither does the
Church require any such head, for Christ is present with it, as he has
promised. Math. 28. Sum vobiscum vsque ad consummationem mundi. I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world.

If the Pope be a visible head, why is he not seen of all men? why does he
not govern all men in the Church, and give nourishment unto them, as the head
ought to do? why does he not preach unto all people? This he does not:
wherefore he is no visible head, as he seems to pretend. And surely, to be
the general head over all: is too great a matter and enterprise for any
mortal man to take upon him.

I am sure the Pope will grant him self to be a member of this Catholic
Church: if he then be a member, how can he also be an head? except the same
thing shall be both an head and a member, which is very absurd and
monstrous. If he say that he is a member, Christ is his head only, and not
any other: why shall not Christ be as well a head for all? These things we
see are very chyldishe and fond, but yet they apply and say, that Christ
said to Peter: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

Now upon this place, our adversaries the Papists, ground this proposition:
the Church is founded upon Saint Peter, Ergo, Saint Peter was the head of the
Church. If Saint Peter be the head of the Church, the Pope is his successor,
Ergo, the Pope is the head of the Church. I deny that Saint Peter was head of
the Church, and therefore is Saint Peter (whose successor the Pope claims
him self to be) was never head of the Church: how can the Bishop of Room be
head?

The confession of our adversaries is grounded upon these words. Tu es
Petrus. That is to say: Thou art Peter. And ours upon this. That it is
said. Super hanc Petram, et non super te Petrum. That is: Upon this Rock, and
not upon thee Peter.

In deed our savior Christ has most manifestly distinguished, Petrum a
Petra, That is to say, Simon Peter from the lively Rock whereupon he has
builded his Church, changing both the name and the person. The which our text
plainly shows us, that which he would never have done, if it ought to have
been understood of Peter, and not of the confession of Saint Peter.

I leave it to the judgment of every Christian: whether it be more agreeable
to the faith, and more healthful for the Church, either that the Church be
founded upon Christ, or upon Peter: upon the son of the living God, upon
him that vanquished satan: or upon him, whom Christ him self in the very
same Chapter calls Satan him self. Upon him who is called the chief corner
stone of the building, or upon him who is an offense unto him: that is to say,
a stone of great stumbling.

None says Saint Paul 1. Cor. 3. Can lay any other foundation, but that
which is laid, which is Christ. Also Saint Peter says. 2. Peter. 2. You are
as living stones, built upon the chief corner stone, in whom who so ever
believes, he shall not be confounded: That is to say, in that cofession of
Christ, which he calls the Rock and foundation of the Church. It appears
then by this place, that Christ has builded it upon him self, and not upon
Simon Peter, and upon the confession of faith which Peter made, and not upon
the faith of Peter, which was too much wavering and unsteadfast. And in very
deed, where Saint John recites this story, he rests wholly upon Peter's
confession. John. 6. And therefore by the Rock, he meant him self. For when
Peter had said, Tu es Christus filius Dei. Thou art Christ the son of God,
Christ said to him: Upon this Rock will I build my Church. And in that
place, he gives no more to Peter in the Keys (which is the binding and
loosing of sinners) then he gives them all else where. As in John. 20. when he
said, (...). Receive the holy Ghost: whose sins so ever ye remit, they are
remitted, and whose sins so ever ye retain, they are retained. Here all
have as much as Peter: And what has ye Pope to do with these words, which
follows not Peter, neither in life, nor doctrine? A strange thing it is to
see, how they build their kingdom upon Peter, and whatsoever is said of
him, they take it to them selves: But before they can prove any thing in
deed, they must prove these three points unto us, if they will have the Pope
to be the supreme head of the whole Church: which they shall never be able to
do by the Scriptures, as long as they live.

First, they must prove that Peter was chief and head of all the Apostles:
Seco^dlie, that he was at Room, and sat there as Bishop general:
Thyrdlie, that he left all the title and pre-eminence, of his seat to his
successors, whatsoever. If they prove the two first points (as they can not)
yet they make nothing against us, although we should grant it them: unless
they prove the third (which they shall never be able to do,) that Saint
Peter has left all his authority to his successors after him for ever.
Saint Paul in his Epistle saluted many that were Christians at Rome, but of
S. Peter he made no mention, if S. Peter had bin at Rome he had not forgotten
to have greeted him as well as the rest.
The Epistles of Saint Peter are extant, but no mention there is, that either
he was at Room, or was cheese of the Apostles, or supreme head of the
Church, or that his successors should play Rex over all men, and be the rulers
of all Churches in the world.

For as much then, that neither by the writings of Saint Peter, nor any other
Apostle of Christ: our adversaries can prove the Pope to be any
Ecclesiastical head to this Church, but Christ Jesus alone, who is always
present with it, and ever walks in the midst of the seven golden
Candelstickes, so that he needs no Vicar general, or universal Bishop:

Let us dearly belooued, as we love the Lord Jesus our head, and tender the
salvation of our own souls, flee far from the Pope, and all his adherentes,
Traditions, Decrees, and Pardons, least he make merchandise also of our
souls, as he does of a great many, both in Room, Italy, France, Spain,
and else where.

O my dearly belooued, be not deceived in your own conceytes, and fond
imagiations: what moves you to take the Pope to be such a fellow, that he
is able to govern universally all Churches? Does his singular virtue (and
not Scriptures) persuade you that the Pope is the universal head of the
Church? If it be so: where appears the excellency of his virtue? Is he
humble as Christ was? nay, the Pope is proud. Is he poor as Christ was?
naie, the Pope is rich. Is he patient as Christ was? naie, the Pope is
impatient. Is he merciful as Christ was? naie, the Pope is unmerciful. Does
he use admonition as Christ used? not so, the Pope uses imprisonment. Does
he use communication as Christ used? naie, the Pope uses extirpation. Does
the Pope use clemency as Christ used? naie, the Pope uses all manner of
tyranny. Does the Pope pray for his adversaries, as Christ did? I tell you
no, the Pope cursseth them apace, and with his thunderboltes of curssing and
banning, he makes affraide: yea, and does terrify the hearts of many that
offend him. I tell you plainly, and th^^ without flattery: you shall find
the Pope in all virtue, severed from Christ: you shall find him to Christ,
Beliall: to light, darkness: to truth, falsehood. Are not these and such
like, the very fruits of Antichriste? the Tree is known by his fruit. O
dear countrymen, forsake not Christ, to follow Antichrist: embrace not
fables, in steed of verity: love not him, which aduanceth him self above
all things, that is called God. Ireneus. Lib. 5. Cap. Penultis mo, a most
ancient Doctor of the Church, who lived almost fifteen hundred years since,
disputing of Antichrist, says thus: Antichristus cum sit seruus, tamen adorari
vult vt Deus: Antichrist, notwithstanding, he be but a slave, yet he will be
worshipped, as if he were God. Ioachimus Abbas says, Antichristus iampridem
natus est Rome, et altius extolletur in sede Apostolica. Antichrist is long
since borne in Room, yet shall he be higher advanced in the Apostolic sea.
Antichriste is he (says Gregory. lib. 4. Epist. 38.) that shall claim to
him self to be universal Bisshoppe, and shall have a guard of Preests to
attend upon him. This Gregory was Bishop of Room, and if this prerogative
and pre-eminence of the name of Christ his general Vicar here on earth, had
been due unto him: he had never (being a wise man) rejected the same, neither
had he at any time been so bold as to call him Antichriste, that should
claim to him self supremacy. If he being Bishop of Room, a godly and a
learned man, would in no wise be counted chief Pastor over all Nations and
Kingdoms: surely, his successors that came after him, were much to blame, to
usurp that swelling and stately title of supremacy. Saint Gregory, calls
the name: Of a supreme head, Of a generallitie, of an universal Patriarche,
of a supreme Bishop, (for all is one:) the name of pride, of rashness, of
blasphemy, an ungodly, a wicked, and a profane name. And that he further
says, Eulogio et Anastasio: None of my predecessors, no Bishop of Room, has
at any time agreede to use so ungodly a title. Let not such also forgette, who
take upon them so rashly, and so vnlearnedlie to maintain the Bishop of
Room: what Gregory herein further says, his words be these, for that they
are manifest, I may not omit them. Gregorius Ioanni Episcopo
Constantinopolitano: Who is therefore (says he) in so corrupt, and naughty a
name, set before us to be followed, which despising the Legions of Angels,
appointed with him in equal fellowshippe, has lept out into the highest point
of singularity, to the intent he might obey none, but rule all. Who also
said: I will clime up into heaven, and make my seat above the Stars of the
sky, I will sit upon the glorious mount toward the North, I will clime up
above the clouds, and will be lykest the most highest. Esai. 21. Let those
which are in blindness, if they have eyes, see, if they have ears, let them
hear: if they have reason, let them judge: if they have learning, let them
discuss, whether these words be so plain, as the Pope in no wise (except he
renounce his Pardons and pride) can avoid them.

Chrisost. Opere imperfect. Hom. 35. Quicunque in terra primatum desiderauerit,
confusionem in coelo inueniet: Whosoever ambiciouslie desires supremacy in
earth, he shall find confusion in heaven. The Pope ambiciouslie desires
supremacy on earth: therefore he shall find confusion in heaven.

Saint Augustine. Tom. 5. De Ciuitate Dei. Lib. 18. Cap. 2. Et Lib. 20. Cap.
19. (He says,) Babylon is the first Room, and Room the second Babylon. And
to come nearer to the matter, Saint John says: Antichrist shall sit in the
City, that is built upon seven hills, And so is the City of Room. Apoca.
17. And moreover ( Sibilla says:) That the greatest terror, and fury of his
Empire, and the greatest woe that he shall work, shall be by the bancks of
Tyber: and there is Room. He that has eyes to see, let him see, and he that
has ears to hear, let him hear. Phocas (as you may read in Platina, In
vita Bonifacij. 3.) That execrable murderer was he, that proclaimed the
Bishop of Room to be head of the universal Church. About six hundred and
thirteen years after Christ was borne, this Phocas being but a common
Soldier: The monstrous cruelty of Phocas, upon the Emperor Mauricius.
by treason and conspiracy, laid hands upon his liege, Lord, and master,
the Emperor Mauricius, and in villainous sort put him to death: and so by
traiterous villainy he aspyred to the Empire.

The manner of his cruelty was this, first he commanded forth the Emperors
youngest Son, and caused him to be slain, even in the sight of his Father,
and so the second, and then the third, and afterward the Empress.

Mauricius, heavily looking on, lamented and cried unto God, saying: Righteous
art thou, O Lord, and rightful is thy judgment. Last of all, he used the
like tyranny also upon the Emperor, and laid him, his wife, and his three
children on a heap, together. After that he had thus lived, and committed
sundry murders, and other great mischeefes: the people took him, slew him,
and threw him into the fire.

Here you may see the first promotour, a holy promotour of the Popes holiness:
a murderer, the finder out of supremacy: and supremacy founded, and builded
upon murder. Thus you have heard, how first the Bishop of Room, was claymed
in steed of president of the universal Church: Not according to Christ his
institution, but according to the commandment of the murderer Phocas: the
Popes usurp the name of supremacy.

Well, shall we have a view of the Scriptures? shall we see what in them that
Bishop of Room has, to maintain his Papacy? one thing (dearly belooued)
before I begin, I dare faithfully promise you, that you shall find
throughout the whole Testament, neither Papa, Papatus, Primas, nor Primatus:
Neither Pope, Papacy, Primate, nor Primacie, to be granted unto any of the
Apostles of Christ, then much less unto the Bishop of Room. How shamefully
they wrest those places of binding and loosing: No learned man there is, but
understands and perceyueth the same. I answer with Cyprian and Augustine:
De. sin. Cleri.

That God in the person of Simon Peter, gave the Keys to all, to signify the
unity of all, for Christ did it not for this purpose, to prefer one man
before another, but to set out the unity of the Church: for the rest of the
Apostles were the same thing that Peter was, endued with like partaking, both
of honor and power.

Augustine says. Homil. in John. 1. Homil. 11. Si in Petro Ecclesia mysterium
non esset, Dominus ei non diceret, Dabo tibi claues: If there were not in Peter
a mystery of the Church, the Lord would not say to him: I will give thee the
Keys.

For if this was said to Peter, the Church has them not: but if the Church
have them, then Peter when he received the Keys, betokened the whole Church.
And in an other place, when they were all asked, only Peter answered, Thou
art Christ: And it is said to him, I will give thee the Keys. As though he
alone, had received the power of binding and loosing: whereas both he being
one said then, one for all, and he received the other with all, as bearing the
person of unity: therefore one for all, because there is unity in all.

Let Peter truly have the first place: yet there is great difference between
the honor of degree, and power. We see that the Apostles commonly granted
this to Peter, that he should speak in assemblies, and after a certain manner
go before them, with propou^ding, exhorting, and admonishing: but of his power
we read nothing at all.

Read the Scriptures, and there ye shall find, what office and power, Peter
had among the Apostles, how he behaved him self, and how he was accepted of
them. Run over all that remains written, you shall find nothing else, but
that he was one of the twelve, equal with the rest, and their fellow, but not
their Lord. But to grant them that which they require, concerning Peter, that
is, that he was the Prince of the Apostles, and excelled the rest in dignity:
Yet there is no cause, why they should of a singular example, make an
universal rule, and draw to perpetuity, that which was once done, since
there is a far differing reason. One was chief among the Apostles,
forsoothe, because they were few in number. If one were the chief of twelve
men, shall it therefore follow, that one ought to be made ruler of a hundred
thousand millions of men? It is no marvel, that twelve had one among them,
that should rule them all, for nature bears this, and the wit of men
requires this, that in every assembly (although they be all equal in power)
yet there is one as a governor, whom the rest may have regard unto. There is
no Court without a Consul: no Session of Judges without a Praetor, or
Propounder: no Company without a Ruler: no fellowshippe without a Master. So
should it be no absurdity, if we confessed, that the Apostles gave to Peter
such a supremacy: but that which is of force among few, is by and by to be
drawn to the whole world, to the ruling whereof, no one man is sufficient. But
(say they) this has place no less in the whole universality of nature, then
in all the parts, that there be one sovereign head of all. And hereof (very
wisely, as they think) they fetch a proof from Cranes and Bees, which always
choose to them selves one guide and not many. I allow in deed, the examples
which they bring forth: but do Bees resort together out of all the world, to
choose them one King? every several King is contented with his own Hiue. So
among Cranes, every hierde has their own King. What else shall they prove
hereby? but that every Church ought to have her own several Bishop
appointed her. But whereas I said, let it be granted, that Peter was Prince
of the Apostles: He was no otherwise called Prince of the Apostles, then Cicero
was called Prince of Eloquence, in respect of excellency, not of superiority:
and so was Homer called, the captain of Poetical finenesse. If a question
should be moved, who were the chief, and captain of the school? Some one or
other should be noted forthwith: yet is he not therefore a Prince over his
fellows, nor his fellows subject unto him. So I say, though Peter had been
called the Prince of the Apostles: yet was he not their sovereign and Lord,
but fellow labourer in the Lord his Vineyarde. And thus much breeflie touching
the Pope and his false supremacy.

Of the erroneous, hippocriticall, and false Church of Room.
Hither unto, I have entreated of the Popes usurped supremacy: now I mean to
speak a word or two of the Church. I will first begin with the definition of
this word, Church, and then I will proceed farther, to entreat thereof,
(...), signifies a Congregation, or company of faithful men, assembled
together. This Church is two manner of ways construed, that is, the Church or
company, only of those, whom God has chosen to everlasting life, in all
times and places. Which is to man invisible, who can not enter so far, as to
know GOD his will, neither the heart of man him self, but is only visyble
to GOD, who knows those that are his (as the Apostle says) and has sealed
them with his own seal. And there is a Church of wicked and reprobate, of
Papists and Turks: yea, the wicked to the end of the world, are mingled with
the good. Papists, contrary to their own laws, frequent the Churches or
assemblies of Christians: the Goats keep company with the Sheep, the chafe
with the grain, and the Tares are found among the good Corn. Into the bosom
of the true Church, God will have his children to be gathered together, not
only that they should by her help and Ministry be nourished, while they are
Infantes and young children: but also be ruled by her motherlie care, till they
grow to ryper age, and at length come to the mark of faith: for it is not
lawful that those things be severed, which God has conjoined.

That to whom he is a Father, the Church be also their Mother: and that not
only under the Law, but also since the coming of Chrisie. As Paul. Galat.
8.26. witnesses, which teaches, That we are the children, of the new and
heavenly Jerusalem. In the Creed where we profess that we believe, In the
holy Catholic Church: We mean not Room to be that holy Catholic
Church, for if no Church ought to be reputed for Christian or Catholic, but
that which is of Rome: Then were the ancient Fathers much to blame, who in
setting down the Articles of our Creed: did neglect and lightly pass over
this vpstart Article of the Romish sea: that where we be commanded to believe
one Catholic and Apostolic Church, they did not in manner command us to
believe the Roman Church withal. Hereby you perceive well enough (my
friends) into what combersome straights, and absurdities, the Papists have
hurled them selves, by their blind and unadvised rashness. For first, if no
certainty of salvation be to be hoped for out of the Church, which Church must
be without all question, that same very Church of Room, as they frame their
arguments, and that the Church of Room be none other, but the same which is
strained and straighted to the universal commandments, and decrees of the
Bishop of Room. Now then they do exempt out of the privilege of the
Church, not only this our English nation: but together with them also, they
do exclude out of the number of the Catholic Church, infinite other famous
learned Clarks, of the ancient and pure age of the Church, as Doctors,
Patriarchs, and Bishops, yea, amongst these also, all the Bishops of
Room, as many as were Gregory's predecessors. But what need many proofs in a
matter of it self so manifest and well known? Undoubtedly, since Christ
would vouchsafe to lay the first foundation, yea, and to build up that
beautiful and everlasting building of his own house, upon none other ground
work, then upon that corner stone of Christian faith, and Christian
confession. And if Paul doubted nothing to recoumpt the same faith to be the
only and infallible shoote-Ancker of salvation: By what Law then will the Pope
adiudge them as out-castes, worthy to be banished from the Catholic and
Apostolic Church, which profess the self same faith of Christ, that the
Apostles and other Catholic Churches did profess? Why should the Papists
thus cruelly deal with the Christians, for following Christ and his Apostles?
Why should they thus furiously persecute the godly, burn them, or consume
them in prison, for denying the Roman Church, to be the holy Catholic
Church? Seeing that no mention thereof is made to be such a Church (as the
Papists would have it to be) throughout all the Scriptures.

But we gather by the Scriptures, that the Church of Room is the Church of the
devil: for if the Church of Room were the true Church of Christ, Christ's
sheep hear his voice, But the Church of Room hears not his voice, but
hears rather the voice of Courtezanes: therefore it is not the true Church,
but the Sinagogue of Satan.

She writes in her coin, That Kingdom and people, that do not obey me,
shall be rooted out, contrary to that: the Kings of Nations bear rule over
them, but ye shall not so do: therefore she is not the true Church. Ambrose
says, That the true Church, is the Mother of the living: But those that be in
this Church are dead, for they have no faith, because they have no knowledge,
therefore this Church is not the true Church. She commits idolatry, and
spiritual adultery many ways: therefore she is not the holy Catholic
Church. The Church of Room numbers her multitudes, as David nu^bred his
Soldiers: and therefore she is not the holy Catholic Church. These Papists
are like Cockles, they carry their house about with them, and so do they their
Church. Aspalathus will not grow but in Boetia, ye kill these men, if ye take
away the couerture of ye Church of Room: This Church is the rich Arras, that
covers all her faults and follies. But admit (good people) that we were
wunderfull humble and obedient to this Church, and most willing to come again,
as foolish Beetles to the shirt of this Church, and to ask of her questions
and demaundes: I protest before heaven and earth, and the founder of them
both, that I think it not good, we should be hold in asking, for the great
and imminent danger in her aunswering. For if we ask, Whether Jesus be
Christ, or no, This Romish Church gives out her answer: That the Bishop of
Room is the high Priest, and that the said Bishop has the strength of the
kingdom of Christ, and the infallible verity of a Prophet. And therefore,
they allow to over rule Christ, by adding and taking too and fro his word.
If we ask, If Christ were the only oblation offered once up for all, for the
sins of the world: Her answer is very dangerous, That the Mass is a
sacrifice for the quick and the dead. And she falls into commendation of
her wheaten God, and does attribute the health of the world, to that
abominable bread and Idol. If we ask her, If Christ be her intercessour to
God: She answers us most wickedlie, Iure Matris imperat: That Christ
forsoothe, shall command his Father, by the right of his Mother.

If we ask her, Of the state and condition of man, since the fall of Adam:
She answers, That he may overtake heaven of him self, and well enough by
him self, work out his own salvation. Ask her, What faith is: And she will
tell of an implicit thing, and of a general faith, and to be holden fast by
that hand: there she keeps silence, and is as speechless as a Fish. If we
ask her, What the Law is: She ladeth our shoulders with the heavy Ceremonies
of Judaisme, and Paganism. If we ask her, What the Gospel is: She makes
void Gods promise, with her own Justice. If we ask her, Of good works: She
answers just, like Saint Lukes Pharasie. Then again, she deuiseth good
works to be thus: to hyre certain men for money, to pray, and to mumble up
much quantity of Psalms in a covert tongue, to keep huge troughes of Ling
and Saltfishe, many years, to wax speechless with seldom speaking, to wax
lame with much sitting, to use many knottes in their gyrdles, and many windows
in their shows, to be buried in Monkishe weeds, and Nunnishe Cowles, etc.

If we ask her, Of the number of Christ's Sacraments: She answers, That
there be seven: Without Scripture, she has added five to Gods two, as though
God has let her his two Sacraments to usury. If we ask her, Whether we go
after this life: She tells us of Virgils, Platoes, and Mahomets Purgatory.
If we should say unto her, Fair Church of Room, whether is thy belooued gone:
She would say, He went in his body to harrowe hell. And then I will ask her,
How she can answer to Signum Ionae, et signum Lazari: The sign of Jonas,
and the sign of Lazarus, that Christ should be three days in his grave. If
we would say, Fair Church of Room, whether is thy belooued gone: She will
say, To heaven.

But then she dreameth grosely of heaven, as Mahomet, and besides that in
every hill Alter, and groan Alter: she will say, Here is Christ, and there
is Christ. The more she answers, the more she answers of lesinges.

Uneath has she now, these many long years answered any thing truly, of
the goinges of the beloved, or of the dooinges of the beloved.

Believe me truly (O world) it is danger to ask her: it is next to deaths
door, to hear her: it is dampnable death and hell, to believe her. Better it
is to dye in body (for him that may) then to believe her to be the holy
Catholic Church, and therefore, to perish in body and soul. Happy were
they, and are, and shall be, who patiently suffered, do suffer, and shall
suffer, the tyranny and persecution of Antichriste, Hope of Room, for the
denial of his whoorishe, and Babilonicall Church. By their patience it
appeared, that they had the cognizance, or badge of the true Church. August. De
tempore. Ser. 130. Crux regni insigne est, The Cross (says Saint Augustine)
is the cognizance, or badge of the Church. Athanasius, Ad solitariam vitam
agentes, says: Caedi Christianorum proprium est: Caedere aus tem Christianos
Pilati, et Caiphae officia sunt. To be persecuted, belongs to Christians: but
to persecute the Christians, belongs to the office of Pilate and Caiphas. But
the Papists say, that they punish the Protestants, only for a desire to have
them reconciled to their Sinagogue, and for entyre love: A gentle kind of
love, like the love of one Philippides (of whom Aristophanes in Vespis
writes) who took a cudgel, A pretty example alluded to the Papists.
and did beat his Father, and all for love. But we may say with Tertullian,
Crudelitas vestra nostra gloria est: Your cruelty, is our glory. For Gods
Religion, the more it is pressed, the more it increases.

This persecution of the Papists against the Christians, is an evident token,
that the Church of Room is the Sinagogue of Satan. Caine, persecuted Abell:
the Giants, Noah: the Sodomites, Loath: Ismaell, Isaac: Esau, Jacob: the
Egiptians, the Israelites: Pharaoh, Moses: Saul, David: and yet David would
not hurt again, of whom we learned, that Gods Church does suffer rather then
hurt: and pardon, rather then persecute. The false Church of the Prophets,
persecuted the true prophetical Church: the Sinagogue of the Jews, persecuted
Christ and his Apostles. The Church of Room persecuteth Christ's little
flock, and congregation: So Hilarious, and Nicephorus, in many places
discourse. Lactantius says excellently to this matter: Divine. Institut. Lib.
5. Cap. 19. Defendenda religio est, non occidendo, sed monendo: non saeuitia,
sed patientia: non scelere sed fide. Nam si sanguine et tormentis, si malo
religionem defendere velis, iam non defendetur illa, sed polluetur atque
violabitur. Religion is to be defended, not with murdering, but with
monishing: not with cruelty, but with patience: not with fury, but with
faithfulness. For if ye defend Religion with bloodshedde, and tormenting, or
with working of mischief: it is not defended, but defiled and deceived.

The Church of Room persecuteth all Christians, The Ornaments and deckings of
the Antichristian Church of Room.
her sentence is, burn, burn, burn: her hadge, let us lay wait for blood:
her head, blasphemy: her sheelde, tyranny: her breast, injury: her eyes,
fire: her gyrdle, fornication: her breath, poison: her tongue, the stinge of
death: her feet, ready to shed innocent blood: her sword, violence: her
Cross, persecution: her pardons, iniquity: her tryple crown, presumption:
her Keys, ambition, and all her dooinges abomination. Here do follow, great
swarms of Cainites, Giantes, Sodomites, Egiptians, Scribes, Pharasies,
Herodians, Monks, The Champions and vpholders of this Babilonicall Sea.
Friars, Cardinals, Adulterers, Idolaters, Parasites, Poysoners, Pardoners,
Bawdes, Flatterers, Traitors, Rebels, Murderers, Thieves: with all the Romish
rabble. These are the right Canniballes, like to the barbarous people of
Armenica, that eat one an other.

My country men, will you build your faith upon this Church, which receives
such Varlettes, which has such graceless persons, such persecutours, and
such bloody butchers? The Church of Christ has none such, there were never
in the Church of Christ, nor are not, nor never shall be, persecutors. The
Church of Christ is still persecuted, and never persecuteth. Did the
Matriarches persecute? did Christ persecute? did ye Apostles persecute? When
the Samaritanes would not receive Christ. James and John being as yet Nouices
in Christ's school, called for fire from heaven, and would have burned and
consumed the Samaritanes: but Christ rebuked them, saying: You wot not of what
manner of spirit you are, for the son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them.

If the Church of Room were the holy Catholic Church: it would then feed
the soul of man (being a spirit) with spiritual food, moon her by
spiritual instruments, draw her by the word, lead her by the spirit, and
persuade her by the Scriptures, which are the only means which God
appoynteth. If an Heretic hold an opinion, he holds it either of
ignorance, or of wylfulnesse: If of ignorance, he is to be converted by
doctrine, to be convinced by Scripture, reformed by exhortation, reduced by
reason, persuaded by the truth: If of wylfulnesse, he is to be menaced by the
Law, and corrected by excommunication. The Church of Rome uses no such
means: wherefore the Church of Room is of the devil, and not of Christ. And
as the Lord has done to Jerusalem, in Titus Vespasianus time, (as Josephus in
his history of the Jews makes mention:) and to the ruins thereof, that the
place should not boast of the Oracles of God: So God has done to Room, A
notable forewarning to the Church of Room.
to the Idolles thereof, that their boasting should be in vain of the Church
of God. For what was Room even from her birth, but a City built in Parricide?
then strengthened with robberies, and made a Sanctuary for murderers of all
Nations, The pettigree of Room.
as you may read in their own Roman Hystories. And what was it afterward
(in the time of the Emperor Iulianus Apostata, Dioclesian, Nero, and diverse
others) but a slaughter house of the Martyrs of God? and what is it in ours,
and our fathers days, but the Queen of pride, the nurse of Idolatries, the
mother of whordomes, the sincke of iniquities? out of which, sorceries,
withcrafts, poisoninges, adulteries, rebellions, and bloody wars, have
ouerflowed the whole earth. Who will believe in this Church? are we commanded
to believe leeue in this Church, when as it is said in our Creed, Credo
sanctam Catholicam Ecclesiam: I believe (that there has been, is, and shall
be) a holy Catholic Church? My sense can not show it, and therefore I
believe it: for if I see it, belief is in vain, for where sense fails, and
can go no farther: there belief begins. For is it necessary that we
should from time to time believe, that Room is the holy Catholic Church:
but we should from time to time believe, there is a holy Catholic church. But
in deed, the Papists and such like open persecutours, have of so long time
kept under the Church, that we are driven to belief, for they have left scarce
any sense, or memory of the true members of Christ's Church. If we believe the
Roman Church to be, The holy Catholic Church: The Scriptures are against
us, their own Doctors are against us: and the definition of the word, Church,
is against us. Shall we believe the building of Saint Peter's Church, to be our
holy Mother the Church? Believe it who that will, and I assure him that he
has not the true Church on his side: nor the Gospel to excuse him.

Seek for this Church, whereof Christ is head, and not the Pope: in this
Church have we liberty, not to do evil, but to do good. The Churth of Room
brings to our life, miserable bondage. Whiles we are in the Church of
Christ, we hope for the promises of life everlasting: but whiles we stand
in the Church of Room, we stand in fear and terror of eternal
condempnation, to come upon us for our sins, in the day of death. Through
Christ (who is the head of this true Church) we see our sins purged, the
Devil vanquished, death and condempnation abolished, and our selves in the
liberty of the children of God, to cry Abba Father. Thus much touching the
Church.

Of the infallible, perfect ground, and sufficiency of the Scriptures, to the
eternal comfort and consolation of all true Christians, and utter confusion of
the Pope, and all his adherentes.
BEcause the Papists affirm and boldly say, that the Scriptures are not
sufficient, for a man thereby to know the truth, by the which he may be saved:
it is erpedient and needful at this present time, to hear what the
Scriptures and Doctors do say thereunto. First I will begin with the
Scriptures, as with the verity it self: and then with the Doctors, who ground
their arguments and reasons upon the word of God, which is the holy
Scripture. Although it behooves man, earnestly to bend his eyes to consider,
the works of God. For as much as he is set (as it were) in this gorgeous
stage, to be a beholder of them: yet principally ought be to bend his ears to
the Scriptures, that he may better profit thereby, and sooner learn the
truth, by the which he may be saved. And therefore it is no marvel, that
they which are borne in darkness: do more and more wax hard in their amazed
dullness, because very few of them do give them selves pliable to learn of
the word of God, whereby to keep them within the bounds: but they rather
rejoice in their own vanity. Thus then ought we to hold, that to the end
true Religion may shine amongst us, we must take our beginning at the heavenly
doctrine, and that no man can have any taste, be it never so little, of true
and sound doctrine: unless he have been Scholar to the Scriptures. And from
hence grows the original of true understanding, that we reverently embrace,
whatsoever it pleases GOD, therein to testify of him self: for not ^nely the
perfect and (in all points) absolute faith: but also all right knowledge of
God, springs from obedience, and truly in this behalf, God of his singular
providence, has provided for men, in all ages.

For if we consider, how slippery an inclination man's mind has to slide
into, by forgetfulness of God, how great a readiness to fall into all kind of
errors, how great a lust to forge oftentimes new and counterfeyt Religions:
The only fall of man into so many and sundry euyls, is the forgetfulness of
God.
We may thereby perceive, how necessary it was to have the heavenly doctrine,
so put in writing, that it should not either perish by forgetfulness, or
grow vain by error, or be corrupted by boldness of men. Since therefore it is
manifest that God has always used the help of his word, toward all those
whom it pleased him at any time fruitfully to instruct, because he foresawe,
that his Image imprinted in that most beautiful form of the world, was not
sufficiently effectual: therefore it behooves us to travail this straight
way, if we earnestly couette to attain to the true beholding of God, we must
I say, come to his word, wherein God is well and lively set out by his
works, when his works be weyed, not after the perverseness of our own
judgment, but according to the rule of the eternal truth. If we swerue from
that word (as I said even now) although we run never so fast: yet we shall
never attain to the mark, because the course of our running is out of the
way. For thus we must think, that the brightness of the face of God, which
the Apostle calls (Romans 16.) such, as can not be attained unto, is unto us
like a Maze, out of which we can not vnwrappe our selves, unless we be by the
line of the word, guided into it. And therefore (David. Psalm. 9. et. 96.97.99.
etc.) oftentimes when he teaches that superstitions are to be taken away out
of the world, that pure Religion may florishe: brings in God reigning,
meaning by this word, reigning, not the power that he has: but the doctrine,
whereby he challenges to him self, a lawful government: because errors can
never be rooted out of the hearts of men, till the true knowledge of God be
planted.

Therefore the same Prophet, after that he has recited. Psalm. 19.21. That
the heavens declare the glory of God, that the fyrmament shows forth the
works of his hands:

That the orderly succeeding course of days and nights, preaches his
Majesty: then he descends to make mention of his word: (...). (says he,)
(...). The law of the Lord is undefiled, converting souls, (says David) the
witness of the Lord is faithful, giving wisdom to little ones: The
rightfulnesse of the Lord is upright, making hearts cheerful: the
commandment of the Lord is bright, giving light to the eyes. For although he
comprehends the other uses of the Law, yet in generallitie, he means: that
for as much as God does in vain, call unto him all Nations, by the beholding
of the heaven and earth: therefore this is the peculiar school of the children
of God. The same meaning has the.xix. Psalm, where the Prophet having
preached, Of the voice of God, which in thunder, winds, showers, whirle-winds
and storms, shakes the earth, makes the mountains to tremble, and breaks
the Ceder trees: In the end, at last he goes farther, and says. That his
praises are sung in the Sanctuary, because the unbelievers are deaf, and
hear not all the voices of God that resound in the air. And in like manner,
in an other Psalm. 93.5. after that he had described, the terrible waves of
the sea: He thus concludes, Thy testimonies are verified, the beauty of thy
Temple is holiness for ever.

And out of this meaning also proceeded, that which Christ said to the woman
of Samaria. John. 4.22. That her Nation and the rest, did honor that which
they knew not, and that only the Jews did worship the true God. For
whereas the wit of man (by reason of the feebleness thereof) can by no
means attain unto God, but being helped and lyfted up by his holy word: It
followed of necessity that all men, except the Jews, did wander in vanity
and error, because they sought God without his word.

Should the Papists commit such absurdities in their writings of matters of
Religion, if they rejected not the scriptures? Should they hold such erroneous
opinions (as they do) if they would content themselves, with the sufficiency
of the Scriptures? no truly, if they followed the doctrine, precepts, and
council of the Scriptures, and not Traditions, the inventions of ambitious and
worldly minded men.

S. John teaches in the. 20. Chap. That all things needful to salvation, are
only contained in the word of God. These are his words. Multa quidem et alia
signa fecit Jesus in conspectu discipulorum suoru^, quae non sunt scripta in
libro hoc: haec autem scripta sunt, vt credatis quod Jesus est Christus ille
filius Dei, et vt credentes vi^ tam habeatis per nomen eius. And many other
signs did Jesus in the presence of his Disciples, which are not written in
this book: but these things are written that ye might believe, that Jesus is
Christ the son of God, and that in believing, ye might have life through his
name.

The which words Cyrill expounds thus. Non omnia qua Dominus fecit,
conscripta sunt, sed quae scribentes putarunt sufficere tam ad mores quam ad
dogmata. All is not written that Christ did, but so much as the writers
thought sufficient, as well to manners as to doctrine.

Saint Augustine, De doctrina Christiana. Lib. 2. Cap. 9. Says: In his quae
aperte in Scripturis posita sunt, inueniuntur ea omnia quae continent fidem
moresque viuendi. All things containing faith and manners, are manifestly set
down in the Scriptures.

Basilius, De fidei Confessione. Says, Manifesta est elapsio a fide, et
superbiae crimen, aut reprobare quid ex ijs quae scripta sunt, aut
superinducere quid ex non scriptis. It is a manifest slyding from the faith,
and a great pride: either to reject any thing that is written in the word of
GOD, or to bring in any thing unwritten. For, Christ's sheep (says Saint
John. Chap. 10.4.) hear his voice, and will not hear the voice of an other.
And in his Moralles he says: That if whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, if
faith come by hearing, hearing by the word of God: whatsoever is brought in
beside the word of God, is not of faith, and therefore sin.

What have we to do good Christian people, with Romish Traditions, with
Decrees, Canons, Constitutions, Councils, and Papisticall writings? are their
inventions comparable with the scriptures? or have the Papists the like
vtteraunce, the like gift of speech, as Christ had? Saint John speaking of
Christ. Chap. 7.46. Says, Nunquam sic loquutus est homo: Never man spoke as
this man does. Not all the hypocritical illusions of the Papists, can once
prevail against Christ's Church.
Not Cicero, the father of eloquence: not Demosthenes, out of whose mouth,
flowed flooddes of eloquence: not eloquent Pericles, of whom it is written,
that he did thunder out his words: not the golden tongued Chrysostom. But
Christ's arguments were so mighty, and his words so sweet: that a certain
woman, having great admonition thereof: lyfted up her voice, and said unto
him. Happy is the womb that bare thee, and the pappes which thou have sucked.

This word differs in perfection: in his words all things endure, take
away this word: what is man? a brute beast: Take away the sun out of the
world, what remains? horrible darkness. Lactantius. De ira Dei. Cap. 1.
Says, Lumen mentis humanae Deus est: remoto Deo coelestique doctrina omnia
erroribus plena sunt: God is the light of man's soul, if you set a side, or put
away from you God his heavenly word: all things are full of errors. Take
away this word, what is man? a captive of Satan, a pray of death, a slave of
sin, a fire-brande of hell. Ignorantia Scripturaru^ Christi ignorantia est.
Says Hierome, in Prologo Esaiae. Ignorance of the scriptures, is ignorance
of Christ. As far as heaven is distaunt from earth, so far ought heavenly
things, always be preferred before human things, yea, incomparably ought
they always to be preferred.

Hierome in Epistola, Ad Demetriadem Virginem, vtere lectione diuina: Says
he: Vtere speculo, vide speculum, foeda corrigenda: pulchra conseruanda, et
pulchra facienda. Scriptura enim speculum est, foeda ostendens, et corrige
dicens. Use to read the holy Scripture, use the glass, see the glass: that
deformity may be amended, fayrenesse preserved, and fair things performed:
For the scripture is a glass, showing deformity, and saying amend. Gregoris,
in Moral, says: Sacra scriptura tanquam speculum quoddam mentis. The holy
Scriptures is as a certain glass of the mind. S. Augustine, in Psalm. 48.
Scriptura sancta sit tibi tanquam speculum, speculum hoc habet splendorem non
mendacem, non adulantem, nullius personam amantem: formosus es? formosum te ibi
vides. Sed cum foedus accesseries, et foedum te ibi videris, noli accusare
speculum, ad te redi, non te fallit speculum, tu te noli fallere. Let the holy
Scripture be to thee as a glass, this glass has no deceytfull or flattering
brightness, it is not in love with any man's person. Art thou beautiful?
thou see thy self there beautiful: but when thou come deformed, accuse
not the glass, advise thy self, the glass deceyueth thee not, deceive not
thou thy self.

Saint Augustine says, Tom. 2. Epist. 166. In Scripturis didicimus Christum,
in Scripturis didicimus Ecclesia^. In the Scriptures we have learned Christ,
in the Scriptures we have learned the Church. Saint Ambrose says, in Homil.
Lib. 4. Cap. 1. Christus oritur in lectione sol iustitiae: In reading the
Scriptures, Christ the son of righteousness ryseth.

Saint Augustine says, Verbo Dei docemur in omnibus: By the word of God, we
are instructed in all things. Saint Basil, in Concione: Quod Deus non causa
malorum: verbum Dei ex quo solo noscitur Deus, regiam viam monstrat, et est
lucerna pedum nostrorum. The word of GOD, by the which only GOD is known:
shows the kings high way, and is the light of our feet. We learn faith in
the Scriptures, and not in Popish Traditions. Saint Hillarie says, Ad
imperatorem Constantinum: to the Emperor Constantinus. Fidem imperator
quaeris? audi eam, non de nouis Chartulis, sed de Dei libris. Does your
Majesty seek the faith? Hear it then, not out of any new scroll, but out of
the book of God. Saint John says, Chap. 14. Qui non diligit me, sermones meos
non seruat: et sermo quem auditis, non est meus, sed eius qui misit me Patris.
He that looueth me not, keeps not my words: and the word which ye hear is
not mine, but the fathers which sent me. If we will be contented with the
scriptures only, and go no farther: we shall receive great benefit thereby.
The blind shall see, the deaf shall hear, the dumb shall speak, the lame
shall walk, fools shall be wise, the sick shall be whole, the dead shall
reuine. The embracing of the word of GOD, has made many Papists, The
inestimable benefit that proceeds by the word of God.
good Christians: many persecutours, holy Martyrs: many proud men, humble:
many covetous mysers, lyberall: many cruel tyrants, merciful favorers: many
faithless, faithful: many filthy fornicatours, chaste: many furious, and
wrathful, meek and mild: many slaunderers, speakers of the truth: many
backbiters, penitent: many slothful and drousie, vigilant and watchful: many
fearful, bold, yea, and contempners of Phalaris Bull: many Saules, many
Paul's: many children of darkness, the children of light.

God by his word, offers to us his merciful hand: by faith, we give to God
our hand, and the Sacraments are as a third hand, which confirm and
establish, the joining of the other two together. If you fear the judgment of
sin, this most precious word offers you, righteousness in Christ: if you
fear death, it offers life: if you fear the fire of hell, it offers the
joys of heaven. And breeflie, you have in this word, whence you may take,
both in life recreation: and in death preservation, both of body and soul
everlastingly. The word of God is water to refreshe us, and wine to cheer us:
The word of God, is the whole direction of a man's life.
it is bread to strengthen us, and Manna to nourishe us: it is a treasure to
enritch us, and a pearl to adorn us: it is a leaven to heat us, and salt to
powder us: it is a sword to defend us, and a fire to purge us: it is a salve to
heal us, and a lantorne to guide us: it it is a Trumpet to call us, and
wisdom to instruct us: a way to dyrect us, and life to revive us. But alas,
we are so far from laboring for this word of God, that whereas like good
husband men, we should labor and dig in the feeld, and sell all that we have
to buie that feelde: whereas, like wise merchant men, we should labor and
seek for good pearls, and sell all that we have, to buie that pearl of great
prise: We (says Saint Matthew. 7.) like dogs refuse holy things offered, we
turn about, and tear them that do offer them: We, like swine, tread pearls
under our feet, and do account this pearl, this holy thing, the word of
life, to be unto us a ring of gold in a swines snowte. For do the Papists
delight to hear Gods word? behold, yet they are like the deaf Adder, which
stops her ears, at the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisclie.
Do they love the bringers of this word? behold, yet there is in England an
Adders brood, a generation of Vipers. If we have more regard in the sayings
of the Papists, and put more confidence in their words, then in the
Scriptures: how can we without speedy repentance, but look for the terrible
stroke of vengeance? God (says Valerius Maximus) has feet of wool, he
comes slowly to punish, but he has hands of iron, when he comes, he
strikes sore. Phillip king of Macedonia, hearing of one in his kingdom, which
refused most unthankfully, to receive a stranger, of whom before he had been
succored in shyp-wracke in extreme need: For a worthy punishment, caused to
be printed in his forehead, with an whotte iron, these words: Ingratus Hospes,
An unthankful Guest. So we, by refusing his word, may we not think our
selves worthy of many whot yrons, to print our unthankfulness to our shame?
Thus much for this part.

Of auricular Confession.
THus much you have heard (dearly belooued) touching the sufficiency of the
word of God: I have proved the sufficiency thereof, both by the testimonies
of the Scriptures, as also with the aucthority of the Doctors. Now I mean
(God wylling) to confute auricular Confession: both by Scriptures, Doctors,
and Reasons.

The Papists are not ashamed to say and write, that it is needful for all
men and women, and that it is necessary for all that are come to the years of
discretion, to confess to their ghostly Father (master popish Priest)
whatsoever sins they have committed. If they refuse so to do, our holy
Father the Pope, will hang them in a Rope, or send them to hell, in ringing
Papa Ioannas Bell. If they could prove by the Scriptures, auricular Confession
to be lawful and necessary, to obtain forgiveness of sins: then is it
tolerable, yea, and commendable (in respect of obedience to the word of God)
to use auricular Confession. But if Scriptures thereof, make no mention at all,
but rather disprooue such whispering of sins, in the ears of doltishe
Priests: I take such auricular Confession to be fond, foolish, and
dangerous: Do thou read, O Christian man, that ever the Patriarchs were
wont to confess their particular sins to Priests, as the Papists do at
this time? did the Prophets use such auricular Confession? or did the
Apostles, or did the Disciples, or did any of the Saints of the primative
Church, reveal in secreate wise their particular faults to any Confessor, or
to any Priest? I read of none. If then the Patriarchs, the Prophets, In the
Primative Church no confession ever heard of.
the Apostles, the Disciples of Christ, the holy Saints of the Primative
Church, never used any auricular Confession: why then should we? what example
have we to follow? what commandment is there given unto us, to confess our
sins before the Priest? what law does charge us, to reckon up all our
sins? Is not sin forgiven, but upon condition, that there be an intent
conceived to confess it? where they babble that there remains no entry into
Paradise, if occasion of confession be neglected. Must all sins be reckened
up? but David (as it is written Psalm. 19.13.) who as I think, had well
studied upon the confession of his sins, yet cried out? Who shall understand
my errors: Lord cleanse me from my secret sins. And in an other place.
Psalm. 28.15. My iniquities have passed abooue my head, and like a weighty
burden have waxed heavy, abooue my strength. Truly, he understood, how great
was the bottomless depth of our sins: how many were the sorts, of our
mischeeuous dooinges: how many heads, this monster Hydra did bear: and how
long a tail she drew after her. Therefore he went not about to reckon up a
register of them, but out of the depth of euyls, he cried unto the Lord: I am
overwhelmed, I am buried and choked: the gates of hell have compassed me, let
thy hand draw me out, which am drowned in the great pit, and am faynting and
ready to die. Who now may think upon the numbering of his sins, when he
seeeth that David can make no number of his? After this rule of David we see,
that the Publicans confession was made, whereof mention is made in the. 18. of
Luke, and in the. 38. verse. (...). Jesus, O son of David, have mercy upon
me. Domine miserere mei peccatoris. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. As if he
should say: All that ever I am, I am altogether a sinner: and I cannot attain
with wit, or express with tongue, the greatness of my sins to be
confessed? let the bottomless depth of thy mercy, swallowe up the bottomless
depth of my sin. But then the Papists will say, what? are not all our sins
to be confessed? is no confession acceptable to God, but ye which is knit up in
these two words, (I am a sinner?) No, but rather we must endeavor our selves as
much as in us lies, to power out our heart before the Lord, and not only in
one word, confess our selves sinners: but also truly and heartily acknowledge
our selves to be such, and with all our thought, record how great and diverse is
our filth of sins, not only that we be unclean: but with how great, and in
how many parts is our vnclea^nes: not only yt we be debtors, but with how great
debts we be laden, and how many ways charged: not only yt we be wounded, but
also with how many and deadly strokes we be wounded. With this reknowledging,
when yt sinner has wholly powered out him self before God, let him earnestly and
sincerely think, yt yet there remain mo sins, and that yt secret corners of
their evils are so deep, yt they can not thoroughly be disclosed, and he cries
out with David. Psa. 19.31. Who understands my errors? Lord cle^ase me from my
hidden sins.

How where the Papists affirm, that sins are not forgiven, but with an
intent of confessing, firmly conceived, and that the gate of Paradise is shut
against him that neglects occasion offered, when he may be consessed: God
forhid that we should grant them that, for there is no other forginenesse of
sins, then always has heene. It is not read, that all they who have confessed
their sins, in the ear of some Priest, that they have only therefore
obtained forgiveness of sins at Christ's hand: And truly they could not
confess, where there were neither Priests, confessors, nor any confessing at
all. And in many ages after, this confession was unheard of, at which time,
sins were forgiven without this condition. But that we may not need to
dispute longer about this, as about a doubtful matter: the word of God is
plain, which abides for ever: Whenever the sinner repents (says Christ,
by the Prophet Ezechiel. Chap. 18.21.) I will no more remember all his
iniquities. He that dare add any thing to this word, binds not sins, but
the mercy of God: for whereas they say, that judgment can not be given, but
when the cause is heard, we have a solution in readiness, that they do
presumptuously take that upon them selves, which have made them selves Judges.
And it is a marvel that they do so boldly frame to them selves such
principles, as no man in his right wit will grant. They boast that the
office of binding and loosing, is committed to them, as though it were a
certain jurisdiction joined with Inquisition.

Moreover, their whole doctrine cries out: that this aucthority was unknown to
the Apostles: Neither does it belong to the Priest, but to him which desires
absolution, to know certainly whether the sinner be loosed or not. For as much
as he that hears, can never know whether the reckoning be just and perfect:
so should there be no absolution, but such as is restrained to his words, that
is, to be judged. The Lord cries out by Esai. Chap. 43.15. It is I, It is I,
that do put away iniquities, for mine own sake, and will not be mindful of
thy sins.

Does he not openly declare, that he fetches the cause and foundation of
forgiveness only from his own goodness? Moreover, whereas the whole
Scripture bears witness of Christ: That forgiveness of sins, is to be
received by the name of Jesus Christ, as it is written in the Acts of the
Apostles, Chap. 10.43. Does it not thereby exclude all other names? how then
do they teach, that it is received by the name of satisfactions? For whereas
the Scripture says, By the name of Christ: it means that we bring nothing,
we allege nothing of our own: but rest upon the foundation of Christ. As
Paul 2. Corin. 5.19. where as he affyrmeth: That God is reconciling the world
to him self in Christ, for his sake, not imputing to men their sins. He
immediately she weth the mean and manner how: Because he that was without
sin, was made sin for us. S. John says, 1. Epi. 2. Cha. (...). My babes,
these things write I unto you, that ye sin not: and if any man sin, we
have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the just. And he is the
reconciliation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins
of the whole world.

And in the. 12. verse: Little children, I write unto you, because your sins
are forgiven you for his names sake. In the first Chapter of S. John: the
same-Enangelist there writes. I (...). Behold the Lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world. He takes them away (says he) him self, and
none other: That is so say, For as much as he alone is the Lamb of God, he
alone is the oblation for sins. He alone the propitiation and sacrifice, he
alone the satisfaction.

Now let us see what the Doctors write, and speak against auricular
Confession. Chrysostom, which was also Bishop of Constantinople. Homil. a.
in Psalm. 50. does in so many places evidently testify, that it is marvel,
that the Papists dare mutter so the contrary. Tell (says he) thy sins, that
thou may do them away: if thou be ashamed to tell any man the sins that
thou have done, tell them daily in thy soul.

I do not say, confess them to thy fellow servant, that may reproach thee:
but tell them to God that takes care of them Confess thy sins upon thy bed,
that there thy conscience may daily recognize her euyls. Again: Sermon. De
penitentia. Et confessi. Hom. 5. But it is not necessary to confess, when
witnesses be present: let the examination of thy sins be done within thy
thought. Let this judgment be without witness: let only God, see thee
confessing. Again: De incomprehen Dei, nam contra anomaeos. I do not lead
thee (says Chrysostom) into a stage of thy fellow servant: I do not
compel thee to disclose thy sins to men, rehearse and utter thy conscience
before God. Show thy wounds to the Lord, the best surgion, and ask salve of
him: show to him that will reproach thee with nothing, but will most gently
heal thee. Again: Hom. 4. De Lazaro. Tell not man, least he reproach thee, for
neither is it to be confessed to thy fellow servant, that may utter it abroad:
but to the Lord. To the Lord show thy wounds, which has care of thee: that is
both a gentle, and sweet Physician. After ward he brings in God, speaking
thus. I compel thee not to come into the mids of a stage, and call many
witnesses: tell thy sin alone to me privately, that I may heal thy sore. Shall
we say, that Chrysostom did so rashly (when he wrote this and other like
things) that he would deliver men's consciences from these bonds, wherewith
they be bound by the law of God? Not so, but he dare not require that, as of
necessity, which he does not understand to be commanded by the word of God.
If auricular Confession were the law of God how durst Nectarius Bishop of
Constantinople repel and destroy the same? Will they accuse for an heretic
and scismatique, Nectarius a holy man of God, allowed by the consenting voices
of all the old Fathers? but by the same sentence they must condemn the
Church of Constantinople, in which Sozomenus affyrmeth, That the manner of
confessing was not only let slip for a time, but also discontinewed, euentyll
within time of his remembrance. Yea, let them condemn of apostasy, not
only the Church of Constantinople: but also all the East Churches, which have
neglected that Law, which (if they say true) is inviolable, and commanded to
all Christians. I could allege many places out of Ambrose, Augustine, Hierom,
and Chrysostom, if the time would permyt: Wherefore the aucthority of
Chrisostom against auricular Confession, the hearing of the godly may
satisfy. I will proceed now farther, to disprooue auricular Confession, by
reason. First, I demand, how can the Priest or Confessor, absolve me of my
sins, who has need of absolution him self? can he pardon my sins, that
can not pardon his own? Moreover, if he that confesses be a naughly man, and
has committed some notorious fact, he will be affrayd to confess the same in
the ear of the Priest, least he be so lewd, as to reveal his confession: and
so by that means the party that confesses, may despair of his salvation,
only for yt he made his confession imperfect, not discovering all the faults
which he had committed: besides that, the Priest may join him such a penance,
that the party confessed to accomplish may refuse: and so may forsake all
hope of salvation. But that I may speak a word merely, and peradventure say no
more then ye truth is: I take the cause of confession to be this, that Preests
being unmarried (and were sworn to do as ye Fore did, to fast when he got no
meat, and so they to be chaste, The crafty devise of Priests, to coullor
their knauerie.
when they got no Concubines,) might in hearing the confession of many, know
who were most inclined and prone to carnal delectation. And she that were
found such a one, should hear in steed of, Absoluo te nomine patris, etc.
These words, Absoluo te nomine Papae, Concubinae, et nothi. I absolve thee, in
the name of the Pope, his Concubine, and bastard, that thou come to my bed
this night. I will prove this to be the cause of auricular Confession by an
example. In the time of king Henry the. 8, A pretty tale of a Priest and his
Lemman.
as I understood by many ye told me the same example which now I utter unto
you: There was a Priest here in England, that got a very fair Gentlewoma^, in
hearing her co^tession, and in steed of absolution, to be his waighting-maid:
This priest fearing lest that this Gentlewoma^s husband should (not finding his
wife at home) search for her in his Parsonage or Vicarage (I can not tell
which:) he took him a goodly and a lusty Gelding, and rode forth, having
his woman behind him the most part of the night, until he had found a
sheepheards lodge, where he rested himself a while. But when they were merry
at supper: the Kings Trumpetter having repaired thither, both for that he was
gone out of the way, and knew not how far be had to any lodging, and also for
that it rayned apace: reposed him self upon a hey mow, which was in the same
lodge, in a corner distant from the Priest and his woman. The black Moorian
Trumpetter, spying some in the sheepheardes lodge, and making joyfully good
cheer, sounded out his Trumpette: the Priest and his woman looking on him, and
seeing his face so black, thought him to be the Devil, they ran away on foot,
and left all things behind: the Trumpetter lost nothing by that shifte.
Behold the fruits of confession.
The Priest beguiled the woman belike, in telling her that she could not be
saved, unless she would consent unto his dishonest request: Wherefore, in like
manner he was deceived, in taking the Moorian to be the Devil.

What great inconveniences have grown out of auricular Confession, Confession
the cause of whoredom.
daily experience taught the same. The Priest has the burning heat of
fleshly lust extinguished, the Daughter is defiled, and the Matrone is at the
Preests berke and commandment. Men's sins oftentimes by the Priests, have
been discovered, great enmity, discentions, and bloody Combats, proceeded
thereof. To avoid these occasions of evils, (whereof auricular Confession is
the cause) good it were and profitable, no more to reveal our sins to the
Priests.

Thus have I breeflie disprooued auricular Confession, both by Scriptures,
Doctors, and Reasons. Now I purpose (God willing) to proceed farther, to
other principal points of Religion: which be in controversy between us and
the Papists. Let this suffice for auricular Confession, more at large could I
have spoken thereof* But as the common proverb is, Quod satis est sufficit,
Enough is as good as a feast: Sufficiency suffiseth.

Of Faith.
TO speak of Faith, for as much as it imports not only ye confidence which
we have in God: but in as much as it includes also with that confidence, the
very knowledge of God, whereon depends, Faith, Hope, and Charity, according
to the judgment of Saint Paul. Hebr. 11. (...). Faith is the ground of
things which are hoped for, and the evidence of things which are not seen.
Therefore Faith is not (as many do think) a certain obscure light of God,
and a certain trifling and frivolous opinion: but it is an evident light, a
certayntie and assurance of the mind, and a clear shyning, which being our
guide, we see that God is so mighty, wise and good, that he can, that he
knows how, and that he will save us. Therefore, with a sure and steadfast
confidence, we put our trust in him, repose and cast our selves wholly upon
him. Faith is the sheeld, wherewith we quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked. Ephe. 6.16. And again: Faith is the mouth, belly and stomach, by the
which we feed on the body and blood of Christ, being at the right hand of
his Father in heaven. John. 6.56.57. And again: Faith is the ladder that
reaches up to heaven, and by which even now, we remain and sit in the
heavenly places with Christ. Ephe. 2.6. Faith is the hand by which we take
hold of Christ, in whom is performed all the promises of God to his elect.
2. Cor. 1.20: Faith is that weapon, by which we overcome the world, the end
whereof is the salvation of our souls. Faith is a clear and effectual
persuasion, wrought, not in the bodily ears, but in the ears of the heart,
not by men, but by the holy ghost, whereby we are made certain and sure to be
the sons of God. Faith (as it is written in the. 8. Cha. to ye Rom.) is a
firm, constant, and perseuering trust, in the bou^tifulnes of God. Faith is a
light, which lyfteth up, and rauisheth above all sensible things, and beyond
that any man is not able to make discourse. to comprehend the breadth, length,
height, and depth of those things which are to us incomprehensible with
natural eyes. Faith is a clear eye of the mind, wherewith, pearcing through
the heavens, we do see the divine secrets of God. Faith is a quickening,
clear and fiery light, which purges our hearts and delyuereth us from the
dark and inextricable Laborinthes of the vain shadows of this world: by
which we guide our blind reason, and are lyfted up to an high estate: so that
by the taste of heavenly things, we despise humane things. Roma. 4. Faith
makes us to conceive Christ spirituallie, and by force of the spirit to be
borne again, with lifting us up unto God: it makes us put of the old Adam
and his concupiscences, and to put on Christ with his virtues, and to become
of ungodly, just temples of God, and his children, brothers, and members of
Christ. Faith justifies, pacifieth the mind and conscience, makes merry,
causes to rejoice, and in such sort, that we glory even in shame. This faith
is such, that it renews us, regenerateth us, quickens, makes noble,
enritcheth, saves, sanctifies, preserves, defends, and obteyneth that
which it demands. Faith knitteth us to God, makes us his heirs and
Children, the brothers of Christ, and his members, yea, it makes us divine
and happy.

Faith is that which in Abell made him offer Sacrifices, acceptable to God: In
Noe, caused him to frame the Arc, for the sauegarde of the world: Made Sara
to conceive, and that Abraham offered his own son to God: Caused Moses to
work so many woonders in Egypt, and in the wilderness. Faith made the
Prophets to speak, loosed the tongue of Zacharias, and saved men in danger:
made Simeon, not to fear death: also, made Paul to wish for it. This in the
Saints caused them (ouercomming the world) that they have wrought wonderful
things, through love.

But what need I speak any more? Faith is a virtue, so noble, excellent, and
worthy, that how much the more a man considers of it: so much the more will
it discover the perfection. Therefore, he which has tasted it, will never be
satisfied, with speaking in praise thereof. Whereas those which never have
felt, nor tried it in them selves, can as much speak thereof, as one that is
blind can discern of coullours, yea, if those speak of it, as those which be
carnal and brutishe: they do not understand it, nor know the excellency
thereof.

He that has this lively Faith, whereof the scripture, in sundry places
speaks, and so highly commends, with so many tytles, before specified: he
is sure to be justified, he is sure to be saved. This faith made Abraham
righteous. Genesis 15.6. By this faith, the just lives. Haba. 2.4. This faith
made the woman whole, to whom Jesus said: Confide filia, fides tua saluam te
fecit. Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole. (...), Be
not afraid, (Says Luke, in the ^^. Chapt. 48. verse) Believe only. And he
said to the woman: H (...). Thy Faith has saved thee, go in peace.

To him give all the Prophets witness: That through his name, all that
believe in him, shall receive remission of sins. Acts. 10.43. And put no
difference between us, and them, after that by faith, he had purified their
hearts.

There is no dyfference: For all have sinned, (Says Saint Paul. Roma. 3.23.)
and are deprived of the glory of GOD: and are justified freely, by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.

Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by Faith, without the works
of the Law: but to him that works not, but believes in him that justifies
the ungodly, his Faith is coumpted for righteousness, we being justified by
Faith, we have peace toward God, through Jesus Christ.

Know that a man is not justified, by the works of the Law, but by the Faith
of Jesus Christ: Even as I say, we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we
might be justified by the faith of Jesus Christ, and not by the works of the
Law: Because that by the works of the Law, no flesh shall be justified.
Gala. 2.16.

Again, if righteousness be by the law, then Christ dyed without a cause:
And that no man is justified by the law, in the sight of God, it is evident:
For the just shall live by faith. Gala. 3. By grace are ye saved through faith,
Says Paul to the Ephe. 2.8. and that not of your selves, it is the gift of
God. The scripture has included all under sin, that the promise by the faith
of Jesus Christ, should be given to them that believe.

Origene writes, in his third Book, and third Chapter, to the Romans, that
Saint Paul by these words: A rbitramur enim iustificari hominem absque
operibus legis: We suppose therefore, that man is justified by faith, without
the works of the law. Affyrmeth that the justification, Solae fidei, Of faith
only: is sufficient, so that any man believing only, can be justified:
although no manner of work has been fulfilled, or done by him. And if we
require an example, who was justified (Sola fide) By faith only, without
works: I suppose that the same Thief does suffice, who when he was crucified
with Christ, did cry unto him from the Cross: Lord Jesus, remember me when
thou come into thy kingdom. Neither any good work of his is described, or
set forth unto us in the Gospels: but for (Ha^c sola^ fide^) This faith only.
Jesus said unto him: Verelie, I say unto thee: this day shall thou be with
me in. Paradise. This Thief then was justified by faith, with out the works
of the law. For the Lord did not upon this require, what he had wrought
before, neither did he look what work he should do after he did believe: but
being ready to enter into Paradise, he took him for his waighting-man, being
justified by that confession only.

Hesichius, in his fowrth Book, and first Chapter upon Leuiticus, says: That
the grace of God, is given only of mercy and favor: and is embraced and
received (Sola fide) by only faith.

Hierome, upon the tenth Chapter to the Romans. They not knowing that God
justifies (Sola fide) by Faith only,) and suppose them selves to be just, by
the works of the law, which they never observed, they would not submit them
selves unto the remission of sins, least they should seem to have been
sinners. Hillarie, in the ninth Canon upon the. 8. of Mathewe. It moves the
Scribes, that sin was forgiven by man, for they did only behold man in
Christ Jesus, and that to be forgiven of him, which the law could not release,
(Fides enim sola iustificat) For faith only justifies. Basil, in his Homily
of Humility. That at length is a perfect and sound rejoicing in God, when a man
does not brag and boast of his own righteousness, he is justified (Sola
fide) By faith only in Christ. Thus have I recited, both Scriptures and
Doctors, for proof that a man is justified only by Faith: more places out of
the Scriptures and Doctors, might be gathered: But these may suffice for this
matter.

Of Free will.
I Will prove both by Scriptures and Doctors, that free will was given unto
man even before his fall, and after his fall. That man had free will before his
fall, these testimonies of the Scriptures alleged, do testify the same. In
Genesis the first Chapter, and 26. verse, there it is written. Et ait Deus,
faciamus hominem ad imaginem et similitudinem nostram, et praesit piscibus
maris, et volatilibus caeli, et bestijs vniuersaeque terrae, omnique reptili
quod mouetur in terra. God said: let us make man in our own Image, according
to our likeness, and let him rule over the Fishes of the sea, and over the
Fowls of the heaven, and over the Beasts, and over all the earth, and over
every thing that creeps, and moves on the earth.

If he had rule over the Beasts of the feelde, of the Fowls of the air, and
of the Fishes of the Sea: he had then free will. And whereas it is written,
That God made man to his own image: It is not meant of the body, nor yet of the
soul, but of principallitie and dominion. In the. 2. Chap. of Gen it is
written. Tulit ergo Domnus Deus hominem, et posuit eum in Paradisum voluptatis,
vt operaretur, et custodiret illum, praecepitque ei dicens: ex omni ligno
Paradisicomedes. Then the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden
of Eden, that he might dress it, and keep it: and the Lord God commanded the
man, saying: thou shall eat freely of every Tree of the garden. By these words
I gather, that seeing it was granted by God to man, to eat of every Tree of
the garden: then had he free will to do as he would, to eat or not to eat.

Again, Ecclesi. 15.14. Deus ab initio co^stituit hominem, et reliquit illum
in manu consilij sui, adiecit mandata, et praecepta sua: si volueris mandata
seruare, conseruabunt te. etc. He made man from the beginning, and left him in
the hand of his counsel, and gave him his commandments and precepts: if
thou will, thou shall observe the commandments, and testify thy good will.
You see that free will was granted unto man, before his fall. God created him,
and left him in the hand of his counsel, to do what he would, he had his own
choice, either to the eating of every Tree of the garden, and so to live
eternally in pleasures, delights, joy, rest, and quietness: or to eat of
the Tree of knowledge, of good and bad, and so to become mortal, to leese his
former state, to become miserable, wretched, a caitife, subject to death, hell,
and dampnation.

Again, in the same Chap. of Eccle. 15.17. Apposuit tibi aquam et ignem, ad
quod volueris porrige manum tuam. And in the 18. verse. Ante hominem vita et
mors, bonum et malum, quod placuerit ci dabitur illi. He has set water, and
fire before thee, stretch out thy hand unto which thou will: Before man is life
and death, good and evil: what it lyketh him, it shall be given him. Here we
see most manifestly, that man had free will before his fall. For if the first
man Adam could have chosen, either life or death, good or evil: who can with
reason deny, but that he had free will? For free will is nothing else, but a
free and loose liberty of the mind, to do as he list. Our Parents, An
evident sign of free will,
Adam and Eve, might have lived* but they would not. Adam and Eve had their
choice, either to live, or to dye, to live and to do good, observing his
commandment, and to dye if they would do evil, neglecting his precept. They
followed the counsel of the Serpent, in eating the fruit forbidden, and so
offended Gods Majesty.

Wherefore, it appears by these words, that they had free will to do as
they were commanded, and so to live in Paradise: or to break the
commandment of God, and so to dye, bannished out of Paradise. Eccle. 17.1.
Deus creauit de terra hominem, et iterum conuertit illum in ipsam. The Lord
has created man of the earth, and turned him to it again. Numerum dierum, et
tempus dedit illi, etc. He gave him the number of days, and certain times,
and gave him power of the things that are upon earth. He clothed him with
strength, as he had need: and made him according to his Image. He made all
flesh to fear him, so that he had dominion over the Beasts and Fowls. He
created unto him a helper, like unto him self, and gave him discretion, and
tongue, and eyes, cares, and an heart to understand: and sixtlie, he gave him a
spirit: and seventhly, he gave him speech to declare his works: and he
filled him with knowledge, of good and evil. And he said unto him, Beware of
all unrighteous things.

Wisd. 23. Deus creauit hominem inexterminabilem, et adimaginem similitudinis
sue fecitillum. God created man without corruption, and made him after the
Image of his own likeness.

Coloss. 3.9. Lie not one to an other, seeing that ye have put off the old
man, with his works, and have put on the new, which is renewed in knowledge,
after the Image of him that created him. Ephesi. 4.23. Be ye renewed in the
spirit of your mind. 24. And put on the new man, which after GOD is created
in righteousness and true holiness.

Omnes homines, (Says Ambrose in his first Book, and third Chapter, of the
calling of the Gentiles) in primo homine creati sunt sine vicio et culpa, et
tota natura nostra integra et valida erat, et peccato istius hominis, totius
nostrae naturae integritatem et salutem amisimus. All men in the first man were
created, without vice or fault, and all our nature was sound and in health:
and by the sin of the same man, we have lost it. Augustine in the book of
the new Song, the. 8. Chapter. Free will before the fall, was an upright free
will: before which, fire and water was laid of God, and the first man did
reach his hand to which he would, he did choose fire, and forsook water. See
the righteous Judge, the same which man being free, he did choose, he did
receive: he would have evil, and the same did follow him. Again, in his
second disputation, against Fortunatus: Dico liberam in eo primo homine fuisse
voluntatem, sic enim creatus erat primus homo, vt volun^ tati suae nihil
resistere potuit, si Dei man^ data obsernasset: Sed quando sua sponte
deliquisset, omnes nos ex sua stirpe prognatos in necessitatem duxit. I say,
that free will was in that man, which was created first, for he was so made,
that nothing could withstand his will, if he would have kept Gods
commandments: but after that he had sinned through free will, he did cast us
(all that came out of his stock) into necessity. In his second Sermon upon
the words of the Apostle. It is true, that man, when he was made, did receive
great strength of free will, but he did loose it by sin again. In the same
Book, and. 11. Chapter. The first man was created in nature, without blame in
nature, without fault, he was created upright: he did not make him self
upright, it is known what he made him self, falling out of the hand of the
potter, he was broken, for he that made him, did govern him, but he was
wylling to forsake him that had made him, and God suffered him so to do, as it
were saying thus. Let him forsake me, that he may find him self, and that he
may by his myserie prove, that without me he can do nothing. By this mean
therefore, would God show unto man, what free will is able to do without God.
Certo scias, (Says S. August.) et ne ambigas, quod primi nostri parents Adam
et Eua creati erant boni, iusti, et sine peccato, cum libera voluntate, qua
potueru^t si voluissent, seruire, et obedire humilitate et libera voluntate, et
cum illa libera voluntate poterant, si voluissent, propria sua natura peccare.
Hold this for certainty, and doubt of it by no means: that our first Parents,
Adam and Eve, were created good, just, and without sin, with free will, by
the which they might, if they would serve and obey, with humility, and good
will: and by the same free will, also might if they would, sin by their own
proper will. Again, in his book of Nature and Grace, against the Pellagians.
Chap. 45. Who knows not, that man was made sound, and blameless, and with
free will to live godly, and was ordained with a free power, and choice to
live righteously.

Again, in his book against the Jews, Pagans, and Arrians. Chapter. 2. The
first man was made of the slyme of the earth, to the Image of GOD: he was
decked with shamefastness: he was prepared with temperaunce: he was compassed
about with love: he was clothed with immortality. In his 22. Book. and
thirty Chapter, of the City of God. Free will was given to man, when he was
first created, by the which he might have chosen, either to sin, or not to
sin.

Thus much you have heard out of Scriptures and Doctors, teaching free will,
before the fall of Adam and Eve.

Now will I speak a little of man's free will after his fall. Videns autent
Dominus, quod multa malitia hominum esset in terra, et cuncta cogitatio cordis
intenta esset ad malum omni tempore. The Lord saw, that the wickedness of man
was great in earth, and all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart,
were only evil continually. Gene. 6.5. Nequaquam vltra maledicam terrae
propter homines, sensus enim et cogitatio humani cordis in malum prona sunt, ab
adolescentia sua. And the Lord said in his heart, I will henceforth curse the
ground no more for man's cause, for the imaginations of man's heart is evil,
even from his youth. Gene. 8.21.

And moreover, it is written in the Ps. 14.3 Hachol sariachdau, geelachu en
garuechad: (...). Vnusquisque declinauit, vnanimiter deteriores facti sunt, non
est qui faciat bonum: ne vnus quidem. All are gone out of the way, they are all
corrupt: there is none that does good, no not one. And in the. 49. Psalm. Adam
bicharvelo, iafin gimshal, chabechemods gidmu: (...). Homo in honor, et sine
intellectu: comparatus est iumentis, quae intereu^t. Man is in honor, and
understands not: he is like to beasts, that perish. Ambrose in his Book of
the calling of the Gentiles, the third Chapter. All men in the first man, were
created without fault or vice, and all our natures were in health, but by the
transgression of the same man, we have lost it. There hence is drawn
mortality: there hence are so many corruptions of the mind: there hence is
ignorance, and difficulty, unprofitable and unlawful concupiscence, etc.
These therefore and other euyls, break into our nature by lost faith, forsaken
hope, blind wisdom, bound will, no man does find in him self, wherewith
he may be repaired or amended. That nature was good, was made evil by
quality, man may not therefore trust in his own strength, for when it was
whole and sound, it could not stand, but must seek victory by him which can
not be overcome, but does overcome all things. Saint Augustine upon the
Psalm. 118. When I was ignorant, God did teach me: when I did err,
PLACE="marg" A notable instruction for all men to remember.
God did reduce me: when I did sin, God did correct me: when I did fall, God
did raise me: when I did stand, God did hold me: when I did go, God did lead
me: when I came to him, he did receive me. The Soul (says Guilielmus
Parisiensis, in his book of the sum of Vices and Virtues) is in such manner
let down into the body, as if a man should fall into a mierie deep, and stony
place, and so should both be drowned, arrayed with mire, and also be hurt. So
by original sin, we are drowned in the darkness of ignorance, we are
defiled with lusts and concupisense: and we are wounded, as touching the
powers and faculties of the mind. At this time, touching this matter of free
will, before the fall of our first Parents, Adam and Eve, and after their fall,
will I speak no more, but here make an end. I will prosecute the other
points of Religion, in order as I purposed to handle them.

Against Purgatory, and praying for the dead.
THe Papists (dearly belooued) are very busy, keep much babbling, and use
many cyrcumstaunces of talk, to defend their feigned Purgatory, their paper
walls, and painted fires. They prate very much, but prove little, yea,
nothing that is to the truth they allege. They are not afraid (so impudent
and shameless they are) to say that Purgatory stands with the Scriptures,
The great impudency of the Papists, in alleging their Purgatory.
and also was allowed by the old writers, of the anncient and Catholic
Church. This they can not verify, by all the Canonical Scriptures, neither
that it was allowed in the primative Church, that we ought to believe that
there is a Purgatory. Therefore both King Henry the eight, and also King
Edward the sixth: with all the learned and godly Clergy of England: in taking
away the vain and erroneous doctrine of popish Purgatory, and in abolishing
or putting down the Massing Sacrifices for the dead, forbydding dirges, and
other like trumperie, to be used any more, did most Catholiquely, and
Christianlike. If their sayings in this matter, touching Purgatory, and
praying for the dead, do agree with the Scriptures, and be grounded upon Gods
word, we will take them for an undoubted, and infallible truth: If not, we
will follow the counsel of the blessed Apostle Saint Paul, who writes on
this manner:

If an Angel from heaven should preach unto you any other Gospel besides that,
that ye have received, let him be accursed. Yea, we will follow the counsel
of the old ancient writers themselves, of whom Ireneus, writing against
Valentinus, and other like heretics, says plainly thus: Scripturis diuinis
niti, quaecerta et indubitata veritas est, in firma et valida petra est domum
suam edificare: hac vero derelicta, alys niti quibusi dam doctrinis, effusae
arenae (vnde facilis euersio est) do mum suam inaedificare. That is to say: To
lean upon the holy Scriptures, which are the sure and undoubted truth, is to
build his house upon a sure and strong rock: but if leaving it (I mean the
truth of the Scriptures,) any man does stick to some other Doctors, the same
is to build his house upon the unsteadfast sand, where it shall easily fall.

Seeing then that the canonical scriptures, make no mention at all of
Purgatory, or of praying for the dead: if we should follow the doctrine of
men in this point, leaving the infallible word of God, wherein all things
that pertayne to the salvation, of all souls and bodies, be most sufficently
set forth and comprehended: were it not I pray you, according to Ireneus
saying: To build upon the unsteadfast sand? Saint Ambrose cries out, saying:
Nos noua omnia, quae Christus non docuit iure damnamus, quia fidelibus via
Christus est: si igitur Christus non docuit, quod docemus, etiam nos id
detestabile iudicamus: We do by right condemn all new things, that Christ
has not taught, for Christ unto the faithful is the way: if therefore
Christ has not taught this that we teach, we do also judge it detestable.

Except then, they can prove, that Christ, who is the way unto the faithful,
did teach us in his Gospel and word, to believe that there is Purgatory, and
that it is requisite to pray for them, that be departed out of this lamentable
maze of myserie: We will be so bold with Saint Ambrose, to judge, coumpt, and
reckon, that doctrine which teaches us to believe that there is Purgatory,
and exhorts us to pray for the dead, to be most detestable and deuillishe,
who soever be Author of it, though it were an Angel from heaven. Let us do
what we can here in this world to gain eternal life: for doubtless after
this life departed, Prayer or Mass may say, Requiescat in pace: Not all the
Papisticall inca^tations, or exorsisms can help us after we be dead.
but may nothing help us in glory, to behold Gods face, here during life,
perpetual joy is won, or everlasting sorrow is gotten. Fasting, nor almose
deeds, repentance, nor righteousness, good nor evil can neither profit or
hurt after our death. Lazarus comes not unto the rich, nor the rich unto
Lazarus: the rich receives not the thing that he does ask, though he does
ask it with earnest prayers of the merciful Abraham. For the Garners and
Sellers he made fast, the time is accomplished and past, the battle
foughten, and the place thereof empty and void, the Crowns are given: they
yt have foughten, are at rest, they that have not prevented or come before, are
gone: they that have not foughte^, he no more there, and they that have been
ouercommed, are driven out. For all things are plainly consumated and ended,
by and by after the departing out of this world: but whiles they be yet all in
the conflict or battle: there is yet hope, there is a medicine and
confession. And although these things be not in all men most perfect, yet the
salvation of other is not without hope. And unto this Saint Hierome does
agree, writing on this manner, in his. 13, question. 2. Chapter. In praesenti
seculo scimus, sieve orationibus, sieve consilijs, inuicem nos inuari posse: cum
autem ante tribunal Christi venerimus, nec Job, nec Daniel, nec Noah rogare
posse pro quoquam, sed vnum quemque portare onus suum. We know, that in this
world, we can be helped, one of an other, either with prayers, or with
counsel: but after we be come once before the judgment seat of Christ,
neither Job, nor Daniel, nor Noah, be able to pray for any body, but every man
shall bear his own burden.

And upon the ninth Chapter of Ecclesiastes, these be his words. Peccator
viuens, iusto mortuo, si voluerit in eius virtutes transire, melior esse
potest. Quare? quia viuentes metu mortis possunt bona opera perpetrare: mortui
vero nihil valent ad id adijcere, quod secum tulere de vita. A sinner yet
living, may be better, then a righteous man that is dead, if he will follow his
virtues. And wherefore? for that they that be alive, may for fear of death, do
yet good deeds: but they that be dead, are able to do nothing unto that,
which they have once borne away out of this life with them.

Therefore, it is wisdom to make our selves ready before, and to prepare oil
for our Lamps, that is to say, to get unto us a lively faith, working
through charity, doing good deeds while we have time, for when we be once
gone, there is no more time of well doing, of repentance, or of amendment of
life: the gate of mercy is shut, we can add nothing unto that, that we have
once carried away with us out of this world. Oh that this would sink into
men's hearts, I would to God this would be remembered of all men.
oh that they would remember this, then we would not trust and have affiaunce
in the good works of other men: we would not be to seek, and buie oil, when
it is more time to go in with the Bridegroom, least it should be said unto
us: Verelie I say unto you, I know you not. Watch ye therefore, for ye know
not the hour, when the son of man shall come. Put not your trust in the
prayers, and dirges of popish Priests: the crown of glory, is here either
lost or won: Everlasting salvation is here provided for, by the due
worshipping of God, and the fruits of Faith. Now grace is granted, crave and
have, be bold and fear not: now is the time, of obtaining eternal
blessedness: now is the day of Iubylie: now is the gate open unto pardon and
forgiveness, and they that seek the truth, shall have an easy access unto
it. Now pray while you have time unto God for your sins, God grant us to
use this time, to his glory, and our souls health.
who is the true and only God, call upon him with a faithful confession, and
acknowledging both of your offenses, and of your state considering: Thus
confessing and believing, we have free pardon and forgiveness given and
granted unto us, of the mere goodness and mercy of God. While we have time,
let us therefore do good, for being once departed out of this life,
repentance is too late. Ciprianus, Tractatu primo contra Demetrianum, Says:
Quando hinc excessum fuerit, nullus iam locus poenitentiae est, nullus
satisfactionis effectus. Hic vita aut amittitur aut tenetur, hic saluti
aeternae cultu Dei, et fructu fidei prouidetur, etc. That is to say: After we
be once departed out of this life, there is no more place of repentance, there
is no more effect or working of satisfaction, it is but in vain, that your
friends should pray for you. It is but folly, that Priests should sing a
Requiem for your souls, seeing that their prayers and dirges profit nothing at
all. There is in sundry places of the Scriptures of heaven and hell express
mention: but of Purgatory, no speech at all. Purgatory for lucre sake, of
late years was invented. How often is it written in the Scriptures, that they
which believe in Christ shall be saved, and they that believe not, shall be
condemned: they that do good, shall go to life everlasting, but they which
do evil, to pain eternal. Here is mention you see of salvation and
condempnation, of joy and of sorrow, of perpetual life and death for ever:
of heaven, and of hell. But the scriptures wrote nothing of Purgatory: and if
there had been such a place, no doubt, but there had been mention made thereof.
Chrisost. in. 22. Matthew, Hom. 41. Quidquid quaeritur ad salutem, totum iam
impletum est in scripturis. Whatsoever is sought unto salvation, all the same
is set forth, and fully taught in the scriptures. If then praying for the
dead, were necessary unto salvation: express mention thereof, should be made
in the scriptures, and word of God, but we can find no such thing there.
Again, in an other place. 1. Homily, in Epist. Ad Titum. Omnia Euangelium
continet praesentia et futura, honorem, pietatem, fidem, simul omnia
praedicationis verbo conclusit. The Gospel (says he) does contain all
things, both present and to come, honor, godliness, faith: to be short, he
has comprehended all things with the word of preaching. Does not holy
Chrysostom, by these words, manifestly declare, that the Gospel of our
savior Jesus Christ, does contain all manner of things, both present, that
is to say, how we ought to behave our selves here in this present life,
toward God and our neighbor: and also things to come? whereby he does
understand, the estate that we shall be in, after our departing out of this
life. In the scriptures, no mention made of praying for the dead.
But where does the Gospel speak one jot only, of prayers and oblations
for the dead? there we do learn, that they that believe and are baptized,
shall be saved, and they that believe not, shall be condemned. There we read
in the. 7. Chapter of Saint Matthew: Of the straight and narrow way, that
leads unto salvation: and of the wide gate and broad way, that leads unto
damnation. Not one only syllable can be found there of any third way, or of
any other estate that we shall be in, besides salvation and dampnation, after
that we be come to our ways end. Which thing Chrysostom him self, in his
second Sermon, De Lazaro, does teach most plainly, saying: Para ad exitum
opera tua, et appara te ad viam, si quid cui rapuisti, read, et dicito iuxta
Zachaeum, do quadruplum si quid rapui. Si cui factus es inimicus, reconciliare
priusquam veniatur ad iudicem. Omnia hic dissolve, vt citra molestiam illud
videas tribunal. Donec hic fueris, spes habeas praeclaras, sed simulac
discesserimus, non est postea in nobis situm poenitere, neque commissa diluere.
That is to say: Prepare thy works against the end, make thy self ready to
the way: if thou have taken away any thing from any man, restore it again, and
say with Zachaeus, if I have taken away any thing from any man, I do give it
him again fourefolde. If thou be made an enemy to any man, be reconciled unto
him again, before ye come before the Judge. Pay all thy debtes here, that
thou may without any fear, or trouble of conscience, see that dreadful
judgment seat. Whiles we be yet here, we have a goodly hope, but as soon as
we be once departed hence, it lies no more in us, for to repent, nor for to
wash away our sins. This holy Father then, will not that we should tarry to
make restitution, or to be reconciled unto those, whom we have offended, till
we be dead. For then says he: I mean after we be once departed out of this
world, there is no way at all to wash away sins. In so much that he says in
an other place. Neque qui in praesenti vita peccata non abluerit, postea
consolationem aliquam inuenturus est in inferno, enim ait, quis confitebitur
tibi? et merito hoc enim est cauearum tempus, et co^flictuum, et certaminu^:
illud vero coronarum, retributionum et praemiorum. Neither he that does not
wash away his sins in this present life, shall find any comfort
afterward. For says he, who shall praise thee in hell, and for a good cause,
for this is the time of scaffoldes, conflictes, wrastlinges, and battayles: but
after this life, is the time of recompenses, crowns, and rewards. How can it
after this life, be the time of crowns, and rewards: if we be cast into a
burning fire, which is nothing differing from the fire of hell? (save only
that this everlasting, and the other lasts but for a time,) there to abide
intolerable torments, till we be helped out, by the prayers and oblations of
the living, A good and kind devotion of popish preests.
and especially of the Priests, which must be hired with good ready money to
do it, else they will suffer us to abide there, broyling and rosting unto the
worlds end: For, that ye may be sure, no penny, no Pater noster, of them. So
that I lust here to make an exclamation with the Poet, Quid non mortalia
pectora cogit auri sacra fames? Which we may english after this sort: Oh of
money, love most execrable, that man's heart do so sore inflame. Oh greedy
desire of mind, so miserable, ye woonders do undertake to thy great shame.
Put away offering then, take away Purgatory: For when the Preests can get no
money, then can they not defend Purgatory, give them pence, then will they
find some shifte or other, to prove that there is Purgatory: yea, and that
proof they will fetch out from the example of S. Augustine, who prayed for his
mother, yea, and left in his writing ye there was Purgatory. But when S.
August. seeks to prove ye same, he does not bring one jot or syllable of
the holy scriptures, for to prove his sayings by: but groundeth him self only
upon the Forefathers. I will be so bold to follow his own counsel, which he
gives in the Prologue of his third book, De Trinitate. Saying: Noli meis
scriptis, quasi canonicis inseruire, sed in illis quod non credebas, si forte
inueneris, incuncta^ter creed: in istis autem, quod certum non habebas nisi
certum intellexeris, noli firmiter credere. I will not have thee to be obedient
unto my writings, as unto the Canonical scriptures: But if thou do by
chance find in them (meaning the Canonical Scriptures) the thing that thou
did not believe, believe it immediately, and without any delay: But in these
(understanding thereby his own works,) except thou do understand, that
thing to be most certain, which thou did not reckon to be certain: I will
not have thee to believe it steadfastly.

What a goodly counsel is this? here all men may see, that this holy Father,
will not have his writings to be believed, except they be grounded upon the
scriptures and word of God. Shall then any man blame us, if we do as he him
self does bid and counsel us to do? Does not all the world know, that
this ancient Doctor, and most holy Father, did as a man, writ many
things, which he was feign to revoke and call back afterward in his book of
Retractions? If he wrote any thing in defense of Purgatory, he disprooued the
same afterward, as by his own words it did appear, in the. 18. Sermon, De
verbis Domini: These be his very words. Duae quippe habitationes sunt vna in
igne aeterno, altera in regno aeterno. There be two habitations, or dwelling
places, the one in the fire everlasting, and the other in the kingdom, that
never shall have end. Does not this agree well with the doctrine of our
savior Jesus Christ, that does only appoint unto us the bosom of Abraham,
that is to say, the society and fellowshippe of all them that died in the
faith of Abraham, into the which, the poor Lazarus was carried by the hands of
the Angels: and hell fire, where the rich glutton was buried unmediatly after
his death? But ye shall hear him yet speak more plainly. Primum enim (says
he) sides Catholicorum diuina autoritate regnum credit esse coelorum: secundum
gehennam, vbi omnis apostata, vel a Christi fide alienus supplicia experitur:
tertium prorsus ignoramus, imo nec esse in scripturis sanctis reperimus. The
faith of the Catholics, does first and foremost believe by the authority of
the Scriptures, that there is the kingdom of heaven: Secondly, that there is
hell fire, where all Apostataes, and all that be strangers from the faith of
Christ, do suffer punishment: We are altogether ignorant of the third
place, yea, we find not in all the holy Scriptures, that there is any. Again,
in an other place he says: It should be best, that they should affirm
nothing, in a matter that is uncertain, of that which the Scriptures do not
only hold their peace: but also do speak the contrary. Yet the Papists
(for lucres sake) are not ashamed to defend the opinion of Purgatory, by the
fancies and dreams of their own heads. They that die in the faith of Christ,
in true confession, and acknowledging their sins, and with a true repentant
heart, have no need after they be once dead, and gone out of this vale of
misery, of the devotion and good deeds of their friends and kinsfolks. If
we should but follow the authority and saying of the blessed Martyr Saint
Cyprian. Contra Demetr. Tracta. primo. Who being a good while before Saint
Augustine, does write after this manner. Tu sub ipso licet exitu, et vitae
temporalis occasu pro delictis roges Deum, qui verus et vnus est, confessionem,
et fidem eius agnitionis implores, venia confitenti datur, et credenti
indulgentia salutaris de diuina pietate conceditur, et ad immortalitatem, sub
ipsa morte transitur: That is to say. Although thou do at thy very
departing out of this world, and going down of this temporal life, pray
unto GOD for thy sins, who is the true and only GOD, calling upon him, with
a faithful confession, and acknowledging both of thine offenses, and of his
truth: Thus confessing and believing, thou have free pardon and forgiveness,
given and granted unto thee, of the mere goodness and mercy of God: And in
the very death (even as soon as thou have given up the ghost) thou passest
unto immortality.

Here do ye see, that by this holy Martyrs saying: if we do unfeignedly
confess and acknowledge our sins, and repent from the bottom of our hearts,
we do not only obtain a free pardon and forgiveness of our trespasses and
offenses, at the bounteous and merciful hand of God: but also in the very
death it self, we pass unto immortality, that is to say, unto a life that
never shall end.

What shall then the devotion, and good deeds of our friends and kinsfolks
profit us? can they better our estate? But then we shall have the fruition of
the Godhead, and see God as he is: we shall be with Jesus Christ in glory, and
have the fellowship of all the blessed spirits, and souls of the righteous.
What could be added to this felicity, I beseech you? the Scriptures do in all
points agree with this holy Martyr. First Ezechiel, Cha* 18. does cry out,
saying. At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins, from the
bottom of his heart: I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance,
says the Lord.

Does not the holy Ghost here, by the mouth of Ezechiel certify us, The
Scriptures are sufficient testimonies for the faith of Christians.
that if we will with a true repentaunt heart, fly unto the mercy of God, and
take hold thereupon (through faith in our savior Jesus Christ) our sins
shall not only be forgiven us, but also clean put out of remembrance, and
utterly forgotten? And wherefore I pray you? because of our own merits and
deseruings? because of the devotion, and good deeds of our friends, and
kinsfolks, when we be dead* Hear what the Lord him self says, by his
Prophet Esai. Chapt. 43. I am even he only, that for mine own sake, do put
away thine offenses, and forget thy sins, so that I will never think upon
them. This verily ought to suffice us: for, here we have a promise that God
will do away our sins, so that he will never think upon them. Not because
of our own merits and deseruings, nor yet because of the devotion and good
deeds of our friends and kinsfolks, but only for his own sake, that is to
say, of his mere goodness and mercy: Thus far of this matter.

Of the Supper of the Lord.
HEthervnto (good Christian people) of Purgatory have I spoken, I have
disprooued and confuted the opinion of our adversaries, touching these paper
walls, and painted fyres, by Scriptures and Doctors. Wherefore, if there be
any here that thinks there is such a place, let him examine the places which
I have brought forth in co^futation of the same, and then I hope he shall be
converted to the confession of the truth, in saying there is no Purgatory.
Now I purpose, by the almighty power of Iehoua, to speak somewhat of the
supper of the Lord. The Papists keep much stir and great iangling, about
this Sacrament: they say, that Christ is really, transubstantially, and bodily
present, in the Sacrament of the Altar. They can show us but one place out of
scriptures, The Papists have but one argument to allege, and the same is
against themselves.
to make an argument thereby, for proof of transubstantiation: but the same
place alleged, makes nothing for them, it is no demonstration. We will bring
out of Scriptures, and out of Doctors, sundry places that make for our
purpose, in denial of the real presence of our Lord in the Sacrament.

First, I will declare the name of this Sacrament, which has been a great
matter of burning and contention, amongst the Papists, it is called Missa, the
Mass, but of this word, in all the Scriptures, I do not find one jot or
syllable. For new things, new names are inverted, by the nouelty of the name.
Missam rem esse minime vetustam tuto licet conijcere: We may safely conjecture
the Mass, to be a thing not of many years invented. We Christians call this
Sacrament, as S. Paul called it, in his first Epist. Timo. 2. 1. Cor. 10. et.
11. Mensam Domini, coenam Domini, corporis et sanguinis communicationem, aut
certe panis fractionem, eucharistian, (...), aut cum Latinis sacrum conuiuium,
sacrificium laudis, aut denique Dominici corporis et sanguinis sacramentum. The
Table of the Lord, the Supper of the Lord, the communicating of the body and
blood, or the breaking of the bread, or thanksgiving, or a holy feast, or the
Sacrifice of praise, or the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. August.
Ad Infantes, Is cyted by Beda. 1. Cor. 10. Quod videtis, panis et vinu^ est, et
quod oculi vestri declarant manifest. That which you see, is bread and wine,
which also your eyes declare manifestly. Origin. 7. Hom. upon Leuit. Si
literaliter sequimini verba scripta: (nisicomederitis carnem filij hominis, non
habetis vitam in vobis) haec litera occidit.

If lyterallie, ye follow the words that be spoken: (except ye eat the
flesh of the son of man, ye have no life in you) this letter kylleth. Who is
so void of reason, that wresting these speeches unto the carnal sense, the
meaning whereef is to be construed figuratively: will imagine that we ought to
be borne in our bodies a new, as Nicodemus did? or to be fed with Christ's
flesh carnally, as the Caphernaites did? What better imagination do the
unlearned multitude conceive in these days, of the doctrine of their
transubstantiation, delivered unto them by their great Doctors: The monstrous
dishonor done unto God by these wicked shauelings.
For on this wise do these famous Christ-makers, enstruct their auditorie:
that the bread which was bread, before the Consecration, altering the very
substance of bread, is no more bread now, but turned into flesh: and that
this also must believed without all question, that it is made the everlasting
soon of God. What can be more absurd? and how comes this change to pass? I
pray you forsoothe, because Christ said: Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body.
For this whole huge Chaos of confused transubstantiation is accomplished with
these four words, by these Christ-makers. What? and did the Lord pronounce no
more words, but these four only? what if he spoke in the Hebrew tongue, and
expressed the whole action in two words only, after the manner of that Nation
(Zoth guphi) because ye phrase of the language, does not for ye most part
express the verb (Est) but to admit he spoke four or five words: what?
did he add thereunto no more besides: or did he speak nothing else, before or
after, to make the very meaning and purpose of his speeches, more evident and
manifest? And why do these fellows omit the cyrcumstances, and not deliver
the whole scriptures withal? why do they chop of the one half of Christ's
proposition, and suppress in silence the chief part, whereby the meaning of
Christ might appear more forcibly? For when Christ made mention of his body,
that it might be eaten: he but gives commandment, to take bread first, and
to eat, Take ye (says Christ) and eat ye. And forthwith making mention
of his body, did say: This is my body, yet not simply nevertheless, but
annexed immediately, That is given and broken for you: To wit, to signify unto
them, nto the very substance of his natural body simply, but that the
crucifying of his body, and the shedding of his blood, should become our food.
From hence bubleth out all the wellspring of error, that where our Lord and
Savior had relation to the efficacy and power of his Passion: the same the
Papists do apply to the only substance of the flesh, as though we were to be
fed with the Passion of his flesh. Note here.
But you will ask how the Passion of Christ feeds, which is not eaten?
forsooth, in the same manner, as the death of Christ does nourish us, so does
his Passion feed us, not after a fleshly, but after a spiritual manner: not
as it is chawed with the teeth, but as it is received into the heart. For then
does the death of Christ feed us, when it refreshes us: then is he eaten,
when he is received by faith, and applied to our infirmities.

Pascasius. 43. Chapter. Therefore we must thus think with our selves, not
how much is chawed with the teeth: but how much is received by faith and
love, etc. Ciprian De coena Domini. Our abiding, and incorporation in him, is
our eating and drinking, whereby we be united unto Christ, and made his body,
not by any corporal, but by a spiritual manner, passing into us, etc. Christ
said to his Disciples: Take ye, and eat ye, this is my body, which is given
for you: do this as often as ye shall do it, in remembrance of me. What can
be more evident, then the interpretation of this Supper, if the cyrcumstances
of the words, be scanned accordingly? For who is so blind that can not
discern the fruits of the Lords death and Passion, to be plainly signified
here? For as much as in the very eating, him self says: This is my body,
that is given to be slain for you. Otherwise, why should he have added with
all, Given to be slain: But that he would set down a plain testimony of
the death of his body, rather then of any substance thereof, to the view of
the Disciples? As if he should say: The time is now at hand, A comfortable
consolation, worthy to be had in remembrance of all men.
wherein my body must be given to be slain for you, not for any of mine
offense at all, but for your sakes, which death of mine shall procure
everlasting life for you. After like sort and manner as this bread, which I
give thus broken unto you to eat, does pass into your bodies, and give
nourishment thereto: Take ye therefore this bread, this bread which I give to
every of you, and eat, and withal consider herein, not the natural bread
which feeds your bodies outwardly: But my body which being given to be
slain and crucified for you, shall inwardly, and much more effectually,
refresh you to eternal life. For my flesh, which I will give to be slain for
the life of the world, is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed.
John. 6. For your bodies do not so much live, by the nourishment of meat and
drink, as your souls be fed within, with the crucifying of my flesh, and the
shedding of my blood: without which you can have no remission of sins, no
joyful resurrection of your flesh, no part or portion of eternal life.
Therefore, let this which is given you in this Supper, remain for a perpetual
Sacrament, and remembrance unto you, of the body which I will hereafter give
for you. For I shall give my body for you into the hands of enemies, the
Sacrament whereof I do here give into your hands.

Whereby you may perceive (dearly belooued) that here be two things given by
Christ, one unto us, the other for us: the first to be eaten, the last to be
crucified: that one in the Supper, this other upon the Cross, Now, if you
desire to know the substance of that which was given in the Supper, it was
bread, and the Sacrament of his body: That which was given upon the Cross, was
his body, and not a Sacrament. What then will you say? was not his body given
at Supper? yes in deed, Christ's body was given there to the Disciples,
neither after a bodily and corporal manner, for that corporal body was given
to the Jews, not in the Supper, but on the Cross, whereupon he gave his body
corporally, not to the Disciples, but for the Disciples. Therefore that which
he gave for his Disciples, was his body: that which he gave to his disciples,
was the mystery of his body, yet was it one and the self same body, both yt
of the supper given to ye Disciples: and yt of the cross given for his
Disciples, but yet not after the same sort, nor yet at the same time. For upon
the Cross it was given to be slain corporally: in the supper it was given,
not to be slain, but to be eaten, not corporally, to be grawne wc their teeth,
but to feed upon it in the bowels of their souls: namely, after a sacrame^tal
kind of receiving, not corporal. Therefore, it is not denied that the Lords
body was both given and eaten in the Supper? but not the body only, but
together with the body, the sacrament annexed also withal: whereof the one
apperteyneth to the feeding of the bodies, the other, to the seeding of the
souls. That which is received within in the soul, is the very body, not the
Sacrament of his body. For as much therefore as these two do necessarily
concur together in the holy supper, that the one can not be severed from the
other: let us so join the one with the other, that we neither separate the
body of Christ from the Sacrament, as the Papists do (which be so thoroughly
wedded to the only substance of the body, as that they leave therein no
substance at all of a Sacrament, but superficial and immateriall shadows: I
know not what, hanging in the air, which serve to no purpose:) Neither let us
so segregate the Sacrament again from the body, as that we leave nothing in
the holy Supper but bare signs. Cyrill, Anathe. 11. Do thou pronouce (says
he) this our sacrament to be man's food, and vrgest the minds of the faithful
irreligiouslie, to gross and carnal thoughts? and do thou practice to
discuss by man's sensual reason, the things which are conceived, by only and
most exquisite faith? Hear what Christ says in the interpretation of his
own speech. Caro (says he) non prodest quicquam, verba mea spiritus et vita
sunt: Flesh does not profit at all, my words be spirit and life. And do
thou cruel Canniball, conceive and eat naught else, but the flesh of Christ?
nor wylt thou permit one crumme so much of bread to remain, because it is
called the body of Christ? But how many things do we hear daily, called by
this or that name: when as in very deed they be not made the things whereof
they bear ye names. When the Disciple whom Jesus looued, was by Christ's own
mouth, called the son of Marie: yet will no man be so wytlesse, as to
confess him to be the natural son of the Virgin Marie. So also the Prophet
does call flesh, a flower of the feelde: In the Gospel, John Baptist, is
called Elias: Peter is named a Rock, so is he also called Satan. To conclude,
throughout all the discourse of the Scriptures, what is more frequented, then
this usual phrase of speec he? and that things be called by this or that name:
wherein notwithstanding is no alteration of nature, but the properties of
things only noted. Theoderet. Christ did signify the signs which be seen,
by calling them his body and blood, not changing the nature, but adding
thereunto grace. Gelasius, Contra Eutichetem. Substantia panis et vini non
mutatur: et sine dubio imago et similitudo corporis et san^ guinis celibratur
in actionem mysteriorum The substance of the bread and wine does not cease:
and without doubt the image and similitude of the body and blood, is celebrated
to the action of the mysteries. Ambrosius De mysterijs. Christus est in
Sacramento, quia est corpus Christi: ideo nonest corporalis, sed spirituas lis
cibus, etc. Christ is in that Sacrament, because it is the body of Christ:
Therefore it is not corporal food, but spiritual. Whereupon the Apostle,
speaking of the figure thereof: Because our fathers did eat the same spiritual
food For ye body of Christ is spiritual: the body of Christ is the body of a
divine spirit. De con. Dis. Ambros. De sacra. Lib. 4. cap. 4. Even as thou have
received the likeness of death: so do thou drink the symilitude of blood.
Hesychius in Leui. Lib. 1. Chap. 2. Hunc comedimus cibum in recordationem
passionis Christi. We do eat this meat, receiving the memory of his
passion. Esai the. 25. Chap. And in this mountain shall the Lord of Hoastes,
make unto all people a feast of fatlinges, even as a feast of meat and fined
wines, and of fat things full of marrowe, of wines fined and purified, etc.
Weereby it appears that his suffering, should be bread and food for all
people in the world, and as it were an everlasting banquet, according to that
prophetical promise. Esaias the Prophet, the. 25. Chapter. And for that cause,
least the remembrance of his passion should wax out of mind: he commanded it
to be done in the remembrance of him, and by the same memorial to show the
Lords death, until he come again. Whereby may appear without any
difficulty, that the natural body is not eaten here, but the death of his body
signified, and the remembrance thereof celebrated: Not the bread and wine
turned into flesh and blood, but a Sacrament of our redemption, to be
instituted in bread and wine. August. De consecrat. Did. 2. This is it, that
the heavenly bread, which the flesh of Christ is called after his manner, the
body of Christ when as in deed it is the Sacrament of Christ's body. Rabanus
Maurius. Lib. 1. Cap 31. Sacramentum vna res est, efficacia sacramenti alia res
est: Sacramentum conuertitur in nutrimentum corporis: virtute sacraments honor
aeternae vitae obtinetur. The Sacrament is one thing, the efficacy of the
sacrament is an other thing: the Sacrament is turned into the nourishment of
the body, by the efficacy of the sacrament, the honor of everlasting life is
obtained. Origin upon Matthew writes after this manner. Panis (says he) qui
verbo Dei sanctificatur, quantum ad materiam et substantiam, in ventrem
descendit, et in latrinam eucitur. The bread which is sanctified by the word
of God, touching the matter and substance thereof, goes down into the belly,
and is thrown out into the draught, etc. If that be bread which after
sanctification goes down into the belly, according to the testimony of
Origin: with what face will the Papists, deny it to be bread? Again, on the
other side, if according to the Papists opinion, there remain no crum of
substance at all: Whereof then shall that be a substance, which Origin does
ascribe to the bread? To the same effect may Augustine, De consecra. Disti. 2.
be produced a witness of antiquity, not to be rejected. The heavenly bread
(says he) which is the flesh of Christ, is after this manner called the body
of Christ, being in very deed the Sacrament of Christ's body, etc.

If it be a sacrament of the body, how is it the very body? again, if because
it is called the body of Christ, it be therefore Christ's flesh: what should
let, but that by the same argument, Peter should be Satan, because he is
called Satan? Moreover, if the nature of Sacraments be such as to be called by
the name of the things which they signify: Let the Papists take away the
substance of bread, what shall be left in the Accidentarie fourmes, that may
either supply the name of a body, or represent the likeness of a body in any
respect?

You have heard (good Christian people) both by the Scriptures and Doctors,
that there is no transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Who
is therefore of so perverse mind, that will not persuade him self, that these
words, Take ye, eat ye: This is my body, to be a Sacramental speech, and
mystical: and ought to be expounded simbolically, and according to the
meaning? For the bread is a Sacrament, sign, or pledge of the body of Christ.
I have given you to understand, by many evident reasons, that these words of
our Lord, This is my body: ought not to be taken according to the gross
lytterall sense: but to be expounded mystically or sacramentally, for the bread
remains in his substance, and is not changed into the substance of the body
of Christ. In like manner the natural body of Jesus Christ (the which being
given once for us, and raised from death, is ascended into heaven,) is not hyd
nor enclosed under the kind or form of bread. For the Angels of God speaking
of this body, bear witness thereof, and say. Acts. 1.11. Hic Jesus, qui
assumptus est a vobis in coelum, sic veniet quemadmodu^ vidistis euntem in
coelum. This same lesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come,
even as you have seen him go into heaven. In like manner S. Peter says. Act.
3.21. Quem oportet quidem coelum accipere vsque in tempora restitutionis
omnium, quae loquus ^us est Deus per os omnium sanctorum suo^um, a seculo
Prophetarum. The heaven must receive Jesus Christ, until the ^yme that all
things be restored, which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy ones, from
the time of the Prophets. Saint Paul says also: Jesus Christ after he has
offered one sacrifice for sins, is set down for ever on the right hand of
God, from hence. forth, tarying till his foes be made his footestoole.
Wherefore, we read that Saint Augustine, writing to Dardanus, said ryghtlie,
and according to the Scriptures: Christ as he is God, is all wholly present
in every place, but, according to the measure and property of a true body, he
has his place, in some one place of heaven, he has given immortallitie to
his body (in the glorification thereof.) After this form he is not to be
thought to be diffused, and spread abroad every where.

Wherefore we must take good heed, that we do not so affirm the divinity of
the man (Christ) that we take away the truth of (His) body. For our person,
is God and man, and out Christ Jesus, is both two, being every where, in
that he is God: but being in heaven, in that he is man. Yea and this aucthor
has left in his books these things and many other like both Catholic, and
according to the true sense of the Scripture, agreeable to this matter.
Moreover, the Catholic verity suffers us not to feign, that Christ has
two bodies. But if you take the words of the letter, This is my body: without
the blessed body of the Lord, being set at the Table with his Disciples, gave
unto them also, I know not what other body: for he could not give him self
with his own hands, unto his Disciples. Therefore with his true body, and
with his hands, he delivered unto his Disciples, the Sacrament of his only
body. Hereupon it follows, that the faithful, acknowledging the Sacrament
and mystery, receive with their mouth, ye sacramental bread of his body: But
with the mouth of the spirit, they eat the very body of the Lord. He is eaten
in such sort, as he may be eaten, that is to say, spiritually by faith: As the
Lord himself expounds this mystery unto us at large in Saint John the. 6.
Chapter. Neither have the purest Doctors of the ancient Church, taught any
otherwise: yea, and this place may well be applied to the words of the Lord.

For seeing our Lord has but one true body, the which he gave up to death for
us, and that in these two places, he speaks of this self same body: it
seems unto me, that this place of S. Mathewe, ought to be expounded by that
of S. John. Seeing that Saint Augustine, also in his third book of the
agreement of the Eua^gelists, supposes that S. John speaks not of the
institution of the Supper of the Lord: because in an other place he had set
forth this matter at large. All the ancient Doctors of ye Church, Neither the
sufficiency of the scriptures, nor authority of the Doctors can satisfy
the Papists.
speaking of the Supper, alleges the Supper of the Lord. Yet for all that,
the Papists ever have in their mouths transubstantiation, transubstantiation.

Though both Scriptures and Doctors writ against them, yet so void they
are, of reason and common sense, and so blockish, that they will embrace
signs, for things them selves: they turn that to worshipping and kneeling,
which was delivered for a thankful remembrance by most agreeable application.
The Devil has so bewitched their senses and understanding, that they think,
they make God every day, as often as they list, having none aucthority of the
most holy Scriptures, but as they wrest it, and wring it, for their own
purposes. For Jesus Christ at his last supper, took bread and gave thanks, and
brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said: Take, eat, this is my body:
and he likewise took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it them, saying:
drink ye all hereof, this is my blood in the new Testament, which shall be
shed for many, for the remission of sins. Now, to come to our purpose, where
as these heretics do take authority upon these words. Hoc est corpus
meum: that is to say, This is my body. The horrible blasphemy of the Papists
used in their Mass.
Does it follow by the holy scripture, that they, when they have said these
words over the bread: should create a material flesh, blood and raynes, yea,
the self same body, that the blessed Virgin Marie did bear, as these
Antichrists say they do? I do answer no, for when Christ brake the bread,
and blessed it: does it follow, that it was his body in deed, and there
remained no more bread? if they say no, I answer, no more do we: if they say
yea, then if the bread was not crucified, he gave it to his Disciples, and they
did eat: did they eat Christ's body, or no? I mean the very self same
body, that was borne of the Virgin Marie, if they say, no: I answer, no more
do we: if they say yea, then dyed he not for us: For could he dye for us, when
they had eaten him up before?

But this word, (...), This is my body, was the sweetest word that they could
find out in all the whole Testament, The poor people much deceived by the
Papists.
to bleare men's eyes with a false God, compelling the people to kneel on
their knees, and hold up their hands, which is abominable, and detestable
Idolatry. But here is a question to be demanded of these holy Gentlemen, the
Godmakers: When they make God, whether do they make him at once or twice? for
they say, Note here
that there remains no material bread after the Consecration, but the very
natural body, that Marie bare, flesh, blood, and bone: Then does it follow,
that we worship a false God in the Challice: Then will they say, as
shameless Iuglers, that they Consecrate the very self same substance in the
wine, that they do in the bread, whereby it does appear manifestly, that they
are false Sacrilegers, robbers, and thieves of the lay people. For at Easter
they give them a dry body, without blood, for they give them Wine
unconsecrated, this is once true and manifest: But what will these Iuglers
say? forsoothe, even as they have all said, Heretic, Heretic, blearing
men's eyes with such blind examples, saying: even as there is a glass, and
many faces seen in the glass, so likewise may a multitude of people receive
the substance at one word. Ah false fayning Iuglers. As there be many faces,
(says he) in the glass, Note here
and but one glass: I answer, if I see my self in the glass, does it
follow that I have a face still in the glass, and an other in my head? Or
when a great number of faces, is seen in one glass, it is not to note that
there are faces in deed, but the similytude of faces: no more is it to be
believed, that this bread is Christ's body that Marie bare, for that it does
but represent the body.

I would demand this question, that I speaking the word with reverence, might
not make Christ's body, as well as they? they will say no: wherefore? because we
are not elect and chosen: let them answer to this question. Does the word
give virtue to election, Note here for an especial enstruction.
or election to the word? If ye they say, that election gives virtue to the
word, then I prove the word of no virtue, and then how can they make God with
it? If they say, that the word gives virtue to the election: then I prove
that all men, speaking the word, may do as much in it, as they: For the word
takes effect in the spirit, and not in the flesh: this argument can not be
denied, except they make God parciall. If a man should demand by what
authority they make God? they will say by the word.

Oh crafty Iuglers, God made the world in sire days, and rested the seventh
day: he made Sun, Moon and stars: he made byrds, beasts, fowls, and
fishes, woormes, serpents, stones, herbs, grass, and every thing of the
same word: and the same words wherewith he made all these things, do remain
main still in the Bible, and yet can it not make any of these things, neither
bread, nor beast, nor nothing else, yet will they make the maker of all these
things, and say, they do it by the word, and the word that made all these
things, remains still in the Bible, and yet can they not do it.

Now to come to the word that they make God of, that is, Hoc est corpus meum,
which is to say: This is my body. Behold the blind peruersenes of the Papists.
In the. 10. of John, Christ says, I am the door: does it follow that he
is a door in deed? no forsooth, I think but that a door is to hard for any
man to eat, they would have taken that place of scripture to make God: Though
Christ said, I am the door, it follows not, Note here
that he was a material door: no more does it follow, that this word, Hoc
est corpus meum, This is my body: to be the same body, that Marie the Virgin
bare, it is plain error, and they are fowly deceived. For when Christ said,
This is my body, that shall be given for you: the word that he spoke was him
self, and him self was the word, or else must the bread have been
crucified, as is before which I will prove by the manifest scriptures. Christ
says in the 6. of John. I am the living bread that came from heaven, your
fathers did eat Manna in the desert and are dead, but I am the bread of life.
So it demonstrateth that Christ was the bread, Note here
which was given for us: but these Gentlemen say, that the bread is he. Now
here is all ye controversy between the Christians and the Papists. Christ
faith, that he is the bread that was given for us, or broken for us: the
Papists say that the bread is Christ, now, how can we agree? for we say, as
Christ says, that he is the bread, and these Ge^tlemen say, that the bread is
he: mark well ye scriptures. Paul says: That which I received of God, I gave
unto you. Let them answer me to this, did Paul receive any thing of the Lord,
but his word? for Paul was not with the Lord at the supper, to receive any
other thing. Oblinde creatures, they wot not what they do, will they have the
blood of witness of Jesus Christ required at their hands still? O good
christian brethren, for the tender mercy of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ,
believe not this erroneous doctrine of the Papists, worship not a wheaten God.
In the. 6. Chap. of John, Christ says: The bread which I will give you, is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Here you may perceive
that the bread that Christ gave us, was his flesh, Ergo, his flesh was ye
bread that he brake, which was him self, and him self was the word, and his
word was his body, which was given for the life of the world. Then strove the
Jews among them selves, and said: How can this fellow give us his flesh to
eat? for they took it carnally, as our clean fingred Ge^tlemen, do now a
days, thinking ye they should have eaten him up, flesh blood and bones? Jesus
said unto the^, John. 6. Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, ye have
no life in you, for whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has
everlasting life. And I shall raise him up at the last day, for my flesh is
very meat, and my blood has everlasting life, and I shall raise him up at the
last day, for my flesh is very meat, and my blood is very drink: and whosoever
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him.

Now I told you before, that Christ was the bread that was given for us: and
even as the material bread feeds the body, so this lively bread feeds the
soul. And Christ speaks here of his flesh and blood, which was offered in
sacrifice, for our salvation, and our redemption, as John says, Chap. 1.8. The
word became flesh, and we see the glory of it, as the only begotten son
of the Father: and who so does believe this, does eat Christ's flesh, and
drinks his blood: But not as these Papists do, for they say that they crash
him with their teeth carnally, Oh abominable blasphemy.
the same body that Mary bare, but they which receive him in a Christian
Communion, receive him by faith. For Christ said (Hoc facite in meam
co^memorationem) Do this in remembrance of me. And whosoever believes, that
this body was done upon the Cross for his salvation, and that the shedding of
his blood, is for the remission of his sins, taken in the remembrance of
Christ's death: eats Christ's body, and drinks his blood spiritually. God
grant we may do so, for our own souls health. Amen. Thus much breefly,
touching the supper of the Lord.

Against men's Merits and righteousness.
Great controversy and disputation there is between the Papists and us
Christians, touching men's merits and righteousness. The Papists say that
they are justified by good works and not by faith. We say that Sola fides
iustificat omnes: Faith alone justifies all men. It is marvelous (dearly
beloved) to see with what rashness and boldness justification of works is
commonly debated: yea, and it is to be seen, how none do more boldly or with
fuller mouths (as the saying is) prate of the righteousness of works, then
they that are monstrously sick of open outward diseases, or be ready to burst
with inward vices: That comes to pass, because they think not upon the
righteousness of God, whereof (if they had never so little feeling) they would
never make so great a mockery of it. And truly it is out of measure lightly
regarded, when it is not acknowledged to be such and so perfect, that nothing
be imputed unto it, but every way whole and absolute, and defiled with no
uncleanness, such as never was and never shall be able to be found in man.

It is in deed easy and ready for every man in schools to talk vainlie
upon the worthiness of works to justify men, but when they come into the
sight of God, such dalliances must avoid, because there is earnest doing used,
and no trifling strife about words. To this, to this I say, we must apply
our mind, if we will profitably enquire of true righteousness, how we may
answer the heavenly Judge when he calls us to account. Let us think him to
be a Judge, not such a one as our own understandings do of themselves imagine:
but such a one as he is painted out in the Scripture, with whose brightness ye
stars shall be darckned, by whose strength the hills do melt away, by whose wrath
the earth is shaken, by whose wisdom the wise are taken in their suttletie, by
whose pureness all things are proved vnpure, whose righteousness the angels
are not able to bear, which makes the innocent not innocent, whose vengeance
when it is once kindled, pearceth to the bottom of hell. If he, I say, sit to
examine men's doings, who (...) pear assured before his throane? Who shall
dwell with a devouring fire, says the prophet Esaie 3.34. Who shall abide with
continual burninges? he that walks in righteousness and speaks truth, etc.
But let such a one come forth whatsoever he be, but that answer makes that
none comes forth, for this terrible saying sou^deth to the contrary: Lord if
thou mark our iniquities, Lord, who shall abide it? Truly all must needs
immediately perish, as it is written in another place: Shall man be justified if
he be compared with god? or shall he be purer then his maker? Behold, they
that serve him are not faithful, and he has found peruersenes in his Angels.
How much more shall they that dwell in houses of clay, and that have an earthly
foundation, be consumed with mothes? They shall be cut down from the morning to
the evening. Behold, among his Saints there is none faithful, and the heavens
are not clean in his sight. Job. 15.15. How much more is man abominable and
unprofitable, which drinks iniquity as water?

I grant in deed that in the book of Job, is mention made of a righteousness
that is higher then the keeping of the Law, and it is good to understand this
distinction, because although a man did satisfy the Law: yet he could not so
stand to the trial of that righteousness that passes all senses. Therefore
although Job be clean in his own conscience, yet he is amazed and not able
to speak, because he sees that the very Angelike holiness cannot appease
GOD, if he exactly way their works. But I therefore will at this time
ouerpasse that righteousness which I have spoken of, because it is
incomprehensible: but only this I say, that if our life be examined by the
rule of the written law, we are more then senseless, if so many curses
wherewith the Lord has willed us to be awaked do not torment us with horrible
fear, and among other this general curse, Cursed is every one that does not
abide in all the things that are written in the book. Finally all this
discourse shall be but unsavory and cold, unless every man yield himself
guilty before the heavenly Judge, and willingly throw down and abace
himself, being careful how he may be acquitted to this, to this I say, we
should have lifted up our eyes to learn rather to tremble for fear, then
vainly to rejoice. Indeed, easy it is, so long as the comparison extends no
further then men, for every man to think himself to have somewhat, which
other ought not to despise, but when we rise up to have respect unto God: then
suddenly that confidence falls to the ground and comes to naught, and in
the same case altogether is our soul in respect of God: as man's body is in
respect of the heaven. For the sight of the eye, so long as it continues in
viewing things that be near unto it, does show of what pearcing force it
is, but if it be once directed up to the sun, the^ being daseled and dulled
with the too great brightness thereof, it feels no less feeblenes of it
self in beholding of the same, then it received strength in beholding inferior
things. Therefore let us not deceive our selves with vain co^fide^ce, although
we count our selves either equal or superior to other men: but ye is nothing to
God, by whose will this knowledge is to be tried. But if our wildnes cannot be
tamed with these admonitions, he will answer to us as he said to the
Pharisees in Luke 16.15. You be they that justify your selves before men: but
that which is high to men is abominable to God. Now go thy way and proudly
boast of thy righteousness among men, while God from heaven abhors it, but
what say the servants of of God yt are truly instructed we his spirit? Enter
not into judgment with thy servant, because every living man shall not be
justified in thy sight. Another says, Although in somewhat diverse meaning, man
cannot be righteous with God, if he will contend with him, he shall not be
able to aunsweare one for a thousand. Here we now plainly perceive what is the
righteousness of God, even such as can be satisfied with no works of men, to
whom when be examineth us of a thousand offenses, we cannot purge our selves
of one. Such a righteousness had the same instrument of God Paul conceived,
when he professed that he knew himself guilty in nothing, but that he was not
thereby justified, And not only such examples are in the holy Scriptures, but
also all godly writers do show that they were always of this mind. So Augustine
ad Bonifacium Lib. 3. Cap. 5. says: All the godly that groan under this
burden of corruptible flesh, and in this weakness of life, have this only
hope, that we have one Mediator, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
appeasement of our sins, Why, says he, if this be their only hope: where is
the confidence of works? For when he calls it only, he leaves none other.

And Bernard super Cant. 6. And in deed where is safe and steadfast rest and
assurednes for the weak: but in the wounds of the savior? And so much the
surer I dwell therein, as he is mightier to save. The world rages, the body
burdeneth, the devil lies in wait: I fall not, because I am builded upon the
sure rock, I have sinned a grievous sin, my conscience is troubled, but it
shall not be over troubled, because I shall remember the wounds of the Lord.
And hereupon afterward he concludes: Therefore my merit, is the Lords
taking of mercy, I am not utterly without merit, so long as he is not utterly
without mercy. But if the mercies of the Lord be many, then I also have as many
merits. Shall I sing mine own righteousness? for that is also my righteousness,
for he is made unto me righteousness of God.

Again in another place, S. Augustine in Psalm. Quihabitat. Ser. 15. This is
the whole merit of man, if he put his whole hope in him that saves whole man.
Likewise where retaining Peace to him self he leaves the glory to God. To
thee (says he) let glory remain undiminished: it shall be well with me if I
have peace. I forswear glory altogether, least if I wrongfully take upon me
that which is not mine own: I lose also that which is offered me. And more
plainly in another place he says, in Cant. ser. 13. Why should the Church be
careful of merits, which has a surer and safer way to glory upon the purpose
of God? So there is no cause why thou should ask by what merits we hope for
good things, specially when thou hear in the prophet, I will do it, not for
your sakes, but for mine own sake, says the Lord. It suffiseth for merits,
to know that merits suffice not. But as it suffiseth of merit not to presume
of merit, so to be without merits, suffiseth to judgment. Whereas he freely
uses this word merits for goood works, we must therein bear with the custom,
but in the end his purpose was to make hipocrits afraid, that wildly range with
licentiousness of sinning against the grace of God, as afterward he
expounds himself saying, Happy is the Church that neither wants merits
without presumption, nor presumption without merits. It has whereupon to
presume, but not merits. It has merits, but to deserve, not to presume,
therefore it presumes so much the more boldly, because it presumes not, having
large matter to glory upon, even the many mercies of the Lord.

This is the truth, the exercysed consciences perceived this to be the only
sanctuary of safety, wherein they may safelye rest themselves when they have
to do with the judgment of God. For if the stars that seemed most bright in
the night season, do loose their brightness with light of the Sun, what, think
we, shall become even of the rarest innocence of man, when it shall be compared
with the pureness of God? For that shall be a most severe examination, that
shall pearce into the most hidden thoughts of the heart. And (as Paul says)
Shall reveal the secrets of darcknes, and disclose the hidden things of the
heart, which shall compel the lurking and unwilling conscience to utter all
things that now are fallen out of remembrance.

The Devil our accuser, will press us, which is privy to all the wicked
deeds that he has moved us to do. There, the outward pompous shows of good
works, (which now only are esteemed) shall nothing profit us. Only the
pureness of will shall be required. Wherefore the hypocrisy (not only
whereby every man knowing him self guilty before God, desires to boaste him
self before men) but also wherewith every man deceives himself before God
(as we be all inclined to flatter our selves) shall fall down confounded,
howsoever it now be proud with more than dronken boldness, they that bend not
their wit to such a sight, may in deed for a short time, sweetly and
pleasantly frame a righteousness to themselves, but it is such a righteousness as
shall be by and by shaken away from them at the judgment of God: Like as great
riches heaped up in a dream, vanish away from men when they wake. But they
that shall earnestly, as it were in the sight of God, enquire of the true rule
of righteousness certainly find that all the works of men, if they be judged
by their own worthiness, are nothing but defilinges and filthiness: That which
among the common people is accounted righteousness, is before God mere
wickedness: that which is judged purity, is uncleanness: that which is
reckoned glory, is but shame.

From this beholding of the perfection of God, let it not grieve us to descend
to look upon our selves, without flattery or blind affection of love, for it
is no marvel if we be all so blind in this behalf, for so much as none does
beware of the pestilent tenderness toward him self, which (as the scripture
cries out) Naturally sticks fast in us all. To every man (says Solomon,
Proverb. chap. 21. verse. 2. and 16. His own way is right in his own eyes.
Again, All the ways of man seem clean in his own eyes. But what? is he
acquitted by his blindness? no: But (as he further says in the same place)
the Lord wayeth the hearts, that is to say, while man flattereth him self by
reason of the outward visor of righteousness that he bears in resemblance:
In the mean time the Lord with his balance examineth the hidden uncleanness of
the heart.

Therefore seeing we see nothing profit with such flatterers, let us not
wilfully mock our selves to our own destruction. But that we may train our
selves rightly, we must necessarily call back our conscience to the judgment
seat of God. For we do altogether need his light to disclose the secret
foldinges of our perverseness, which otherwise lie too deeply hidden. For then,
and never till then, we shall cleerelye perceive what is meant hereby, that
man being rottenness, and a worm, abominable and vain, which drinks
wickedness as water, is far from being justified before God. For who should make
that clean that is conceived of unclean seed? not one man. Then shall we
also find that by experience, which Job said of him self, chapter 19. St
iustificare me voluero, os meum condemnabit me: si innocentem ostendero, prauum
me comprobabit. If I will go about to show my self innocent, my own mouth
shall condemn me: If I will show my self righteous, it will prove me wicked.
For that is not meant of one age only, but of all ages, which the Prophet in
old time, of Israel, that all went astray like sheep, that every one turned
aside to his own way. For he there comprehends all them, to whom the grace
of redemption should come, and the rigorousnesse of this examination ought to
proceed so far, till it subdue us, so that we be fully thrown down with all,
and by that mean, prepare us to receive the grace of Christ. For he is
deceived that thinks himself able to receive the enjoying of this grace,
until he have first thrown down all hautinesse of mind.

This is a known saying, that God confounds the proud, and gives grace to
the humble. O, I would to God that me^ would no longer trust to their own
righteousness, but give place to the mercy of God, that they do not
presumptuously advance them selves, nor reprochfullye triumph over others,
but unfeignedly submitting themselves before God, acknowledging their own
misery and needinesse, at last yealde to the truth, and say with us, and with
S. Paul, (...). Non est iustus, ne vnus quide^: there is none righteous, no
not one. (...): There is none that does good, no not one. Ex operibus Legis non
iustificabitur omnis caro in conspectu eius. By the works of the Law shall no
flesh be justified in his sight.

Again to the Romans 4.2. (...). If Abraham were justified by works, he has
wherein to rejoice, but not with God.

Again. (...). The ways of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal
life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Again, to the Romans 10.3. (...). They beeinge ignoraunte of the Righteousness
of God, and going about to stablish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God. Again in the 11. chap. 5. ver. (...).

Even then, so at this present time is there a remnant through the election of
grace, and if it be of grace, it is now no more of works, or else were grace
no more grace. But if it be of works, it is no more grace, or else were works
no more works. (...), who has given to him first, and he shall be recompensed,
for of him, and through him, and for him, are all things, To him be glory for
ever. Amen.

Again to the Cor. 1. Epist. and 4. chap. 4. ver. Nullius omnino rei mihi
conscius sum, sed non per hoc iuctificatus sum, caeterum qui me iudicat Dominus
est. I know nothing by my self, yet I am not thereby justified, but he that
judges me is the Lord. S. Paul in his 2. Chapter to the Ephesians 8. verse,
Gratia enim estis saluati perfidem, idque non ex vobis, Dei donum est, By grace
are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of
God, not works, least any man should boast him self. 2. Tim. 1.9. Qui saluos
fecit nos, and vocauit vocatione sancta, non secundum opera nostra, sed
secundum suum propositum, and gratiam, quae dat a quidem est per Christum Iesum
ante tempora aeterna. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling,
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which
was given to us through Jesus Christ, before the world was. Titus. 3.5. Non ex
operibus quae sunt in iustitia, quae faciebamus nos, sed secundum suam
misericordiam saluos nos fecit per lauacrum regenerationis, ac renouationis
Spiritus sancti. That is, Not by the works of righteousness which we had done,
but according to his mercy, he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and
the renewing of the holy Ghost, that we being justified by his grace, should be
made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. 1. John. 4.10. (...).

Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
Son to be a reco^ciliation for our sins. In ye 9. ver. We love him because
he loved us first. To the Reave. 21.6. (...). I will geeue to him that is a
thirst, of the well of the water of life, freely,

Many other places of Scripture could I allege against men's merits and
righteousness: but these already alleged, may suffice any Christian man. Now
briefly will I see what the Doctors speak against this matter of Justification
by good works. Origene in his 4. book, and 4. Chap. I do scarcely believe
that there can be any work that may of duty require a reward.

Basil upon the Psalm 32. He that trusts not in his own good deeds, nor
hops to be justified by his works, has the only hope of his salvation in
the mercies of God.

Hilarie upon the 118. Psalm. If we fast once, we think we have satisfied.
If out of the barnes of our household stoare, we give somewhat to the poor, we
believe that we have fulfilled the measure of righteousness: But the Prophet
hops all of God, and trusts all of his mercy.

Hierome upon the 64. Chapter of Esaias, If we behold our own merits, we must
be driven to desperation. Upon the. 3. Cha. to the Ephesians. In Christ Jesus
our Lord, in whom we have boldness and lyberty, to come and trust, and
affiance by the faith of him, not through our righteousness, but through him, in
whose name our sins be forgiven. In his first book against the Pellagians.
Our righteousness does not confist of our merits, but of the grace and mercy
of God. Augustine in his, 50. Book of Homyles. 14 Hom. Did not he give, that
thou might fight a good fight? if he him self did not give, what was it
that thou say? In an other place, I labored more then all they: yet not I,
but the grace of God within me, behold thou say, I have ended my course, did
he not also give unto thee that thou should finish thy course? If he gave
not unto thee, that thou should finish thy course: what is it, that thou
say? In an other place, It lies not in the willer, nor in the runner, but in
God that shows mercy. I have kept the faith: I acknowledge and allow it. I
confess and grant, that thou have kept the faith: but except the Lord does
keep the City: he watches in vain, that does keep it. Pardon me O
Apostle, I know nothing of thine own, but evil. Pardon us O Apostle, we say
so, because thou have taught us. Therefore when he crowns thy merits, he
crowns nothing, but his own gyfts. Thus you have heard (dearly beloved)
what both scriptures and Doctors write against men's merits, and
righteousness: Wherefore I pray you, in the name of Christ, to embrace the
truth.

THus was ye Sermon ended at Room in the year of our Lord. 1578. in the
month of May: which Sermon is registered only for this cause, ye if I should
revolt from Papistry, mine own writing which is registered should condemn me to
the fire, for pardon there were none. Otherwise, if they had not registered this
Sermon, I might have forsaken Papistrie, and without any fear of burning, I
might have repaired unto them, and be reconciled to the Romish Church again.
But now, if I were so wicked and lewd, by means of my Sermon registered at
Room, the Pope him self, could grant me no pardon, according to their own
laws: But without any fail I should be burnt as an Heretic, for thus term
they Christians. But God defend me from their claws, and strengthen me in his
faith, and grant me patience unto the end, and in the end. God grant me an
heart to love him, and obey my Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth: During her life,
I hope ye Papists shall not burn me, God grant her Grace many years, to
reign with much felicity, increase of honor, and joy of health, both of
body and soul. Pray well, O England, for her Majesty, for truly thou have
much need, thou know the cause as well as I, wherefore the same I do omit to
write. This book is ended, Momus hold thy peace, for there was never Momus
that ever thriued, unless he became a mome for his labor. Men will say (as
they have done before this time,) that this Book was the labor of other men,
as they say the other was: It is well known of twenty, and not so few, that I
had the help of none, in this book, neither in the first book, which was
called my Recantation. All the help I had, was of God and my books, as for
other help had I none: not so much as one sentence or clawse had I, by other
men's industry, to be written in my book. This have I spoken, not to win
praise, or that I should seem to be coumpted learned, before I be: But I
thought it good so much to write, to certify the Readers, how falsely I am
accused, and slaundered, and what untruths ye Papists report of me. I crane
no more of them, then they would of me, in the like case, to speak no more
then truth is: And let them not spare, to report that which is truth: so
shall they (as I think) neither displease God, nor molest their own
conscience. And before ye any man ought to believe them, in misreporting ought
of me, let them first try and examine their words, whether they be true or
false, and as they have proved their words, so let them believe. Thus I have
ended to write any farther, to God be praise, and unto me to accomplish, what
to a Christian belongs. If you like this simple work of mine, expect for a
better, which I hope to God ere it be long, shall be brought to light, to the
misliking of the Papists, and to the discredit of their hypocritical
Religion, and to the profit of the Christians, and advancement of the
undoubted truth of the Gospel.

FINIS.
Et Laus Deo.
Dum spiro spero, vita mors, coelum gehenna.
Liuoris et maleuolentiae Papistarum, breuis atque dilucida narratio, et
explicatio.
PApistarum animos ita distractos; atque discerptos esse video, vt nihil
inconstantius aut miserius fingi possit. Duobus retro annis, summo me
prosequuti sunt amore: nunc odio incendu^tur, et varia in me co^uicia atque
maledicta certe indigne spargunt: proh dolor, quid scripsi? quid feci? quid
lobuutus sum, quod non viro libero idoneum, quod non Christiano congruens, quod
non ingenuo dignum? Cum hosts hamani generis sempiterni animam meam
obsederant, et ad eam laniandam acriter incitati fuerant, cum spinis obsita,
tenebris obducta, mortiferisque cincta periculis fuerat anima mea, nemo
Romanistarum, erat qui mihi non fauebat, et qui optimam opinionem de me non
habebat: sed iam quia Christus salutarem vulneri meo medicina^ adhibuit, et
mihi homini misero benignitatis suae lucem porrexit, et ad spem salutis
excitauit: pessime de me loquuntur, sic furiarum iaculis agitantur, sic in
varias parts impetu quodam rabido concitantur (cum impietas religion is suae
omnibus patefacta sit) vt nullu^ sermone^ habere possint, quo me calum nijs, et
vituperijs non afficiant. Quid excogitari potest amentius? quid magis furiosum
atque turbulentum, quam animum hostili odio imbutu^ habere, simultates atque
inimicitias ex inuidia et aemulatione conceptas, in illum tantum exercere, qui
non plus loquitur quam probare potest. Venit interim in me^tem mihi admirari,
quibus rebus adducti plerique Papistae, tantum mendaciis atque figmentis
tribuant, vt easummis honoribus decoranda, et omnibus ornamentis afficie^da
esse putent: vt grauis illorum mendax est conditio, vereor ne exitus multo sit
acerbior. Qui magna fingendi delectatione ducitur, verendum est ne sempiternas
exoluat poenas. Qua^diu possint libere de me mendacia dicant, et quando
vlterius in medacijs fingendis progredi nequea^t, desinant tunc mentiri: et si
me vincunt ingenio, et si eruditione superant, non certe (Deo adiuuante)
propter ingenij tarditatem me deludi sina^, ego ad Euangelicae veritatis fidem,
officia vitae diriga^ et Christu^ deprecabor, vt mihi fidem adaugeat, et ab
illa recidere minime patiatur, vt odio prosequar religionem Papistarum, quae
fausta nunciat, et perniciem comparat: quae spem virtutis ostendit, et ingum
durissimae seruitutis imponit: quae specie praesentis iucunditatis allicit, et
postea multis curis animum et moestitia ingenti solicitat: quae viam in coelum
se monstraturam esse pollicetur, et homines illius open fretos, in miseriae
perennis terminu^ praecipites exturbat. Colluuio Papistarum fremat, quantum
lubet, et qua^tum potest inclamet: nec enim meum est, nee id mihi munus
assignatum patitur, vel perturbari conuitijs, vel ad omnia maledicta
respondere. Ego nunquam aliquem illorum maledicto lacessiui. Liber meae
recantationis, quem in lucem edideram, quem vniuersi Papistae Anglicani et
VVallici, maledictis lacerant, nullum verbum contumeliosum habet, nisi fortasse
querelam iustissimam, et errorum et flagitiorum explicationem verissimam,
conuitiu^ appellare velint: et tamen quasi apri feroces telo venenato confixi,
in me furenter irruunt: tantum vero abfuit, vt contumelijs suis co^turbarer, vt
saepe mihi risum ista suae linguae petulantia mouerent. Christum optimum
maximum oro, et obtestor per sanguinem illius, pro omnium salute profusum, per
vulnera, per acerbissimu^ cruciatum, per mortem, qua morti necem intulit, per
victoriam, quam de Satanae imperio consequutus est, vt omnes aduersarios
nostros erroribus liberet, et splendore sui luminis illustret, et ad fidem, et
religionis sanctissimae consensionem, et Ecclesiae septa reducat, spiritusque
sui praesidio tueatur, vt simul eadem vitae perennitate perfruamur. Amen.

Per me miserum, non hominem, sed vermem, non foelicem, sed infaustam, non
bonam, sed improbam creaturam. I. N. multis curis et cogitationibus excubantem
atque pernoctantem.

Non dubito, quin aliqua in hoc libro commissa sint, sed non multa, et non
magni momenti fore confido.

A confutation of the Oration made before the 4. Cardinals, and the dominican
Inquisitor.
GEntle Reader, both for mine own credit, and to gain thy freendly
courtesy: I am to speak somewhat as concerning my obstinacy in my Oration,
which perhaps will be lightly reproched of the wilful, and may yield some
cause of misliking to the wise. First, consider the person before whom it was
presented, next the place, and lastly the error wherein I was my self. Being
then (unto my no small grief now) a contemner of Gods true religion, and a
delighter in that abominable and Babilonical sect: I spoke that against the
Protestants, which neither they nor I could justly verify: for no greater
delight have the Papists, then by lies and wicked reports to abuse the
Protestants, defaming our Ministers they care not how, and belying their lives,
they care not in what. The which I hearing, and as then perfectly believing:
upon their words I reported, that which I am heartily sorry for. And yet I
have good hope, that considering I was then a Papist, living in error and
idolatry, and am now in the truth, embracing the same in the very bowels of
my soul: the remainder of my life shall cut off the remembrance of mine
offense, and my duty faithfully and truly discharged, shall stop the mouths
of all mine enemies. Thus loath to be over tedious to thee, and to come into any
ill reproach my self: I desire thee to respect me as I am, not as I was, and
to forget my folly, on the establishing of my faith. In hope whereof, I
commit thee to God, whom I pray to bless thee with his heavenly providence,
and increase my faith, to thy comfort and profit. Amen.

J. Nichols.

FINIS.
Vtilis et pia precatio, ab omnibus Christianis dici digna, mane atque vesperi.
ILle diuinus spiritus, qui coelu^ et terras tuetur et regit, Regina^
Elizabetham defendat ac protegat, procreator mundi omnes suos inimicos
extinguat, et funditus deleat: Suorum honorabilium viroru^ a conciliis Iehoua
conseruator sit, praeses atque custos. Ordinis sacricolaru^ numen diuinum sit
adiutor, in verbo Dei propagando: cunctos primates, heroes, magistratus huius
regni Anglicani, qui summus est in coelo atque in terra, tueatur et conseruet,
eiusdem vulgarem populum Deus defensum habeat: Euangelii fautorum Christus sit
vnicus defensor, atque propugnaculum, inimicos nostros veritati Deus
reconciliet, et omnem inter nos et illos controuersiam dirimat: potentia diuina
Antichristum destruat, cum toto suo imperio insolenti: optabilem et liberum
transitum concedat Deus Euangelio. In anima omnium graduum talem inscribat Deus
gratiam, quali praeditus quisque, in suo officio et munere digne ambulare
possit: Amen.


