A LEARNED AND FRVITFVLL SERMON, Preached in Christ's Church in Norwich.

BY Mr. NEVVHOVSE, late Preacher of Gods Word there.

1 PETER 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God.

LONDON: Printed for Jonas Man, and are to be sold at the sign of the Talbot
in Paternoster-row. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Mr. Thomas Layer, an ancient Senator, and a just
Justice of Peace, in the City of Norwich: Grace and Peace.
RIGHT Worshipful, though the Word of God be the Bread of life, yet the
Ministers of Gods word are his Stewards to divide it: and though the same Word
be the Water of Life, yet they are his Conduits to convey it. If the Bread in a
loaf be not cut out unto the hungry, an Infant that is hungry may dye with a
whole loaf in his hands: and if the Water in a fountain be not drawn out to
the thirsty, a child may perish with a bottle in his arms.

How necessary it is, that the one should be cut out to the hungry soul, and
the other drawn out to the thirsty spirit, they know best that have the care
of their own family, and how necessary it is that both the bread and water of
life, should be carved and filled out to all such as hunger and thirst after
righteousness, they know well who have any care of Gods Family.

We that live in this Kingdom, have good experience of Gods favor toward us
in this respect. We have many a faithful Ahimelech amongst us, who rather then
David should perish for hunger, will give unto him the Shewbread of the
Sanctuary: We have many a worthy Minister amongst us, who rather then David
should dye for thirst, will with the hazard of their lives give unto him of the
waters of Bethlehem.

When I enter into a serious meditation of the Majesty of Gods Word, and
withal consider that all is as nothing without application, methinkes I do
say, here is salve: but where is the hand that must lay it on the soar? Here
is Balm: where is the finger that must pour it into the wound? Here is
Physic: where is the Physician? And here is the Poole of Bethesdah: where is
the friend that will help us in? Do we look for an hand? the hand of Gods
Minister will lay on the salve. Do we desire a finger? The finger of Gods
Minister will pour in this oil. Would we send for a Physician? the Art of
Gods Minister will administer this Physic. And if at the descent of the
Angel, we would feign be put into the Poole of Bethesdah, who will sooner do
it then this Man of God?

I cannot deny, but that by reading of Gods word a man may receive much
comfort: nay, I am persuaded that by the same, he may be excellently prepared
to get saving knowledge: yet preaching is that alone ordinary means, which God
has sanctified for the salvation of his Children, and to make them wise unto
that salvation.

By preaching, the Mind of the ignorant is enlightened: the Memory of the
forgetful is strengthened: the Heart of the obstinate is mollified: the
Affections of the untoward are reduced: the Will of the perverse is restrained:
and the Life of the ungodly so changed, that at the voice of a simple and
sinful man, he cries out with the Jews in the Acts, Men and brethren, what
shall I do to be saved? This made David to say, I am the man: Saul to say, I
have sinned: and every private convert to say: God is in these men indeed.

Were it not for preaching of the Word, where were the understanding of it?
where were the consolation by it? where were direction from it? Without it how
should hard places be made plain? plain be applied? repugnances in it be
reconciled? or oppugners of it be confuted? Take away Preaching, and then down
with our Schools of learning, our Houses of prayer, our Obedience to
Superiors, our Love to equals, and our right to heaven.

I am now in a Labirinth, I cannot well come out. The Preaching of the Gospel,
is the power of God unto salvation: the Pillar of God in our journey to Canaan:
the Angel of God to bring us out of Sodom: the Messenger of God to prepare
his way: the Trumpet of God, to cry down Jericho: and the Hammer of God to
drive in the nail of piety, and to break out the brains of profaneness.

How much we are beholding to the Preachers of the Gospel we shall then know,
when the Lord shall send such a Famine of this Bread, that though we go from
East to West we shall not find it: or such a Drought of this water of life,
that we shall run from City to City, and shall not get it. But blessed be
God, we are now full: and I wish it may never be said unto us, Woe be unto you
that are full.

Amongst many Cities in this famous Kingdom, beholding unto God for the
Ministry of the Word, you in your City are not the least beholding. Every
Sabbath day, in many of your Churches is the Word preached, and almost every
day in the week, the preaching of the same is painfully continued.

And surely, when I consider the pains required of your City preachers, the
uncertain allowance provided for them, the mean estate they must ever needs
live in, and that sound Learning which has been, and is now in many of them,
I begin to think, that it is either the sweetness of the air, or the
civility of your people, or the contentedness of their minds, or their
desire to do good, or the special blessing of almighty God, that continues
thus amongst you the great means of salvation.

But howsoever the Arc of Gods Covenant be beautifully set up in your several
Temples, yet to you of S. Andrews has God appeared in exceeding beauty. How
many hungry souls in that City are almost daily fed at your table? How many
thirsty spirits do drink ordinarily of your Cisternes? And I doubt whether
any one Parish in the Kingdom has been so successively blessed with learned
and laborious Ministers, as you have been, for almost threescore years.

If you forget that faithful Servant of Christ Mr. More, who for twenty
years together preached amongst you almost every day in the week, besides his
private conferences in your several families, surely then I fear me there is
a state risen up amongst you, like unto that of the Egyptians, whose King knew
not Joseph. But I know you remember both him and his.

And can you then forget this worthy man, who for the space of fourteen
years past, lived partly a Preacher, and partly a Pastor in your Congregation?
Concerning whom I might say much (and if a learned Father does not deceive me,
it is piety to commend the dead,) but I must not make an Epistle larger then
the book. I lived with him in a famous College, I labored with him in your
holy City, for the space of five years and more: and I ever observed him
diligent in his study: witty in discourse, apprehensiue of truth, deep in
knowledge, powerful in preaching, vigilant in practicing, and a perfect
pattern of gravity and sobriety in the whole course of his life and
conversation. And if the spirit of that judicious Mr. Perkins might be found in
any Divine, I think it appeared in him.

It is the Art of Arts to preach well, to divide the word, and to save souls:
he excelled in this Art: and that he might grow in this knowledge, he took
such pains, that like unto a serviceable candle, in giving light to you, he
consumed himself.

Though there be too many Books in this scribbling age, and the paper is worth
more then the things that are written in them, (as Socrates once said, when he
would write nothing) yet of some men's Labors there are too few. For though
they should write but that which before has been written, yet by reason of
their credit in the Church, the soundness of their judgment, the uprightness
of their life, their experience in cases of controversy and conscience, and
that love which their auditors have had to them and their doctrine, they might
by writing do much good.

We read not indeed that our Savior Christ committed of himself any thing
to writing: yet his Apostles he made as his Hand and Secretaries, to commend
the New Testament to the Church of God.

Our adversaries the Papists, daily do assault the Church with deadly weapons;
the poison of Aspes is under their pens: if these Fools were not answered to
their Folly, they would be too proud.

Our Adversary the Devil casts daily new devised darts into the minds and
Consciences of people: if he should not be resisted by the Sling of David, he
would soon triumph over the Israel of God.

True it is indeed, that by the mouth of the Preacher we receive much good,
and the lively voice gives much life to discourse: but when, after hearing, we
may with our eyes peruse that which our ear has heard, we shall the better
ponder, and know, and remember, and affect that which otherwise we might
utterly forget: and make our hearts as rich in grace, as our Books are full of
goodness.

To this end, that which was preached unto the ear, in the assembly of many
learned Divines, and by name, before that Reverend Doctor Redman, late Bishop
of your Diocese, I am bold to publish to your view: that by the finger of this
Herculean labourer, you may know what the whole man was.

And the same I am bold to dedicate to your Worship, as a testimony of your
long love to me, and my desire to be thankful to you.

When I lived in your Parish a painful Preacher, I found seeming favor at the
hands of some curious, but substantial favor of diverse courteous and true
meaning people.

How in the first year of my coming, I was entertained by that grave Senator,
Mr. Francis Rugge, then the third time Mayor of that happy City, I cannot
forget, whose house was unto me rather an habitation then an Inn: How ever
after I was welcome to you, and continually was fed at your table, I must not
forget, unless I would be thought an unthankful man.

I acknowledge all with much thanks, both to God, for such a friend, and to you
for such friendship: and desire that when both you and I shall have gone the
way of all flesh, the kindness which you have showed to me, may (of all into
whose hands this little Book shall come) he had in remembrance.

I am now at an end. I present unto you this learned Sermon of the
Justification of a sinner before God, with an excellent Prayer which Mr.
New-house gave me, written with his own hand. I doubt not of your kind
acceptance of them both: and I trust they will be a welcome New-yeeres gift to
the whole City, who I hope will ever obey them that have the ouer-sight of
them, Hebr. 13.
and submit themselves to them: for they watch for their souls, even as they
that must give accounts: that they may do it with joy and not with grief: for
that is unprofitable for them.

Now I pray, that as the true fear of God has so increased your happy days
upon earth, that you have attained to the age of fourscore years, and for
above forty years past have lived a worthy Senator of a most worthy City; so
it would please God, when your glass is run, and Death shall call for you,
you may with old Simeon depart in peace; with faithful Samuel be lamented for,
and after receive the end of your Faith, which is the salvation of your Soul.

Thus craving pardon, recommending you, your virtuous Wife Mris. Anne Layer,
with that bountiful and godly Widow Mris. Anne Rugge, to the protection of
the Almighty, I humbly take my leave.

From Mr. Andrew Curwaynes house in Salisburie-rents, at S. Martins in the
Fields. December. 3. 1611.

Your Worships ever in the Lord, ROBERT HILL.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Great S. Mary's, in Cambridge.
2 COR. 5.21. For he made him which knew no sin, to be sin for us; that we
should be made the righteousness of God in him.


FRom the ninth verse of this Chapter to the eighteenth, the Apostle commends
his faithfulness and sincerity in the execution of his function Apostolical.
From the eighteenth verse unto the end, he commends the doctrine of the
Gospel, and that by a double argument: the former whereof is taken from the
Author or efficient cause, who is, GOD himself: the latter from the effect,
to wit, reconciliation between God and man; and therefore it is called the
Ministry of reconciliation. Further this effect is enlarged by sundry
arguments: first, from the Author, who is also God himself: secondly, from
the subject, viz. the World, by a Metonimie of the subject, men living in the
world; and by a Synecdoche of the whole for the part, the Elect in the world:
thirdly, from the form, viz. the not imputing of sin: fourthly, from the
adiuuant causes, that is, the Ministers of the word, to whom the dispensation
of this heavenly embassage is committed, verse 19. and 20. fifthly, from the
meritorious and impulsive cause, which is the work of Christ's Mediatorshippe,
in undertaking the discharge of man's sin before God. verse 21.

Wherein three things more particularly are to be considered. First, our
Savior Christ, the Redeemer and reconciler of the world, is described by his
adioynt or property, which is purity of nature, and immunitie from sin, in
these words, (Which knew no sin.) Secondly, his work is propounded, whereby
he merited and procured at the hands of his Father, atonement and
reconciliation between God and man, in these words, ( became sin for us.
Thirdly, this work is amplified from the use and end of it, which is the
justification of a sinner before God, in the last words, (that we might be made
the righteousness of GOD in him.) Thus much shall suffice to have spoken of
the coherence, order, and resolution of these words.

Now to descend to a more particular examination of them, let us first of all
search the true and proper meaning of the words, and then proceed to the use
of doctrine and edification which they shall naturally afford.

First, therefore whereas the Apostle says, he made him, the meaning is, God
the Father in his eternal and unchangeable counsel, decreed and appointed him
which knew no sin to become sin for us, and answerably, in fullness of
time, sent his Son to take upon him flesh, that is, man's nature, that in the
same he might work and suffer whatsoever was to be done and suffered for the
accomplishment of man's redemption. This appears to be so, both because the
outward and external works of God stretch themselves not only to the devils
themselves, but to the executions thereof, as also because this work of
Redemption and Reconciliation between God and man, as it was begun in the
decree of God, so it was continued in the incarnation of Christ, and then
finished and accomplished when all our sin and guilt was laid upon him, and
he paid the ransom for them all.

And least this should seem strange and hard to any, that Christ being very
God should be any way subject or subordinate unto the decree of God, the
Scripture is plain and pregnant in this point: 1 Pet. 1.20. He was
fore-appointed, or foreordained from the beginning of the world, viz. to this
work of mediation. And our Savior Christ himself speaks plainly, John
6.27. Him has the Father sealed, that is, signed and singled, by setting as it
were, a stamp and mark upon him, thereby separating him unto this work.

This we shall the better conceive if we do but remember this distinction:
Christ is to be considered of us two ways: first, absolutely as he is God, in
which respect being equal with the Father and the holy Ghost, he decrees and
determines together with them all things that are or come to pass in heaven
or in earth: secondly, with limitation or addition, viz. as he is God
incarnate, God manifested in the flesh, the mediator and reconciler of the
world; in which respect he may be truly said to be under the decree of God,
though not in respect of his Nature, yet in respect of his Office.

Which knew no sin.] The meaning is not that our Savior Christ was ignorant of
the nature, quality and force of sin, all our sins being laid upon him,
but he knew no sin, to wit, experimentally, either inherent in his person or
practiced in his life; in a word, he was no sinner at al, either by the guilt
of Adams first transgression, or by the corruption of nature proceeding thence,
or by any actual offense committed in all his life. The Scripture is clear and
evident in this point: And first for original sin, that is the guilt and
corruption of nature, Lu. 1.35. The Angel Gabriel in his salutation to the
Virgin Marie, says, that that which shall be borne of her, shall be holy,
that is, pure and free from all stain and contagion of original sin: Hebre.
4.15. He was tempted in all things like unto us, yet without sin. And though
this were a sufficient reason to exempt our Savior Christ from all actual
sin, yet the Scripture is not wanting in this point also, Ioh. 8.46. he
clears himself from all actual transgression, when he says, Which of you
can convince or rebuke me of sin? And for them both, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ
suffered, the just for the unjust, just in nature, just in actions. Heb. 7.26
Such an high Priest it became us to have, as is holy, undefiled, innocent, and
separate from sinners. And the reason is rendered in the words following,
because he must not be like to the high Priests of the Law, who being sinners
themselves, first offered sacrifice for themselves, and then for the people;
but he must be an absolute and perfect high Priest, that he may be in all
points an absolute and a perfect Savior.

The ground of all this is, the extraordinary and miraculous sanctification of
our Savior Christ in the womb of the Virgin, whereof there be two parts: the
first is the stay and stoppage of the guilt of Adams first transgression, with
the corruption of nature proceeding thence, which was done on this manner: God
in the beginning took this order touching man, that whatsoever good he had, he
should have it for himself and his posterity, and whatsoever evil or hurt he
brought upon himself, that he should derive it to every one of his posterity
descending from him, insomuch as every father is in stead of Adam, to convey
unto his child not only nature and substance, but the guilt also and
corruption of nature: now that this evil might be prevented in Christ, God in
great wisdom appointed that he should be immediately conceived by the holy
Ghost in the womb of the Virgin, without any manner generation by man,
insomuch as he took substance from Marie without the guilt and corruption of
nature.

Object. If it shall be objected (as the spirit of error has found one only
cavil against this clear truth) that all that are in Adam have sinned in him
but our Savior Christ was in Adam, ergo.

An. The proposition is not true, unless it be thus expounded: All that are in
Adam have sinned in him, sobeit they descend from him by ordinary generation.
Romans 5.12. the holy Ghost says, by one man sin entered into the world, he
does not say from one man, signifying that Adam conueyeth the corruption of
nature to no more then he does beget: for the Assumption, it must be
distinguished; our Savior Christ was in Adam not simply as other men are, but
in part only, that is, in regard of substance which he took from Adam, but
not in regard of the propagation of nature by ordinary generation. All other
men are from Adam, and by Adam; but he is from him only, and not by him, as
by a begetter and procreant cause.

The second part is the infusion of holiness into the manhood of Christ, so
far forth as is meet for the person and office of a Mediator.

Became sin for us.] These words at the first sight may seem to imply a
contradiction, but being rightly expounded, all difficulty will easily be
removed. Some expound (Sin) a sacrifice for sin, by a Metonimie of the
subject, Sin being the object of sacrifice, specially of the propitiatory
sacrifice, which was conversant about the expiation of sin: this exposition
is Orthodoxe, agreeable to the Analogy of Faith, the tenure of Scripture, and
the use of the word, which often in the Scripture admits this trope, as
might be showed in many places of the old Testament if need were.
Nevertheless it seems not to be so fit and suitable unto this place, and that
for two reasons principally: first, because of the Antithesis here used by the
Apostle, wherein if by one member, viz. Sin, we understand a sacrifice for
sin and no more, so as our guilt and punishment shall be translated unto
Christ alone, and not the fault (as Bellarmine and the Rhemists would have it)
then necessarily by righteousness in the second member we must understand the
reward and fruit of righteousness, which cannot stand; because the very
righteousness it self is imputed to justification, as afterward we shall
show. Secondly, it is unequal and unjust; yea, altogether impossible, to
impose our guilt upon Christ and not our sin, because sin and guilt go
inseperably together, and where there is no sin, there can be no guilt,
therefore that our guilt might be laid upon Christ, necessarily our sin must
after a sort be made his, and annexed unto him, that is, by imputation.
Wherefore the more convenient exposition, and (as I take it) the better
befitting this place, is, if by sin we understand a grievous and notorious
sinner, the abstract emphatically noting the haynousnesse of the offense. And
indeed the offense must needs be great, not which he had committed, but which
was imputed unto him, all the sins of the Elect, their periuries,
blasphemies, adulteries, murders, oppressions and Heresies being laid upon
him, so that he might justly be termed, and yet without disgrace unto his
person, Luther. in Gal. 3.13. and Calvin. idem.
blasphemus, periurus, haereticorum haereticissimus, (as Luther speaks.)

Now if any man shall reply and say these are contrary one to another, for
Christ to be a sinner, and to be no sinner, the answer is easy: there is no
contradiction, unless the same respect be observed in both, he is verily a
sinner, and verily no sinner: in a diverse and sundry consideration, he is
verily no sinner properly, personally, and by act of inherencie; he is a sinner
truly, yet relatiuely and by act of imputation.

For us.] That is, so many of us as are elected, and do believe: for we may
not think that our Savior Christ undertook the discharge of all men's sins
before God, to answer and satisfy the justice of God for them all; for then
why are not all men saved? Col. 1.14. In whom we have redemption by his blood,
that is, the remission of sins. Out of which place I reason thus: All that
are effectually redeemed by Christ on Gods part, they have the pardon of their
sins, but all and every particular singular man have not the pardon of their
sin, ergo, all and every particular man are not effectually redeemed by
Christ on Gods part. The proposition is manifest out of the words of the text,
where redemption and remission of sins, are inseperably yoaked and coupled
together, and reason does enforce the same, that where the justice of God is
fully satisfied, nothing can be further objected unto, or required of the
sinner: and on satisfaction necessarily follows and depends the abolishment
of all sin and guilt: for the Assumption, that is likewise clear. For if all
men had the pardon of their sins, then some who are effectually called,
justified, sanctified and united unto Christ, may totally fall away from grace,
and finally perish, which is a hellish and uncomfortably doctrine; the
reprobates may be members of the Catholic Church, which is a Popish doctrine:
then the gifts and calling of God should be such, whereof he did repent him,
if the pardon of sin once given could be frustrate and made void. Wherefore
those men that hold and teach that our Savior Christ took upon him the
discharge of all men's sins, to appease and pacify the wrath of God for them
all, as well of Caine as of Abel, of Esau as of Jacob, of Pharaoh as of Moses,
of Judas as of Peter, of reprobate as of elect, they err and are greatly
deceived, as might be showed at large, if this Text did give me so fit occasion.

That we.] That is, so many of us as do believe. Here comes three things to be
expounded: first, what this righteousness here mentioned is: secondly, why it
is called the righteousness of God: thirdly, how we become it, and it ours.
This righteousness that we may the better conceive, we must remember this
distinction. There is in Christ a twofold righteousness, according to the
diversity of his nature; the one is uncreated and infinite, which is the
righteousness of the Deity, called by Divines, his essential righteousness:
the other is created and finite, which is the righteousness of the humanity.
The former is not here intended or spoken of by the Apostle, as may appear by
two reasons: first, this righteousness is infinite, and therefore
incommunicable, and if it could be communicated, yet the finite creature were
not capable of it, considering that that which is infinite, can neither be part
nor accident of that which is finite: secondly, if we could be capable of it,
we should be Deified; and then the Apostle might more sitly have said, that
we might be made righteous Gods in him, then the righteousness of God in him.

Wherefore the dotage of Osiander, concerning the justification of a sinner by
his essential righteousness, is to be abhorred and renounced as blasphemous
heresy, absurd and ridiculous even to common sense. As for the place, 2 Pet.
1.4. where it is said that the faithful are made partakers of the divine
nature, it makes nothing for the patronaging of this error, for by Nature is
not meant substance, but divine qualities of wisdom, holiness, and
righteousness, liuelily representing the nature of God, who is wisdom, holiness
and righteousness it self. The latter is the righteousness of the humanity,
which is here: which is twofold, original, which is the purity and
integrity of his nature, viz. the conformity of the whole man unto the will
of God: actual, which is either active, which he achiued in fulfilling the
Law; or passive in his sufferings. Now this whole righteousness is imputed
unto us to justification, as after we shall declare.

In the second place, this righteousness is called the righteousness of God,
and that for three causes: first, because God is the sole Author and giver of
it, Nature does not afford, neither good education, all that free will and the
good use of the gifts of Nature does or can afford is no more but an outward
civil righteousness before men, which cannot justify a sinner before God:
secondly, God alone accepts it for and in the behalf of the sinner, thereby
giving him absolution from guilt, and title and interest unto life: thirdly, in
respect of the subject, because it is in that person which is not only man but
also God, in whom it is reserved as in a storehouse for the use of the Church.

Thirdly, this righteousness becomes ours after this manner; Sin is that
which makes a man unrighteous and the child of wrath and vengeance: now in
sin there are three things hurtful unto man: the first is, condemnation or
guilt, which is an obligation to punishment: the second is actual disobedience
unto the moral Law: the third is, original corruption, the fountain of all
sin: these are three deadly wounds and three running sores in the hearts and
consciences of all sinners.

Contrariwise Christ Jesus is perfectly righteous, and in him are three
inestimable benefits, answerable to the three former evils: first, the
sufferings of Christ upon the Cross, sufficient for all men's sins: secondly,
the obedience of Christ in fulfilling the Law: thirdly, the perfect holiness
of the humane nature of Christ, and these are three sovereign medicines to
heal all wounded consciences: and as three running streams of living waters
to bathe and to supple the bruised and contrite heart. Now comes Faith, and
first lays hold on the sufferings or passive obedience of Christ, which being
imputed and appived to the sinner, he is delivered from guilt and
condemnation, and so the first deadly wound is cured. Again, Faith lays hold
upon his active obedience in fulfilling the Law, which being imputed and
applied, the person of the sinner is accepted as perfectly just before God, and
so the second deadly wound is cured Thirdly, Faith applies the holiness of
his humane nature, called his habitual or original righteousness, whereby
he is accepted of God as perfectly holy, and so the third deadly wound is
cured. And thus we see how this righteousness is become ours, and we it. And
thus much shall suffice to have spoken touching the meaning of the words.

Now follows the use of doctrine. And to omit many other doctrines which
might be gathered out of this place, I will content my self with this one
which the words do naturally afford, being almost expressed in the Text, to
wit, hence we are taught what is the formal cause of the justification of a
sinner before God, viz. a reciprocal translation of our sin unto Christ, and
his righteousness unto us, the which comprehends the whole form of
Justification: wherein there are two things: first, a not imputing of sin:
secondly, an imputing of righteousness; for that our sins may not be imputed
unto us, necessarily they must be imputed unto Christ; and that we of sinners
may become just, his righteousness must be imputed unto us. In a word then,
the form of Justification is the imputation of the perfect obedience of Christ
unto the believer for the remission of sins, and for righteousness. This
point because it is a fundamental principle, and a maine ground and pillar of
our religion, and not a little controuerted between the church of Rome and us,
I will stand the longer in the handling of it, both that we may be confirmed in
the truth of so necessary doctrine, as also armed with the armor of proof
against all the assaults of the adversaries wherewith they shall impugn it.

And that we may proceed in some order, we will consider these three things:
first, what imputation is: secondly, that it is the formal cause of the
Justification of a sinner before God: thirdly, we will touch some of the
principal objections which are alleged to the contrary by that apostaticall
and heretical Church of Rome. And to begin with the name: Imputation, is a
Metaphor, borrowed not from numbers and Arithmetique (as some have thought) but
from a kind of contract, called acceptilation; wherein the creditor is content
to accept the payment of the surety in the behalf of the debtor, even as if
he had discharged it in his own person. Touching the use and acception of the
word, it is twofold in Scriptures: the first is, when an inherent quality or
action proceeding thence, is imputed unto reward or punishment: for reward,
mention is made of it, Romans 4.4. to him that works, the wages are imputed: an
example of it we have in Phinchas, Psalm. 106.31. whose work the Lord imputed
unto him for righteousness, that is, he approved it, accepted it, and
rewarded it for the faith of the worker. For punishment we have an instance, 2 Samuel 19.19. where the varlet Shimei does beseech David on this manner: Let not
my Lord impute wickedness unto me, that is, let him not inflict the punishment
of my sin upon me. 2. Tim. 4.26. At my first answering no man assisted me,
but all forsook me, I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge. The
second is, when something out of a man's self is by imputation made his, as
though it were inherent in him, or wrought by him: thus it is used, Romans 2.26.
Thy uncircumcision is made Circumcision if thou be an obseruer of the Law.
So to Philemon, verse 18. If Onesimus has done thee any hurt, impute it to me,
or set it on my score, I will repay: and in this latter sense we are to speak
of it in this place.

Imputation therefore may be thus described; It is an action of God accepting
the all-sufficient and perfect Obedience of Christ, in the behalf of the
believing sinner, unto satisfaction and justification. Now then to come to the
first point, that Imputation thus described, is the form of the justification
of a sinner before God, though many arguments might be used, yet I will content
my self with these two, both which are contained in this Text: the former
whereof may be framed thus; After what manner Christ became a sinner, after the
same manner we are made just; but he became a sinner, not by infusion of any
corrupt qualities into his holy nature (which were blasphemy once to conceive)
but by imputation of our sin only: therefore we are just before God, not by
infusion of any habitual grace into our corrupt natures, but by imputation of
his righteousness only. This argument is firm and invincible, and cannot be
deluded, being so surely grounded upon this Text If it be replied (as indeed
it is) that if this reason of reciprocal imputation be so firm, and of such
force, why do not the like consequents follow of both? to wit, why does not
the imputation of our sin unto Christ, as well bring with it inherent
corruption in him, as the imputation of his righteousness unto us, inherent
grace in us. Ans. The reason is far unlike; for first though sin be of a very
poysonfull nature, yet there is not the like force and power in sin to defile
and to pollute, as in grace to purge and to sanctify, Romans 5.15. The gift is
not so as is the offense, noting that there is more virtue and efficacy in
grace to sanctify and to save, then in sin to defile and to destroy. And
indeed Grace is like unto fire, which though it be for quantity small, yet for
efficacy great: Again, the humane nature of Christ is so replenished with
holiness, that it is not at all capable of sin; but man's nature is not so
stained and corrupted with sin, but that it is capable of grace being at the
first created after the Image of God, and afterward again to be re^ed by
Christ and therefore considering that Christ is not so capable of sin as man
is of holiness, the reason is of no moment. The latter reason may be gathered
out of the words of the Apostle, where he says, That we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: Whence I reason thus: The righteousness whereby a
sinner is just before God, is either his own, or the righteousness of
another; but it is not his own, for the Apostle would have said, we are made
the righteousness of God in our selves, and not in him: and thus some of the
ancient Fathers expounding this place, say, that it is not in our selves, but
in him; not ours, but his: and Chrysostom says, that therefore it is called
the righteousness of God, because it is without all stain and defect, and
therefore cannot possibly be inherent in us, wherefore we may safely conclude,
that this righteousness is not resident in us, but received from another, and
after a sort made ours, to wit, by imputation.

Object. But it is excepted, that it is absurd in reason, that a man should be
just by the righteousness of another, even as if a man should be wise by the
wisdom of another, or learned by the learning of another, or live by the life
of another.

Ans. This reason had some color, if the righteousness of Christ were
personal, and so limited and tied unto him, that it could not from him be
derived unto others; but it is so in him that it may be ours, and conveyed unto
us by imputation: the reason is, because Christ is a public person,
representing all the Elect; yea, the root and stock of the Elect, even as
Adam was the root and stock of all mankind. Look as therefore the first
transgression of Adam was not his alone, but every particular man's descending
from him by generation: even so, the righteousness of Christ is not his alone,
but pertaines to all the Elect, being by faith united unto him, and made bone
of his bone, and flesh of his flesh.

And as the juice and sap which is in the root of the tree, is made the sap of
the branches by participation: even so the righteousness of Christ being
inherent in him as in the head, is made the righteousness of the members by
imputation. And as the Lands and goods of one man are made over unto another by
deed of gift, sale, exchange, or some like conueyance of Law, both for title
and use: even so, the righteousness of Christ, by virtue of the free gift of
God, according to the tenure of the Covenant of Grace, is truly and really
conveyed unto us and made ours. These two reasons are sufficient grounds,
whatsoever may be excepted to the contrary, whereupon this conclusion may be
raised; that the sole imputation of the righteousness of Christ, is the form
of the justification of a sinner before GOD.

Now follows the third point, viz. the answering of those objections which
are alleged to the contrary.

Ob. First of all, it is replied that Imputation, is a conceit invented and
devised by man, not above fifty or sixty years old, not to be found in
Scriptures, or in the ancient and Orthodoxe Writers of the Church.

Ans. To this many things may be answered; first, what greater impudency and
bold-hardinesse can there be, then to contradict the manifest and express
testimony of Scripture? for this very Imputation is beat upon and repeated no
seldomer then eleven times in the fourth Chapter to the Romans, and it is as
ancient as Abraham, of whom it is said, Genesis 15.6. He believed God and it was
imputed unto him for righteousness: not as the Papists falsely interpret it;
that Abraham's faith was so excellent, that it deserved the infusion of
habitual grace, but Abraham by faith casting himself and relying upon the
promise of grace concerning righteousness, remission of sins, and life by
Christ, was justified, or his Faith was imputed unto him for righteousness,
Metonimia adiuncti; that is, what his faith apprehended became his
righteousness by imputation. Again, it is to be found in the best and
soundest ancient Writers, Hierome, Anselme, and Chrysostom upon this place,
who though they do not express the word Imputation, yet use it in effect;
saying, that this righteousness is not in us, but in him, as our sin is not
his but ours, not in him but in us, and Chrysostom says, it must be without
all stain and want. So Aug. in tract. 3. in John. and de Sp. and litera, ca.
9. and 26. and Bernard. ser. 62. in Cant. and ser. ad milites templi, ca. 11.
mors in Christo morte fugatur, and Christi iustitia nohis imputatur. Many more
testimonies might be alleged to this purpose, but qui plura videre cupit,
legate Fulconem in responsione ad annotationes Rhemensium super hunc locum. Let
then the Rhemists mock so long as they will, and call this a new no-iustice, it
is sufficient for us, that it is grounded on Scriptures, and wants not the
testimony of the Church.

To proceed further, Imputation is not a mere device, but a very thing; for
it is a relation, that is, an ordination, or application of that which the
Logitians call the fundament unto his term, or of the relative unto his
correlatiue, for example: In Imputation the fundament is the righteousness of
Christ; the term is the person of the believer; and the relation is the mercy
of God, or the action of God mercifully accepting the perfect righteousness of
Christ in the behalf of the believer. Now this is not a fiction: and if a
relation be nothing, how shall we distinguish the persons in Trinity, who
though they subsist all in one infinite, and undivided essence, yet are three
really distinguished by an inco^municable property, which is nothing else but
a relation? Again, if a relation be nothing, what shall be the internal form
of a Sacrament? is it any other but a relation or proportion between the sign
and the thing signified? And if a relation be nothing, many a man is unjustly
adjudged and condemned to dye, both in the Courts of men, and in the court of
Conscience, before God: for why do men daily dye the death of the body, and
the death of the soul, is it not because they are guilty? And if sin had not
guiltiness annexed unto it as an inseparable property thereof, men might at
their pleasures break and transgress both the Laws of God and of men, and
never be obnoxious to punishment: for it is not sin, but guilt that binds over
unto punishment: now what else is this guilt but a relation? and if the
imputation of Adams sin unto us be something, why should not the imputation of
Christ's righteousness be also something, and not a mere figment as they would
make it? Nay, Relations (as the Schoolmen speak, though they be minimae
entitatis, yet are they maximae efficaciae.

To conclude this point, behold what injury this Antichristian Synagogue does
offer unto our Savior Christ: the Pope forsooth, by virtue of the keys, has
power to dispense and apply the merits of one man to another, insomuch as all
his Indulgences are imputative, but Christ has not this power. What is this
else, but to deny unto the Head, that which they allow unto the members? and to
give to their ministerial head, that which they deny unto the imperial, as
they foolishly distinguish? But not content with this, they plead further for
themselves, saying, that there is no necessity of the imputation of
righteousness, because we are justified by an inherent righteousness,
received from Christ by infusion: this they labor to confirm by testimony of
Scripture, principally out of Romans 5.18. As by the offense of one man many dye;
out of which place they reason thus: As the imputative disobedience of Adam did
truly print into the nature of man, corruption and sin, and not putatiuely
only, as they speak: so the imputative obedience of Christ, does print into
the nature of man holiness and grace, and notiby imputation only. This
argument they take to be so firm and so strong that it admits no answer,
which notwithstanding, being well weighed is of no moment: for if all were
granted, nothing could be proved, unless it could be showed that this
righteousness printed in our natures, and resident in us, were that whereby a
sinner is justified before God, which cannot be, as is manifest by this reason:
That righteousness which must absolve and acquit a sinner before God, must be
absolute and perfect, and in all points answerable and correspondent unto the
rigor and extremity of the moral Law; but our inherent righteousness is not
such, nay, Psalm. 143.2 Dan. 9.18.
it is imperfect in this life, and therefore David and Daniel durst not oppose
it to the severe examination of gods judgment seat, but renounced it, and
relied themselves only upon the mere mercy of God, and merit of Christ, and so
have the Saints of God done from time to time.

Paul, 1 Cor. 4.4. Though he had a great measure of this inherent
righteousness, yet testifies plainly, that he is not thereby justified; and
S. John tells us, 1 Ioh. 3.11
that it is mingled and blemished with sin in this life; and if any man think
otherwise, he is no better then a liar and an hypocrite. But let all be granted
which this place in show of words, and according to their interpretation, will
or can afford, it serves as much to stablish justification by imputation, as
by inherencie; yea, and more rather, by how much the cause is of greater force
then the effect: for as the imputative sin of Adam was the cause of inherent
corruption in man's nature; even so the imputative righteousness of Christ is
the cause of inherent grace in the faithful. And now to take this weapon out
of their hands, which they have drawn (as it were) to cut the throat of
Imputation, it may fitly be retorted upon their own heads on this manner: As
the imputative disobedience of Adam was sufficient to make all men guilty and
culpable of condemnation before God, though it left behind it no print or
impression of corruption in the nature of man: even so, the imputative
righteousness of Christ is sufficient to discharge and absolve us of this
guilt, though it should bring with it no inherent righteousness in us.

Ob. Further, they reason for themselves out of Dan. 9.24. the righteousness
of the Messiah is an eternal righteousness, but this imputative
righteousness cease at the end of this life: ergo.

An. Though the act of imputation of righteousness cease after death,
because there is no remission of sins this life ended, yet the righteousness
imputed abides still, and stands a man in stead to discharge and set him
free from all the sins of his life bypast, which otherwise the Lord might
require at his hands. Again, it remains in an inseparable fruit and effect
of it, which is perfect holiness, to wit, a conformity of the whole man unto
the will of God.

Thus being destitute of Scriptures, they fly unto reason, pleading for
themselves in this manner.

Object. Christ, the second Adam, did restore no more then the first Adam lost;
but the first Adam never had, and therefore could never lose this imputative
righteousness: ergo.

Ans. The proposition is false; for Christ, as he was every way far more
excellent then Adam was, so he is far more liberal in conferring grace, and in
bestowing his gifts, then Adam was prodigal in losing them, and in depriving
himself and his posterity of them, and therefore vouchsafed many more and
greater gifts unto us, then Adam ever lost: for first, Adam never had
justifying Faith, neither indeed was it necessary in that estate: he believed
in God, but he knew not, neither believed in the Messiah; but Christ has
vouchsafed us this supernatural gift of justifying Faith. Again, Adam had not
the grace of confirmation and final perseverance, and therefore being tempted,
sell though the free motion of his own will: but we have the second grace,
that is, of corroboration, whereby we are preserved in the state of grace,
which is the privilege of the state of redemption, before the state of
innocence. Adam had power to have stood, if he would, but he had no power to
will that he could, but we by the blessing of God have in some part, both the
posse and the velle, insomuch as it is not possible for us, being once in the
state of grace, either totally to fall, or finally to perish. For the
Assumption: Adam had the same righteousness for substance which we have, but not
in one and the same manner: Adam had it resident in his person by inherencie,
but we have it out of our selves from another by imputation.

Now being destitute both of Scriptures and reason, they try another way, if
not to stablish their own supposed righteousness, yet to bring our doctrine of
imputation into contempt, and therefore they search their wits, laboring by
all means to fasten some gross absurdities upon it, but all in vain. First
therefore, they reason thus: If the righteousness of Christ be the
righteousness of a sinner, then every sinner that believes is as righteous as
Christ, and consequently a Savior; both which are absurd: the ground of this
argument is, because the selfsame perfect righteousness, which is in Christ,
both for parts and degrees, is made his by imputation, the which is necessary,
because the righteousness which justifies must be absolute, and in all points
answerable unto the moral Law. For the answering of this, first, consider the
absurdity of this kind of reasoning in the like instances: If the light of
the Sun be the light of the Air, then the Air is as lightsome as the Sun,
and consequently the Sun it self, that is, the fountain of light and heat.
If the heat of the fire be the heat of a man's hand, then the hand is as hot
as the fire. If the water of the fountain be the water of the river, then the
river is the fountain, or as copious and clear as the fountain. Who can
endure to hear this idle and foolish talking, for it deserves not the name of
reasoning? nay, whose ears do not glow to hear it? But to satisfy this
cavil and sophistication more fully, both the consequents of the Proposition
are false. For first, though the same righteousness which is in Christ be made
ours, yet not in the same manner: in him it is inherent, as in his proper
subject; in us it is not resident, but after a sort annexed unto us, to wit, by
imputation: Again, though it were in us as it is in him, yet it should not be
equal in both.

Object. But it will be said, it is alike perfect in both, therefore equal in
both.

Ans. It follows not; for the difference of inequality arises not of the
righteousness it self, which of it self, and by it self considered, neither
admits decrease nor increase; but from the diversity of the subject: for
being in Christ, it is not the righteousness of a bare creature, but of him also
that is the Creator; yea, of God himself, for whom Christ suffered, God
suffered; when Christ obeyed, God obeyed, insomuch as this righteousness is of
infinite merit, price, value and dignity, to satisfy for the whole world;
yea, of ten thousand worlds, if it were thereto appointed by God: but in man it
is the righteousness of a bare creature, and no more: the diversity therefore
of the subject does add great excellency unto it, though the thing for
substance be the same in both.

To explane this by this comparison: The same righteousness which is in
Christ, is in the good Angel, and as perfect both for substance and degree,
shall we therefore reason, that the good Angel is as righteous as Christ?
nothing less: and why? because the righteousness of the one is but the
righteousness of the creature, the other is besides, the righteousness of the
Creator. The other consequent is far more unreasonable, for though the
infinite merit of Christ be imputed to the sinner, yet not infinitely, but so
far forth as it serves to satisfy the justice of God, and to make him
righteous before God.

To make this plain by a familiar comparison: The whole light of the Sun is
communicated to one star, yet not wholly, but with a quatenus, so far forth as
it causes the said Star to shine.

Object. Further, they would infer a second absurdity: If we be righteous by
the righteousness of Christ imputed, then he is a sinner by the imputation of
our sin, and consequently the child of the Devil, which is blasphemy once
to remember.

Ans. We may safely and without indignity unto the holy person of our Savior
Christ, and according to the tenure of this Scripture, term him a sinner, yet
not properly, but relatiuely only, as we showed before: neither does it hence
follow that he is become the child of the Devil, for a man may be properly
and personally a sinner, and yet not the child of the Devil; much more then
imputatiuely: but this diabolical title, Saint John gives only to those that
commit sin, that is, wholly addict themselves to the practice of sin, with
full consent of will, and with delight, and make an Art and occupation of
sinning, and keep a course therein: for the children of God, though they be
sinful, yet they are not the Sons of the Devil, but the adopted Sons and
daughters of God.

Object. But it will be said, that Christ in us is become a committer of sin,
because our commissions are imputed unto him; why may not he therefore be
termed filius diaboli, at the least by imputation?

Ans. To this I answer: howsoever our sin is in regard of the guilt and
punishment translated unto Christ, yet no further, and therefore these
consequents of filius irae, which agrees only to them that are partakers of
Adams sins, and filius diaboli, which agrees only to them that personally
work and practice sin, cannot be extended to him who is only relatiuely a
sinner.

Object. If we by this righteousness imputed, be made filij Dei, then why
should not he by imputation of our sins be made filius Diaboli?

Ans. The reason is not alike, he is not at all capable of the one, but we are
capable of the other: neither is it necessary that every consequent and
property of sin, which it has and brings with it in us, should be
translated unto Christ: for it cannot be proved by Scripture that he took any
more upon him then the guilt, fault, and punishment of our sins.

To make this plain by comparison: The debt of one man is imputed unto
another, viz. the Surety, and yet not the consequent of the debt, for the debt
in the debtor has banqueruptnesse annexed unto it, which it has not in the
surety, being an able man: so our sins in us have many titles and consequents
annexed unto them, mentioned in the Scripture, which cannot be fastened upon
Christ, and it were great injury to impute them unto him, as it is great
iniquity for the debtor besides his debt to impute also his banqueruptnes unto
the surety: nay, if the debtor shall but call his pledge, or term him a
banquerupt imputatiuely, in regard of his proper debt translated unto the
other, he shall offer him no small injury and disgrace, and testify his
unthankful mind: how much less may this vile title either imputatiuely or
falsely be ascribed unto Christ, without great disgrace and dishonor to his
person? inasmuch as that only the Scripture testifies to be imputed unto him,
which falls under sin, viz. fault, guilt, punishment, and not all that
follows upon it in us.

But how then is that title taken from us? do we still after justification
remain the sons of the Devil? nothing less: for we are become the adopted
Sons of God in Christ. Now that which gives us the right of adoption does
abolish the former title, which is not the imputation of this diabolical title
from us unto Christ, but the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us,
whereby we are become no sons of the Devil, but Sons of God.

And to conclude, this very blasphemy, which they do so much fear and
abhor, may (will they, nill they) be fastened upon their doctrine of
Justification: for if we be justified by the righteousness of Christ infused,
then he is a sinner by our sin and corruption infused, and so shall become
indeed filius diaboli, or else the Apostles Antithesis falls to the ground,
which to the judgment of any indifferent man is firm and sure.

Ob. It is further replied that upon this doctrine of Imputation it will
follow, that God shall pronounce a false judgment, viz. him to be just, who is
indeed unjust, and a sinner, even as if a man should salve up a wound, and
draw over a skin over that which is festered and corrupted within: or as if one
should build a Tomb, paint it, and make it glorious without, there being
nothing within but rottenness, stink, and dead men's bones.

Ans. The consequent also is false, for God does pronounce no man just, whom he
does not make just at the very same instant, even in himself: for by the
selfsame act whereby a man is justified, he is also sanctified, and by the
same justice and no other; for that which is imputed to justify, is also
infused to sanctify, and is inherent in us, at the least, in the fruit and
efficacy of it. To explane this further; the person who is justified, cease
to be a sinner in regard of guilt wholly, and in regard of the corruption of
nature also in part, which though it be not altogether abolished, yet it
receives a deadly wound in the very act and instant, and never reigns after;
yea, to proceed further, at the very same time, and in the same act, he is
presently sanctified, and therefore worthily esteemed and adjudged of God, holy
and just presently, I say, in regard of all the parts and substance of
holiness, which is afterward to receive his accomplishment by degrees in this
life, and in death, to be wholly consummate and finished.

Ob. Lastly, they urge and say, that it cannot stand with Gods justice, to
justify and absolve a sinner: for Prou. 17.15. To justify the wicked, and to
condemn the just, both these are abominable to the Lord.

Ans. Indeed to justify the wicked person, and to acquit him in judgment
without all manner of satisfaction made either by himself or some other, were
injustice. But God which justifies the ungodly, as the Apostle speaks, Romans
4.5. does acquit and absolve them for the all-sufficient satisfaction of
Christ, and they though they be wicked and ungodly before their justification,
yet in it, and by it, they become righteous both before God, and also in
themselves in part. (*)

FINIS.
A right godly Prayer, made by Mr. Newhouse, to be said either Morning or
Evening, as accasion shall serve, changing some few words. (*)
MOst merciful and loving father in Jesus Christ, we beseech thee to remove
all impediments which usually hinder us in this exercise of prayer, and quicken
up our hearts with fear and reverence of thy Majesty, in feeling of our own
wants, in a desire to receive a supply of them from thee, and in assurance to
be heard of thee in all our suites and requests, to put up our prayers and
supplications unto thee.

O Lord our God, we do here in thy presence acknowledge and confess that we
are of our selves most wretched and miserable sinners, both in respect of the
corruptions of our hearts, as also the transgressions of our lives: more
particularly we do acknowledge the infidelity of our hearts, whereby we have
not yet learned to depend upon thy providence for the things of this life, nor
upon thy mercy, for the salvation of our souls: hence comes impatience under
the cross, discontentation with our present estate, doubting and
distrustfulnes in regard of our salvation, immoderate care and desire of the
things of this life: we confess also the Atheism and profanes both of our
minds and hearts, whereby all our thoughts and affections are estranged from
thee, and so glued and fastened to the things of this world, that we can take
more joy and delight in doing our own wills, and in serving our own lusts,
then ever we would do in serving and obaying thee; we acknowledge likewise the
pride of our hearts, whereby we do exalt our selves in the vanity of our own
conceits against thy Majesty, and above our brethren, whom thou have made far
more excellent then our selves: our security of the flesh, whereby we put away
the day of evil and wrath far from us, promising unto our selves immunitie
from all thy curses and plagues, notwithstanding we walk in sin and in the
stubbornes of our hearts: our vainglory, whereby we desire praise and
commendation among men, more then thy glory; our self-love, whereby we love
our own ease, liberty, peace, carnal pleasures more then thy Majesty, more
then our brethren: our hypocrisy, whereby we content our selves with an
outward name and profession of religion and holiness before men, not regarding
the truth and power of godliness: answerably our lives abound in all actual
transgressions against every one of thy commandments: we have lived in the
contempt of thy providence, and have not been ashamed to commit sin and
wickedness in thy sight: in the abuse of thy mercies, and have not been drawn
nearer unto thee: in the neglect of thy judgments, and fatherly chasticements,
partly upon others, and partly upon our selves, and have not profitted thereby
to true repentance and reformation of life: in the profanation of all thy holy
ordinances, thy Word, Sacraments, this exercise of Prayer, neither preparing
our selves hereunto aright, nor being conversant therein with that care,
diligence, and conscience, as we ought, and therefore have missed of that fruit
of edification we might have reaped by the reverent and religious handling of
these thy divine ordinances, in the abuse of thy creatures unto intemperancy
and excess, whereby we have disabled our selves to thy worship and service,
and to the duties of our particular callings. Many other sins have we
committed, the least whereof if thou should lay unto our charge, we were
never able to appear in thy presence or to answer thee one of a thousand: we
beseech thee to deal favorably with us, as thou art wont to do with thy
children, that call upon thy name and seek thee in the truth of their hearts,
and in the midst of judgment, remember mercy; open our blind eyes, that we
may come to a particular knowledge of our own sins; touch our hard and
stony hearts that we may sigh and groan under the burden of them, being
heartily displeased with our selves, because therein we have dishonored thy
name. Stir up our hearts also, that we may hunger and thirst after Christ
and his righteousness, and after every drop of his most precious blood: in him
alone be well pleased with us, and for his merit and righteousness vouchsafe
mercifully and freely to do away all our offenses: wash them all away in the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, and our hearts from the filthiness and
impuritie of them all. Say unto our souls, thou art our salvation: let thy
holy and good spirit of Adoption, cry in our hearts through Jesus Christ
Abba-Father, telling and persuading unto our consciences by the inward
testimony of the same Spirit, that our sins are pardoned, and we stand
discharged of them all before thy tribunal seat.

And because our faith is weak, partly through the manifold corruptions that
be in our hearts, and partly through the innumerable transgressions that break
out into our lives, we beseech thee to strengthen the same by the often
consideration, meditation, and application of thy merciful promises made unto
us in Christ, stirring up our unbelieving hearts to assent unto, and to apply
the same, that we may receive comfort thereby, specially in the time of danger
and distress; and namely, in the agony of conscience, and in the hour of
death. And because there can be no greater enemy to true Faith, then is
carnal confidence and vain presumption, confound this hellish and damnable
corruption in every one of our hearts, and work in the same the contrary grace
of thy holy Spirit, namely, true Humility, whereby we may acknowledge our
own nothing, and may utterly renounce and deny ourselves, and learn only and
wholly to rely and depend upon the blessed merit of Christ, in matter of our
salvation, ascribing the whole work and glory thereof to him alone, and to no
other thing.

And because all that are in Christ are new creatures, and walk not according
to the flesh, but according to the spirit, we beseech thee to renew us in the
spirits of our minds, and in the affections of our hearts, enlightening us
more and more with true knowledge and understanding in spiritual things, and
sanctifying our hearts to the love and obedience thereof, that we may walk
worthy of thee, please thee in all things, fructify in every good work, and
increase in the knowledge of thy holy will. Above all things set before us thy
holy fear, imprint this grace of thine deeply in our hearts, persuade us
effectually of thy presence wheresoever we do become, in secret or open place,
that we may learn to make conscience of sin, and of every evil way,
endeavoring to please and obey thee in all thy Commandments, and evermore to
preserve pure and unblameable consciences before thee and before all men, and
that to the end of our days.

And because we are at continual war against Satan, this wicked world, and
our own damnable and fleshly lusts, Lord help us in this spiritual combat,
in all temptations; when we are most weak, be thou most strong in us,
together with the temptation, grant an issue and an evasion: teach us to watch
over our own hearts, and to keep them with all diligent observation, that we
be not any more circumuented of the wiles of Satan, or seduced through the
deceitfulness of sin. Help our infirmities, give strength against our
particular corruptions, that in the very act of temptation, we may be able to
resist and to overcome, that we may have as just cause to praise thy name in
our victories, as we have had cause to be humbled and cast down in our foyles.

And because it is the lot of thy Children in this world, to be tried sundry
ways; Lord prepare us to the days of trial, arm us with spiritual patience
to bear thy hand, that we may meekely and contentedly submit our wills to thy
good will and pleasure; howsoever it shall please thee to deal with us, only
teach us to profit under thy rods of correction: grant that we may learn
hereby, to deny our selves, to forsake this world, pleasures, profits, and
preferments of it; to make vile and base account of them in respect of heavenly
things, to love thy kingdom and thy righteousness, desiring to be dissolved
and to be with Christ, that sin and the corruption thereof might be
abolished, and we might have near conjunction with thy Majesty in thine own
kingdom. Nevertheless, so long as thou please to hold us here in this
earthly tabernacle, dissolve in our hearts the cursed works of the Devil,
confound the power and tyranny of sin daily more and more; increase the Graces
of thy holy Spirit, namely, Faith and repentance, thy fear and thy love,
humility, and a good conscience, with all other graces whereby thy own image
may be renewed in us daily, that the longer we live in this world, the nearer we
may draw to thy Kingdom, the greater strength we may have against our own
sins, the greater will and ability to serve and please thee in righteousness
and new obedience.

Bless with us thy whole Church and every member thereof: be good and gracious
to these Churches in England and Ireland: give thy Gospel a free passage every
where, with all good means whereby it may be further published and maintained,
removing all lets and impediments whereby the course and proceedings thereof are
hindered and stayed: for this cause be good unto our gracious King, the
principal member thereof: bless him with life and honor, confirm his heart in
the truth of this holy Religion he has a long time professed, and maintained,
against all the adversaries thereof, increasing his love and zeal thereunto,
and his constancy therein, and adding unto his years many days, that he may
be an ancient Father in this Church of thine, a Patron and an vpholder of thy
pure and true Religion, against all them that oppose themselves against it.
Bless our gracious Queen, the Prince, and the residue of that Royal
Progeny. Be merciful to the Honorable Privy Counsel, and the inferior
Magistrates of this Land, blessing them with the wisdom of thy spirit from
above, that they may take counsel with thy word in all their enterprises and
deliberations, so as first they may conclude of those things which make most
for the advancement of thy Kingdom and Gospel; and then for the peaceable and
religious government both of Church and Commonweal. Bless the Ministers of
thy word and Sacraments: increase the number of those that are faithful and
painful; double thy spirit and graces upon them, that they may go in and out
before thy people, not only in the light of pure doctrine, but of holy and
unblameable conversation, that by this means many may be won to the
knowledge and obedience of thy truth. Be merciful to the people of this Land:
confirm them that are called; and strengthen them that they may continue
steadfast in the sinceere profession and practice of true religion unto the end:
those that yet wander and go astray through sin and wickedness; call them
home in thy own good time, that they with us, and we with them, may have both
hearts and mouths enlarged to glorify thy holy name. Touch all our hearts
with true Repentance from the highest to the lowest, that thy judgments
present and imminent may be removed and prevented, thy mercies still procured
unto us, and the posterity after us, especially in the continuance of thy word
and Gospel among us for ever.

Lord be merciful to all thine afflicted, whether they be sick upon their
beds, or distressed in conscience for sin, or persecuted for thy name and
truth, or pinched with poverty, wanting those outward things which thou have in
great abundance dealt out unto us, relieve them according to their several
necessities, strengthen them in their weakness, comfort them in their
distress, mitigate their sorrows and extremities, put an end unto them in
thine own good time, and turn them to their humiliation, and in the end, to
their eternal comfort and salvation by Christ.

Be merciful to our friends in the flesh, and acquaintance in the spirit,
parents, brethren, sisters, children, servants, and all other, for whom we are
bound by any duty to pray, granting unto them a supply of all graces needful
for their present state and calling, and the final salvation of their souls.
Have mercy on us, now calling on thy name; forgive our sins and manifold
defects in this holy duty, and accept at our hands this weak and imperfect
obedience in Christ: and give us thankful hearts for all mercies received from
thy bountiful hand, that thou have loved us in Jesus Christ with an
everlasting love before the world was, and from love have chosen us to life and
glory; called us in time, to the certain knowledge of this our Election;
justified and redeemed us by Jesus Christ his death and resurrection;
sanctified us in the inner man by his holy spirit; that thou have given us
Faith in thy promises, and hope of a better life, fear of thy Name, love of
thy Majesty, zeal of thy glory, love and tender affection toward our
brethren; yea, toward our enemies, and those that hate us; patience under the
Cross, strength against our particular temptations and corruptious; Humility,
gentleness, and meeknes, with many other gifts and graces of regeneration, all
which we acknowledge have proceeded of thy mere mercy and goodness toward
us, we beseech thee to increase them daily more and more in us, and ^et us not
be negligent in the use of all good means, whereby they may grow in us daily.
We do also with all thankfulness, remember all temporal blessings concerning
this life, and the preservation thereof, our health, liberty, peace,
prosperity, and all outward things we do enjoy, this gracious government,
with all blessings accompanying the same. We thank thee, that thou have
sustained us in great weakness, relieved us in much necessity, comforted us
in much distress, resolved us in many doubts, delivered us from many and great
dangers, and when we were falling into them, have rescued us with thine own
hand, and preserved us from many grievous sins, into which through the
corruptions of our natures and Satan's temptations, we might have fallen. Make
us ^nfaignedly thankful, and teach us to walk worthy of them, and to testify
thankfulness therefore, not in word only, but by a conscionable walking with
thee in all duty and obedience unto the end.

Bless us this night, keep us and all ours from all dangers, grant unto us
(if it be thy holy and good will) such a portion of rest and sleep, that
thereby body and senses being refreshed, we may rise up in the morning
cheerfully, to glorify thy name in the duties of Christianity, and in the
works of our particular callings, as thou shall severally dispose of us, and
give us strength and opportunity, and that by Jesus Christ In whose name we
conclude our prayers as he himself has taught us, saying, Our Father which
art, etc.

FINIS.

