March 7, 1623. Numb. 21. A PROCLAMATION BY THE STATES of the Province of
Vtrecht, against certain others of the Conspirators. Together with a new and
full Relation of the Apprehension, Examination, Torturing, and Confession of
diverse of the principal Conspirators, of the late intended Treason against the
Prince of Orange, and the State of the United Provinces. Both by Letters, and
other direction from the States themselves. As they were Printed at Amsterdam,
for Martin Iansen Brandt Bookeseller, dwelling by the new Church at the sign
of the reformed Catechism. Anno 1623.

LONDON Printed for Nathaniel Butter, Nicholas Bourne, and Thomas Archer. 1623.

THE PROCLAMATION OF THE STATES OF the Province of Vtrecht, against the
Conspirators.
MAuritius by the Grace of God, Prince of Orange, Count of Nassaw, Meurs,
Buren, etc. Marquis of Camp-veere, and Flushing, Lord and Baron of Breda Die,
etc. Governor or Deputy of Holland, Zealand, and Vtrecht, with the States of
the Land of Vtrecht, send to all them which shall see or hear these presents
read, greeting.

Seeing there is of Late discovered an abominable, and most wicked Conspiracy,
against the State, and welfare of the Land, and that amongst others the
Instigators and Conductors or principal Instruments have been these
following, namely Hendrick Danielsson Slatius in former time Preacher at
Bleyswick: Adriaen Adriaensson van Dyck, which was here before Secretary of the
said place: Cornelius Gesteranus in former time Preacher at Gorchum, and
Cornelius Velsius, lately Preacher at Rackangie, which is a village lying in
the Island of the Briel. The Sons of the late Barneuelt, and Adriaen Vander
Dussen of Rotterdam, are likewise accused of the crime before said, besides many
more, which are all fled intending to save themselves in Brabant, or other
Countries of our Enemies, so that they are not easily to be met withal,
although their apprehension is much required, and greatly necessary for the
good of these united Provinces.

So it is, that there is notice given by these presents that whosoever can
reveal any one of them, or any of their accomplices, and assistantes which have
had a hand in this abominable conspiracy, and cause them a live to be delivered
to the Justice, that he shall be rewarded with the sum of 4000. Gilders, which
amounte to 400. pound sterling for each one of the persons which are here above
named and described, and for any other they shall be recompensed with a sum
of 600. Gilders, which amounte to 60. pounds starling: And here besides shall
the reuealers or Informers be pardoned of this crime if they be guilty of it:
and their own persons and names shall not be made known to any.

We interdicte and prohibit likewise by these all manner of Persons to lodge
any of the aforementioned (which hide themselves) or their accomplices, and
assistantes which are culpable of this damnable and detestable Conspiracy, in
their houses, or keep, or suffer them in their Gardens, Ships, Boats, Hay
Reekes, Barnes, or permit them to go away with their Wagons, Horses, Carts,
Sleds, or any such like serving to get away, either by Water, or by Land, upon
pain of life and goods, and there shall not any favor be showed to any,
although it were first known many years after.

Furthermore seeing it has appeared manifestly by diverse informations, which
the Commissioners authorized and appointed thereunto have received, that the
Arminians, or the Society of the Remonstrants (as they instile them) have in
these Lands, a formal Court, or College, wherein they meet, being also
provided of diverse Commissioners, or chief undertakers and a Superintendent:
likewise it is confessed, that they have diverse Commissioners in every Town,
and City, to gather the moneys amongst them of their own Faction, of which
they must make account to their Court where the Superintendent sittes with the
other Commissioners. Moreover that some of their society had written to some
of their Preachers in these Lands, that they maruailed mightily that some of
them mayntained that their society might not right their cause by the way of
violence: And they had therefore consulted upon this point at their meeting, or
Court, where they judged that the said way could not be tried without
indangering the Country to her utter destruction and ruin, nevertheless
considering that they could not mend themselves (as they thought) in any other
manner of ways, and suspecting their Confraters, or Brothers to smell of
Anabaptisme, or Memnonisme, (knowing that their opinion was hurtful to their
dessignes) they rejected them: Whereby, as likewise by that which is already
discovered of the aforesaid abominable and most detestable Conspiracy, as also,
by the Enterprises, and Machinations of the hidden Preachers, above mentioned,
and diverse others of their Society, it appears evidently, that they have
used all kind of sinister practices and devises, to disturb again not only
the Church and State, but likewise to cause in these Countries an inevitable or
unavoidable bath of blood, and to destroy these Provinces afterward by
Incendiaries, or firers which should set several places on fire, whereupon
(when the Country should have been in this confusion and perplexity) would
our Enemy, have assaulted us, and invaded the Country to make himself Master
of it, which he has not been able to do (God be praised within the space of
these last 50. years and more, although he employed to the said purpose great
Armies, and charges, as it appeared likewise of late within these last two
years.

Seeing also that a great while since it is perceived, that diverse Arminian
preachers which were here tofore banished, and led out of these United
Provinces, have emboldened themselves to return hither again (in such manner
that there has been four and twenty of them at once at Vtrecht) against the
Proclamations of the High and Mighty Lords, the States General of the United
Provinces, and go disguised with strange habits in the United Provinces, and
principally in this Province of Vtrecht, as well in the City, as the other
Towns and Villages thereof, conuersing and walking there both day and night:
Keeping also secret meetings, and conuenticles, in which they make even their
Sermons, (which are prohibited by the State) and provoke there, and instigate
the good Inhabitants of the United Provinces, and especially them of the City,
the Towns, and the Lands of Vtrecht, to factions and commotions, and
dissentions: as likewise to the disobedience of their Superiors and
Magistrates: In such manner, that (which is great pity) there are found some
of their faction and Society, that have lost the one which they did bear in
former time to the Almighty, their Country, and Countri-men, (before this
Arminian Faction or Sect (rather) arose, living then Peaceably with their
neighbors) and have forgotten themselves so far, that they have been
plotters and chief workemasters of this most wicked and abominable Conspiracy,
and made it ready to the execution, which had happened assuredly, if the
merciful God had not stopped their proceedings, through his infinite wisdom,
and caused it to be revealed in good time.

So it is that we insisting upon that which is aforesaid, prohibit moreover
(according to the tenor of the two former Proclamations of the general
States, one of them was dated the third of July, 1619. the other the first of
February, Anno 1620. and the resolutions, and interpretations made since upon
them) expressly, any manner of persons whatsoever, to appear (under what
pretext or color soever) at any of those meetings, and conuenticles aforesaid,
neither in the City, nor Towns, nor Lands of this Province, or to do or say
any thing which might in any manner of ways prejudice the Land, or the
Government: upon the pains appointed by the Proclamations aforesaid, besides
they shall be accounted as perturbators of the State, and shall be punished
according to their offense, and as the case shall require. Likewise we charge
that none shall presume to lodge any of the banished Preachers before mentioned,
which are also led out of the Country, nor any of their young propounders, or
other which do not stick to cause prohibited meetings, to preach, read, or
exhort in the same without permission. As likewise to administer the
Sacraments, and other Ecclesiastical functions, nor cause or suffer them to
come in their houses, gardens, hay-reekes, barnes, ships, boats, wagons, carts,
or sleds: nor to hide them any where, be it by water or by land, upon pain of
banishment, or otherwise (as the fault shall deserve) to be punished, without
that any long time shall excuse them although it were many years since
discovered.

And because such persons may be the better revealed and taken, they which
shall discover them, (which are here last of all mentioned) shall be rewarded
with the sum of 300. Gilders, which are 30 pounds sterling, and shall receive
them of the Country or State: and if they be guilty themselves they shall be
pardoned, promising moreover, that their persons or names shall not be
discovered. For we have judged with a general voice this to be convenient,
and a fit remedy to prevent all further Conspiracies and wicked Machinations,
and to advance the welfare and preservation of these Lands, and their
inhabitants.

And because the contents hereof may well be observed and kept, and that none
might pretent ignorance, We have given order that this present Proclamation
shall be published in all usual places as the custom is, and command hereby
the President, and the Council of Vtrecht, as likewise all Officers, Justices,
and ministers of Justice, whom this may concern, to proceed against the
offenders, and cause likewise to be proceeded against them without any
connivency, savor, or dissimulation to the contrary.

Given at Vtrecht, the 14. day of February, according to the new style. Anno
1623. Upon the margin was written, Dirick van Eck. Vt.
Lower stood, By the order of the aforesaid Lords the States.
And was subscribed, Ant: van Hilten.
Upon the Margin was the Seal of the said States in red wax.

From the Hage, Febr. 8. 1623.
Loving Friend: knowing that there are dispersed amongst you strange speeches
of the Prisoners here lately taken, I would not forbear to advise you the
truth of the matter.

The Prince of Orange being two days ago about the afternoon, at Ryswyck,
there came three or four Sailors which desired to speak with his Excellency,
and having gotten access to his person, they related, that they were asked at
Rotterdam, whether they would be employed in a service for the good of these
Countries, and were also promised great reward therefore.

They confessed moreover, that they had accepted the said service, and had
received certain money thereupon, and that they were sent afterward to the
Hage, where they delivered two days ago their fire-workes and other things,
at a house (unto which they were directed) called the little fool in the
Achterom, which is a street. And that they had spoken there with the party unto
whom they were directed to receive further instruction: but he had not told
the^ at the same time, what they should do, wishing them only to go on to
the business with a good courage, and promising that the next day the matter
should be laid open unto them.

They told moreover, that they got of them at that instant certain Duch Riders
of 21. shillings sterling a piece, which they showed also to the Prince of
Orange, and said that their great liberality made them to mistrust the
goodness of this service, and caused them to suspect some treason or
Conspiracy.

Hereupon the Prince commanded them to return to the Hage, and to come toward
evening to him at his Palace. Which they did, and informed his Excellency fully
of all the business.

Whereupon he sent presently for the President, and the Council of State, who
forthwith (after some deliberation) sent the Attorney or Fiscall of the Court,
with the Provost Marshall, to the house or Inn aforesaid, where they found the
persons by them described, and the man which paid them the money aforesaid,
whom they carried instantly to the Court, and examined them.

The Townsmen and the Soldiers within were presently commanded to keep
strong watches every where, and to stop all passages that no body should come
away without leave. But it was not possible for them to prevent it, seeing
there are no walls about the Hage. They searched also afterward the Helmet (an
Inn) about the Wagons which go to Harlem, and when they asked for the man
with his Trunks, the owner thereof went speedily up into a chamber where it
stood, and opening it, he took some things thereour, and leaving it open, came
down in great haste, and got out of the house, seeing that there was a
Sergeant which told to the rest, that he was an honest man, and that he had
known him many years ago.

When the Fiscall asked the Host whether there was not a man with a trunk in
his house: he answered, no: But seeing they found afterward the trunk, (open
with diverse pistols and other things, as it was left by the owner) when they
searched the house, the Host was taken prisoner, though the owner, the former
Secretary of Bleyswicke had made an escape, as is aforesaid, the other were
examined the same night, and he which paid the money to the Mariners confessed
that there was one dwelling at Rotterdam which had set him on work, and having
told his name and described his person, there went, about four of the clock
in the morning, two Counselors of State with diverse others to find him out,
but he was departed thence, and it is thought that the late Secretary of
Bleyswick who was escaped had given him notice of the discovering of their
conspiracy.

The examinations of the prisoners have lasted yesterday, and this night and
day, but their confessions are kept as yet very secret: there are found in the
mean time many pistols, swords and daggers in the truncke aforesaid, and in
the other Inn, and I have seen some of them at the Court.

To day had the Preachers order to give God thanks in their prayers for the
discovering of this abominable conspiracy of the enemies of the State.

The Mariners which have revealed this Treason, are glad that they have cleared
their conscience, and cast this burden off their necks, making good cheer at
the Castelayn of the Court his house.

I hear at this instant that there is now to be made another search: of the
success I will advise you with the next, if God give me leave.

Farewell.
From Amsterdam, Febr. 28. 1623.
Yesterday were 4. of the conspiracy executed at the Hage, one of them was
beheaded and quartered, the other three were only beheaded: to morrow we hope
to get here the Copies of their sentences. The principal and the richer sort
are as yet kept in prison, but it is generally reported that they shall follow
the other very speedily.

They have confessed that they would have murdered first of all the Prince of
Orange: secondly, changed the government and Religion: thirdly, that they had
correspondency and intelligence with the enemies: fourthly, that they would
have set on fire several houses and towns.

Last Sunday, past through this City certain Soldiers of Emden, which brought
thence these following prisoners; Abraham and Ian Blancert, and one William
Pertii, carrying them by the way of Harlem toward the Hage.

A RELATION, OR The Light of February: Wherein is to be seen, The strange and
abominable Conspiracy which was intended against the united Provinces, and the
Inhabitants therein: Revealed by these four honest men: John Engelen, John
Faes, Ieroen Ewoutszon, Pieter Ianssen Broeck.
IT seems that the Almighty has been pleased many times to defend or
preserve his Church not only by means of the simple, but even also by the
actions of her own enemies, as you may perceive by this present Relation. And
it is very well known to the Inhabitants of this Country, what kind of
fellows our Mariners are for the most part, and principally these 4, which
discovered the treason, here before mentioned, to be very stout and resolute,
and stained moreover with the Arminian doctrine, as all the rest of the
conspiracy, but I will not say that they are all stained which have conuersed
with them, with such a foul spot, as shall appear by these and other good
Patriots or well-willers of their Country.

But to come to the matter: It is to be observed that the eldest of these four
Mariners was called (by a nicke name) Light, amongst the common people, which
seemed to presage some thing, if the Prognostication had been made before the
effect appeared: but to leave all frivolous things behind, and to relate
shortly that which is past in these parts of the Low Countries, concerning the
conspiracy aforementioned.

The 4. of February, in the year 1623. came to Rotterdam a strange Monster, in
the shape of the former Secretary of Bleyswyck, having his belly filled with
rank poyfon, as shall be published afterward by authority of the State to all
the world: This wicked fellow who (as he thought) could alter his mouth and
face into such countenance as he pleased, and change his voice as he listed,
was acquainted with one of the Mariners aforesaid, but the Mariner could not
feel presently with his woollen gloves what he carried under his cloak, as he
did afterward (by the grace of God) when his hands were naked. He told in the
beginning to the Mariner, that it was a brave enterprise, and tending to the
good of the Commonwealth, but (as he said) it must be kept secret, and the
reward would assuage or sweeten the labor and pains, and desired him therefore
to find out three other lusty and resolute Sailors as he was himself, which he
did at an instant, (seeing they know one another, and can certify whom they
dare trust with their lives, and will stand for a man when occasion shall
serve) and brought them to him; where after some speeches betwixt them, the
four Mariners yielded to their employment in the said service. About the same
time there came another (whom they never saw before) which after some
conference gave them 300. Gilders (which amount to 30. Pound sterling) a piece
aforehand, only upon hope of good success, which pleased the Mariners
exceeding well, and made them grow hot to the business: He added moreover
that after the enterprise was performed they should want neither goods nor
money, and should each one of them besides be honored with an office. After
these fair promises made unto the Mariners, the other two told them where they
should receive diverse Pistols, besides gunpowder, and Lead, or Bullets, with
great store of Stillettos or murdering Daggers, and other such like things to
pierce a harness of proof withal, and desired them to bring them in several
trunkes to a certain Inn at the Hage, which they performed with all possible
speed, and diligence, for they packt these things secretly up in trunkes, and
caused them in their company the 5. of February to be carried from Rotterdam
to Delft, and thence toward the Hage, where they brought them to the appointed
Inn called the Helmet, and found there at the same instant their Master (which
set them on work at the beginning) who bade them welcome, and made them good
cheer.

In the mean time had he (who paid them the money) hired likewise four other
courageous and lusty Mariners, and had sent them with the like instruments and
commodities put in trunkes as the other, through the same passage toward the
Hage, and charged the^ to meet at an Inn called the little Fool, (which they
did) and were there well received and entertained with drink and meat.

The sixth of this Month (O happy day) began the Mariners aforesaid to
suspect the business, (without question through the inspiration of the
Almighty) and to confer one with another about it, and concluded amongst
themselves, that they would not enter any further into the said business,
believing it to be a foul piece of work: And resolved thereupon that two of
them should go instantly to the Prince of Orange, to certify his Excellency
of the case, and to learn whether they were employed in the service of the
Country or not. Coming with all possible speed to the Court in the Hage, they
understood that the Prince of Orange was gone to Ryswyck, (where some of his
Horse are kept) they went thither presently with their tarred apparel, and
sheaths of horn for their knives, and other things, as the Sailors use to
wear in the Low Countries, and talking amongst themselves along the way, the
time seemed very short unto them at their arrival: And amongst the rest, they
conferred together in what manner, and with what countenance they should speak
to the Prince his Excellency.

When they were at the Stable of the Prince, they saw there diverse Lacquies and
Yeomen of the Prince his Guard, and told them that they would feign speak a
word or two with his Excellency; but no body seemed to give greatly ear unto
them, nevertheless there was one of the Lacquies, who laughing, accepted to
tell the Prince of them and their desire, suspecting that they had some strange
toy or thing to show to his Excellency; who sent them word back again by the
Lacquy, that he would hear them as soon as he came out of his stable:
whereupon they answered, that they would speak with his Excellency about a
business that concerned mightily his own person, and that there was perhaps
danger in delay, (as the Civil Lawyers say) Periculum in mora: The Prince (who
has loved continually the Mariners) understanding this, caused them instantly
to come to him, where they made the best reverence they could after their own
manner, and revealed all the matter unto him. Now you may guess what the
Prince thought of it, hearing of an enterprise of which he knew not himself:
he commanded the Mariners to return to the Court, by the way of Vorburg, which
is a village about the Hage, and rode himself with all speed to the Court,
where he communicated instantly this matter with the States. Hereupon was
presently given order that the two Innes here before mentioned, should be
searched instantly, and that all them which were within the two Innes should be
ceased upon, until such time as the heads and accomplices of this wicked
onterprise should be found out. They got the money master or Purser, (who paid
the Mariners) at the Inn called the little Fool, the rest which were in the
house are likewise apprehended, and I cannot hear as yet that any one of them
is set at liberty. At the other Inn (where the Secretary of Bleyswick escaped)
were even also diverse apprehended, but they are all dismissed, seeing they were
found innocent and clear of this business. All the instruments aforesaid
which were found in the two Innes, were likewise carried away by the Officers
of the Court.

Concerning the Mariners, they were 9. days kept in the house of the Keeper or
Castelain of the Court, until the States knew by examination that they were not
guilty, and had behaved themselves as true Patriots and well-willers of the
Country ought to do, and discharged their consciences.

This night and the next day commanded the States strong watches to be kept, as
well of the Townsmen, as of the Soldiers about the Hage, and the passages to
go thence: And they caused likewise a Proclamation to be published and printed
as we have heard before.

The next day being Wednesday, upon the 8. of this Month, was the fasting and
prayer day kept, whereof the States had warned the Country fourteen days
before. This alteration seemed to cause a new zeal amongst the inhabitants,
that all the Churches were packt up so full, as the like was not seen by any
man living.

About the evening came the Hangman into the Hage, to put some of the
apprehended to the torture. The same day were likewise three of Barnevelts
servants taken prisoners, and the house of the widow of John of Oldenbarnevelt
as likewise that of Renier of Oldenbarnevelt his son guarded by certain
officers of the Court.

The 9. day of this Month were yet some at the Hage apprehended, and there
came news that two were taken at Rotterdam, and that some were fled thence,
whereupon the Country was much perplexed.

The same day there came also tidings from Harlem, that there was made a great
hole in the walls of the prison by some which were without, with a great augre,
just upon the room in which two Arminian Preachers were put about three weeks
ago, because they were come into the Dominion of the States, out of which they
were banished.

The 10. and 11. day of this Month, were in all the Cities and Towns of the
United Provinces the Proclamations of the States concerning this Conspiracy
published, and every where great pains were taken to apprehend the Authors and
Accomplices thereof. In those days was the Lord vander Mylen sent for to come
into the Hage, where he came freely, and is lodged now at the house of the
Keeper of the Court, whereby it seems that he is not suspected.

The 12. day of this Month when it was night, there were two poor Boers which
saw Adriaen Adriaensson van Dyck, the former Secretary of Bleyswyck, whereupon
they went purposely to the Mayor of the place, who took him afterward:
whereupon the Boers got within few days the moneys promised by the
Proclamation of the States, for the discovering of him, namely 4000. Gilders,
which amount to 400. pounds sterling.

The 14. of this Month, the forementioned Adriaen Adriaensson van Dyck sent
for some of his Children and Kindred (a little before the Officers came to him
out of the Hage) and confessed unto them that he had deserved death, and cursed
mightily the Arminian Preachers which seduced him, he was yet the same day
brought to the prison of the Hage by the Officers which came for him from the
Court.

This day were the Sailers (which had until that time made good cheer at the
house of the keeper of the Court) set at liberty, and each one of them was
honored of his Excellency with a piece of gold whereon was the Picture and
Arms of the Prince with his Device, worth about 80. Gilders, which amount to
8. pounds sterling, as likewise with a siluerd Sword for each of them. The
States moreover caused to each of them to be given 600. Gilders which amount to
60. pounds sterling, besides a monthly pension of 16. Gilders, or 32.
shillings sterling, during their lives: granting them moreover their Letters of
recommendation to the Court of Admiralty, for the first offices (of which they
be capable) that shall fall. Whereupon they returned with great contentment to
Rotterdam, and told their friends their fortune, and clothed themselves there
in gray suits of cloth, and bought there for their own wearing gray hats, with
golden bands, as if they had bin Sea-Captains already.

The same day were the bells of the Town house of the Hage rung, whereupon the
two sons of Barnevelt were warned to appear within the space of 14. days;
and to answer for themselves upon pain of their banishment, and confiscation
of their goods, according to the Laws and custom of the Country.

The 15. day four Citizens were apprehended at Leyden about this Conspiracy,
and it was perceived that some of their consorts were fled.

The 16. of this Month was at the Hage a rumor that both the sons of
Barneuelt were seen at Scheuelingen about the Seacoast, with a skipper of
their acquaintance who dwelt there, whereupon his Wife was apprehended in the
absence of her husband and carried to the Hage, where she confessed upon
examination that her husband departed the night before from his house with
them: and search being made, it was found out presently that they went from
Scheuelingen to Berckerhey, Catwyck, Noortwyck, Santvoort, Wyck op Zee, along a
ditch toward the Sea, which is called the Hondsbosh, and came thence into the
Island of Texel.

The 17. day of this Month was the townhouse of Rotterdam fired very early
in the morning, at which time the Cutler before mentioned got away among the
people which came to quench the fire, he was taken, because he had sold diverse
Instruments and arms to the Conspirators. The other, namely the Tinker was
dismissed by the Lords, seeing there was at that time yet nothing found out
wherewith they could charge him.

The Cutler went to diverse of his acquaintance, but no man would receive him,
and seeing he is still absent there is promised a sum of mone^ to them that
shall cause him to be apprehended.

The 18. of this Month was the eldest son of Barnevelt taken in the Island
of Texel, with the skipper aforesaid, and one of his men.

The 19. being the next day, he was brought to the Hage and put in prison,
where he was examined since, but we cannot hear as yet any thing of his
confession.

The 20. of this Month were all the prisoners which were taken about this
Conspiracy examined by the Justices of the Court.

The 21. were at Ouwerschic, a village, yet two other taken of this Conspiracy,
namely David Corenwinder Secretary in former time of Berckel, and the Boer
which lodged him. They were carried likewise the same day to the prison which
is in the Hage, where there are (masters and servants) at least twenty,
apprehended for this Conspiracy.

FINIS.

