SPERO
CEO. CHALMERS ESQUIRE. F. R. S. S. A.



A tropoion Delion, OR, The death of Delia: With the Tears of her Funeral.

A Poetical Excusiue Discourse of our late Eliza.

T. N. G.

Quis eius oblitus. HONI ^ SOIT ^:QVI:^:MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE:^
royal blazon or coat of arms

Imprinted at London for W. Iohnes at the sign of the Gunne, near Holborne
Conduit, 1603.

To the right Honorable my Lady Anne, Countess of Darbie, now wife to the
right Honorable Sir Thomas Fgerton Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of
England, and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
RIght Honorable, having no means at all to make known the humble affection I
bear unto your good Ladyship, but in putting the patronizing of this my poor
pains upon your Honor: hoping first, for the tender love you boar to the
Delia of my sorrowing, you will deigne both to look over it, and favor it:
next, for the hearty love (in no little hono. kindness) your La. boar to your
humble Servant my late Uncle Marm. Newton; who in the bitter pains of his
death, discoursed the bountiful affection your La. boar unto him, and what
loss he had sustaind in loosing so good a La. and Mistress: which corsite
inwardly so grieved him, that he grew weerie of the World, lamenting to his
last gasp, that he had not time to prefer me to your Ladyships favor, that
his former love toward you, and your three honorable Daughters, dying in him,
might live in me. And thus hoping that with the remembrance of both, your
Ladyship will deigne to accept my pains to your favor, in the amplest hope of
my desire.

Your Ladyships devoted in all humility, Tho. Newton.

To the right Honerable my Lady Anne Stanley, Lady St(...)g^.
A. Silver flower from your rich orient eyes,
N. A(...)e tricking down those Alpe^ where Beauty keeps,
Would more adorn the Tomb where Delia lies;
Since that a Virgin for a Virg^n weepeth.
Good Lady from your Heart one thought I crave,
To th^^ke how poor your Delia lies in Grave:
And to weep a tear, that will not move ye
Unfortunate was she, so dear to love ye:
But I dare swear your eyes have wept ^o many,
That you are not a tear behande with any.
T. N.

To the right Honorable my Lady Francis.
F. Ainting with sorrow this my youngling Muse,
R. Equires as much of you for Delias death:
A. Tear (...): eyes, that are sorrows (...),
N. Ever drops one, for one so dear on earth,
C. Old all your tears at once be dry distilled,
I. Know you would not leave one drop vnshead,
S. O dear you loved your Delia, wrapped in lead.
T. N.

To the right Honorable, my Lady Elizabeth.
E. Yes that before her death, did then behold her,
L. Amentes in flood of tears to loose their seeing,
I. N yours no less I know, your tears infoldes her:
S. O heavy bears your heart, her loss of being.
A. Dde one (good Lady) more, at my desire,
B. Vt for to give my tears a worthier shade:
E. Lse shall my hopes and pains with grief retire,
T. Hat for your Sisters sake and yours, were made
H. Eere with my pains, my bounden heart I give,
E. ^^^ ^o love a S(...)y, whiles I live.
T. N.

A POETICAL EXcusiue Discourse of our late ELIZA.
CASTITAS. LAte I sad Angel in an Angels breast
Inthroned late in glory, state, and bliss,
But now displac't to mourn my throne at rest,
I see how hrittle state, and glory is:
My virtuous pride, so proud, was never seen,
Not so preserved from blot, from breath, or stains
Or ever was so rich in any Queen,
As in this Delia whom I thus complain:
No strangers eye but weeps that never knew her,
What then can mine, that never lod'ge without her?
Or what can D^^^^ souls that still did view her?
Or her chaste beauteous train that kept about her?
Ye Nimphs to her linked all like burnish't amber
Why let ye death approach her privy chamber?

NYMPHAE. MAd in dispaise (poor souls) we sainting stood,
Armed all with blades of hope and spears of prayers,
Pik't hanging down our hair to shed deaths blood
And drench his forces in a sea of tears.
With storms of sighs we strived to weak his strength,
And fought with earnest courage on our Knee:
Yet pale-fac't Hag with creeping dart at length
Deprived v^ (wretches) of our Deity:
When we awak't, and w^tcht all sleepie hours,
That midnight death each heavy brain does cover,
That end of all usurping ending powers,
Robbed her of life, and us, who dear did love her.
O Lord! why let ye such a one bereave her,
That makes us al dispersed mourn, weep, and leave her.

HEROES. Our Wits that ever were employed to keep,
Her sacred person safe and still secure:
Our Eyes, that now upon her Hearce do weep,
Scarce wink't at all, since first she seemed unsure.
But wandered in our wisdoms arts, and skill,
To find a mean, by all the means we could,
Which mean we found, but being mortal still,
No mean immortal could we find for gold.
Wits witless thus, ceased to proceed in pain: Medium fuit Phisica.

Eyes, eyelesse thus, ceased to be blind in seeing:
Heart, heartlesse thus, ceased longer to maintain
That wrong, which had no help on earth a being.
O World! why did thou foster such a foe,
To be chaste Delias traitor, Cynthias woe.

MVNDVS. I Mourn for Delia, for I partly knew her, Regna propria, and Regna
aliena.

And partly knew her not; yet wholly mourn,
The part that knew her well, makes the other rue her,
And both together, wail to be forlorn.
For in the spacious multitude of me,
I find a great defect, though one be small,
The loss of Delias crowned Virginity:
But Delias grace and person most of all: Terra mortaliti subiecta number erum dim
inuit c^^lum. (...) contra.

In this (poor world) I differ from the Skies,
For they enlarge and never break their number,
And these they w(...), to thrones eternal rise:
And th^s^ I loose, (...)'d in claye lie under:
O Earth, why did thy womb bear such a brood
That thus (remorcelesse) (...) my Delias blood.

TERRA. DELIA, subject of the world lamenting,
Was such a glorious issue of my womb,
In her above the rest, grew my c(...)ing,
But now the mother and her issues tomb: Ad (...) terra. Humus hum(...).
Ci(...).

Alas too timelesse did I bring her forth,
Since she too timelesse is returnde again:
More joy I took to see her living worth
Then thus in warpping of my Delia slain:
Her life, how rich a life was it to many.
The sight of her, how rich a comfort blistit:
How then her death, is it not grief to any?
Yes, grief; with cross of hopes to them that wished it.
Delos I wayle, and with mine eyes beweepe her,
That neither thou nor I had tower to keep her.

DELOS. IF any place of pleasure or delight,
As Garden, Mount, or Vale, by Rivers side,
Had fed her vital spirits, with their sight:
Then would not I have moorn'd, not Delia di'de.
The whitest seat Whitehal.
I had, my Delia had it,
The greenest Greenwich.
Palace of my breasts support,
The richest Mount Richmond.
(the richest hands had made it)
Washers, where she did lastly keep her Court:
That time of last, would it had never been:
Then had my late-dead Delia lasted ever.
For one poor period of Time, my Queen
And me, does both in corporate and sever. In corporata mortte. Separata vita

Then woe to thee, O Time for thou do wrong us,
That would not lend us time for her among us,

TEMPVS. I Was the As^^list that did attend her,
West to her vital web, her breathing scope:
I was that Time, against my will, did end her,
And he that set the passelesse point of hope,
Along my Snaylish-iourney as I went.
I led my Delia in a dextrous hand,
And having traueld far ((...) last a Saint)
My chaste companion, wish, me take a stand,
Till she afresh had gotten breath and wind:
Now I that had no joints to rest nor bend, Tempus tibiatum ferro in^umile.
(...)pedatum Elephantis pedibus.

Constraind to travel, left my Saint behind,
Else had we trauel'd to our iourneys end.
Thou fatal Clotho, to my Sacred sweet,
Would not afford her Time, heart, breath, nor feet:

CLOTHO. I Smoke the Distaffe in my bosom fast
Whereon my Delias life was wrapped in Flax,
And duly sat, till many years were past
My Distaffe bare and thread full length was waxt:
Which thread when first my Sisters began to spin it
How fast they drew, so fast it rol'd and knotted, Nodi representant mise^tas
tempora so^oris. Illum aureum, auream gubernationem. Nodus accumilatus. Vita
sincin.

That more their care and pain was to begin it,
Doubting too timelesse breach to it allotted.
But having spun a full third part and more,
The other two it turned all to gold,
And spun not half so harsh as't did before,
Till all at last upon a knot it rold.
So Lachesis, thy spinning and my pain,
Was but to put on Time, and done in vain.

LACHESIS. ALas, had I had substance whereupon to pull,
Or where withal to add unto her thread,
My fingers should not weary, nor mine eyes be dull,
Nor night, nor day from work lay down my head:
For rich was he that might but kiss her hand,
And much esteemed, that had her word of praise:
How proud was he, might at her door but stand
And hold a Polax in her princely days?
Amongst these riches then, how rich was I?
That had both twisting, twining of the Clew,
No greater riches with my Delia die,
Then whom she loved, must seek their love anew.
Oh had I (Atropos) Flax for her life, Morte moritur amor.

Thou should not only spin, but break thy knife.

ATROPOS. SO Angel-like, immortall-seeming Saint,
The tract of her most chaste and prosperous life,
Did make the worldings think that scarce constraint
Could bring her Thread once under yoke of knife.
I cannot choose but mourn, her death, their grief,
She did so love them: they no less deserved it.
And held her next to Joue; on Earth for chief:
Her as her love, and love as her preserved it.
If Clotho's Distaffe had been still supplide,
And Lachesis small Fingers spinning longer:
My Knife should still have hung close by my side,
And neither edge nor point touched thread, nor wronged her,
But Nature, thou art she that would't not give
Substance of life, to make my Delia live.

NATVRA. WHen first my curious Pensill did purtraie
The pure composed limbs of Delia's form;
Me thought my fingers striued to assaie
A work immortal, not terrestrial borne,
And having brought it to a full perfection,
The very Gods descended down to see,
Their next celestial shape, with such affection:
It pleased them so, they would have robbed me.
But I more glorying in my labor taken,
Grew jealous of the same, the whiles 'twas mine:
Since when, my work it self had me forsaken, Aditus eius in mundum

The Gods have seeted her in heaven to shine:
Death was the fatal messenger that crossed her,
She having spent my strength, I having lost her.

MORS. I Was that fatal executioner
That gave that fatal stroke of Delia's death:
I also was that fatal Messenger
That brought this fatal news into the Earth.
I was that thief which stole into her chamber; Mors est vltimus morsus.

And first that made her saint, the Nymphs to wonder:
I was that traitor which did fear no danger
For acting treason to be rent asunder:
Yet what I did, was by the Gods agreed,
And not by me, but by the Powers above her; Mors non habet essentiam and nihil
aliud est nisi actio deo^um

They, not my dart, had made your Delia bleed;
But for to make her know how they did love her:
A Quier of Angels did descend beneathe,
To take her up to heaven, too good for earth,

ANGELI. CEase Nymphs with tears to ouercharge your eyes,
For Delia, weeps not now, that she has left ye,
Comfort your selves in earth for she in skies,
Comforted by them, which late bereft ye,
So many years the Gods did let ye keep her,
In tender love for to support your peace,
But being gone, it naught auailes to weep her.
She now enioyes a crown of longer lease:
Let this suffice how looth she was to part,
So long as she had tongue, hand, eye or breath,
Till when our Quire of Angels took her heart,
She then bid welcome joys, and farewell earth.
Where once each soul his Delias soul shall see,
Crow'd in another kind of Majesty.

FAMA. BRight heavens, you that enjoy our Delias soul,
And death with Death that causd our Ladies moorne (...) est (...).

That did the wisdom of our lords control,
And strived against all Synthus power in scorn,
Know this that Fame immortal is on earth,
As you in heaven, and will not loose her so:
You have her substance: I a God beneath,
Will keep the substance of her life to show,
I have her shape drawn in as lively die,
As if my Delia were her self in being:
And that is her Delias self unto my eye,
I need no other Delia for my seeing:
And yet me thinks she not in heaven essign'de,
So plain I keep her Trophey in my mind.

I Have in writing Golden Pens to praise her,
In datelesse Volumes of the silver air,
The very style so lofty high shall raise her,
That Time shall be too short to tear her hair:
Wherein shall first her Chastity be writ
As pure in Picture as it self was pure:
Next her Religion, Love, her Art and Wit Fuit casta. Religiosa vera. Sit
viuens Fama mortua corpore viuans anima.

So fair, that Delias life may still endure,
Then Synthus think thou have thy Delia ever:
The Heavens do keep her soul, thou keep'st her life,
Which life (I vow) from thee shall never sever,
Nor subject be to Fates Atropian knife
Take this to wipe thy bleared eyes again,
Her life is thine, though Heaven her soul contain.

CASTIT AS. AT length to Church I brought my Delia's Hearse,
Blindfolded (for my eyes were blind with crying)
And all a long the way in howling verse,
I sung a Dirge unto her utmost dying:
The Birds above, while I did sing beneath,
With heartlesse yeelping filled the silver air,
Ne with a shriller Quier then Ion earth,
For all I sob'd, I howled, and rent my hair:
But then to help my Song my Delias Singers,
(I mean her boys new turned to Black from Red,
Like Lambs by Uthers nursed, with Orpheus fingers)
Mixed tears with Notes to see her buried:
And to be changed to clay, her Robes from gould,
Her princely Guard to Woormes, her bed to mould.

NYMPHAE. NOw has Attendance done the last command,
That love or duty to our Delia ought:
It need not watch her call, or slender hand:
The one is mute, the other wastes to naught.
Now are our Revels and our dancing sport,
Turnde all to sighs, each one to private plain:
Now Delia can no more remove her Court,
The Graue's her Palace, and the woormes her train
She is arrayde in Robes, in Pearl, in Stone:
But not so rich as she was wont to be:
For why; she lackes us Ladies every one,
The worst her self, she lackes as well as we:
Her Robes are sullen, such as Earth contain:
Her Stones vnpollish't, Pearl, Earthes sinking rain.

HEROES. Our eyes did now behold their last beholding
Of Delias shape, wrapped in obscurity:
Till that the crummie Earth her corpse infoulding,
Had blinded us with his condensitie:
Returning then our thoughts, began to paint
Her lyuelie shape with new rememberaunce:
And coming to her face, a new Complaint
Grew, thinking on so sweet a countenance,
That then we thought we had a new to make
Both mourning vestmentes, tears, grave, hearse and all:
For Delia seemed a new in life to wake,
When was but done a new her Funeral.
A grief unto us all, to them most wretched,
To whom our Deliaes love and bounty stretched.

PHISICI. With Chastity the Nymphs and noble Peers,
Out ouer-weeried Wits and drowsy Eyes,
Restles retires with droughtlesse spring of tears,
To think how Delia in a cold bed lies:
We thought our Art would have preserved her ever,
But now we see his purest power and strength
Was but for to prolong, (and not deliver)
Her life, which death did overcome at length:
No trust we put in Phisicks Art at all
But this; when always we began to make it,
For life no more to be effectual,
Till when her stomachs strength did fail to take it:
Which weekenesse finding in her vital veins,
Then ended she her life, and we our pains.

Sepulchrum CASTITATI Loquens. HEnce from my mouth, and wast no more thy tears:
No tears prevail to take my Delia from me:
No sighs can make my breast that thee vp-reares
Dissolve in two; with kneeling thus upon me:
But to the greene-grasse sprouted hills be winging,
Where pleasure does release the time of sorrow,
And where in pleasure sorrow sits a singing,
When one sad soul another breast does borrow:
There make a Chaplet of the sweetest flowers,
That pretty pinked Grove or Dale does yield:
There shade thy temples in those templed bower:
That canopize the haunters of the field:
And round about thee in the Springing Meedes,
The Swaynes will finger Ditties to their reeds.

OR else, gird Bow and Quiver to thy side,
And run with Cynthia in the Pheboone-parke,
To seek the Heart where he his head does hide,
With bended Bow whiles chopping Talbots bark
That after Midday-heat some Willow under
You may betake your self to bathe and wash
In some clear spring kept cool with such an number
That none may see you naked to sport and dash,
Thou may be happy, that in Bruiuses snow,
Thy slight was not decreed nor Delias death,
On every twigge a thousand pleasures grave,
That now a Heaven does scarce resemble Earth:
Leave kneeling tears, bid farewell Court and train,
For them thou know not when to see again.

Sepulchrum NYMPHIS, Loquens. AS her I have dismi'st, so must I you:
Naught can release your Queen my arms must keep her,
No sad submission though you bend and bow,
Are ought of force to make ye more be-weepe her:
Bind up your hair,, wipe both your cheeks and eyes,
Leave wringing, kneeling, thumping of my breast,
Envy not me, though in me, Delia lies.
For she contented, gives her self to rest,
For I am night, and bed, her life was day,
Wherein cours'd and recours'd her cares of mind,
Which wearied her at last: but I for aye
Am that sweet rest, wherein she rest does find:
O Nymphs! for Delia, why so much complain ye?
Doubtless as good a Queen will entertain ye.

Sepulchrum HEROIBVS Loquens. ASsemble now no more for Consultation:
(I mean, for Delias safety, life, and state)
I take upon me now her preservation,
All wits extending duty comes too late:
You have committed her unto my keeping,
She is my prisoner, I am her Jail,
The debt's so great, that neither gold nor weeping,
Nor all the world beside, can be her bail,
Bondage is judged to be her punishment,
Death officer to execute her woe:
For Time perpertuall imprisonment,
Perpetual to earth, to Heaven not so,
For Jove's sweet Mercury, will from her tomb,
Release your Delia at the day of Doom.

Vermes MEDICIS Loquens. YOu that by Art procure the ease of man
With short abridgement of continuance,
It Is short you see for not beyond a spanne,
The greatest Prince of all you can advance:
Your ease is wasting ease, and Nature spends,
Perchance you will say it adds unto the breath;
Not so in age, for then it but besriendeth
The heart, to bring it to a pleasant death:
For now your labors vain, you see at last,
The leafes and Rules of Gallen lies at rest,
And now when all your hope is dead and past,
No more you search to find Probatum est.
Now what is your art in power, ne all you have,
Cannot preserve her body in the Grave.

FOr what is her body now, whereon such care
Was still bestowed in all humility?
Where are her robes? is not her body bare,
Respectles in the earths obscurity?
Now where is her glory and her Majesty?
Her triple crown, her honor, state, and train?
Are not her riches all in poverty,
And all her earthly Gloryes past and vain, Aequalitas morta^itatis inter
Reges and pauperes est in morte and post mortem.

Now where are all her cates, her glorious dishes,
That were by death of sundry creatures spread,
Her Fowls, her fat Quadrupidists and Fishes,
Are they not living, now your Delias dead?
And we in life too filthy for her tooth,
Are now in death the next unto her mouth.

With that the greedy worms their heads shrunk down
The grave shut close her heavy brooken ground,
And crawling crept unto he liuelesse crown
Much like to Flies about a bleeding wound,
Then all her Mourners eyes were vailde and blind,
They weep not now with passion of the sight,
But with a true remembrance of the mind
They mean to mourn their Delia day and night:
Thence they return, where Delis helpless lies,
Each one betakes him to a private place
To wipe the tears of over deluged eyes,
Instead of her to welcome such a Grace;
As all the Bounds of Europe, ne the Earth,
Affords a wiser Prince of greater Birth,

FINIS.
In laud Authoris.
PASS forth, pure ^em, to Subjects censuring,
And what thy virtue yields, let Subjects read,
Free is thy heart from false dissembling,
For which; thrice happy, in so blessed a deed:
Small is thy port, yet with rich Truth art graced,
And zealous Truth in highest Heavens is placed:
Where she (great Empress) ever singing lives,
(Before his crystal Thron, which al good gives)
More white than Snow, freed from infirmity,
Crowned with pure Laurel of Eternity;
Many have writ sad Elegies of woe:
But these true Mourners with her Funeral go.
I: O: St. G.


