LAWS AND ORDInances touching military discipline. Set down and established
the 13. of August. 1590.

Translated into English by I. D.

Imprinted at the Haghe by the widow and heirs of the deceased Hillebrand
Jacobs van Wouw, Ordinary Printer to the high and mighty Lords the Stats
General. Anno 1631. Cum Privilegie.

WHereas by daily experience, many disorders are found, to grow amongst those
that bear arms, tending to the great damage of these Countries, and prejudice
of the gouverneme^t thereof, which notwithstanding are not any where so
punished as in reason they ought, because there is no certain order, or law
touching like matters as yet decreed and published: The States general of the
united Provinces have therefore (with th'advyce of the Council of State of the
same) ordained, appointed, and decreed, do by these presents ordain, appoint,
and decree the orders or laws here ensuing, which their will is, to have from
point to point strictly observed and followed by all those that bear arms in
their service, To which end it shall be every where published, and accordingly
sworn to by the soldiers.

I. FIrst he that shall take the Lords name in vain, or blaspheme the same,
shall for the first time make an honorable amends, and be kept three days in
prison at bread and water: The second time shall have a glowing iron thrust
through his tongue, the^ be stripped to his shirte, and so banished out of the
united Provinces.

II. The like penalty shall they incur, for the first and second times, who
shall either do or say ought in despyte, or derision of Gods word, or the
Ministers of the Church.

III. All wilful murders, rapes, adultery, fyring of houses, the very,
violence, outrage, falsehood, and other like bad facts, and open offenses, or
unnatural abuses, shall be punished with death.

IIII. None shall any way outrage, stryke, knock, beat, threaten or
dishonestly touch any widows, married or unmarried women, such as are in
childebed, or with child, nor any young children, on pain to be discharged
without money or pasporte, or else punished corporally according to the quality
of the offense. Likewise all common whores shall for the first time be expulsed
out of the Camp with shame, and being found there the second time, soundly
whipped and banished.

V. He that shall have done or conspyred ought against the States, the Country,
Towns, or other places thereof, or against any Governors, or Captains in the
same, whereby the public state of the Land may be in any sort endammaged, or
endangered: as also whosoever shall consent thereunto, shall without any mercy
be hanged.

VI. The like punishment shall they also incur, whosoever coming to the
knowledge of any such matter, shall not reveal it to their Captain, or chieff
Officers.

VII. None shall raise any mutiny, or make any unlawful assembly, on whatsoever
secret, cloaked, or other purposes: nor for what cause soever it be, without
order from their Commanders, on pain of hanging.

VIII. In like sort shall they also be punished, that shall be present at such
assemblies, or call, stir up, and incite any to be present thereat. And is to
be understood also, that such Officers as shall be at the like seditious
meetings, shall receyve punishment before all other soldiers, except those
(that are noe authors thereof)

IX. He that shall speak ill of the States general, or particular, the
Council of State, or other Superiors, or shall speak ought to despite or
deride any of them, shall without mercy be punished with death.

X. He that shall have spoken any words tending to sedition, mutiny, or
disobedience, or that having heard such words, and shall not presently acquaint
his Cap. therewith, shall be punished with death.

XI. In like sort shall they also be punished, who rehearse any such words in
presence of private soldiers, either of themselves, or by suggestion of
others, or practice ought, whereby any mutiny or sedition may grow.

XII. No man, be yt out of guarded, or besieged places, or in other like cases,
shall use any speech or correspondence with the enemy, nor send him any
messages or Letters, nor receive any from him, nor deal in like sort with any
of his confederates, be it in secret or publicque, without the consent first
had of his Gouvernour or Cap. or that he make it forthwith known unto him,
unless he be thereto aucthorised. Neither shall any man be adherent or in any
sort assistant to the enemy, on pain of death.

XIII. Likewise none shall confer or converse with any Trompet or Drum of
the enemies, or any other sent on message from him, but they only who are
thereto appointed, on pain of death.

XIIII. None shall in going, departing, lying still, mustering, or in garnison
do outrage or spoil to the inhabitants of these Countries, their favorours or
confederates, or take from them any victuals, money, or ought else, without
paying duly for the same, nor yet throw down, or spoil any water-mils or
waterworks, nor set on fire the same, or other houses, or else the camp, at
the breaking up thereof, without special command from the General, or other
Chief Officer, on pain of death.

XV. Like wise none shall either do or practice ought against any persons,
Towns, Villages, Forts, Havens, or whatsoever goods warranted by pasportes or
other assurances from the Generality, on pain of death.

XVI. He that will depart from one Company to another, or elsewhere, or will
leave the Colors under which he serves, is to have a sufficient pasport from
his Cap. or Commander, and failing therein, shall be punished with death.

XVII. Whatsoever Cap. shall entertayne soldiers without a lawful discharge
from their former Cap. shall be punished with death.

XVIII. If any soldier (serving on horse or foot) shall knock or stryke his
host, hostess, their man or mayde-servant, he shall for the first time be kept
three days at bread and water, the second, make an honorable amends, and
before the whole watch be disarmed, and then banished out of the Company, And
if the party so stricken be maimed, or blood drawn, then shall the soldier
offending have his hand stricken of.

XIX. Whosoever shall have taken or stolen any victuals, or other provisions
brought up, toward the Camp, Garnison, or any Towns, or places under the
jurisdiction of the States general, shall be hanged.

XX. Likewise none shall out of the Camp or Garnison forcibly take or else buy
up before hand, any victuals or goods bound thitherwardes, before the same
shall be brought to a fit place for sale, and taxed: Neither shall he rob any
cabin, shop, tent, Victualer, or Marchand that is there for the help of the
Camp or Garnison, on pain of death.

XXI. He that shall go out of the quarter from his Colors, or Garnison,
further then a Canon-shot, without his Cap. leave, shall be punished with death.

XXII. Whosoever shall go out of the Camp, besieged town, fort or other
place, without the special consent of his Cap. or Officer, for any cause, be
it for forage or ought else, shall be hanged.

XXIII. Whosoever shall take any Cattaile, or beasts within the lands that lie
under the obedience of the Generality, shall be punished as a Theife.

XXIIII. He that in marching by land toward the field, or in retourning
thence, shall forsake his Colors or Cornet, shall without any mercy be punished
with death.

XXV. And whosoever (not being visited with manifest sickness, and the same
known to his Cap. or Commander) shall keep along with the baggage, or ride on
the wagons, shall be disarmed before the whole Company, and then banished
without money or pasport.

XXVI. If any shall neglect his watch, or other service committed unto him, he
shall be punished with death.

XXVII. If any soldier shall be found sleeping on his sentinel, he shall
without any mercy be punished with death.

XXVIII. Whatsoever soldier shall, either by day or night depart from his
sentinel, where he has been placed by his Corporal, unless he be called
thence, or relieved by the said Corporal, shall receive punishment of death
without any mercy.

XXIX. None shall declare or make known the watchword to the enemy, or any
other, nor give any other word then is given him by the Officer, on pain of
death.

XXX. Whosoever shall absent himself out of the Court of guard above two
hours in the day time, or any with in the night without his Corporals leave,
shall be punished with death.

XXXI. None shall without lawful cause raise any tumult, or alarm, nor
discharge a piece by night, nor make any noise, nor do ought else, where by the
same may grow (without cause) on pain of death.

XXXII. He that shall presume within the Camp, Quarter, or place, where he
lies in garnison, as also after the watch is set, to draw his weapon shall
forfeict his life: as also if he do it out of the Camp, Town, or place,
without leave of his Officer.

XXXIII. He that shall stryke any man with his sword vndrawne, or with a
cudgel, stone, or otherwise, that blood follow, shall loose his hand.

XXXIIII. He that shall give any one a box on the ear, shall in presence of the
Company take the like box again of the party so wronged, and besides be
disarmed and banished the Company.

XXXV. No soldiers shall without order from their Chiefs, Captains, or
Commanders hold any common meeting or gathering together, be it to demand
money or ought else, nor yet be present at such assemblies, on pain of death.
Provided always, that such Capt. or Commanders as shall suffer the same to
happen at undue seasons, and in vnlawfulwise, shall (for an example to others)
be punished with death before all the soldiers.

XXXVI. If any shall call for money as they are marching in the face of the
ennemy, or upon any enterprise, they shall receive punishment of death without
any mercy.

XXXVII. If yt chance that the Monthly entertainment be not paid on the
very day, or that it cannot be sent unto the soldiers for some cause, be it
through any hinderance of the enemy, or otherwise, none shall therefore make
any tumult, or speak seditious words, or seek to force his Captain to the
payment thereof, neither yet any whit the less discharge and have care of his
marches and watches, but contenting him self with a reasonable loan, until
the money become, or may come shall fully perform the duty required of a
good soldier. And whosoever does the contrary, or accompanies those that
do it, shall be punished with death.

XXXVIII. No Captains, Lieutenants, or Ensigns shall depart out of the place
where their Companies lie in garnison, whether it be to solicit for payment
of their said Companies, or for their own business, without leave of their
Commander or Governor, on pain of death.

XXXIX. He that shall in any quarrel, fight, or otherwise call those of his
nation to help, or gather an assembly, shall be hanged.

XL. He that shall be found by day or night out of the camp or place besieged,
without his Captains leave, shall be punished with death.

XLI. Whosoever shall go on fre-booting, and commit spoils, extorsions, and
theft, shall be hanged.

XLII. If one soldier challenge another into the field, without leave from
him that commaundes in that quarter, he shall be punished with death.

XLIII. If any Corporal or other commanding the watch, shall suffer towe
soldiers to go forth to fight, he shall without mercy be punished with
death.

XLIIII. Any soldier being wronged by word or deed he shall repair to him
that commaundes in the quarter, who after the hearing of both parties shall
cause satisfaction of the wrong to be made unto the party interessed, with bare
head, and in presence of the whole watch: And if he find cause, shall also
disarme the wrongdoer, and banish him out of the Company.

XLV. And if there be no witness of the quarrel, then shall the said Commander
cause the parties to agree in his presence, whereto if they will not
condescende, then both, or he that denies it, shall be disarmed and banished out
of the Company.

XLVI. Whatsoever soldier or Commander shall go out of the camp, Town, or
fort, or enter thereinto by any other way, then at the ports and and ordinary
entrances, shall be hanged.

XLVII. If any soldier shall refuse the command of his Cap. or any other,
who commaundes over him in the service of the States General, and not perform
the same, he shall be punished with death: as he like wise shall, who
transgresses any off the Generals commandments published by sound of dromme
or trompet.

XLVIII. At the sounding of any alarm every one shall resort to his Ensign,
or Cornet, and whosoever comes not thither (unless it be on apparent
necessity) or runs to an other place without consent and special order from
his Commander, or comes not so soon as his Ensign, shall be punished with
death.

XLIX. Every soldier shall aid and defend his Colors by day and night, and
on the first warning repair unto them, not departing thence, until it be
brought into a place of safety, on pain of death.

L. If any shall depart out of the order, or rank wherein he is placed,
unless it be on necessary occasions, and that he has therewith acquaynted
his Officer, he shall be punished with death.

LI. He that shall first begin to fly in a battle or assault, may
lawfully be slain thereupon by any one: And if he escape, he shall be declared
a villayne, and receive punishment of death without mercy.

LII. None that is appointed to the defense of any breach, trenche, or skonce,
be it Cap. or Soldier, shall willingly forsake the same, or through any
false or colored occasions, or excuses absent himself from thence, without
sufficient order, or warrant allowed by the Council of war, on pain of death.

LIII. None shall surrender or deliver to the enemy any place, the keeping
whereof is commitred unto him, on pain of death.

LIIII. Likewise none shall run from his quarter in a besieged place, cry for
composition, or speak thereof, be unwilling to fight, labor, or defend
their quarter, or make others unwilling thereunto, or do ought else in such a
place, whereby the defense thereof may be hindered, on pain of death without
any mercy.

LV. If any man run away to the enemy, or in such his flight be taken by
the enemy, he shall be punished with death.

LVI. No Captains shall seduce, or intyce away each others Soldiers, on
pain of death.

LVII. Whosoever shall by word or deed busy himself with the Sergeant Mayor
doing his office, be he Captain or Soldier, shall without mercy be punished
with death: As he also shall, who will not content himself with that quarter, or
lodging, whereto he shall be appointed by the Quartermaster or Furrier, or who
will disturb another man in his place.

LVIII. If any soldier having the wacth, shall come to his Colors not fully
armed, to march with the rest unto the watch, he shall for the first time, be
kept three days at bread and water: the second, disarmed and banished for
three Months out of the Company, and the third time suffer death.

LIX. Every one, of what condition soever he be, shall forthwith or before
the evening bring before him that commaundes in the quarter, al such prisoners
as shall be taken of the enemy, on pain of forfeicting the said prisoners, and
to be punished besides with death.

LX. And if any shall take prisoner a General, Commander, or other man of
account of the enemy, he is forthwith to present, or cause to be presented the
said prisoner unto the States general or Council of State, and with-all to
deliver him over, as also whatsoever other prisoners they will take to
themselves, receyving therefore a reasonable reward according to the quality
and ability of the prisoner: provided that it exceed not the sum of 5000.
gilderns: And so the said prisoner shall be at the disposing of th'aforesayd
States, and he that took him, pretend no farther interest in that behalf.

LXI. Likewise none shall kill any prisoner, or set his ransom, or after the
payment of the said ransom, suffer him to depart without leave of the
General, or him that commaundes in the quarter, on pain of being disarmed, and
banished out of these Countries.

LXII. And if any prisoners be found, walking along the Camp or place of
garnison, without leave of the General, or him that commaundes there, he to
whom the prisoner belongs, shall forfeicte him to those, who shall first lay
hands on the said prisoner.

LXIII. Concerning lawful pryzes, whosoever bring in the same, shall acquaynte
therewith the General, or him that commaundes in the quarter, within three
hours after their return, to the end they may be accordingly registered, on
pain of forfeicting the same, and to be besides punished on the body.

LXIIII. Whosoever shall have gotten any thing upon the enemy, and gives not
notice thereof as aforesaid, that it may be registered, and after sold in the
Camp or place of garnison, but shall sell, or cause it to be sold in the
places or towns near thereunto, shall without any mercy be punished with
death, to the end that better order be held in all, and no man wronged in his
right.

LXV. When a soldier shall have done any offense or fault, his Captain
shall be bound (on pain of three months suspension from his charge) to deliver
the said soldier into the Generals hands, or his that commaundes in the
quarter, who with the Captames, Lieutenants, and Ensigns then present, shall
upon th'information, which he shall cause to be taken thereof, judge according
to these orders and laws.

LXVI. He that is droncke on his watch-day, shall be cassiered, and banished out
of the Company.

LXVII. Item if any one drink himself druncke, and in his drunckennesse
commit any ill or ought forbidden, he shall not thereby be excused, but so
much the more sharply punished.

LXVIII. If any Cap. or soldier shall refuse the muster or reviewe, he
shall be cassiered.

LXIX. None shall at the muster let himself be entered by a changed, or other
name, then his own, nor pass muster with a borrowed horse or arms: neither
shall any on the musterday lend the like, on pain of being disarmed and
banished out of the Company.

LXX. None shall let himself be entered, or muster under towe Companis, on pain
of death.

LXXI. None shall diminisch or pawn his arms, which are appointed him by his
Captain, on pain of being disarmed, and banished for six months out of the
Company.

LXXII. None shall likewise take or pawn any soldiers arms, on pain of
loosing double the worth of the pawn.

LXXIII. None shall play away or quyte his arms, but keep the same always
clean and serviceable, on pain of being cassiered out of the Company without
pasport.

LXXIIII. None shall by cousenage get away his fellows provisions, victuals,
or arms, on pain of being disarmed, and banished for three months out of the
Company, or else besides, of sustaining corporal punishment according to the
quality of th'offense.

LXXV. He that shall presume to set upon a Commissary of the musters, or wrong
him either in word or deed, shall be punished with death.

LXXVI. If any Captain give his soldiers less then the pay allowed him by
the States, he shall be disgraded.

LXXVII. If any soldier proffer to draw his weapon against his Chief, or
Commander, he shall be punished with death.

LXXVIII. If the Provost or his Officers apprehende one or more soldiers,
none (of what degree soever) shall oppose himself thereagainst, or reskewe, or
attempt to reskewe the said prisoners, on pain of death.

LXXIX. Furthermore, no Officer nor Gentleman of any Company, of horse or
foot, nor any common soldier shall victuaile in any Camp, without the
Generals special consent, on pain of being disarmed.

LXXX. Likewise al Victualers that victual in the Camp, shall be subject to
th'aforesaid articles and the Council of war there being, on the penalty here
in contained, and shall not draw any wine or beer for any one in the evening,
an hour after the Suns setting, or in the morning as much before the rising
thereof, on pain of forfeicting 3 gilderns for every time they shall be found
to have done so: the said forfeict to be converted, the one half to the
Provosts behoof, and the other to the relief of the poor.

LXXXI. Al other abuses and offenses not specifyed in thse Orders, shall be
punished according to the ordinances, laws, and customs of the war.

LXXXII. And if any soldiers should not be present at the proclayming of
these orders and laws, they shall notwithstanding be as much bound to
th'observation of them as the other who were present. But to the end none may
pretend ignorance, and every one have notice thereof, the States general have
given order, that the same shall be every where published on the muster-day, and
charged the Commissaries to cause all the soldiers to swear accordingly
thereunto.

THus done and decreed at Arnhem after sundry conferences had hereupon with the
chiefest Commanders of these united Provinces. It being farther appointed,
that these orders and laws shall be published both in the Camp, and wheresoever
else it shall be meet and requisite, and that at every muster the Commissaries
shall read, and propound the same agarne unto the Companies. The 13. of August
1590.

By order of the Council of State. Chr. Huyghens.


