Monodia OR WALTHAMS COMPLAINT,

Upon The death of that most Virtuous and Noble Lady, late deceased, the Lady
HONOR HAY,

Sole Daughter and Heir to the Right Honorable EDWARD, Lord DENNIE, Baron of
Waltham, and wife to the Right Honorable JAMES Lord HAY.

Virtus post funera viuit.

By R. N. Oxon.

LONDON, Printed by W. S. for Richard Meighen and Thomas Jones, and are to be
sold at their shop without Temple-barre under S. Clements Church. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND RELIGIOUS PATTERNS OF VERTVE, AND PATRONS of
Learning, EDWARD, Lord DENNIE, Baron of Waltham, and his most noble Son JAMES
Lord HAY.
RIght Honorable Lords, though unworthy and unknown (as not worthy to be
known to your Lordships) I want that good opinion begot by foreknowledge,
which, like a pleasing glass that makes any thing that is seen through it
seem better then it is, might set a fair gloss upon the forefront of this
rude Poem; yet not doubting, but that your Honors will vouchsafe to look upon
my imperfections herein, with more affection out of passion for the deads sake,
whom here I honor, then judgment out of reason to discuss, how unworthy I am
to discourse of such Honor. I presume to offer up in my Walthams Complaint this
funeral Obsequie, or mournful M^nodia, at the sh^ine of your Favors, as the
Sacrifice of my last duty to that most Noble, and to you most dear, dead
Lady; of whom living, by her Sisters tears, my Muse in her first Infancy of
being known, finding gracious acceptance, but deprived the fruition thereof
through inevitable chance, and hoping with her weak breath to revive those
sparks that my enforced absence had rakt up in the ashes of oblivion, lately
singing the Image of her Honer, was (alas tha: I should say she was) too
suddenly thunder-striken by that unlooked for Dart of Death, in top of all her
hopes. Wherefore both of that consecrated to her Honor, then living, and of
this, devoted to your ^ordships, in honor of her now dead, most humbly craving
your gracious Protections, I live

Your Honors most ^umbly at c^mmand. R. N.

To the same right Honorable Lords, the Lord DENNIE, and the Lord HAY.
THe last, the least, and yet best deed alone
Done to the dead by those that d^e survive,
Is to record their virtues, they being gone:
For only virtue keeps the dead alive.
My last, my least, and yet my best I can
Of duty to that honored Ladies name,
Which from her virtues first in me began,
I owe to you, that best can judge the same.
My subject (Noble Lords) does fit your worth,
And since my humble ^lile is far too base,
I for the subjects sake do pick you forth,
That style and subject both may purchase grace.
Which if (great Lords) my humble Muse obtain,
Walthams complaint cannot be told in vain.
Your Honors most humbly devoted. RIC^. NICCO^S.

WALTHAMS COMPLAINT,
IN that sixth month, whose name at first begun
From great Augustus, good Octauius son,
When in each fertile field the flowrie grain
Shot up on high, did bow their heads again,
As doing humble homage to the earth,
From whence they took their being and their birth;
And every fruitful tree did seem to groan
As burdened with the fruit that hung thereon,
Inu^ting all that past by their abode,
To strip their boughs, and ease them of their lode;
Beside the banks of Lees delightful brook,
Which Waltham Abbey.
Walthams ancient Town does ouerlooke.
I walked, expecting in the days prime birth
The joy, with which the morning greets the earth:
But she, as not disposed to mirth, did lay
Her azure robes with silver fringed away;
And in their stead, whose wear the world does glad
Was in dark russet mantle meanly clad.
A vale of mist her silver brow did hide,
The golden tramels of her hair were tide
In fillet of black clouds, and with ^ad look
She mourner-like to heaven her journey took:
Earth, as it had a part in sorrow bore,
Upon her back a cloak of vapors wore,
And, as if wanting eyes her grief to show,
Her grass in stead of tear^s dropped weeping dew
Into the river Lee, by which I stood.
Marra^^ Be^ne and S^ower with an arm called the (...) because it devid^th
(...), and Hartfordshi^es.
Three other brooks, that to increase her slood
Did poor themselves, with her along did glide
As if no grief their waters could divide:
Which their mixed waves did mutually declare,
By breathing vaporie sighs into the air:
Whose waters bubling over the pible stone,
As if they would unto the trees upon
The banks on either side express by voice
An inward sorrow, made a murmuring noise.
All things that came beneath my sight did show
As each with other would consort in wo^;
Which through mine eyes did steal my hearts consen^
To bear a part; for I to Waltham went,
Beside whose Abbie there a work of praise,
Which worthy hands in antique time did raise,
The Lord Dennie.
That noble Barons Hospitable sea^e,
Where rich and pore find bountiful entreat,
Sad spectacle of sorrow I did see,
The sight of which did much impassion me.
On the bare ground, sitting in open field,
A fair, but forlorn, Lady I beheld,
Without remorse, now rending from her head,
Her yellow hair, like threads of gold dispred
About her silver neck, now beating sore
Her breast, the lodge of gri^fe, and evermore
Fixing her eye so steadfast on the ground,
As thence, from her own tears, which did abound,
As from a Crystal glass, help she would borrow,
To see the face of her own faces sorrow;
Whose woeful gesture did my heart so wound,
That I requested her to show the ground
Of this her grief, and she as loath to speak,
Yet in these words at last did silence break.
In vain, my voice, in vain thou do impart
Weak words, for signs of my wo-wounded heart.
In vain my heart do thy sad sighs arise
From inward thoughts with tears to fill mine eyes:
In vain mine eyes your moist tears ouerflow;
No grief so great, that can express my woe.
Weak words, sad sighs, moist tears, in vain ye be,
Mine Honor dead I neuermore shall see.
To hear her mourning and her sad complaint,
I silent was awhile with griefs constraint;
Till sorrows self did urge me ask her name,
To which thus she this sad reply did frame.
Waltham I was; and though some think I am
What I have been; yet bear I but the name
Of what I was; and yet in my distress
Such is my chance, (hard chance you well may guess)
That wretched I of late through deaths despite,
Have lost my Dear, my Da^ling, my Delight,
The Light of nature, Ornament of earth,
Model of heaven, the Pearl of grace, whose birth
Did with that Honor grace my fruitful womb,
Which now, she dead, lies buried in her tomb.
For know (alas that it should ere be known)
My honor late is dead, is dead and gone.
Was It not enough that fortune, who takes pleasure
In humane woes, bereaved me of that treasure,
Which daily Lees large stream (though now a pore
And petty brook) did bring unto my shore;
Till or Alured which upon this occasion (...) called the Kings stream at
Waltham. Raph Holles^lia, Descript. Britt.
Alfred, scourge of Danes, that Royal King
Her larger stream to lesser brooks did bring;
When Denmarks Navy did on her broad breast
My sister Hartford with long siege molest:
Where he that time his foes proud hearts did ^ame
And burnt their Danish Fleet with English flame?
Was It not enough I say, I so should be
Bereft of comfort in beloved Lee:
But that by death, eu'u she, whom all did know
To be (ay me that now she is not so)
My garlands fairest flower, should be defaced,
The fairest flower, that ere my garland graced?
No hand will crop the stem up in despite,
That yearly yields flowers ^or delight;
No churl will lay his axe unto the root
Of such a plant, that yearly yields fruit;
Yet she, true plant of Honor (O ste^ne death)
Even bearing fruit was blasted by thy breath.
If ever beauty might prevail with thee,
A ra^er beauty eye did seldom see;
If ever honor; she, most noble Dame,
Was Honor self in nature and in name^
If ever Virtue; she was that fair shrine,
Whence Virtues beams unto the World did shine.
How could thou looking on her lovely face,
^ift up thy hand to strike, when in that place
Youth, graced with a^l the graces heaven could give,
Did with such beauty beg thy leave to live,
How could thou but let fall thy deadly dart,
When sad^y she (at thought of which my heart
Now bleeds afr^sh) distilling from her eyes
D^^ps pure as pearl, did show in woeful wise
Her childed womb, that thou should pity take,
I^ not for hers, yet for her infants sake?
H^w could, I say, but mildly look upon her,
When in her barthened womb, that babe of Honor
Did for the mother mercy seem to c^ie,
And she again, for her dear babe would die?
O unrelenting death thou could not then
Strike, though thy hand were I f^ed up: but when
Lucina brought the sweet babe from the throes
Of the chaste mother to this world of woes,
Then, then, thy hand did crop my Honors ^lowre,
My Beauties bud, my Bounties Paramoure.
But why did Nature, to augment her fame,
With cunning build up such a glorious frame,
And heaven with her more glorious spirit grace it,
Finding no fairer mansion where to place it:
Yet leave it, like vain bubble made of breath,
To be a triumph to victorious death?
Poor Nature well I see, that all thy power
But weakness is: Death daily does devour
Thy noblest works: of beggars and of Kings
The generation from corruption springs.
Flesh is but dust, made up in humane shape,
To which, weak Nature, like th'Eternals Ape,
T'ind^ce us to believe that she can give
Eternity to make it ever live,
A lively color over it does lay,
Which makes ^lesh think it never shall decay,
But flourish ever; when unlooked for Death
Does in a moment blast it with his breath;
"Flesh is but flesh, the fairest things do fall,
"The strongest stoop, Death is the end of all.
Loue-drawing load-stars, unto whom is given
Shape, like the winged messengers of Heaven,
To whose sweet beauties all men's knees are bent,
Help me, O help me, kindly to lament
This honored Lady, Lady of all Honor,
And in your gentle hearts so think upon her,
That in the glass, when you with curious care
Trimming the tresses of your golden hair
Shall wonder at your selves, you then may say,
This beauty is but borrowed for a day,
An hour, a minute, or a moments space,
Death's here, is there, at hand in every place.
The Springs most hopeful bud in youthful May
Is sometime with the blossom blown away:
The fruit sometimes does perish in the bud,
At most it can attain but so much good,
As to grow ripe, and drop into the shade:
Both blossom, bud, and fruit in time do vade.
Nor do I simply challenge Death alone
Of that late wrong, too soon alas yet done,
To the dead mirror of all women kind:
Th'ineuitable end of things designed,
And written by the great Creators hand
In the star-text of Heaven, shall ever stand,
And in it self is good, but every end
Upon a mediate cause does still depend.
And though by means at evil ends we aim;
Yet divine providence directs the same,
And makes, when wicked we all good neglect,
An evil cause produce a good effect:
So that sad inst^ument of wicked ill,
By which death doubtless found the way to spill
This glorious work of nature, evil meant,
Spoil was the end and scope of his intent.
But heaven did frustrate what his purpose was;
Yet in his action suffered him to pass,
That so her ^oule, shut up in house of clay,
Unworthy such a guest might find a way,
Upon deaths ladder from base earth to rise:
For death is Honors scale to climb the skies.
But woe to thee the while, whose wicked hands
Were instruments of death t'vnknit the bands.
Which in that body held so fair a mind,
In which soul enuies self no fault could find;
O wretched world, whose crooked back does bow,
And groan beneath four ages past, yet thou
As old in evil, as in age do nurse
Thine own disease, and which alas is worse
Do only yield thine aged pappes to those,
That are black mischiefs friends and virtues foes:
Thine iron age the worst of all the four
In no part good, when good men did deplore
Astr^as flight from hence to heaven above,
Was not so bad; but that it may improve
This thy last age, of clay, of dirt, of mud,
Of anything more vile or void of good
When evil spirits in shapes of men do dwell,
And earth it self is made another hell:
Astraea then from earth to heaven did fly,
Because truth trodden down did helpless lie
Beneath oppression, and to her was given,
That place, where now she holds the scale in heaven,
Yet Honor with us st^^l did seem to stay*
As if from earth, heaven would not take away
Virtues reward, till Vice did so abound,
That now true virtue no where can be found:
Or if it can, yet does it want reward;
The sons of Honor now have no regard,
To baser vice greatness of state inclines,
Who^e vpstart grooms, each where in purple shines;
Soule-sauing virtue shames to show her face,
To be true virtuous now is to be base,
And honesty, whence Honor takes her name,
To those profess it, is accounted shame:
Then happy she, though hapless we lament
The absence of her noble soul, which sent
From Heaven at first, as heavenly dew did fall
Upon this sinful earth, and finding all
Too gross end muddie, where she mig^t remain,
Was through the poores of her life's fru^t again
Exhaled from earth by those attractiue rays,
Which heavens bright sun of mercy thence displaies
Where unto her all glory now is given;
Astraeas self and all those stars in heaven,
Which antique times did stellifie of yore,
Give honor unto Honor evermore:
No part of those rare parts, that did excel,
Whose worth no tongue, much less thy Muse could tell^
Though she obliged by duty gave th'g assay,
While time does last, on earth shall ere decay.
For heaven* when living she did truly honor,
Now dead bes^owes a living name upon her;
A name to live, while fame has wings to fly,
For sure on earth, the fame shall never die
Of her true noble Sire, a patron known
Unto weak want, and second unto none
For great good deeds, which Envy cannot blame,
Nor to this Lord deny; but yield, what fame
To (...), and his dear daughter dead does give,
That she by him, and he by her may live;
May live in those two noble pla^ts which she,
True honored ^o^d, has living le^t to thee:
In whom, that so t^ine image and her own
May unto all posterity be known,
Heaven give them length of days, and bless them so,
That from suc^ plants fruit euerm^re may grow:
Who in all (...) times may claim the crown
Of that il^st^ate deed, which does renown
Their Fathers name, of which if these bad days
Which slights best things would hearken to my lays,
My Mus^ (great Lord) should strike so high a string,
That boldest Bardes should cease to hear her sing.
And on thy Faulcons wings alost should soar,
To tell of thy great Ancessors of yore,
And of their valor, whence derived came
Those arms, that now nobiliate thy name.
When like a tempest that proud Pagan host
From the North seas ariu'd on (...)
Scotlands coast,
Where near (...)
Loncart the noble ^iuer T^y
From that sad sight, as grieved, did glide away.
When she beheld her countries lot sink down
And fame in fight her foes with conquest crown.
Till with his plough-beame glory-thirs^ing Hay
Aided by his two sons did cross the way,
And forced his flying countrie-men again
With courage to (...) head upon on the Dane,
Whose host destroyed, with a plough-beame that day
He saved his (...)
King and country from decay,
Of which upon that field, the Hay^^ own land,
The Faulcons stone a trophe still does stand.
But back my Muse, their glory may not be
Thy subject now; yet we by this may see,
That by him living, bles^ is she now dead,
Who made him blessed by a frui^ful bed:
She dead, he living both blessed evermore
In that fatre fruit, which her chaste bosom bore;
Her chastest bosom, which was once the bower,
Where virtues Queen did keep her court, whose ^lowre,
Which from a plant in paradise did spring,
Set in her thoughts fair garden forth did bring,
The fruit of chaste desire and spotless love:
For which her happy soul now sits above
Those, that for other virtues praised been;
In women chastity is virtues Queen,
Which through that grace, which unto her was given,
For her true zeal unto the King of heaven,
Without the which none can possess the same,
While life did last, she kept from touch of blame:
(Ye nobler Dames) that all vain thoughts despise,
Who would preserve from theft of hungry eyes
Your ^lowre of beauty, and would quench the fires,
Which fal^e termed love has tin'd in base desires,
Ensue her steps in grace and piety,
Which are the guardians of true chastity;
O let not those shape-shifters, that do steal
By false pretense of sanctimonious zeal,
Into the closet of your thoughts, entice
Your ears from truth, who by a new devise
Teaching to be unchaste, to be no crime
Or veial at the least, abuse the time:
Nor let those Palace parasites, those apes,
Who putting on the gestures and the shapes
Of grauer men, with their pro^aner lips
To make their Ladies laugh, spit forth court quips
Against devotion, mocking holy things,
Improve your sanctity, whence all good springs:
Shame not to show in public, as she did
Your zeal to heaven, true zeal will not be hid;
Join outward action to your inward will,
Not to do good, she knew, was to do ill.
But from her faith the efficient cause of good,
And those diuiner virtues understood
Of heavenly souls, in which she did excel,
Let me proceed her other gifts to tell.
Least courtly ease, of great ones counted state,
To wanton Vice might open Virtues gate,
Her studi^us soul was exercised sti^l;
For where ease is, it is easy to do ill.
When she herself to solace did dispose
To pass the time, no vain delights she chsse:
If in her needle she did tak^ delight,
What fairer pattern then her hands fair white?
If she by art the I illies white would show;
Then if not there, where did white Lillies grow?
If azure brooks winding the lands about
In their true figure she would portrait out,
Then th^se blew veins were such, which on her hand
Made little Islands in a little land.
Would she work roses with a perfect red,
Her lips, as often as she did beh^d
The si^^e grown short with pearle-like teeth, had power
To give a ^^imson color to each flower,
Which on her w^^ke so like the life did show,
As if h^y by her eyes fair be^ames did grow,
And through her t^uch for sent did so excel,
As if her brea^h had given them fragrant smell.
In which for skill with that ra^e Lydian Dame
She seemed with Pallas to contend for ^ame.
Sometimes her dainty voice with breath as sweet
As April Zephyr's gentle gales, that g^eet
Our sent with odor of the mornings rose,
Sweet ditties did in such sweet tunes compose,
That all that h^ard her so am^zed were,
As if their souls were only in the ear:
While her soft hand wou^d gently touch the Lute,
And sometimes bid the Violl not be mute,
Who taught by her, as if they did rejoice
To bear a part to so divine a voice,
Such heavenly music to the ear wou^d bring,
That ^oues nine daughters could no better sing:
With whom she (honored Lady) nights and days
Would spend in hearing their melodious lays,
And unto learni^g ever being a friend
To hopeful wits her help she would extend.
But here (pe^haps) if thou do hap to write
Her noble worth, which now I do recite,
Virtues companion black mouthed Envy says,
Thy pen does drop a mercenarie praise;
But to acquit thee here the world may know,
She lived not (noble Lady) to bestow
Her purposed favors on thy forlorn Muse,
In whom, her worth yet, which I more abuse
Then truly blazon, cannot silent sleep;
Of her great worth what Muse can silence keep?
Ye thrice three sisters of that sacred spring,
About whose banks ye sit and sadly sing
Your heavenly skils contempt and learning^ scorn,
Double your grief; for greater cause to mourn
How can ye have? your art must now need^ perish,
Since all are dead with her, that arts did cherish.
Look not in Court or City any more
To find that grace, was given you of yore,
Now gentle bloods trained up in fancies school,
Do give the due of learning to the ^oole;
Your art is base, your skill is counted shame,
You must be poor with those profess the same;
And thou unhappy Swain whose Muse did raise
An image of her Honor, poor ^ssay^s
In have compiled in hope her grace to gain,
Neglect of which sorc'd absence did constrain,
This Ladies loss may most of all lament,
Too hasty death did all thy have prevent;
What boot^ it here to bid thy Muse be sad,
Who now more grieves, that she may say she had
Hope in good hap, till that unhappy day,
That death with her took hope and hap away;
Then justly have thou part in my complaint,
To wail the loss of that now heavenly Saint;
For who like her (ah none like her is left)
Will deigne to hear thee sing, thou art bere^t
Of future hopes, who spoke thee fair, forlorn,
Now mock thy hopes and laugh thy ears to scorn;
Break then thy pipe, that was thy wonted bliss,
Whose tunes once pleased, if some think not amiss,
Ne let thy Clioes trump, whose sound did bring
The dead to life, when Enuies ears did ring,
To hear the praises of Elizas name,
Be ever heard to sound the deeds of fame,
May none alive, that do the Muses wrong
Once dead, be named in any Muses song.
Ne let the painted Theater be gr^e'd
With tragic s^aene from thee; Wit so misplaced.
Has weau'd the webs of folly, neither let
Thy Muse henceforth more serious things, ^orget,
To please the world: who best deserves, shall find
Best friends wax cold, and all the world unkind.
Then henceforth silent sit in thy sad cell,
And evermore bid such delights farewell.
Or in thy thoughts, if to thy self thou raise
A shrine to virtue, where to offer praise,
To whom so chaste, yet fair as eye could find,
To whom so fair, and yet so meek in mind;
To whom so meek, yet borne in Honors Throne,
Can offer it but unto her alone?
In them that live, what now is worthy found,
Who only vaunt to hear false flattery sound
Their painted beauties, chiefly they provide
Them Parasites to praise their foolish pride,
Sly Apes, that can but congie with a leg,
Do gain their grace, while learned wits may beg.
Go then, ^h go thou to you sacred Fane,
In which her chaste dead body does remain;
For left to me poor Wal^ham nothing is
Of my dear Honor now, excepting this,
That burial to her body dead I give,
Who gave it birth at first, when it did live:
There as thou did before her living shed
Thy sisters Tears for Royal Henry dead,
Unto her Tomb, let tears thy duty tell,
And from sad Wal^ham bid a sad farewell.
This said, she sighed, and as that sigh did rise,
She rose and vanished from before mine eyes,
Which not so maz'de to see, as grieved to know
Her cause of grief, I to that place did go,
To seek the grave and bless that happy stone,
Which keeps the shrine where Honor kept her throne
Where when I came, the doors did say me nay,
From whence debarred with grief I went my way,
Else on her Tomb, whose soul now lives in bl^sse,
I had imposd this Honors Pyramid.
FINIS.


Sky
Azure
Boue the
TO endure
Most s^^e
Then this here
And greater,
Far better,
In HONOR
Ever to live
God her does give
That place of ^est,
For Abrams breast;
To place her in.
To mean has bin,
An Angels room,
Where being come
To this her bold assay
And Ch^ritie made way
Hope made her heart soar hie,
^aith gave her Wings to fly
To blast her youths May flower;
That Age might have no power
It Is thought this ^ady past,
And thither with mo^e have
Above each heavenly staire:
She is ascended ^arre
Which Fame bestowed upon her,
For leaving ^ar^hly Honor;
Her sweet Soul did aspi^e*
Boue which with brave desire
Above the Earth they do abide,
The baser Earth can never hide
Her Virtues and her Nobler part^,
But her true ^oue to learned Arts
Her part of Earth to Earth does give:
That was, while thee on Earth did live,
As Fair a Fair as any one,
Fair HONOR here beneath this stone*

