A LETTER SENT FROM MAYNHEM CONCERning the late defeat given the Duke of
Brunswicke by Monsieur Tilley.

Whereunto is added a Couranto of other news from Vienna, Prague, the
Palatinate and other places this 20. of June. 1622.

LONDON. Printed by Bernard Alsop for Nathaniel Butter. 1622.

THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM Mainhem the 20. of June 1622.
SIR, since my last, we received a packet certifying; that about the fifteenth
or sixeteenth of this month that before the Duke of Brunswicke could pass the
river Maine, staying a day and a night after he had built his bridge at the
town of Hoest two Dutch mile from Franckfort, hearing that Tilley with his
army of 24000 was advancing toward him, resolves to stay to give him bartle,
so loosing his opportunity of passing the bridge with his whole army, at last
perceiving the greatness of Tilleys army, and by the persuasion of his
Council of war, makes all the have he could to put over his army, all his
foot being safely passed being about 10000. men, and his horse about 7000. a
great part of them having past the bridge with all of his treasure, and some
Canon; Tilley so speedily pursues his rereward of horse, that he slew at least
1000. of his horse, took three Earls, the one of them called Count Leuistone,
taking a great part of his baggage, and three pieces of Canon. And it is
reported that a piece of Ordnance being discharged by Tilley, brake the bridge,
which as was thought was the occasion that Brunswicks lost so many of his horse
for want of passage, others suppose it was done by Brunswicke to prevent
Monsieur Tilleys pursuit, it is thought that Brunswicke the same day, or the
next morning, came to the King of Bohemia, and the Marquess of Baden: It is
certain, that Tilley cannot get to Openheme without a long and tedious march,
with many difficulties.

Count de Lip is one of the three Earls, prisoners.

This Letter came from Brusse^ls, dated the 24. of June.
From Vienna the 24. of May. 1621.
Yesterday is his Imperial Majesty happily arrived with 5000. men at
Odenburgh, and was received with great pomp and state of the Hungarians;
whether the proposition shall be done to day o^ to morrow, is yet unknown.

Thurs^ is come to Odenburgh with 600. horse, but his Ladies sickness caused
his speedy departure.

The Hungarians declare that they will not have two Kings, or that the
Span-ships, or the confederated, and the best part of all Hungary to be given
unto Bethlem Gabor, and desire nevertheless to be secured against the Turks,
who make great preparations.

From Prague this 26. of May. 1622.
The Duke of Bauaria, having written for great aid unto the Emperor, his
Majesty had consented the Holsteynish Saxish 1000. horse shall join with him:
they are mustered now, the Holsteynish lie at Liedtmorich, and the Saxish in
Pa^dmer kreits.

They of Glats having made a sally out of the City, have taken 140. oxen that
were driving toward Prage coming from Prussia, and conducted them to their
City.

A copy of a trustfull Letter from Vienna the 27. of May. 1622.
Favorable Lord and friend, the wars in the Empire are made in the Empire
with enough disorder, and it seems that the Duke of Bauaria does but little
prevail with his forces; And Tilley impouerisheth the Country by the
contributions: He favors much the Bishop of Wirtsburgh, but it is to be feared
that he is not able to help his Lordship much in his pretension.

Concerning the peace or war of Hungary, we shall now soon know what will be
the Hungarian diet, which upon some new conditions offered by the Emperor, is
now begun at Odenburgh, where the Emperor met with ^00. horse and foot. The
Ambassadors of Bethlem Gabor; and the States of Hungary with 12000. And the
Lord Budeani went thither with 6000. men. There is great longing for the
proposition and issue of this diet.

They marvel at Constantinople that Bethlem is entered so deep in this treaty
of peace, without giving any notice aforehand of it unto the great Turk: but
seeing Bethlem has not sent thither any body to give account of his dealing
and further enterprise, the Turk has likewise not yet resolved what he will
do. In the mean time he has sent an army of forty thousand men, upon the
frontires of Hungaria, and appointed General of the Camp, the Viceroy of
Gracia, having been before Bashaw of Buda.

From Bunten this 24.
Those of Predigaw have as yet strongly besieged Meyevelt being 8000. in number
both horse and foot. The besieged have slain in two several places 1200. of
their enemies, and driving many of them into the river, did get at their great
need abundance of armor and munition, and look yet for more aid of their
confederates that are assembled at Baden.

Those of Zarich have sent unto them of Predigaw before Ma^euelt 600. men and
three pieces of Ordenance, besides diverse Petards: Those of the Glarer have
sent them likewise two hundred men, and they look for more aid from other
places, and have beset the pass.

The besieged of Ma^euelt write, that if they be not rescued, within a fort
night they must surrender themselves, the Canon playing mightily upon their
city.

From Strasburgh the 2. of June.
From Switserland we understand that the Grisons keep themselves bravely,
having lately defeated the socours come from Millaine, driving the rest back,
which caused the Governor of Millaine to resolve to come into the field
himself in the defense of the house of Austria, and to take with him the
Spanish Regiments, and that of the Collonell Serbellone, leaving the government
of the Dukedom into the hands of the Castelein, charging him to raise two
Regiments more during his absence, to be employed in time of necessi^e, The
Grisons re-enforce themselves likewise being assisted with 60000. Gilder by the
Swissers as other friends.

From Franefort the 9. June.
The king and the Count of Mansfield lies yet at Darmstat and is not yet known
when they will depart nor whether. The whole land is declared prise, but
burning and murdering prohibited upon life, there is great store of Kine and
Sheep to day conveyed in this city, the Magistrates have bought many of
them, because the people may redeem them again for the money laid out, as is
done already by many.

The Count Lodwic is yet at Darmstat.

Yesterday is the Spanish Commissarie, S. de Fort besides the Rector of Hochst
taken prisoner by this City and carried away.

From Franckfort the 12. of June.
By my former Letters is advised that the king of Bohemia was ^^riued in the
Land of the Count Darmstat, which is mightily spoiled by the soldiers. The
King was yet the 8. day of this month in the city of Darmstat, but the next
day he intended to go toward the Bishopric of Ments. In the interim had the
said Count treated with the King upon some points which the King propounded,
but the Count not liking the conditions, went on Thursday last with his son
privately out of the City to save themselves there, but was taken within a
mile of the said City by the Marquess of Durlach being strong 8000. foot and
1600. horse, and conveyed again to Darmstat, which flight caused the army not
to depart so soon.

From Ments the 10. of June.
We understand here that the Count Lodwicke of Darmstat by command of the King
of Bohemia is taken prisoner, and with a strong conuoy both of horse and foot
conducted to Mainhem, and his land is made prise, excepting only burning,
murdering and like shameful actions.

The cause is as they say, that the Count (aforesaid) a while ago had written
Letters against the king of Bohemia directing the same unto the Magistrate of
Hidelbergh.

The Count of Mansfield has demanded from the Jews at Franckfort a notable
sum of money, they say 150000. Rix Dollers, it is reported that they offer
12000.

From Hanan the 6. of June.
The Lord of Anholt is with his forces lying near Frankfort, but two miles
from Mansfelt, of both sides they come within the City threatening one another.

The Marquess of Durlach is arrived at Basheym, how strong, is not yet known.
Monsieur Tilley is about Aschassenbach, with whom join the forces sent lately
from Bauaria: whether Anholt shall do the like, is uncertain.

From Collen the 11. of June.
The Lord of Anholt is with the most part of his forces at Aschoppenburch;
where it is thought that Tilley shall come to meet him.

The Spanish forces have broken the bridge at Oppenheim, resolving to make
another at Steyn.

The duke Christian of Brunswike did lie about Gota, taking his way toward
Franken-land.

Yesterday did Count Mansfield send a Trumpetter, to sommon Steynheymb (lying
upon the River of Meyn) to surrender it, but was answered, that they had
nothing for him but gunpowder and lead.

The Elector of Ments fearing Mansfield, has commanded the trees about the
City to be cut down, and the Ordenance to be planted upon the walls; besides
other preparations to defend the City.

Count Henry of Nassau, is the first of June arrived at Arnhem, traveling in
all speed to Embricke; there are sent many ships upwards the Rheine, with
soldiers and warlike preparations.

The 11. of June, is finally concluded and granted by the high and mighty Lords
the States general of the united Provinces, the West- India company, wherein
they traffic for salt, and the negotiation upon Guinea are comprehended, to
the great good liking of all good Patriots. And the subscribing shall last
until the last of July, being two months after the resolution aforesaid, but
forreiners shall have three months.

The King of Denmark commands two thousand horse to be levied, which his
Majesty shall maintain at his own charges in the service of the united
Provinces.

FINIS.

