GOOD NEVVES FROM ALSASIA AND THE PALATInate, the fifth of June.

THE ABSTRACT OF THREE Several letters, the one sent from Elsas in Alsatia,
where Leopold used to keep his Court, the other from Hagenaw which was
besieged by him the last from Franke-fort, containing the King of Bohemias
pursuit of his Victory obtained against the Emperors forces under Leopoldus.

AFTERWARD THE MARCHING OF THE Kings forces under Count Mansfield, toward the
Landtgraue of Darmestats Country, with the Abstract of another letter sent from
the Land of Hessen, relating the adventures which has happened to the Duke
Christian of Brunswicke in his journey toward the Palatinate.

The late proceedings in the Low Countries, France, and diverse other parts in
Germany.

At London printed by E. A. for Nicholas Bourne, and Thomas Archer, and are to
be sold at the Exchange, and in Popes Head-pallace. 1622.

AN ABSTRACT OVT OF LETTERS WRITTEN FROM ELSAS AND STRABVRGH, bearing date of
the 22. of May. 1622.
THe Town of Hagenaw being strongly besiege by the Arch Duke Leopoldus, and
upon the 16. of May, all the sconces about it taken by him, but yet with great
loss of many of his men, presently thereupon he sent certain messengers to
Strasburgh, who for the taking in of the Town made suit unto them to send him
some provision for the same, hoping upon the 17. of May, to take it; and for
that it is the Imperial chamber, the said Arch Duke doubted not, but that the
Counsel of the City of Strasburgh, would not spare to stretch out their
means to help him, where upon the said Counsel taking no speedy resolution,
but rather for a while consulted what they should do, sent some powder,
bullets, and prouant unto him. But not long after, news was brought that
Frederick King of Bohemia, and the Earl of Mansfield with their Army were
not far from Hagenaw, and that 1000. crabaten most cuirassers, that were sent
by the Arch Duke to stop Mansfields passage, were set upon and fought with all
by Colonel Ouertront, in which fight 500. of them were slain, many taken
prisoners, and the rest scattered and dispersed abroad. And upon the 17. day of
May in the evening, some of them that fled, got to Leopoldus Camp, and
certified him thereof, counselling him to make preparation to fly away,
whereupon he presently set fire on his Tents, and so went away, leaving the
Town at liberty again. But the Earl of Mansfield, with all speed and
diligence with 10000. men, followed him, and as many of his soldiers as he
could get, he slew, and dispersing Leopoldus Army took from him great store
of powder, bullets, pillage: and some prouant.

And upon the 18. and 19. of May the said Earl of Mansfield pursuing the
chase, marched further toward Trusenheim, where Leopoldus soldiers had cast
up a sconse upon the Rhin, and had fortified the same, wherein many of the said
soldiers had saved themselves, to the number of 2000. men, and had prepared
boats ready, if they were assailed, to set them over the Rhin, but Mansfield
enclosed them round about, and cutting of the boats, and carrying them away,
gave them an alarm, and entering in upon them, slew them all, and therein found
great store of booty, of the which every soldier was suffered to take
whatsoever he could for himself.

After that upon the 20. of May many of Mansfields soldiers marched along by
Strasburgh, to ouerrun all the Country of Elsas, and all those places that
Leopoldus had taken in, which put Leopoldus soldiers in such a fear that they
knew not where to stay, nor to hide themselves, and if it had not been for a
bridge that was broken down, whereby Colonel Ouertr^nt came half an hour to
late, he had taken Leopoldus himself, the King of Bohemia went personally to
go into Strasburgh, from whence Leopoldus messengers much grieved, road
hastily away, and what soever they had obtained of the Town, Mansfield had the
most part thereof.

Touching the Marquis of Doerlach his overthrow was not so great, as it was
thought to have been, who with the first is to enter into the field again
with ten thousand men. It is said, that the Duke of Bauaria wrote unto him, to
make good his losses, and to give him all again that was taken from him, if
he would leave the field, and discharge his soldiers; but he roundly and
roughly refused to do so, and for answer sent him word, that he hoped by Arms
to recover his losses again.

Letters of the 21. also certify, That after Leopoldus Colonels and Soldiers
understood, that Mansfields Army still marched upward, and behaved themselves
so valiantly, and with such courage against them, they would not stay for him,
but retired in flight to Elsas, Sabren, Moltheim and Dacksteim; but their
carriage, wagons and women, were all left behind them, which Mansfield set
upon, and ransacking them, took many chains of gold and jewels from them,
but did no hurt to the women, but took their quarter from them, and there
stayed.

Other Letters of the 22. certify, That the same day six cornets of Leopoldus
horsemen came to Mitlehinsbergen, that had conuoyed their Colonel Morder, but
as then he was not personally with them: men wondered that Mansfield had not
set on them, they said, that in the space of three days, they had neither
eaten nor seen any bread, and that they had saved themselves here and there
in the woods, and for a time got fother from the said Town, and after that
went to Strasburgh, being not far from thence, where staying about the length
of a great piece of Ordinance shot, without the Town, they sent a Trumpet to
offer their service unto them, but the magistrates thanked them, and made them
answer, that they had no need of horsemen, whereupon they entreated the
Magistrates, that they might be permitted (if any of Mansfields colonells were
in the Town) to offer their service unto them, and so to yield themselves
unto him, which they granted. But Colonel Ouertront with his brother and
cosen that then were there, hearing thereof, rode presently unto them, with
certain horsemen, and entertaining them with a friendly countenance, asked
them why they would no more serve their Lord, they told him, that they had not
received any money in twelve or eighteen months, as also, that their Colonel
had left them, and that therefore they were discharged of their oaths, and
prayed that they might be entertained in Mansfields Army. The Duke of Saxon in
the mean time came to dissuade those horse, when they were on the point of
changing their Spanish Cosaques, and so was taken prisoner: he is of the house
of Saxen, Lawenberg, his grandfather was he that was deprived of the
Electorate; he pretends himself to be no lawful prisoner, having quitted a
Regiment he had in Hungary, about seven months since, that he was at
Strasburgh, in expectation of being received into the French Kings service.
That he came out of the Port of Strasburgh to speak with a Captain of his
brothers Regiment, to reserve himself for France if the Regiment disbanded.
His Brother is in Bohemia, where he has two other Regiments, one of horse and
another of foot. But Ouertrant alleges that he is in Leopoldus service, and
came out to dissuade the Regiment from disbanding, and that he clapped between
him and the Port. The Duke says within the Centrie, but without the Turn
pike. What King Frederick will do with him, we shall hereafter hear.

The said 6 Coronets of horsemen said, that the next day, 5 Coronets of
Cratische horsemen, and a regiment of footmen more would also yield unto
Mansfield, and enter into pay with him. It is thought the whole army will rise
and march toward Elsus Saberen, Moltisheim, Dacstein and other places, for
that the said towns have want of Munition and prouant, because they were
forced to send it all to the camp before Hagenaw: it is dangerous traveling
in these parts round about: and it is to be feared that all Flsas will yield,
or forcibly be brought under King Fredericks command. The Archduke Leopoldus
saved himself in Freiburge.

Further, letters of the 22 of May certify, that thereabouts they have
strengthened themselves with a few footmen that fled away from Hagenaw, with 5
field pieces, and in great danger; for the Marquis of Durlach who with 7000
foot and 2000 horsemen is entered again into the field, and having discharged
and paid all his men, has again entertained them in King Fredericks name.

The relieuing and beating away of the army before Hagenaw, is confirmed by
other letters: they within the town could not have holden out above 2 days
longer: the Archduke Leopoldus in his retraite lost a great piece of ordinance,
26 hundred weight of powder, great store of munition, bullets and match, as
also all his carriage, and 500 men that were slain, the rest that saved
themselves in the flight, went to Litchtnaw, and further vpvvard to Wilsteden,
and are gone over the Rhine, and in the ditches about the suburbs, while the
garrison in Hagenaw valiantly defended themselves: many of Leopoldus soldiers
were stain in the approach. And news is now come that Wasenaw, Colonel
Crats, with 6 cornets of horsemen and 2 regiments of footmen, have left
Leopoldus, and are fallen to Mansfields side, and that four cornets of horsemen
more and a regiment of footmen would do the like.

An extract of a letter sent from Hagenaw, dated the 19 of May, 1622.
The 17 of May the Earl of Mansfield came before Hagenaw, to release the town
from the siege that was laid about it by the Archduke Leopoldus; and therefore
the said Archduke had beaten down the bridge over the water to hinder the
enemies approach; but they within in the space of three hours repaired it
again: but when the Archduke understood of the enemies approach with so great
forces, in the morning at 6 of the clock he left the town, and in great
confusion fled away, leaving behind him 4000 loaves of bread and good store of
wine and all other provision. Mansfields horsemen set upon the Leopoldians,
and killed all they could find, and took much booty from them, one vvaggon being
laden full of bandoleers for pieces.

The 18 of May Mansfields soldiers went to Buswild a mile from Hagenaw,
wherein was 60 soldiers that yielded unto them, there they found all manner
of munition and a great piece of Ordinance, some pieces of Ordinance were
sunk, and Mansfields soldiers were before Cotton, and as it is said have
taken it, and pursued after Leopoldus soldiers, and some of the said Leopoldus
soldiers themselves did rob and ransacke many of his wagon, and took
what they could carry away, the rest they left for Mansfield.

An extract out of a letter sent from Frankfor^^ the 29 of May, 1622.
That which was last written touching the breaking up of the siege before the
town of Hagenaw, and the overthrow of Leopoldus, is confirmed out of Elsas and
Strasburch, after that the town of Hagenaw was besieged by Leopoldus with an
army of 12000 men horse and foot, and the same had by him bin battered eight
days together: they within issued so valiantly out, and fought so
courageously within, that before it an Italian Colonel and a Lieutenant
Colonel, called Fels were taken prisoners, who were much favored by
Leopoldus, and a 1000 men were slain by them, as also the 1000 Crabaten that
the said Archduke sent to the town of Weissenburg to take it, were also by
the Earl of Mansfield most part slain and dispersed, and yet daily some of
them are killed by the pesants.

The King of Bohemia with the Earl of Mansfield and 15000 horse and foot
coming to Hagenaw, the Leopoldians were already fled, leaving all their
carriage and wagon with munition behind them, and here and there saved
themselves, as they best could do it: but the Colonels Ouertr^nt and M^gen
^nderstanding they were fled, presently followed after them with their
horsemen, and killed many of them: which pursuit continued for the space of
three days till Leopoldus soldiers were driven further away: and in Trusen
hey^i^^ vvood the said Earl of Mansfield enclosed 16 companies of Italian
horsemen that could not get out; how they sped, it is yet no^ certainly known,
but it is to be feared that few of them would escape away.

At Bisweyld 60 of them also saved th^^selues in the castle; with those that
were Dutch and Netherlanders; good quarter was holden, but the Spaniards and
Wallons were all slain, for amongst them they held no quarter: in that castle
they found 460 weight of powder, and at Brunbt 300 weight of powder. Thus
Leopoldus soldiers were scattered abroad, and those that were not slain
fell from him, as already many cornets of horse and footmen are entertained by
Mansfield, and are entered into pay.

It is said that the Earl^ of Mansfield lies round about Spiers again^, to let
the Spaniards that are coming thither from joining with the Bauarians, and to
cut them off. It is confirmed that the overthrow of the Marquis of Durlach was
not so great as it was reported to be: the said Marquis in the beginning having
had the victory against the Spaniards, but his gun powder being fired, the
Spaniards set upon him again, yet 2 spanish Lords were taken prisoners by him,
for whom Monsieur Tilly offered to release all his prisoners, but the Marquis
would not, unless he would restore his Ordinance and munition also again.

An abstract of a letter written from Hessen the 22 of May, 1622.
It is reported that the Spaniards and Bauarians intending to set upon the
town of Paderborme, from whence the Duke of Brunswick was gone; the said Duke
thereupon returned back again, and as we hear has fought with them, where
between them there was a great fight, wherein many on both sides were slain,
and that the Duke of Brunswick had the victory, the certainty whereof is
daily expected: it is said yt he is gone with certain thousand men toward the
Palatinate, and has left good garrisons in Lipstat and Soest.

As also that upon the 16 of May the said Duke going from Paterborm with his
army of 20000 men horse and foot marching to Eisvelt, and having made a bridge
over the Wesel at Hopsel, the Earl Stirom with his horsemen having the
Rereward, being wartered at Salts Cotton, the Spaniards and Bauarians the night
before went thither and made an alarm, setting upon the Rereward, and thought
to take their carriage; but the Duke presently relieuing them, killed some of the
Spaniards and Bauarians, and took some prisoners. And since we heard that the
Elector of Colen and the Baron of Anholt had an intent to set upon the Duke of
Brunswick as he marched forward, and to that end sent 16 companies of horsemen
and some foot to set upon his Rereward; Which the Duke understanding, turned
back again, and met with the enemy, having eight pieces of Ordinance with him,
vvhereupon the enemy furiously set upon him; and he causing his greatest
troops with the pieces to retire, presently made a lane, and gave fire to his
Ordinance, and and therewith put his enemies in such a fear, that they fled
away, whom he o^ all sides pursued, and slew three cornets of horse, and eight
companies of their footmen, which done he followed on his victory.

And now we are certified that the said Duke of Brunswick has bin at
Hildesheim belonging to the Bishop of Colen, and has gotten 2000 weeks Dollers
of the Capiall, and as much from the Jews there, for that they having taken up
the good money in the country of Brunswik, caused such bad money to be minted,
that thereby great complaints and hurt ensued. And after that the said Duke
went to the stift Fulda, and it is said that he is there already, and causes
the Abbot and the Capitol to give him a great sum of money, from whence he
intends to go to the Bishopric of Wirtsburg in Frankenland, and also to the
Bishop of Bamburg and other to visit them.

It is said that he left a strong garrison in Lipstat before his d^parture,
being eleven companies of horse and footmen, as also in the town of Ham, these
2 towns are indifferent strong and well provided of all things, so that in
certain months they can want nothing.

It is certified from Veni^e, that in Naples the preparation for the War
daily goes forward, and that they have great want of prouant, as also that
there are Soldiers taken up in the double Done of Millaine that are to be
sent against those of Valtolina, and the Grisons.

They write from Vienna that the same day the Emperor rode to the meeting
holden in Oldenburgh, wherein he is to enter the 20. of May, and that the next
Monday ensuing, the Propositions shall be propounded, and then those at
Lepenburg and Newstadt shall cease, where the Spauschapper and the
principallest Lords are altogether assembled. With the Emperor there went 12.
Companies of Foot, and two Regiments of Horsemen. That Bethlem Gabor the
Marquess of Iagarensdorp and the Earl of Thurne and Hof-kirchen are yet at
Grootwerden, and cause a great number of Soldiers to march out of Setenberghen
to Cassan.

Also that the Emperors General, the Earl of Nigromont with Don Balthazar,
are appointed to go from thence to the Emperors ^^d Leopoldus his Army in
Elsas.

That still they build up the new Bulwarks in Vienna, and it is said that the
Suburbs that were last marked out shall be taken down again, and that on the
other side of the Drawbridge there shall be a new Town built, the ground
being freely given to that use.

The last Letter from Prague makes mention, that the 1000. Horsemen taken up by
the Duke of Holstein for the Emperor are come into the Gatser Crays, the
Commissary of the Musters chief Lieutenant is gone thither to muster to muster
them, but they will take no other money but rickes Dollars and Gold, there are
to go to the lower Palatinate with the men of Bechmans Regiment, and 5.
Companies of Prenesteines Regiment.

Likewise that the Dampier Horsemen, that served at the beginning of the War,
because that in long time they have received no pay, quarter themselves at
Pilgrimb in Bohemia.

That in the Commincke Gratser Territories, there are 3000. Pesants (belonging
to the Baron Datsby) assembled together, who having nothing to live on, nor no
means left them to Plow and till the Country, are resolutely determined to
venture their lives, and to join with those that are the strongest, it is said
that they were moved and stirred up unto that Commotion by the young Earl of
Thurne, and it is certified, that not long since they have pillaged and
ransackt the Country, ^^d all the ways 5. miles round about, and have carried
away all that they could get or come by, and it is reported that the old Earl
of Thurne with some thousands of Walachians, will march through Morauia to
relieve his Son that is besieged in Glats.

It is written from Cullen, that the day before the King of
Bohemia's-departure, Being the 16. of May, there came an Ambassador unto him
from Bethlem Gab^r, as also from the Marquess of Iagarensdorp, with Letters
containing as it is thought, that he would make no peace with the Emperor,
but would continue the War still and hold with the King.

That the Spaniards insconce themselves by Oppenheim, and the Bauarians at
Gilzerhoorn upon the Necker, 2. miles above Heydelburgh.

That there are some Galleons and Ships sent out of Spain and Biscaine, but
what they will do it is not yet known.

Out of France it is certified, that they of Rochell daily bring Prizes and
booties into the Town and still strengthen themselves by water. That the King
is in the Field with 3. Armies. It is said that Roane is besieged, and that
there is great speed made to besiege Rochell both by Water and by Land, but
they of Rochell make preparation to withstand it.

It is also certified, that the King has taken Roane by Composition, as also
Truingo, and that they marched to St. Foy.

It is certified that the Ostenders at Sea, kept 2. and 2. together, and that
the Holland^^s Ships follow them and have driven of them on ground in England,
and we hear another of them is cast away.

The Netherland Soldiers out of diverse parts are all marched upwards, and our
Ships with Ordnance, Bridges, and other Munition are gone higher to and before
Bommell.

A Letter from Mainheim, dated the 24. of May. 1622.
MY last Letter was on the 14. of May, in which I gave you to understand of the
Archduke Leopoldus his shameful retreat from Hagenaw and of his loss there
of Munition especially. The King and Count Mansfield marched down again to
Spires, there the Marquess of Baden met them, whereupon Consultation it was
concluded, that the King and Count Mansfield should pass over the Rhine and
Necker before at this Town as they did the day before yesterday, and will be
this night in the Land of Darmestat, if God permit.

And the Marquess of Baden is passed the Rhine yesterday as was agreed at
Germersheim, and to morrow will repasse it here again with his Army, and
follow the King: which separation was a bold and brave Adventure, yet is like
to speed well as such do often in War, for Don Gousa has sent 25. Coronets
of Cauallery to Monsieur Tilly, who lies still about Heydelburgh as far as we
hear, and will not meddle with the Coun^ Mansfield and the Marquis of Baden,
if they be once joined, seeing it appears that Cordou^ will not stir out of
his Garrisons with his Infantry. But I would the Marquis were with the King,
he for his person behaved himself exceeding bravely, as I hear since from
the mouths of his Enemies, and so did his two younger Sons also, who are now
also with him, besides the loss of all his Baggage, Artillery and Munition,
his men flung away their Arms in their flight, but he has furnished them
again, by disarming his Subjects.

The Duke of Brunswicke is on foot, and like to go to Bauaria rather then come
hither as I hear, and is feared by the way, he takes through the Land of
Algsfield, to spare which he has bin offered 100. Thousand Dollers, but would
have 50. Thousand more. The Duke of Bauaria is going I hear to form a Camp
about Dunaner^ to resist him, and the Elector of Saxon is drawing his Forces
together in Turning, to the same end also as it is thought, but he will make
his part good, unless Monsieur Tilly go from hence to help him, and if he
do, the Priests and Shauelings and their helpers are like to go to wrack.

It is reported that the Town of Collen before this, did aid Spinola with 50.
thousand Dollers, and that now also the Hollanders will have as much of the same
Town, what will ensue thereof we shall hear.

From Brussels it is certified, that the Earl of Swatzenburgh the Emperors
Ambassador is arrived there out of England, and yet stays there, as also an
Ambassador out of England, and that they have begun to enter into a treaty.
That the Countess of Bucquoy, with her Son Albertus, and the Earl Biglia
her Brother, were ready to depart from thence with Don Iean Heruaert, to go to
Vienna, and carry the Duke of Lichtenstein, and the Earl of Megen the Golden
Fleece.

From the East Country it is written, that the King of Denmark, has sent
Ambassadors to the Emperor and the Duke of Saxon, to be a means to procure
Peace to be made in the Empire, and that the Palatinate may be restored again,
In the mean time the said King takes up a great number of Soldiers in the
Land of Holst, Denmark, and other places, and 3. Pesants are forced to set out
one Soldier.

FINIS.

