Of the ends and deaths of two Prisoners / lately pressed to death in
Newgate. 1569.
TRue Preachers which God likes well,
To you I run with all my heart,
Your words with me are like to dwell,
Until this life I shall depart.
As for the rest whose tounges are tide,
To them who runs, he runs far wide.
What so does best commend the truth,
All falsehood likewise discommendes,
I know you Preachers tender youth,
And visits them like faithful friends.
Yet if there hap a dismoll day,
The Wolves would tear your lives away
But they that humbly do you bear,
And eke well bear your words away,
Having their understandings clear,
Needs never fear the dismoll day.
Nor will seek^ peace here in this life,
Where naught is found but war and strife.
So they that do, nor yet will bear,
When they be called, and truth is told,
Ill haps to them unawares is near,
Yet blindness makes Bayardes bold.
But they that warned are in time,
Half armed are against dangerous crime.
A trial just I found of late,
Where Preachers did them selves address,
To spend the day within Newgate,
To comfort two whom Law bad press.
There did I see that comfort great,
Whereof our Preachers often entreat.
There saw I more, do what they might,
Sharp judgment pass, the Press at hand,
The one would not remyt his spite
But does the same to understand,
By blasphemies most horrible,
And countenance most terrible.
(...) would believe that he should dye,
Which plainly did to us appear,
By ^^yish countenance smylingly,
Which seemed very monstrous gear.
And yet he was of perfect mind,
But thus he showed his devilish kind.
With him persuasions would not serve,
In all my life I saw none such:
He swear great oaths he would not sterue,
If ought there were within the hutch.
And to it he went full egerly,
As one that thought he should not dye.
Anon there came a prisoner in,
That yrons had clapped on good store.
Gods heart quoth Wat, you will not lyn,
These parts you played like slaves before.
And up he snatch hot coals in hand,
To throw at one that by did stand.
This stander by a Keeper was,
That hardly handled him always:
Wherefore if he might bring to pas,
That Keeper should now end his days.
Though he did burn in hell therefore.
Such Keepers should keep there no more.
This desperate fool entreated was,
By Master Young and others there,
To pray for them that did trespass,
And to forgive, sith death is near.
Gods wounds quoth he, it is shame for ye,
That cry not against this tyranny.
Why will not bolts or fetters serve,
Think you (quoth Wat) to hold this man?
He has no money though he sterue,
His hos^ and doublet must trudge than.
If bell there be, or plages to fall,
These Villains will be plaged all.
For my part if I boil in lead,
I cannot hold but brawle this out.
Would I might ^ight how ever I sped,
Chuld course that Ore and fl^^ring Lout.
No more good Wat, quoth Master Young,
Thou hurt^ thy self most with that tongue.
Thus parted he and Master Young,
Much grieved for his senceles soul.
But I remained and used my tongue,
As God did force vice to control,
But-Wat no chaungeling would not rest,
But fell a fresh unto a ^est.
As I might then I did exhort,
Them both with me to go and pray,
Where I would speak to their comfort,
If that the Lord did not say nay.
The time is short, therefore quoth I,
Let us seek the Lord whiles he is nigh.
I pray you be content quoth Wat,
The Lord has mercy enough in store,
I may yet have my part of that,
As he to others has given before.
You must repent and call for grace,
(Quoth I) else never look to see Gods face.
Then was the the other glad of me,
And gave to God great thanks and praise,
That he might have my company,
With him for to remain always.
Wherein such comfort great he found,
That tears of joy dropped to the ground.
I see now God is good (quoth he)
And will not have my soul be lost,
But has provided you for me,
Not sparing any pain nor cost.
You come from God, your words arswete,
I feel Gods grace my heart does mete.
I would I had known you befor^e,
But now it is in right good time:
For though my carcas be forlorn,
My soul to God I feel does clyme.
Oh bear me (says he) to the rest,
Ill haps to me is for the best.
Hear how this misery has wrought,
The taming of my flesh so proud:
My soul to God that has it bought,
I do commend with voice so loud.
Knowing that he does hear my cry,
And pardons me immediately,
Would God the world did hear my voice
And would be warned by my death,
Then would they not in evil rejoice,
But praise the Lord whiles they have breath.
And love him that has loved them well,
Who has redeemed their souls from hell.
O God (quoth he) is this thy kind,
To care for him that knew not thee?
I never had thee erst in mind,
Yet now thy grace has healed me.
Due thanks to thee I cannot give,
That have now made me to believe.
O tell me I pray, what is your name,
Says he to me unknown you are:
To you likewise I am the same,
But God that knows us is not far.
He will reward you this I trust,
Since I cannot that dye needs must.
So God dealt with me yester day,
A friend be sent us in Limbo:
Whose good estate God bless always,
For that good ^ore that came him fro.
His name was Draper Alderman,
Which was my comfort great as than.
He prayed with us most earnestly,
No scorn was in his v^luet cote,
With tears he kyst us lovingly,
And went with mourning there God wot.
So does the power of the Lord,
Make diverse men in truth accord.
Thus God has found me out at length,
And stayed me of my wicked race
And me indu^^ with perfect strength
No ^ong can rightly praise such grace
I would my death were much more vile
That others might beware there while.
So then we prayed each one for other
With trickling tears of joy and grief
In truth I took him for my brother
Though never so much he were a thief.
Then death to him could not come ill,
For of Gods grace he had his fill.
Then forth we went and made a fire,
I dyned there with bread and cheese:
To sing some Psalms was his desire,
So each man soonge in their degrees.
O Lord turn not away thy face,
From him that lies prostrate in place.
But Watson fell unto his food
As one that hungry was in deed
And merely eat that he thought good,
But threw the rest the dogs to feed.
I saw no thought that he did take,
Nor lykelyhoode from sin to wake.
Then up came Master Young again
Their deaths now being at the door
But Watson could not yet refrain,
But laughes it out still more and more.
Still all in vain to him was said,
Yet all the rest down kneeling prayde.
Then Skarlet took him by the hand
And preached, though small to his regard
Yet all the rest might understand,
His words deserved to be hard.
And yet he could not ^olde but smyles,
In deed he was begylde therwhyles.
A Prisoners tale that he did trust
Made him that way to loose his life
So there the matter was discust,
The press at length did end their strife.
He trusted that which was untrue,
Until it was to late to rue.
Lo thus much I thought good to write
For those that warned yet will be
That they in evil no more delyght,
Nor to such council do agree.
Who did this ill one so peruarte,
That heavy press burst Watsons heart.
Imprinted at London by John Awdely, dwelling in little Britain street without
Aldersgate.


