Numb. 1. AN ABSTRACT OF SOME SPECIAL Foreign Occurrences, brought down to
the weekly News, of the 20 of December.

OR,

The several passages and novels which have happened in Germany, France,
Spain, Italy, and other places some few months since.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter and Nicholas Bourne, By permission, 1638.

The Currantiers to the Readers.
GEntle Readers, this Intelligencer the Curranto having been long silenced, and
now permitted by Authority to speak again, presents you here at first with
such things as passed some months since, not because we conceive that they are
absolutely Novels unto you, but first because there is fraud in generalities,
we thought fit to acquaint you with each particular; and secondly, that by
these Antecedents you may the better understand the Consequents, which we
shall now publish weekly as heretofore.

Amongst other special Avisoes, these:
THe famous battle betwixt D. Bernard Weymar, and General Gotz at the black
Wood in July last past.

The battle of the Prince Palatine, and General Hartzfield in Westphalia
near Minden, where Prince Robert, and the Lord Craven were taken prisoners.

A PRODIGIOVS Eruption of Fire, which exhaled in the midst of the Ocean sea,
over against the Isle of Saint Michael, one of the Tercera's, and the new
Island which it has made. It took beginning the third of July of this present
year 1638.
BEtwixt the Tercera's Islands, so known to those who sail to the East and
West Indies and to Brasile, there is a site of water in the midst of the sea,
distant two leagues from the Island of Saint Michael, which the adjoining
inhabitants call Ferraria, so abounding with fish, that it is doubtful whether
there be any place more plentiful in all the seas. In this place nature has
wrought the most portentous case that the ages have seen, it was thus; On the
third of the last July, within the bottom of the sea, which in the said place
is one hundred and fifty fadomes deep, like the springing of a mine, with a
horrible noise and great horror, a space of earth separated it self, which
would take the sowing of half a bushel of wheat, with the vehemency and
force of an impetuous fire, against which all the waters of the ocean sea it
self could make no resistance, casting up to the clouds the water and earth in
severed parts, as it were burning torches, and very great stones, some whereof
ascending while others descended, and so encountering each other, returned by
virtue of the new impulse to fly up more than three pikes high: others
dissolved in pieces, did fly as if they had sailed large distances, and the
broken pieces being handled, dissolved into black ashes, and all that circuit
of water changing its nature, like withered and dry wood, ministers matter if
not aliment to the fire, which without ceasing does continue burning. A fatal
wonder, which is so much the more, to see that with the multitude of stones
which the fire has cast up, there is composed and formed a new Island, which
takes up a league and a half in length, and is threescore fadomes high, and it
did continue its augmentation and burning until the tenth day of the said July,
as appears by an assured relation which was sent to his Majesty, whom God
protect, and is in the registry of State belonging to Portugal. All the fish
which were within more than eight leagues distance round about, died consumed,
and made worth nothing; and the sea cast forth upon the shores of the Island of
Saint Michael so great a quantity, that it would have filled many of those
ships which sail to the East Indies: and lest the air should be infected,
they made great pits in which they buried them. All the sea boiled for many
leagues, the smell of the brimstone was felt by the most remote of those
Islands: the smoke and the ashes filled the air, and hid the light of the
Sun, to the admiration of all the inhabitants of those Islands.

Before this fire there preceded an earthquake, which continued more than eight
days, perceived in all those seas and Islands, and with a greater noise in
that of Saint Michael; so that the inhabitants terrified, confounded and
astonished, lest they should perish amidst the ruins of the buildings, fled
into the fields, where they remained for some days, confessing, fasting, and
making processions of blood, and other acts of penance as those who feared to
to die, either drowned with the Islands themselves, or consumed and burned with
another equal fire.

Our Lord God was pleased that the wind should be from the land, for had it
been from sea, it had burned all the towns of the neighboring Islands, and
would have occasioned another cineration like that which happened in those parts
in the year 1630.

There went many persons to sound the depth of that place, and they have found
that it has of depth in the sea more than one hundred and fifty fadoms. Let
the Speculative ponder, and the philosopher search out the cause of so
portentuous an effect, in as much as the Mathematician seeks rects for his
judgment, and the Historian knowledges for his discourse.

Madrid the eighth of September, 1638. With License in Madrid.

In the Imprimierie of Francisco Martinez, in the year 1638.


engraving of island created by the volcanic eruption of Sete Cidades off the
coast of San Miguel AA. The places where the fire burst out.

BB. The length of the Island.

C. The Island.



From Basil. A TRVE AND PARTICVLAR RELAtion, of the famous and bloody
battle, fought the 30 day of July old style, in this present year 1638.
near the Village of Witten-weyer in the County of Brisgaw on the River of
Rhyne, how it was first begun, and how it ended according to Gods good will
and pleasure.
AFter that Duke Bernhard of Saxo^ Weymar had kept his general Randevouze the
27 of July, or 6 of Aug. at Langendentalingen not far from Fry-burg in the
County of Brisgaw, and the next day thereupon following directed his march
toward Kentzingen, and pitched his Camp near the said City. His Highness
received intelligence by the parties, which he had sent abroad, that the
Imperial and Bavarian Armies with a great number of Wagons, laden with corn,
meal, and other victuals, were arrived near the Cloister of Shutteren, his
Highness broke up again the same evening with his whole Army, and marched the
whole night, till unto the dawning of the day to meet them, and on Sunday
morning being the 29 of July or 8 of Aug: lighted upon both the General
Field-marshals, the Duke of Savelly, and John Count of Goetz with all their
forces not far from the aforesaid Cloister of Shutteren near the Village of
Friesenheim, assaulted immediately their Sentinels consisting of commanded
Horsemen, took prisoners a Lieutenant with eight horsemen, and slew some more
of the^, and the rest he pursued to the maine Imperial Army and by the help
of certain commanded troops of foot, consisting for the most part of French,
took two passages, which the Imperiallists had strongly guarded, and slew there
about 60 of the Imperial soldiers; wherefore the Imperialists to hinder and to
prevent a farther pursuit, thought it convenient and good to fire the
aforesaid Village in several places; both the Field-marshals being certified
of the unexpected coming of his Highness, Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weymar and
his sudden assault, did begin to march in good order with their whole Army
and Artillery, upon an high and very advantageous hill hard by it, and to play
from thence with their Canons upon his Highness Forces very fiercely and
without ceasing, yet being their Canons played too high without any great effect
and harm; And that they were answered by his Highness Canons diverse times,
although not so fiercely and so often, yet with more effect; in the mean time
the Musketeers skirmished one against another, insomuc^ that the same
forenoone, on the Imperial and B^varian side, as they themselves confessed
above 120. men were slain; but on his Highness side not ab^v^ 20. killed, and
about 30 wounded. And although the French troops, that were there, seeing they
had so good success in the beginning, were very eager to climb up the Hill,
and to assault the maine Imperial Camp, yet his Highness had discry'd
already, that without great danger and loss, nothing could be effected: and
therefore found it more convenient in his judgment to betake himself into the
open field hardby, and to put his men into a right Battaile-array, hoping that
the abovesaid General Field-marshals, would likewise resolve to come down
upon his Highness; being prompted to it by a report and general rumor of
long continuance that Field-marshall Goetz desired much to meet the Duke
Bernhard upon such terms.

His Ex. wished nothing else but the like occasion: But being both generals
were loath to break forth out of their advantages in which they lay, and
desired not to meddle further with his Highness besides that which had passed
with the Cannons and small skirmishes aforementioned, his Highness about noone
retired somewhat toward Mohlburg, and thereby gave the more occasion to both
generals Field Marshalls to betake themselves likewise down from the
advantageous hill, upon which they lay. The night following was spent on both
sides with alarm, and the next monday following being the 30 of July, the 9 of
August: his Highness caused the service of God and the sermon of the weeping
of Christ over Jerusalem (which the day before by reason of those skirmishes
was neglected) orderly to be performed: and whereas in the conclusion of the
same sermon strong proof was produced, how that God Almighty who is a God of
long sufferance does forbear a long time the despisers and persecutors of his
holy word, and that although they be terrible and mighty for a time, yet
causes them at last to be confounded and overthrown: his Highness hereupon
took final resolution, and immediately thereupon spoke these words to all the
Cavalliers that were present, that without further delay he was resolved to
fall upon the enemy, with a certain assurance, that God Almighty would grant
them this day a glorious victory, and immediately thereupon gave order for the
whole Army to break up, and as soon as his Highness had dined, immediately
took horse, his Highness having received certain intelligence, that both the
general Feild-marishalls with all their forces, and provisio^ were already
marching upwards toward the river of Rhine, and therefore his Highness, least
they should pass by and attain to their end (the victualling of the City and
Fort of Bryssack) made the more haste to prevent them; and thereupon presently
after 12 of the clock at noone near the Village of Wittenweyer (where his
Highness the last year had his sconce and Shipbridge) lighted upon the
aforesaid Generals, yet the said Generals, having intelligence before of his
coming, had made themselves ready in all things and therefore gotten the
advantage of the ground to put their Army in battaile-aray, whereas on the
other side it fell heavy and troblesome to his Highness to march through a
great wood and over a small Island, moates and bridges, which were overgrown
with thick hedges, which by the help of certain 100 men of the Imperial
forces if not totally stopped, yet for a certain time might much have hindered
him, but being his Highness found there no opposition, he put his Artillery
and the troops, which he had got over there, at the end of the aforesaid wood
into Battaglia, and kept them close together, till he had brought over all his
forces and could give in a right order a full assault: whereupon the shooting
with the Cannons was begun on both sides and continued with great eagerness,
insomuch that his Highness right wing (which was lead by General Major
Tupadell) because the Imperial and Bavarian right wing was selected and
consisted of the choicest of their forces, as namely of the currassiers and
others of the best Regiments, was beaten back a great way, and forced to retire
as far as the reserve, which was commanded by Colonel Canofsky; and being
the same stood yet somewhat far behind, the Imperialists on their side stood
in hope that they had got already a great victory, but that joy lasted not
long, because as soon as the aforesaid General Major Tupadell had come within
reach of the said Colonel Canofsky, they fell on again withal possible speed
upon the aforesaid left wing, and put the same so hard to it, that it did as
General M^jor Tupadell before was forced to do, to look for a second.

In the mean time Colonel Rosal who together with the Count of N^ssaw and the
Baron of Pulbus lead Duke Bernhards left wing, chased the Savellish and
Goetzish right wing without any great resistance pell mell into their own
foot forces, and pursued so far after them, that the Imperial party had
great loss, and immediately thereupon a part of their foot Forces began to
betake themselves to flight: In the mean time the rest of the Brigades came
very nigh one upon another, and yet the Imperial Musketeers would not give
fire, till Duke Bernhard of Weymar had drawn certain small troops out of his
Army, and sent them close up to the Imperial Musketeers and caused bullets to
be changed one with another, whereupon the maine body of the Army came one upon
another, and now this party and then the other party was assaulted by the horse
men, and then seconded again, in which mixture it came so far, that at last
they did beat the Muskets one about another heads, and the Goetzish attained
of Duke Bernhards Artilery 3. pieces shooting a bulled of 12. pound, and four
small field pieces: On the other side Duke Bernhard of Weymar got into his
power all the Imperial and Bavarian Canons, together with all the Bullets and
appurtenances, whereupon both sides made use of his enemies Canons, as much as
they would, yet with this remarkable inequallty, that the Goetzish being they
were not provided with fitting bullets for those 7 pieces of Ordnance which
they had obtained, had but small advantage by them, but the Weymarish
continually and with a remarkable effect could shoot: Now being it lasted so
long, so that those that belonged to the Artillery were quite tired, a part of
Duke Bernhards horsemen alighted, and supplied the office of the tired
Constables or Gunners and carried away the praise, that they have shot
extraordinary well: Yet notwithstanding being the Imperiallists had still fresh
supply of more Forces, which consisted of old beaten and expert Soldiers, and
found in the Weymarish the like, they fought so stoutly on both sides that not
one Squ^dro^, except it was drawn off by force, did leave the field, but did
fight so valiantly one with another, that each side for the second time got his
enemies ground, in so much that the victory was doubtful for five hours
together, at last they fought only by way of Squadrons and Regiments one
against another, whereof each of them would not leave the field, till it was
beaten out of it by maine force, till at last the Goetzish and Savellish
betook themselves to flight by whole troops, and ^ell one upon another
baggage, and begun themselves to pillage their own; but the Weymarish followed
them close, and chased them away from it, and parted the good booty amongst
themselves, and by that means divided and separated themselves so far one
from another, that Duke Bernhard of Weymar could no more rely upon his
horsemen, but only with the foot forces, and some few troops of horse
maintained the place of fight, and in that place his Highness was well and
thankfully contented with this and other victories, which it had pleased God
Almighty to grant unto him.

Now when it was come so far, that many of the Commanders wished much joy to
his Highness of that glorious victory, General Major Tupadell was urged by
his zeal and eagerness to pursue with some small troops of his men after the
fugitives; and when he had sent his troops up and down, here and there, and
thought to return back again with some few men thinking that no more of the
Imperial and Bavarian troops were at hand: he was met unawares by an Imperial
troop, which had drawn together again, and thus was carried away prisoner: and
near the very place of fight, five Imperial squadrons of horse, and four of
foot, lay yet on a certain hill, and a very advantageous place, which made
show, as if they would defend themselves further; but as soon as the maine
body of the Wey-marish Army came near unto them, and a blind alarm was made,
they retired immediately in a great disorder, and fled toward Offenburg, where
his Excellence Field-marshall Goetz himself stayed not above half an hour,
but with six wagons laden with baggage, which of all the rest he had left
behind him there, retired yet the same night, together with General Major
Sknetter, Colonel Geyling, Truekmuller, and Reynach toward Overkerk, into the
narrow valley, where his Excellency caused diverse high Officers which were
carried away from the place of fight either dead, or dyed by the way, to be
buried: In the mean time the ways and passages over the high mountains,
(called the Kniebis) which were stopped by cutting down of trees, he caused by
the Country people to be opened, and the rest of his and the Duke of Savellies
troops, as namely 1400 horse. and 900 foot, yet all in a great confusion, to
march through the said passages into the Country of Wirtenberg, and immediately
thereupon caused the said ways and passages to be dug up again, and to be
stopped with cutting down of trees, more then they were afore-time. On the
other side, his Highness Duke Bernhard of Weymar took his lodging upon the
place of fight amongst the dead and wounded, where the enemy in the beginning
stood in battle array, and there rested with joy of his extraordinary great
labor, which he had that day, because he himself in person has brought up
and lead on almost all the Squadrons and Brigads, and many times he was in the
midst of the enemies troops, and was known by many of the Imperial Officers,
which called him by his name, and craved quarter of him: but God Almighty has
protected his Highness so far, that he had not the least hurt, only upon
his armor he had got two slashes. His Highness motto in this hot and bloody
battle was, Got mitt vus: or in English, God with us: and amongst the French
and other nations then present in the battle, which could not well pronounce
the German language, their motto was Emanuel. But amongst the Goetzish and
Savellish, they called Ferdinandus: the victory consisted in these points. 1
That his Highness Duke Bernard of Saxon Weymar recovered again not only all
his Canons, which the Imperialists during the battle had taken from him, but
also taken from them all theirs, as many as they had about them; namely, two
Demi-Cannons, two great heavy pieces, which they call Boehlers, whereof each did
shoot 125 l. bullet, three Faulcons, two Falconets, and four Fieldpieces,
together with all their appurtenances, Bullets, Grenades, Gunne-powder and
Matches, which consisted of a great quantity; as also many wagons laden with
all manner of materials two Field-Smiths, and all necessaries belonging to the
state of a well ordered Artillery, together with all the Officers and men
belonging thereunto. 2 That his Highness has obtained all the victuals and
provision wherewith the City and Fort of Brysack should have been relieved
together with all the wagons that belonged thereunto, which were in all 1000 in
number. 3 That his Highness has taken from the Goetzish and Savellish, all
their baggage, namely 2000 Wagons and Carts, amongst which were many fair
Coaches, with a very rich booty, and especially the Chaunceries and letters of
both the General Field-Marshals. 4 That his Highness has taken from them 80
Standards and Ensigns, amongst which were 7 of General Field-Marshall Goetz,
his Life Regiment of Currassiers, which are very fair, and embroydered with
silver and gold, and of other Regiments of Currassiers, were likewise found
diverse standards. 5 That not only above 1500 men of the Imperial and Bavarian
Army were slain upon the place of fight, but also a great number of them
chased into the River of Rhine and drowned: many yielded upon discretion, and
took service under Duke Bernhard of Weymar: many were taken prisoners; and in
a word, this brave Army, which consisted altogether of the ancient Regiments,
at least 12000 effective strong, was so diminished and dispersed, that as above
said, not above 2500 men of horse and foot, came again to their Generals, but
how many wounded and hurt men are amongst them, is not yet known. The
Imperial Field-Marshall, Duc de Savelly, was shot into his back, and narrowly
escaped. Colonel Seneschall is taken prisoner, Colonel Meusell, Colonel
Hagshausen, Colonel Sales, who commanded the Brisigellish: Colonel Stephan
Albert, who commanded the Tyllish: and Colonel de Puis, who commanded the
Eppish Regiment, as also Colonel Limpach, and as it is generally believed,
Colonel Edelstett are slain: five Lieutenant Colonels are taken prisoners,
and at least six or seven slain. Of Sergeant Majors were but three taken
prisoners, but how many of them (as also of Captains of horse, Captains of
foot, Lievetenants, Standardbearers, Ancients, and other under Officers) were
slain, it is not yet perfectly known, although a great number of them are
known, and easily may be guessed at by the precedent relation. Sergeant Major
Vivario was buried at Overkerk, besides other officers: and it is certain that
a great number of the Imperial Officers are taken prisoners, even the Rosich
Regiment alone has taken above 100. amongst which the meanest are
quarter masters; but the reason why the whole number of all the Regiments could
not be drawn together and here named, is, because the Regiments continued
together no longer, but one whole day, but were partly by his Highness, D.
Bernard of Weymar commanded to pursue further after the enemy, and the most
part of them sent here and there into their quarters for the better convenience
of getting sorrage for the horses. His Highness Duke Bernard of Weymar in this
great and violent re-encounter, has lost on his side fourteen Ensigns, and
eight Standards, two Majors, as namely Major Weyersheim of the Tupadellish
Regiment of horse, and Major Vitzthumb of the Hatsteinish Regiment of foot,
together with eight or nine Captains of horse and foot, and certain under
Officers, as also about 500 common Horsemen and Soldiers, whose number was so
largely supplied and made up again by the prisoners, that took service
willingly, that, as it was openly seen, the greater part of his Highnesses
Regiments of Foot marched off from the place of fight certain 100 men
stronger then they were, when they went thither.

The Imperiallists in their retreat carried away prisoners as above said
General Major Tupapell, Lieutenant Colonel Ruht of the Vorbufish Regiment,
four Captains of Horse, and three or four Captains of Foot, together with
certain Lieutenants, Standard bearers and Ancients, which within few days
shall be redeemed again by exchange. And on his Highness side in this first
occasion has been wounded most dangerously, Colonel Rotenhan a valiant
Soldier, Lieutenant Colonel Rhinegrave John Lodowick, Lieutenant Colonel
Fleckenstein, Major Rosa, Major Prestin, but now, God be thanked, they are all
without danger of their lives, Colonel Rosa, and Colonel Count William Otto
of Nassaw have likewise been shot, notwithstanding they did not leave their
Office, but still kept on Horseback, and performed their service: On Teuesday
following being the 31 of July his Highness, Duke Bernhard of Weymar caused
first of all those Soldiers, which were slain of his Army, as also all the
chief of the enemies Officers, that could be known to be orderly buried.

In like manner his Highness gave order, that provisio^ should be made, that for
the hurt and wounded, and they were lodged in several places, afterward he
gave to the Soldiers for their refreshment all the Wagons which were taken,
together with all the provision in them, and sent for all his Baggage to be
brought unto him from Mohlburg upon the place of fight: On wednesday morning
being the 1. 11 of August, (to the praise and glory of God, who had granted so
glorious a victory by the whole Army) a solemn Fast of thanksgiving, was kept
where the Hymn, Prayer, and the Annunciation of the blessings of the most High
God did sound about through the whole Camp, by every Regiment severally: And
with his Highness, were present all the Colonels and chiefest Officers, and
together with Him they sung heartily the 124 Psalm: If God had not bin on over
side etc. afterward after the hearing of the word of God, he presented
himself upon his knees under the open sky, and by special prayers gave hearty
thanks unto God Almighty, and thereupon Te Deum Laudamus was joyfully
sounded, and with all submission were presented unto his Highness, by every
Regiment particularly, the Standards and Ensigns, which they had obtained, and
did hang them up before his Tent, which (being many new and fair Standards and
Ensigns) was very stately and sumptuous to look upon. After all this his
Highness first of all caused to be discharged all the Cannons as well his
own, as also those which he had taken from his enemy, and then all the
Horsemen and Musketeers discharged twice in a fair order, and thus this
general feastivall day of joy was concluded. We heartily pray God Almighty to
bless this victory according to his Highnesses own words, prayers and hearty
wishes, that it may tend to the glory and praise of Gods holy Name, for a
general, firm and constant peace of our dear native Country, and to the
redeeming and refreshing of many distressed and oppressed Christians. Amen,
Amen.

FROM THE CAMP BEFORE BRISACK, the 19. or 29. of September, 1638.
IT being noised in the Camp that some hundreds of Crabats, with certain
bushels of meal behind them upon their horses (were upon a design, and on the
way to get into Brisacke:) all passages were blocked up, and carefully watched,
that they cannot easily steal into the town: we labor hard to fortify the
Camp on this side of the Rhine: namely, betwixt Hechen Helhing, and Iringh, as
far as the ship bridge: the trenches are in full defense (betwixt the French
and high Dutch quarter) by twelve Redoubts, which are all well furnished with
Cannon provision and ammunition in the sconces, which are thirteen in number,
are made Backhohse, furnace, and other works. In a word, his Highness the Duke
Bernard of Weymar, takes great pains to get the City for the Crown of France.
Here in the Camp we have abundance of all manner of provision. And his
Highness Duke Bernard, causes the soldiers and laborers to work day and
night in the approaches. The soldiers that labor, receive every night 25
stivers a piece, and the Boores 10 stivers. The other day was brought into the
Camp from Newburg, two great Mortar pieces, and four great pieces of
ordnance, every one of them carrying a bullet of twelve pound, and yesterday
there was brought hither four demi Canons. The besieged shoot fiercely out of
the town, because they are well provided of ammunition, but hitherto they have
done but little harm with their artillery. The fugitives that come to us out
of Brisacke, relate unanimously that the provision which was brought last into
the town, is almost eaten up, for the town cannot spend l^sse then 25 Multers
of corn every week. They relate also that every soldier receives no more
then half a pound of bread a day: of Cattle they have no want. Yesterday nine
of our horsemen went close to the City of Brisacke, and brought with them out
of the pasture 62 Beefes, and 13 horses. We likewise have intercepted a Spy,
who came with letters from the Emperor, (from Prague in Bohemia) unto General
Major Reynaker, Governor in the City of Brisacke.

Stransburgh the 20 or 30 of Sept.
THe City of Brisacke is now round about besieged, so that now no man can get
in, or come out without great danger of being taken or slain. Fresh men are
sent from the Duke of Longeville, and more are expected daily: the Imperial
Field-Marshall Goetzs lies now at Villenghen, and the Duke de Savelly at
Heilbrun. Duke Bernard has taken the Village of Pisen into his trenches,
because the Crabats that last got into Brisacke, came that way. The head
quarter of the Imperial Field-Marshall Goetz is at Eshingen, four leagues from
Brisack, where he does entrench himself for fear of being surprised by Duke
Bernard. The most part of Duke Bernards Horse lay in the Munster Valley, four
leagues from Brisacke, and have brought great store of provision (from the
Swartzwold, alias Blackwood) and laid it into Fryburg.

Saint German 22 of Sept. 2 of October.
THe Spanish forces have taken the Castle of Pomara, not far from Cassell,
and have besieged Rosigeau. The Duchess of Savoy has desired aid and
assistance of his Majesty the King of France, or else she should be forced to
come to an agreement with the Spaniard: wherefore his Majesty the King has
sent her in money 400000 pound.

The Duke Charles of Lorraigne makes preparations for the relief of Brisacke,
wherefore order is given by his Majesty the King, that diverse troops shall be
sent to Duke Bernard of Weymar, to reinforce his Army. Monsieur Belleford with
400 horse, and 1200 foot is marching toward the French County. And Colonel
Gassion with four Regiments toward Lorraigne. Monsieur Hallier (as soon as
Chastilett is fortified, and the works repaired) with 6000 horse and foot is
to follow him, and by the way is to clear the Dukedom of Lorraigne, and to
succor Duke Bernard of Weymar. In a word, the most part of the French forces
are going toward Brisgow.

Paris the 22 of September 2 of October.
DVke Bernard of Weymar has sent one of his Pages to his Majesty the King,
and desires succor. The Cardinal Richelieu is at Saint Germains, and has
saluted the Queen and her Son, and this day he is expected here. The other day
Count Henry of Nassaw arrived here to congratulate their Majesty's the King and
the Queen in the name of his Highness the Prince of Orange. The Lord of
Bredrode is likewise expected to congratulate their Majesty's, the King and the
Queen, in the name of the Lords States. Yesterday the Ambassadors of the
Crown of Sweden, Genoa, and the Popes Nuntio have congratulated the Queen.
The Lord Knyt is treating here with the King concerning the Lords States.

Antwerp the 30 of September, the tenth of October.
FRom Lisbon the eighteenth or twenty eight of August is written, that in the
harbor at Vienna and Porta Port, arrived the fourth or fourteenth, and fifth
or fifteenth of the said month, 23 ships, with nine or ten thousand chests of
Sugar, and two hundred thousand Rials, with other commodities, which came from
Rio dell Genuo. It was two years growth of the Sugar: five thousand Chests
more are expected from the Bahie Todos los Santos within few days. And they
write, that the fleet appointed for Brasile, shall go to Sea within two or
three weeks, being 38 Sail, amongst which are five and twenty or six and
twenty well manned ships, but how many soldiers they are to carry thither, is
diversely spoken of: some write of five thousand, others eight thousand
Soldiers and Mariners, but esteemed unexpert men. As soon as the Fleet is
gone to Sea, all the ships that are stayed there, shall be set free again. The
Spanish Army in Italy has laid a bridge over the River of Sesia, near Bremio,
and another over the River of Poe. The half of the Spanish Army lies about
Pomaro, and the rest is gone toward Aigni to besiege Alba.

Flushing the 1 or 11 of October.
SInce my last letter, Captain John Williams has brought in hither a
Caravell, which came from Bahie Todos los Santos, which has in her two hundred
and sixty chests of Sugar, a great number of Hides, a good quantity of Brazill
wood, with other commodities.

Lower Saxony, the 3 or 13 of October.
HIS Excellency General Bannier lies about Drubensea, with the greater part
of his army. His troops are to take their Winter quarter in the lower
Pomerania. The Brandenburgish forces have plundered of their own Cities Betzaw,
Bernaw, and Landsberg. Those of Berlin fearing they should be served in like
manner, cause every night an hundred and sixty soldiers to watch. The Sickness
is hot in the Brandenburgish camp and in the country there is great misery.

The seventeenth or twenty seventh of September his Imperial Majesty went from
Brundis to Leutmaritz, to confer there with the Elector of Saxony.

The Prince Elector Palatine with his and the Swedish troops lies now before
Lemgow, which he fiercely batters, and has brought before it four Mortar
pieces, and it is thought that the city will not be able to hold out long.

Amsterdam the sixth or sixteenth of October.
IN the Texell lie ready four ships which are bound for Brasile, which carry
over with them four hundred and fifty land soldiers, and two great ships
likewise which are bound for Ginny.

The army of his Highness the Prince of Orange is broken up this week from
the Grave, and gone into garrison. And the other day his Highness the Prince of
Orange is safely arrived at the Hague.

The valiant Ritmaster Crook, while that the Cardinal Infant lay about Venlo,
has don great harm to the Spaniards, and brought many horses into our Camp.

From Frankfort the seventh or seventeenth of October it is written,
THat the Weymerish General Commissioner going from the Camp toward Basil,
is taken prisoner by an Imperial party that was abroad that way.

The Dunkirkers are now at sea, the Hollanders are pursuing after them, and
has already taken two of their ships.

Venice the one and twentieth of September, or first of October.
DOn Francisco di Melo with the Spanish army intended to pass the river of
Poneor Villagio, to make an invasion into Montferrat: but the French and Savoy
troops lay in wait for them in an advantageous place, and gave them such
entertainment that they were forced to retire and leave their bridge behind
them.

The Galleys of Malta have met with six Turkish Galleys of Rhodes, sunk four
of them, and taken two; but two of the Maltaza Galleys were sunk likewise in
the fight.

Basil the two and twentieth of September or second of October.
DVke Bernard of Saxon Weymar causes the Laborers to work hard about the
circumvallation before Brisacke, and has cut down a great part of the wood on
this side the Rhine; and to secure the bridge he has raised near unto it two
Ravelins, and likewise a royal sconce. The circumvallation is three hours
going in the round, with deep moats and breast works, which in some places
are sixteen foot thick.

Six days agone the Cannons were mounted upon all the batteries, and played
fiercely upon the besieged. His army is victualled from Colmar Benfield,
Strausburg, and the wood Cities, and from the black Forest the forage and
cattle are brought into the Camp. The most part of the French troops are
taken out of the camp and put into garrison into Freyburg and other places;
and the High Dutch are brought out of the garrisons to supply their places.
Many houses and butts are built in the quarters, and a great Magazine is
erected; whereby some guess that Brisacke will hold out yet a long time.
Colonel Rosa with six Regiments is gone through the wood toward Newstat and
Villengen, to visit the Imperialists in their quarters.

Colonel Berenhalt is freed from his imprisonment by redemption: and the
Marquess of Dourlach and Paderburg is freed from this world by death at
Strausburg. Of the French succors two thousand men are arrived in this
Bishopric, and in Delsperger valley the old garrisons of Mompelgard follow;
insomuch that Duke Bernard of Weymar (as it is thought) will receive an accrue
and succor of 12000 men.

Villingen the 26 of September, or sixth of October.
THe Imperial field Marshall Goetz with his Army lies round about Ravensbergh,
and has drawn together in haste all his horse and foot, and has brought
together ten regiments.

General major Lamboy and Colonel Wael, with four thousand men which will be
here within ten or twelve days are to join with him.

The twentieth or thirtieth of September the Duchess of Bavaria was brought
to bed of another son, who was christened Maximilian Philippus Ieronimus.

Saint German the 29 of September, or ninth of October.
THe Admiral of Bordeaux for want of provision has betaken himself to Belsle.
The Duke de Valetta Monsieur Grammont and others are expected here to bring the
information, who was in the fault that the siege before Fontarabie was raised.
The government of Guyen is given to the Prince of Conde, and has now absolute
authority to dispose of the wars in those parts. His Majesty the King has
sent from Paris to Guyenne four hundred thousand pound. The Duke of
Longueville has order and command to hinder the victualling and relief of
Brisacke from Lorraine side, and to send all needful assistance to Duke
Bernard of Weymar: four Regiments consisting of two thousand men, are passed
through the dominion of Berne and Delspenger Vallie, under the command of
Monsieur Roque, and gone to the Camp before Brisack. His Majesty the King has
likewise sent to Duke Bernard Weymar, four hundred thousand pound.

Frem the Camp before Brisack the 30 of September, or 10 of October.
THe circumvallations about this City, was finished seven days agone,
consisting of twenty royal Sconces, and a great many of Redouts, with deep and
wide Moats, and double Palisadoes, in such a form the like was hardly ever seen
in Germany in any siege. Of victuals we have no want, bread we have in
abundance, a pound of flesh is sold in the Camp for three pence, a quart of
wine for four pence: Geese, all sorts of foul, Salt, Bacon, Cheese, and other
provisions for the mouth, are bought at a reasonable rate. The first of this
month, Colonel Rosa went from the Blackwood into Vibres valley, and the Count
of Nassaw toward the Munster valley, to visit the Imperialists in their
quarters, which entrench themselves betwixt Hohenwiel and Waldshut; it seems
that they aim at Lauffenberg, to make a diversion. The City of Kentzingen,
Duke Bernard of Weymar has burned down, pulled down the walls, and brought
the materials of the said City into the Camp, to build houses and huts, it
seems as if a new City were built about Brisacke. The Duke of Longeville has
taken by assault Chamnitz. The third of this month, Monsieur le Motte, with
6000 foot, and 4000 horse is marched through the Bishopric of Basil, and is
expected here to morrow. Colonel Shonbeck with 200 Musketeers, has taken the
little sconce before Brisack, which lies upon an Island, in which he found two
pieces of Ordnance, each carrying a bullet of 6 pound, and three pieces of 12
pound bullet: the besieged in two days made upon it above 200 Cannon and
demy-cannon shot, upon which we made a false alarm (to draw them out of the
town) made show as if we would forsake the Sconce, but the besieged found the
contrary, for they were in great confusion chased into the Rhine. The great
Sconce near the City is at this present likewise fiercely battered: as soon
as we have mastered the same, then we can with ease ruinate the bridge before
Brisacke. Duke Bernard of Waymar is resolved to fight again another battle,
if the Duke of Lorraine (who is at Than) with some thousands of his own men,
and assisted with the Imperialists, to assault the Duke Bernard on both sides
of the Rhine. Here at this present are the French Ambassador, Monsieur
Molliand, the English Resident Fleminge, General Major Erlach, a Lord of
Rhelingen, which treat upon weighty matters with Duke Bernard.

Lien the 30 of September. 10 of October.
THe Prince of Conde has accused the Marshall de Valette to be the occasion of
the loss at Fontarabie, alleging that he did not assault the Spanish
Succors, rather obeying his father the Duke of Espernons command, then the
service he should have done; and this, because he was discontented, that the
general command which the Prince of Conde had, was not given unto him:
wherefore his Majesty, the King has commanded Espernon to retire to his house,
and the Marquess de Valette summoned to appear at the Court.

SOME PASSAGES OVT OF THE NOremberg Avisoes, of the month of October, from
Basil.
From the Camp before Brisack.
THat the Imperial Field-Marshall Goetz, and General Major Lamboy, the 11 or
21 day of this month, with 5000 horse, and 8000 foot, and 12 pieces of
Ordnance, broke up from Kirckhosen, and marched toward Brisack, and presented
themselves about the length of two Canon shots from the Weymarish Camp, made
three shots out of demy-Canons: whereupon those of Brisacke, with three Canon
shots answered; on Friday morning the Imperialists with their Artillery
approached, and at night 1000 foot, and certain 100 Currassiers carrying along
with them great canon baskets, intended to assault a Sconce below Brisacke, but
being there was a clear Moone-shine night, they were beaten off with small
shot. Upon Sunday, being the 14 or 24 of this month, the Goetzish Army
assaulted the two upper Sconces, whereof one lay in the wood, and the other
about Duke Bernards Rhine-bridge, and they were feign to wade through a moat
and ditch above the middle, before they could come near the Sconce, yet at last
they mastered it, and put all the Scots that lay in it to the sword, and thus
mastered the first bridge, which lay over an arm of the Rhine, and thereupon,
two Imperial squadrons about 1600 strong, passed upon the head bridge of the
Rhine, and threw off a part of it, lest they should be surprised and
over-hastened; notwithstanding Duke Bernard of Weymar commanded thitherwards
Colonel Shonbeck, with certain Regiments of horse and foot, which immediately
with boords and other materials, repaired the Bridge again, and although the
Goetzish Musketeers gave fierce fire upon them, yet at last they were beaten
back, many of them were drowned in the moat, and the rest almost all slain
and taken prisoners, insomuch that of those 1600 men, very few escaped. In the
mean time the Weymarish forces under the command of Monsieur de Guebrian, did
beat the Goetzish Musketeers out of the next Sconce that lay in the Wood, and
recovered again the lower Sconce, but the upper Sconce, the Goetzish forces
kept strongly guarded till night: but when Duke Bernard of Weymar commanded
against it at night a Lieutenant with certain troops of horse and foot. He
found the Sconce open and forsaken, insomuch that the Goetzish at night leaving
behind them 1600 dead, and certain 100 wounded and prisoners, amongst which
are said to be 26 Captains, broke up and marched toward Freyburg, which place
they summoned, yet they would not stay there, but marched toward Offenburg.
Colonel Golling, together with many other Officers, was slain in this
assault: on the Weymarish side, Colonel Lesle is either slain, or taken
prisoner; Colonel Shonbeck was shot through the shoulder, and many of the
soldiers were likewise slain: yesterday Duke Bernard of Weymar has likewise
taken the Jacobs Sconce and Mill Sconce, insomuch that Brisack is now in
extreme danger, out of which they shoot very fiercely.

Venice the 29 of October. and 9 of November.
AT Constantinople upon the command of the great Turk, the Venetian
Ambassador there is arrested, and is watched at Pera by 200 Ianitsars, because
the Venetians have assaulted the Barbary Galleys in the harbor at Valona,
wherefore this Signory is preparing and making ready against the next Spring,
above 100 Galleyes, besides the Gallions and other ships.

Leipsig the 27 of October. or 7 of Novem.
FRom the Marquisate of Brandenburg is written, that the Imperial Army is
marching again toward Domitz: the Ship-bridge is likewise carried thither
from Werben, and the Luneburgish troops about 4000 strong, are likewise gone
toward Domitz, and certain Saxon Regiments under the command of
Field-marshall Marazini, are likewise marching to the Gallashish Army, insomuch
that the said Army will be reinforced with nine or ten thousand fresh soldiers
to oppose General Bannier, who is gone again from the River of Elve, toward
the Dukedom of Mecklenburg, where he mastereth all the strong places.
Colonel Slangh has likewise summoned the Warmunder Sconce, but the Governor
in it refuses to surrender it.

Collen the 25 of October. the 4. of November.
LAst Sunday a great fire happened in the City of Orsoy, which burned down
almost half the City, and did great harm, and about 39000 Cheeses, which
belonged to shippers, and all the matches for the garrison was burned, insomuch
that they were to be provided again from Rhinberck in all haste.

The Hatzfieldish troops lay yet still in the Bishopric of Osnabrugge, and
refresh themselves. General Major King has commanded abroad, 1000 horse to
d^s^ry them, which lighted upon four Imperial Companies, totally routed and
dispersed them, and took from them two Standards. In the Bishopric of Bremen
have been taken up 2000 soldiers for the Prince Elector Palatine, which are
already marching toward Minden.

From the Camp before Brisack, the 18 or 28 of October.
MOnsieur de Turenne, and Colonel Shmidberger, have taken by assault from the
Brisackers, a head Sconce, on which the chain hangs, which is a great loss
to the Brisackers, insomuch that the besieged do shoot so fiercely no more: one
that came out of the City, had about him bread that was baked of branne and
Acron shells, who being strictly examined, confessed that they had generally no
other bread in the town, except the high Officers.

The 16. 26. of this month, the Lorraine troops mastered the City of
Ensisheim, but the Castle holds out yet, and is well provided. The Weymarish
horsemen are gone against them to beat them out again. Field-marshall Goets
intends to lay a bridge over the Rhine at Drusenheim.

The other day an Eagle flew thrice about Duke Bernard of Weymars camp, as
also over Duke Bernards own Tent, but at last he flew toward Freyburg: the
meaning of it, God knows.

Collen the 26 of October. the 5 of Novem.
The Palatine and Swedish troops gather themselves again very strong about
Minden and Osnabrugge, and they are already stronger then they have been before
the battle: there come daily more fresh forces un^ (...)

THE AVISOES OF HOLLAND.
Venice the 5. 15. of October.
FIve Spanish Galleys with many military instruments are arived at Savona. The
Governors of Antybo, Saint Margaretta and Villa Franca are put in prison by
the King of France because they kept correspondence with the King of Spain.

Certain days since, Ducca di Saint Georgia with 33 companies of Horse,
surprised 600 French horsemen at Rocca Civalera, slew 150 of them, took 60
prisoners, among which are many officers, got 500 horses, and 80 Mules with
12000 crowns in ready money, the rest fled to Felizzano. The next day after,
the Count Galeazzo Trizze, who intended to surprise another French quarter, was
beaten off with loss of 200 men, and himself was greatly wounded.

The Duke of Savoy is deceased at Turino, and his brother of 8 years of age, is
very sick. The Turkish Prince lies now before Babilonia, where the primo
Vezier a great enemy to the Christians is lately dead.

Strasburg the 5. 15. Oct.
At this instant we received avisoes that Colonel Rosa, Callenback and others
with 7. regiments are gone against the Duke of Lorraine: in the mean time Duke
Bernhard of Weymar keeps a watchful eye toward the Imperial Army, which
intends to assault him unawares, wherefore bread is given for 6 days, to be
given to the Soldiers.

Berlin the 6. 16. of Oct.
We have been here in great danger, because General Gallas did send his
Baggage on this side of Vierbellin, and the Swedes lay about Furstenlerg, but
general Gallas with his Army set himself before the Dam near Rubin upon the
high ground, and entrenched himself there, and having behind him the River of
Nien, the Enemy cannot well come at him, except he do assault him in his
advantage, Since it was feared that the Enemy would go toward Berlin, but now
we receive Avisoes that General Gallas is going away from Vierbellin, and that
he takes his way toward Werbin. Our Brandenburgish troops stay behind, and
lie yet entrenched near Vierbellin.

Hamborough the 10. 20 of Oct.
The Imperial General Gallas with his Army is retiring toward Havelberg, and
takes his way toward Kluckaw, and so toward the Werber Sconce, where a
Ship-bridge is laid over the River of Elve. The Swedish General Bannier
follows him upon the foot and has left behind him all his Baggage and
carries along with him the provision upon horses and Asses, and being he
marched so swiftly, no doubt is but he will overtake the Imperial General.
Some other Swedish troops have made an invasion into the Dukedom of Luneburg:
they show as yet no hostility but seek only the passage ward the River of
Elve. Last Sunday the Swedish Colonel Slaugh with certain troops is likewise
arrived at Boytsenburg, and passed yesterday morning with 15 great boats at
Lawenburg over the River of Elve to join with the rest of the Swedish troops
there: they are all going toward the Werber Sconce where the Magazine of the
Imperialists is, insomuch that the aforesaid General Bannier persues after the
Imperialists on both sides of the River of Elve, which retiring in great
confusion, pillage all the places wheresoever they come, yea their Generals
own Baggage. Colonel Yersdorff is sent by General Gallas to the Emperor to
certify him of the miserable state and condition of his troops, desiring
withal a speedy aid and assistance, because he has not above 8000 men more
of his own Army: and the Brandenburgish Army is so much consumed that it is
not strong above 1000 horse, and 150 foot; and more then 1000 of the
Brandenburgish soldiers are come over to the Swedes, and have taken service
under General Bannier.

A Relation of the Battle betwixt the Prince Elector Palatine, and the
Imperial General Hatzfeld, fought the 7.17. of October. near Vlota on the
River of Wesar.
HIs Highness, the Prince Elector Palatine, and his brother Prince Robert,
being joined with the Swedish General Major King, they brought together an
Army of 5000. men, and came before the City of Lemgow the Metropolitan of the
Earldom of Lip, but after they had straightly continued the Siege for
certain days together, the Imperial General Hatzfeld drew together an Army
of 6000 men and went to relieve it, whereupon the said Prince Elector Palatine
thought it best to leave the siege and sent before him all his Baggage toward
Vlota in the Earldome of Ravensperg to be transported thence toward Minden.
The Imperial General Hatzfeld having received intelligence of it by some
prisoners, marched in all haste to cut off the passage from them, and overtook
the said Prince Elector about 2 of the clock in the afternoon near Valdorp.
The Palatine and Swedish troops fought in the beginning most valiantly, and
put the Imperialists to flight, and with their horsemen pursued close after
them, whereupon the Duke of Luneburg who had not showed the least hostility
against them heretofore, came with 1000 horse, and 1000 foot betwixt the
Swedish and Palatine horse and foot, and separated them that they could not get
together again, and immediately thereupon the Imperialists turned again and
assaulted the Prince Elector and Swedes horse, and the Duke of Luneburg the
foot, and so kept them off that they could not succor the horse, insomuch that
the horse being entrapped were at last totally routed, and many of them slain
and taken prisoners, and many of the foot were chased into the River of Wesar
and drowned, and the Imperialists obtained 8 pieces of Ordinance, 2 mortering
pieces, 20 ensigns, and 4 Standards. The certain number of those that were
slain and taken prisoners, is not yet known; the report goes of fifteen
hundred that were both slain and drowned, and about 800 taken prisoners. Among
the chiefest of the prisoners these are known namely Prince Robert, Lieutenant
General Ferars, the Lord Craven, Colonel Boy, Lieutenant Colonel Berovo of
Wenge, Colonel Busaid, Colonel Mulard, Lieutenant Colonel Look, the younger
King, and others. The Prince Elector Palatine himself, and General Major King
escaped and fled into Minden. On the Imperial side is slain the General
Serjant Major Count Peter Goetz, Colonel Tyrelly, and others. Prince Robert is
shrewdly wounded, and the Lord Craven has received 5 wounds.

The last letters from Italy bring no other news but that the French and
Savoyish troops have routed and defeated upon the borders of Savoy 3000 Spanish
soldiers.

From Saint German the 13. 23 of Oct.
THe Queen of Spain is brought to bed of a daughter. His Majesty the King of
France has sent a new supply of money unto his Highness Duke Bernard of
Weymar, and upon the frontiers he provideth for thee maintaining of the Armies,
and has likewise laid up in store a great sum of money for the continuation
of the war.

Avisoes of Holland.
Alsatia the 17. 27. of October.
DUke Charles of Lorraine is arrived on this side of the Rhine, and with five
or six thousand men passed Thun, carrying along with him a great store of
Provision and Ammunition, with a full resolution to bring it into Brissack, and
to relieve the said Town: But his Highness Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weymar, for
the preventing of his design, broke up in all haste with certain 1000 men and
went to meet him, and at last lighted upon him in the valley betwixt Enfishem
and Thun, where he assaulted the said Duke of Lorraine furiously, totally
routed and defeated his Army, slew many of the Lorrainers, took from them all
their Canons, Baggage and Ammunition, and obtained in a short time a glorious
victory. Whereupon the aforesaid Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weymar returned
immediately back again into the Camp before Brissack, and by a succes^efull
enterprise without the loss of any man took the great Sconce together with the
outmost bridge, which those of Brissack had on this side of the Rhine. In the
mean time the Imperial fieldmarshall Goetz, General Major Lamboy and Goetz
with a strong Army consisting of 14000 fighting men, thought likewise to try
their fortune on the other side of the Rhine toward Brisgaw and to relieve the
said City and Fort of Brissack, and with great fury assaulted 4 several times
our Sconces, and in the 5 assault they brought it so far that they took not
only one Sconce, but also under favor of their Cannons brought a whole
Regiment into the same; But his Highness Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weymar
assaulted the Enemy immediately with such a fury and courage, that the
Imperialists were presently beaten again out of the Sconce, insomuch that the
Imperial General Major Lamboy lost the most part of his forces there, at which
he took great distaste against Field marshall Goetz, because the said Lamboy
gave the first onset and thought to get great honor by it, and the other
Field-marshall Goetz did not in due time second him, and by that means both
the Generals are now at variance, insomuch that the said General Major Lamboy
will give none other assault, their fair and brave Cavallerie comes quite to
nothing, they run away in great numbers for want of forage and victuals,
and their horses die likewise in great numbers. The prisoners relate that in 5
days they have not seen a piece of bread in their Camp; and it is certain
that their pockets were found full of crabs. The rest of the Lorrain foot
forces run daily away in great numbers, and come over unto us.

Benfeld the 14. 24. of October.
Since the overthrow of the Duke of Lorraine, upon the Oxenfield, the 5. 15. of
this month, the said Duke of Lorrain, with the dispersed troops, fled to Than.
Certain Weymarish Regiments followed him upon the foot to ruinate the Wagons,
which about 600. in number, were each of them laden with 6. quarters of Meal,
and left in the open field before Than. The most part of the Lorraine foot fled
into the wood, where they were at last forced to yield upon discretion. His
horsemen suffered shrewdly, and were totally dispersed, and the Weymarish
obtained 12 pieces of Ordnance, small and great: 34 Standards, and 20 Ensigns,
Colonel Rosa only with his Regiment has routed 3 of the Enemies Squadrons,
and beaten diverse times through them. The Duke of Lorraines own horse was got
by Colonel Rosa's Page and brought into Colmar. The Duke of Lorraine saved
himself on foot through the wood. Monsieur Passampiere, 2 Colonells, both
Mercy, and Colonel Famier, and 20 other officers are brought prisoners into
Colmar. On our side is slain Colonel Wickerkeyme, and many wounded soldiers
are come into Colmar. In the mean time the Imperial Field-marshall Goetz
assaulted likewise furiously at night the Camp of Duke Bernhard of Weymar, but
was three times beaten off with the loss of many of his men, and retired 2
houers going from the Camp, where he lies yet. The 6. 16 of this month, the
besieged sallied forth very strong, but after a small skirmish they were chased
back again into the Town. The 18 of this month, triumphs were made at
Colmar for the victory, and the 9. 19 of this month, here in this City.

Boytzenburg the 16. 26 of Oct.
After that the Imperial General Gallas was broke up from his head quarter at
Malchin, in great disorder, his Excellence the Swedish General Bannier
followed him the 10. 20 of this month with the horsemen as far as Witstock,
Perlebarg, and the River of Havell. The said General Gallas has left behind
him in the villages, and in the way many sick and tired soldiers, and besides
he has lost near upon 1500 men which were cut off from him in the pursuit.
In the mean time General Bannier has taken Lawenburg, Newmarck and this City
of Boytzenburg, Gustrow, Swerin, and other Cities and passages and strongly
guarded them. Here in this City lie 3 Swedish Regiments, and at Lawenburg four
Regiments which have arrested all Saxon and Brandenburgish ships, and here lay
a bridge over the River of Elve to hinder that the Imperialists get no
provision and ammunition from Hamborough. The Swedish General Major Polin with
certain Swedish troops has made an invasion into the Dukedom of Luneburg,
insomuch that the City of Luneburg stands now in great danger and fear, and by
all appearance neutrality will be denied to the Duke of Luneburg. At this
instant we receive certain Avisoes that the Imperial General Gallas being
loath to expect the Swedes betwixt the Rivers of Havell and Elve is broke up
again, and took along with him the Ship-bridge near the Cloerber-Sconce, and
the most part of the provision, and is retired toward Sandaw into the
Bishopric of Maydenburg, w^ere he intends to lay the Ship-bridge again over
the River of Elve to be the nearer to Salome and the Emperors hereditarie
Countries: whereupon his excellency General Bannier is likewise broke up from
his head quarter at Swerin, and takes his way directly toward Saxony, being
fully resolved to follow the Imperial General Gallas though it were into
Bohemia, but some think that he will first of all assault the Werber Sconce to
have a free passage over the River of Elve. His Excel: General Bannier could
not draw the Imperial General Gallas to battle in the pursuit. The Earl
of Ridbery who with 15 Regiments led the avantguard, had express order to
hazard no skirmish. The prisoners declare and certify that the Gallassish army
is in all not 12000 men strong. At this present the City of Domitz is fiercely
battered by the Swedes with 24 pieces of Ordnance. Many Swedish officers are
now at Hamborough, where they set themselves out bravely, and by this breaking
up of the Imperial Army, and the good success of the Swedes, the treaty of
peace at Lubeck is quite broke off.

Collen the 20. 30. of Oct.
The Duke of Newburg has taken up many officers, both of horse and foot. It
seems that he intends to take up certain 1000 men for the defense of his
Countries, but many fear that it will be for no good end, because the report
goes that the said Duke of Newburg has received at Brussells certain 1000
Rix-Dollers for the levying of those men. Since the overthrow of the Palatine
Army, the dispersed repair again toward Minden, where they keep their
Randevouze. The Imperialists have taken Wit^aeden, and seek to destroy the
Palatines Forces in all places.

Furnelford the 21. 31 of Oct.
Duke Bernard of Weymar has taken de Novo a Sconce of the River of Rhine
before Brissack, in which he found three Pieces of Ordnance. The great Sconce
being of great importance which lies in the midst of Rhine is likewise
surrendered, whereupon he has burned down a great part of the bridge. The
besieged shoot continually fiercely into the Town. The Imperial
Field-marshall Goetz has assaulted a great Sconce which lies on the side of
the Rhine upon a hill, but was beaten off by Colonel Moser, and left behind
him many dead men, and certain 100 Cannon Baskets: notwithstanding he makes
great show again as if he would assault the Camp on 3 places. And from
Strasburg they write already that for certain hours together they heard
terrible Shooting; what there passed, we shall shortly hear.

Liepsich 20. 30 October.
The Imperial General Lord Rodolph Count of Marazini is now in pay of the
Elector of Saxony, and made Field-marshall of his forces, who went from hence
this afternoon, and went into Lusatia to draw there together the Saxon
Regiments, and to join with the Imperial Gallassish Army.

Amsterdam October. 27. Nov. 6.
Yesterday was seven night the ship of the Lord Vice Admiral Wemmer of
Berchem arrived in the Texell himself, because he was sickely, came over land,
having given the absolute Command to his Lieutenant. October. 21. the Dunkerkes
put to Sea with 14 men of war, and 2 Fregats, our Admiral Adam
Witten-wittense, which crossed the Sea near Gravelinge persued them and met
them in the Ocean, where 4 days together viz till Oct. 15. 25 they charged
each other continually, but the last of those nights being very dark, they
lost one another. It is thought that the Dunkerkes took their course toward
the North, whither our Vice Admiral follows them. This week here are
arrived some ships, which came from Saint Huges, with letters from Lisbone,
Dated October. 14. the contents whereof are these. The 7 of the last month the
Portugal Fleet departed thence, consisting of 26 Sail, of small and great
bottomes: the Spanish Fleet following 18. 28 of the same, which consisted of 19
strong vessels, both these are to meet at Capo verde, they carry 8000 Soldiers
and Mariners under the Command of a Portugal Don Ferdinando Massas, who has
been Vice Roy of Goa, and their Admiral Francisco d' Amello a stout Soldier.
There is brought into Zealand, a Prize with 200. pipes of Canary wine. The
Turks have taken two ships which were going from Holland to Saint Lucars, and
another is burnt by mischance. Last Monday, 4. ships arived in the Texell, from
Fernambouck, by name, the Spoel-Iacht, the Black-Beare, the Tigre, and
Empress, which brought about 3000. Chests of Sugar with them. Two days before
arived in the Texell the ship Crom-steven, which came from Rio Grande with
26000000 l. of Brazile-wood, and brings news, that in the Capitania of
Fernambouck, 16. Seignors d' Ingenios, and a Burgomaster of Pariba are taken
prisoners, which held correspondence with the Count d'Baniola, and that they
have erected a great private Magazine to succor the Spanish forces in time of
need.

Basil 5.15. October.
Last Friday, Colonel Shmitberger took the half moon before the bridge at
Brissack, and burnt down a great part of the bridge, maugre the garrison which
in vain played fiercely upon him with their Demi-Cannons.

Yesterday was sevennight, when Duke Bernhard went to prayers, an Eagle flew
round about the Camp and the Dukes tent, as if it would have pearched there,
yet afterward it flew to the mountains; this was seen by all the Camp.

The Imperial Fieldmar: Gotz is passed the Rhine at Drusenheim, and the Duke
Savelly, and Colonel Cappaun, who are to join with him at Germesheim, to make
a new adventure upon the Camp on this side the Rhine. The French succors
consisting of 4000, horse and 2000, foot, is arived at Dudell. In Brissak there
is said to be so much treasure, that if the Imperialists should loose it, they
would esteem the loss greater then the loss of a Kingdom.

Hamburgh. October. 30. November. 9.
The Duke of Luneburgh having conferred with the King of Denmark at
Gluckstadt, is returned to Hildesheim, his troops are sent to Gallas his Army.
The City of Vecht, though the report was otherwise, holds out still. The Prince
Elector, and General King, rally their forces, and resolve a revenge.

Leipsich November. 2. 12.
The Diet of the circle of upper Saxe is this day begun. Both Armies in
Pomerania lie still. The City of Witstock is fired in diverse places, and burnt
down to the ground.

Collen November. 1. 11.
The Hollanders are still levying new forces. But the Prince of Orange
resolves not to go to field, without absolute power to manage the war, and to
fight a battle if there be opportunity.

From the Camp before Brissak Oct. 25. No. 4.
Duke Bernhard has intercepted letters dated at Brissack Oct. 9. 19. in which
the Governor complains that he has not bread but for two days, and flesh but
for few: that the most part of his men, the officers especially, are sick,
dead, run away, and discontented: that Aug. 26. he was promised relief within
six weeks, which time was expired above three weeks since; desiring, that if
things did not go well with him, he might not be blamed, he being already
brought to extremity, that he durst not write that which most troubled him; yet
notwithstanding he would do his best to hold the place, and not show himself
of lesser courage then those of Hermenstein.

From the Camp before Brissack No. 9. new style
Duke Bernhard has sent a Trumpet to the Governor, and offered him honorable
Conditions; adding, That if he stood out against reason, he could not take it
well, nor would he deal with him as with an honest Cavaliere. The answer we
expect. By all apperance the Duke will assault the Eckelsberg, for which all
the officers importune him, promising to do their best endeavors.

Inclingen November. 10. new style.
Monsieur Feuquieres having blocked up Luneville, and understood that the Duke
de Savelle was on his way to march by Inclingen, Octo. 26. old style, marched
thitherward to meet him: But the Duke having intelligence of it, took his way
toward Blaumont, whither Feuquiers followed him, enquartering betwixt
Arrecourt, and Blaumont (October. 28.) into which place, Savelly's Infantrie and
some troops of horse were laid. Feuquieres immediately charged, routed and
defeated them; made them yield upon discretion; took their wagons, 80 in
number, laden with Ammunition, and 3 barrels of money; and presently
surrounded the small City, and Castle of Blanckenbourg, wherein Savelly, and
the rest of the horse lay. So that now the Duke is in a trap; there being no
succor to be expected, no provision there for his horse, and men, and the
place of no strength. But at this instant we receive avisoes, that the Duke
with 30 horse, is got out of the Town, and escaped narrowly.

From the Bishopric of Bremen. Nov. 10. 20.
700 Soldiers, English, Scots, and of other Nations, taken up by Colonel
Valkener for the Prince Elector Palatine, thought to have marched through the
City of Bremen, but the Magistrate would not suffer them, yet he granted them
passage below the City over the Wesar. Our Bishop understanding it, charged his
subjects to let no man pass, who thereupon took up Arms and beat them back
to the gates of Bremen, where they lay two days without victuals, and at the
last were feign to run away, and shift for themselves. And now both the
Bishop, and the Magistrate, require the Princes Colonels to bring no more
forces that way, and to Countermand such as be upon the way.

Minden November. 11. 21.
The Prince Elector Palatine is here still, and by all appearance will winter
here. Lieutenant General King has rallyed his troops, and put them into
Garrison to refresh themselves, with order to give no rest to the Enemy.
Colonel Coningsmark, has done something already, He has assaulted, and
defeated the Imperial Reare-ward, taken diverse officers, and common men, which
he has brought into this City, with some Enfignes: other parties are abroad,
which so fill our prisons with Imperialists, that it is thought they will not
be able to abide long amongst our Garrisons.

From the Bishopric of Munster. Nov. 11. 21.
Hatzfeld has taken Cloppenburg; and now battereth Vecht; but by reason of the
rain he cannot come near it: His Soldiers in the Approaches stand above the
knees in water. His greatest piece is broken. All the Swedish horsemen which
lay about Osnabrugge, are gone to Minden, to join with other troops there.

Hamburgh. Nov. 16. 26.
Nothing has yet passed betwixt Banniere, and Gallas; only they lie close
together, and it is thought, will not part without blows. Banier has given
money to his Cavaliers to buy new horses, many of his old horses, having died
within few weeks.

A VISOES FROM NORIMBERG. A full declaration of the Battle betwixt Duke
Bernhard and the Duke of Lorrain.
From Basil the 12. 22. Oct.
DUke Bernhard of Weymar having received intelligence that the Duke of Lorrain,
General Sergeant Major Passampiere, and General Major Mercy, the 3. 13 of
this month, with 6 Regiments of horse, 5 pieces of Ordnance among which are 2
Demicannons, and 80 wagons laden with provision was arrived about Than, he
himself in person in all haste with 7 Regiments of horse and 500 commanded
musqueteres, under the command of Colonel Shmitberger, 6 pieces of Ordnance
each carrying a bullet of 6 pound, broke up and marched toward Than, and the 5.
15 of this month about 10 of the clock in the morning, lighted upon the Duke of
Lorraine betwixt Vfhottzen, and Sanheimeb, where he lay with his whole Army,
which Duke Bernhard of Weymar immediately charged and especially slanked upon
the horse from all places, and assaulted them with such fury, that at last they
were forced to leave the field in great disorder and confusion, leaving many
dead, wounded, and prisoners behind them. The foot forces after the fight
retired into a wood called Nunnenbruch; which wood, Duke Bernhard surrounded
with the horse, planted the Ordnance before it, and shot so fiercely into it,
that many of the Lorrainers were slain in it: of the rest some hid themselves,
and some fled toward Than, Duke Bernhard having got all the Lorraine Cannons,
all the ammunition, wagons, and 23 Standards. General Sargeant Major
Passampiere, the General A'diutant, Lieutenant Colonel Fleekenstein, many
Captains of horse, and other officers, are taken prisoners. What officers have
been slain on the Weymarish side, is not yet known; we hear only of Colonel
Wittersheim. The Count of Nassaw is shot into the Leg: Colonel Okem had only a
touch of a Bullet, and the Earl of Witgenstein was shot through the cheek.
After this victory, the French succor consisting of 2000 men joined with Duke
Bernhard of Weymar, who immediately thereupon with his troops marched again
into the Camp before Brissack, because Field-marshall Goetz and General Major
Lamboy had joined together and arrived at Kirchhoffin betwixt Freyburg and
N^wburg with 5000 horse, and 7000 foot, 12 pieces of Ordnance and great store
of provision. The other day Duke Bernhard of Weymar commanded Colonel
Shmitberger and Colonel Shonbeck with 2000 men, and many scaling ladders to
march on this side of the Rhine against the Sconce before Brissack, which they
assaulted with such fury, that they took it without any remarkable loss, and
obtained in it 10 pieces of Ordnance, and burned down a great part of the
Rhine bridge, and have so entrenched themselves already against the Sconce,
that the besieged can do them no more harm with their Canons although for 2
days together they have made 1000 Canon shot out of the Town upon the Sconce,
but all was in vain. Yesterday 2000 sacks with Oats, 1500 sacks with Meal,
600 sacks with Corn, 3000 loafes of bread were brought down from above in 6
ships into the Camp before Brissack. Last Friday when the battle was ended,
Field-marshall Goetz gave a furious assault at night upon Weymarish Camp on
this side of the Rhine, but he was so received by the Canons, that he was
forced to retire back from the Camp an hour and a halfe's going. Saturday night
the besieged sallied likewise forth very strong, but after a long Skirmish they
were beaten back again. we have now seen again the third time a great fire,
which is taken for a sign that the besieged are in great distress.

Brunswick the 7. 17 of October.
The Imperial Lieutenant General Gallas with his troops lies now at
Havelberg, and General Bannier in the Principallity of Saxon Lawenburg on the
River of Elve, of whose Army certain 1000 horse have been already on this
side of the River of Elve, an^ driven away much cattle out of the Dukedom of
Luneburg, fired a whole village, and thereupon went back again with the
booty. Their intent is to lay a Ship-bridge over the Elve which the Duke of
Luneburg intends to hinder. The Gallassish army when it broke up from
Pomerania, because of the deep ways and marrasses, has left behind it diverse
great pieces of Ordnance which the Swedes got. The first of November, shall be
a meeting in Leipsich, of the circle of upper and lower Saxony, and the like
shall be done in other circles, to consult by what means the enemies of the
sacred Roman Empire may be opposed.

Collen the 18. 28. of October.
From Paderborne is written that the dispersed Swedish and Palatine troops
gather themselves again about the River of Wesar. Thither are likewise
marching 4 Swedish Regiments which have not been in the battle, as also those
Swedish Regiments which lay at Suttersea, General Picolomini is now going into
his winter quarters in the Country of Gulick. Some say that he is to go to
Field marshall Goetz. The Spanish Garrison in Kerpen does great harm, wherefore
certain Holland troops are likewise going toward the Country of Gulick.
Four days ago the Weymarish have taken the other Sconce on the Rhine.
Colonel Shmitberger lies now in the said Sconce, and shot down and burned a
great part of the other bridge. In the last battle of the Lorraine horsemen
escaped not 100. The foot forces run away in great number. At Mulhausen,
Basel and Newburg above 300 have taken service under Duke Bernhard. At this
instant we receive Avisoes that the great Sconce which lies in the midst of the
Rhine betwixt the two bridges is likewise taken by the Weymarish, which is of
great importance.

From the Camp before Brissack the 14. 24 of Oct.
This morning the Imperial field-marshall Goetz, and General Major Lamboy
have made a furious assault upon the Sconces of our Camp before the Ship-bridge
above the city: and after that we had beaten them off 4 times in the 5 assault,
they became Masters of 2 Sconces and the Spipbridge, and had got above 400 men
upon the said bridge: but they were so furiously assaulted by the Vicount of
Turenne with his French troops, that they were not only forced to forsake the
bridge, but also one of the Sconces that they had taken. Almost all the
Imperialists that were upon the bridge have been knocked down without mercy;
and it is certain that the enemy in those assaults has lost above 1000 men,
and we have taken prisoners 5 Captains, and Colonel Goling and Colonel
Newmarck were slain. On our side amongst the wounded is Colonel Shonbeck,
Last night the French have taken Saint Jacobs Sconce, which lies before the
bridge of the City, insomuch that we are now wholly masters of the
Rhine-bridge. Field-marshall Goetz is retired toward the black Forest. We do
not yet know what booty we have obtained, only we see that the soldiers do
bring into their quarters many silken coats, and wagons laden with muskets
and Pikes. At this present Field-marshall Goetz stands again in Batalia. By all
appearance he will venture once more, the effect whereof we shall see to morrow

Another from the Camp the 15. 25. of Oct.
Yesterday I doubt not but you have understood out of my Letter, the victory
which God almighty has granted us. It is certain that the enemy has lost
above a thousand men. This day Arms for two thousand men have been taken up,
which the Imperiallists had thrown away. By all men's judgment Duke Bernhard
by his own strength could not have bin able to beat the enemy again out of
the Sconces which they had taken; and therefore his Highness and all the
Colonells give the praise, next unto God, to the French, which fought like
Lions, and gave quarter to none, but only to seven or eight Captains: Our
High Dutch have spared the lives of many Officers. Three chief Commanders
whose names are not yet known, are slain. Last night we thought the Enemy
would have again assaulted our Camp, but he departed suddenly in the night,
and took his way toward Freybury, forsaking the other Sconce which he had
yesterday in his possession. Our Horsemen are this day to follow him. We hope
now to be shortly masters of Brissack. This day above eight hundred dead
Soldiers have bin thrown into the River of Rhine, and in diverse places many
lie yet in the field unburied.

Strasburg the 19. 29. of October.
The Imperial Field-Marshall Goetz for want of provision, is retiring with his
Army toward Offenburg. The report goes very strong, that he is to receive a
succor of 6000. men, which are taken out of the Garrisons in Bavaria and other
Countries, and is resolved to try his fortune once more. Besides that, the D.
of Savelle takes great pains to reform the Duke of Lorraines Army, and to
relieve Brissack on the same side. In the last assault are presented unto Duke
Bernhard 28 Captains, together with Colonel Suyter, which are taken prisoners.

Paris the 20. 30 of October.
From Italy is written, That both Armies are gone into Garrison. The young Duke
of Savoy is recovered again of his sickness. The great Turk threatens the
Venetians with war, yet the same Seigniory labors to compose the
differences, and to appease them with Presents. The French Fleet in the
Mediterranean Sea is gone toward Touton and Marsellies, to Winter there, and
in the Ocean toward Rochell and Breast. The Duke of Longueville with twelve
hundred Horse, and three thousand Foot is gone toward Brissack, and the Count
of Arpenyan with two and twenty Companies of Horse, and six old Regiments of
Foot, is gone toward Lorraine, to join with Monsieur Belliford. The Prince of
Lorraine brother to Duke Charles, lies with two thousand men about Vicy, and
has summoned Noyen. The succor under the command of Monsieur Roquenseniriere;
consisting of two thousand men, is speedily marching toward Duke Bernhard of
Weymar. Monsieur Haliere with his troops lie about Castilet, and Marshall De la
Foru about Guyse, Prince Thomas and Picolomini about Buvay; Monsieur Benedesire
has presented to His Majesty the King 21. Standards, which Duke Bernhard of
Weymar has taken from the Duke of Lorraine about Than.

Osnabrug the 27. of October, and the 6. of November.
In the Circle lies two Swedish Regiments, which straggle continually abroad,
and bring in daily many Imperial Soldiers which they take prisoners. The
dispersed Palatine Cavallarie sallieth again about this City, and at Minden,
and there are not so many missed as it was thought. The Palatine and Swedish
Officers which were taken Prisoners, in the last Battle are brought into Han,
Munster, Warendorp, and other places. Prince Robert, the Lieutenant General
Ferentz, and two English Lords are at Warendorp. Prince Robert is within few
days to be carried to Vienna. The Prince Elector Palatine himself, General
Major King, and the Officers are at Minden, only General Major King is hurt
in his shoulder, and one of his cheeks, but not dangerously. After the taken of
Witlacken, the most part of the Hatzfieldish Horsemen arrived about Vecht, to
besiege the same place. Four or five days ago the City of Munster has sent
five Pieces of Ordnance to General Hatzfeld. Doubtless he will use them in
the siege. Duke George of Luneburg has sent certain troops of horse and foot
from the River of Wesar toward Blekede. Colonel Slaugh with his commanded
troops lies yet at Lavenburg and Boytzenburg on the River of Elue, of which the
Imperialists have surprised five hundred horsemen, and totally ruinated them.

Lower Saxony the 29 of October, and 8. of November.
The two and twentieth of October his Excellency General Bannier with his
whole Army arrived at Lawenburg, and has arrested all Ships, to lay a
Ship-bridge over the River of Elve, and to make an invasion into the Dukedom
of Luneburg. The Imperial General Gallas with his Army lies about Rupin.
General Klitsing about Berlin, and the Saxon troops about Wittenberg. The
Palatine and Swedish troops under General Major King, gather themselves
again very strong, and get great Succors. The peace with Hessen (as is
believed) will go forward, because the Emperor will suffer the reformed
Religion in Hessen. At this present the City of Vecht is strongly besieged by
the Imperial General Hatzfeld, and from Munster two Morter-Peeces are brought
into the Camp. Those of Osnabrug have taken prisoner the Count Spar, who had
about him eighteen thousand Rixdollars in ready money, and certain Standards,
and was to command as Master of the Artillerle of the Hatzfeldish Army.

Luneburg the 23. of October, and 2. of Nomember.
Yesterday one thousand horse, and one thousand foot, marched through this
City, and some Regiments by it, they make up in all four thousand men
belonging to Duke George of Brunswick, and Luneburg. They are brave and stout
Soldiers, and are all going toward the River of Elve to oppose the Swedes
which have threatened this Country. The Swedes master all strong places in the
Dukedom of Mecklenburg. They have lately taken Botzow, which lies three
leagues from Gustraw, and six leagues from Rostock; wherefore the same Duke
will trust them no farther, but is gone with his Duchess to Brunswick.

Basel the 23. of October, and the 2. of November.
One part of the Duke of Lorraines troops had made a false alarm in one place
of the City of Ensisheim, into which part of the Lorraine foot Forces had
retired, by that means to amaze the Weymarish, which had given an assault upon
the said Town, that in the mean time the said Lorraine foot Forces might save
themselves by flight: But Colonel Rosa perceiving their plot, prevented them
immediately with his troops, and lay in wait for them about Cwittelsback, near
a wood where he fell upon them, totally routed and defeated them, slew many,
and took prisoners two hundred horse, and four hundred foot also. Which
willingly take service under Duke Bernhard of Weymar, General Major Mercy,
with no more but thirty horsemen fled to Than. Colonel Cuelyers Lieutenant
Colonel, and two and twenty other Lorraine Officers are taken prisoners.
Colonel Rosa pursued the rest into the wood. The Imperial Field-Marshall
Goetz, with his Army did the like, and made a show as if he would go to this
side of the Rhine toward Colmar: but now we hear that he is seeking already
his winter Quarters in the country of Wirtenburg toward Tubingen. It seems
that he has no great mind more to assault our Sconces: We hope now that
Brissack, in which the besieged are in great distress, by the help of God
will shortly be surrendered.

Alsatia the 26. of October, the 5. of November.
It is certain that the Duke of Lorraine de Novo is routed and defeated near
Ensisheim by the Weymarish Colonel Rosa, who commanded one thousand horse, and
two thousand foot, the most part of the Lorrainers have taken service under
Duke Bernhard; the report goes, of near upon one hundred Officers that were
taken prisoners. Last Friday Duke Bernhard of Weymar caused the City of
Brissack to be summoned by a Trumpeter, the Governor Reinacher bestowed a
quart of Rhinish wine upon the Trumpetter, and sent him word, that he as an
honest Soldier expected the promised relief, and six days hence he should
come again.

St. German the 27. of October, the 6. of November.
The Armies in Italy lie yet on both side in Garrison, the Spanlsh Forces lie
partly in the Dukedom of Millaine, and partly in Montferat: the French
Foot-forces lie likewise in some part of Montferat, and the Horsemen in
Delphinate. His Majesty the King has sent for diverse Colonells, which have
been this year in the field, to come to the Court; some are believed will not
fare well.

Bremen the 1. 11. of November.
The Prince Elector Palatine, together with General Major King, is yet at
Minden, and draws together his Troops from all places. Here are passed by
this City seven hundred new levied soldiers for the said Prince Elector, all
foot, which are marching toward their Randevouz; fifteen hundred more are
daily to follow them with certain pieces of Ordnance, a certain sum of
Money, and great store of Ammunition.

Hamborough the 3. 13. of November.
His Excellency General Bannier has his Head quarter a league from Swerin,
being eight leagues from the River of Elve. The Imperial General Gallas lies
at Grabau; both Armies approach one to another, insomuch that many believe,
that within few days it will come to a pitched battle. General Hatzfeld has
order to join with the aforesaid General Gallas; to which end a Bridge is to
be laid over the River of Elve at Domitz. The Inhabitants of the Dukedom of
Mecklenburg write of great misery, which they endure in the said Country.

Franckford the 11. 21. of November.
As for News we have none other at this time, but that the same which I wrote
unto you last week is confirmed, namely, that Duc de Savelly is totally
routed. At this instant we receive Avisoes from Vlin, that Bryssack is
surrendered. The like they write from Lion, Paris, and other places.

An Abstract of the NOREMBERG Curranto.
Basil the 25 of October, 5 of November.
WHen yesterday was seven-night, Duke Bernehard of Wymar went to Prayers: a
great Eagle flew about the Weymarish Camp, and about Duke Bernehards Tent; as
if he would sit upon it; afterward he flew again into the Mountains, which
was seen by all those that were in the Camp.

After that the Lorraine troops had taken the City of Ensisheim, and guarded
it with 500 men, the Sweedish garrison that lay in it, retired into the Castle,
from whence they shot fiercely into the City, whereupon the Lorraine General
Major Mercy (of whose troops, 400 Horse had likewise taken the little City of
Munster, in St. Georges vallie, and obtained Colonel Callenbuchs Baggage, and
afterward fired the said City) with 500 horse, and 500 Foot, together with two
pieces of Ordinances, went likewise toward Ensisheim to master the Castle,
wherefore Duke Bernehard of Weymar, commanded thitherwards Colonel Rosa with
five regiments of horse to keep the same place blocked up, till the fifteen
hundred commanded Musketeers, and six pieces of Ordinances, did follow him to
relieve the Castle, but General Major Mercy, being loath to expect him,
betook himself with his troops, together with the garrison out of Ensisheim,
and thought to escape through the wood, near Wildeshim, but Colonel Rosa lay
in wait for him there, assaulted him, and totally routed and dispersed his
troops, that General Major Mercy, only with thirty horsemen fled into Than,
four hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse of his troops, together with their
Officers, took willingly service under the Weymarish, the rest were knocked
down in the wood, and Colonel Rosa has taken prisoner General Mayor Mercy's
Lieutenant, Colonel, and twenty two other Officers, and obtained two pieces of
Ordnances, insomuch that now the whole Lorraine Army is ruinated.

The Prince Elector Palatine, and the Swedish General King, recollect their
forces, as much as they can, and are resolved to seek their revenge.

Leipzig, the 2. 12. of November.
The Diet of the Circle of upper Saxony, takes (...) here is beginning, to
which end, yesterday are arrived here Imperial Electorall, and Princely
Deputies, as also other Peers of the circle of upper Saxony, and thereupon
yesterday, and this day in the forenoone, they have met together in the
Towne-hall: what they will conclude, time will show.

Both Armies in Pomerania, lay now still, only General Gallas, causes the
ship-bridge to be laid again over the Elve at Domitz, and all the provision
that lies at Maideburg, Tangermund, as also at Hamberough is carried thither,
it seems that they intend to march again into the Dukedom of Mecklenburg,
and we hear that Bannier is already marched toward Wismar. The City of
VVitstocke is fired in diverse places, and burned down to the ground.

From the Camp before Bryssack, the 25. of October. the 5. of Nov.
Certain days ago, Duke Bernhard of Weymar, summoned Bryssack, unto whom the
Governor made a gracious answer: Duke Bernhard has intercepted Letters, being
dated the 9. 19 of of October, in which the Governor Reinacher writes, that he
has no more but for two days bread, and for some few days yet flesh, and
that the most part of his soldiers, yea above the half part, especially the
Officers are sick, dead, run away, and discontented, and that they have set
him time, from the 26 of Aug. 6 weeks to relieve him, which were expired above
half, if so be it did not go well, he would be blameless, because all
things were now brought to extreme, what troubled him most, he durst not
write, and that he dissembled so much, that he hopes that the enemy will not
perceive it, and that notwithstansting he will do his best endeavor, and
yield in nothing to the Hermersteiners, etc.

From the Camp before Bryssack, the 30. of October. the 10. of Nov.
Yesterday the besieged did forsake their mill Sconce, against which we have
approached these 2 days together, the mill they have fired in several places:
the night thereupon following, Duke Bernhard of Weymar, commanded Viscount de
Turenne, and Monsier de Rogue, services against a Hill, called Eysenberg, which
they took by assault, and took prisoners, one Captain, and 30 soldiers, of
the Wymarish soldiers were but 2. hurt, insomuch that the besieged have now no
out-workes more: yesterday Duke Bernehard has sent again a Trumpeter into the
City, and has offered to the Governor Reinacher very honorable conditions,
and withal warned him, that if so be he did stand out longer against all
reasons and conscience, He would not take it ill, if his highness here fter
did not deal with them, as an honest Cavallier.

An Extract of a Letter from Imlingon, the 30. of October 10. of November.
After that the French Army under the command of Monsieur de Feuguieres, had
blocked up the City of Luneville, and received intelligence, that the Duke of
Savelly with his Army, was in the way to march by Imlingen, and to join with
the Duke of Lorraine, the said Monsieur de Feuguieres, immediately broke up from
before Luneville, and the 26. of October, about evening, with 16. or 1700.
horse, took his quarter in the foresaid Town of Imlingen, wherefore the Duke
of Saville having received intelligence of it, marched toward Blamount,
whereupon Monsieur de Feuguieres in the evening, an hour before night, broke
up again and took his quarter in the village of Singrichen, the next day
after being the 28. day of October, he quartered betwixt Airecourt and
Blaumont, into which, (namely Blaumont) all the Savellish foot forces together
with certain troops of horse, and all their Baggage came, where Monsieur de
Feugieres, immediately routed and defeated all the foot, and made them yield
upon discretion, and obtained all their Wagons, that were laden with the
Baggage and ammunition, about 88. together with three barrels with money, and
immediately thereupon surrounded the little City and Castle of Blanckenburg, in
which the Duke of Saville with all rest of horsemen lays, insomuch that no man
can get in or out: In the mean time the Duke of Longueville, with certain
1000. men, has likewise joined with Monsieur de Feugieres, insomuch that the
Duke of Saville together with all those that are about him, are in a trap,
because they have not to look for any succor or relieve; much less have they
any provision, either for men or horse: and besides the said place is not
strong at all. At this instant we receive avisoes, that the said Duke of
Savelly with 30. horse men, by a stratageme has got out of the Town, and
saved himself by flight very narrowly.

From the Bishoprike of Bremen the 10. 20. of November.
Certain days ago arrived at Veyhsack in this Bishopric 700. Soldiers both
English Scots, and other nations, taken up by Colonel Valekener, for the
Prince Electour Palatine, which thought to march through the City of Bremen,
but the Magistrate of the said City, refused and granted them only passage
below the City over the River of Wesar. Our Bishop having received intelligence
of it, summoned with all speed all his subjects, and strictly charged every one
to let no man pass, which they did accordingly, and drove the said Palatine
troops, to the very gates of the City of Bremen, where they lay two days
together without victuals, atlast they were feign to run away, and to shift for
themselves as well as they could.

Minden the 11. 21. November.
The Prince Elector Palatine is yet here, and by all appearance will continue
here this Winter. Lieutenant General King, has recollected his troops, both
of horse and foo^, ^ut first of all they will be laid into garrison to refresh
themselves with order to leave no rest to the enemy in all whereof Colonel
Coningsmarck, has done already a prove, assaulted and defeated the Imperial
Reereguard, and taken diverse Officers and common Soldiers, prisoners:
together with certain standards. He has brought hither into the City. Other
parties are at this present likewise in the field, insomuch that the prisons
are made full, and the Imperialists, will not be able to lay long betwixt our
garrisons.

From the Bishoprike of Munster the 11. 21. November.
The Imperialists have forsaken the siege before Witluken, the Imperial
General Hatzfeld, has taken Cloppenburgh, and batters now fiercely the City
of Vecht, but by reason of the continual rain, he cannot approach, because
the said place is by nature morish and waterie, his Soldiers stood in the
approaches above the knees in the water.

Colen the 11. 21. of November.
We have received certain Avisoes, that the Imperial Fieldmarshall Goetz, is
strictly change d by the Emperor to relieve Brysiack, although he should
consume and ruinate the whole Army; others write, that he is to expect, first
the coming of Piccolomeni, whose troops are marching toward the River of
Mosell: He himself in person was with the last letters, yet at Brussells.

Vlessing the 17. 27 of Nov.
From hence are gone to Sea, diverse ships, toward England and France, they
have along with them, for a convey, 3 men of War, as namely Bastian This of
the Veere, Abraham Corunis, and Captain Holuert: the said Holuert, and
Corunis, are to cross the Sea, when they have brought their ships into safety:
In the same Fleet, went a Prince of Polen, and the Son of Marshall de
Chatillion. A party of our soldiers in the Sconce of Philippina, have been
abroad, whereof some did swim over the River of Ley, amongst which was one,
who could well play his part with lamenting and groaning that he got a Priest
out of his house, in a certain village, to make his confession to his Father,
as he called him, because he was a dying: And although the Priest did not do it
willingly, because it was night, yet notwithstanding, out of compassion, as
also by intercession of the Maid, was moved to go along, and when they had him
without his door, they made him keep silence by threatenings, and tied a towell
about him, and hailed him along with them over the River, and thus brought him
into Philippina Sconce. He is a very rich Priest.

Vienna the 30 of October the 10 of November.
THis week his Imperial Majesty has been a Hunting and killed above 100
wild Boares, and in the hunting has escaped a great mischance, because the
great wind tore out a great tree with the roots, which fell down close by his
Imperial Majesty yet without any hurt to him.

At Prague the sickness begins to be very brief, many Spiritual and Laymen
betake themselves into the Country: About the said City are likewise grown
strange worms, which have almost eaten up all the sown corn.

From Hungary we are certified, that the Turkish Army before Babylon about
300000 strong is totally routed and defeated, insomuch that the Turkish
Emperor saved himself only with few men, who has charged now all the Bassas
in Hungary to give no cause or occasion to the Christians to wars.

Basil 2. 12. of November.
FRom the Camp before Brisack we are certified, that the 29. of October, many
skaling ladders have been brought into the Camp, and the same day the
besieged for want of Soldiers have forsaken the Awemill, fired it, and carried
the Canons into the town, which Mil is now guarded by the Weymarish, the night
thereupo^ following the French have taken the Moas hill, and obtained upon it 5
pieces of Ordnances, insomuch that they have now in their possession all the
outworks of the City on both sides; whereupon Duke Bernhard sent a Trumpeter
into the City, who is not yet returned back again, Fieldmarshall Goetz lies
yet in the Blackwood: The French succor consisting of 4000. foot and 1500.
horse is Marching toward Dudel upon their arrival, it is thought Duke
Bernhard will give an assault upon the City of Brisack, the Soldiers, which
come daily out of the City unto us, certify, that many men are already dead
and starved for want of food, the most part of the Soldiers lie sick: The Duke
of Longoville has received order from the King of France, to go into Lorraine
and to recover again Espinael and other places: The second of this month the
Austrian City of Bludentz happened on fire, and within the space of 4 hours
was burned down to the ground.

Colonel Flenheim 3. days a go upon order of Duke Bernhard of Weymar is gone
against the Boores, what he will effect, we shall shortly hear. The
confederate Switzers are yet together at Baden treating about the Neutrality of
Burgundy.

Freyburg the 5 or 15 of November,
THe City of Brisack lies now a bleeding before the Gutenburg, Fieldmarshall
Goetz has lost 3 assaults, the said City is but little, yet strong and with
few Soldiers guarded. General Major Lamboy with 800 men, is gone upon another
exploit. Duk Bernhard of Weymar has sent the Captains, which he has taken
upon the Ecken-hill, without any ranson into Brisack, to certify the Governor
of that which they have seen, especially of the overthrowes of the Duke of
Lorraine and the Duke of Savelly, which overthrowes the besieged will not
believe: The run awaies, that came last out of Brisack declare all
unanimously, that the said City is in great distress, all the Cats and Dogs in
it are eaten up, a pound of Horse flesh is sold for 12 pence, every third day
each Soldier received as much bread as the bigness of an apple, and that not
above 200 fighting men now are in the City.

Venice the 2. 12 of November.
The 19. 29 of October, the Governor of Cassal Octavio de Montegli was
beheaded. He is accused by the French that he intended to surrender the said
Castle unto the Spaniards.

From Constantinople is comfirmed the overthrow of the Turkish Army before
Babilonia, where 50000. Turks were slain, wherefore at Constantinople the
ships and goods, not only of the Venetians, but also of all other Christians,
are set at liberty.

Erfurd the 10. 20 of November.
The Imperial General Gallas with his Army lies yet about Waldesleben, the
shipbridge is said about Lentz over the River of Elve, the Luneburgish troops
about 4000 strong, and General Marozini with 5000 men of the Saxon troops are
likewise marching to the Gallassish Army, which can be victualled for a time
from Domitz, and within few days they are to go over the River of Elve,
against General Bannier, who has great want of Horses, and had some loss
before Damine.

The Imperial proposition is made at Leipzig, the circle of upper and lower
Saxony shall maintain 18000, foot, and 8000. horse, and besides the
maintenance and service of the reformed Regiments, pay 1932370. Florens,
th'tother circles are not taxed so high, and the Imperial hereditarie
Countries are kept exempt and free, insomuch that this meeting will produce
strange things, the States and Peers instead of paying pretend their poverty
and destruction of their Countries, together with many displeasures and burdens.

The Swedish and Palatine troops that lay at Minden and Osnabrug straggle very
strong up and down, and have taken prisoner Colonel Otto, Christopher of Spar
who should have been General Sergeant Major of the Hatzfeldish Army, and
took from him 14. Standards and Ensigns, which the Imperiallists had taken
from the Swedes in Gartz and Wolgast.

The D. of Savelly is defeated again by the French upon the frontiers of
Burgundy, and himself escaped only with 30 Horsemen: General Major Lamboy with
his troops is arrived again about Darmstat, why he has separated himself
from Fieldmarshall Goetz is not known.

Spandaw the 7 or 17 of November.
THe Swedish General Bannier lies yet about Swerin, certain troops of his
soldiers have besieged the Warmunder Sconce near Rostock. The Imperial
General Gallas with his army lies yet about Lentz and Waldeslechen.

Leipzig the 10 or 20 of November.
The Diet here continues yet. From Prussia is certified, that the Elector of
Brandenburg going abroad in his coach, a shot was made down from a house,
which went through the coach and the brim of his hat, without doing him any
hurt.

At this instant we receive avisoes, that the Imperial field Marshall Goetz
presents himself in the valley about Oldkerck in full battle array.

An Express which this day came hither brings news, that the said field
Marshal Goetz with certain 1000 men has fallen again upon Colonel Morsers
Sconce and Quarter before Brisack, but after that he had made three assaults
upon it, he was beaten off and forced to retire with the loss of 2000 men.

Paris the 10 or 20 of November.
DVke de la Valette is fled with 50000 pistolets into England; wherefore Duke
d' Espernon is more narrowly looked to at Blasack. The report goes that the
Cardinal de la Vallette goes to Rome and Duke de Candale to Venice. Monsieur de
Merry is called back again and arrived at Grenoble: in a word, many
alterations fall in the Court about the Offices.

The Grisons can get no audience neither with the Archdutchesse of ^yrol, nor
with the Marquis de Leganes, which by all appearance will cause new troubles.

Last Sunday came hither a Page from duke Bernard of Weymar, who solliciteth
for assistance. In all the Provinces great forces and moneys are gathered to
continue the war next spring with all severitie.

This day arrived here an Express, who came from the Duke of Longeville,
relating that the duke of Savellies troops are totally routed and defeated.
besides 500 horsemen more which lay in Blaumont, and yielded upon discretion,
with all the baggage and Chancery of the said duke of Savelly.

Monsieur Preul has likewise defeated about Dourlans 500 horsemen.

Hamborough the 14 or 24 of November.
HIs Excellency General Bannier has his head quarter yet at New Cloister,
where he does reinforce himself, and has caused above 3000 horses to be
brought, because many of his horses died, and near upon 5000 horsemen went a
foot. His Majesty the King of France has de novo made over by bills of
Exchange to General Bannier a great sum of money:

Bremen the 16 or 26 of November.
The city of Vecht, in which the Swedish garrison defended it self stoutly,
was surrendered the 14 or 24 day of this month by composition, unto the
Imperial General Hatzfield, and the Swedish garrison was conducted toward
Minden. D^vers Imperial high officers have been slain in this siege, as
namely General Sergeant Major Westerholt, a young Count of Pappenheim, and
above 300 common soldiers. At this instant we receive likewise Avisoes, that
an Imperial convoy with ammunition going from hence toward the Imperial camp,
was assaulted about Wilshousen by 80 Swedish horsemen that came out of
Nienburg, and totally routed and defeated, and all the gun-pouder blown up.

Mastricht the 17 or 27 of November.
LAst Monday the French horsemen went abroad from hence, and have pillaged in
the country of Gulick, Geelkercken and other places, and are returned hither
again with a rich booty. At this instant by beating of the drum is
published, that all merchants in the Bishopric of Collen, country of Gulick,
and Haken, may free and without hindrance come hither into this city with their
wares, and that they shall not bec molested or troubled by the Frenh.

Collen the 17 or 27 of November.
WIth the last letters from Strausburg is written, that duke Bernard of Weymar
has taken the Eckenberger sconce, and being he understood by the prisoners the
great distress of the besieged, he was resolved to assault them by force.

The Imperial General Sergeant Major Horst with 3000 horsemen is gone toward
Stollhoven to pass the river of Rhine. We hear of no great succor sent unto
Field Marshall Goetz, insomuch that the relieving of Brisack is much doubted.

Amsterdam the 25 of Nov. or 4 of December.
This week are arrived in the Ulie between two and 300 ships, which came from
the East Countries and Norway.

The West India Company in these provinces continues yet strongly with their
preparations, and above 1600 brave soldiers are already mustred and shipped,
and 3000 more are to be taken up.

From Barcellona are sent toward Italy 370 chests with Ryals of eight, for the
continuing of the war in Italy.


