A PROCLAMATION set out by the K. of Spain.

Wherein order is taken for the use and traffic of merchandise, with those of
Holland Zealand and others, as well by water as by land.

Truly translated out of the Dutch copy printed at Andwerpe in February last.

VBIQVE FLORET printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, and are to be sold by William Wright. 1592.

A PROCLAMATION set out by the K. of Spain.
TO our Skout of Andwerp and Markegraue our of land of Reyn or his deputy,
greeting.
Whereas for to pleasure our good subjects, and to keep them in the trade and
dealing of merchandising, We are content to permit the aforesaid dealing with
those of Holland and Zealand, and other countries at this present being
possessed by our enemies and rebels, for so much as concerns the permitted
wares and merchandises, which by this our present ordinance are not prohibited:
in paying certain duties of license, according to the roll thereupon made or
yet to be made.

Therefore so it is, That we desiring herein to set down a general rule and
order. And having thereupon had the advice of our well-beloved and trusty the
persons of our council of Estates. Have with the deliberation of our
well-beloved and dear Nephue the Duke of Parma and of Plaissance, knight of our
order, Liefe-tenaunt governor, and Captain General of our countries on this
side, Consented and do consent by these presents, (until otherwise therein)
shall be ordained, That al and singular (as well our subjects as others) being good
and loyal merchants, trading and dealing in the aforesaid countries on this
side, may bring into the same out of the aforesaid country of Holland Zealand
and other like, and carry thetherward, all sorts of wares and merchandises,
permitted and not permitted, First paying besides the old and ordinary
customs, the duties of Licenses according to the tenor of the roll, thereof
made or yet to be made, And that throughout all havens, sluses, and rivers on
this side, where on our behalf certain officers shall be committed to receive
and collect the said duties, and that in such manner and order, as on our
behalf in every place and haven shall be set down and established, Provided
always that it shall not be lawful for any merchants or particular persons
to come hetherwarde from the countries of Holland and Zealand and other like,
or to go thetherward, for to bring in or carry out any manner of the aforesaid
permitted wares and merchandises, or otherwise without having passeport and
safe conduct for their persons or factors and dealers with expressing the names
and surnames of them. Which passeports they may obtain of us, or of our
aforesaid good Nephue the Duke of Parma etc. Or of him who thereunto on his
behalf shall be assigned, and of none other. Prohibiting all governors,
generals, chiefetaines, captains, magistrates of towns, and other our
officers, that they to the effect aforesaid do not undertake to give any
passeports or safeconductes unto any whosoever, or to let any body pass
without our aforesaid leave and passeport, as is aforesaid, upon pain of
nullity and to be arbitrarily punished, as well the person which shall have
granted forth the same, as he who would have helped himself therewith. Even
as also we do straightly prohibit them neither to troble nor molest the
aforsaid passengers, nor also to demand or receive of them any thing, either
in respect of the persons nor of the merchandises, upon pain to be severely
punished. Whereupon we do ordeine our Fiscall, and all other our Justices and
Officers, to take and cause to be taken, good and careful heed to the end
this disorder and abuse do not break in further. Considering some have
presumed to do to the contrary, Prohibiting all Masters of Ships, which shall
bring hither any merchandises from the aforesaid countries of Holland Zealland
and other rebels that they do not take on boorde their ships any greater number
of marinors then they shall have need of, for the conducting of the said
ships. And if any shall come over apparelled like mariners, and shall be
convicted of any deceit, or to have done any thing against our service and the
common wealth, in such case, shall as well the one as the other be punished to
the example of others, and their ships forfaited to our use. And to the end
men may know what merchandises are to pay the duties of License. We do declare
that all that which shall be grown in the Provinces being in rebellion against
us or other places holding with our contrary party, shall be subject to pay the
said duties, whether the same come from the enemies country, or whether it
come by any other way or country of our obedience even as also all that which
shall pass by water or by land, through the Jurisdictions and limits of the
aforesaid countries and provinces (holding part with our enemies) shall be
reputed and taken to come from the enemy, or that which with ships of the enemy
shallbe brought hither, though so it were that the same were done with
passeporte from us, or of our aforesaid good Nephew the Duke of Parma etc. And
also all that which shall pass through the aforesaid countries (taking part
against us) shall be reputed to go to the ennemy.

And to the end all men may know what Marchandises are prohibited and may not
be carried out of our said countries, we do declare the same to be, all sorts
of Armor and munitions of war, corn, and vittels, Bell mettle, and mettle,
Teasels, Hops, Barks of trees, Flax, thread of Flax, and of woosted, Talwood as
of Oake-trees, Elm trees and Ashtrees. And touching the marchandizes which we
will not to be brought hither, are these following, to wit: All clothes,
stammels, and generally all commodities of woollen, worsted and linen, wrought
and made in England, Holland, zealand and like provinces. And for so much as by
our said rebels, hinderance is done in the repairing and maintaining of the
banks on this side: we will and declare, that as long as such hinderance shall
continue, it shall not be lawful for any, to carry out of the provinces of our
obedience, unto our aforesaid rebels any sorts of wood Bauin wood, stones and
other materials, serving for the repayring and maintaining of the banks on
their side, even as also it shall not be lawful for any one to bring or cause
to be brought hither, any white or refined salt, unless he do also bring with
him like quantity of bay salt. Which duties and license (even as they are or
shall be specified in the roll thereupon made or to be made) the Collectors
and Controulers shall not in any manner exceed, or receive more, upon pain to
be deposed from their offices, and to pay the Quadruple value to our use, and
to restore unto the Merchants or others, that which they vndulie shall have
received. It shall be lawful for the aforesaid officers, as often as they shall
think good, to cause the merchants, Marinors, and others, which shall at any
time conduct any Marchandizes, to verefie that which they shall have entered,
upon pain (in case of denial) that they shall be reputed guilty and
culpable of that which shall be proposed against them. And to the end the said
officers may the better and without deceit and suspicion attend their callings,
it shall not be lawful for them, to meddle with any marchandizes, or factorie,
nor to have part or portion with any merchants, Farmers of our customs, or
others using trade, muchlesse shall it be lawful for them to keep a Tavern
and sell wine or beer, upon pain of loasing their offices, and to be
Arbitrarilie punished. Prohibiting and defending al masters of ships, and
carriers, in their ships wagons or other vessels, to lade or unlade, any
Marchandizes or wares, without having first paid the duty of the aforesaid
licenses unto the Collectors thereunto committed: who in this case, shall give
unto every Merchant a hill, containing good and ample specification of all the
parcels of Marchandizes, which they will lade or unlade together, also the
sum paid for the same, and shall be subscribed by the aforesaid Collector
and other officers thereunto ordained and sealed, if any seal be thereunto
appointed. Which bill the said Merchants shall be holden to exhibit or show
unto the Controuler, before it shall be lawful to transport the said
marchandizes from any place or Haven. And the said Controuler shall be bound,
thereof to keep good account, to keep the same bills in his possession, and to
keep counterroule of the sums therein, according to these instructions. And
if it shall be found, that any fraud or abuse be committed by the merchants,
Factors, Shipmaisters, Carriers, or others, as in being departed, without
having paid the duty of the aforesaid License, or having entered one thing
for another. We will that such wares and Marchandises shall be by the officers
of our aforesaid Licenses, seized on, and confiscated according to the said
proclamation. And if the same or the like were committed by the Shipmaisters,
or carriers, unto whom the marchandizes do not apperteine. And that likewise
the said Shipmaisters and Carriers, had put in practice to depart, sail away,
or unlade, and to seek any unwonted way with out having entered or advised our
aforesaid officers of the Licenses thereof, and satisfied them, according to
the order here before set down: In such case their Ships, Wagons, and
horse, shall be confiscated, whether the same do appertain unto them or no. And
shall there besides forfait the sum of one hundred pounds of xl. pence
Flemish the pounds. Prohibiting moreover, all and singular of what quality
they be, to wrong, injury, revile, molest, or slander in any manner of wise
soever, any of the Committees, or officers of the said Licenses, upon like
pain of one hundred pounds, for every time, and to be arbitrarilie punished.
Considering that all the same officers have been retained (even as we in
effect do retain them by these presents, in so much as concerns their
offices and charges) under our protection and tuition. And therefore we do
charge and ordain all governors, Captains, Maiestrates and officers, to
assist, protect, and defend them, against the said injuries, troubles,
molestations, and hindrances, which might be done unto them.

And to the end none pretend ignorance of all the points and Articles
aforesaid: we do will and command you, that you presently and without delay,
cause the same to be made known, proclaimed, and published, within our Town
of Antwerp, and limits of your jurisdiction, where need shall require, and you
shall find to appertain. And for the keeping and observing thereof, do you
proceed and cause to be proceeded against the transgressors and disobedient,
by the execution of the penalties, forfaitures, and fines aforesaid, without
favor, dissimulation, or delaie: for the doing whereof, we do give you full
power, authority, and special charge.

Willing and commanding, all and singular, that they unto you in doing the
same be dilligent and obedient, For so it pleases us.

Given in our Town of Brussels, under our Cruterseale thereupon Printed
Subscribed the sixth of December, 1591. By the King in his Council.

Published in our Town of Andvverp the xi. of February. 1592.


