Number. 84. The NORIMBERG Curranto of this week.
The confirmation of the defeat of the remainds of Marazini's Army, and taking
him prisoner. The people of Tabor make away apace to Vienna, and to Gratz, and
so to the Mountains, by reason of the Swedes approach. General Bannier is
drawing his forces from all parts to Brandeis, 3 leagues from Prague, where
Hatzfeld is now joined with Gallas; whereupon another battle is like to follow.

Prague the 2: 12 of May.
WHat I have certified you, is not only confirmed, but we have likewise
received here further intelligence, that the Swedes are already in the midst of
our Kingdom, and have anew totally routed and defeated the rest of Gen:
Marazini's forces, and about 1000 of them slain, obtained 28 Standards, and
taken prisoner Gen: Marazini himself, together with his wife and children, the
young Count of Shlick, and other Officers, which causes great fear, not only
in this City, but even at Vienna: Gen: Hatzfeld is coming with his troops, to
succor Gen: Gallas, but the Swedish Gen: Major King follows him upon the
foot; if this conjunction be hindered, our Kingdom will be in the highest
danger; and it is to be feared, that we shall not be rid again so soon of these
guests: Gen: Gallas, Fieldmarshall Baron of Hoffkirck, the old Count of Shlick,
Count of Furstenburg, and Count of Colleredo, are here in this City very much
perplexed, and their forces entrench themselves upon the White-Hill:


Norimberg the 7. 17 of May.
The Hatzfeldish troops, which are arrived hereabouts, and lie at Furt, are to
break up again to morrow, or next day after, with whom certain Bavarian troops
are to join, and go together into Bohemia, they have very bad weather to march,
and are likely to come too late: At this instant we receive the Letters from
Prague, it seems the poor people dare not write what they know, yet this they
certify, that the Swedes at their own pleasure straggle all the Country over,
and play the master in the field; the Imperialists, except the Hatzfeldish
succor, which consists of brave horsemen, but the foot are not 1500 strong, and
in all, both horse and foot, not above 5000; the Imperialists themselves begin
already to pillage in the Cities of Prague; the passage toward Dresden and
Silesia is stopped, and it seems that the War will be very hot this year in
Bohemia and Silesia; if so be that Gen: Bannier gives one blow more to the
Imperialists, he will go a great way: the Swedes go about to salute the
Hatzfeldish troops, before they come into Bohemia; many of the said Hatzfeldish
troops run away, insomuch that not above 4000 men will come into Bohemia.


Lintz the 7. 17 of May.
Within this hour, I am to go by Post from Prague, but with small courage,
because the danger is too great; Gen: Bannier with his Army, is marching
directly thitherwards; he has now in his possession Leutmaritz, and has
surrounded Tabor, where is such flying toward Vienna, and from thence toward
Gratz into Stiria, that it is not to be expressed; whole Bohemia will be lost
within few days: upon the White-Hill lie 10000 Imperialists to oppose the
Swedes. The Imperial Court, together with the young Prince, is going toward
Gratz. At Vienna, all the names of the Townsmen are taken, he that does not
furnish his house with provision for 6 months must depart out of the City,
insomuch that many are already going toward Hungaria.


Strasburg the 12. 22 of May.
It is certain, that the 8. 18 of this Month, the Bavarian Army has kept its
general Randevouze about Guntzburg, betwixt Donawerth and Vlm; the Duke of
Bavaria himself has propounded and assigned Gen: Gleen his Fieldmarshall, and
Baron Mercy, General of the Artillery, the Army consists of 3000 horse and
4000 foot, which way they will take, is not yet known: At Augspurg 300 Vats
with Meal are laden upon Carts, which are to be carried to the Army.


Dresden the 10. 20 of May.
As for News, none other, but that the Swedes have left the siege before the
Castle at Pirna, but the City they have guarded with about 100 men, they took
their way toward Leutmaritz, and so forwards into Bohemia; on the other side of
the river of Elve they straggle as far as Bautzen, at Bishopswerda they used
great cruelty, and committed all manner of insolences.


Altenburg the 9. 19 of May.
The Witzlebish and Ebersteinish Regiments have layn for 2 days together in
the little city of Schnallen, one league from hence, where they took away all
the horses from the Inhabitants, and drove together in the Country great store
of Cattle, and yesterday went with them toward Gera, Jehna, and Erford, they
conduct the Ambassadors of the Duke of Luneburg, and from Erfurd they are to
bring back to the Army certain Wagons laden with Ammunition.


Rome the 4. 14 of May.
The Spaniards have taken, not far from Marsellies, a French ship with Cloth,
amounting to the value of 20000 Crowns: the Neapolitan Galleys have likewise
mastered 2 Turkey ships, and made many Turks to be slaves. And a Florentine
Galley has mastered a Gallion of Algiers, slew all the Corsars upon it,
obtained 32 pieces of Ordnance, and about 300 Christian slaves.


Vienna the 8. 18 of May.
Certain days ago, one Regiment of the new levied Hungarians went with 50
Wagons laden with provision, a great sum of money, and about 100 Musketeers
toward Prague; in all the Austrian Countries, great forces are levied for His
Imperial Majesty.


Peinitz the 10. 20 of May.
This night lay here before this City, and in the next neighboring Villages,
about 3000 heads of Cattels, which the Swedes have brought out of Bohemia, they
have 300 horse for a Convoy with them, they intend to drive them from hence to
Altenburg, and so forwards into lower Saxony. At Shnallen lie likewise Swedish
horsemen with a great number of Horses and Cows.


From the River of Suar the 10. 20 of May.
The Duke of Lorrain, with certain troops, is arrived again at Syrck and
Reussel, where he kept his Randevouze, and is now marching along the River of
Suar toward Suarbruck, which way he will take, time will show.


Prague the 18. 28 of May.
Three days ago, the Swedish Gener: Bannier commanded 5000 horsemen over the
river of Elve, with order to assault this City from behind, and to hinder that
Gen: Hatzfeld may not join with Gen: Gallas, but a great shower falling, they
were forced to retire without any expedition.


Duringer the 19. 29 of May.
The 14. 24 of this Month, the Saxon Garrison at Leipzig, scaled and mastered
the City of Weissenfels, the Swedes that lay in it, retired into the Castle,
from thence they gave fierce fire upon the City, and flung many fireballs into
it, by which means the City was fired, and most part of it burned down;
whereupon the Duke Francis Henry of Saxon Lawenburg with his Regiment, that had
retired into the said Castle, broke up from thence, and marched toward
Naumburg, and from thence to Zeitz, and so forwards to the Swedish Army, and in
their march they have likewise fired Asterfelden, and diverse other places in
Saxony. Three days ago, 1200 Imp: horsemen, and 500 foot arrived in this
Country, and pillaged Franckenhausen, Greussen and other places, and 50 Crabats
straggled as far as Gotha, after which certain Swedish horsemen pursued and took
4 of them prisoners. The Other day came strict order from Gen: Bannier, that all
old and new levied horsemen, as also all Musketeers, which hitherto has layn
in Duringen, shall march speedily without any excuse to the Army, it is
thought, that he will assault the City of Prague from behind, and hinder, that
General Hatzfeld may not join with Gallas.


Zwickaw the 16. 26 of May.
The Swedish Lieutenant Gen: Dorstenson with 3 Regiments of horse and 300 foot,
has forced the whole Country of upper Lusatia, as namely, the Cities of
Camentz, Bautzen, Goerlitz, Loebenan, Sirtaw and Lauben, to pay unto him a
great sum of money; the most part of the Swedish forces is gone out of these
Countries into Bohemia, and lay the 11: 21 of this Month, 3 Leagues from
Prague, the Imperial Soldiers run away in great number, and take pay under
Gen: Bannier; 3 Imperial Regiments do mutiny and straggle over the whole
kingdom of Bohemia; At Prague they are in fear, and labor both day and night
in the Trenches, the Jews themselves must help to it, and the Scholars and
Citizens keep the walls; the City of Molnick, which lies 4 leagues from Prague,
the Swedes have pillaged and forsaken again, and brought from thence great
store of provision to Leutmaritz and Lawastits, and from thence commanded 5000
men toward Tabor, Rudolfs and Budweis.


Leipzig the 18: 28 of May.
In these parts lie now few Swedish Soldiers, they are all gone into Bohemia.
Last Wednesday went from hence 600 Musketeers, intending to surprise at
Weissenfels, the Duke of Saxon Lawenburg, but being the said Duke had retired
with his Regiment out of the City into the Castle, they were forced to return
back again, with the loss of 40 dead and wounded. This day 250 men are to go
again toward Moersburg, to drive away the Swedes from thence.


An Extract of a Letter from Basel, the 28 of May, the 7 of June.
The 23 of May, 4 of June, Duke Bernhard of Weymar, with 400 horsemen, marched
secretly from Bryssack toward the Lake of Constance, and surprised about
Lindaw diverse Imperial quarters, and the 27 of May, came back again to
Lauffenburg with above 1000 horses, which he had obtained of the Imperialists;
His Highness is now coming back again into the French County, to draw together
His troops, and to undertake his great march, it is thought, that he will first
assault the City of Salines, which City, as also the City of Besanson, being
they see that all passages toward Switzerland are cut off from them, offer now
to come to a composition; but the city of S. Claude, being it would neither
swear to the French King, nor contribute to His Highness, Duke Bernhard of
Weymar, and moreover, kept secret correspondence with the Enemy, was fired by
the Weymarish and burned down to the ground, together with a great part of the
Abbey.


London, printed June 21. 1639, for Nath: Butter and Nicholas Bourn; with
Privilege.

Imprimatur R. Read.


