July 29. Numb. 42.

MORE NEWS OF THE GOOD SVCcesse of the Duke of BRVNSVVICKE. Fully Relating His
last and several Victories achieved against the Forces of Monsieur TILLY.
With the Muster, March, Strength, Order, Approaches, Encounters, and Pursuits
of the said Duke of Brunswick; from the first setting forth unto the third of
our July. As likewise some Letters betwixt the old Duke of Brunswick and
Monsieur Tilly, concerning the State of the Business. Something also Of the
Emperors other Preparations, and several other Occurrences about the Kings of
Denmark, Poland, and Sweden. Together with other weekly News from sundry
other places.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, and Nicholas Bourne, 1623.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR WEEKLY news out of Italy, Hungary, Bohemia, Silesia,
Austria, the Pallatinate, Eischvelt, Westphalia, the Low Countries, and other
places of the upper and lower Germany.
COnditions of composition having been offered unto Bethlem Gabor by the
Emperor, and for ought we yet hear refused (as we told you in our last
printed, July 22) The Emperor being now at last, either much wearied, or more
weakened with the wars, seems of late times to be rather willing to require a
peace, then at leisure to expect, (as aforetimes) the mediation of great
Princes unto him to grant it. So that there were the last year scarce more
Ambassadors retaining upon him at Vienna, then he has of late sent abroad
upon his own employments. Witness those messages of his; unto the States of
Hungary, to persuade with them for their constancy; unto the Great Turk, for
the conseruing of the peace, concluded for twenty years with the former
Emperor Rodulphus; unto the Duke of Saexonie, to know whither he were to expect
him a friend, foe, or Neutrall; unto the Princes of the lower Saxony, to
desire passage for Tilly, and denial of passage to Brunswick: and lastly unto
Brunswick himself, with a second pardon, and unto Mansfield, (as it is
thought) with some promises of much preferment: Of all which we shall speak as
we have occasion.

The Emperors present and most apparent hopes, seem to depend upon Monsieur
Tilly, and his greatest fears in Bethlem Gabor; who having of late reassumed
the Title of King elect of Hungary, which he is said to have stamped upon his
Coin, and to have besides his own preparations of Hungars and Walachians,
which he has mustered, and with them advanced forwards, and sent the Turks
and Tartars unto Canisia, and the Borders of the Empire, (which they are feared
to be ready to enter, so soon as Harvest is off the ground,) he is further
believed to have agreed with the Turks and Tartars in another place, that they
for the diuersion of the King of Polands aid, promised by him unto his Brother
in Law the Emperor, and fall upon his Lands of Podolia; which as they have
often this year heretofore made inrodes upon, so now are they said in most
huge multitudes, (their fears in Silesia makes them report, that there are
200000 of them) to be upon falling in once again upon it. Besides all which,
Bethlem Gabor is thought to correspond with the King of Sweden, who upon the
expiration of the truce betwixt him and Poland, is said to have a brave Army in
a readiness, for the raising of the siege of Riga, which it is said that the
young Prince of Poland is to besiege presently with 20000 men. Sweden is also
said to have a fair Fleet, with 23 ships, of which as some Shippers of
Amsterdam that loosed from Dantzick, June 29, and July 1, relate; That the King
of Poland and his son being then to be entertained by the Dantzickers in
their Town; that the King of Sweden lay before the River about Dantzick, with
23 ships, or as others say, with 28: many of which were furnished with 28
fair cast pieces of Brass, (there being a report also, that his Majesty of
Sweden himself in person, was aboard one of them) which fleet haling all ships
that past that way for the King of Sweden; did strictly and severally examine
all the Shippers they could meet with, and arrested the ships of Poland: they
of the Fleet of Sweden also reported, that their King had an Army in a
readiness for the defense of the Country of Lituania, which of late days he
took from the Crown of Poland. Thus write the Letters from Amsterdam, July 17.

Lastly, is Bethlem Gabor affirmed, to maintain near intelligence with
Brunswick and Mansfield, that so the Emperor might have work enough on all
sides: and whosoever (finally) being discontented with the Emperor, and
repaires to him, he entertaines; as accounting them to be friends sure enough
to him, and foes eager enough against the Emperor, whom their own private
interest makes to be so.

For prevention of all which, the Emperor is said to have sometimes conceived a
very good hope, that by a speedy strengthening of Monsieur Tilly, he should
either by treaty or victory conclude time enough with Brunswick to employ
Tilly above in Bohemia or Silesia, which has been most of the reason, that
those Cosacks which himself meant for defense of those Countries, were by
himself threatened unto both the circuits of Saxony, to be ready to be sent
unto the aid of Tilly; and that his Camp in Bohemia, for which a place had
been laid out about Coningsgraets, is since that thought fitter to be formed
about Egra. For which purpose the Collonell Walsterp was about the end of June,
come from Coningsgraets to Prage, with Commission from the Emperor to do it.
Who was thereupon to have some better place it seems, for his own Regiment
being mustered and paid, he was to leave to be commanded by the Count of de
Nagrat, whose Lieutenant Colonel, one Merote was to be. About which business
also the Landtgraue of Lichtensteyne, Lord Deputy of Bohemia, and the Count of
Swartzenberg, were instantly to repair unto Prage, to consult upon that, and
upon the message of the Duke of Bauaria, and the Bishop of Wurtzberg, who had
then sent to Prage for all the aid that could be spared out of Bohemia, to be
forthwith sent down to Monsieur Tilly, who expected no other but to be put to
it to fight presently. But the Count of Swartzenbergh having diverse aduices and
Letters of the Emperor about him, is said to have been killed in the way (by
some that lay for the purpose) and his packets and intelligence taken away,
which will bring forth a new discovery. This Count of Swartzenbergh, which is
thus said to be killed, is the very same Gentleman who was the last year that
great Ambassador from the Emperor, being here in London feasted and
entertained.

As for the two aides of Cosacks, those 4000 which came to offer their service
to the Emperor, they lie yet in Morauia about Brin and Iglaw; where having
done much hurt, they are now said to keep better discipline, since that the
country of Austria has been enforced to contribute toward their victuals,
and that they have been received into the pay of the Bishop of Neus, who is
the Archduke Charles, brother to the Emperor. But for those other 12000 which
lay above, between the Frontiers of Poland, Brandenburgh, and Silesia; their
behavior was so good, that the Silesians raised 10000 men to withstand their
passage; which they offering to force, the Silesians killed diverse of the
Cosacks; the Elector of Brandenburgh likewise, and the Duke of Pomeren, have
commanded their subjects from man to man, to make up toward the Cosacks
quarters; and if they shall offer to forage or burn the Villages, as they have
done, to cut the throats of them.

And this is the truth of the Emperors warlike and apparent preparations for
resisting of Bethlem Gabor. The State of Hungary is distracted and has not as
yet agreed upon the choice of their Pallatine for this year: The Camp in
Bohemia, is for suspicion of Brunswicks making upwards, drawn down to Egra
further from Hungary, and nearer to Brunswick; (as being in the very confines
of Bohemia, next to the Dominions of Bauaria and Saxony, and close upon the
upper Pallatinate;) much of which Army is also (for the time) to be divided, by
sending aid out of it to Monsieur Tilly; and for the Auxiliarie Cosacks, you
see in what distress they are themselves. Here are the helps, that the
Silesians have now 10000 men (which whether they purpose or shall be able to
continue in the Emperors service, or whether they gathered them only upon
this occasion to withstand the Cosacks, we cannot tell.) And for supply of
money, there is a new Imposition, and that a greater one, laid upon Morauia and
Silesia, (as for Lusatia which should contribute with them, it is you hear
sequestered into the hands of the Duke of Saxony. They of Silesia being to pay
five florins a month, for every Citizen, and every Country man or Boer two and
a half. The confiscated goods of the Protestants in Bohemia and those parts
may yield some addition of treasure; which business goes now forward very
earnestly; And that course which is taken with the Jews both at Vienna and
Prague, is likely to bring in a fairer Entrato and a good round sum. For the
Jews are in the end of June, in both these cities warned, either to turn to
the Catholic Religion; or else out of hand to pay so much moneys for the
entertainment of the Emperors Armies, and in case they refuse to do either,
they are commanded presently to avoid the land, this is written from Vienna
June 28, and 29. And thus have Christian Princes, still in their necessity
saved themselves upon the Jews from time to time.

Now for the countenancing of Monseur Tilly, the Emperor has of late taken
diverse courses: As June 23. he sent a Post unto the lower Creitz of Saxony,
once more to require a final resolution of them, whether they were purposed to
grant passage unto his enemies through their Countries or not, (meaning Duke
Christian of Brunswicks army) which if they purposed to do, he then threatened
them with the sending down of the Cossackes toward the aid of Monseur Tilly.
And for this answer he propounded them eight days, that is, by the eight of
July, as they write from Vienna June 29. The same message was also sent to the
Elector the Duke of the upper Saxony, of whom he further requires to be
certified, whether by his army which he has now gotten together, he now
means peace or war toward him. Unto other States of the Empire, who have
hitherto showed themselves for him, has he sent other messengers, to desire
the continuance of their constancy, and that they would by no means be drawn
in to side against him with any other League, but every way to oppose his
enemies.

And June 27. there passed an Imperial Post through Prage, with Letters
toward Count Mansfield and the Duke of Brunswicke, to draw them off, with
offer of pardon and new promises. But the success of the Letters may well be
judged, by the time of their delivery, which fell out to be just at the time
when both Mansfield and Brunswicke were newly risen with their armies. Of the
sending of these Letters they write from Prage June 29. And that it may not
seem strange or cheap, that the Emperor would vouchsafe to send another
pardon unto the Duke of Brunswicke, who had so lately refused the former: this
is said to be the reason, namely, that the old Duchess of Brunswicke, Duke
Christians mother, having persuaded her self that she should in time prevail
with her Son to accept it, had already assured the Emperor, that he had
accepted of it: whereupon the new pardon was drawn, signed, and sent: which
being delivered to the Duke in the Camp, without the knowledge of any such
undertaking of his mother in his behalf, he first received and read so far,
till perceiving what it was, he with his own hands is said to have cancelled,
as he had done the former. To make this pardon (it seems) to take the sooner,
Monseur Tilly had Commission likewise to demand of Duke Christian the reason of
his advancing forwards with such an Army, and required in the name of his
Imperial Majesty his direct answer within eight days, whether it were for the
Emperor or against him.

About which time (but whether upon confidence of the former undertaking of the
old Duchess or no, we know not, or upon hope that the Princes of the Lower
Creitz of Saxony durst not deny the Emperor any thing) Monseur Tilly was bold,
by directions from the Emperor, to require passage of Duke Vlrick (the present
governing Duke of Brunswicke, Duke Christians elder Brother) for his Army to
pass through his Countries, whereof we have here given you the true Copies.

To the Lord Frederick Vlrick, Duke of Brunswicke, Illustrious high-borne
Prince and Gracious Lord.
I Cannot forbear in most humble manner to certify your Princely Grace, that
there is great appearance, how your Highness Brother the Duke Christian, will
easily give me occasion to seek passage with my whole Army, through your
Lordships Dominions. In which case, I must humbly entreat that of your good
Grace you would not take it ill, If I seek passage that way. But for the more
security of this Army, and that his Imperial Majesty's Forces may not be
stopped, hindered or molested in their passage, (but rather supplied with
victuals and all other necessaries for an Army, that they may keep civil and
military Discipline the better, and have cause to favor your Highness Subjects
the more) I desire your Lordship graciously to appoint such Officers of your
own, in all places, as may provide us of such convenient necessaries as we
moderately demand, or otherwise (without prescribing me or limiting the manner
or proportion) to send one or two Commissaries, which may continually attend
our Army for the service above required: I am confident in this particular,
that according to your former sincerity ever shown toward his Imperial
Majesty, you will be careful to provide herein to satisfy our expectation.

But if it shall otherwise fall out, that any annoyance or inconvenience should
in our passage light upon any of your Subjects, (which I could most willingly
desire might by a good and timely order, by you to be given, be by all means
prevented and eschewed) your Excellency shall not have cause to impute these
disturbances unto me: for which reason I would not omit to give you timely
notice by these my Letters. And thus humbly taking my leave, I commend me with
all submission unto your princely Excellency.

Your Highness obedient, John Count of Tilly.


These Letters of the General, being received, read, wondered at, and
considered upon, an answer as sudden as the cause required, was forthwith
returned to the Bauarian Camp. The Dukes Letters bearing this Superscription,
which is Monseur Tillies style:

To John Count Thordas of Tilly, Baron of Worbiese, Valester, and Wantigen,
General of the Emperor.
The Dukes Letters were signed on the top, Frederick Vlrick.

Our favor and good will prefixed. (Highborne and especially beloved) your
Letters dated at Eschwegen the 19. of June, Stylo novo, were yesterday
delivered unto us by your Trumpet, by whom you sent them: although the delivery
of them was somewhat after an unusual fashion, the messenger approaching our
walls with sounding his Trumpet, as if he had been in an enemies Country. By
which Letters of yours, we to our great wonder understood, how that your intent
is to conduct your Army through this Circuit of the lower Saxony, and
particularly through our Country; you pretending that our beloved Brother Duke
Christian of Brunswicke may give you occasion to seek this passage: unto which
our answer is, that as concerning our Brother we hold not our selves obliged to
maintain any of his actions, further then they are fitly and well done,
wherefore we cannot return answer unto your demands for passage, without the
advice of the Princes and States of the whole Circuit, of the lower Saxony, nor
before their general Dyett or Meeting (which is now at hand) be finally ended.
In the mean time nevertheless, we cannot apprehend how our Brother the Duke
Christian should give you occasion to desire such a passage; seeing that our
Brother has not hitherto made any hostile attempts, either upon your self or
any man else; but contains only his army within his own quarters, which he
keeps about him for his own security; being in the mean time in all
humility and subjection, in expectation of further extension and assecuration
of the Imperial pardon. But if whilst this treaty be in hand (for which time
the Princes and States of the lower Circuit of Saxony, have most humbly
entreated his Imperial Majesty to stay and suspend all further execution) you
shall of your self against all promise and faith given (as is apparent upon
record) offer to surprise or set upon him and our lands, we will not believe it
to be done by the consent of the Emperor our most merciful Lord; who, in
consideration of all our sincere intentions, and most faithfully devoted
services performed toward him, will not suffer so many faithful promises and
high assurances to be called in question or mistrusted. And in such a case we
nothing doubt, that we are likely in equity to incur either blame or
displeasure, if upon our own urgent necessity, we make it manifest unto the
world, how we are driven and constrained to fail off from our due obedience,
and most submissiue devotion, wherein we should otherwise have perseuered to
the end; and do withal in our own defense require the assistance of the next
Lords and Princes of our blood, and of his Majesty of Denmark especially, and
likewise of the whole Circuit of the lower Saxony. But if you would consider
that although our dear Brother did stand already declared (as God be thanked
he yet does not) an open enemy, but stands rather upon Articles of treaty,
and relies upon the further resolution of his Imperial Majesty; you could not
then, or at least ought not, according to the order which is given for the stay
of the execution, (which order we will by no means suffer to be any ways
infringed) to invade this Circuit of Saxony with a foreign army, and make your
self by that means master of our Lands and Subjects, which are altogether
innocent.

And if any third party (our Brother) has offended; yet ought not his Lands
to be therefore molested. If you desire therefore to have these orders
observed by us, it is fit that you observe them first your self.

For which reason we yet once more desire you to spare our Dominions, and
forbear to make any march or passage through them, and not to molest us, (who
rest our selves upon so many high promises of the Emperor) upon which many and
great damages and inconceniences may happen and ensue; and not to raise any
further iealousies or distrusts betwixt his Imperial Majesty, and the obedient
Princes and States which are under him: But we admonish you rather to expect
his Imperial Majesty's further resolution extension (and enlargement in some
points) of his former pardon to our Brother, upon the accommodation, or taking
up, (as we hope) of all matters betwixt them. To the intent, that the sinister
opinions and diffidences which the Princes and States have before conceived
concerning the slow performance of his Imperial Majesty's many and high
promises, be not more strongly confirmed in them; the several States of the
Empire having already heretofore deeply conceited such imaginations, and set
down their grieuances under their hands in writing.

We expect hereupon your further Resolution and Declaration, by which we may
know what we are to look for at your hands hereafter: Till when, we rest very
well inclined toward you, and wish you all prosperity.

Given at our Palace of Wolfenbuttel the 14 of June, 1623.

Not long after this resolute answer of the elder Duke of Brunswicke, which
expressed the mine of the whole lower circuit of Saxony his Confederates, who
were all in the same predicament: The Duke Elector of the upper Saxony was said
also to send another as peremptory a message unto the General Tilly;
admonishing him with all speed to depart out of the land of Hessen with his
whole Forces, or else he would use other means to enforce him unto it: seeing
that he (the Elector) was tied by the Articles of the League betwix him and the
other Princes and States, not to suffer any man that so behaved himself as an
enemy to remain in any of their Lands. This they write from Culle^ July 14.

And it is also written from Franckford, July 10. That if Monsieur Tilly offers
to set foot upon any of the lands of the lower Saxony, that the Princes will
send their whole joint forces against him; And the Duke Vlricke of Brunswicke
himself is said by the Letters from Cullen July 14. to have presently beset
the passages of his own land against Tilly, with the forces of his own
country.

After which Auises, General Tilly did not only forbear to attempt any
passage that way; out also (want in his Army withal compelling him unto it)
not long after this prepared to withdraw out of the lands of Saxony and
Hessen, making up toward Eischvelt, part of which belongs (as we take it) unto
the Bishop Elector of Mentz. In which country of Eisehvelt, for that the whole
business so much talked of has been atcheiued, let it not be unpleasant unto
you to take the whole order of the performance, (with the likelyhoods, reasons
and causes of the doing) along with you. Of which we having now received more
full, more particular, and more certain intelligence, will import the whole
unto you, and the rather, for that one depends upon another, and the second
victory, was upon the pursuit of the first. Monsieur Tilly therefore having
every way written very earnestly for all possible help before his rising; both
of Prage, from whence the Count de Colatto was to come to him with 3.
Regiments; and to Vienna from whence in the beginning of July, there were four
fair pieces of Canon sent toward him by water, first toward Heidelbergh, and
soon to his Leager; And the Crabats being upon his Letter turned back again
toward him, and the Baron of Anholt making up toward him, being not at that
time able or willing to stay in Hessen land to expect them; he marched directly
toward Eischuelt, in which also the Duke of Brunswick was, (this Eichuelt
lying just in his way from his own Bishopric of Halberstadt, and the lands
of Hessen, Duringen, and those places through which Tilly suspected him likly
to march up) Monsieur Tillies bold advancing so near to Brunswick, and so full
in the mouth of the Canon, was; for the preventing of his further proceedings
by the stopping up of all passages. Having therefore in Hessenland left
Witzenhausen. Allendorp Eif^rege and Wanfreid, under sufficient Garrisons
assured at his back, and W^^sl^ch Aln^^^^de and other villages not far from
Lassell it self pillaged and burnt, he proceeded on, and with all speed took
in the town of Duderstadt to Eisch^^lt, toward which Brunswick himself was
also making; which how he afterward recovered, we will presently inform you.

Monsieur Tilly upon June 25. came up as far as Garth in the country of
Eischuelt; pitching his Tente for that night in the open fields about
Retmartshausen: the next Thursday they went beyond Duderstadt toward Lindaw,
which lies within a little league (three English miles) of Northeim where Duke
Christians Army was then entrenched. And there began Monsieur Tilly, to measure
out his ground, to cast out his quarters, to dig himself into the earth, and
on all hands fell to forming of a Camp.

While this was a doing; Tilly having lest order with the Duke of Saxon,
Lawenburgh, and Holsteyn to provide for the victualing of Duderstadt, wherein
he had left 500. Musketeers (which town peradventure was to be the two Dukes
quarters) they with their horse Regiments (wherein they had 25. Cornets:)
rambling up and down to get this victual, by the pillage of the country: and
staying something longer then their Generals directions had given order to
them, and the Duke of Saxon, Lawenburgh having a design in his head, for the
taking in of the town of Gottingen, for that it lay full in the way toward
Halberstadt; which way Brunswick came; he with his fellows, when they thought
themselves most sure, were fallen into an Ambush by a Woods side near
Gottingen; out of which on a sudden 7. cornets of horse of the Count of Shirum
start up, whereof 400. were Dragoniers, that is horsemen every one of which (as
the manner is, leaving off his Carbine or fire-locke) had taken up a Muskettier
behind him, which 1100. Dragoniers, horsemen, and Musketeers) charging the
Duke of Lawenburghs Regiment afront, presently had the killing of 300. of them.
Some small resistance but not great, the straightnes of the place suffered
those of Tilly to make; in which conflict, Saxon Lawenburgh had his horse
slain under him. (Which chance made the Mayor of Budensbergh, who at the same
time escaped out of Saxon Lawenberghs custody, under which he was prisoner, to
report him to be slain when he saw him fall (the Duke hardly recovered
another, upon which fresh horse, with three others horse only in his company;
some Letters from Franckford dated July 10. say that he made an escape. And at
the same time, the Colonel Kniphowsens horse starting up and setting upon
their reere, and the 700. Musketeers upon the middle, Saxon Lawenbergh, and
Holsteyn were both cut off from rescuing of their own baggage, which was
bestowed in the middle; and there (to be short) 700. of Tillyes were slain;
amongst which the Duke of Holsteyn himself, is in some Letters said to be one;
the Captain Montagne and another Baron were left dead in the place; the rest
fled, some into the Wood, where they were left to the mercy of the Boars; there
were 1000. horse taken; and all the baggage and the treasure which they of
Cullen estimated to amount to 800000. Rixe Dollers. Of some horse which drue
the carriages, the driuers cut off the Trayse and womb-ropes by which they
drew; so that the horse being thus loose and frighted, ran away, to be taken up
otherwhere: Those of Tillyes were at first strong 25. Cornets or troops of
horse; there were 7. Ensigns or Cornets taken, and carried to Duke Christian
of Brunswick in token of victory; so that the whole Regiments were utterly
defeated and all the baggage taken, and as some say three or four Field-pices;
So that the Duke of Saxon Lawenbergh shifting away, had not left him so much as
a Shirt to shift him. And this last description is related out of Tillyes own
Camp which July 8. lay at Griebel from whence this was written. And thus the
Regiments being utterly defeated, the Conuoye for the victualling of Duderstadt
was cut off; which victuals being by Tilly and Saxon Lawenbergh destinated at
first for the relief of this town of Duderstadt, was after this brought into
the Town nevertheless. For Brunswicke at the same time (holding the Vantgard
of the enemies maine Camp played in the mean time with some light skirmishes)
sent out likewise certain other bands under the leading of the young Count of
Thurne as some report; who cutting off those 500. Musketeers which Monsieur
Tilly had left there in Garrison; presently made themselves Masters of the
place, and left a Garrison there of their own, unto whom the victuals
aforesaid in 160. Wagons, was forthwith safely conueighed. And thus 700. of
Tillyes being said to be slain in the place, in the fight with Saxon
Lawenbergh, and some others who had their throats cut by the Boores in the
foot and in their flight; and 500. surprised in this town; will help to make
up the full account of 1500. men which betwixt the first encounter, and this
last taking in of Duderstadt, diverse Letters report to have been slain of
Tillyes by those of Brunswicke. This fight with Saxon Lawenbergh, was made upon
Wednesday July 5. (which according to our account was June 25. (as they write
from Eranckford June 10.

Monsieur Tilly having after the former answer of the Duke Vlrick of Brunswick,
advanced nevertheless the land of Eischuelt, which touches upon Brunswick
land, and is within the circuit of the lower Saxony, and for the most part
belongs unto the Princes and States of that Confederacy: Duke Christian (his
enemy Tilly having thus begun) set forward to confront him; having stayed
before in his own Dominions of Halberstadt, as if he had waited but for Tilly
to begin to break out first. And according to his Muster made in Halberstad^
June 1. he marched these several troops and Companies.

Of Cornets of Horse. The Duke himself being General.
Has Cornets 6 The Count of Stirum 5 D. Frederick of Oldenburg 10 Colnell
Witzphel. 4 The Duke of Weymar 5 The young Count of Thurne 10 The Count of
Eisenb^rgh 10 The chief Lieutenant Versbeck 4 Captain of the horse Gent. 2
The Total is 56. Cornets, which amount unto 7000. or 6500. at the least.

The whole Army of horse and and foot, are mustered about 3000. fighting men.

Companies of Foot.
Brunswick himself has 3000 D. of Saxon Weymar 4000 D. Arut, or Barnard of
Weimar 3000 Colonel Kniphewsen 3000 Colonel Spee 3000 Colonel Girtsen 2000
Colonel Mey 2000 Colonel Spar 2000 Lieutenant Colonel Platto has of
Dragoniers 600 More of spare men vndistributed toward another Regiment. 1000
The total, (counting the Dragoniers double) is 24200
In this gallant Army there are diverse Princes, and brave noble Spirits, as
namely five brethren Dukes of Weymar, and three Counts of Oldenburgh: The young
Count of Thurne is Lieutenant General: one of the Dukes of Weymar is chief
Watch-maister; who in his Regiment of horse has 420. Seruitors on horseback,
who have all been Officers at Arms in other wars; and being now
Reformadoes, are content to serve thus in private, and to be commanded: But yet
for their general honor, they are said to have sworn one to another by the
honor of Arms, to second, rescue, relieve back, assist, and fetch off one
another, in all encounters, skirmishes, and dangers in battle how hot soever.
They call themselves The desperate Cauallierie.

There are also as yet diverse Bohemian Lords and Barons in his Army: and we
understand that there came of late a certain Hungarian Lord unto the young
Count of Thurn, with letters of great importance, although the contents be not
as yet divulged. All this is written from the Dukes own Leager, at Northeim
July 2.

In the march this order was observed; having stood a while some four hours
in battalia in the fields, to see if any enemy would come against them, in
which space many came from several places to view their order, (a fair Army
being the fairest of the three fairest things in the world.) The word being
given, they began to march. The order was in three deuisions. The Duke himself
rode before all the rest with six Cornets of choice Horse for the Guard of his
person: after him followed the Duke of Saxon Weymar, who led the Vantguard, and
in it 7000. horse. The Generals Lieutenant the Count of Thurne led the battle,
or the body of the Army with as many more; and the Colon^l Kniphowsen brought
up the rear, likewise with the numbers proportionable to the former. Some
other unarmed men likewise were left behind, who tarry for the Arms which one
of the Dukes of Weymar brings out of Holland with him, and then they are to
follow the Army.

Brunswick advancing forwards in this equipage, did at his first coming, take
in the town of Eischuelt it self, in and about which, he quartered his whole
forces: there is Colonel Kniphowsen said, to have killed 300. of Tillyes
Soldiers: his head quarter he laid at Northeim, which was so near unto
Monsieur Tillyes quarters at Lindaw, that their Vantguards had every day some
exercise of their Arms, and more then light skirmishes. The Canons out of
Tillyes quatters played upon Brunswicks men very hotly; which were answered by
Duke Christians men again, with six demy-Canons; although those of Tilly
could do no great matter upon Brunswicks men, by reason of the commodity of the
place, upon which they had chosen to make their approaches: The Duke of Saxon
Weymar, and the Colonel Kniphowsen, placed themselves behind their own
Ordnance, with full resolutions to set a fresh upon the enemies, if they durst
adventure forth of their trenches. But whither that the wary General Tilly,
had given order to his Companies rather to receive their enemies upon their
own advantages at push of Pyke on the top of their trenches, if they should
prove so hot and brave as to offer to force them; or that he were unwilling to
venture his men upon a salley out of their own strengths: this the letters
affirm for certain, that none of Tillies did at time issue forth; so that some
bullets being spent on both sides, the night took of the brauadoe of those of
Brunswick, every man retiring to his quarter.

That night or else within a night or two following; the General Tilly
remembering that nothing becoming their liberties, he had provoked the forces
of the lower Saxony, which for ought he knew, might be following after
Brunswicke, and make him at the first thus brave to dare him in his very
trenches, And considering the late loss of two brave Regiments of horse, and
that the enemy was blouded by the cutting off the Conuoy of victuals before
Duderstadt, and the slaughter of his men there, and at Eischaelt; In all which
encounters he had lost at least 1500 or 1600 men; and considering withal,
that he was by this already weakened, and did daily expect fresh supplies,
(some of which he then heard to be hard by) Thought it his best to retreat
back again toward his former quarters and Garrisons in Hessenland, upon the
river of Werra. In which resolution, leaving great store of lights and fires in
his Camp (as if he had still been there) he did under the opportunity of the
darkness of the night, with as much silence, as possible could be, without
sound of drum or trumpet, closely steal away; and what between retreating
and fleeing he retired three great German leagues (12 miles English at least)
that very night. The Perdues, as they call them (Sentinels that lie so close to
the enemies, that the sentinels of each side, may oftentimes whisper one to
another) hearing some bustling; and anon perceiving the truth of the business;
presently advertise their General the Duke of Brunswicke. Whereupon the Alarm
being given: Tilly is the next morning by break of day (the darkness being
unfit, for fear of Ambushes and entrapments, for such a purpose) with might
and maine pursued.

Tillyes flight or retreat continued three days, Tilley being ofttimes forced
to make a stand by the way, and to make head against the fierce impression of
the Brunswickers. And thus sometime fighting, but most times fleeing: the
Vantguard of those of Brunswicke, still beat upon his Reere, and were still
cutting off the tail of his Army. The thirst was all this while said to be
very sore in his Army; for the want of water, was said to be one of the maine
reasons of his so sudden retreating; (there being no river near to his
former camp, nor other water but such as was brought on horseback in buckets,
water-budgets, Borachoes and the like, which made it to be sold extreme dear)
And all this while showers of lead rattling amongst them. Monsir Tilley was said
to be feign with much disorder and danger, to have passed some of his forces
over the river of Werra again.

In this flight, three Regiments amongst the rest, are particularized to have
been worst of all beaten and disordered; many of whose Companies, thinking it
safer to run away then to be killd with their fellows, were scattered all
over the Country: most of which, as they were taken pilladging for their
victuals, were knocked on the head by the Bores of the Country. With the rest,
the fight and flight continued three days, that is the 1, 2, and third of our
July: so that at last Brunswicke is said to have beaten them so much, that
there were 7000 slain in the place, and of prisoners so many hundreds taken.
The booty was said to be great, some letters, that name least, mentioning 200
Wagons to have been there taken: others name no fewer then 600: there were
four pieces of Cannon taken, as some letters say, or as others, fix: and of
treasure five or six tun of gold, and some reports have been so particular
herein, as to Judge some of the Jewels, which were taken from some of Tillyes
Commanders, to have been some of those, which themselves before had made
pillage of at the taking of Prague: whereupon some letters boldly infer thus
much: That now is quittance cried with the Duke of Bauaria, for the taking of
Prague. Finally, the spoil was said to be such, as that many of Brunswicks
Caualliers, were said to have gotten above one thousand Ducats a piece, for
their single and several shares.

Some letters we have seen to conclude with this peremptory and tart
breaking off: that Monsir Tilly is by this hot and close pursuit of the Duke of
Brunswicke, so beaten, routed, and disordered, that they believe he will not
be able to make head again to much purpose this Summer. And some have yet
followed him further then so: Affirming that Tilly himself hardly escaped
(alone almost) into a little Town of the Landtgraue of Darmstadts, but which
(that we can remember) they name not, but if it were any at all, Giesen is as
likely as any; as being both near enough unto the river of Werra, where the
last of the fight is said to be, and this Town being also newly fortified of
late by the Duke. Nay some reports, will not let Tilly rest here neither, but
give out, that Brunswicke sent after him thither also, requiring him as his
lawful prisoner, to be quietly delivered unto him by the Landtgraue of
Darmstadt; and in case of denial he threatened to lay an imposition of seven
or eight thousand Rixe Dollars, as a punishment upon the Landtgraue and his
Dominions.

And thus much the several reports of this business being laid together, will
make up, unto which, we promise the world, that we have added no one
particular in the writing, but can readily show the effect of every point, out
of the several letters of several dates, from Franckford, Cullen, Aquisgraue
or Aken, Antwerp, Dort, and other places: And we further affirm, that all but
the last encounter of the last three days, is alrea^y printed News in high
Dutch.

The News you hear has gone current over the Town for many days, without
any apparent or particular contradiction, more then men's mistrust of the
vnlikelyhood of it. And whereas it may be thought, that all this rumor came up
at first, only upon one letter written from Cullen, upon some misprision of the
writer; you may easily answer this by the particulars forementioned, which
being diverse, both in the manner and numbers; (some reporting 200 Wagons
taken, and some of 600: others of four pieces of Cannon, others of six,
others of seven, so that it is very unlikely that all this variety should
arise out of one letter*

And whereas the letters from Franckford which bear date the 12. of our July,
which was eight whole days after the 3. of July, which is reported to be the
last day of the fight; do yet mention no such thing: we may readily answer to
that, that though these letters intimate no mention of these particulars, yet
do they not infer any contradiction to them: for it is very easy for such a
business to be eight days in coming out of Hessenland unto Franckford. And
again, the writer of that intelligence professes thus much, that he had heard
of Tillyes flight or retreat for three Dutch miles: and affirms, that he was
that day to receive letters out of Hessen, Duringen, and those parts from
whence the noise of this battle should come.

Howsoever; although this victory be not impossible, yet for that diverse have
suspended their beleefes of it for a while; we will not therefore use
arguments to show the probability of that, which a few days may prove false;
Thus much in the mean time, we have great reason to believe our selves, that
much blood has been shed, and that Tilly has had the worst of it (though
the reports of the particulars differ) and that Brunswicke has hitherto kept
the field. The particulars we must leave to time, and our next intelligence.

But howeuer, this small victory which we next report, is yet beyond all
contradiction, being written from Culle^, July 11; which was how that, The
Baron of Anholt offering to join with Monsir Tilley: that some of the Duke of
Brunswickes horse had surprised and defeated a troop of horse of the Barons,
and taken their Captain prisoner.

As for further News of the Baron of Anholt, It is constantly affirmed. That
for all that the Imperialists give the Lantgraue of Hess^n very good words;
calling him a good man, and a faithful subject to the Emperor: for that he
made no more resistance unto Monsir Tilly: yet questionless good words will
not give him satisfaction for the spoiling of his Country, nor does he
purpose to do the Emperor such a pleasure, as to suffer the Baron of Anholt
to come through his Country to join with Monsir Tilly; but having before
stopped up all the passages, he is said to be resolved to fight with him, rather
then to suffer him to pass vntalkt withal.

The Baron of Anholt being in this state, did about the middle of our June
endeavor to certify Monsir Tilly of all: For which reason he dispatched six
messengers with letters unto him; whereof five were taken and slain about
Spangenberg; but a sixth did about the 14. of June get up to Tillyes Camp with
his letters, letting him to understand his Lords desire to join with him, if
that Tilly could find the means to procure or open him the passages, and this
they write from Monsieur Tillyes own camp, which at that time lay about
Giebel.

As for other aid which was upon coming to Tilly, the letters from Isenach
Iulie 8. relate how that the 15 of June being Sunday, there past about noone
five troops of horse, of the Regiment of Collonell Auentans, being for the
most part Crabats, which Tilly had sent for back again. They brought along
with them fifty wagons laden with baggage, many hang-byes following the
soldiers. They marched a quarter of a league beyond out town of Isenach,
quartering that night about Mila, Bishoffsrod^ and Bercka from whence they are
directly to repair unto Monsieur Tillyes Army. They demeaned themselves very
mannerly where they came, paying for what they took, and demanding victuals
and wine not beyond moderation, being otherwise content with what they found.
And they report, that there are yet four thousand horse to follow them,
amongst which they affirm that there be 1000. Cutiassers (which be horsemen
heavy armed, and at all points cap a pie.) But whence they should come, they
told not, nor do we believe any such matter as four thousand horse to be
coming to Tilly.

To return again unto our Duke of Brunswick and to give you a taste of the
martial discipline, that he keeps. Some of his army having pillaged and set
fire to the Dorpe called Hattorst, which is near to the Haertzberg (a hilly
forest so called in the land of Eischvelt) he took ten or twelve of the
principal offenders, and hanged them up presently. And whereas some of his
soldiers had done some wrongs unto certain of the Duke of Lunenburghs
subjects who had occasion to travel that way; he righted them again,
proclaiming a general and safe conduct throughout all places where he should
at any time quarter: unto the subjects of his cosen of Lunenburgh.

Unto him after his taking of Duderstadt, did the Landtgraue Maurice of Hessen
address these 3. following names in Embassage, as Siegen for one, the second
was called Harst^ll, and the third was named Goets a lawyer. These had private
audience but kept their message secret.

Thus having done with these parts, let us turn aside toward the Pallatinate.
Concerning which it is written from Franckford July 22. that the city of
Heidelbergh, shall in part be freed of her troublesome garrison, in
compensation whereof, the country that is to receive the benefit of it, is to
have a new taxation laid upon them. And yet nevertheless, that the soldiers
are fewer, and the contributions greater, yet are the soldiers no better paid
any where, for which reason they fall again to commit many outrages.

As Concerning the Diet of Composition about the Palatinate, there is not now
so much talk, as there has been of late. But about the intent for the total
and final Restitution, nothing at all, Only there is some speech, that the
treaty for the restitution of the Ioynter of the old Princess Electresse
(widow to the former Elector, mother to the king of Bohemia, and sister to the
Prince of Orange) shall first be deliberated upon: as also the Duchyes of
Simmern and Lautern, with the Lands going with them, and belonging unto the
Prince Lodowick Philip, younger brother to the king of Bohemia (who lives at
this present at Castrine with his Uncle the Marquess Elector of Brandenburg)
are withal to be taken at consideration, seeing that the young Prince has
before put in his Plea unto them, at the Imperial assembly, at the late Diet
of Regenspurg. And with the consultation about the restitution of these two
Princes Portions, (the Grandmother and the Nephew) are the Imperial
Commissoners said to be the first to begin withal. This is written from
Franckford July 22.

The Duke of Saxony being installed in the Administration of Lusatia for these
ten or twelve years to come; is now said to be buisie about mustering his own
forces about Lipsich although his intentions in it, be scarcely known to the
Emperor himself, who has lately sent to him, to know what he purposes to do
with them.

As for the King of Denmark; it is written that for his own person he was
lately at the Diet of Saxony, which was then held at Luneburgh, by
Brunswick-land; which Diet is now ended, and the Conclusions not yet divulged.

As for his Army, it is still said to be about Hamborough: little of the
designs of it, being as yet known.

Concerning Don Gonsales de Cordoua, this they write from Cullen 11. How that
his Forces lay then still about Mulheim where they did before, And they then
heard at Cullen, that he was not resolved to remove, before those 3000. which
he has so long expected, be come in unto him; after which, it is either thought
that he shall wait upon Mansfeild, or go presently to the siege of Lipstat.

Don Cordoua, has lately sent his Lie^tenant Boyset unto Brussells, to
solicit for that pay, which the Archduchesse is behind hand with his
Companyes. Which Boyset returning back again, was said to bring such news,
as that it was thereupon rumored, that Don Cordova was to put himself upon his
march within a week or two: this they write from Franckford July 10.

Concerning the Count of Mansfeild, this they write; how that he has had
diverse fair pieces of Ordnance lately sent unto him; with diverse Ensigns, and
good store of all manner of other Ammunition. It is also here reported that
Mounsiuer le Noue, has received new Commission in France, for the leuying of
2000. more, which are to be forthwith conducted unto the Count of Mansfeld. His
design is as yet kept as sercet as ever, nor can we hear that he is as yet
removed from about Meppen, where he last lay, or of any intent that he has, or
has not for the besieging of the Town of Lingen.

He is agreed finally with the Count of Embden, and the Articles of Agreement
we should here have given you, which by casualty are to be kept for the next.

Prince Henry of Nassaw having victualled Me^rs, is again returned to the
Hage, where there is not much news of any sudden going into the field, it
being the custom of the States, to expect while Spinola begins.

The Venetian Ambassador is very stately received at the Hage, and has had
his audience, nor is more of his Errant known vulgarly as yet, then that he
is shortly to go toward the Camp of the Count of Mansfield.

As for Spinola, we cannot hear any thing of the certainty of the time of his
going into the held, by the preparations that he makes. Only some Spanish
troops of horse, lie about Mastricht: And that Spinola has caused 60000.
loaves of bread to be baked at Antwerp, of late.

There is certain news come to Amsterdam, and to other places, that the
Fleet of the States, whereof Mounsieur L' Hermit went Admiral, which was
called the Fleet of the unknown Voyage, has now taken the Island of Terceraes
from the Spaniards.

From Prague: July 1.
A few days since, is the Imperial Chapel standing on the lesser side of
this City reformed: It was before called by the name of John Hu^ but now the
seats, benches, etc. are all to be altered, and the very stones taken off the
graves, and the Chapel is to be new Consecrated, and called Saint Leopoldus,
by the name of the Emperors Brother, the Archduke Leopoldus.

From Basile in Switzerland, July 6.
The Archduke Leopoldus brother to the Emperor, is said to be busy in
conveying his treasure, jewels, and most precious vtensiles, out of Alsatia,
where he used before to be resident: into the Country of Tyrolis, as if he
were afraid of some enemy.

The Duke of Fiano is come out of the Valtoline, toward Millane, whence he
presently went with the French Ambassador in his company toward Rome. The
Popes soldiers expel all the Grisons out of the valley of Paraglia, unless
they will embrace the Romish religion.

Since our last we have received this confirmation of Brunswicks second
victory, from Hanaw.

From Eicshvelt, June 25.
About Eischvelt, 150. of Tillies folk were slain and diverse of his Captains
taken prisoners. The Duke of Holstien is slain. The Duke of Saxon Lawenburgh
has lost 106. wagons and all his baggage, (most of which, were those very
same that were taken at Prague) 1000. horse, and many thousands of Rixe
Dollars, besides those wagons and horses which they of Brunswicke gave away to
the Boers and country people.

It seems they of Tillie would have stopped Brunswicks passage at this place,
which was timely enough revealed unto Brunswicke. Upon notice of which,
Colonel Kniphousen drawing out certain choice men out of several Ensigns,
which-dividing into three troops, they dressed an Ambush, and lay all night in
their arms and order.

Those of Tillie coming on, fell within their danger and were instantly put to
the sword. After this slaughter, there came 15. Companies of Tallies Soldiers
who presently hearing of this first victory, fell of to Brunswicks party. The
body of Tillies Army following after with a purpose to retreat and hearing of
1500. of theirs already slain, and of as many more revolted in that maze, fell
a flying, and those of Brunswickes pursuing, had the killing of them, so that
God be thanked ours have gotten the victory. Captain Smit with sundry
officers, amongst which they say that Tillie himself was, fled away. Captain
Petit one of Monsieur Tillies side, is escaped to Tibach. For the certainty of
this: The Count of Crubach (who is one of Count Mansfeildes Army) coming
hither yesterday, was with much ceremony fetched into the Castle: reports this
for most certain. Kniphousen has done bravely, And he was the chief in their
overthrow.

From Hanaw July 5* Stilo veteri.
By this plain description you see, the rowting of Tillie himself in his
retreat, after the overthrow of the first two Regiments.

News of this second battle also was brought unto Hanaw by the Count of
Erpach, who reported this for certain unto the Countess of Hanaw; And that
there were exceeding few of Brunswicks side slain.

Some say that Tillie is fled to Oppenheim.

FINIS.

