Saint Nycholas of tolle^tyne
portrait of Saint Nicholas of Tolentino

portrait of Saint Nicholas of Tolentino

THis glorious and blessed confessor and true relygyous keeper called saint
Nycholas of tollentyne / was borne in a country called Pycen in a well
dysposed Cite called Fyrmane. His fathers name was Compagnous. His mother hight
Amata / both were very devout folk / and well dysposed. The which long
lacking a child gretely desiring to have one / full besyly both day and
night besoughte almighty god with devout voice and prayers yt they might have
one yt might be his dylygente servant. And because they thought themself un
worthy to be herd / they daily worshipped blessed saint Nycholas devoutly
besechynge him to be their advocate yt they might obtain their petycionand
asking. And at the last of their more devotion by the inspyracyon of the holy
ghost they went on pilgrimage to a town of ye country of Apuley called
Barus. Where the for said glorious bishop saint Nycholas by an image yt was
there of him yt was gretely sought and worshypped. And when they had done their
pylgry mage they returned home again faythefully trusting on god our lady
and saint Nycholas to have their desiring and petycyon / as at the last they
had by their concessyon and grace. For anon after they came home ye foresaid
devout woman Amata conceived and by process she had a child / whom she
caused to be crystened Nycholas in the worship of their advocate and patron
saint Nycholas that they behette to for a child.

lectio. ij.
THis foresaid child Nycholas brought up in the virtuous examples and wholesome
techinges of his father and mother / and also well lettered in scripture /
grew in chyldhode meruaylously good / so yt all the folk of the town praised
his virtuous living bey^ge but a child / and his gracyous dysposycyon against
all men / as prophecyenge before / said plainly yt great holiness should prove
afterward in him / for his life showed and appeared a certain special
prerogatyue of all gentylnesse certely / mekenes / softenes / chastyte of mind
and body and so great abstynence he did yt wha^ he was but.vij. year old he
fasted three days in the weke. Also he was of great pity / so yt oftentimes
wylfully he brought pore men seek or dyseased in to his fathers house / and
there through his entyse caused them to be releued and cherysshed. Also he was
of good relygyon and believe unto god whose ensamples he looked upon or read or
else remembered / ye good words and commandments with a right fervent desire
he gladly herd and fastly ever prynted them in his mind. In ye which thing
is noted a meruayll ye which blessed Nycholas told in his last days to a
certain relygous man that took head to him when he was sore seek on a time /
saying yt in his chyldehode when he did help a priest to sing mass. When
the blessed sacrament was lift up / our savior Jesus christ appeared to him in
the lykenes of a fair child in a relucent garmente and a bright shynynge face
and merry chere / saint Nycholas herd him sayng these words.

Innocents and recti adheserunt michi. That is to say Innocents and good
harmeles men has drawn unto me. Also he said yt in so much that he strongely
relysted their great temptacyon of all goostly enmyes and ever for soke his
own will to please him / he should have ye more grace and accepcyon of prayers.
Lo what mede it is to wax good by times / for grace grows after gouernaun^ce.

Lcto^. iij.
AS he was a young man he gretely coueyted relygyon / which ever he specially
loved / and was made a chanon in a place called saint savior / he grew up in
virtue as he begone tredynge down and leuynge a side all ye vices of youth and
with great pain merueyllously for berynge and leuynge all manner of sloth
wyldnes and sy^nes of youth. It forturied on a time he herd a certain
relygyous man of the nombre of them yt blessed saint Austyn had ordained and
called friar heremyte when this blessed saint Nycholas herd this holy rely
gyous man declare and show openly among the people ye perils / Ieoperdyes
and vanytees of ye world exorty^ge all folk in their hertes to despise ye
world / and when this blessed Nycholas herd him anon it kyndeled hy^
inwardly / in so much yt utterly he purposed wylfully to do and fullfyll yt
thing with all his heart yt the relygyous man had aduysed him to do. Wherefore he
yode to ye relygyous man whose words were roted in his heart and lowly prayed
him yt he would help hy^ for charity out of ye bands of the world in the
which said saint Nycholas I have been fetered and combred unto this day / and
that I might be worthy too be received among the nombre of your brethren
freres hermytes of the order of saint Austyn. For I quod saint Nycholas hertely
desire ever to serve and give me to god / utterly to for sake ye world / ye
devil / and my flesh. And in every thing and point to live relygyously to ye
vttermest of my power by the grace of god / and so did he gladly. His father
and his mother were glad thereof / and at the first consented thereto.

lcto^. iiij.
AS this blessed saint Nycholas had taken upon him the relygion of friar
hermytes of the order of saint Austyn about ye.xv. year of his age / helyued
virtuously therein till conuenyent and able time of his full aege / and than he
was made a priest in a town called cy^gulus. At ye last he was sent of ye
rulers of ye order to Tollentyne where he led almoost all his life with a
merueylous abstyne^ce in so much ye he fasted.iiij. days every weke bread and
water alonely / beside the days that were commanded by the church. Also
flesh / fysshe nor eggs / white mete nor apples this blessed Nycholas never
ete. And on a time when he was sore seek they yt had power to command uneath
could bring him or cause him to ete fless he a certain season because to make
him strong and restore his health. And an other time when he was so sore and
grievously seek than there seemed no longer life in him / nor no man behete him
life in this world / as he was in a faint sleep he saw Mary vyrgyn mother of
god / and also saint Austyn whose help he besought with all entencyon of all his
heart standing by him we a merry chere. And when this blessed saint Nycholas
saw them before him he greatly meruaylled and thanked them of their coming. And
they exorted him and commanded him to be of good chere / the blessed vyrgyn
Mary showed her finger to a street and commanded him yt in the name of her
sone he should go in that street to a certain woman whose name she showed him
/ and that he should ask ye woman new bake bread in the honor of our lady
and her sone and wete it in water / and anon he should amend. And as he was
commanded in his sleep he did wha^ he waked trusty^ge in almighty god and the
blessed vyrgyn mary and saint Austyn to be heled / and so he was.

lcto^. v.
THis blessed saint Nycholas punysshed his flesh and his body with great
hardness and correccyon And for more correccyon he ware most often chains of
iron. And also soft and easy beds and syttynges and soft and easy clothes
and raymentes he ever refused. He lay upon chafe ye which he thought was to
easy for his body. Also ye clothes ye he ware was sharp course and hard and
often chafed his body in many places. Also in him was great stedfastnes / for
on a time when he was entysed and counsaylled of a certain rich kynnesman of
his / yt he should leave so sharp and hard a life and go back to an other
place ye he could get him to where he might live more plenteously / and more
delycyously saint Nycholas ever refused it utterly with a strong mind in god
/ for he could never bow his mind thereto. His mekenes and obedyence was
exceeding without mesure / for not alonely to his superyour / but also to his
euenall and his inferyor. He was obedyent in goodness and suffered them all. He
had to all folk a synguler and a meruaylous pity and charity / namely to poor
folk / and nedy / and to them yt were in any trouble or sekenes / whom often
he vysyted and conforted when he was very seek and weyke himself. Sometime he
comforted them and releued them with words and sometime he exhorted them to
keep pacyence with good doctrine of scripture. And sometime he refresshed them
with bodily fode and clothing every man after his need. Also he caused thrughe
his sweet exortacyon and great dyly gence many men that he knew had richesse
to do the same too the poor and nedy. When this blessed saint Nycholas had
knowledge of any folks sins or fautes either by preuy confession / or by any
otherwise he was so sorry that he would weep and pray for them and punysshed
his body sore with fastes and correccyon to get them forgyuenes and grace to
amend themself and to continue in goodness. This blessed saint Nycholas was
pale of face shamefast and glad / and merry of countenance / of a smothe and
fair flesh / and kind to every body. And he was most myse / ready / and
dylygente to any thing that he should do that was good and goodly

Lcto^.vi.
ALso this blessed saint Nycholas said mass every day / but he never said
mass but he was clean shryuen before / ne there can no tongue tell the devotion
that he had ever and in especyall at mass / for the straight of his mass was
so spedy toward god that on a time when he went to a place called Pethaurus
in a certain wilderness by the way and laid him down upon the ground for
fayntnes / and was half a sleep there appeared unto him the soul of a certain
man whom saint Nycholas knew well ynoghe and loved in his life / the which
prayed him instauntly yt he would say mass for him / the which should not
deliver and do profit alonely to him but also it should profit unto
innumerable other souls the which souls were in a certain plain there nigh
by that he showed to saint Nycholas / where they were punysshed and tormented
with grievous pains / and that same soul the which was comen unto saint
Nycholas for socoure and help was also tormented with them with the same self
torments that they had. And even so it was done. For seven days after this
blessed saint Nycholas had done the mass he saw than in his sleep ye same
soul in great and infynyte Joy and myrthe thanking saint Nycholas entyerly
besechynge him that thrughe his help the other great innumerable multitude of
souls might be delivered from their grievous pains / and that they might come
to heaven to everlasting Joy and gladness.

Feria. ij.
lec. j.
THe custom of singing of this blessed saint was ever to be besy so yt he
slepte never a night almost / but prayed contynually / and the day also / save
wha^ he was besy either in refresshynge his body with mete or drink / the
which he took full soberly and full seldom as it is showed before / or else
in herynge confessyons or doyenge other necessary things that were good and
virtuous. He prayed with so great stedfastnes and entencyon and was eleuate and
fyrmly set with so great attendement and vehemente of devotion yt he seemed
holely rauysshed in god / and utterly delivered and done of fro man / nor there
was nothing so high and great to obtain but with the excelente delight and
besynes as who says with so hot affection and high deuocyan of his most
steadfast prayers this blessed saint obtained it and gate it.

lcto^.ij.
FOr ye which namely he used a certain oratory and praynge place Joined and
fast by an altar where now his most holy bones are and rest. Also in his
celle lay a stone ye which he kneled upon / and another ye he lened his arms
upon when he was so weary yt he could in no wise hold them up no longer / and
winter and somer kneeled on the cold stones.

lectio. iij.
Hereof the fendes had great dyspyte so yt they cesed not alonely to tempte him
with diverse temptacyons / but also they seeing yt they could in no wise cause him
to consent to no manner suggestyons of temptacyons / set against him open
bataylle / and vexed him with most sharpest rebukes / threttes vexacyons and
sore wounds. More over more Inwardly and hardly than a man can think. And
more over on a time when this blessed saint Nycholas amended his garments the
deuylles took it away from him because his prayer was of so great effect /
and they would have caused him to leave of his prayer / and muse on things
unprofitable to his soul the which this blessed saint Nycholas knew right
well because of his good lyuy^ge and most great pain in resystynge
temptacyon the which two things good lyuinge and forsakynge the consenting
of temptacion and for the same cause another time they put out his lamp and
cast it on ye ground and brake it.

lcto^. iiij.
ALso oftentimes these forsayde deuylles made great noyses in his celle
houlynge abhomynably / because his prayers was of so great effect / and made
russhynge and claterynge of stones / and crackynge of the tymbre as all the
celle should have fallen down. And forall this they seeing that they could not
in no wise let him of his prayer / nor ones too make him to look aside for he
thought on god. And ones he said if it be te^ptacyon I will pray much more to
have grace to with stand it. if it be gods sonde I will pray feruentely to
have mercy and grace for I care not what pain come to my body so it be to the
health of my soul. And the deuylles seeing yt they could not let him but he
prayed more and more / they came in at his door with huge and oryble lokes and
ferefull noyses / rorynges and cryenges. And they scorged him so gretely and
bette him so fyersly yt many days after the marks of the whyppes and scorges
appeared in all the parts of his body.

Lectio. v.
THe which also another time they did unto him in his celle door where they
met him by night going to his oratory / they chydde him and ouerthrewe him
grievously to the ground. And ever when he would have risen up they beat him
down again and hurt him right sore / and made so great noise that the freres
herd it and rose from their beds. And as they knew the horrible battle of
this holy man they took him up as deed and bare him too his bed. And thereof
this blessed saint Nycholas was so feblysshed yt ever after he was lame. And
like wise we read that it happened so to saint Anthony abbot. This thing was
of great prove and holiness / and that he was good which the deuylles hated so /
and did so great pain and persecucyon yt he was a martyr ghostly.

lectio. vi.
THese wicked deuylles also had great envy of saint Nycholas good brethren
and of the bryghtnes of his most holy life / fro whom as they knew well came
so bright bemes of virtue that chased all derkenes of deedly sin and
lyghtynge with good ensample / and gloryfyed all holy church both far and
broad. Also thrughe the great counsayll of god it fortuned that this blessed
saint Nycholas saw a meruaylous vysyon of a star ye first appeared unto him
when he was a sleep as there were a great multitude of people upon it so yt hy^
thought it stratched fro ye town that he was borne in / unto Tollentyne where
after he deseased. At last it appeared unto him more oftener / when he was
awaked and ever it went before him to an altar that stood by his oratory yt he
prayed in.

Feria. iij.
lcto^. j.
When this blessed saint Nycholas turned his back to go fro the altar the
star vanysshed away / ye which when this virtuous father understood many
years before his death commanded yt his body should be buried there when he
shall depart and that no man should take it fro thens. Also by this vysyon
plainly god would it should be sygnyfied that the most bryghtest clerenes of
his most holy life and ye bryghtnes of his great deserves showed eueuery where
and ye full constaunt and shyninge bryghtnes of his great and innumerable
miracles should lyghten and spring out at the altar where by the vysyon of
god would he should be buried.

HEre shall be showed the miracles of this blessed saint bryefly. There was a
certain woman yt ever wha^ she conceived ye child was borne or ye time / and
she took great sorrow and confessed herself with great waylynges and wepynges /
and betoke herself to him do what he would with her / mekely besechynge him
too pray for her / for it was utterly agay^st her will. And this blyssed saint
Nycholas so prayed for her unto god that ever after she had good delyueraunce.
The same woman had a little daughter yt had so grievous a swellynge under her
chy^ne yt it must needs be cut and not without great peril. And yet this
blyssed saint Nycholas thrughe his prayer yielded her safe and sou^de to her
mother.

lco^. iij.
ALso this blyssed saint Nycholas delivered an other woman ye which thrughe
trauayll.viij. days tofore was grievously payned unto death. Also he heeled
another woman fro great pain yt she had in her eyes and in her heed and in her
face swellynge / thrughe the besechynge of her sone to saint Nycholas yt knew
than his virtue. Also another child that fell in the fire and the hands and
the arms was so sore bre^ned yt the fyngers grew together / which was heeled
thrughe the prayers of saint Nycholas.

lcto^. iiij.
IN likewise he heled another woman's sone that fell also in to the fire and
brent all his face and lost his sight. And also he gave another woman her sight
that had two great eyes and they stared out and yet she could not se. Also
another woman had so great disease in her eyes yt she could not se at all. And
she had both leches and charms for the same cause / and when they had done
the best that they could she was never the better but had more sorrow / for
she lost both her wit and natural strength / but by ye prayers of this
blessed saint Nycholas she had perfyte sight and strength.

lcto^. v.
ALso it is to be noted that he perfytely heeled an other woman yt was so often
vexed with so great need ache yt she might another here nor se. Also he
perfytely heled a woman of the blody flyxe / whom no leche nor medycyne could
help. Also he perfytely heled a woman's breast yt was sore hurt. Also he fully
heled a certain relygyous man of his order yt was brusten and sore vexed
withal. Also he heled perfytely another yt had lost ye strength of all ye
left side of his body / and yt foot of his left side. And also another that
was most grievously vexed with heed ache and many other he delivered fro most
grievous and ferefull axes. Also he fully heled another man yt hewed blocks and
cut ye shynnes of his legs with so great stroke yt all ye leches said plainly
that there was no hope at all yt ever he should be heled.

lcto^. vi.
THis saint Nycholas also knew before and proved full many things by ye holy
ghost. Al^o a poor woman gave him a certain of flower for alms / he left
some of it / and she had that little home in her vessel / and it was so
increased wha^ she should occupye it by miracle that it was much more than
ever it was. Also at mass when there was water brought him and he lacked wine
/ by his prayer the water was turned in to good wine.

Also partryges was brought him deer and roasted / he commanded them to flee
and they had feathers and life / and flewe forth with all as well as ever they
did. Also by his prayer he made a stone hole again ye king before the
crucyfyxe with iron chains and fell upon his heed. Also by his prayer he made
hole another stone that a great black bird like a kyte did break / when
there was a counsayll taken in the cloister of Tollentyne too make a pyt and
wit where it might best be done thrughe ye prayers of this holy man it is
sothe yt in the top of a certain read the water sprange up / by the which
token they understood plainly yt there it was best to dygge it. In translatio
scti^ Nicolai.

Lectio. j.
ALso this great miracle is to be had in mind yt when this pytte was in
dyggynge a great quaue began both in the pytte and in the foundacyon of yt
church. And when this blyssed saint prayed weeping ye ground was sad and sure
/ so that there was no fere falling. When that this most holy man shone with
so great miracles at the last god ordained to call him unto him / and when the
end of his life drawed nigh he herd by night before matyns time the most
swetest aungelles the which abode contynually.vi. months before his death.

lcto^. ij.
THis blessed saint Nycholas had so great delight in the herynge of them that he
brennynge for yt desire of another life and ceased not to say with saint Paul
I desire and coueyte to be departed and to be with christ / for than I were
surer. And openly he said unto them yt were present that the time of his death
was nigh / the which h e took with so great mekenes and devotion yt they
meruayled that stood by / namly when they saw him with so great mekenes
asking them forgyuenes for all yt he had trespassed them. He went with so
great Joy and gladness yt he was seen stand ever by the heavenly company of
aungelles / and it was no meruayll because our sauyoure Jesus christ appeared to
him with his blyssed mother vyrgyn / and saint Austyn his aduouryes confortynge
him and saying / well thou be thou good servant and true come in to the Joy
of thy god. etc.

Thus ends the life of saint Nycholas of Tollentyne. Enprynted at London in
Fletestrete at the sign of the son by Wynkyn de word.

Wynkyn de Word.
tripartite printer's device of Wynkyn de Word, McKerrow 23, incorporating: a
sun over a crescent moon with stars; the mark and initials of William Caxton;
de Worde's name, a hunting dog and sagittary below


