THE Bible-bearer.

By A. N. sometimes of Trinity College in Oxford.

De Hipocritis haec Disutatio est Qui mihi irasci voluerit, ipse de se, quod
talis sit, confitebitur. Ierom. de vita Clerec. Printed at London by W.I. for
I.C. and are to be sold at the North door of Paul's. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful, master Hugh Browker, one of the Prothonotories of
his Majesty's Court of common Pleas.
IVuenall in his days complained of the multitude of writers, saying: -- Tenet
insanabi^e multos Scribendi Caco^the^.

And that Patrons were wearied in protection of their labors. There be also
many in this our age, that ad prelum tanquam ad praelium run to the press,
and subscribe to their endeavors: yet learning was never so friendlesse, that
she so wearied her favorers, but that always his works s^^^ (...) worthy
Maecenas. I have in this little book discovered the follies of irreligious
Hippocrites and dissemb^^^, by which the Church has been ^^lipended, God
(...) been offended, and th^^^ and grievously punnished. God auert his future
pl^g^es, and turn his Justice into mercy. GOD raise up (especially now) trusty
Chusa, provident Joseph, and just Samuel, bold Elias, plain John the Baptist,
instant Paul, and feeding Peter: exploding and extirpating wicked Achitophel,
covetous Judas, blind Elimas, and paltry Magus: and granting that the fig*
leaves of Authority, Parentage, Self love, flattery, and dissembling, may be
pulled off from Madam Placentia, and the Noble Lady Verona may show her
liniaments in vninuested and vnobscured nakedness: So that with true hearts and
pure Souls every one may bring the Ark of God into their houses, while they
may; that their houses may be blessed, as those houses where the Arc was: and
that this famous City with the adjoining places, now after their long
infection, and late sorrovvfull sighing of that Hei mihi quanta despe decidi,
may (as it was said of Christ) gustare post fella fauos: to the glory of God,
Church, Common-^^ealth, and our private good.

(...) ^oldned by good notice taken of your love to Learning and virtue, to
pass this my Labor under the prote^^ion of your name. Not doubting but the
subject being good, it shall find your favorable and good acceptance, and be
thereby sorovvded from the preiu^^^e of Contempt. If you look on it, and like
it, my endeavors have a condign counterpoise. In which hope I commit your
^orship to the Almighty.

A. N.

A Preface to the Reader.
IF a Tree (says Chris^sto^^g) ^e^^^ no fruit, the cause is in the ro^^* The
cause of the barrein leaves of peoples trec^, and their vain words, and worse
(...) o^k^, may be taken to be the wa^^ of Religion, and Nutrality in Religion.
I have therefore undertaken to write this small Treatise: entitled the
Bible-bearer, discovering the vanity and errors of such as make a se^^ely
profession, yet have no true practice of Religion: that would be accounted
zealous, yet are Neuters and Irreligions: because this our age has brought
forth many a prodigious Polipu^, and vain ayre-full Camelions.

Wherein, Si forte mihi vitio detur. If perchance I be blamed (especially of
idle make bates, and gaping Cauillers) that I have applied some writers to my
own use, I answer them as Patric. ^^pist. in lib. d^ i^^tir. R^in.
Patricius did the like: Me parum admodum fidei rebus meis facturum fuisse; Si
solum authoritate mea in^erer. Besides, it is the custom of all Writers to
mingle other men's things with their own. Tum vt certiora scribant, tum vt
gratius, iucundiusque legantur. Both that the truth may be written more
certainly, and that which is written may be to the Reader more gracious and
pleasing. Or as Idem (...).
Aphranius being accused, that he had taken much out of Menander: I confess
(says he) I have taken not only out of him, but out of every one that agreed
to my matter. Quodeunque me non posse facere melius credidi. Only this I fear
that the Autho^ whom I cite, may return Mart^als Apostroph^^ po^^ me, Sed male
dum recitas, incipit ^^^tuum* (...) running through so (...) Ch^^^^^ (...) of
his sweetness.

(...) he man (...) ^^ough: for the matter it self, (...) ^uer this mean
Book has learned this ^ean, P^^^^p^^^s, ^icere de vitijs: To spare the man,
and to ^ouch his manners: ye^ some (as I (...)
Lip^^^ (...) ca^eth of a (...) of his) homines male ac^es, (...) ^i^^isse me
volent quae per som^^^ (...). Will think I meant that (...) my mind. Howbeit I
may safe^^^ (...) with S^^^ Hierome. (...)
Neminem laesi, nul^^^ (...) desig natum est. Neminem spe^^^ (...) etc. I have
stricken (...) strise: Maligned no man, (...) any, but his envy (...)
. (...) people and contentious, I (...) I shall (...) please, nor do I pass
(...) of man's judgment, when (...). Only thee (gentle Reader) I (...) thought
of Hera^lit^^s (...) ^ouldest char^^^^^ (...), 6. (...) ^^^stand is (...) want
(...) against the spi^^^ ^f sing (...) ^^^^sme, and to ^^en the (...) being
provoked, I have called some (...), He ^earers, Neuters, or Nullifidians, bear
with this also: Ipsa enim necessitas adure s^^ hutus certaminis doctrinas
instans, talem nobis suderem ^ff^^it, et vt lectores auertantur Epiphan.
p^^fa^. in lib h^t es.
. As says Epiphanius, i^ not unlike case. I did it, because sinful schism,
and hypocrisy is impudent: and hau ng a whoores forehead, will not be ashamed
till we spit in her face.

In respect of which, as I cannot hope for much acc^p^ance of my widows mite,
for some will despise it a^ a thing of no value, and disdain to read it:
others in ^or love to the name, consider the person, not the thing: and more
commend others silence then this endeavor: some account me bold, for handling
such matter: some think themselves skillful and learned, if they can detract
from other men's labors, Et non quid ipsi possint: Sed quid nos non possumus,
dijudicent: So may I justly wish with Lucilius, that neither the best nor worst
learned might be my Readers: because they understand nothing at all, and these
more then (perhaps) I mean. Perseum non curo legere, Lael^um vol^. Perseus is
too learned, I wish honest, Cice^ lib. (...) de Orat.
and not unlearned Laelius to be my Reader. If I have done well it is the
thing I desire; if slenderly and bately, it is that I could: howsoever let the
profit be his that reads, the painer his that has wri^en. And this for
M^mus. M^^. Ep^^. ^^an^.


Corpore vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
The Speakers names ARE THEOTIMVS, and POLIPHEMVS.
The. POliphemus, thou art very well met: for trauayling along the way alone,
my eyes presented with no desired objects to feed upon, nor my heart made
happy in the fruition of any hopeful accident, I began to be melancholy: and
thy coming tenders occasion unto me to talk, as well to satisfy my mind, as
to beguile the tediousness of time.


Poli I am glad Theotimus, that my presence may either pleasure you, or profit
you: for mine own part, my Fortunes are all alike: No wind at any time blows
me any comfort or commodity, but travail I whither I will, Per varios casus,
and tot descrimina rerum, I still continue in eodem statu: A good year mends
me not, nor a bad pairs me slot.


Theo. It may be so (Poliphemus) for that is a fate that always follows men,
that fashion themselves to time, that can play on both sides, that can be,
Verbis tenus, factis procul. Such as can holo with the Hare, and run with the
Hound, and care more for a dram of dissimulation, then a pound of plain
dealing.


Poli. But I pray thee tell me (Theotimus) what makes thee thus Critical? Or
causes these complaints against the condition of Times? Is it any former
observation from others, or any present object from my self?


Theo. It is both.


Po. Why then seeing our way is alike, and time presents us with like oppor
tunity: before I hear mine own faults rehearsed (if at any time heretofore y^
have noted any in me) let me hear other men's blemishes blazed, such (as thou
s^iest) carry (like Ianus) two faces under one hood, y^ are men for all inanity
of goodness, as wels without wa^er: for lightness and instability, as winds
without rain: for barrenness, trees without fruit: and for darkness, Stars
without light.


Theo. The more shameful that any fault is (Poliphemus) the more careful we
should be to shun it. And what more heinous crime then Hypocrisy, yet what
more commen then such behauior? There live now many Monsters in nature,
Apostataes from God, Atheists in error* Counterfeites of holiness, that
profess the kingdom of the Gospel, but for the most part embrace the
kingdom of the world: that are Angels in show, in deeds Devils: that are
Saints in face in heart Serpents: Gods word swumming in their lips: but
detestable Satan digging in their souls.


Poli. Such are termed Atheists, are they not Theotimus?


Theo. You may call them what you will, but I think they are people worse then
Atheists, for the Atheists profess themselves to be (as they are) openly
wicked, but the other by ill dissimulation, to be good: Whereby that ill does
more annoy under color of goodness. Swear an oath they will not, but by my
truly: Indeed-la: Assure as I live, yet for all this fair show, they will not
stick to practice any underhand prejudice against their Neighbout: and infect
the heavens with their horride and unheard of impieties.


Po. But God knows their secret intents (Theo.) does he not? The. Thou
speak like thy self (Poli.) better instructed to defend thy body with thy
Weapon then to comfort thy soul with Gods word: do thou not know that
dissemble with the world they may, but with God they cannot? He of his
knowledge cannot be deceived: Of his truth cannot be changed: of his inviolable
faithfulness, cannot be corrupted: For (although he permit them a while) yet
does he proceed to note down the falfinesse of their behavior, and at lenght
give them to know that it is in vain to make false semblance with him: to be
ready both to worship Baal, with Achab, and the Lord with Jehu: Reg. 16, and
29. Ezr. 4. Numb 24 Math. 20, and 27.
To build up the Temple with Zerubbabel, and pull it down with the Aramites: To
bless for Israel, and curse for Bal^ak: to cry Hosanna to day, and Crucifige
too morrow, etc.


Po. This same Dissimulation then is a great sin belike.


Theo. It is the Throne and crown of all villainy, the stain and shame of
piety, the scum of fallacy, the founder of iniquity, and consounder of
integrity. It works all her falsehood under a color of truth, it affects
wrongs under a Mask of doing right: It performs all manner of iniquity,
under the Vesture of Christian Duty.


Po. It seems (Theoti.) you have been a curious obseruer of other men.


Theo. Not curious, but careful: and not without cause. For it hurts more
with a vayled seeming verity, then does an Enemy by armed hostility: The one
comes into the field like a man, the other into the Court with falsehood,
like the Devil: the one with weapon in hand, the other with poison in heart:
this assaulteth with valor and magnanimity, that other deceives by dissembled
color and Treachery.


Poli. But now tell me (Theo.) what saw you in me, that at the first gave you
occasion to make this the subject of your speech?


Theo. I will resolve you by and by, but first make it known unto me what you
will do ( Poliphe.) hunting in this place?


Poli You ask (methinkes) a very idle question, for wha^ ^oundes have I, I
pra^ you, or hunting staff? See h^re my Nets, Tramell, and hunting geere.


Theo What do I behold: Ba^chus in a Lions case? My swagging Poliphemus with a
Book. This makes well for our first matter: yet you have bin at cost with it,
it seems to me to be a warlike book, it is so armed, so painted and bound
about with brases of brass.


Poli. Look into it.


Theo. I see it well enough, and yet I see it is not sufficiently furnished as
it ought to be.


Poli. Look into it.


Theo. I see it well enough, and yet I see it is not suffciently furnished as
it ought to be.


Poli. What lackes it?


Theo. You should have set it forth better, and garnisht it wi^h your own
Arms.


Poli. What Arms?


Theo. Sylenus head, or an Asses head peeping out of a Tun: for omnis habitus
a^ff^cile separabilis est a Subiesto, And because thou cariest it, methinks the
subject should be of no other matter, but the art of quaffing, or Carrowsing.


Poly Take heed least thou speak unadvisedly, for 3. things I have herd) are
exempt from mocking and blasphemy. The first is, the affairs of Princes, for
they are not to be meddled with, Qua supra nos, nihil ad nos. The second, the
misery of them that are poor, for Fortune (changing) may make thy case like.

Quem des vidit veniens superbum,
Hunc dies vid^, fugiens iacentem.
The third, the Ceremonies of the Church, whcih admits no idle, unchaste, or
blasphemous person. According to that of Vibullus.

Dis^edat ab aris,
Out tul t hesterna gaudia noste venus,
Casta plac^^t superis: ^ura cum monte venite, etc.

Theo. What is it then, any Church matter, or holy thing that thou bear?


Poly. Is there any thing more requisite to be had in the church, or more
sacred, or holy thing then the Bible?


Theo. Jesus God: what has Polyphemus to do with the Bible?


Poly. Ask you that? What a Christian has to do with Christ? Bona pars est
Christianismi velle sier, Christia^um.


Theo. I that's true, if it be Toto pectore, without Hyppocrisie or
Dissimulation. But (except thy mind be suddenly altered, which I desire) I
think rather an Halbert, or a sword and dagger, would become thy qualities,
and person for if (unacquainted) I should meet thee on the sea in these
habiliments. I shu^d take thee for a Pyrate: if on the land, for a very thief
and robber.


Poli. But this Bible teaches we should not judge any man according to his
outward show and apearance, for as many times under a Russet coat lurkes a
Tyranous and cruel heart, so sometimes a long lock, shag hair, staring
Muchachio, fierce eyes, a flaunting feather, a soldiers Cassocke, and a
swaggring hose, do cover a Gospellers mind.


Theo. And why not? for the Wolves skin many times does cover the harmless
sheep, and (if we may believe tales) an Ass is oftentimes hidden under a
Lions case.


Poli. It seems you deem very strangely of me.


Theo. I wish that as thou carriest this book in thy hands, so thou had it
engraven in thy heart. That thou were as thou would seem to be, sound in
religion, and not Neither hot, nor cold.


Poli. I pray thee (Theotimus) what is it to be hot in religion?


Theo. It is to be baptized by Christ cum Spiritu Sancto, etigni, etc. Those
that have not only cast off the works of darkness by mortifying their own
flesh, denying their own selves, subduing their own wills, for going their own
delights, and contemning the glory of the world, the flattrings of prosperity,
and the despights of adversity, but are made infatigable against al labors:
Intrepidable against dangers, and inexpugnable against all power using. Tanta
humilitate in Conuersatione, Stabilitate infide veritate in verbis, iustitia in
factis: Such government in manners, and Justice in Works, as that the^r whole
lives, are Pietye: Their bodies, Sanctity: Their mouths, Verity: Their
hearts, Charity, and themselves Myrrors of Integrity. These may be said to be
hot in religion.


Poly. How comes it, that there be so few of this number? You never had more
Teaching, and Preaching.


The. That's true, But Non omnes Sancti, qui calcant limma Templi: We are now
too many Biblebearers, Too many impious, that would seem Religious, too many
that under the show of sacred holiness shrowde a mulfitude of wickedness.


Poly. What is the reason that the Word of GOD so frankely, and so freely
taught, it fructifies no more? But many do still (as thou say) make Religion
a Cloak for their evil dealing?


The. There be two causes that hinder the true love of Religion. Worldly
Riches, and Spiritual Poverty. The one oftentimes ensuing the other. For men
immeasurably rich, are immoderaly bent upon the world: So toyled with Wordly
Cares, that they scarce respite themselves one breath of an Heavenly thought:
Wealth makes men conceive so well of themselves, that what they do, they
esteem well done, and because they have Goods enough, they think themselves
to be good enough. For Prosperity is often proud, wealth Wanton, and many
times not only Wilful, but witless.

Money is as mighty unto mischief as the Devil himself: It makes men forsake
GOD, and dissemble Religion. It can Work Miracles, condemn Innocents,
vanquish Armies, overthrow Kingdoms, After man's Nature, Change his Heart,
pervert his will, and turn the reasonable mind into brutish affections.

Diuitiarum sequela, est luxuria, ura intemperant, furor miustus, arrogantia
superba, etc. Seeing then the use of Riches, is so dangerous, man's Nature so
pernicious, and the abuse so impious, we should in our lives show the
fruits of true Religion, and Christianity, not bear Bibles in our hands,
and carry mischieues in our hearts: Not seem to despise the world, and yet
greedilye Gape and gaze after those things, which Possesa onerant, Amata
inquinant, amissa cruciant. That is, Burden them that possess them, defile
them that love them, torment them that lose them.

Nullum est pietatis in illo Cord vestigium,
In quo sibi Auaritia fecit habitaculum.
Let us not so fashion our selves to the superficial and deceiving show of the
world, that we neglect Heaven, and heavenly things: Aug. lib. 3. de l^b. ^0
(...).
least they that do see the truth, and will not, be made b^ind yt they cannot.
For it is a just punishment following sin, that every one should lose that
gift, that he would not use well, when he had it: Vt (...) rectum ^aecere cum
possit, non vult, Amitiat posse cum ^e^t.


Poli. But now (The^timus) go forward to tell me who they be whom thou
termest to be cold in Religion, Bibl^ bearers, luke warm hypocrites, or
Dissemblers. Theo I will. And think my labor very well bestowed if it may
profit thee. There be three sorts of people ke^cold in Religion, Atheistes,
Natural men, Epicures: The one is described to be without God, The other
without Christ, the last, without any sp^rke of the blessed spirit. The Atheist
wantes the light of Nature, the Natural man, the light of grace. The Epicure
the light of the law, Whereby it comes to pass, that the Atheist is
Irreligious without hope. Rom 1, ^0 1 cor. 2, 14 Gal^t. 3.
The Natural man, Erroneous without truth: The Epicure Impious without
conscience. Him we may term a formalist Bible bearer, that in religion is
neither hot nor cold: For he that neither has the comfort of the holy ghost in
such a degree as a Saint, nor is so chill with the coldness of iniquity, as an
Infidel, Is neither Saint nor Infidel. But as betwixt an Horse and an Ass,
is procreated a Mule: So betwixt this heat, and that coldness, is ^ngendred a
Nullifidi^^: He that loves in word, and in tongue, but not in deed, and in
truth. He that is holy in profession, but hollow in condition: Of a good
opinion touching truth, but of an ill example touching li e. Such a one indeed
as bears the Bible in his hand, but without true zeal in his heart: as will
say, he is of true Religion, but is not truly Religious. These men have their
Coats made of Linsie-Wolsie, these are they that plough with an Ox and an
Ass? these do sow their land with diverse kinds of seeds, and are like the
Griffin in the war between the Birds and the Beasts. To the Birds he shows
his wings, to the Beasts his feet: professing aid to both, yet showing
himself Neuter to both: For as he by reason of his partaking of both natures,
has a natural facility to play with both hands, so these lukewarm
professors, these Mungrell minded mixtures, are indifferent for all religions,
ready to partake any, but in deed to love none, but as lukewarm water will be
soonest Ice, so lukewarm men will be soonest wicked. And as Ice will rather
dissolve, then admit warmenesse, so they will as easily dye as return to
goodness. For partim seruiunt Deo, partim Diabolo. Where God being angry, the
Devil should have any part, does leave his part, and let the Devil take all.


Poli. You are too bitter Theotimus.


Theo. It may be you think me so, because (happily) I touch you nearly. But
it were well with you, if you were none of those, that for want of heat, were
cold affected: nor through warmness, bus^ headed, but as you have been
careful, the book or Bible you bear should be fairly bound up, and
garnished with outward ornaments, so you would be as diligent, your book
should furnish and beautify you with true zeal, and good conditions, and
reach you to know your self in the School of Humility.


Poli. What is that you call Humility?


Theo. It is a virtue, springing from the true fear and knowledge of God, the
mother of Meekness; and sister of Devotion, without which no man can attain
to the knowledge, and feeling his own misery in Adam, and felicity in Christ.
It teaches us to live like Christians, not like Pagans: to look like a Lamb,
not speak like a Dragon, to throw down and subject our selves, to have the
name of God in our tongues, and the fear of God in our hearts.


Poli. Why is it then? That men continue so proud in heart, and so confidently
wise in their own imaginations: There were never better teachers?


Theo. It Is true, never more teaching, nor less following: never more talking,
and less practicing. For Men now study to serve all turns, change themselves
into al forms: with a trice becoming openly Protestants, secretly, Papists:
inwardly neither, outwardly both. Our lives worse then our forefathers who
lived in ignorance, for in truth they knew very little, yet did very much: But
we have filed tongues, but defiled hearts: the more good we know, the less we
do.


Poli. I will endeavor* that the same be reformed in my self.


Theo. I pray God you do, and that you use not as heretofore you have done, to
be a Booke-bearer, a counterfeit of holiness, a Saint in honor, and a Devil
in demeanor.


Poli. But leaving to be thus Critical, do you condemn them which bear the
Bible about them?


Theo. No. But as he that did bear Christ, was called Christofer. So you of
bearing your Bible, shall be called Bibliofer a Bible-bearer.


Poli. Do you not think it then an holy thing to carry the Bible?


Theo. No. Unless you will confess that Asses be holy.


Poli. Why so?


Theo. For one Ass will carry 500. such books, and A think you are as well
able to carry as many, being as well bridled, and Sadled, and Spurred forward,
as commonly an Ass is.


Poly. Yet is it no absurdity, to attribute holiness to the Ass which carried
Christ.


Theo. I do not envy you this holiness, if therefore you will, I will give you
a relic of the same Ass.


Po. you gibe at me, yet your gift should not displease me, for that Ass by
touching Christ, was consecrated, and made holy.


Theo. Then belike they were holy that buffetted him, for no doubt they touched
him.


Poli. But jest not. Is it not a holy thing to bear about one the Bible or
Gods holy word?


Theo. It is, if it be truly done, without Hypocrisy.


Po. Let Monks and Friars be Hypocrites, what have I to do with it? First then
tell me what is hypocrisy?


The. It is a cursed and capital crime, It is the slaughter of sanctity, and
massacre of verity: Helles sacring, Heavens unhallowing. Medea confesses that
she could by the help of Hecate, Ripis mirantibus, amnes in fontes redire suos
fac^re, By her incantation make Rivers run backwardes again into their
Fountains, turn streams backward, and roots of trees vpwardes: A thing very
prodigious: but this sin of Hypocrisy (that makes show of that which is not)
can do a great deal more then that: For whereas she could only enchant by her
charms, Rivers, hills, woods, herbs, stones, etc. This couers Neroes cruelty
under Catoes gravity: and Herod's butchery with John Baptists simplicity. This
causes me^ carry in their hearts untrue thoughts, in their mouths Honey, in
their minds Gal. Hypocrisy makes truth (under a false show) her cloak to
cover all her abominations, so that she infecteth the very heaues with the
breath of her mouth, the very air with the venom^ of her tongue, and
surmounteth Hell with the malice of her heart.


Poli. But what pretendes this carrying of the Bible? Does it not betoken a
Gospel like mind, or holy heart?


Theo. Yes, where the life, and conversation agrees with the Gospel, or Gods
word, and where it is otherwise, Is it not Hypocrisy?


Po. It seems so: But what is it truly to bear the word of God, or the Bible?


The. Some carry it in their hands, as the Friars of Saint Frauncis, do S.
Frauncis rules of their order: So can Asses and Pack horses do: Some in their
mouths, having at every word, Christ, and Gods word, which is Pharysaicall:
Some in their minds, or by roat. But he caries it truly, that in his hands,
in his mouth, and in his heart caries it.


Po. yet for all that, they are not all holy, which have the Bible in their
minds.


Theo. Play not the Sophister with me, none has it in mind, that does not
inwardly love it; nor does any man love it, that in his life, behavior, and
conditions does not express, and obey it.


Poli. I do not well understand these high matters.


Theo. I will tell you more plainly. If you carry on your shoulders a bottle of
good Rhenish wine, or sweet Muscadine, what other is it then a burden?


Poli. Nothing else.


Theo. If you hold it in your mouth, and presently spit it out, what then?


Poli. It does no good.


Theo. But if you drink well of it.


Po. There can be nothing more heavenly, or better.


The. It warmes your body, Cheeres your countenance, and makes you merry, and
joyful, does it not?


Poli. It does so.


Theo. Such is the Gospel or Gods word, for being once digested* it changes
the whole habit of a man, and reuiueth (or rather renews him.)


Poli. Do you think I live not acording to Gods word or the Gospel?


Theo. No man can tell better then your self.


Po. If the matter were to be decided with my sword.


The. What if a man should to thy face call thee slave, or give thee the lie,
what would thou do?


Po. I should kill him, or soundly beat him.


The. yet this book that you bear, teaches you to render for evil good, and
to turn thy left cheek to him which strikes thee on the right.


Po. I did read it, but I forgot it.


The. you pray often I am assured: Do you not.


Po. That is Pharysaicall.


The. It is Pharysaicall to pray long, and not from the heart, but your book
wills you to pray, and that from your soul.


Po. I do sometimes pray.


The. When?


Po. When it comes into my mind.


The. What prayer do you then use?


Po. The Lords prayer.


The. How often?


Po. Once: for the gospel forbids us Battology, that is, repeating one
thing often.


The. Can you with attension say all the Lords prayer?


Po. I never tried it. Is it not enough yt I pronounce it?


The. No, if it be only with the tongue, for God respects, and hears the
voice of the heart. Do you fast often?


Po. Never I.


The. But your book, enioyns you to fast and pray.


Po. What good does fasting?


The. It serves to 3. special good ends, first to mortify and subdue the
flesh: Secondly to stir up our minds to meditation and prayer. Thirdly, to
be a Testimony of our inward humility, and dutiful obedience to the will of
God. We ought to fast to keep our bodies from surfeiting, and our souls from
sinning. The diseases of the mind (says an holy Father) are healed with
praying, and the lusts of the body with fasting. For even as a wanton pampred
horse does strive to cast his Ryder, so does a Wanton pampred body by Nature
resist against virtue. It is good to fast (says Saint Ambrose) but better to
give Alms. When the lusts of our flesh are mortified, our Wronged brother
satisfied, and our needye neighbor relieved, then GOD with our fast is well
pleased. August.
Augustine in his Sermon in the wilderness says:

The sick for lack of stomach fast,
the poor fot want of meat,
The covetous chuffe to spare his purse,
the glutton more to eat:
The Apish Hipocrite for praise,
a good man for his souls ease.

Po. I could like well of fasting (for it would save me much money to eat
less) but that my stomach and belly call still for meat.


Theo. But Paul says, they cannot serve Christ, that serve their bellies,
you eat flesh every day, do you not?


Po. When I can get it.


Theo. But your strong-sence-like-body is taught to pluck down the pride of
the flesh, if it be with feeding on hay, or barks of trees.


Po. But Christ says, a man is not defiled with that which goes into his
body, or enters into his mouth.


Theo. If we feed moderately without offending.


Po. This shall profitte me, and teach me to refrain from inordinate diet and
drinking.


Theo. I wish it might. But has thy book yet taught thee to know what thou
art?


Po. I am a Man.


Theo. What man is?


Po. No.


Theo. I will then tell thee, he is a Mirrhor of misery, a play of Fortune,
and a prey of death: He is borne weeping to show his wretchedness, he lives
laughing and toying, to bewray his folly, he dies sighing, and sobbing to
declare his infirmity. Oh homo (says Chrysostom) si consideras quid peros,
quid per nares, quid per caeteros meatus egrediatur, nunquam vilius
Sterquilinum inuenisti.


Po, What profit is it to me to know what man is?


Theo. There is nothing more needful to man, nor more necessary to suppress
and subdue his haughty affections, then continual remembrance what he is, from
whence he came, and whether he shall. That in calling to mind his base mettle,
his Wretched condition, and mortal generation, he may the rather be moved
more humblye and lowly to conceive and esteem of himself.


Po. Thou might do well then (Theotimus) to tell me what the world is, for I
am sure there is much villainy in that.


Theo. What the world is? Her mirth is nothing but sorrow: her pleasure pain:
her wisdom foolishnes: and her wealth misery: pinching some with poverty, and
oppressing with misery, aduauncing the proud and vicious without desert,
deiecting the Humble and Veriuous without cause: befrending the froward and
seditious, and molesting the quiet and obedient: permitting the ignorant and
foolish to speak, and putting to silence the wise and discreet: extolling
crafty dissemblers, and despising simple innocents.

The world (Poliphemus) torments some with strife and contention: some with
sickness, sores, and diseases. Insomuch that if an old man would set down the
Tragedy of his life (from the day of his birth till his departure to his
grave) a man would wonder that the body could suffer, and the heart could bear
so painful and dolorous a pilgrimage.


Poli. Why is it then that ye world so bad, men put such affyance in her, and
are so easily seduced by her subtilties?


Theo. The first cause is, Covetousness, which (as a Reverend Father says)
Colit Idola, quae finxit: for whereas the eternal Majesty is only mighty,
wise, bountiful, rich, blessed, and full of all goodness. Now the Miser says,
it is my Money that can do all things, therefore the most mighty, provide all
things, therefore most wise: give all things, therefore most bountyfull,
purchase all things, therefore most rich; cause a man to live in all plenty,
therefore most blessed.

The second is our own corruption and deformity through Adams fall. Since
which time, the nature of man is so frail, the occasions unto evil so many,
and the illusion of Satan so prompt, and ready that (except Gods special
grace prevent him) he is apt upon every light occasion to be drunk with the
dregs of the world, and to yield unto sin and wickedness, being more easily
brought to conceive an error by one little word, then the truth by a long tale,
and sooner seduced to consent unto vice by one small example, then convert unto
virtue by many vehement persuasions.


Poli. These Resolutions of thine have done me more good, then my book as yet.


Theo. I thought what a Bible-bearer, what a sound professor I should find
you? I told you, you would prove one of those that carry your Book and
frequent Sermons more for fashion of the world, then love to the word. But do
you live chaste?


Poli. Happily I shall do when I am old. But shall I confess the truth unto
thee Theotimus?


Theo. I am no Priest. If you will be confessed, seek some other, or rather
confess unto God.


Poli. Why then (Poliph.) know I am not yet a perfect Gospeller, but one of the
common sort. We Gospellers (I mean our fraternity) do especially hunt after
four things. First, to fill our bellies. Secondly, to feed our lusts.
Thirdly, to have living. Fourthly, to be uncontrolled, or to do what we list.



Theo. You say true indeed, there be many ye challenge to themselves the
addition of pure professors, who strive to live as they list, and think it a
burden and servitude to submit their necks and souls to the yoke of humain
obedience, but hold that a Christian man's liberty is to live as he please and
for this cause some have refused to receive che Lords Supper kneeling, etc.
They will not (for sooth) be drawn under the yoke of man's power, but are of
such a perverse nature, as that they would not only take unto themselves
liberty in things indifferent, but endeavor also to cross the customs of
the Church: For some have sent their Servants to Plough and Cart upon the very
feast day of the Nativity of Christ, which we commonly call Christmasse day,
to cross the custom of the Church of England, which keeps it holy. Oxfords
answer etc.
Others (as appears by Oxfords answer to their Petition exhibited to the
King) Did spend the fifth of August 1605 in fasting, to cross that authority
which commanded them to celebrate it with joy and thankfulness for his
majesty's strange deliverance from the conspiracy of the Earl of Gowry. There
is another society of men, who in the time of Lent, were wont to eat flesh
seven days in the week, though out of Lent but five, and I think they did it
to no other end but only to cross the authority of that power, which
enioynes them from eating of flesh meat at that time of the year. Thus they
behave themselves (in deed) like men that labor to live uncontrolled. They
will be ever in an ertreame, for when we feast, they will fast: and when we
fast they will feast: And carry to the cie of the world such a seeming show of
sauctify, that (unless a man be well acquainted with their manners and
conditions) they are able to deceive a very well taught and grounded
experience. Thi^ I knew (Poli.) thou art able to justify of thy self in thy
observance of their beheauiours since thou have been a Bible-bearer, I mean a
professor in show, not in deed, if thou would but discover their
absurdities which I think very fit for a Caution and instruction to others.


Poli. I am not yet (Theo.) so resolved a professor, but that good and wholesome
perswasio^s may prevail with me, for (methinkes) I cannot relish our Teachers
doctrine, nor do I like their impugning of the magistracy, ^^^o^tan. to England
Page 92.
nor their exhorting the common people to repute those Princes for Gods
Enemies, that live not under the yoke of their pretended holy Discipline.


Theo. I make no doubt but thou will grow into a dislike of their dealings, for
they have depraved and slaundered not only the common book, but the whole
estate of the Church as it was reformed by her late majesty. Yea in her
majesty's life time, the state of this church of England was so depraved beyond
the Seas, by new fangle D^sciplinartans, Qualter episcop l li^usi an. 1574.
as that it has been conceived by very godly and Religious men in foreign
Countries, that we have no laws, no good orders, no discipline, but that every
man may do what he list. They refuse to subscribe to the Kings lawful
authority, in causes Ecclesiastical, to the Articles of Religion, to ye Book
of common prayer, and the orders rites and Ceremonies of our Church. Nay they
dissent from us in things accidental and Ceremonial. For example sake, Pet.
Mart. in Epist. 3. Beza in lij^^st. 8, and ^2
the Cappe, and the Surplesse etc. are Adiaphora, that is, things in different
in their own nature, yet are there many of so perverse a condition that rather
then they will wear them, they will lose their livings, and forsake their
callings.


Poli. They are not of my mind, for in my opinion that is then great folly and
insolency. Had I a good living I should willingly use those matters, being
things so indifferent, before I should forgo my means by such a madness.

Bulling aduersus Anaba^t. fo. 18 102.
But who have they cried out against benificed-men, saying they were Ventris
minstra, Ministers of the belly, and that they could not teach truly, because
of their great living.


Theo The only thing I think (Poli.) they aimed at, was that the Pastors might
be expelled, yt so they might succeed them. Swinglius says, They teach that
such cannot preach the Gospel sincerely, Zuingl. in Ecclesiast.
which have great benifices: But then hope is to have the true Pastors
expelled, that they may succeed in their places: And yet forsooth they
publicly protest, they seek for no living.


Po. But I pray thee fell me (The) that I may profit by thee? how long h^^h the
Surplesse been used?


Theo. Hierom. de s^npioribus ecclesiast.
The Godly fathers of the Church in the purest estate thereof, have left it in
writing, that the Ministers in their times did usually put on white garments,
in the celebration of the Sacraments, and execution of divine Service.

Nay it was used in the very day^e of the Apostles, as is testified by
Hegesipp^^, who (as an holy Father says) lived near the Apostles time. His
Testimony is this, Hegisip. li. comment linea, no lanea vest induauatur.
When James surnamed Iustus* went into the Temple, he was apparelled with a
linen vesture.


Poli. This shall suffice me for that question, but why do our teachers tell us
that the Cross in baptism is a piece of Popery?


Theo. Therein they commit a fallacy, for it was used in the Church within the
compass of 300 years after Christ, and has been used ever since. Dyon.
Arcop. de ecclesiast. hierer. ca. de baptismo.
Besides the writings of many fathers, that justify the same, Dionisius
Areopagita, who lived in the Apostles time, makes mention of the Cross in
baptism, why do they find fault with the Ring in the solemnization of
Marraige?


The. They are too nice in their points. The ring in Ma^^^mony is an ancient
Ceremony. For Tertullian who ^^ued almost 200. years before Saint Chrysostomes
time makes mention of it. Therefore Zanchye speaks in our behalf for the
use thereof, Z^n^h^^s d^ (...). C^^ ^.
Resexternae, etc. Things exte^nall which are not repugnant to the word, and
which neither are Superstitious, nor obscene, are to be observed acc^rding to
the Custom of the Country wherein we live. But many make show of zeal,
where there is none: affecting new forms, Inuenting new opinions, and running
from error to error.


Po. What think you the cause that many have so run from one new opinion to
another, and are of no more slayed and settled a judgment?


The I conjecture it to be, because they have contemned and disdained the
ancient fathers of the church, and have thought it the loosing and mispending
of good hours to pervse their writings. For one of them being urged (for his
conformity) with the Testimonies of the Classical and principal Doctors of
the Church, T. C li. 1 page 154
cried out, that Truth was measured by the crooked yard of Time, and termed the
seeking into the Fathers writings, A taking in duches, and that his hearty ^^xed
cold, and his flesh trembled to hear m^n say that a Preacher should quote
Doctors* allege P^et^ and Philosophers, Idem. li. 1. page 1.4
and confirm his matter o^t of hum ne vvriters. And yet Paul himself does
allege Aratus, Menander, and Epime^ides, who were all He^^^en P^e^^.


Poly. I think that warrant enough, and sufficient. But what is the reason
then, that since my late conuersing with some of them, I have heard such
exceptions taken against Poets and Philosophers, and the fathers whom they
ought rather to reverence (with Seneca) saying, (Ego illos ve^eror, etc) and to
do a kind of homage to their very names? Aug. lib. 3. contra Petilian ca. 16



The. I am thus conceipted of them, that as Petilian dispraised Logic, and
Rhetoric, because he himself had no skill in these Arts: So many
New-fangle-Nouilists, contemn all Gentile learning, and find fault with such
as make use of it, because they themselves are ignorant therein: Resembling the
Fox, that dispiseth the Grape, that himself cannot reach: or rather like that
old Fox, that by a mischaunce having lost his tail, went presently to other
Foxes, and persuaded every one of them to cut off his Tail, pleading that it
was to weighty and Cumbersome, etc. But the matter coming in question, and to
be thoroughly scanned, it was found that the subtle Fore did it so cover his
own deformity, which should never have been espied, if it had once become a
fashion, or custom to be without Tails.


Poli. But note unto me I pray thee some of the Qualities, and conditions of
their Proselytes, and followers, I mean such as are of the Vulgar sort, such
as thou tearmest fashionarie Bible-bearers, that will go six or seven Miles
to hear one of their own Teachers, and return home ready to do mischief to
their neighbors.


The. Their followers (Polyphemus) behave themselves, according to that Image
of the world that I have seen pic^ured with the feet upward, importing that
all things are turned up side down.

The very Cobbler in these days, although he be taught and warned, Ne suitor
vltra Crepidam, and that his Art forbiddes him to go above the latchet, will
yet find fault and condemn the Workmanshippe of the thigh of the Picture.

The very Butcher, whose skill reaches no further then the opening and cutting
up of an Ox, will yet assume the cunning to Anotamize a man. The proud
Tailor, that has served a Prentishippe only to learn the fashioning of
Garments, will take upon him to teach Preachers to shape their Sermons to
suit his affections.

The Cook whose whole learning lies in the Kitchen and Larder-house, will be
saucy and meddle with the order of the Church. The Smith whose Art extends it
self no further then his forge, will yet be so bold as to blow the Coals of
Contention into the Church, and so forge new Opinions upon the Anvile of
error: yea many will carpe at the Churches Government, and blame the life and
dealinges of other men, when themselves are far Worse, and altogether unable
to give good directions to their own ordinary^ affairs, yet do they bear
the World in hand, that whatsoever they do, they do it being moved
thereunto by the Spirit.

But to such I could wish milder Spirits, and that they would not meddle so
much in other Men's callings and so little in their own: but that they would
learn how dangerous a thing it is, to go beyond the limmits and Precinctes of
their Professions, and to leave their prejudicial and obstinate minds, being
first content to try all things, and then afterward to hold fast that which
is good.


Theo. By your speeches then it appears, that it were better for us, if we were
all of one mind, and of one profession of Religion.


Poli. I (Poliphemus) So it stands with the Truth, for Aequalitas prima pars
est aquitatis, Seneca in Epist.
Equality is the first, and chief part of Equity. And it is not good as (
Seneca says) to be busy in a well ordered state. It is inco^venient that one
people, within the said Land, Senecain Tripod.
and under the same government should be under diverse opinions, but be all
led by one Law and rule. It is the sayings of Curtius, and it may be held an
Oracle for Truth, that Eiusdem iuris esse debent, qui sub ecdem Rege victuri
sunt. They ought to be under one law, that are under the government of one
King. Curtius lib. 10
It is also the Judgment of the Fathers, that such as live in the same Church
together, should be under Law indifferently, and be enforced by the Law to
acco^modate themselves to the customs of the place wherein they live. In his
rebus (says one of the fathers.) de quibus nihil certistatuit Scriptura divina
mos populi Dei, vel instituta Maiorum pro lege tendenda sunt. Another holds
it b^rye meet that Ecclesiastical Traditions, (namely such as do not hinder
faith) should be observed, August. epist. 86
as they are delivered of our Elders: and that the custom of one should not be
ouerthrown with the contrary customs of others.

Hemingius holds it an heinous sin to break the ordinances of the Church.
Qui violat (says he) Ecclesiasticam Politiam, peccar multis modis. Yet many
now adays, forgetting to know that it is free for every Church to make a
form of Discipline or policy fit and profitable for it self, because the
Lord has prescribed no certainety in this behalf, (like distempering
humors) have gone about to alter the state of this mystical body, which
whether it be the pusse of Ambition in some, who like Diotrephes, would have
pre-eminence, Qui quoniam non possunt primum loum in Excclesia obtimere,
idcirco illam scindunt, vel ab e^ dificiunt, Or the prick of their own
private Spirit, who would have all things according to their own minds, sure
I am, the Devil has invented Schisms, to subvert faith, corrupt verity, and
rent unity, Vt quos detinere non potuit via veteris caecitate, deciperet noui
itin^ris errore. That them, whom he could not keeps in old blindness, he
might deceive with new opinions and errors.


Poli. But whence grow these waries and contentions: that men for wearing of a
Surplise, bury their talent in a Napkin? That they stand on a corner Cappe, as
on a corner stone^ That they trouble Christ's Spouse for a Ring in marriage, and
refuse to present her as a chaste Virgin to Christ? That for the cross in
Baptism they leave the Fountain of living water, and become such enemies to
the Cross of Christ Jesus, etc.


Theo. From hence they proceed (Poli) even of their lusts (as Saint James
says) that fight in their members, They lust, Ian. ^, 1.
and have not: They envy and have indignation, because they cannot obtain:
they fight and war, because they get nothing. They would and will not: thou
dissemble ambition under the cloak of dislike: because the master of the
feast bids them not, Friend sit up higher, as of some here, in his days
speaks Ioannes Saribur^ensis And we have many a John, who if he could be
Sarisbur^ensis, would preach the faith which before he destroyed, and retract
like Paul, when I was a little one I spoke like a Child, I understood as a
Child: I thought as a Child: but when I because a man I put away childish
things, etc. But it were a happy thing, that they would conform themselves,
and be obedient to the Church, for many by factious behavior are drawn to be
our adversaries. It causes much grief, and bringes great sorrow to Gods
Church, when Sons fight against their Father, green heads against gray
hayres, and men of yesterday, presume to cross antiquity. As they of Athens
said truly of their divisions, Auximus phil p^um ^o^tris (...) ^^e^^on bus,
so we strengthen the Pope, and Phillips faction by these our dissentions.


Poli. What is the reason that in rebus tam multis consertium, etim vita tam in
explicabile dissidium? In so many things fellowship, and in life no friendship?


Theo. It is for this, that men for wealth will be Hypocrites, and dissemble
Religion carry books to show an inward, zeal, and yet being (all one body) in
the members no Sympathy: being al one spirit, and in the affections no harmony:
All one hope of heaven, and in Coheirs no Symphony: All one Lord, yet in fellow
Servants no unity: All one faith, yet in opinions no Siminetrie: All sworn in
one Baptism, yet in fellow Soldiers no Symmac^ic: All adopted by one father,
yet in brethren much discord, and no fraternity. Thus riches enchanting the
mind, causes a man to think himself wise when he is but foolish, strong
when he is but weak, fenced when he is but naked, to leave the true Tower, and
strength of his defense, and to trust in the weak and rotten walls of wealth.

For man's nature is composed of two contraries, of a mortal body, the Earth,
and an eternal soul which is from heaven; and they are as contrary as Heaven
and earth: whilst either of these parties, are naturally moved to conserve
the good of his own nature. It comes to pass, that both this base and
earthly part draws a man vehemently to be attent upon earthly things, and
contrary to that divine and heavenly part does cover to carry men up into
heaven from whence he is descended: by means of which repugnancy in man's
nature, it is brought to pass, that man is wonderfully drawn into contrary
desires: endeavoring to join things together, which of their own nature are
severed farthest asunder, wearying himself with infinite toil, how to join
with God, and the world together. To partalie of corporal pleasures, and
spiritual joys: To possess the prosperity of earth, and the felicity of
Heaven: This is the cause of so little faith amongst Men, or dissension,
Hypocrisy, and all Neutrality at this day: For many would feign be
Christians, and worldlings too: worship God, and Mammon too: Taste the
sweetness of Heaven, and of the earth, and so would be Neuters, that is, hot
and cold too.


Po. Are there many of this sort, think you?


The. Too many (Poli.) both men and Women, that like the Ambidexter Gebionites
play on both sides, and halt between opinions: If the head be for their
profit, they go after it: If the eye, they go after it: And these Neuters,
(or rather Vters) are like those Sea-Calues, Crocadiles, Otters, and Sea-Colts,
in Aristotle and Pliny, which are one while in the water, another while on the
land, for greater booty: justly termed Dubia by Isodoro, because you cannot
tell where to have them: Sometime they are Natatilia, and swim with the tide,
other sometimes Gressabilia, and go back for advantage: but amongst many there
are few found, that side neither to the right hand, nor the left, but go
straight forward without Hypocrisy.


Poli. Are there women also that are shew-carrying Bible-bearers, Hypocrites,
and dissemblers?


The. I (Po.) and that sex is very dangerous. There are many that to be
reckoned religions, frequent Sermons, have their Bibles fayrely bound, and
hanging by their sides, when they cannot so much as read them, much less have
them imprinted in their hearts. These mask their evil under a veil of
purity, and under a fair show shadow much mischief. Their eyes are snares,
their words charms, their deceit much, and their desires more. Their
consciences like a Pumyce-stone, light and full of holes, for lucre prone to
change to any humor.


Po. What is the punishment assigned for such Newters, Hypocrites, or
dissembling Bible-bearers?


The. The pain is no less then to be vomited out of the Lords mouth. That
is, that all Neuters for their Hypocrisy and dissimulation, should be cast out
of favor with the Son of GOD, which is a woeful and importable chastisement,
if we consider his divine Nature rightly, what the son of God is, namely that
he is the same God that is unto us the cause of our being, the Fountain of
life, and the founder of all joy.


Poli. Is that only meant by Vomiting?


The. No, By this vomiting is meant more then a bare eiecting out of favor:
For therein is expressed a fearful, and violent casting out in anger: In this
Simile the Church is compared to the stomach: The Luke warm Newter or
Hypocrite, to the Lukewarm Water, and their grievous disturbance to noisome
vomitings.

The Church is compared to the stomach, because as the stomach b^ altering and
concocting the nourishment received, feeds and preserves the parts of the
body: So the Church by concocting and disgesting the food of li^e, does
nourish and preserve the body of Christ, even in such sort, as from out of food
in the stomach the liuor draws blood: the heart, Spirit: the brain, Sense:
the sinnewes, strength: the veins, norishment: the body, life: So out of the
food of immortality (which is the word of God) that is in the church, to every
member of Christ does the heart draw faith: the will, obedience: the
understanding, knowledge: the conscience, Comfort: the body, immortality: and
the soul, all felicity. And that also after so rare, and stupendous an order,
that even as the stomach: So does it quicken by killing: revive by
destroying: grow wise, by foolishnes: obey, by rebelling against it own flesh:
obtain life, through death: felicity through misery: and eternity, out of
mortality.


Po. Why is the Newter, or Hypocrite, compared to Luke warm water?


The. For that lukewarm water to a fasting stomach (being received) is
hurtful: while it remains is grieffull: and being eiected is shameful.
Became all Newters and Hypocrites are even such in Gods Church, not only by
hindering the work of Gods spirit in the church, but by the vnquieting and
disturbing of the same.


Poly. Why are their disturbings compare to noisome vomitings?


Theo. Because, as that which breeds vomiting, is cast out with hatred, for
that it is enemy to Nature: with violence because it oppresses the stomach:
with shamefulnes, because the defilings thereof are laid open to the eye: and
lastly so eiected, as never again to be received: So al Hypocritical
Bible-bearers, al incorrigible Newters shall: by the Lord himself be thrown
out of the Church, as filthy vomitings out of the stomach, and that with
hatred: because they are enemies to Christ, and deceivers of his people: with
violence, because they hurt and oppress the Church: with shame, because their
Hypocrisy shall be made known: and lastly cast out of the Church, never
again to be received: because while they were in the Church they could never
be amended. Thus the hatred of eiection does show the detestation of the
Crime: the violence, the mightines of the pain: The shame, the horror of
Confusion: And the never receiving, the eternity of destruction.


Po. But these Hypocrites (perhaps) will say as much by others as you say by
them.


Theo. Not unlike so: for they are apt enough to justify their own weakness:
but I may answer them with the Poet, Oh mayor tandem parc^^ insane minori:
Hypocrite, first cast out the beam, Horat. lib. 2. Sat. 3
the beam in thine own eye, and then afterward thou shall see clearly to
cast out the moat that is in ours: They are full of wounds themselves, yet
vpbraide us with Scarres: They tradu^^ us from slipping, when themselves fall
down headlonge: They are covered with mire, and yet triumpl^nt our spots.

They are as full of dissentions in their own errors, as ever were the Heathens
in their Paganism: Et quet sunt Sodalitia tot sunt factiones. As Erasmus well
observed: so many orders, so many factions: so many men, so many minds.

If they vpbraide us with Schisms, or Contrarieties of opinions: I may bandy
that objection back again, and answer them as Demaratus did Phillippe of
Macedon, who asking him tauntingly: How do yes Gracians agree at Athens and
Peloponesus, when himself was fallen out with his wife and his own Son.
Indeed thou do well (quoth he) Phillip to enquire of our Concord. Qui
familiam tuam tanta patris seditione, and dissention^ habes laborantem. Who
have so great discord and dissension at home in thine own house.


Poly. It were happy then I perceive if these Hyppocrites were rooted out of
the Church, that we might agree all in one, and not stumble at small matters,
and let go the greater.


The. It were much to be wished that as our reverend Fathers have caused an
uniformity of discipline in the Church, so they would not only execute that
Peacemaking Canon, that none Preach against the Doctrine, of another, but
prescribe also generant Tennants of our Church to be followed by churchmen in
the lesser matters of Doctrine, that foolish and unlearned questions might be
stayed. And if the Jews be tied to their Cab^^^^ the Turks to their Alcaron:
Logitians to the Axi^^^ of Aristotle: Physicians to the Aphorisms of
Hipocrates, and Galen: Geometricians to ye compasses of Euclide: Rhetoritians
to the Precepts of Tully: Lawyers to the Maxims of Justinian: y^^ Gramarians
to the rules of Lilly, why not such as are brought up in Chris^^^ School to
the Rules thereof; who is a Lilly of the Valleys and as a Lilly among thorns,
so is Christ's to be among the Daughters, etc.


Po. Are these Hippocrites and Newters, such sowers of dissension and varieties
amongst us.


The. No doubt of it. lib. de Isid. et Orisid.
We read of a crafty King in Plutarch, who knowing his Enemies the Egyptians
would not match him in strength, if they matched in minds and accorded in
their Counsel, enjoined each Country, the worshipping of diverse Beasts,
which were Enemies by Nature, and would prey each on other: And while every
one defended his beast against the rauine of another, and took his Wrongs
^^patiently it came to pass at last (says the Autho^^) Vt ob animalium
inimicitias ipsa quoque gentes re non obseruata infesta sibi invicem hostesque
redderentur. That by the enmity of their beasts the people themselves unawares
became such Enimyes that he subdued them. Thus, and more then so subtle is
the Prince of darkness, who perceiving us to be Insuperabiles nisi
separabiles, impregnable while knit in one mind and judgment, he brings in
Neuters and Hypocrites amongst us: imescruing, and fashionary Bible-bearers,
that sow strange questions, as tares among Wheat, and as Idols adore their
priua^e opinions, about which while we contend, Ob opinionum in^micitias re non
obseruata ipsi quoque, hosts reddimur. Of this doting on questions, and
unnecessary striefes, comes envy raylings, and evil surmisinges through
vain disputations of men.

After which (as after No^elties) their ears do naturally itch: giving
themselves Athenian-like, to nothing so much as to hear new things, Acts. 17,
21.
and nothing embracing that unity and true peace, that should be in brethren of
one father.


Poli. What is that peace and union brethren?


Theo. It is the mother of Cremites, father of Can^bites, and Sister of
Solitaries, it is the bond of the Patriarcks, the Chariot of the Prophets, and
the refuge of the Ap^sties: It is the Calmness of the mind, the tranquillity
of the soul, and singleness of the heart.

It stauncheth grudges, quenches broils, stynteth Garboyles, and pulls
down the Crest of pride. Let him therefore that possesses it, keep it: let
him that wantes it, seek it: and him that has lost it, go after it: For
behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity.

Which as it was joyful for David to behold in some of his kingdom, for
Ostendebat qui dicebat Ecce (says Austine) he poynted the finger to some whom
he said Behold: So I wish that Psalm might now be said as truly Ecce:
August. in hunc Psalm.
Behold how brethren of one heavenly Father dwell together in unity.

I wish they that are without might point asbs, as did the Heathen at those
Christians in the primitive Church, and say, Tertul. 39. apo. aduers. Genesis
Behold how these Christians love one another. Not like Hypocrites, in
superstitiall and worldly show, but as becomes true Professors with inward and
hearty affection: such as beseemes the Servant and Sons of their Master
and Maker. Now is high time the end of ye world being said by the prophets, to
be so near at hand.


Po. How gather they the end of the world is at hand?


The. Because (say they) Men do now as they did when the ^^ud was near,
banquet, eat, drink, buy, sell, take use, or gain, build houses and palaces,
Kings make wars, and manage Arms, ministers study to augment their tithes,
Divines knit Sillogismes, and the Commons are tumultuous. To conclude, there is
no evil which now is not among men: hunger, thirst, theft, and Robbery,
wars, Pestilence, Sedition, and want of all that is good.

Wherefore let the same mind be in us, (shall I say with the Apostle that was
in Christ) the same? Nay I am out of hope of it: He was such a lover of men, as
they were but men, that he laid down his most precious life to the most
ignominious death, for man his most rebellious Traitor. But if not the same,
yet let the like mind be in us that was in Christ: at least let the mind of
Aristotle an Heathen and natural man be in Christians: for shame of mankind,
let not the mind of Tigers, of Wolves, of Bears, and of Lions be in us, least
we be Shame-kins to mankind. Nay, let but the mind of these to their own
kind, the mind of Lions, to Lions; of Wolves, to Wolves be in us; not to hate
our mankind, and good enough. But alas when it should be Homo homini Deus,
Man to man a preserver, Now it is become Homo homini Lupus. Man to man a
deuourer. Every man hunteth his brother with a net. Yea, whereas all minds and
motions of Enmity are in these beasts, but singular and peculiar to their
kind, they all meet in one Man like Ryuers in the Sea, who is to Man in mind
ravenous as a Wolf, in head crafty as a Fore, in heart fiery as a Tiger, in
tongue poisonous as an Aspe, in the evil eye, deadly as a Cockatrice, in
bloody hands cruel as a Lion: Therefore the Psalmist compares this man not
to one beast, but to the beasts that perish. Vide^ blandas consalutationes,
amicos complexus, hilares compotationes, caeteraque officia humanitatis; I see
indeed (says Erasmus) every one give fair spoken and courteous salutations,
friendly embracings, and congies, merry meetinges, and kind drinking one to
another, and other such parts of humanity: At o re^ indignam (it is the
complaint of Peace her self) ficta, fucata omnia, all is fained friendship and
Hypocrisy. One cannot see the least shadow of true amity amongst men, all is
naught but dissimulation and deceit.

They cover hart-burning, and malice, Envy, and hatred under these duties of
humanity: cloakes of Courtesy, and fair seeming show of piety: They come in
sheeps clothing with the name of brother of Friend, Cousin, and Kinsman, Et
astutam vapido S^rvunt sub pectore Vulpem, and within they are ravening Wolves.
Where is now a faithful yoke fellow that is Alter idem, in whose ear a man
may lay his heart, and his life in his hand: where is a Nazian^en^ with a Basil?
An Austin^ with an Alipius? which like a pair of Turtle Doves mourn and
rejoice together? where are they that bear out the others burden, and support
each other thorough Love? The Heathen in their days, tought but eight such
faithful yoke fellows, Pylades. N^^^ Pa^oc^i I (...). Casto^. Tyd^^. S^p^o.
Damon. and Orestes. Euryatus. Achilles. Pernhous. Pollux. Polynices. Laetius.
Pythias.


But if now the Lord should look down from heaven upon the children of men
to see if there were any that would understand, and seek God in the love of
his neighbor, that of David might now be returned, Ne ^nus qu^dem. There is
scant a man to be found on the earth: If now, as once Diogenes sought an
honest man in the street with a candle at noone day: or if as the Lord ^ad his
Prophet, one should now run too and fro by the streets of Jerusalem to know
and inquire in the open places thereof it be could ^^rid one man that is
faithful to a man, he might (I fear) in many places return his errant with
Sal^m^n. Behold I sought one by one to find (...) count, and yet my soul
seeks, but I find it not: I have found one man of a thousand. And what is
the reason of this? For that as Christians (says Aug^^tine) having all one
Father which is God: ^^d de des^^^^t. ^hristian. (...) 1.
one Mother the Church, whereby we are brethren in the spirit: we yet keep
not the vni^y, of the spirit in the bond of peace. We would seem Religious,
yet show it not in our Works, carry books in our hands to deceive the
world, yet not have them grafted in our hearts to please God. Every man is led
by his own will, follows affectation, and observes the rule of his own
opinion, forgetting, or at least neglecting that of Bernard. Tom. 1.
Sanctior est copula cordium quam corporam, and Coniunctiores sunt qui ani^^
^quam qui corporibus coniunguntur, Nearer are they of kin whose hearts are of
affinity in the spirit, lib. 6. divine. instit. c^. 10.
then they who are but of lynage in the flesh.


FINIS.

