AN ANSWER TO THE JEWISH PART OF Mr SELDEN'S HISTORY OF TITHES.

By STEPHEN NETTLES, B. of Divinity.

PROVE. 3.9, and 10. (...) 9. (...) 10.

9. Honor the Lord with thy riches, and with the first fruits of all thine
increase.

10. So shall thy barnes be filled with abundance, and thy presses shall burst
with new wine.

seal of the University of Oxford AC: OX


AT OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD, and WILLIAM TVRNER, Printers to the
famous University. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL DOCTOR PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exceter College, His
MAIESTIE'S Professor in Divinity, and Vice Chancellor of the University of
Oxford.
Reverend and worthy Sir,
THE combination of zeal and learning wherewith God has honored You, the love
You bear to the Hebrew studies, and the cause handled in this little tract,
together with the manifold favors You have pleased to vouchsafe me (being as
yet unknown unto You) have been the Allectiues to this small remembrance;
whereby coveting to show my thankfulness, I first offer unto you the first
fruits of these my poor endeavors. And albeit coming now to write in this
manner, after the diverse treatises of tithes already extant, I know it is but
little that can either be performed, or expected from me in this subject: yet as
the Jews in gathering their fruits in Harvest, beside their oblations and
tithes, had also their (...) Levit. 19.9. Deuteronomy. 24.19, 20. i. the corner of the
field, the gleaning, and the forgotten sheafe, which were assigned to the use
and benefit of the poor: so in some respect may I judge these scattered,
slender, and poor Collections to be much of the like nature; and therefore
desiring to cast my mite into the treasury of the Church, I present them unto
You; in hope that as You have already afforded them Your favorable
Construction, so You will please also to assist them, so far as truth
requires, with your willing and able protection. And thus beseeching the
Almighty to bless You and Your worthy labors to his glory, and the good of
the Church, I take my leave, and rest

Your Worships in all Christian duty to be commanded STEPHEN NETTLES.
Lexden, May 4. 1625.
THE PRAEFACE.
WHereas diverse Treatises have bin published heretofore in way of answer to
the Book entitled The History of Tithes; it may be, after this long silence,
it will now seem strange, and be thought a work altogether unseasonable and
superfluous, either to write or speak any more of that subject.
Notwithstanding because the Historian himself and many others, led rather with
affection, then judgment, do still much magnify among the rest, the Jewish
part of that History, (as though some hidden matters of importance were
involued therein) I hope it shall not be offensive to any, (since this passage
as yet has not bin scanned) if I as another witness in the same cause,
endeavor only to bring in some evidence not yet explained, that may help to
unfold and clear sundry doubts and questions in this kind. For albeit the
Author of the History in the Praeface thereof, offering it to the trial of the
most censorious examination, with a challenge against all opponents in his
poetical phrase; Si falsa est, accingere contra, etc. does thereby insinuate
that he has written nothing but infallible truth: And though also the
authority of the Jewish Writers against the divine right of the Church in
Tithes, be alleged with much confidence and ostentation, and received also
with great applause, and more then ordinary approbation: yet let praejudice and
partiality with other sinister respects be laid aside, and I make no doubt but
there will appear as much defect and error, even in this part of the History,
as in any other whatsoever; and that the writings of the Jews, though we
depend not on them (because in many things they are vain and fabulous) yet
take them as they are, being truly related, will afford more grounds of proof
for the divine right of Tithes, then either has as yet from them, or can be
showed against it. I did wish and expect that a more able workman would have
undertaken this task; and therefore these papers of mine, which long since
have bin viewed and censured, were neither at the first intended, nor after
hastened to the Press. But seeing in all this time I hear of no other
discourse of this nature, either performed or promised, I have at length
yielded to the desire and persuasion of such as might command me to publish
this; the rather, because not long after the first appearing of the History, I
did in a public Sermon take exception against diverse parts thereof, which
being distastefull to some hearers, I thought it did concern me for better
satisfaction, as well to the Eye as to the Ear, to justify with my pen, what I
avouched in the Pulpit; and the same, together with other observations, to
present to open view: the intendment whereof aiming at nothing else but
manifestation and confirmation of truth, I am not careful, neither do I
think it needful, for this attempt to make any long apology. Having therefore
thus much praemised in way of Praeface, I now pass forward unto our purpose.

AN ANSWER TO THE JEWISH PART OF Mr SELDOM his History of Tithes.
SECT. 1.
THere are two things for which this History being duly examined does discover
it self worthy to be taxed: The first is the wresting of holy Scriptures
against their true sense: The other, the boasting of Jewish Rabbines without
any soundness or show of reason: for the Author (as it seems) bearing no
good affection either to Priest, or payment of Tithes, when he would draw a
text of Scripture to his purpose, he does usually garnish and set it forth with
the expositions of the Jews, and that in general terms, as though he had
them all at his fingers ends, and all of them were on his side, when as
notwithstanding it will appear that sometimes none rightly understood,
sometimes instead of all, only one is cited; as on that Text, Levit. 27.30.
Also all the tithe of the land, both of the seed of the ground, and of the
fruit of the trees is the Lords, it is holy to the Lord. The History says,
cap. 2. page 13. The Jews apply this Scripture to the second Tithe. The Jews
are here propounded in general, yet there is none quoted but Salomoh Iarchi.
Cap. 2. page 16.
So on Deuteronomy. 26.12. (...) he says this place of the year of tithing is
interpreted by the common gloss of the Jews, by the year of one Tithe, etc:
and yet none is cited but Salomoh Iarchi; notwithstanding when Salomoh Iarchi
speaks any thing that may seem to make for the divine right of tithing, then
his testimony is curtol'd and contradicted, as is plain in the very beginning
of the History, Genesis 14.20. And Abraham gave him tithe of all, that is (says
he) (...) of all that he had, as the ordinary gloss of Salomoh Iarchi there
interprets. But here he leaves out these words, (...) i. because he was the
Priest, the whole sentence being thus, (...), that is; And Abraham gave him
tithe of all that he had, because he was the Priest; which later clause
contains a reason why Abraham paid the Tithes to Melchisedek, namely because
he was the Priest, implying thereby both a right in Melchisedek to receive
them, and a duty in Abraham to pay them; and so says R. Bechai on that text:
(...) i. According to the opinion of our Ancestors he was a Priest indeed, and
therefore Abraham gave him the Tithe. This is also further confirmed by the
like testimony of Ramban, Deuteronomy. 14.18. (...) i. And he was the Priest of the
most high God. To show that Abraham would not give the Tithe to the Priest of
strange gods, but because he knew him that he was the Priest of the most high
God, therefore he gave him the tithe, for the honor of God. And hereby was
signified to Abraham, that there should be the house of God, and thither his
posterity should bring the tithe and the therumahs or oblations, and that there
they bless the Lord.

Of what credit this Ramban is, Mercer on Genesis, in the beginning, page 3.
tells us in these words. R. Mose Ben Nachman, quem Ramban per Nun in fine
appellant, qui and Moses Gerundensis, cum alius R. Mose ben Maimon, qui Rambam
per Mem in fine vocatur, sit; qui R. Moses Aegyptius dicitur; vterque vir
insignis. etsi Iudaei vt and caeteri sint cum iudicio legendi. Now this
Testimony of Ramban implies in it these things,

1 That Abraham was to pay tithe to some one Priest or other.

2 That not only the Priests of the true God, but also the Priests of strange
gods among the Gentiles, did in those times receive Tithes.

3 That Abraham paid the Tithes to the honor of God.

4 That this payment was a president and type of the future payment of his
posterity.

5 That the payment of Tithes was annexed to the place of God's worship.

Aben Ezra on this Text, and also on Genesis 28. ver. 22. writes in a manner to
the same effect: and on Genesis 35.1. he says of Jacob: (...)

i. And in Bethel he performed his vow and gave the Tithe of his substance for
the honor of God to him that was in that generation for to receive it; That
is, to the Priest; for in the Apostles language, Heb. 7. a Priest and a
receiver of Tithes are aequipollents. Instead of saying, Men that die are
Priests, he says, Men that die receive Tithes. Instead of saying, He that
lives is a Priest, he says, He that lives takes tithes: as if in his judgment
Tithes and Priesthood were inseparable: And therefore the Emphasis of the
phrase he uses, Heb. 7.6. (...); that Melchisedek tithed Abraham, shows both
that he had authority to take Tithes, and seems also to subject Abraham to a
necessity of being tithed, which is the same that Iarchi means in the
testimony before cited; saying that Abraham paid him tithe of all that he had,
because he was the Priest. I have the rather insisted upon this, that the
Historian has left out and excluded the Priest from receiving Tithes, because
it seems he does it of set purpose; for otherwise to what end does he set
down those words in the beginning ( And gave him tithe of all) in that
uncertain manner, not following any translation, but leaving it doubtful who
should here be the giver? or for what cause does he tell us afterward. That
were it not for the holy exposition in that Epistle to the Hebrews the
relation in Genesis might as well be understood that on the other side,
Melchisedek as a bounteous Ancestor had given to Abraham the tenth part of his
estate, the text indeed being both in the Hebrew and Septuagints so, that no
name immediately preceding the mention of the gift, it sufficiently thence
appears not who was the giver. etc.

This supposition is somewhat strange, to which I may answer both for the
thing su^posed, and the consequent thereof, that if it were (...) ^^lse, we
might with him conceive it to be true; (...) Apostle does assure us that it is
false; to what end therefore is it related? for though he go about to justify
this assertion in his Review, page 450. by the authority of Fathers, and
acknowledge no fault at al to be in it: yet how can this satisfy? is it not a
fault to call in question, or make a doubt of that which the holy Scripture
has put out of doubt? is it not a fault to oppose the imagination of man's
brain against the determination of God's truth?

As for the testimony of S. Hierome, writing not his own, but the Jews
opinion, and other Fathers here alleged, it has already bin sufficiently
answered by others, and therefore both in this and many things else, my labor
as it has bin prevented, so it may very well be spared, for I come but to
gleane after others reaping. Neither will I here recite the expositions of the
Jews against this conceit, who generally understand the Text according to the
true interpretation thereof in the Epistle to the Hebrews. But suppose for
argument sake that the holy Apostle had not fully cleared this truth; yet that
which the Historian would hereupon infer, will not follow, viz: That
Melchisedek as a bounteous Ancestor, had given to Abraham the tenth part of his
estate, or as a portion to one of his posterity, (as he speaks in his Review)
but that he gave the tenth or tithe to Abraham, as a duty still belonging to
the Priest; for in that sense do those Jews take it, which were the first
authors of this fancy, that Melchisedek paid tithe to Abraham, for they write,
that the Priesthood was translated from Melchisedek to Abraham, because that
Melchisedek used a preposterous order in his blessing, in that he first blessed
Abraham, and after blessed God, as it were preferring the servant before the
Master: as R. Bechai and Chaskuni and others relate on Genesis 14.20. And to this
they apply that in Psalm. 110.4. Thou art a Priest for ever. (...) That is,
because of the word that Melchisedek did speak, as Rabbi Chimki there
interprets it, and Iarchi concerning Abraham, which also they have from the
Talmud in Massech. Nedarim cap. 3. fol. 32. But this is not generally received:
for Aben-Ezra on Genesis 14: reiects it, saying, (...) That Melchisedek spoke as
was fitting, and did well in that he blessed Abraham; first because he
voluntarily offered himself to save those that were led captive; and afterward
he said: and blessed be God that did help him, and gave his enemies into his
hand: and therefore he interprets those words in the Psalm, (...) i. according
to the order or custom: or else says that the letter Caph is here wanting; i.
Thou art a Priest for ever.

(...) i. because thou art as Melchisedek was; and of him it is written, Genesis
14.18. and he was a Priest of the most high God: which agrees with the Syriacke
translation, (...) i. after the similitude of Melchisedek: as also with the
Epistle, (...), according to the order of Melchisedek: and in the Arabique,
(...) like Melchisedek.

So then howsoever some interpreters may differ, and make needless scruples
and doubts in their glosses on the Text, yet take it which way you will, this
one thing appears to be the general consent of the Jews, that the Tithes
still followed the Priesthood.

If any say, the Priesthood is now abolished, and therefore also the Tithes;
the answer is easy and common, that this is true for the Leviticall
Priesthood, and the Leviticall payment of Tithe. But the Priesthood after the
order of Melchisedek, is not abolished, nor the Tithes to the same belonging,
as the Apostle shows, Heb. 7.8. And here men that die receive tithes. but
there he receives them, of whom it is witnessed, that he lives.

Besides, the Jews themselves acknowledge, that he which is a Priest after the
order of Melchisedek, has right to take Tithes, as Melchisedek did: for so are
the express words of Aben-Ezra on Psalm. 110.4. The Lord swear, etc. (...)
(...) i. Thou art a Priest. Every Priest is a Minister: and so it is said, 2
Samuel. 8.18. and the sons of David were Priests, that is, to serve the Lord:
And behold the meaning is, that Israel shall fight, and thou shall take the
tithe, as Melchisedek took it of Abraham.

I am not ignorant that the Jews diversely expou^ding this Psalm, son of
Abraham, soon of David, son of Messiah, teach that the word (...) is taken
not only for a Priest, but also for a Prince. But Aben-Ezra here contradicts
this; for though, as he confesses Esaias 43.28. the Priests are called (...) i.
the Rulers or Princes of the Sanctuary; yet he denies that (...) does
any-where signify a Prince, as on Genesis 14.18. and 41.45, etc. And very plainly
on that Text, Esaias 61.6. But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord, and
men shall say unto you, the ministers of our God. He thus writes, (...) i. I
have heretofore affirmed, that every Priest is always taken for a Minister, as
here it is witnessed, the Priests the Ministers of our God. And so does he in
this text interpret the word Priest, and not Prince, and says; that this
Priest shall take tithe as Melchisedek did: Now the reason why the Jews thus
constantly challenge the Tithe as due to the Priest, is; for that they hold the
Tithe to be God's part, and allotted by him unto the Priest, so does Ramban
expressly teach on Genesis 14. (...) i. Abraham would not take to himself so
much as a thread or shoo-latchet, but he did separate God's part to give it to
the Priest. And so Esaias 5.8, Woe unto them that join house to house, etc.
Iarchi says, (...) i. Ye rob God of his part in tithes. So also he expou^ds
that of Malach. 3.8. The tithes and offerings whereof ye spoil the Priests and
Levites. (...) that is, the spoiling of me. And in the Talmud Baba Kamah, cap.
7. fol. 69. it is said, (...) i. the tenth or tithe is god's riches: which
agrees with that text of Levit. 27.30. All the tithe of the land, etc. is the
Lord's, it is holy to the Lord. Nay the Jews go further in this kind, and
teach that the Tithe is so the Lords, as that a man has no right to the nine
parts, till he has given God the tenth, as R. Bechai testifies on Deuteronomy.
14.23. (...) i. The tithe of thy corn and of thy wine. If thou pay the tithe*
it is thy corn; if not, it is my corn. If thou pay the tithe, it is thy wine;
if not, it is my wine: for it is said Hose. 2.9. Therefore I will return, and
take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof.

That God chose the tenth for his part, Aben-Ezra on Deuteronomy. 14. takes upon him
to render a reason for it, which he draws from the perfection of number, ten
in simple numbers being the highest we can arise unto, without iteration of
numbers under it, being as he terms it, (...) i. The beginning of the second
Combination, and the end of the first, whereupon all other numbers do depend.
But I will not stand upon such nice argumentations, the certainty of the truth
and the equity thereof being otherwise cleared. Abarbinell on Levit. 27.30.
teaches, that the tenth part is consecrate to God in regard of his providence
and blessing of the fruits of the earth. And to this purpose R. Bechai on Deuteronomy.
14.22. writes thus; (...) i. Thou shall give the tithe of all the increase,
etc. (...) etc. i. It is the fashion of the world, if a man have ground, he
puts it out to halfes, or for a third or fourth part, but it is not so with the
Almighty; for he casseth the winds, raises the Clouds, sends down rain,
disperseth the deaw, makes fat the fruits of the Earth, and yet requires but
one part of ten; therefore Moses admonishes Israel diligently to pay the Tithe.

And hence it was, that even before the Law, they held the payment of Tithes
not to be a voluntary oblation, but a necessary duty, and work of justice and
righteousness; and therefore Ramban on Genesis 14. says, that the King of Sodom
did entreat Abraham to give him the persons. (...) i. after he saw the bounty
of his heart, and his righteousness, in that he gave the tithe. By these and
such like speeches, together with their reasons beforementioned, the Jews
ordinarily declare the Tithe to be God's part, and to be paid to the Priest by
a perpetual right. And the force of these reasons stands good, not only for
the time under the Law, but also for the time both before and after the Law;
for Malach. 3.6. God changes not, neither is his arm shortened, or his goodness
to his creatures in blessing the fruits of the Earth diminished. In this
therefore the Jews speak no otherwise concerning Tithes, then the ancient
Fathers of the Church and Councills have spoken in former times: Among the rest

Concilium Lateranense primum, cap. 54. says thus: Cum non sit in homine quod
semen serenti respo^deat, quoniam iuxta verbum Apostoli, 1 Cor. 3.7. Neque qui
plantat est aliquid, neque qui rigat, sed qui incrementu^ dat Deus: ipsum
quidem de mortificato semine plurimum fructum afferente, nimis avare in decimis
quidam defrandare nituntur, etc. And again in the same place; Cum autem in
signu^ vniuersalis dominij quasi quodam titulo speciali sibi dominus decimas
reservaverit; nos etc. thereupon they decree there, ut decimae ante tributa
solvantur. So also Council. Tribur. cap. 13. speaks in right of Tithes. Quid si
diceret dominus, nempe meus es homo, mea est terra quam colis, mea semina quae
spargis, etc. and in the end gives these reasons for the payment of them:
Decimae offerendae sunt a populo, ut hac ratione Deus placatus, largius
praestet quae necessaria sunt, and ut ministri Ecclesiae exinde relevati,
liberiores fiant ad spiritualis officij expletionem, etc. And this selfsame
reason is used by R. Chaskin on Numb. 18.20.

But I return again to the History, where we may observe, that as the
testimony of Iarchi was before mangled and maimed, by leaving out a principal
part of it; so in the next words his meaning is restrained and perverted; for
whereas Iarchi writes, that Abraham gave Melchisedek tithe of all that he had,
because he was the Priest; Here now the Historian says; But it is hard to
conceive it of any other, all that he had, then all the substance, or all the
spoils that he had by that expedition. And yet on the other side more hard and
harsh is the conceit of those, that to spoil the Church of Tithes, do teach,
that Abraham paid nothing else but only tithe of spoils. It is the advice of
Solomon, Prove. 20.18. Establish the thoughts by counsel, and by counsel make
war. And it is not to be thought that the Patriarch Abraham wanted this
wisdom, or that he would undertake a business of such consequence and
importance in any rash or unadvised manner, but with provident care and due
praeparation. For Luke 14.31. What King going to make war against another
King, sits not down first, and takes counsel whether he be able, etc. Nay
R. Levi Ben Gershon in his Collections from Judge. 3. does propound Abraham for
a pattern and an example of wariness and policy in this kind; teaching that
as it is meet to make war by counsel, so much more when his enemies are too
strong for him, as Abraham did when he went to battle against the four Kings,
(...) for he divided himself against them by night, that they might not
perceive him. He therefore that was thus careful and circumspect in his
actions, and able also to pursue the enemy with 318 persons, trained up in his
own house, did no doubt in like sort furnish them every way, and took with him
sufficient and necessary provision for that war, which either was all spent
before Melchisedek met him, or else why should he not pay tithes of that, being
his own goods, as well as of the spoils, unless he had tithed them before,
when as the Text says, he gave him tithe of all, especially considering his
answer to the King of Sodom, ver. 23. and his practice in the burial of
Sarah, Genesis 23.13. together with the like practice of David in the 2. of Sam.
24.24.

That his provision was so slender, that all was spent before he met
Melchisedek, it is not likely; for it appears by the circumstances of the
Text, that Abraham very speedily prevailed, and considering the distance of
place betwixt Hebron in the land of Judah, and Damascus out of the land, he
obtained the victory (as the Jews write) in an extraordinary and miraculous
manner: so says Ramban on Genesis 14.15. And therefore ver. 20. Melchisedek said
unto him; Blessed be the most high God, which has delivered thine enemies into
thy hand. Again, having speedily vanquished the enemies, he needed not waste
much of his own substance; for he was now otherwise provided, having to
sustain his soldiers with the spoils that he had taken, and so he did as it
is the Text ver. 24. save only that which the young men had eaten. And this
practice upon like occasion was usual, as Aben-Ezra signifies on Numb. 31.32.
And the booty being the rest of the prey which the men of war had caught was
six hundred thousand, and seventy thousand, and five thousand sheep. (...) i.
the rest of the prey besides that which they had eaten: for therefore it is
called the rest, says he. Abraham then being furnished with the spoils, might
here well spare his own goods: for certainly in this case the equity of the
Apostles rule stands in force: Who goes a warfare any time at his own cost? 1
Cor. 9.7. And therefore the Targum attributed to Jonathan Ben Vziel, if it be
of any credit, he gave him tithe (...) of all that he brought bach again, may
comprehend all that Abraham brought back again, as well of his own goods, as
of the spoils. And the Targum of Onkelus does restrain nothing, but speaks
full as large as the Text, saying; (...) i. And he gave him a tenth part of
all. But let us go on with thhe History.

And to free it from doubt, the holy Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
first using the Text of Genesis in these words, (...) the tithe of all, after a
few words interposed, explaines it by (...), the tithe of the spoils, as if he
had said, (...), the tithe of all the spoils.

This manner of expounding the Text, cannot stand; for besides the unfit
connection, or rather convulsion of two several texts, to make a new sense
against the intendment of the Apostle, and judgment of all interpreters, his
conclusion is not sound: for Abraham did not pay the tithe of all the spoils;
but only of his own part of the spoils: The young men had eaten part of them,
before Abraham came to Melchisedek, as I lately mentioned. And if Abraham paid
tithe of all the spoils, then he paid of that which was not his own, which to
do were injustice; for Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre, which were confederate with
him, Genesis 14.13. and went with him to war, had also their share and part in
the spoils. ver. 24.

And hence it is that Iarchi on this text, touching the parting of the spoil,
says; that David learned of Abraham, when he said 1 Samuel 30.24. As his part is
that goes down to battle, so shall his part be that tarryeth by the stuff,
they shall part alike. And therefore it is further said in that place as he well
observes, (...) i. And it was so from that day and before. And he made it a
statute and an ordinance; but it is not said from that day forward, because it
was already made a statute in the days of Abraham. Therefore it is t ue that
Abraham paid tithe of all, and also of the spoils, but not (...), of all the
spoils; but generally as Iarchi says it, (...) of all things that he had.

Some are so far from thinking that Abraham paid tithe of all the spoils,
as that on the contrary they hold, that he paid no tithe of the spoils at
all, because he said to the King of Sodom, that he would not take so much as a
thread or shoo-latchet of all that was his. But Ramban answers this, in the
testimony before cited, where he says, (...) etc. i. Abraham would not take to
himself so much as a shoo-latchet, but he did separate God's part, to give it
to the Priest. But it will be said, by what right did Abraham give the tenth as
God's part out of other men's goods? To this R. Abuhab makes answer, explaining
the exposition of Ramban in these words, (...) etc. i. It may seem at the
first view, that Abraham's intent and will was to take all the substance to
himself; and this is that which the Scripture testifies, that he gave the
tithe, even as a man gives the tithe of his goods. And so it is said, the King
of Sodom came forth to meet him, that is to say, in respect of his substance;
and when he saw that he did not give it him, nor consent thereto, he entreated
him, saying, give me the persons. But our Rabbine is not clear or resolute in
his exposition; for behold Abraham said, I will not take of all that is thine
so much as a thread or shoo-latchet, etc. for so according to this exposition
he should pay tithe of that which was not his own; to this therefore our
Rabbine says, that certainly by right it was his, but by reason of his great
kindness and exceeding bounty, he would not take any thing, for Abraham
trusted in his God, that he would give him substance, and riches, and honor,
and therefore would take nothing from him, lest he should say that he made
Abraham rich.

The drift therefore of this answer is in effect to show that Abraham gave
tithe of the spoils, and yet of his own goods, for that the spoils were his
own gotten in just war, and given without any wrong to the King of Sodom;
and whereas Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre retained to themselves their part of the
spoils, it shows that Abraham's giving of his part, was of his own voluntary
courtesy, and not of any necessity. By this therefore that has bin alleged,
it is evident, according to the opinion of the Jews, that Abraham dayde tithe
of the spoils, yet they do not teach, that he paid tithe only of the
spoils, but the contrary; for R. Chaskuni says on Genesis 14: That the bread and
wine which Melchisedek brought forth, was (...) that is, such things as were
not tithed, (...) i. To the end that Abraham might set apart the tithe thereof.
Therefore in his judgment something else was then tithed beside spoils: on
those words in Genesis 25, 27. and Esau was a cunning hunter, Iarchi has this
gloss, (...) (...) i. He was cunning to deceive and beguile his father with
his words, asking him, father how do they tithe salt? how do they tithe straw
or chafe, that his father might think that he did accurately study the
commandments of the Law. R. Bechai does also relate this on the same Text. Now
these and such like glosses, though in themselves idle and fabulous, yet they
make this one thing plain, that in those times they held tithes due to be
paid, and that they were also paid of other things besides spoils. Aben-Ezra
on Genesis 28.22. expounds the words of Jacob, of all that thou shall give me will
I give the tenth to thee. (...) i. of all the goods that thou shall give me
will I give the tenth to thee. And why may we not likewise think that his
grandfather Abraham paid tithe also of all the goods that God did give him?
either now at this meeting of Melchisedek, or else at other times: when as the
Apostle makes the tithing here to countervail the tithing in the Law? Some say
here of Jacob, as R. Bechai on Numb. 18. notes from Pirke R. Eliezer, that
(...) i. he gave also the tenth of his sons as holy to the Lord: which
beginning with Benjamin, and so numbering them backward, they take to be Levi,
even as in tirhing their sheep, that which goes last into the Coat, comes
first out; and so says Abarbinel on Levit. 27.30. But this is rejected hy
Aben-Ezra on Genesis 28.22. saying, (...) (...) i. That Levi should be the tenth,
it is a figurative exposition, and not according to the letter; for it is not
in the Law, that a man should give the tenth of his sons, but the tenth of
bullocks, and of sheep, and of increase. Where he takes this for granted, that
such tithes were to be paid by the Patriarchs before the Law, as were usually
paid afterward in the time of the Law, otherwise his reason were nothing. In
like manner may we say that Abraham paid not only the tenth of spoils, for
it is not in the Law that a man should give only the tenth of spoils, but the
tenth of bullocks, and of sheep, and of increase. Again the same Rabbine on
Levit. 27. making mention of Abraham's tithing, and Jacob's tithing; which
relation to the manner of tithing under the Law, gives us to understand, that
in his conceit both for the things tithed, as also for the yearly payment of
them, the order and practice was alike.

But what should I speak of the Rabbines? does not the Apostle himself in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, comparing Abraham's paying of tithe with the payment to
Levi under the Law, implye that the payment was alike in both? for when he
says, Heb. 7.9. Levi also which receives tithes, paid tithes in Abraham.
Shall we imagine that Levi received tithes of diverse things according to the
Law, but paid tithes in Abraham only of the spoils? Or that Melchisedek
Priest of the most high God, to whom the Jews say Tithes were paid, because
he was the Priest, was confined and stinted perpetually to take tithe of
nothing else but only spoils? How will that agree with the scope of the
Apostle in that place, who to prove the excellency of Melchisedek's Priesthood,
among other reasons draws one principal argument, amplified with diverse
circumstances a iure decimandi, from the right of tithing. His right therefore
in tithing must no way be less, but rather greater then Levi's was; which
being proved only by the practice of Abraham's tithing; the Apostle doubtless
does here intend, that such Tithes at the least as Levi received, such also he
paid in Abraham. But Levi did not receive Tithes only of the spoils;
therefore he did not pay Tithes only of the spoils. Nay I add further, that
Levi did not receive any Tithe of the spoils, or any part of the spoils at
all; for so the Jews teach from these Texts of Scripture, Deuteronomy. 18.1. The
Priests of the Levites, and all the Tribe of Levi, shall have no part nor
inheritance with Israel; that is, says Iarchi, (...) i. They shall have no part
in the spoil, nor inheritance in the land. Likewise Numb. 18.20. And the Lord
said unto Aaron, thou shall have no inheritance in their land, neither shall
thou have any part among them: where again is the same gloss of Iarchi, (...)
i. They shall have no part even in the spoil. And this is also confirmed by
Ramban, and by R. Bechai on the same Text. (...) i. Our Doctors teach. In their
land thou shall have no inheritance at the time of the division of the land,
and thou shall have no part among them in the spoil. I am thy part or portion,
thou shall feed at my Table. And whereas Numb. 31.28.29. a tribute was taken of
the prey, one of five hundred from the soldiers part, and one of fifty from
the peoples, which was given to Eleazar and to the Levites; Ramban in way of
explanation, answers that doubt in these words, (...) etc. i. This tribute
was offered, because the spoil came by the executing of God's vengeance upon a
land that was not theirs, Numb. 25.17. but in the land of Sihon and Og, they
gave not to the Priests and Levites any thing thereof, for they were admonished
to the contrary, where it is said, (...) i. Thou shall have no part among them,
no not in the spoil. And R. Bechai does likewise confirm this writing on the
same Text. How then can Abraham's paying of Tithe be compared with that of the
Law, if Abraham paid nothing but tithe of spoils, and in the Law they paid
no tithe of spoils at all? Or to what end is it said; Levi that received
tithes, paid tithes in Abraham, except he paid in Abraham some such tithes as
he did receive? and if so, then something else beside spoils, for Levi received
no tithe of spoils, if we may believe the Jews.

Again, when the Apostle says, ver. 8. Here men that die receive tithes, but
here he receives them of whom it is witnessed, that he lives: he speaks in
the plural number (...), which being in the same manner without change of
number applied to Melchisedek, may seem to include more then only tithe of
spoils; for making mention of them in ver. 4. he does not speak in the
plural number, but only in the singular, (...).

But how shall the Priesthood of Melchisedek be proved greater then Levi's in
regard of the right of tithing, if Melchisedek receive tithe but once, and of
one person, and that only of spoils, and that also by courtesy, when as Levi
received them often, and of many persons, and of all things prescribed in the
Law, and that by divine authority; for ver. 5. they had a commandment to take
Tithes. Surely this will not argue a superiority, but rather an inferiority in
Melchisedek's Priesthood in regard of tithing, which is contrary to the drift
of the Apostle. Therefore I rather think whereas it is said in Heb. 7.2. first
that Abraham gave tithe of all things, and after gave also the tithe of the
spoils, ver. 4. That the Apostle here infolds an other argument to prove the
greatness of Melchisedek's Priesthood above the Leviticall, because Abraham
did not only pay to Melchisedek tithe of all things as well as they did in the
Law to Levi, but also gave the tithe of the spoils, which the Jews say was
not given in the Law. And some inducement for this may be gathered from the
words of the Text it self; for in the first place it is said in the Greek,
ver. 2. (...), he divided the tithe; and after ver. 4. (...), he gave even of
the spoils; and so answerable to these are the Syriaque words, first (...) i.
he divided; then (...) he gave: as though his latter had bin more free, and
more then was in use in the Leviticall Law, for no doubt but the Apostle
(brought up at Gamaliel's feet) was well acquainted with the manner and
practice of the Jews in the payment of their Tithes.

But howsoever they teach, that no Tithe or part of spoils was given to Leui,
yet Aben-Ezra on Psalm. 110.4. in the testimony before cited, does plainly
show, that the Tithe of spoils is to be given to him that is a Priest after
the order of Melchisedek; for of him he says, Israel shall fight, and thou
shall receive the tithe as Melchisedek did of Abraham. Now the Tithe taken
after the fighting of a battle, what is it else but the Tithe of spoils,
except by a Synecdoche we understand by fighting; not only the action of
soldiers in time of war, but also the exercise of other Arts and vocations
in time of peace. To conclude therefore, the Apostle proves Melchisedek to be
greater then Leui from the right of tithing, not only in regard of the persons
that paid tithe unto him, to wit, Abraham and Levi, and the continuance of the
payment, he receiving the^ of who^ it is witnessed, that he lives; but also in
respect of the things themselves, whereof tithes were paid, that is, of all
things; yea even of the spoils, under which both personal and praediall
Tithes may be comprehended,

The Syriaque and Arabique translations of the New Testament agree with this.
And the testimonies alleged for Abraham's tithing of spoils, do none of
them show that he paid tithe only of the spoils, but that he did pay the
tithe of spoils, which we do not deny. And if the tithe of spoils was God's
part, as the Jews themselves do teach, in Abraham's tithing; then much more
the Tithe of other goods, which in many things are obtained, not by the labor
and industry of man, but only by the gracious providence and blessing of God.
All this while I have moved no quaestion (as some do) about the interpretation
of the word (...), which properly signifies the chief parts or top of the heap;
but I take it as it is here translated, spoils; neither will I contend about
the Syriaque translation, which has Tithes and first fruits. And yet the word
(...) rendered first fruits, Heb. 7.4. is of a more large extent; for in Heb.
7.3, it is expounded the beginning, (...) i. Having neither beginning of days.
And in Luke 15.22. the chief or best, (...) i. Bring forth the best robe:
which may well accord with the vulgar Latin in rhis, place; Decimas dedit de
praecipuis. But for the Arabique word (...) to rest rain it here, as the
Historian does, to signify Alms, must needs be a penurious and improper
exposition, the same being expressed in the best Arabique Lexicons by the
Latin words augmentum, incrementu^, thesaurus, corbona, perfectura, perfectus,
but never cleemosyna. There is indeed an other word somewhat like this,
springing from the same root, which is (...) explained by (...) righteousness,
which also sometimes by a Synecdoche signifies Alms, as being parts of
righteousness. And so in Math 6.4. the Arabique (...) coming from the Hebrew is
translated alms, as also the Hebrew term it self is sometimes used, as
Bechai shows on Deuteronomy. 26. (...) i. He that gives alms to the poor, gives
alms to the Lord. But the proper word which the Arabiques use for Alms, is
(...) expressed in Math. 6.1.2. etc. and is derived from the Hebrew Radix (...)
misereri, whereas the other comes of (...) mundare, vel mundum esse. But
neither of these words are found in this Text, but the other that is not
expressed by the same Characters, which if in a borrowed signification it be at
any time either in the Alcoran, or elsewhere taken for Alms, yet it is
altogether improper and unfit to use any such exposition in this place, as it
is unfit that a gift which is presented to a Prince, should be called by the
name of Alms. For how can we think that Melchisedek the King of Salem, and
Priest of the most high God was a receiver of Alms, but rather a giver, it
being a more blessed thing to give, then to receive: Acts 20.35. And so much
the Text it self, Genesis 14. together with the expositions of the Jews does
import; where it is said that Melchisedek brought forth bread and wine to
refresh Abraham's wearyed soldiers. There Iarchi thus glosseth, (...) i. So
they use to do to the^ that returned weary from the war.

Wherefore to shut up this point, one thing we may note by the way, that if the
Arabique translation here alleged, may stand for sufficient authority,
whereas the Historian makes it doubtful who should be the Author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, stiling him in ambiguous and general terms, The holy
Author, but naming none: The Arabique puts this quaestion out of doubt; for it
does not only in the Title and inscription thereof call it the Epistle of St
Paul, but does express it to be in number the fourtenth of his Epistles, as it
is styled in the beginning thereof. And so also does the Syriaque Translation
without any scruple ascribe it plainly to St Paul.

SECT. 2.
THe next passage of Tithes is in Jacob's vow, Genesis 28.22. This stone which I
have set up as a pillar shall be God's house, and all that thou shall give me,
I will tithe, and give the tenth to thee. This vow, if we read the beginning of
it in ver. 20. seems to be uttered conditionally, if God will be with me, and
keep me in this journey, etc. But R. Bechai, and also Ramban do otherwise
expound it, and say expressly (...) That it is no condition, as Iarchi would
have it; for Jacob did not doubt of God's promises which he made unto him, ver.
15. But says Ramban, the Scripture speaks in this manner concerning things to
come, as Genesis 28.15. (...) I will not forsake thee until I have performed that
that I have promised thee. and so Numb. 36.4. (...) not if, but when the Iubily
comes. And Pagnine shows that the particle (...) is not always to be taken
as a note of a condition, and interpreted, si, if; but says he, sunt qui ad
(...) reducant, quia pro vero and certe sumitur interdum, and est particula
certo aliquid statuens. And David Chimki gives examples for this in radice
(...) as Numb. 1.30. (...) id est, (...) that is, certainly the Lord will make
a new thing. So Prove. 3.34. (...) id est (...) Surely he scorneth the scorners,
as the last translation has it. And in the same sense the word is used in Job
22.20. etc. and elsewhere. Whereas therefore Abulensis and others argue, that
Tithes belong not to the Law of nature, or moral Law, because things moral
are not to be vowed with condition but absolutely, the ground of that objection
is clean taken away by this interpretation of the Text. For the Jews teach
that the vow of Jacob was not a conditional, but an absolute vow. It follows
in the History Which, Josephus says, upon his return being after 20 years,
he performed, offering the tithe of all his substance, or (...), the tithe of
all that he had gotten. Josephus does not only say this, but also Iarchi on
Genesis 28. (...) i. So he did at his return when he said unto him Arise, go to
Bethel, Genesis 35.1. And Aben-Ezra likewise on the same cap. 35.1. confirms this
saying, (...) i. In Bethel he performed his vow, and gave the tithe of his
substance to the honor of God. But that this was done after 20 years, neither
does Josephus, or any other Jew affirm. And if the computation of the years
of the life of Jacob, set down by Iarchi on Genesis 28. be true, it was above 20,
yea above 30 years before he performed this vow; for he continued twenty
years with Laban; as appears Genesis 31.38. and 14 years (says Iarchi)
according to the opinion of their Doctors, he lived privately in the house of
Heber, after he had received the blessing, and before he went to Laban. And
this they maintain especially to make up the full sum of 130 years of
Jacob's age, when he came before Pharaoh, Genesis 47.9. Mercer also on Genesis 26.34.
makes mention of this; but it being a matter of small moment, I let it pass,
and look again to the History.

Into whose hands he gave the tithes, appears not; but the chiefest Priest of
that time was his father Isaac: for before Aaron, the Jews said the Priesthood
was wholly annexed to the firstborn of families, which agrees well with the
sanctifying of the firstborn commanded in Egypt, Exodus 13.

It is evident by the testimony of Ramban on Genesis 26.5. that the Patriarchs
were liberal in giving their Tithes to the Priests of the Lord. (...) i. as to
Shem and Heber and their disciples, as he there says. And among the Disciples
of Shem and Heber they account Jacob for one. And therefore on those words,
Genesis 25.27. Jacob was a plain man, and dwelt intents, Iarchi here glosseth,
and Bechai and others. (...) i. the tent of Shem, and the tent of Heber. And on
Genesis 37.3. Israel loved Joseph more then all his sons, (...) because he
begat him in his old age. The Targum of Onkelus expresses it thus; (...) i.
for he was a wise and understanding child; interpreting the words of the
excellency of his apprehension and capacity; for otherwise he begat also
Benjamin in his old age after Joseph; and hence it is that the Jews say here
as Iarchi, (...) i. That Jacob committed to Joseph whatsoever himself had
learned of Shem and Heber: and as Ramban says, (...) i. He delivered to him
the wisdom and mysteries of the Law, and found him wise and capable of them*
as though he had bin of ripe age. But now Shem and Heber being dead, as
appears by computation of time, to whom Jacob gave his Tithe; or whether Isaac
were the chiefest Priest of that time, it is altogether uncertain. Aben-Ezra
on Genesis 35.1. says, that Jacob gave his Tithe, (...) i. to him that was in
that generation fit to receive it, but who that should be, he leaves doubtful.
Mercer on ver. 15. says, Dederit autem ipsi Heber aut eius filijs, vel potius
consecrarit in usus sacros, etc. But the Historian says,

As Abraham gave Tithes to Shem, being the eldest auncestor of the house; so it
may be thought that Jacob paid his vow into the hands of Isaac, the chief of
the family then living, as a firstborn, and a Priest also. I deny not but
this may be thought so, but I cannot conceive how it can be certainly thought
or taken for a truth: for all hold that Jacob at his return performed his vow
at Bethel, a great while before he came to his father Isaac at Hebron, Genesis
35.27. so Josephus, Aben Ezra, Iarchi, and Ramban agree. Again after the
performance of his vow, many things happened to him by the way before he came
to his father, as namely the death of Deborah, the birth of Benjamin, the death
of Rachel, the sin of Reuben; and therefore on ver. 22. Iarchi says, (...)
i. All these things happened to him whilst as yet he was not come to Isaac at
Hebron: Neither is there any likelihood that Isaac should meet Jacob at Bethel,
and there receive his Tithes; for Isaac was old and blind, Genesis 27.1. and Esau
gaped for his death, ver. 41. before Jacob's first departure from him to go to
Laban. And hence it is that the Jews speaking of the death of Deborah,
Rebecca's nurse, and the mourning for her, say that it had relation to Rebecca
her self, for whom Jacob especially mourned, and that therefore the place was
called (...) the oak of mourning and lamentation; but say they, as Ramban
relates it, there is no mention made of her death, because she was buried
privately, without that funeral solemnity that others had; for Jacob was not
there, and Esau hated her, and would not come thither, and Isaac he was blind,
and went not out of doors. Now if Isaac because of blindness could not go out
to the burial of his wife, much less could he go to meet his son Jacob at
Bethel, to take of him the Tithes. Where then, or how can it be thought that
Jacob paid his vow into the hands of his father Isaac? And for that he says.

Before Aaron the Jews say the Priesthood was wholly annexed to the firstborn
of families, which agrees well with the sanctifying of the firstborn
commanded in Egypt. True it is that the Jews in diverse places affirm that
the Priesthood followed the birthright, until such time as they sinned in
worshipping ths golden calfe; but after that, the Priesthood, say they, was
given to Levi, because among the rest only the Tribe of Levi was free from that
transgression, which they gather, though weakly, from these words, Exodus
32.26. where Moses said, Who pertains to the Lord? let him come down to me.
And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves unto him. And this they also
record on diverse Texts, as Iarchi shows on Deuteronomy. 8.16. Exodus 32.26. Deuteronomy.
10.9. Malach. 2.6. And Chimki on 1 Kings 12, 31. But Ramban writing on Numb.
16. touching the rebellion of Corah, seems to be of another mind in this
point, for these are his words, (...) i. Now all this that I have spoken
concerning the first borne, is according to the tradition of our Doctors, which
say that the service belonged to the firstborn; but according to the literal
exposition, at the first all Israel were fit for the service of the
sacrifices: for so was always the custom in the high places of particular or
private persons; but Aaron was chosen for the service of the Tabernacle and
Sanctuary, and against this election did Corah contend, and would have restored
the service to all Israel; for (says he) all the congregation is holy every
one of them, as Numb. 16.3.

Again this that Ramban writes concerning the Priesthood, is confirmed by the
like testimony of R. Bechai on Exodus 12.1. page 79. grounded upon the tradition
of their Doctors. (...) i. whilst that Aaron was not chosen, all Israel were
fit for the Priesthood; after that Aaron was chosen, all Israel were excepted.
Therefore by these authorities of the Jews, that cannot be altogether true,
which is affirmed here, that before Aaron, the Priesthood was wholly annexed to
the firstborn of families. Neither does this agree so well with the
sanctifying of the firstborn, commanded in Egypt, Exodus 13.2. for the
sanctifying there commanded, was not only of the firstborn of man, but of
beast, and that in respect of the death of the firstborn in Egypt, both of
man and beast, Exodus 12.29. Again it appears not in this relation to what
firstborn the Priesthood did belong; whether to the firstborn of the father
or mother, or both: for this distinction is to be observed, as R. Bechai writes
on Exodus 13.2. and 11.5. with reference to Psalm. 78.51. the one being called
(...) the beginning of strength: the other (...) that first opens the womb*
Reuben was first borne to Jacob, but Joseph to Rachel; and after Reubens sin,
the birthright was given to Joseph, the Kingdom to Judah, but the Priesthood
to Levi, as Bechai speaks on Genesis 49.3. and 28.21. But now the sanctifying of
the firstborn commanded in Egypt is expressly restrained to the firstborn
of the mother; the first that opens the womb, as being best known, says
Bechai, and having special relation to the sanctified firstborn of the
blessed virgin, the expectation and glory of all firstborn, Luke 2.7.
Moreover the name of firstborn in Scripture is not only properly, but also
figuratively taken, and so it is said, Exodus 4.22. Israel is my son, even my
first borne: which is thus expounded in the Talmud Massech, cap. 2. fol. 31.
(...) Giving a reason of the love wherewith he loved them, he says: Israel is
my son, my firstborn. And so in Ier. 31.9. Ephraim is my firstborn.
Chimki there gives tbe same interpretation, and so does the Targum of Jonathan
in that place: Sometime the name of firstborn is ascribed to men in Scripture
in regard of dignity and honor, Psalm. 89.27. also I will make him my
firstborn higher then the Kings of the earth. (...) He calls him firstborn
(says Chimki) because the firstborn has dignity over the other sons;
which was that privilege of birthright, as R. Bechai thinks, that Esau sold
to Jacob, Genesis 25.31. And so the Patriarchs and Fathers of the ancient
Church, are in respect of honor termed the Congregation of the firstborn,
Heb. 12.23. And further on Exodus 13.2. R. Bechai says, that whereas the Lord
smote all the first borne in the land of Egypt, Exodus 12.29. (...) i. That it
is extended to the eldest in the family, if no firstborn were there, for he
is also called a first borne. And in this sense the Patriarchs and heads of
families, whether firstborn or not, might be accounted instead of Priests in
their generation, and were also Prophets and Kings, as Chimki shows on Psalm.
105.15. Touch not mine anointed, etc. But properly Priests they were not; for
no man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron, Heb. 5.4. and we find but two orders of Priesthood in Scripture; the one
after Melchisedek, the other after Aaron. The Priesthood of Aaron was not yet
instituted, and none but only Christ is said to be a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedek; and to this purpose in the Talmud in Massech Nedarim,
cap. 3. fol. 32. they write thus concerning Melchisedek Priest of the most high
God, (...) i. he was a Priest, but his seed no Priest. To conclude therefore it
is lest altogether uncertain in this passage of the history, either what order
of Priesthood it was that belonged to the firstborn, or what manner of
firstborn it was to which the Priesthood was annexed. And yet he proceeds
further in this kind, saying: And Noah, Abraham, and Job, and the like, are
accounted by this right, Priests of that time. For proof of this, Origin lib.
1. in Job, is cited in the margent. But Origin does not there say, that these
were Priests by that right of primo-geniture, but thus: Erant nihilominus etiam
ea tempestate sacerdotes, necdum adhuc a lege ordinati, sed naturali sapientia
hoc requirente ac perficiente, ita sacerdotio functus est Noah, etc: and again
speaking there of Job's sacrificing for his sons and daughters, he does not
thence infer that he was a Priest, but proves out of Job 12.19. that there
were Priests in his time, and then concludes doubtfully thus: Sieve ergo
memorati sacerdotes, sieve ipse per seipsum Job offerebat hostias pro illis
secundum numerum illorum. But the Jews they do not teach that Job was a
Priest, but that he was a Judge; for so Aben-Ezra in the conclusion of his
Commentary on Job, at the end of the book directly expresses, proving it from
cap. 22. ver. 9. of that book compared with cap. 29.13.14.15.16. his words are
these. (...) i. His companions said unto him, thou have sent widows away
empty: And this is a sign that he was a Judge, and therefore he answers, I was
a father to the poor, and I caused the widows heart to sing for joy.
Furthermore to prove Jacob's Priesthood gained by the sale of the birthright
from Esau, the Historian says, that Express mention is of his exercising this
holy function in sacrifices during his fathers life, and for this alleges
Genesis 31.54. But he has mistaken and mis-applyed this Text, if his own author
Rabbi Iarchi may be believed; for Iarchi does not think that Jacob did here
offer a sacrifice, neither does he interpret the Text in that sense, but says;
(...) i. That he slew cattle to make a feast for his brethren and friends that
came with Laban. And so often the word (...) does signify as well mactare, as
sacrificare; to slay, as to sacrifice. Neither could he with a good conscience
invite them to his sacrifice, that were out of the covenant, being (as they
were) of another religion, as that judicious Divine Mr Perkins answers our
adversaries, alleging and interpreting this Text against their arguments for
the sacrifice of the Mass, in his Reformed Catholic.

Again, all those that offered sacrifices were not Priests, as appears by
Samuel, 1 Samuel 7.9. For R. Levi Ben Gershom writing on that Text, says
plainly; (...) that Samuel was no Priest: and so S. Austin retract. lib. 2.
cap. 43. and Chimki here shows that Iosuah did sacrifice in Gilgal, Iosuah
8.30. and Eliah in Carmel, 1 Kings 18. and so did Balaam, Numb. 23. Iarchi
speaks of this, and R. Bechai on Numb. 18.7. and Deuteronomy. 2.8. who says, that
before the Tabernacle was set up, the high places were permitted, and every man
that would, offered sacrifice on the top of his house, but after the erecting
of the Tabernacle, they were prohibited so long as the host continued in the
wilderness, as in Levit. 17.3.^. Afterward when they passed over Jordan for
the space of 14 years, whilst they were employed in subduing and dividing the
land, the use of the high places was then lawful, which being appointed by the
direction of a Prophet, a stranger that was no Priest, might offer sacrifice in
them. But when they come to Jerusalem, the inheritance mentioned, Deuteronomy. 12.9.
then were they no longer lawful. Therefore the Kings of Judah are blamed, when
they destroyed not the high places. And touching the sacrifices of the
Patriarchs, one thing here may be remembered, which in the first Tome of
Counsels, in the second Epistle of Anacletus, is recorded in these words;
Initium sacerdotij Aaron fuit, licet Melchisedec prior obtulerit sacrificium,
and post eum Abraham, Isaae, and Jacob, sed hi spontanea voluntate, non
sacerdotali autoritate ista fecerunt. Which shows, that in the judgment of
the ancients, though the Patriarchs did offer sacrifice; yet that was no
sufficient argument to prove them to be Priests. And if Cain and Abel were
therefore both of them to be accounted Priests, because both of them did offer
sacrifice, then was not the Priesthood before Aaron, wholly annexed to the
firstborn of families; for Abel was no firstborn, and yet the sacrifice of
Abel was accepted, and not the sacrifice of Cain. But our author has not yet
done with this Treatise of the Priesthood, he presses it further, saying,
Whence observe by the way, that both Abraham and Jacob, according to the right
of that time, must be Priests also, when they paid these tithes.

I marvel what he intends to make of this observation, it may be would hence
conclude that Priests should therefore pay tithes now as well as other men, or
else none to be paid at all. I answer therefore to this, observe also by the
way, that first here is very slender evidence, brought either to prove that
there was any such right of Priesthood, as he speaks of at that time, or that
Abraham and Jacob were Priests by th t right (as has already bin showed;) for
as for Abraham, though he says that he was a firstborn, but proves it not;
and says also that the form of offering his son Isaac iustifies him to be a
Priest; Yet the Jews account him a Priest in the offering of his son, no
otherwise then as I showed before by that fiction of theirs in translating the
Priesthood from Melchisedek to Abraham, and so R. Chaskuni testifies on Genesis
22.2. and offer him there for a burnt offering, etc. (...) i. He said in the
presence of the Lord of the world, can there be a sacrifice without a Priest?
to which he answered, I have appointed thee already to be a Priest, as it is
said, the Lord swore, and will not repent, etc. Psalm. 110. And for Jacob's
Priesthood, Baal Haturim on Genesis 28. writes thus, (...) (...) i. To put on
garments is twice in the Masoreth here, viz: Genesis 28.20. and in Leuit. 21.10.
which teaches that Jacob was the high Priest, as it is in Bereshith Rabbah.
The blessed Almighty said to Michael, Thou have made Jacob my high Priest to
have a blemish, Levit. 21.18. for he halts upon his thigh, as sure as thou
live, thou must be feign to be the high Priest above in his room: this is it
that he says; and will give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on, that he
will confirm to me the Priesthood which I have bought of Esau.

These words though strange in the literal sense, yet may be in some sort
admitted in a figurative and spiritual application; for Jacob and all the
Priests on earth were lame, and had all of them some one blemish or other to
stayne them; and therefote Heb. 7.27. The high Priests of the Law were daily to
offer up sacrifice, first for their own sins, and then for the sins of the
people. But our Michael that fights against the Dragon, Rev. 12.7. Dan. 12.1.
Our high Priest which is most perfect is above, and makes intercession for us:
for such an high Priest it became us to have, which is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the Heavens, Heb. 7.26.
But gtant that Abraham and Jacob were after a sort Priests, as our author would
have them, at that time when they paid their Tithes, and so also in that
respect types of Christ that was in their loins, and is the true high Priest,
and the firstborn of every creature, Coloss. 1.15. Yet in the action it self
of paying tithes, they did nor represent Christ, but the Church and people of
God that pay Tithes to Christ, represented in Melchisedek. And this is noted by
Bucanus de peccato, quaest. 19. Cum Levi dicatur decimatus in Abraham, quia
fuit in lumbis Abrahae, Heb. 7.9. quomodo non etiam Christus in Adam peccasse
dicitur? Resp. Quia non est communi more ratione seminali de semine viri natus,
sed de spiritu sancto conceptus, ideo a peccato originali, eiusque reatu liber,
and exemptus extitit: Sicut nec in Abrahae lumbis decimatus fuit, sed in
Melchisedechi persona repraesentatus, ut aeternus sacerdos non decimas dans,
sed accipiens. Christ did not pay Tithes in the loins of Abraham, as Levi did,
but was represented in the person of Melchisedek as an eternal Priest, not
giving, but receiving Tithes. Therefore in this relation betwixt Priest and
people, Christ in the person of Melchisedek stands for the Priest, and Abraham
for the people. And to this purpose S. Augustine on John 3. writes thus:
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, tres patres, and populus unus: tres patres in quibus
figurabatur populus. And after, In populo Iudaeorum figuratus est populus
Christianorum. And therefore say the Jews; Abraham was first called Abram
pater Syriae: and after the promise, Abraham pater multarum gentium, as Iarchi
writes on Genesis 17. and Bechai on Deuteronomy. 26. fol. 30. And in the Talmud in
Massech Beracoth cap. 1. fol. 13. he is called (...) i. father of all the
world, both Jews and Gentiles that believe. Therefore Abraham in paying Tithes
to Melchisedek, was herein a Type and pattern to all his posterity: for Ramban
on Genesis 36.43. says expressly, (...) i. The actions of the Patriarchs, and the
accidents that happened to them had relation to their seed. And the same author
and Bechai also on Genesis 12. do exemplify this in diverse particulars. And on
Genesis 14. they make the four Kings there named to signify the four Monarchs
of the world. And speaking there also of Abraham's tithing, he confirms this
saying, (...) etc. i. And this was a sign to Abraham, that there should be the
house of God, and thither his seed should bring the tithes, and there they
should bless the Lord. Which is in like manner verified in the example of
Jacob, that vowed Tithes, whereof says Mercer on Genesis 28.22. Et hoc tam pro se
quam pro posteris suis vovet. He vowed not only for himself, but for his
posterity. Agreeing herein with R Bechai, and Chaskuni, saying, (...) That
Jacob's vow was a pattern for future generations. No other express mention is
of Tithes before Moses his time, unless with the Jews you dream that the
Leviticall Law was written before the Creation. And yet by his leave the Jews
allege another text before Moses time; from whence they teach, that as Abraham
and Jacob, so also Isaac pays tithes, Genesis 26.12. Afterward Isaac sowed in
that land, and found in the same year an hundredth measures, or an hundredth
fold by estimation. Whereupon says Iarchi (...) i. Our Doctors say that this
measuring was for the Tithes. And Ramban likewise on the same place confirms
it, saying, (...) i. They write concerning the hundredth measures, that the
measuring thereof was for the Tithes: and there he adds further; That the
Patriarchs were liberal in giving their Tithes to the Priests of the Lord, as
to Shem and Heber, and their Disciples. If any think this collection of
theirs, has not sufficient ground or warrant from the Text, though this be
granted, yet hereby appears that the tradition of their ancestors and their
opinion concurres in this, that all the Patriarchs in their time, did duly pay
their tithes to the Priests. Again, the book of Job is supposed to have bin
written before Moses time; and the Jews in the Talmud in Baba Bathra, cap. 1.
fol. 15. among other opinions, say that Job lived in the time of Jacob:
Aben-Ezra and Iarchi on Job 1. say, he descended of the sons of Nachor,
Abraham's brother; and so says Chaskuni on Genesis 25. Origin in the beginning of
his Commentary on Job says, that Moses was the Interpreter of the book of
Job, out of Syriacke into Hebrew; and the Jews in effect say as much; as R.
Levi Ben Gershon in his praeface to the book of Job: and Aben-Ezra on Job 2.
And generally by most he is held to be more ancient then Moses. Now the Jews
interpret diverse sentences in his book, to be understood of Tithes, Job 31.38.
If my land cry against me, or the furrows thereof complain together. (...) i.
that I have not brought out my Tithes, as was meet, says Iarchi. So Job 24.19.
Drought and heat consume the snow waters. The Chalde Paraphrase explains it
thus, (...) i. Because they have neglected the setting forth of the Tithe in
the appointed time thereof, in the heat of summer, therefore the waters of the
rain and snow are restrained fromt them. And so they expound this text in the
Talmud Massech Shabath, cap. 2. fol. 32 (...) i. Through the sin of omission
of oblations and tithes, the heavens are shut up, and restrained from sending
down deawe and rain; and men run about to seek their food, and find it
not: as it is said Job 24.19. Drought and heat, etc. But on the contrary if
they duly pay their Tithes, they are blessed, as in Malachi 3. Bring all the
Tithes, etc. And thus far the Talmud.

By this therefore it is apparent in the judgment of these Writers, that it was
no rare thing, but common and usual both among Jews and Gentiles to pay
Tithes, and that also before Moses time. As for the dream of the Jews, that
the Leviticall Law was written before the Creation, David Chimki says it is a
dream to them that know not the true interpretation of it, which he explaineth
on Esai 22.11. saying, (...) etc. i. Our Doctors say that seven things were
created before the world was created, and they are these; Paradise, and the
Law, and the righteous, and Israel, and the Throne of Glory, and Jerusalem, and
Messiah the son of David. But the meaning of this tradition is not (says he)
as the common sort of learners understand it, but that they were in potentia to
be created, or in intention before the world was created, because these things
are the perfection or end of the creation of the world. And Iarchi here says,
(...) i. Before he created the World, Jerusalem and the Sanctuary came into his
thought. And Mercer on Genesis 1. takes it in the same sense, saying. Save in part
Rabbi Eliezer Hagadol. 1. Magni qui magnae est apud illos autoritatis part 3,
afferunt septem ante orbem conditum creata, 1. meo iudicio quae in mente divina
essent ab aeterno; nam ante mundi exordium alioqui creatum nihil esse potuit
proprie loquendo. Inter ea Messiam commemorant.

Moses Ben Maimon in Pirke Avoth, cap. 6. fol. 12. speaks to this point. (...)
i. The Law is one of God's possessions, Prove. 8.22. The Lord has possessed me
in the beginning of his way, because the creation thereof was before the World;
for when it came into his thought to create the World, he said it shall be
established by reason of the Law. And R. Bechai writes also of this on Deuteronomy.
34. fol. 243. Therefore by the Law written before the Creation, they mean,
written in the Tables of God's divine knowledge, and of his eternal purpose
and decree. Aben-Ezrah on Esai. 41.13. fear not, I will help thee, (...)
says. (...) i. The praeterperfect tense is put here for the future, and the
reason is, because all decrees that are to come, are with God accounted as if
they were. And again because time past, and time to come, are only in respect
of the Creatures, and not in respect of the Creator, who is actus purus. And
hence it is that R. Bechai on Levit. 12. page 141. says, that man was the
first of Gods Creatures in intention, but the last in creation. But I will not
spend too many words about a dream, and yet a man would think that a grand
Rabbi, who so earnestly urges the authority of these Writers against us in
other places, should know the true meaning of his own masters, and acquaint us
as well with their interpretations, as with their dreams. But grant that the
Jews, and these that are their followers, do oftentimes tell us many dreams,
yet this one thing they teach plainly without dreaming, that though the Law was
not written before Moses time, yet the Patriarchs knew the Law, and kept it,
and taught it their Children also before Moses time, as Ramban declares on
Genesis 26.5. and Bechai on Genesis 48.22. (...) etc. i. It seems to me according to
the judgment of our Doctors, that our father Abraham learned the whole Law by
the holy Spirit, and exercised himself therein, and also taught it his
children. And so he speaks in the same place of Jacob, not much dissonant from
that which Calvin writes concerning his vow of worshipping God, and paying
Tithes, saying; Non quod suo arbitrio Deum coluerit, nam directio spiritus vice
legis scriptae fuit. And therefore hence it may be thought that the Patriarchs
paid tithes either by the knowledge of the Law according to the will of God,
or else by the direction of the spirit of God, which was instead of a Law unto
them.

SECT. 3.
TOuching Cain and Abel's sacrifice, mentioned in the passage following, and
the diverse expositions of that text, Genesis 4, 7. The writings of the Jews, if
it were needful, might afford matter enough of discourse, which I will but
point at.

Moses Ben Maimon in More Hanebucim writes, that the end for which sacrifices
were commanded, did tend especially to the rooting out of Idolatry; for whereas
the Gentiles worshipped beasts, as the Chaldeans and Egyptians bullocks and
sheep, with reference to the Celestial Signs, Aries, and Taurus, etc.
therefore (says he) God commanded these to be slain in sacrifice. And because
the Sign Aries is in his chiefest strength in the month Nisan, (which takes
part of our March, and part of April) therefore as Ramban notes on Exodus 12.
in the Passover they were enjoined to kill a Lamb, and to cat it, to show
that the Israelites came not out of Egypt by the power of the Sign, but by
the decree of the highest, and that the Egyptians God was not able to help
them when he was in his greatest force. But Ramban and Bechai both of them on
Levit. 1.2. confute this opinion of Maimon concerning sacrifices, affirming
that before there was either Chaldean or Egyptian, sacrifices were offered; as
by Cain, and Abel, and Noah, and also by Adam at the first, as Chimki relates
on Psalm. 69.31. This shall please the Lord better then a young bullock that
has horns and hoofes: That is, (say the Jews) better then the Bullock that
Adam offered, that had horns before hoofes, as it is in Massech Cholin, cap.
3. fol. 60. In which respect Ramban on Genesis 22.9. observes that where it is
written, Abraham builded an Altar there. (...) i. It is expressed with the
article notificatiue (...) that Altar, meaning that he pointed at the Altar
whereon Adam, and Cain, and Abel, and Noah did sacrifice. And therefore they
said, that in the sacrifices there is contained a hidden and secret mystery,
hidden indeed to them that have the veil upon their hearts, 2 Cor. 3.15: but
revealed to us. For all sacrifices had relation to Christ. And the Commandment
of sacrificing was given to the Fathers; first that it might be the common
exercise of piety, whilst they did profess themselves to be God's people, and
that all things that they had, they received from him. And 2ly that they might
be admonished, that they stood in need of some expiation to reconcile them to
God. The sacrifice of expiation is fully accomplished and ended in Christ. The
other which is the sacrifice of thanksgiving, does still continue. And the
Jews themselves confess this, as Ramban on Levit. 23. and Chimki on Ier,
33.11. (...) i. All sacrifices shall cease, but the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving shall never cease. But I will speak no more of sacrifice, lest I
digress too far from Tithes. Only thus much the learned have observe from
the sacrifice of Cain and Abel, that they acknowledged hereby that God from the
beginning had a right in every man's goods. And this right afterward by the
practice of the Patriarchs was declared to be Tithes.

SECT. 4.
THe next Section contains nothing but a relation of fables and fopperies. For
as for Cabalistique and doting curiosities, or identity of numbers in several
words, as in (...) and (...), first fruits and Tithes, or such like; for my
part I list not spend time or paper in the reci^all of them, we need not seek
such proofs for the right of Tithes, the evidence of Scripture is sufficient.
And if any be delighted with the reading of these toys, Salomoh Iarchi in
diverse of his Commentaries, and Baal Haturim upon the Pentateuch, can quickly
furnish him with store of such stuff.

But because the Author of the History among other things does here again make
mention of Abraham his success, with his company of 318, together with
Arithmeticall and nice speculations taken from thence, even among Christians,
as Clemens Alexan. Stromat. 5. Let him give me leave by the way to put him in
mind, that he needed not for this matter to have gone any further then his
own R. Iarchi so often recited by him, who I am sure touching this number of
318, has left upon record as vain and frivolous a fancy as any the History
speaks of; for he says, that none went with Abraham to war against the four
Kings, but only Eliezer, and why? because forsooth the letters contained in his
name amount to the number of 318 (...) as though all the rest of Abraham's
soldiers had bin nothing else but mere cyphares. But R. Bechai calls this
conceit a riddle; and Aben-Ezra on the same Text, viz. Genesis 14. condemns it.
saying, (...) i. The number of the letters of Eliezer is but a figura-true
gloss, for the Scripture speaks not by any such Arithmetical respect, for so
whosoever will, may turn any names either to good or bad, but the word is to
be taken according to the literal sense. Notwithstanding if we leave the
conceit of number; and consider the true signification of the name, we may
refer it to a better use: for Eliezer signifies the help of God. And
therefore Moses called one of his sons (...) Eliezer, for the God of my
Fathers was my help (says he) and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh,
Exodus 18.4. In like manner Abraham also might call his servant Eliezer, for the
God of Abraham was his help, and delivered him from the sword of his enemies.
And therefore Melchisedek in this respect praised God, and said; Blessed be the
most high God, which has delivered thine enemies into thy hand.

CAP. 2.
Exodus 23.19. Levit 23.10. Numb. 15.20.
THe yearly increase being either fruits of the ground or cattle: In the Law
of fruits of the ground, first the first of the forwardest were offered to the
Priest in ears of wheat and Barley, figgs, grapes, olives, pomgranates and
dates. And of these seven only the first fruits In Talmud in Seder Heraim
Massechet^ Biccurim, atque inde rece^tio es erum Iurisperiti.
were paid in what quantity the owner would.

Touching first fruits, the History here does avouch three things: 1 That the
first of the forwardest were offered to the Priest in ears of wheat and barley,
figs, grapes, olives, pomgranates, and dates. 2 That of these seven only the
first fruits were paid. 3 That they were paid in what quantity the owner
would.


But of these three assertions there is not one of them sufficiently proved,
and as I take it, being examined by holy Scripture, not one of them true. For
first that the first fruits were offered in ears of wheat and barley, etc. The
places of Scripture quoted in the margent do not show it, that which comes
nearest, is Levit. 23.10. When ye be come into the land which I give unto you,
and reap the harvest thereof, then ye shall bring a sheafe of the first
fruits of your harvest unto the Priest. The word here translated sheafe, is in
the original (...), which Iarchi takes to be (...), the tenth part of an
Ephah (...), they did measure it with an Omer, Exodus 16.18. and ver. 36. the
Omer is the tenth part of the Ephah: which Aben-Ezra on Leuit. 5. says was
(...) i. One man's meat for one day, as Exodus 16.18. But this Text does not
prove that the first fruits were offered in ears of wheat and barlye, etc. but
an Omer, that is, a sheafe, or the tenth part of an Ephah. And hence it is that
Baal Haturim on Exodus 16.36. says, (...) i. The Omer is annexed to the chapter
of Manna, to signify that they should eat Manna until they had offered the
Omer: that is, after they came into the land, and did reap the harvest thereof.
Again Exodus 34.22. Thou shall also observe the feast of weeks in the time of
the first fruits of wheat harvest. Iarchi expounds the Text thus: (...) i. The
first fruits of wheat harvest, in which thou art to bring two loaves of wheat;
first fruits, that is, the first meat offering that comes of new wheat to the
Sanctuary, for the meat offering of the Omer that is brought in the Passover
that is of barley, as in Levit. 23.10. and 17. and so Bechai. And Aben-Ezrah on
Nehem. 10.35. does second this: (...) i. And to bring the first fruits of our
land, as an Omer and two loaves. By these authorities it appears that in the
feast of the Passover they offered an Omer or sheafe of the first fruits of
barley; and in the feast of Pentecost they presented for the first fruits of
their wheat-haruest, two loaves of fine flower of wheat baken with leaven: But
all this while no mention here of first fruits in ears of wheat and barley,
etc. As for that Text Levit. 2.14. where there is mention of ears of corn
dried by the fire, Aben-Ezra shows there that it is meant of a free will
offering, saying; (...) i. That which is due is the first of the first fruits,
Exodus 34.26: not the first fruits in general, and if a man bring a meat
offering of the first fruits, he shall bring it as a free will offering. And
the text imports as much, for it is said, (...) If you offer a meat offering,
etc. Consider now what is taught in these testimonies before alleged, and
then with one labor we may easily descrye the falsehood of two of the
forenamed assertions; for here we see that an Omer or tenth part of an Ephah
was offered for first fruits of barley, and two loaves of fine flower, for the
first fruits of wheat. And therefore the first fruits thereof were not paid in
ears of barley or ears of wheat, etc. according to Scripture. Again an Omer
of barley, and two loaves of wheat, determine in these particulars a set
quantity of first fruits. And therefore the first fruits were not paid in what
quantity the owner would. Beside (as our Historian does afterward relate from
Scaliger) that not Moses, but the Jews prescribed what should be the quantity
of the therumah or heave offering; so it seems also by their writings, that
they appointed what should be the determinate quantity of the first fruits, as
may be gathered by the gloss of Baal Haturim on Deuteronomy. 26.2. (...) i. The
letters of the word translated basket, contain in number 60, to signify that
of first fruits they should pay a sixtieth part. And herein he agrees with R.
Simeon on Massech Bicurim, cap. 3. fol. 85. Again the same author on Numb.
15.21. says, (...) i. The verse begins with Mem, and ends with Mem, to show
that a gift of a good eye is a fourtieth part. For the Hebrew letter Mem in
number stands for forty. I go not about to justify these Cabalisticall
collections from the Text, but only by them to show that the Jews had among
them a set quantity for their first fruits, as well as for their Therumahs, as
these glosses do import, flat against the History.

Now as before we have declared for wheat and barley, that the first fruits of
them was not paid in ears of wheat and barley; so for the other things
specified in the history, figs, grapes, olives, pomgranates* and dates, we
do not read in the Scripture, that the first fruits of these are prescribed or
expressed in particular; but the fruits of corn, wine, and oil, Deuteronomy. 18.4.
And so 2 Chronic. 31.5. The children of Israel brought abundance of first
fruits of corn, wine, and oil, etc. And Ramban on Deuteronomy. 14. as also on Exodus
22. teaches concerning grapes and olives, that the tithe of them was not due
by the Law until such time as they yielded wine and oil; and so likewise may
we conjecture for the first fruits of them. Or if the first fruits were paid
both of grapes and olives, (as the History says) and of wine and oil too (as
the Scripture shows) then the first fruits were not paid only of those seven
things which are before described. And this is the last of those three
assertions; against which I took exception. It was indeed propounded in the
second place, but blame me not though I bind not my self too strictly to
order, in following a confused History, that has in it as little truth, as
order. The two former points I have passed over briefly: But this that he
says; That of these seven only, wheat, barley, figs, etc. the first fruits
were paid, it requires a little larger explication. All the proof that is
brought for it, is quoted in the margent, viz: Talmud in Seder Heraim,
Massechetb Biccurim, atque inde recentiores eorum iurisperiti. It is an easier
task for a man to quote the Talmud, then to read or understand it; and easier
to read and understand it, then to justify or defend it. And therefore as the
Historian himself in his preface page 3. speaking of the divine right of
Tithes, says well, that the holy Text must be the sole trial of it; so say we
likewise concerning first fruits; that what is spoken of them, not the Jewish
Talmud, but the holy Text must be the trial of it; for as the Jews
themselves teach, the Talmud is but the exposition of the Text, so says
Aben-Ezra on Exodus 19.7. (...) i. and proposed to them. That is the Law by
tradition which is the exposition of the Law in writing. Therefore here we
desire to know quid scriptum est? what Text of Scripture he has for his
warrant, Scripture he shows none, either because he would not, or else could
not find any to serve his turn. Notwithstanding for better satisfaction to
the Reader herein, I must confess that the Jewish Commentators upon the
Scripture, as Iarchi on Exodus 23.19. and 34.26. And on Deuteronomy. 26.2. Aben-Ezra on
Nehem. ^0. and Chimki on 2 Chronicles. 31. do all of them allege a place of
Scripture on which this their assertion is grounded, and that is, Deuteronomy. 8.8. A
land of wheat and barley, and of vineyards, and figge-trees, and pomegranates, a
land of oil olive, and honey. Here are seven kinds of fruits, for which the
land of Canaan is commended, and of which only the Jews say the first fruits
were paid. If any object that Dates are here wanting, which were reckoned in
the former number; for this we must know that the word (...) which is
translated honey, the Jews in this place interpret Dates; as Iarchi shows on
Exodus 34.26. and Deuteronomy. 26.2. and 2 Chronicles. 31. And Chimki to make this more
plain on 2 Chronicles. 31.5. says, that by honey here they understand Dates, and
adds this reason, because (says he) they brought neither first fruits nor
oblations of honey, having reference (as it may seem) to that in Leuit. 2.11.
All the meat offerings which ye shall offer unto the Lord. shall be made
without leaven, for ye shall neither burn leaven, nor honey in any offering of
the Lord made by fire. Not leaven; nor honey, says Baal Haturim on this text,
because evil concupiscence is resembled to these, seeming at the first to be
sweet as honey, and after sour as leaven. And Ramban here concurring with
Moses Ben Maimon in Moreh Hanebucim, says it was a custom among Idolaters to
offer all their meat offerings with leaven, and to mix honey in all their
sacrifices; and therefore they are forbidden to be offered to God, as on the
contrary, salt was required, because by them it was loathed: and so says he;
The pillar which was allowed in the days of the Patriarchs, because
afterward it was abused by idolaters, therefore God hated it: as Deuteronomy. 16.22.
David de Pomis in his Dictionary in the word (...) and Ramban on Levit. 23.17:
write that in as much as sacrifices were offered to obtain the favor of God,
and appease his wrath; therefore they did not bring them of such things that
were only sour, as leaven, which had relation to judgment, nor of things
which were altogether sweet, as honey, signifying mercy, but of a mixed quality,
as it is said in the Creation of the world, that he mixed mercy and judgment
together, and created it.

But against this which by Chimki and the rest is here alleged, it is to be
considered, that though the text says, Leuit. 2.11. Ye shall neither burn
leaven, nor honey in any offering of the Lord made by fire; Yet in the next
verse it follows: In the oblation of the first fruits ye shall offer them: and
so it is plain, Leuit. 23.17. and Chimki himself on Amos 4.5. (...) condemns
the Idolaters not for offering a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven, but for
burning it upon the altar against the Law Furthermore the text before
rehearsed, viz: Deuteronomy. 8.8. and the intendment thereof being principally to
amplify and set forth the Commendation of the Land for the fruitfulness of
the same; there is no reason why we should restrain the signification, or
alter the proper sense of the words, but rather give every word his largest
extent, and then can not (...) which properly signifies honey, be limited or
restrained to signify Dates, especially when the Jews themselves under this
word, comprehend the fatness and sweetness of all kind of fruits; so says
Iarchi on Levit. 2.11. (...) i. All sweetness of fruit is called honey. To the
same purpose also speaks Ramban on Exodus 3.8. Ralbag on Job. 20.17. Chimki on
Psalm. 81.16. and Deuteronomy. 32.13. And Aben Ezra on Numb. 16.13.14. and Bechai on
Deuteronomy. 6.24. And so also by the like reason, honey in this Text may better be
extended to all other sweet and pleasant fruits, then be contracted and
stinted only to Dates. And yet Aben-Ezra on Levit. 2.11. reports, (...) i.
That many of them say, the exposition of Debash is Dates, and so euery-where a
land flowing with milk and honey* and they have (says he) a resemblance of a
reason for it in the book of Ezra. Whereby as I take it, he means the book
of Chronicles which were gathered by Ezra, as the Jews write, after their
return from Babylon. And in 2 Chronicles. 31.5. they interpret (...) not honey, but
(...) dates. So Chimki and Iarchi note on that Text. And our last translation
interpreting the word in the Text, honey, writes in the margent, dates. But
though it were to be so understood in this place, yet there is no probability
or show of reason why it should be thus expounded in that Text, Deuteronomy. 8. or
where it is found in many other Texts beside. We may as well believe that to be
true which Baal Haturim writes of their pomegranates, as this that they affirm
of Dates; for he on Numb. 13.34. compared with Esai 40.22. says, that one of
the Giants of the sons of Anak having eaten a pomegranate, did cast away the
pill thereof, and afterward all the twelve spies that were sent to search the
land, went into it to sit there and shade themselves from the heat of the
Sun. And to make this good, that the room might seem big enough, and the
men little enough, R. Iarchi seconds him with the like gloss on that text, ver.
34. (...) i. So we were in their sight, we heard them say one to another, there
are pismires in the Vineyards like men: that is, the spies heard the Giants say
so concerning them.

These and such like are the expositions and glosses of some of those grand
Rabbis, on whose testimony the History of Tithes is principally grounded. But
now suppose that Dates were to be understood in that text, as the Jews would
have it, does it therefore follow, because seven kinds of fruits are there
named; that only of those seven and no more, the first fruits should be paid?
so they teach also by the like warrant, that there are just seven habitations,
or seven several vaults of hell; must we therefore needs believe it to be
true? Chimki relates this on 2 Samuel 18.33. and 19.4. where David mourning for
the death of Absalom ingeminates those words (...) my son, my son, eight
times; with seven of them he raised him up (says he) out of the seven vaults
or mansions of Hell, and with the eight he brought him into Paradise. Iarchi
also mentions this on Esai 20.23. and Baal Haturim on Deuteronomy. 15.8. from
Massecheth Sutah, cap. 1. fol, 10. and Kimchi on 2 Kings 23.10. But before I
leave this point, there is yet one other thing to be considered; for what if
more then seven kind of fruits be sound to be contained in the foresaid text,
shall not the Law of first fruits take hold of them? R. Bechai on this text.
Deuteronomy. 8.8. fol. 209.2. and fol. 212.1. says expressly, that the land is here
commended for ten things, adding three to the former seven; for says he, Rye,
oats, and spelt, or bear corn, are comprehended under wheat and barley, which
are named as the principal; and no reason to the contrary, but that of these
they were to pay first fruits as well as of the other, and therefore they were
not paid only of seven kinds. It is written 2 Chronicles. 31.5. The children of
Israel brought abundance of first fruits of corn, wine, and oil, and honey,
and of all the increase of the field. Now under Corn the Jews contain five
several specie's; so says Chimki in Miclol in the word (...), and Ramban on
Deuteronomy. 14. (...) i Corn in the holy tongue signifies five known kinds; which
are the same that Bechai expresses before, and therefore being under this word
comprehended, no question but of these the first fruits are also here required.
Again, the Jews themselves understanding this text to be spoken of (...)
first fruits properly, as Chimki here expounds it, when as in their former
Catalogue of seven, among the rest they say, that the first fruits were paid
of grapes, and olives, (as I mentioned before) and here the Text says, that
they were paid of wine and oil, (which in propriety of speech are none of the
seven before specified) we can not choose, but must needs conclude, that the
first fruits were paid of more commodities then only seven. Nay the Text is
very direct, that they brought first fruits of all the increase of the field,
ver. 5. And to this agrees the general current of the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 26.2.
Then shall thou take of the first of all the fruit of the earth, and bring it:
and so Nehemiah. 10.35. and ver. 37. And to bring the first fruits of our land,
and the first of all the fruits of all trees, etc. year by year into the
house of the Lord.

The only reason that I can meet with, why the Jews presented but these seven
kinds for first fruits is related by R. Bechai on Deuteronomy. 26. to be, because
they held these to be the most choice and useful for the nourishment of man,
which being admitted to be true, yet this does not suffice to exclude the rest
which are in Scripture comprehended as well as these. So also they teach, that
that part of Canaan which was the inheritance of the five Nations mentioned in
Scripture, Exodus 13.5. namely the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the
Hiuite, the Iebusite, because it was a land that flowed with milk and honey,
therefore they paid the first fruits only from thence: but the land of the
other two Nations, the Perezites, and the Gergesites, was not subject to the
payment of first fruits, because it was not a land that flowed with milk and
honey; so Ramban notes on Deuteronomy. 18.1. And in Massecheth Bicurim, cap. 1. to the
same purpose R. Iosi says, (...) i. They use not to bring first fruits from
beyond Jordan, because it was not a land that flowed with milk and honey. But
against this, Moses Ben Maimon in his Commentary on that place, says; that
though it were not a land that flowed with milk and honey, yet says he, the
Lord gave it unto us, so that we may truly say, Deuteronomy. 26.10. (...) which thou
have given me: and therefore he there declares herein his own judgment, and
concludes contrary to the opinion of R. Iosi.

Last of all for the seven kinds of first fruits so often mentioned, the
Doctors likewise differ in the Talmud Massech Bicurim, cap. 3. fol. 86. (...)
etc. R. Simeon the son of Nanas, says, they set forth the first fruits of
more then seven kinds; which opinion without all doubt is most consonant to
the rules and precepts of the Scripture; for whereas God gave unto Aaron, and
his sons, the first ripe fruits of all that was in their land, Numb. 18.13.
what reason is there that they should be deprived of their right, and have the
first fruits but only of seven kinds? But it may be, though the Scripture
favor not this conceit, yet the Historian thinks it sufficient that it is so
related in the Talmud. I confess some things in the Talmud may truly be
reported to have bin done: but this does not prove that the Talmud does
therefore rightly teach what should be done; and again, as that worthy Knight
Sr James Sempill has answered, Though the relation of the fact were true for
practice in their times, yet might it much degenerate from the former ages.

But how shall we certainly know what was done, or what was the Jewish manner
and custom in payment of the first fruits, for herein the History fails us,
except we can learn it by the bare marginall mentioning of the Talmud.
Therefore to make this more plain, I have thought good here to translate as
near as I can verbatim, that which R. Bechai delivers concerning first fruits,
in his Commentary on Deuteronomy. 26. which for the most part he has transcribed from
the Talmud, and set down in manner following.

When they brought up the first fruits to Jerusalem, the men of the cities
near adjoining, assembled altogether. that they should not solitarily go up
alone, as it is said, In the multitude of the people is the honor of the King,
Prove: 14.28. And they lodged in the street of the city, and went not into
houses because of the tabernacles of pollution: And in the morning the guide or
governor said; Arise, let us go up to Sion to the Lord our God. And a
Bullock for a peace offering went before them, having his horns covered with
gold and an olive garland upon his head. Also a flute, an instrument of music
sounded before them, Esai 30.29: until they came near to Jerusalem, and they
went forward all the way reading Psalm. 122. I was glad when they said unto me,
we will go unto the house of the Lord. Notwithstanding they did not continue
their progress all the day, but only at two set times in the day. When they
approached near to Jerusalem, they sent messengers before them to give notice
to the Citicens of Jerusalem, and they the mean while set forth and beautified
their first fruits. Afterward the Prince and the Rulers, the chief Priests and
the Treasurers came forth from Jerusalem to meet them, according to the number
of them that came up, so proportionably was the number of them that went out to
meet them: If there were many that came up, many went out; if few, then few.
And as they entered all of them into the gates of Jerusalem, they began to read
Psalm. 122.2. Our feet shall stand in thy gatcs O Jerusalem. And all the
Tradesmen of Jerusalem stood up before them, and saluted them, saying;
Brethren, men of such or such a place, ye are welcome. So they walked in the
midst of Jerusalem, and the instrument still sounded before them, till they
came to the hill of the House. When they came to the hill of the House, every
man bare his basket upon his shoulder, and said Psalm. 150. Praise the Lord,
praise God in his Sanctuary, etc: until those words, Let every thing that has
breath praise the Lord, Halleluiah. Thus they continued till they came to the
Court. When they came to the Court, the Levites sang that Psalmee, I will
magnify thee O Lord, for thou have exalted me, and have not made my foes to
rejoice over me. Psalm. 30.

They add also in the Talmud, that the rich men brought their first fruits in
baskets of silver and gold, that is (says Maimon) covered with silver and
gold; and the poor in baskets made of willow rods, and both the baskets and
the first fruits were given to the Priests, as it is said, Deuteronomy. 26.4. Then the
Priest shall take the basket out of thine hand.

Now besides the former seven kinds of first fruits before rehearsed, the Jews
further teach, that there are seven other things requisite in the offering of
first fruits, for which they seem to have more probable ground from the
Scripture, and they are these; 1 The bringing of them up to the place
appointed. 2 The vessel wherein they were brought. 3 The reading of the Text.
4 An offering or oblation. 5 Their rejoicing in singing. 6 The shaking of them
to and fro. 7 Their lodging in Jerusalem.


1 The bringing of them up to the place appointed, for it was necessary that
they should bring them up to the House of the Sanctuary, as it is written Deuteronomy.
26.2. And thou shall go to the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, etc.

2 The Vessel as it is said ver. 2. And thou shall put it in a basket. It is
also a precept of special choice to bring every kind in a basket by it self,
but if they brought them in one basket, they were to be careful that they
should not confusedly be mixed together, but barley in the lowest place, and
wheat upon that, and dates about that, and pomgranates above them, and figs
above them all, and something was to be put between every species, to sever
them one from another, as leaves, or such like. And outwardly they compassed
the figs with bunches of grapes. They brought likewise in their hands turtle
doves, and young pigeons; for it is said, and thou shall rejoice in every good
thing, ver. 11. and for this rejoicing, flesh was requisite. They hanged also
on the sides of their baskets turtle doves, and young pigeons, to set forth and
adorn their first fruits: Those that were on their baskets they offered for
burnt sacrifice, and those that were in their hands they gave to the Priests of
that ward, together with the first fruits, which they divided among themselves
as other holy things.

3 The reading, as it is said, ver. 5. And thou shall answer and say, etc.
that is, he read the Text from those words, ver. 5. A Syrian was my father,
etc. until those ver. 10. And now lo, I have brought the first fruits of the
land which thou O Lord have given me. And this answering was praise and
thanksgiving, with lifting up of voice, and that in the holy tongue, as it is
written Deuteronomy. 31.21. (...) i. this song shall answer them: and so it is here
ver. 5. thou shall answer and say Deuteronomy 26.5.

4 The oblation was a peace offering.

5 A song was required, for it is said; And thou shall rejoice in every good
thing, ver. 11. and for this, singing was necessary, as it is Psalm. 33.3.

(...) i. Sing chearefully with a loud voice: for so the Levites did read with
singing, when they brought ihe first fruits after that they came into the Court.

6 The shaking of them to and fro, as it is written Deuteronomy. 26.10. and Numb.
14.9. (...) And thou shall set it before the Lord thy God, when as the Priest
put his hand under the hand of the owners, and shaked it, and this is that is
said ver. 4. Then the Priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, that is
to say, to shake it to and fro.

7 Lodging, that albeit he brought his first fruits, and offered his
peace-offrings, and performed all his duty that day, yet it was not lawful for
him to depart the same day out of Jerusalem, but that he should lodge there, as
it is said, Deuteronomy. 16.7. (...) And thou shall return on the morrow, and go
unto thy Tents. And so they teach, all returning whereby thou returnest from
the Sanctuary, after thou art come thither, shall not be but on the morrow.
Thus far R. Bechai touching the manner of the Jews in paying their first
fruits, as is described in their Talmud.

And among other questions touching first fruits, he adds further, that it is
disputed among them, whether a stranger were to pay them, or not; some say he
might not, because he could not use the words of the protestation, Deuteronomy, 26.3.
(...) I am come into the Country which the Lord swear unto our fathers to give
us. But the more general and common opinion was, that he might both bring the
first fruits, and likewise use the protestation, because Abraham is reputed
also the father of strangers, as it is said Genesis 17.5. I have made thee a
father of many Nations. And it may be (says he) that this is pointed at in the
text, where it is said, ver. 11. thou and the Leuite, and the stranger that is
among you.

Lastly for the end of the oblation of first fruits, he affirms that it
tended to the honor of God, the dignity of the Priest, and the great benefit
of Israel. 1 The honor of God, in that they came to make prayer and
supplication before him in that great and holy Temple for the multiplying of
his benefits, and acknowledging that all blessings proceeded only from him. 2
The dignity of the Priest, in that the Israelite wearied and turmoyled himself
all the way to feed him with the first of his fruits, and most choice of them.
3. The great benefit of Israel, in that by the due observation of this
precept, the fruits were increased, and the food of the world blessed. And so
much for first fruits.

CAP. 3.
NExt, the Therumah or heave offering, or first fruits of Corn, Wine, Oil,
Flecce, and the like, were also given to the Priests. Deuteronomy. 18.4. I do not
well understand in what sense these words, the therumah or heave offering, or
first fruits, can properly be spoken in this place; for hereby he seems to
confound the first fruits and the therumahs, as if they were all one, which
according to the tradition and history of the Jews, are manifestly
distinguished, as appears in the several Tractates or Massecheths in the
Talmud both of (...) first fruits, and (...) heave offerings. And the place
quoted in the margent, viz: Deuteronomy. 18.4. speaks directly of first fruits, and
not therumahs or heave offerings, howsoever some of the Jews do otherwise
expound it. For the first fruits were either (...) or (...) Numb. 18.12.13. and
the word used there in Deuteronomy. 18.4. is (...) which properly signifies first
fruits; yea the first of the first fruits.

But it being not determined by Moses of what quantity this heave offering
should be, the Jews anciently assest it to be enough at the fiftieth part,
Sal. Iarchi ad dict. locum caeteri Jurisp. and D. Hieronymus ad ^zech. cap. 45
and Cassianus collat. 21. cap. 3.
but so that no necessity was that every one should pay so much, he that paid
a sixtieth part was discharged, and many of the better devotion offered a
fortieth. The fiftieth part they call (...) i. that is, an indifferent or
competent therumah or heave offering, which they named also (...) that is, the
great heave offering. The fourtieth they style (...) that is, a Therumah of a
fair eye, Hanc loquendi formulam babes apud D. Matthaeum cap. 20.15.
or liberally given. And the sixtieth (...) that is, a Therumah of an ill eye,
or a niggards gift.

If he mean that only (...) that is, the indifferent heave offering, is called
(...) (...) the great heave offering, as his words seem to import, then does
he much mistake his Rabbines; for neither does Scaliger, whose steps he
follows, nor the Jews, so understand it; but whether it be an indifferent
therumah or heave offering, or a therumah of a fair eye, or a therumah of an
ill eye, it is still called therumah gedolah, (...) the great heaue-offering,
to make a difference between it and (...), the heave offering of the Tithe, or
decimae decimarum, which were given to Aaron the high Priest. R. Chaskuni on
Deuteronomy. 18. shows the reason why it is called the great heave offering, saying,
(...) etc. i. The first heave offering is called the great heave offering,
because it is great in quantity, above the quantity of the first Tithe, and the
heave offering of the Tithe, forasmuch as that after it is offered, being a
fiftieth part, they were to take the forty nine parts that remain, and make
thereof fifty again, that they might thence have five parts for the first
Tithe, etc. Further howsoever some style the fourtieth part (...), a Therumah
of a fair eye, or liberally given; yet in the Talmud in Massech Termoth, cap.
4. fol. 51. (...) They of the College of Shamai hold, that a thirtieth part is
the Therumah of a good eye: and R. Bechai on Deuteronomy. 26.15. has this notation
(...) i. two of an hundred. The note in the margent, hanc loquendi formulam
habes apud D. Matthaeum, cap. 20.15. seems to insinuate, that St Matthew
borrowed this form of speech from the Jewish Rabbines, but it is an idle
conceit to think so; for it is a phrase more ancient and usual in the holy
Scripture, as Prove. 22.9. he that has a good eye, he shall be blessed: and
Prove. 23.6. Eat thou not the bread of him that has an evil eye: and so Deuteronomy.
15.9. etc. These set quantities of the Therumah gedolah for the fourtieth,
fiftieth, sixtieth part, Baal Haturim gathers cabalistically from the words in
Exodus 25.2. (...) i. That they take an offering for me of every man whose heart
gives it freely, etc. (...) i. The word (...) translated (for me) arises in
number to forty, signifying that the gift of a good eye is a fourtieth part.
(...) arises to fifty; that is, an indifferent offering of a fiftieth part,
(...) i. of every man. The two first letters of the words arise to 60, that is,
the gift of an evil eye is a sixtieth part. And yet this Text is not
understood of the Therumah gedolah, or great heave offering, which was taken of
the fruits of the earth, and given to the Priests; but of the voluntary gifts
or offerings for the making of the Tabernacle. Whereby it may be thought that
they held the same proportion, not only in this, but also in other Therumahs,
for there were diuerr sorts of them, as Bechai on Exodus 25.1. and 30.11. and
also Ramban on Deuteronomy. 12.6. does intimate, saying; (...) i. For whatsoever a man
does offer up unto the Lord of all that he has, either for sacrifices, or for
repairing of the Temple, (as it is said Exodus 25. that they receive an offering
for me) or for the Priests the ministers of the Lord, all these are called
Therumahs, according as it is written of the tribute, Numb. 31.28.29. And shall
give it to Eleazar the high Priest as an heave offering to the Lord, and it
shall be absolutely common or free in his hand. It follows in the History,

But you may observe too, that this which they called a niggards gift, was not
beneath the quantity of the Therumah appointed in Ezech. 45.13.11. where the
words are, This is the Therumah that ye shall offer, the sixth part of an Ephah
of an Omer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an Ephah of an Omer of
barley. It is the same as if he had said, ye shall offer a Therumah of the
sixtieth part, of every Omer, for an Ephah, being the same measure with a bath,
(that is near our common bushel) was the tenth part of an Omer, therefore the
sixth part of an Ephah the sixtieth of an Omer.

This text of Ezechiel, quoted by Iarchi on Numb. 18.4. and here alleged by
the Historian, is unfitly applied to prove the quantity of the Therumah
gedolah, as David Chimki here evidently declares with very sufficient reasons,
which are by him thus expressed: (...) etc. I wonder at Iarchi his exposition,
for since that the Therumah by the Law has no quantity, but one grain or corn
of wheat, frees the whole heap, to what end should Ezechiel come to teach the
Therumah of an evil eye, or. niggards gift? he should have taught rather the
indifferent Therumah, which is a fiftieth part: And again, why does he mention
the wheat and barley above by themselves, and the oil above by it self for a
tenth part, he should have said, corn, wine, and oil; as it is written in the
Law, When as therefore the Ephah is the same measure with the Bath, and the
sixth part of an Ephah of an Omer of wheat and barley is offered, and not the
sixth, but a tenth part of a Bath of oil, 'as it is ver. 14: it follows that
the Therumah of oil was not so much as a sixtieth part, but was only an
hundredth part of an Omer or Cor, differing from the quantities of the Therumah
beforementioned. And therefore Chimki concludes, that this Text is not meant
of the Therumah gedolah, or great heave offering of the fruits given to the
Priest, but of the heave offering which they should offer, (...) for the
dedication of the House or Temple, that should be afterward in time to come,
and not of the first or second Temple.

Now that which is understood only of practice for time to come, can not be a
praecedent or warrant for the practice of times past; and therefore this Text
makes nothing to the purpose for which it is alleged. It is true that there
are many things very difficult and hard to be understood in this Prophecy of
Ezechiel, and especially in those Chapters that are written of the Temple, as
St Hierome observes on cap. 45. and the Jews themselves confess that there
are many things here expressed which they conceive not, but say that Eliah when
he comes shall expound them, as R. Chimki notes on Ezech. 40.13. and 42.5. and
45.18. Yet in this the best Interpreters, both Jews and Christians, do all
agree, that the things here spoken of, can not be applied to the time either of
the first or second Temple; but to the time of the Messiah, and the House that
he should build, and so teaches St Hierom on Ezech 40. and Chimki on Ezech.
43.11, etc. But I return to recall that which was before affirmed in the
History in these terms:

For an Ephah being the same measure with a Bath, that is, near our common
Bushel, was the tenth part of an Omer; therefore the sixth part of an Ephah,
the sixtieth of an Omer.

Here it must be remembered by the way, that there is some difference betwixt
the Ephah and the Bath; for the Ephah is a measure only of things that are dry,
as wheat, and barley, etc. and the Bath of things that are liquid and moist, as
oil, and the like; so Chimki shows on Ezech. 45.11. and Iarchi, and so does
St Hierom on the same Text, where he also notes how the Septuagint Translation
in expressing these measures, differs from the Hebrew Text; and it is likewise
to be noted, that whereas here an Ephah is said to be the tenth part of an
Omer, and in Exodus 16.36. an Omer the tenth part of an Ephah, though they sound
alike, yet they are differing measures, and differing words also, for Omer in
one place begins with the Hebrew letter (...) Ain, and in the other with the
Hebrew letter (...) Cheth. Furthermore that Ephah should in measure (as the
Historian says) be near our common Bushel, it is a matter somewhat
questionable.

St Hierom on Ezech. 45.1. says, that an Ephah is tres modij, which is usually
taken to be three bushels; for these are there his words: Decima pars Cori in
his quae modio mensurantur, appellatur Ephah, i. tres modij, and decima pars
Cori in speciebus liquidis vocatur batus, sive vadus, ut eiusdem mensurae sit
Ephah and Batus. But how the true measure of the Ephah was accounted among the
Jews, we may easily conjecture by that which Salomoh Iarchi speaks concerning
this on Exodus 29.40. (...) i. A tenth part of fine flower, that is, the tenth
part of an Ephah; 43 eggs and the fifth part of an egg. And this he explaines
more at large on Exodus 16.36. The Omer is the tenth part of the Ephah: (...) i.
Our Ephah contains three Seahs, a Seah contains six Cabines, a Cab four
Lugimes. a log six eggs, so that the tenth part of an Ephah is found to be
three and forty eggs and the fifth part of an egg, and this was the quantity
for the cake and for the meat offering. R. Bechai agrees herein with Iarchi,
and so does David Chimki in his Miclol the second part, in radicibus, where he
expresses the several quantity of these measures agreeable to this relation.
He therefore that can tell how many eggs will fill a Bushel, may hence
quickly be resolved, how near the Jewish Ephah comes to the English Bushel. I
have done with the Therumahs, I come now to the Tithes; for in this order they
succeed in the History, where it is said,

After the Therumah offered to the Priests (every kind being given in season)
out of the rest were taken the Tithes, which are best divided into the first
and second Tithe.

Concerning this division whether it be the best or no, after the due scanning
of it, let others judge: the mean while we may here take notice, that as the
Historian makes but two sorts of Tithes, so on the other side there are some
that make three, and some four, taken from Deuteronomy. 14. and Numb. 18.

1 The first is the Levites Tithe, or Tithe inheritance, Deuteronomy. 14.22. and Numb.
18.21.

2 The second is the Tithe for feasts, which were to be eaten yearly at
Jerusalem, as in Deuteronomy. 14.23.

3 The third the Tithe of the third year for the poor, Deuteronomy. 14.28.29.

4 The fourth the tenth part of the Tithe, or the Lords heave offering, which
the Levites were to give to Aaron the high Priest, Numb. 18.26.28. But the
Jews usually confound this last with the first Tithe, calling it (...) the
heave offering of the Tithe: And for this cause where it is said Deuteronomy. 14.24.
The Tithes of the children of Israel, which they shall offer as an offering to
the Lord, etc. Salomoh Iarchi says, (...) i. The Scripture calls it an
offering, until he separate from it the oblations or offerings of the Tithe:
that is, decimas decimarum, the Tenth of the Tithe, for until that was given
to the Priest, the Levites had no power to dispose of their own Tithes. And
hereby Iarchi answers an objection of those that from this place would
conclude the Tithes to be a mere ceremonial offering, in as much as he
shows that they are called an offering only in regard of the Tithe, or the
offering that was taken out of them for the high Priest.

Now for these several sorts of Tithes before reckoned, as the Jews confound
the first and fourth, so other Writers in the rest do the like, some making
the first and second to be one and the same; some the first and the third, one.
Which last opinion the Author of the History, maintains in the Sections
following, and says, that the two first years after the Sabbaticall, the
second Tithe was paid at Jerusalem, and in the third year it ceased: but
after the first Tithe paid, they paid that year the poor man's Tithe instead
of the second, as Iarchi speaks on Deuteronomy. 26.12. And Ben Maimon in Misuah Torah
part. 3. de decima secunda, cap. 1.

But for proof of this assertion, first of all he brings no testimony from the
holy Scriptures: 2ly he has not (as is pretended) the general consent of the
Jews; for besides the authority of Tobit cap. 1. ver. 7 Josephus Archaeol.
4.7. alleged by himself: Tremelius also, and Iunius on Deuteronomy. 14.28. do call
this poor man's tithe, the third tithe. And so likewise Aben Ezra that was not
ignorant of the Jewish practice in tithing, does in the same place term this
poor man's tithe (...) the third tithe; and says further: (...) i. And he
shall not bring forth this year the second tithe, and some say he shall bring
forth all those three tithes: which indeed is most probable, though he leave it
altogether uncertain and doubtful.

But among other things here alleged, I marvel why the Septuagints
translation on Deuteronomy. 26.12. is so far pressed, (...), etc. Where to prove
that the poor man's Tithe is expressly called the second Tithe, this Translation
is so much insisisted upon, as the original Text it self is called in
question, for here says the Author, Doubtless they there instead of (...)
shenath hamaigsher, that is, the year of tithing (as the Text is) found in
their Hebrew Copies (...) shenith hamaigsher, which they take for the second
Tithe, knowing that in truth that place meant no other.

Doubtless I can conceive of this to be nothing else but a mere fiction, and
such a one that neither Jew nor Christian ought once to admit against the holy
Scriptures: For first hereby as he makes the Septuagints Translation more
authentical then the Hebrew Text, implying therewithal that the same has bin
corrupted and changed, (and yet no corruption ever once noted before in this
place) so also that which he surmiseth is against reason, for the second does
always presuppose a first; but how shall it be thought that the Scripture
should here in express terms mention a second Tithe, when as it does no where
expressly mention a first? for though the ground of these distinctions be in
Scripture, viz: Tithes for the Priest, Tithes for the Leuite, Tithes for the
feasts, and Tithes for the poor; yet by these terms of (...) and (...) first
Tithe, and second Tithe; or which shall be the first, or which the second;
there neither is, nor ever was any such matter in Scripture: These indeed are
notions devised by the Rabbines for distinction sake, but shall we therefore
bring them into the Text, and make Text of them? whether shall the Rabbines
follow the Text, or the Text follow the Rabbines? Surely this is nothing else
but to make new Scripture, and when that is done, because the foresaid (...)
and (...) can not agree in gender, (the word being no where so construed)
therefore also to make, as he does in that place, a new Grammar, that the new
Scripture may have good construction. And yet after all this, consider it who
will, no Scripture, no Masoreth, no Targum, no Grammar, no Rabbin, no reason,
either does or can justify it.

And for the Septuagint Translation, why may we not interpret (...), alteram or
posteriorem decimam, an other Tithe, or the later Tithe, as well as decimam
secundam, the second tithe; the word being often elsewhere used in that sense,
as the Greek Lexicons teach, res aliqua (...) esse dicitur quae ei postponitur:
and again, Quum vero dicitur temporis ratione, exponitur etiam posterior,
veletiam iteratus, ut (...). And so may it be taken also in this place: Or if
it be interpreted the second tithe, must it needs be the second in the same
order and manner as he would have it? as though the Septuagints that were so
ancient, intended hereby to establish this new devise, invented only by
Rabbines of later times. Do not the best expositions disagree, in setting down
precisely the number and order of the Tithes? St Hierome on Ezech. 45. reckons
up four sorts of tithes, and makes that first which the people paid to the
Levites, and that the second which the Levites thence paid to the Priests, of
which he says, Et haec est quae appellatur (...), wherein he differs from the
Rabbines, and all their followers, and yet knew better then they what Scripture
taught concerning first or second tithes.

But it is not enough for our Historian thus to corrupt the text, to fortify
his own fancies, but he goes on, and dallies yet further with this Scripture,
saying,

This place of the year of Tithing, Sal. Iarchi ad dict. loc. Deuteronomy.
is interpreted by the common gloss of the Jews, by the year of one Tithe,
as if the Text had bin (...) that is, the year of one Tithe, or of paying
only one Tithe.

First instead of the common gloss of the Jews, he cites only in the margent
the proper gloss of Sal. Iarchi, against whom I oppose Aben Ezra, who does not
interpret the year of tithing by the year of one tithe, or of paying only
one tithe, but thus; (...) i. The year of tithing, that is, the poor man's
tithe, meaning the year of paying the poor man's tithe, which was not paid in
other years; and this is answereable to that he said before, that some held
that all the three tithes were this year brought forth, and therefore most
probably it is termed the year of tithing, because a new accrue of tithes came
this year above the rest; and so Bechai on Deuteronomy. 26.12. R Chaskuni on Deuteronomy.
14.28. has these words, (...) Thou shall bring forth all the tithes: i. It
concerns thee to bring forth the first tithe, the second tithe, the poor man's
tithe; setting down the three distinct tithes by three distinct and several
names. And therefore that cannot be true which the Historian teaches, that the
second tithe, and the poor man's tithe are substantially the same, and fitly
go under one name; for that which was given instead of the second tithe,
cannot properly be said to be the same: But, say the Jews (as he notes) in
the third and sixth years, the poor man's tithe was given (...) instead of the
second tithe; and therefore can no more fitly be said to be the same, then John
may be said to be Peter, because he sits in the same chair wherein Peter sat
yesterday. Furthermore Iarchi and Bechai on Deuteronomy. 14.28. and Deuteronomy. 26.12.
speak to this effect: (...) i. If a man delay or put off the payment of his
Tithes the first and second year after the Sabbaticall, then of necessity, he
must bring them forth of his house the third year. So that in this case, all
the three tithes by Iarchi his confession, being brought forth this third
year, they must needs be accounted three several kinds of Tithes; and
therefore the poor man's tithe was not always paid instead of the second
tithe, nor one and the same in substance with the second tithe. And a maine
difference is noted betwixt them in the Talmud in Seder Teharoth Massech Iadim
cap. 4, fol. 157. Where the expositor attributes these words to R. Eliezer.
(...) i. The second tithe is holy, but the poor man's tithe common or profane:
For the one might only be eaten at Jerusalem, but the other in any place; the
one belonged to the householder, the other to the poor. And though regularly
they teach, that the poor man's tithe was paid only the third and sixth years,
yet in the place before-named, they deliver it as a tradition of Moses from
Sinai, that Babel, Egypt, Ammon, and Moab, paid the poor man's tithe in the
seventh year, and Ramban in his preface to Seder Heraim, says as much of the
second tithe, that the same was also paid in these places the seventh year.

I would be loath to stand too long upon this point, and yet I think it not
amiss to consider in what manner he goes about to prove it from the text
before cited: First he takes the Septuagint translation for a full and perfect
confirmation of his opinion, that the poor man's tithe is one and the same with
the second tithe, and therefore to make that good, he says; Doubtless they
read in their Hebrew Copies (...) the second tithe, instead of (...) the year
of tithing. Afterward he alleges again the same Text, with the
interpretation of the Jews, and then makes an other reading of it, and
supposes in effect that they did not read as before (...) the second tithe;
but with alteration and addition (...) i. The year of one tithe: thus making
text to be text, or no text, as please himself; and yet (which is more
strange) he concludes, that this exposition of Iarchi and the Jews, in
substance exactly agrees also with the meaning of the Septuagint.

But I pray you mark this substantial and exact agreement. The Septuagint
interprets the text to be understood only of one tithe. Iarchi interprets it
not only of one, but of two Tithes. The Septuagint in his conceit, understands
there only the second Tithe: Iarchi not the second, but the first Tithe, and
the poor man's Tithe properly. Again, the Septuagint gives the second Tithe,
so named, jointly to the Leuite, stranger, fatherless, and widow.

And this testimony of Iarchi is by him iterated and repeated three times at
least for failing. First on Deuteronomy. 26.12. (...) And have given to the Leuite,
(...) i. That which belongs to him, namely the first Tithe (...) i. To the
stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, this is the poor man's Tithe. So
likewise on ver. 13. (...) i. And I have given it to the Levites, that is, the
first Tithe, and to the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, (...) i. This
is the poor man's Tithe. And so it is also expounded in the Talmud Maigshar
Sheni, cap. 5. fol. 71. And in like manner on Deuteronomy. 14.29. Iarchi thus
expounds the Text:

Then the Leuite shall come, and shall take the first Tithe; and the stranger,
the fatherless, and the widow the poor man's Tithe, still making two distinct
and several Tithe: still making two distinct and several Tithes, where the
Author of the History makes but one, and yet he cites this Rabbine, as yielding
testimony for him, whereof that which he affirms, is most direct against him.
I have not done yet with the testimonies of Iarchi; for if we mark them well,
they will serve besides the former slippes, to discover the falsehood of three
other conclusions delivered in this Section, which as yet I have not touched:

1 The first is, that the Levites at the Temple had an interest and share in
the second Tithes for their feasts and love days. page 15.

2ly That the Levites in the Country were entertained with this poor man's
Tithe, or Tithe of the third year. ibid.

3ly That the first Tithe was paid to the Levites at Jerusalem. page 13.

As the Historian does show neither Scripture, nor reason, nor Rabbines for the
proof of these assertions, so on the other side the only authority of Iarchi
in the places before cited, is sufficient to disprove them all: For Iarchi
seems to be confident in this, that the Levites still held themselves to the
first tithe, and could not claim any thing due to them, either in the second
Tithe at Jerusalem, or in the poor man's Tithe in the Country. For although in
the former Text, the Levites, stranger, fatherless, and widow are jointly
named together, yet he does distinguish them in taking the tithes; and
therefore he confines the Leuite to the first tithe, and the stranger,
fatherless, and widow, to the poor man's tithe. And this is likewise confirmed
by other Jews, writing on the same text, as R. Chaskuni on Deuteronomy. 14.28. (...)
i. He shows here that the first Tithe was for the Leuite, and the second to
be eaten by the householder at Jerusalem: And in the 3d year the Leuite had the
first tithe, and the stranger, fatherless, and widow, the poor man's tithe. R.
Bechai says as much, showing that the first tithe was only assigned to the
Leuite, and not the second a poor man's tithe. Whereas therefore the Historian
says, that

Every third year the Levites at the Temple mist their second tithe for their
feasts and love days, the same being charitably and by divine ordinance spent
at home in the gates of the husbandman:

This is nothing else but a fallacy, let him first prove, that the Levites at
the Temple had a right to the second tithe for feasts, and then show how they
lost it, for otherwise how can they be said to miss or loose that which they
never had. I deny not but the Levites might be invited by the husbandman to the
feasts that were made of the second tithe; and to that purpose also St Ierom
speaks on Ezech. 45. but this does not argue, that therefore the Levites had a
right therein: neither was the same that is the second tithe, charitably, and
by divine ordinance spent at home in the gates of the husbandman, as the
History here teaches; That the tithe for the feasts, which the Jews call the
second Tithe, should yearly be eaten at Jerusalem; the Scripture shows it to
be inioined by divine ordinance: But that this tithe should cease the third
year, and the poor man's Tithe be paid instead of it, or the same be spent at
home in the gates of the husbandman; it is a mere Jewish dream, and no divine
ordinance, neither can it be verified by any divine evidence: Again the words
that he uses afterward to this purpose, are of no validity; for says he,

As the Levites ministering in their course at the Temple, were to have part in
the feasts made of the second, so were the Levites, and the poor in the
country entertained with this of the third year.

As the one is true, so I grant is the other: but as yet no proof appears
either for the one, or the other, but the contrary. For Iarchi on Deuteronomy. 14.29.
and also on other texts of Scripture before cited, agreeing herein with the
rest of the Jews, teaches expressly, that in the third year the Leuite took
the first tithe; and stranger, fatherless, and widow, the poor man's tithe,
excluding him from having any part with them in their tithe. Neither needed
Levi to beg for a part among the poor, being always sufficiently furnished
and maintained with his own portion; for though the Jews some of them hold,
that in the 3d and 6t years, there was a cessation of the second tithe for
feasts, yet they all absolutely determine in the Talmud Rosh Hashanah, cap. 1.
fol. 12. that the first tithe, or Levites tithe never ceased; both because it
is said in Deuteronomy. 14.29. The Leuite shall come and take his tithe, as Iarchi
explaines it, and also because the first tithe is their inheritance, Numb.
18.26 And therefore, say they, as an inheritance cease not, so also the first
tithe cease not, or has no end. And though regularly in the seventh year
there was no payment of tithes, because no gathering in of fruits, yet a
compensation and supply thereof was made in the sixth year, by the blessing
and large increase of the sruits for three years, and so by consequent, the
large increase of the tithes, Leuit. 25.21.

3 Now for the third assertion, that the first tithe was paid to the Levites
of Jerusalem, and so the first tithe of the third year:

Do but consider the text with the exposition of Iarchi, and then judge of the
truth of it. Deuteronomy. 14.28. At the end of three years thou shall bring forth all
the tithes of thine increase of the same year, and lay it up within thy gates,
ver. 29. Then the Leuite shall come, and shall take the first tithe, says
Iarchi. If the Leuite shall come and take the first tithe of those that were
laid up within the gates in the Country, then war not the first tithe always
brought up and paid to the Levites at Jerusalem. But Iarchi here affirms the
first, therefore the second will follow. Again for that other text, Deuteronomy.
26.12. It is evident that it speaks of the tithe that was to be given to the
Leuite, stranger, fatherless, and widow that were within the gates in the
Country, and here they were to eat it, as is manifest in the Text. Now Iarchi
says here, that the Leuite took the first Tithe, and the fatherless,
stranger, etc. the poor man's Tithe. The Historian therefore forgets himself
when he says that Iarchi

So expounds it, that he takes the mention of the Levites there, to design out
the first tithe of that third year paid at Jerusalem.

For the Text speaks not of the Levites at Jerusalem, but of the Levites
within the gates in the Country, where they did both receive and eat their
Tithes, for they were not confined only to Jerusalem to eat there, but it was
lawful for them to eat their Tithe in all places, Numb. 18.31. And for
further confirmation of this point, that the Levites took the first Tithe in
the Country, and not only at Jerusalem I will add to these testimonies of
Iarchi, the testimony also of Aben-Ezra on Deuteronomy. 14.27. And the Leuite that is
within thy gates shall thou not forsake, etc. (...) i. It seems that he
speaks of the first Tithe, for having before made mention of the second Tithe,
he says, thou may not think that thou shall escape free with the second
Tithe alone. And the meaning of that he says, which is within thy gates, is
because he must give the first tithe to him, that is, to the Leuite within his
gates, and he may not say, it shall remain with me, or I will bring it to
another Leuite, or I have given it already. By which it appe r th, that the
first Tithe was given to the Levites within the gates, or as it is in the
Targum, the Levites in the Cities or Towns abroad in the Country: And a
pregnant place for this is that of Nehem: 10.37 that the Levites might have the
Tithes in all the Cities of our travel: Iarchi expounds it thus: (...) i.
Which take their Tithes in all the Cities of Israel. So on Genesis 49.7. I will
divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel: Iarchi here to touching the
dispersion of Leui, has this gloss, (...) i. The Tribe of Leui he made to
have recourse to the Garners or Barnes for oblations and Tithes, appointing him
his dispersion in way of honor. And it seems with reason, that where they
performed their service, there also they should receive their wages. But says
Aben Ezra and R. Chaskuni on Deuteronomy. 18.6. (...) i. He makes mention of the
Levites, because they also teach the Law in the gates: as it is testified in
the 2d book of Chron. 17.8, 9. And they taught in Judah, and had the book of
the Law of the Lord with them, and went about through all the cities of Judah,
and taught the people. On which words Iarchi says, (...) i. For it appertains
to the Priests and Levites to teach and instruct, as it is written in Deuteronomy.
24.8. and do according to all that the Priests the Levites shall teach you:
and agreeable to this is that we read in Act. 15.21. and in 2 Chronicles. 31.4. to
give a part to the Priests and Levites, that they might be encouraged in the
Law of the Lord.

But it will be objected that it is said Deuteronomy. 12.5.6. ye shall bring thither
your burnt offerings and your sacrifices, and your Tithes. To which, the
exposition of Iarchi on that place may afford an answer, for he interprets
(...) your tithes to be (...) i. The Tithe of Cattle, and the second tithe to
be eaten within the wall at Jerusalem. And not to be meant of the first Tithe,
as also R. Abuhab there explaines it. Again concerning that text, 2 Chronicles.
31.5.6.11.12. It does not prove that the first tithe was usually brought up to
Jerusalem, for that which is here expressed was an extraordinary practice at
that time by the Commandment of King Ezechiah, (as Chimki shows) And then
they did so exceed in bringing up all sorts of Tithes and oblations, as that
they brought also the Tithes of the fruits of trees and herbs, that were not
due by the Law (as Chimki here declares) according to the tradition of their
ancients, and their exposition of the Law, and on ver. 6. he says, (...) i.
That even of the holy things which they did consecrate, they brought of them
the Tithes, albeit they were altogether free from tithing. And as at this time
there was an extraordinary quantity of Tithes brought in, so Chimki on ver. 10.
does note that there was an extraordinary concurse and multitude of Priests and
Levites assembled together from all places, insomuch that on ver. 17. he says,
they were appointed to serve before their usual time, that they might be made
acquainted with the manner of divine worship, for now they had forgot all
through the long omiss on of the service of God's House in the days of the
wicked Kings. And therefore the Levites are taken here from 20 years old,
whereas according to the Law, Numb. 4.23.30. they were appointed from 30 years
and above, to the service of bearing of burdens; and from 25 years to the
service of the Tabernacle, as Aben Ezra and Ramban teach on Numb. 8.24. All
which serves to show that the tithing here was extraordinary, and therefore
this no clear place (as is pretended) to prove that the first Tithe was
ordinarily paid to the Leui^es at Jerusalem. In the Talmud in Massech Bicurim
cap. 2. fol. 84. it is said, (...) i. There are some things incident to tithe
and first fruits, which are not incident to the Therumahs: for the Tithe and
first fruits, were to be brought up to the place of God's worship, etc. But
this Moses Ben Maimon in that place, and Iarchi, interpret of the second Tithe,
as he did before on Deuteronomy. 12. signifying thereby that it was not usual to
bring up the first Tithe to Jerusalem: If happily the Priests and Levites that
ministered in their courses at Jerusalem, did in the time of their service
receive there their Tithes, as some of the Jews in their writings seem to
avouch; yet they that ministered abroad, and taught in the gates and cities in
the country, out of all doubt received and spent their Tithes also in the
Country. Ramban on Deuteronomy. 12.6. does discuss this point at large: David Chimki
also touches it on Malach. 3.10. and Iarchi on Nehem. 10.37. and 12.44. the
portions of the Law for the Priests and Levites. (...) i. The Priests took
that which was fitting for them, and the Levites that which was fitting or meet
for them, whilst they stood and ministered there before the Lord with praises
and thanksgiuings. But as for those Levites that served in the gates and cities
abroad in the Country, Ramban on Deuteronomy. 12. the place before named, is very
direct and plain, that they did receive and spend their Tithes in the Country,
and that in these words, (...) i. And the Leuite that is within thy gates shall
eat there within thy gates, that which is meet for him, according as it is said
concerning them, Numb. 8.31. and ye shall eat it in all places. And agreeable
to this is the judgment of Calvin on Deuteronomy. 14. where he disputes the question,
An consentaneum fuerit decimas uno in loco solui, and gives his reasons, and
concludes thus, Dubium igitur mihi non est, quin Levitae in suis quique
regionibus decimas collegerint. There is yet one other Text which may seem to
cross this that has bin said, and that is Malach. 3.10. bring all the tithes
into the storehouse. I must confess the Jews generally here under tithes,
do among the rest understand and include the first Tithe: But this (say they)
was the decree or constitution of Ezra, (whom they also with St Hierome, take
to be Malachi himself) that the Tithes here spoken of, should be brought up to
the storehouse. And therefore in the Talmud in Massecheth Maccoth. cap. 3. fol.
23. Rabbi Ioshuah Ben Levi makes mention of this, saying; (...) i. Three things
they did in the lower house on earth, to which they gave consent in the
vpper-house in Heaven, (...) That is, the convocation or celebration in Esther,
the giving of salutation in the Name of Jehovah, and the bringing up of the
Tithe. The celebration in Esther, as it is written Esther 9.27. The Jews also
ordained and promised for them, and for their seed, etc. (...) i. They ordained
or confirmed above, what they promised or undertook below.

2 The giving of Salutation, Ruth 2.4. And behold Boaz came from Bethlehem, and
said unto the reapers, (...) the Lord be with you: and Judge. 6.12. The Angel
said to Gideon (...) the Lord be with thee thou valiant man.

3 The bringing in of the Tithe, as it is written Malach. 3.10. Bring all the
tithes into the storehouse, etc. Where by the storehouse they understand the
Chambers of the House of God, prepared by Ezra for the receiving of the fruits
and tithes, as in Nehem. 10.37.38.

And in Massecheth Iebamoth, cap. ^. fol. 86. they said that Ezra the Scribe
did punish the Levites, because they came not up with him from Babel to
Jerusalem, Ezra 8.15. And therefore he commanded to bring all the Tithes into
the Chambers of the House of God; and so the Priests and Levites were made
equal in the first Tithe, for which they allege Nehem. 10.38. And the Priest
the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites when the Levites take tithes. And
in like manner as the Commentator there notes, Ezechiah did prepare chambers to
bring in thither all the Tithes that those Levites which had worshipped Idols,
should not be partakers of them 2 Chronicles. 31.11. Ezech. 44.10. Moses Ben Maimon
in his explanation of Massech. Megnashar Sheni, cap. 5. fol. 72. toward the
end, makes mention of this punishment of the Levites inflicted by Ezra, and
says, that Iochanan the high Priest did abrogate the use of the Confession,
commanded in the payment of Tithes, Deuteronomy. 26.13. etc. I have brought the
hallowed thing out of mine house, etc. because at that time they could not
truly say those words, according to all thy commandments which thou have
commanded me; for God had commanded them to give the first Tithe unto the
Levites, and they then gave it only to the Priests, and that as he there
speaks, (...) i. By the decree of the counsel or consistory of Ezrah, because
that when he came up, the Levites came not up with him (as I said before)
Ezrah, 8.15. And therefore he punished them, commanding that the Tithes should
not be given to them, but to the Priests. And this matter is recorded in diverse
other places of the Talmud, as in Iebanoth cap. 2. fol. 86. Cethuboth cap 2.
fol.. 26. And also in Massech Cholin, cap. 10. fol. 131. where diverse questions
and doubts are moved concerning this punishment of the Levites, and whether at
this time only the Priests, or else both Priests and Levites took the first
Tithe; for though the Levites might for a while be suspended from their right
of tithing, or have their portion therein somewhat diminished, yet that they
were not altogether deprived of it, but still had a part in the first Tithe,
they argue from that which is written in Nehem. 13.10.11.12. Notwithstanding
whatsoever other differences there are among them, yet herein they all agree,
that at this time the Priests had a right and interest in the first Tithe,
which plainly overthrows an other position, boldly delivered by our
Historian, and that also without any proof, when he says page 13. that

The Priests received no tithes of the husbandmen, only the Levites received
tithes from them, and paid their tithe to the Priests. And so also in his
Review, page 454.

If we may give credit to that which the great Doctors of the Jews have
delivered in the Talmud, and their later Comments, which the Historian
elsewhere says, are testimonies beyond exception for the practice or
Historical part, then it is most certain, by the common opinion of them all,
that the Priests did receive Tithes, yea the first Tithe which was paid by the
husbandman; but all the question is, whether the inferior Levites did at this
time receive any, or no: for the reason why Iochanan the high Priest did not
permit the confession of the payment of Tithe, prescribed Deuteronomy. 26.13. was (say
they) because all was then given to the Priests, and none to the Levites,
whereas indeed in the general grant of the tenth to the children of Levi for
an inheritance for their service which they serve in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, Numb. 18.21. the whole Tribe, both Priests and Levites are
included. And therefore setting aside this conceit of the Levites punishment by
Ezra, as having no sufficient ground in Scripture. They yield an other reason
why the first Tithe belongs unto the Priests, to wit, because the Priests are
comprehended under the name of Levites, to whom the grant was made; for says
Aben Ezra on Leuit. 16. (...) i. Every Priest is a Leuite, but every Leuite is
not a Priest. And hence it is, that in Massecheth Iebanoth cap. 9, fol. 86.
Ioshuah Ben Levi mentioning that text Numb. 18.26. Speak also unto the
Levites, etc. does under the name of Levites understand also Priests, and says
there that (...) i. In four and twenty places the Priests are called Levites;
and one of them is Ezech. 44.15. But the Priests of the Levites, the sons of
Zadok, etc. this is again repeated in Massech Becoroth, cap. 1. fol. 4. And
David Chimki also speaks of it in his Commentary on 2 Chronicles. 5.4, And in
Massech Cholin, cap. 10. fol. 131. The expositor in that Tractate, does
express it fully, and apply it thus; (...) i. Forasmuch as in four and twenty
places, the Priests are called Levites, therefore though in the first Tithe the
Levites are nominated, yet the Priests are therein also contained. Moreover in
Massech Chethuboth, cap. 2. fol. 26. R. Simeon Ben Eliezer writes expressly for
the first Tithe. that the Priest had a right in it, saying, (...) i. As the
Therumah or heaue-offering is the possession of the Priesthood, so also the
first Tithe is the possession of the Priesthood. Those words in Genesis 49.7. I
will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, are spoken of the whole
tribe of Leui and Iarchi here says, that their scattering was for the
receiving of the Tithes, as also for the teaching of the people, Deuteronomy. 33 10.
And in Deuteronomy. 33.11. bless O Lord this substance, etc the blessing has
reference to the whole Tribe, both Priests and Levites, and there Aben Ezra
takes his substance to be (...) first fruits and Tithes, and so also does R.
Bechai. Again Deuteronomy. 18.1. The Priests and the Levites, and all the Tribe of
Leui, etc. Iarchi interprets his inheritance to be (...) i. oblations and
tithes; and the Text speaks plainly of the whole Tribe of Leui, and therefore
the whole Tribe is interessed in the Tithe; and not only the inferior Levites.
R. Bechai, and the Targum in this place agree with Iarchi in the same
interpretation.

Besides, it appears by practice, that the Priests received Tithes as well as
the Levites, so much does Chimki intimate on Malach. 3.10. And it is clear in
Tobit 1.7. The first tenth part I gave to the Priests the sons of Aaron which
ministered in Jerusalem. Which well agrees with the testimony of Josephus,
Antiquit. lib. 4. cap. 4. where he says, (...), He commanded the people to pay
the tenth of their yearly increase unto the Levites and the Priests. And this
is plainly confirmed and taught by the Apostle, Heb. 7.5. For verily they which
are the children of Leui, which receive the office of the Priesthood, have a
commandment to take according to the Law tithes of the people, etc. Which Text
by Lyra (who was skillful in the ancient affairs of the Jews) is explained
thus: Levitae generaliter recipiebant decimas a reliquo populo; Inter Levitas
autem illi qui erant maiores illius tribus, videlicet sacerdotes summi filij
Aaron, non solum accipiebant decimam cum Levitis a populo, sed etiam de part
Levitarum recipiebant quae vocabatur decima decimae, Numb. 18. And therefore by
all this it is very evident, that the Priests received Tithes of the people,
and not only the inferior Levites, as the History teaches.

SECT. 5.
AFter the Historians discourse concerning the division of Tithes among the
Jews, he propounds an example borrowed from Scaliger, whereby the order of the
payment of the first fruits and heave offerings, and the first tithe, and the
second tithe, may better appear; and then having summed up his account, he
concludes that the husbandman yearly thus paid more then a sixth part of his
increase; beside first fruits, almost a fifth. But here notwithstanding these
which are rehearsed, there are some other things left out, which should also by
right be taken into the reckoning; for beside the first fruits and Therumahs,
and first and second tithe, there was (...) Leuit. 19.9. and Deuteronomy. 24.19.20.
the corner of the field, the gleaning, and the forgotten sheafe, which were
taken out of the fruits of the husbandman: and though they were exempted from
tithing, yet not only the poor, but also the Levites had a share in them; for
so says Iarchi on Deuteronomy. 14.27. And the Leuite that is within thy gates shall
thou not forsake, for he has neither part nor inheritance with thee, (...) i.
They shall have no part with thee, except gleaning, that which is forgotten,
and the corner of the field; and that which is common; for he also has a part
with thee in these, as well as thou, and they are not subject to tithing. Moses
Ben Maimon does likewise confirm this in his Commentary on Massech Therumoth,
cap. 1. fol. 48. David de pomis in his Dictionary in the word (...), where he
briefly shows the order of tithing among the Jews, does there particularly
express these things in the first place: and concerning the standing corn
which was to be left at the end or corner of the field; which is called (...)
(whereof there is a special Massecheth or Tractate in the Talmud) he says
that it has no quantity praescribed in the Law, but according to the
appointment of their Doctors (...) a sixtieth part was required. But Baal
Haturim on Leuit. 19.9. says, that they were to leave out (...) a fourtieth
part. And in Massech Peah cap. 1. fol. 2. they say it was to be given
proportionably according to the number of the poor, and the quantity of the
field. To these we may also add the 24. gifts of the Priesthood, omitted in
this History; but often mentioned by the Jews, as we shall after hear; which
being considered and valued together with the rest, that which the husbandman
paid out of his fruits, will amount to a greater fumme then what the History
speaks of.

And if it was not thought too much to give all this beside Tithes in the time
of the Law, why shall it be thought too much to give only Tithes in the time
of the Gospel? unless we think it fitting that the spiritual sons of the
Church should live in all plenty, and the spiritual Fathers go a begging: not
considering what the Apostle says Galat. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the
word, make him that taught him, partaker of all his goods.

And that we may yet further see in what manner the Priests in the Law were
partakers of the peoples goods, I will here relate one thing more, that R.
Bechai has on Numb. 18.14. in these words, (...) i. Our Doctors of happy
memory, in their discourses propound an example of a certain woman that had a
sheep, which when she went to sheare, the Priest came to her, that she should
give him the first of the fleece, Deuteronomy. 18.4. And when she brought forth the
firstborne the Priest took that, Numb. 18.15. Now she seeing the case stand
thus, killed it: then came the Priest, and took the gifts, Deuteronomy. 18.3.
Afterward she said, this flesh shall be a thing separate from the common use,
then he took all, Numb. 18.14.

In the beginning of this second Chapter of the History, the Author in his
Dichotomie says, that the yearly increase is either fruits of the ground, or
cattle: I have already spoken so much as I intended of the first, and should
now come to the other; but before I enter upon that, considering that among
other texts of holy Scripture, wrested and misinterpreted in this treatise, we
meet here with a cross exposition of that text, Leuit. 27.30. cited in page
13. of this Chapter: I think it not amiss in a word or two to try the
soundnes of it; the rather because this Scripture has usually been alleged
by judicious and learned Divines, as a principal ground for the establishing of
the divine right in tithes. But the Historian intending here (as it seems) to
deprive us of the benefit of this text, and the true sense thereof, does
therefore slily bring it in by way of a Parenthesis, and says that the Jews
apply it to the second Tithe, which Tithe was merely Leviticall, and is
finished, and so by consequent he does insinuate, that all have erred who have
otherwise interpreted or understood this text: and therefore no hope here any
longer of any hold or warrant for the Tithes we challenge: But for answer to
this, though the Jews be oftentimes idle and ridiculous in their
interpretations, and being enemies to Christianity, give us cause to trust them
no further then we see them; yet to let these exceptions pass, first I avouch,
that the chiefest and best learned of the Jews, do not expound this text to
be meant of the second tithe; and because the Jews in general are here
named, and yet none but one only is cited, therefore that the truth may the
better appear, I will oppose one of greater authority against him; Aben Ezra a
Jew, (often heretofore mentioned) and one of special credit among them, and
therefore usually styled with an epithete, Aben Ezra (...), Aben Ezra the wise
man, he is plain of an other opinion touching this Text; his words are these
on Leuit. 27.30. (...) i. He that has an heart to understand the secret of the
world, shall also know the secret of the firstborne, and the tenth: And behold
Abraham gave tithe, and fo also our father Jacob, and I will further reveal
part of the mystery when I speak of the second tithe, by the help of him
that is first, or one, and has no second.

1 By which words it is evident first that he speaking of Abraham and Jacobs
tithing, takes such Tithes to be meant here as Abraham and Jacob paid before
the Law.

2ly Whereas he says, he will reveal part of the mystery, when he comes to
speak of the second Tithe, he does manifestly acknowledge, that this place is
not meant of the second Tithe; and therefore when he comes to the proper place
thereof in his Commentary upon Deuteronomy. 14.23. he does there perform that which
he did here promise. His mystical reason there expressed, is taken from the
perfection of number, which I have touched before, and the drift of his speech
tends to signify in effect, that as God is Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the end, the first and the last; so the beginning and the end, the prime
and the perfection, the first and the tenth must be consecrate to him. And in
this respect Philo Iudaeus says, (...). i. de congressu quaerendae eruditionis
gratia. page 342. (...), there is some nerenesse (as it were) and affinity
between God and the tenth. And to like purpose writes Abarbinel on this Text
of Leviticus. But I let pass these curious speculations and subtilties about
number, ne forte cum de numero multum loquamur, mensuram and pondus negligere
iudicemur: as St Austin speaks in the like case, de civit. Dei lib. 11. cap.
31. neither do I intend to dispute the question, but only to free the Text
from false interpretation, and therefore I have here produced this Rabbines
Testimony, a Jew against a Jew, a better against a worse*

I might likewise here allege the authority of Lyra and others, that in this
agree with Aben Ezra, and among the rest Abarbinel is very plain, that both
first and second Tithe is comprehended in this Text, saying, (...) i. The Tithe
of the corn of the ground, that is, the first tithe, and the second tithe: and
he adds also a reason, to show that these are holy to the Lord, as arising
from his providence. (...) and his blessing of the increase of the earth, which
has reference as well to the first, as to the second tithe.

But I come now to hear the adverse party, and to consider briefly the form
and reason of his testimony, Levit. 27.30. All the Tithe of the land, both of
the seed of the ground, and of the fruit of the trees is the Lords, it is holy
to the Lord. (...) i. The Scripture speaks of the second Tithe, says Salomoh
Iarchi in this place. It is the sentence and rule of Hilary, (observed by that
Reverend Father of the Church, whose learned labor for the clearing of the
truth in the question of tithes, has now long been extant) That he who
reads Scripture as he ought, must not bring a sense to the words, but fetch
the sense from the words, and not compel the Scripture to speak as he in
prejudice conceiueth. But R. Iarchi goes directly against this rule; for he
having a prejudicial conceit that this Text must be interpreted of the second
Tithe, he therefore restraines all the particulars therein contained, to his
own purpose. And because in Deuteronomy. 14.23. the place of the second Tithe, it is
said, Thou shall eat before the Lord thy God the Tithe of thy corn, of thy
wine, and of thine oil: therefore from thence he expounds these in Leuit.
27.30. (...) i. Of the seed of the ground, that is, corn; of the fruit of the
trees, that is, wine and oil. As though there were no seed of the ground but
corn, and no fruit of the trees but wine and oil; what is this else but
contrary to the former rule, to bring a sense to the words, and not to take a
sense from the words? Again, to restrain this Text only to the second Tithe,
is without any sufficient warrant, considering that not only the second, but
also the first tithe is the Lords, and holy to the Lord, as Abarbinel here
says, because it proceeds from his blessing of the earth as a reserved portion
to himself. That it is the Lords, appears Numb. 18 21. For behold I have
given the children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance; He gives
that here which in a peculiar manner was his own to give. And therefore well
says Calvin touching this on Leuit. 27.30. His verbis ostendit Deus se decimas
Leuitis assignando, proprio iure cedere, quae sunt quasi regale vectigal, atque
ita querimonias omnes compescit, quia alioqui obstrepere poterant aliae tribus
ultra modum se gravari. And that the first tithe is the Lords, Iarchi himself
evidently shows on Malach. 3.8. Wherein have we spoiled thee? In tithes and
offerings: where says Iarchi, (...) i. The tithes and offerings which ye take
from the Priests and Levites, that is the spoiling of me. Which words are meant
not of the second, but of the first tithe, which only belonged to the Priests
and Levites, and in defrauding them hereof, God himself is said to be spoiled.
And so in Esaias 5.8. Woe to them that join house to house, etc. Iarchi has the
like saying, (...) i. Ye rob God of his part in tithes. Beside, as the first
tithe is the Lords, so also it is holy to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 26.13. I have brought
the hallowed thing out of my house, and also have given it to the Levites, etc.
The Targum here says, (...) i. I have brought the holy Tithe out of my house,
(...) i. And also have given it to the Levites, that is, the first Tithe (says
Iarchi) and so he does here interpret the words in ver. 12. of the Levites
Tithe, or first Tithe. And this is likewise confirmed by Aben Ezra on Numb.
18.29: and again by Iarchi on Nehem. 12.47. And they gave the holy things unto
the Levites; which Iarchi thus expounds, (...) And they gave the Tithe to the
Levites: whereby he implies, that the first Tithe, or Levites Tithe, is holy.
And to conclude, if that be true which the Historian says; of the increase of
their cattle, one Tithe only was paid, and that to the Levites; then it
follows that the first tithe, or Levites tithe, is holy to the Lord; for it
is said Leuit. 27.32. Every tithe of Bullock, and of Sheep of all that goes
under the rod, the tenth shall be holy to the Lord. If then the first tithe be
the Lords, and holy to the Lord, why shall it be excluded out of this text? And
if this verse be understood of the first tithe, as the History teaches, why
shall not also the verses immediately going before, be understood in like manner
of the first tithe? To this that has bin said, one thing more may be added,
that whereas Iarchi touching the redeeming of the tithe, by adding the first
part thereto, as in Leuit. 27.31. says, that this redeeming was (...) i. That
it may be free to be eaten in every place. First the adding of the first part
is not prescribed at all in that text, which they make to be the ground of the
second tithe, viz: Deuteronomy. 14.23. Neither was the second tithe to be eaten in all
places, for that was proper only to the first tithe, as Deuteronomy. 18.31. In regard
whereof Ramban confutes Iarchi his exposition of those words in Deuteronomy. 26.4. nor
given ought thereof for the dead, etc. to be meant of the second tithe, and
therefore has this gloss, (...) i. To make a coffin and winding sheet for the
dead. Ramban here shows that this exposition is not sound, for says he, (...)
etc. It is declared in the Scripture, that they might not profane the second
tithe out of Jerusalem, but only, if the way were too far, it was to be made
in money, and that money to be laid out at Jerusalem for some thing fit to be
eaten there, ox and sheep, etc. Deuteronomy. 14 26. and therefore not to make a
coffin or winding sheet for the dead: and so much does Chimki also note on Esaias
62.9.

But for this redeeming of the Tithe, by adding the fifth part thereto, I take
that to be agreeable to the truth, which the judicious interpreter Calvin
touching this point, has delivered on Leuit. 27, 30. in these words,

Quod vero ubi pecunia redimuntur decimae, quintam partem aestimationi vult
superaddi, non eo tendit, ut Levitae ex alieno damno lucrum faciant, sed quia
astute aliquam vtilitatem captabant agrorum domini, frumentum in pecuniam
mutando, fraudibus occurritur, ne quid ex captiosa permutatione Levitis
decedat. Eadem ratione animalia iubet qualiacunque erunt decimari, nec pecunia
redimi patitur, quoniam si libera fuisset electio, nullum unquam animal pingue
aut vegetum venisset ad Levitas. Ergo hac lege remedium avaritiae and sordibus
fuit adhibitum.

Where we see also that Calvin does manifestly interpret this Text of the first
Tithe, or Levites tithe, as the most or best interpreters do, so that here we
have both Jews and Christians against the foresaid History. Wherefore though
we loose the Tithes, yet let us not loose the Text, let us not loose the Truth;
for if this dealing with Scripture may currently pass, Abraham paid Tithe of
all; that is, only of the spoils: All the Tithe of the land is the Lords; that
is, only the second Tithe: (...) the year of tithing, that is, (...) the
second Tithe, or the year of paying only one Tithe: I say, if this course may
be allowed, as Tithes are made no Tithes by wicked customs and prescriptions,
so Scripture shall be made no Scripture by corrupt glosses, and false
expositions: and yet these matters are set forth with such a goodly outward
show, as though forsooth they might admit no contradiction; for thus says the
Author,

Many of no small name grossly slip in reckoning and dividing these kinds of
their Tithes, but this here delivered, is from the holy Text, and the Jewish
Lawyers. What we receive rightly deduced from the Text we willingly embrace,
but as for the Iewi h Lawyers they jar among themselves, they trust not one
another, and therefore we have no reason to trust them, or depend upon their
testimony; but to follow the Apostles rule, 1 Thessal. 5.21. (...), Try all
things, and keep that which is good. But because we stand so much upon the
Jewish Lawyers, I would feign know how they and the Christian Lawyer can be
reconciled in that which is delivered in the next Section concerning Cattle,
which is the second part of his division, and is thus expressed.

SECT. 6.
OF their cattle the firstborne were the Exodus 13.2.
Lords, paid to the Priest, of clean beasts in kind; of unclean in money,
with a fifth part added Of the increase of them one Tithe only was paid, and
that to the Levites: Every Tithe of Bullock, and of sheep of all that goes
under the rod, the tenth shall be holy to the Lord, says holy Levit. 27.26.
and 32
Writ.

Thence at the tithing they used to shut the Lambs (for example) in a
sheep-coat, where the straitness of the door might permit but one at once to
come out: Then opening the door, either gently to hunt them out, or by placing
the Ewes bleating near them without, so to cause them run forth one by one,
while a servant standing at the door with a rod colored with oker, solemnly
told to the tenth, which with his rod he marked, so they understand going under
the rod.

That so marked, what ever it were, male, or female, worst, or best, was the
Tithe, and might not be changed.

First here to omit what maybe objected touching the firstborn of clean
beasts from Deuteronomy. 14.23: whereas he says, that the first of those that were
unclean were paid to the Priest in money, with a fifth part added, though he
pretend Text of Scripture, and stand much upon the Jewish Lawyers; yet I take
it, this cannot be justified either by any text of Scripture, or by any Jewish
Lawyer: First, for Scripture it is plain, that the first foale of the Ass,
which was an unclean beast, was not to be paid to the Priest in money, but
was to be redeemed with a Lamb, Exodus 13.13. and 34.20. Again the Jews
teach, that no firstborn of any unclean beast was paid at all, but only of
the Ass: Even Salomoh Iarchi his own man avoucheth this in his Commentary
upon the Texts before cited, Exodus 13.13. and 34.20. And every firstborn of
an Ass thou shall redeem with a Lamb, (...) i. The first of the Ass, but
not the first of any other unclean beast. To this also agrees Aben Ezra and
Chaskuni writing on the same Texts, and so does Abarbinel on Levit. 27.27.

Rabbi Joseph Karo in his (...) i. tractate of the firstling of the ass, has
these words, (...) etc. i. The firstborn of the unclean beast was in use in
all places, and at all times, but it was not in use save only of Asses, which
were to be redeemed with a Lamb. R. Bechai on Exodus 13.13. testifyeth the same
thing, saying; (...) etc. i. And every first foale of an Ass, only the Ass,
and not the first of horses or camels. And the reason hereof (says he) as
their Doctors teach, is, because the Egyptians are compared to Asses, as it is
said Ezech. 23.2^. Whose flesh is as the flesh of Asses. And again, because
the Israelites brought up many Asses with them laden with gold and silver, and
the Treasures of Egypt. And therefore it is commanded that the first of the
Ass should be redeemed, and not of other beasts, because the slaying of the
firstborn, was the firstborn of the Egyptians.

R. Moses Ben Maimon in the Talmud in Massecheth Becoroth, i. the Treatise of
the firstborn, confirms this there, in his exposition of the Mishuaioth cap.
1. saying, (...) i. It is said to Aaron: And the firstborn of the unclean
beast shall thou redeem; he means the firstborn of the Ass, because he
took not the first of any unclean beast, but only the Ass. Where we see that
Maimon expounds that place, concerning the unclean beast, Numb. 18.15. to be
understood only of the ass. And as for that we read in Levit. 27.27. which is
spoken of the dedication of unclean beasts, it is not meant of the firstborn,
for that was the Lords already, as ver. 26. But of such beasts as were
unclean, and had blemishes, and were unfit for sacrifice, and therefore were
given as a vow or dedication (...) for the repairing of the Temple, and not
paid as a duty to the Priest, as the firstborn was; for so does Iarchi and
Ramban, and other Jews expound that Text.

Where then, or how shall it be proved that the firstborn of unclean beasts
were paid to the Priest in money, with a fifth part added? In the next words he
says,

Of the increase of them (that is) of their cattle, one Tithe only was paid,
and that to the Levites.

Here I will not in his own Phrase proclaim that a man of no small name does
grossly slip; but I dare boldly say in plain English, that he has delivered in
these words a gross falsehood according to the doctrine and practice of the
Jews, which he takes upon him to relate: For they do not teach that only one
Tithe of their cattle was paid, or that it was paid either unto the Levites,
or Priests at all; but contrary, That it was of the nature of the peace
offerings, and to be eaten by the owners themselves at Jerusalem.

And for proof hereof, before I go any further, I appeal first to his own
witness, Salomoh Iarchi upon this very Text cited by himself, viz. Leuit.
27.32. And every Tithe of Bullock and of sheep of all that goes under the
rod, the tenth shall be holy to the Lord. Which Iarchi thus interprets. (...)
i. Shall be holy to offer the blood and combustible parts thereof upon the
altar, and the flesh shall be eaten by the owners: for behold it is not
reckoned among the gifts of the Priesthood, neither do we find that it should
be given to the Priests.

It seems strange that the Historian should so confidently allege the
testimony of this Rabbine against us in ver. 30. of this Chap, applying that
Text to be meant only of the second Tithe; and here on this ver. 32. the next
but one after, either not to read him, or not to understand him, or not to
respect him, when as he writes so direct against this History And yet I will
spare to impute this to ignorance or lazines, or impudent boldness, or the like;
though he spare not without cause to lay load on others in this kind, not
remembering that of the Poet. Iliad. 20. (...). But be it what it what it will,
sure I am that beside Iarchi his Testimony in this place, with whom R. Bechai
and Abarbinel on the same Text concur in a manner word for word, both he and
other Rabbines on diverse texts of Scripture; and also in the Talmud do plainly
show against this History, that the Tithe of beasts is a distinct and several
Tithe by it self, differing from the Priests and Levites Tithe, Deuteronomy. 12.6. Ye
shall bring thither your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your Tithes.
Where Iarchi expounds (...) your Tithes, to be (...) i. The Tithe of beasts,
and the second Tithe to be eaten within the wall at Jerusalem. And Rabbi Abuhab
commenting upon Iarchi in the same place, says, (...) i. Iarchi speaks this,
because that if he should interpret it, of the first Tithe, he was to give that
unto the Leuite. Where he makes a manifest difference betwixt the Levites
Tithe, and the Tithe of beasts; and and so does Ramban on the same Text at
large: likewise on Amos 4.4. Come to Bethell, and transgress to Gilgal, and
multiply transgressions, and bring your sacrifices in the morning, and your
Tithes after three years. It is in the original (...) And your Tithes after
three days. The Jews therefore give a double exposition of these words,
either that (...) does signify years, as sometimes it is taken in Scripture,
as Leuit. 25.29. (...) within a year may he redeem it: and so this Text of
Amos has reference to that in Deuteronomy. 14.28. At the end of three year th u
shall bring forth all the Tithes, etc. Or else it is taken in his proper
signification for days; and in this sense they understand here by Tithes, the
Tithe of beasts, which Idolaters did offer contrary to the Law; for so are
Iarchi his words; (...) i. The Law says concerning the less holy things,
Levit. 7.18. and 19.6.7. It shall be eaten the day ye offer it, or on the
morrow, but idolaters say, after three days eat the Tithe of your cattle, or
else the idolatrous Priests teach them so; as he further shows in this place,
etc. In like manner David Chimki on the same Text, accords with Iarchi in
this interpretation, saying; (...) i. After three days your Tithes: i. The
Tithe of beasts, which is of the less holy things; and the Law says
concerning the less holy things; It shall be eaten the day ye offer it, or on
the morrow: but they eat it after three days.

For the better clearing of these testimonies, we must here note by the way,
that the Jews make two sorts of holy things, the one they call (...) the most
holy: the other (...) the less holy. Iarchi grounds this distinction on Leuit.
21.22. The bread of his God, even of the most holy, and of the holy shall he
eat. The same distinction is commonly used by other Rabbines, as Aben Ezra on
Numb. 18.9. And by Ramban on Leuit. 19.5. and Baal Haturim on Deuteronomy. 12.11. and
so also in the Talmud as in Massecheth Gnorlah, cap. 2. fol. 81. and Chiduschin
cap. 2. fol. 52. etc. The most holy things were such as only the Priests were
to eat of, as Iarchi shows on Numb. 18.10. and so Aben Ezra on Deuteronomy. 12.27.
The less holy the people also might eat, as Aben Ezra signifies on Leuit.
7.15. and Deuteronomy. 12.27. and Iarchi on Levit. 10, 14. Among the first sort of
these holy things they number the meat offering, the trespass offering, the
sin offering, the firstborn, the shoulder, the breast, etc. as appears by
Aben Ezra on Numb. 18.9. and Deuteronomy. 12.27. Among the second they reckon the
peace offerings, Leuit. 7.15. So does Aben Ezra on this Text: and Ramban
likewise testifies the same thing on Leuit. 19.5. And when ye shall offer a
peace offering unto the Lord, ye shall offer it freely: (...) i. He speaks
this of the peace-offrings which were the less holy things, and were to be
eaten by the owners themselves, etc. And to this second sort of holy things,
the Jews likewise do refer the Tithe of Cattle, as is evident by Iarchi
and Chimki, and others in the places before cited. And Ramban further confirms
it on Numb. 5.10. And every man's hallowed things shall be his, (...) i. The
Scripture draws all holy things, and gives them to the Priests, and does not
reserve of them but only the offering of thanksgiving, and the peace-offrings,
and the Passover, and the tithe of beasts, and the 2d Tithe, and the planting
of the 4th year, that they should belong to the owners. David de pomis in his
dictionary in the word (...) showing the diverse kinds of sacrifices among the
Jews, does in all things agree with us, in this that has been said
concerning the Tithe of beasts, and so does Moses Ben Maimon in the Talmud in
Massecheth Becoroth, cap. 9. fol. 25. Mishneh in Megnashar Seni cap. 1. (...)
i. We have heretofore oftentimes mentioned that for the Tithe of beasts they
offer the fat and the blood thereof, and the owners do eat it in Jerusalem:
that is, do eat the flesh thereof, as Iarchi before expressed: Now the reason
why the Jews do after this manner conceive and teach concerding this Tithe,
is related both by R. Bechai, and also by Iarchi on Levit. 27.33. to be,
because (say they) it is not reckoned among the 24 gifts of the Priesthood (for
that is the number that they make of them) according as I find them set down
both by R. Bechai, and R. Chaskoni on Numb. 18. in this order. So Iarchi on
Genesis 29.34. and in the Talmud in Massech Cholin 133. fol. 2 page (...) (...) i.
The twenty four gifts of the Priesthood were given to the Priests, twelve in
Jerusalem, and twelve in the borders. The twelve that were given in Jerusalem
are these, the sin offering, the trespass offering, the peace offerings of
the Congregation, the skins of the holy things, the show bread, the two
loaves, the Omer or sheafe, the remainder of the meat offerings, the residue of
the log, or pint of oil, for the leaper, the oblation of the thanksgiving, the
oblation of the peace offering, the oblation of the Ram of the Nazarite. And
these following are the twelve that were given in the borders. The great heave
offering, the heave offering or oblation of the tithe, the cake, the first
fruits, the first of the fleece, the shoulder, the two cheeks and the maw, the
first borne of man, the first borne of the clean beast, the firstling of the
ass, the dedications or vows, the field of possession, the robbery of the
stranger, Leuit. 6.5. Numb. 5.7.8. These are the four and twenty gifts that
belonged to the Priesthood.

And among these there is no mention of the firstborn of any unclean beast,
but only the Ass, and no mention at all of the tithe of cattle. What
soundness there is in this their doctrine and interpretation of Scriptures, I
leave that to others, but what their opinion is touching the point here
propounded, their writings (as has bin showed) do sufficiently declare. And
therefore by all this it is very manifest, that our Historian has set down a
false relation of the Tithe of cattle, as it was in use among the Jews.

And whereas he goes on in his History for the manner of tithing their
cattle, and tells us a tale of the streitnes of a door for Lambs to go
through, and the Ewes bleating near them without, and a servant standing with
a rod colored with oker to mark the tenth, etc. Albeit happily some such
custom might at some times be observed in certain places among the Jews of
later ages, and that not only for Lambs, but a so for calfes, as Iarchi there
notes: yet to make the Text Leuit. 27.32. to be the ground and warrant of this
practice; or that Moses intended hereby to teach them that particular manner of
marking the tenth, I think it carries but small show of probability; for
though the Historian say, So they understand going under the rod: Yet certain
it is, that the chiefest and best learned of the Jews do not so understand
it. Aben Ezra expounds (...) under the rod, to be (...) The shepherd or
heard-mans rod; which was not a rod colored with oker, but such a one as David
in Psalm. 23.4. alludes unto, where comparing God to a shepherd, and himself
to a sheep, he says ver. 4. thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. On which
words Chimki has this gloss; (...) i. For the shepherd feeds his sheep with
the rod which he has in his hand, and leanes upon it when he stands. And it
seems also that he numbered his sheep with it, as Chimki on Ier. 33.13. and
Baal Haturim on Numb. 1.2. does intimate. And this is more fully explained in
Ezech 20.37. And I will cause you to pass under the rod, etc: The same phrase
is here used with that in Leuit. 27.32. as Chimki does observe, interpreting
the words of the Text in this manner: (...) i. I will cause you to pass under
the rod, according as it is said, of all that goes under the rod, Leuit 27.
that is to say, as he that telletth his sheep holds a rod in his hand, and
tells the^ one by one, and the tenth brings out for the Tithe, so will I
number you, and the sinner shall perish, etc. Where it is evident that R.
Chimki explaines that Text of Leuit. by this of Ezech. and this also by that,
but makes no mention of any such rod colored with oker, as the History speaks
of, either there to mark beasts, or here to mark men; neither does the Text
implye any such consequence. And indeed in the Talmud in Massecheth Becoroth
cap. 9 where this is first spoken of, the Jews do not teach, that they did
mark the tenth with a rod colored with oker, but they numbered not only their
sheep, but also other cattle with a rod one by one till they came to the
tenth, and the tenth that came forth (...) they marked with a red color; for
so does Maimon in that place, and David de pomis in his Dictionary expound
(...) to be (...) i. a known name of a red color: yet so that this was no
such constant custom, but that it might be and was also changed. And therefore
in some cases (as there they do declare) they did neither tell or mark the
tenth in this manner, but took indifferently as might be, ten out of an
hundred, and tithed also by guess and conjecture, and therefore there they
write thus: (...) i. The Tithe of beasts is annexed to the Tithe of corn,
whereas therefore the tithe of corn is taken by guess and conjecture, so also
the tithe of beasts is taken by guess and conjecture. Now what this guess and
conjecture is, they do also there explain in the Commentary upon the Talmud
in these terms, (...) i. Whereas the Tithe of corn is one part of ten, so
also the Tithe of beasts is one often, without going under the rod, but only
that ten are before him, and he takes one of them: More may be alleged from
the same pla e to this purpose, but it being a point of small moment, this
which has been said already, may be sufficient. It may be the favorers of
tbis History will esteem these to be but slight objections, propounded only
by a polyanthean predicant against the learned and peremptory conclusions of a
grand polymathist and predominant Philologer: And yet as slight as they are,
they cut in pieces the one half of his Jewish History. For his Dichotomy is,
that the yearly increase is either fruits of the ground, or ca tell, having
done with the fruits of the ground so far forth as Scaliger gave him direction,
he comes in the next place to tithe of cattle; and here Scaliger leaves him;
and therefore he writes at random on his own head, contrary to the writings
of all the Jews; and for the usual manner of the tithing of their cattle he
tells us scarce a word of truth. And yet forsooth in his Preface page 6. he
professes that to supply the want of a full and faithful collection of the
historical part, was the end and purpose why this was composed, which might
remain as a furnished armory for such as inquire about this Ecclesiastical
revenue.

See now what a faithful collection, and what a furnished armory he has here
left us. If any object, that this practice of the Jews in tithing their
cattle, may be questioned as not agreeable to precept and rules of Scripture;
for this I answer, that so the greatest part of this History may in that regard
justly be suspected. But the question is not now what is agreeable or
disagreeable to Scriptu e; but what was in truth the practice and manner of the
Jewish tithing; for that is it the Historian undertakes to teach us: and if ye
ask, where shall this be found, or how shall it appear? he tells us in his
Review, page 453. that what the Jewish Lawyers and Doctors in the Talmud and
later Comments have delivered, are testimonies beyond excepti^n for the
practice or historical part;: And if they be so, then I am sure the Jewish
Lawyers do herein put the Christian Lawyer to his geofayle beyond all
exception; for they manifestly cross and contradict this that he has taught
us, as has been before demonstrated. Notwithstanding if we leave the Jewish
Writers, and follow the rule of the holy Scriptures, I take it to be an
undoubted truth, that the Tithe of cattle was to be paid to the Leuite, which
though it be not plain in that Text which is quoted, Leuit. 27.32. yet add
rhereunto Numb. 18.21. and then it is fully cleared, But consider yet a little
further what our Author has delivered in this 5 Section of his 2. Chap.
concerning cattle and the firstborn thereof, and the manner of tithing them,
together with the rod to mark them, and then judge if he has not here brought
his own Rabbi Iarchi with a rod to ierke himself; for here is a Tithe that
Iarchi and the rest of the Jews do show the Historian has fowly mistaken,
and it is neither (...) nor (...), first or second Tithe. And therefore that
division of his which he makes the ground of his discourse, and labors so much
to justify, though he account it to be the best, will in conclusion prove
stark naught; for this Tithe of cattle can not be reduced either to the first
or second Tithe: not the first, for that was given to the Levites, and was by
the Jews esteemed to be (...) for common use or profane, as Ramban says on
Deuteronomy. 14. and might be eaten in any place, Numb. 18.31. But this (say the
Jews) was not given either to Priest or Leuite, but was always accounted
(...) holy, and might be eaten nowhere but at Jerusalem, as has been proved
before, both by Iarchi and Bechai on Leuit. 27. and other of the Jews.

Again, it is not the second Tithe, for that was Deuteronomy. 14.23: the Tithe of
corn, wine and oil, and not the Tithe of beasts, that also might be changed
into money if the way were long, and the place of God's worship far off, Deuteronomy.
14.24.25. But the Tithe of beasts might not be changed, Leuit. 27.33. And if
they bought cattle, ox, or sheep, with the money to be eaten at Jerusalem,
Deuteronomy. 14.26. yet that was not the tenth, nor to be accounted the Tithe of the
cattle, but still the second Tithe; and therefore the Jews do ordinarily
distinguish them in their writings, calling the one (...) the tithe of beasts;
and the other (...) the second tithe. So that if there were no other exception
to be taken against his best division, but only this, this were sufficient to
prove it naught, and therefore also by consequent a great part of his Jewish
treatise that stands upon this rotten foundation, can not be found.

But if this will not serve the turn to discover the weakness of the History,
beside the former Tithe mistaken, there is yet an other Tithe among the Jews,
that the compiler of the History has neue so much as once spoken of, and it
comes not within the compass of his division of first and second tithe,
neither was it for the Priest or Leuite, or for the feasts, or for the poor,
but of an other quality differing from these, and that is (...) the kings
Tithe. Baal Haturim on Deuteronomy. ^8.1. speaking of the cohaerence betwixt this and
the precedent Chap. that treats of the King, has there these words: (...)
etc. (...) etc. (...) i. The Priests of the Levites shall have no part, etc.
this Chapter is annexed to the Chapter of the king, because the king he is
anointed by the high Priest, and he preferres the king in the first place,
because he is greater then the other, etc. And again whereas the Priest and
Leuite do take Tithe, so also shall the king, he shall take the tenth of your
sheep, as 1. Samuel 8.17. Whether this manner of collection be warrantable
from the Text, or not, I stand not to examine; it suffices to show here by
this authority, what was the judgment of the Jews touching the kings tithe,
viz: that he might take a tenth as well as the Priest or Leuite, but yet could
not take the Priest's or Leuite's Tithe, for the right of the one in taking
Tithes, did not abridge the right of the other: And rhis point is iudiciously
ohserued by that worthy religious Knight Sr James Sempill, in his Book of
Sacrilege for the Gospel, chap. 8. sect. 3. And so much also is employed in
this ^estimony, and in other writings of the Jews, answereable hereunto. For
albeit Calvin on Numb. 18, 20. does say, vetustissimum fuisse morem, ut reges
decimarent colligitur ex 1 Samuel 8.15. that it is collected from the 1 Samuel 8.
that it was a most ancient custom that kings should take Tithe; yet whether
that Scripture does describe a just king or a tyrant, the Jews teach, that the
tithe there spoken of, is not the Levites Tithe, but an other Tithe after the
Levites Tithe; for so are the express words of Chimki on that Text, 1 Samuel
8.15. and he will take the tenth of your seed, etc. (...) i. He shall take the
tithe of the fields and vineyards, or of the fruits after the tithe of the
Levites: It is true indeed that there is a controversy among the Rabbines (as
Chimki here notes) concerning (...) ius regni, the right of the kingdom in the
things here mentioned: Rabbi Judah says, that this Text is written only to
terrify them, and discourage them from their enterprise in choosing a king:
and so is Ralbag his opinion in that place. Rabbi Iosi says, that whatsoever
is spoken in this chapter of the king, the king has power and right therein,
and so say others also, as appears in the Talmud Sanhedrim cap. 2. fol. 20.
where they discuss this matter at large. And hence it is that they expound the
word (...) ver. 11. translated the manner of the king, to be (...) ius, the
right of the king, or the kings due, according as the same word is used in
Deuteronomy. 18.3. (...) i. This shall be the Priests duty from the people: and the
Child Paraphrase of Jonathan accords with it: (...) i. This shall be the
king's Law. And as touching that in ver. 14. He will take your fields and your
vineyards, etc: Chimki further there declares, that their Doctors teach, that
he might not take the fields and vineyards themselves, but the fruits, if his
servants stood in need of them, when they went to war. And the reason hereof
is, (says he) because it is not said, he will take your fields, and your
vineyards, and your best oliue-yards to himself, but he will give them to his
servants, that is, to his warriors that are with him; for otherwise all are
his servants. Not that he might take to himself the body of the fields and
vineyards; for if so, then Ahab might have taken Naboth's vineyard by the right
of the kingdom, and Iesebel had not needed to have used all those lewd
practices, and the shedding of innocent blood. Thus far Chimki in this place.

And writing again of the same subject, 1 Kings 21. he confirms his former
exposition, and adds an other reason, why the text is to be understood, not of
the fields themselves* but of the fruits, saying; (...) And an other reason is
for that he says; Your fields, your vine-yards, and your oliue-yards; but does
not say, your houses, to signify that he speaks of the fruits, and not of the
body or substance of the ground. But as for the tithe, according to the opinion
of their Doctors, his words are evident on 1 Samuel 8.14. (...) i. But the
tithe of increase, and of the fruits, and of the sheep, that is his due at all
times, whenever he pleases; for even Solomon the king of Israel took it. So
that by these authorities it is apparent, the Jews held, that the King had a
right to take tithe, and that this was different from the Priests and Levites
tithe, which point our Historian has altogether concealed; and yet here is a
more ancient and better right of tithing ascribed to the King, then that which
he records, page: 13. to be derived from the Pope.

Wherefore considering the manyfold defects, and falsehood of this History, me
thinks, these speeches might very well have bin spared, whereby he pretends,
that no Christian before himself, ever taught what was considerable in the
general payment of tithe among the Jews, no not Scaliger though he undertook
it, and others without his help, slothfully and ignorantly talk of a third
tithe, and a fourth tithe, and indeed they know not what tithe, etc.

What needed all this, except he had either manifestly confuted those that have
heretofore written of this argument, (which he can never do) or had made a
better division, or Treatise of tithes, then they, which as yet he has not
done, seeing that in this History first (...) the poor man's tithe, which Aben
Ezra, and others on Deuteronomy. 14. call (...) the third tithe, is absurdly
confounded with the second, the tithe of Cattle, contrary to the tradition of
the Jews grossly mistaken, and the Kings tithe either slothfully, or ignorantly
omitted. Insomuch that the great Doctors of the Jews, and their later
Comments, (which he says are testimonies beyond exception for the practice or
Historical part) being truly examined, do plainly testify against him, that
what he has written of their manner of tithing, has been rightly heretofore
termed Historia fallax, a false and imperfect History. Indeed I must confess,
that whether we respect the beginning, middle, or end of the book, (besides
what he owes to Scaliger) it is for two things very considerable;

The first is assentation in pleasing the multitude that are loath to pay
tithes: 2 The other is ostentation in pleasing himself with his own praise:
In both which respects, this work is so sufficiently performed, as that, I
think, there needs nothing more to be added; or if there be, I make no doubt
but it shall be answered.

This short Treatise touching the tithe of cattle among the Jews, having some
years past bin perused by diverse Readers, was at length returned again into
my hands, together with a censure thereof, written by an uncertain author,
which though it nothing favor this Work, but rather hindered the publishing of
it, which at that time was by some expected; yet because it may give some light
for the better manifestation of the truth, I have thought good to insert it in
this place. The tenor thereof is this.

There be two maine points in controversy between the Author and Mr Seldom.
1 WHether the firstborn of other unclean cattle, as well as of Asses, were
not to be redeemed by paying a Lamb unto the Priest?

It is true, the Scripture names only the ass, Exodus 13.13. and 34.20.
because those were most common in that country: but I take it, that vncler that
one he comprehends by a Synecdoche all other beasts unclean for sacrifice;
whereunto I am led both by the tenth commandment, Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house, his ox, nor his ass; where under the ass, all other of
that kind are comprehended; and by that which is written in Numb. 18.15. The
firstborn of the unclean beast thou shall redeem* which is general, and
not, as some Hebrew Writers do, to be restrained to the ass only. Also
Leuit. 27.27. does strongly confirm it, if it be of any unclean beast, he
shall redeem it, and give the fifth part more thereunto; which to be meant of
the firstborn, the verse going before does evince, howsoever Iarchi and
Ramban, and other Jews expound that text.

2 Whether the tithe were to be paid to the Leuite of the increase of cattle.

That tithe was to be paid of cattle to the Leuite, the next seems plain,
Leuit. 27.32. of bullocks, and of sheep, the tenth shall be holy to the Lord.
Where those words, holy to the Lord, are not to be taken as the Rabbines would
have it, of wholly to offer upon the altar, but holy in regard they were the
Lord's portion, and by him bestowed upon the Levites, as is apparent by the
30th verse before.

But touching that which is spoken of passing under the rod, I agree with the
author, who well compares these two texts, Levit. 27.32. and Ezech. 20.37. And
the marking with a red oaker I hold to be but a Rabbinicall conceit.

So as if the question be in these two points of the right of tithing,
according to the rules and precepts of the Scripture, I hold the truth to be
with Mr Seldom: but if of the exposition of the Rabbines, it seems to be
against him.

Touching the King's tithe, which Mr Seldom is taxed for not speaking of it, he
may (as I think) be well excused; because howsoever you will judge of that
kind of tithe, it was nothing pertinent to his purpose, who writes only of
Tithes due to the Church.

In his Review page 456. he does admonish those that argue for Tithes from the
Mosaicall Laws of tithing, to examine which of the two kinds are due, why not
the second as well as the first. And to consider how the payment of the Tithes,
from the Laity to the Priests of the Gospel, succeeds to the payment from the
Levites, to the sons of Aaron: and I think also, if something had not
hindered, he would also have added, and how the payment of the tithe of cattle
to the Priests of the Gospel, succeedes to the none-payment of them to the
Priests of the Law; but (says he) these considerations can only be, where
knowledge of fact preceedes; belike then his knowledge of fact here failed him,
and therefore he also failed us: and yet for all this, we give no more credit
to the Jews herein, than we do to his History: for though their writings
manifest unto us this knowledge of fact, yet can they not prove this fact to be
according to knowledge, or agreeable to truth and evidence of Scripture.

1 For first, that the tithe of cattle should be holy, to be offered upon the
altar as a peace offering, and not to be given to the Priest in such sort as
the Jewish Rabbines teach, there is no text of Scripture to warrant it; neither
do they allege any but only this of Leuit. 27.32. which some of themselves
confess, as Ramban on Deuteronomy. 14. that it does not prescribe either to whom the
tithe should be paid, or in what manner it should be imployd; but only
declares, that it is holy to the Lord. Now then to appoint a sacrifice, or any
thing to be done in the worship of God, of which, sacrifices were a part,
without the will and Word of God, what is it else but (...), will worship, so
often condemned in Scripture. And whereas it was not lawful for any man,
either to change or redeem the tithe of his cattle, how could it be lawful
for him to eat it, as they did the peace offerings, without special
commandment from God, neither could all the flesh thereof be eaten by the
owners, as the Jews seem to affirm; for Deuteronomy. 18.3. the shoulder, the two
cheeks and the maw of every sacrifice, was due to the Priest (say the Jews)
as a reward of Phinees his zeal: the shoulder in respect of his hand, as it is
said Numb. 25.7. he took a spear in his hand: the cheek with the tongue
therein included in regard of his prayer, Psalm. 106.30. then stood up Phinees,
and prayde. The maw, with reference to that action of his, Numb. 25.8. he
thrust them both thorough, to wit, tbe man of Israel, and the woman thorough
her belly; or as Aben Ezra has it: the shoulder for his killing of the
heaue-offerings, the cheeks and the tongue for his blessing, and the maw for
his searching of the suspect vice. Or as Ramban (...) i. Because these are the
first, or chief and principal members, and therefore were given for the
honor of the Almighty unto his Ministers.

2 Furthermore, whereas in the wilderness, all beasts that were eaten, were
offered for peace offerings, Levit. 17. Ramban in the exposition of that Text,
Deuteronomy. 12.20. says; When the Lord your God shall enlarge your border, and ye
shall not all abide about the tabernacle, as ye do at this day in the
wilderness; then shall common flesh be permitted unto you* for it is impossible
that ye should all go from places far distant, unto the place that God shall
choose; and that ye should offer for peace-offrings whatsoever ye should eat.

In like manner also may I say in this case, that it is impossible, at
least-wyse improbable, that besides the multitude of other sacrifices, every
tithe of bullock, and of sheep, and other cattle, should all from the
furthest parts, yea from all the parts of Ganaan, be brought up to Jerusalem,
and be offered and eaten there by the husbandmen, as the Rabbines teach;
especially when as the Lord himself, to prevent this and the like trouble and
inconveniency, has appointed for the second tithe, Deuteronomy. 14.25. that if the
way were too long for them, and the place of God's worship far off, they might
change it into money, and therewith buy things to be eaten at Jerusalem, which
was not granted for the tithe of cattle; for the Law commands, that that
should not be changed.

3 Again, the Jews teach from Leuit. 17.4. that whilst the Israelites were
in the wilderness, (at which time also this precept was given concerning the
tithe) all flesh was holy, and that they were neither to kill or eat any beast,
but such as were offered for peace-offrings, till such time as they came into
Canaan, where they had more liberty granted, Deuteronomy. 12.20. Why then should the
Tithe at that time particularly be said to be holy to the Lord, in respect of
sacrifice; when as other beasts, if not all, were in this regard holy, as well
as the tenth, unless some further matter were signified thereby.

4 Moreover it is said concerning the tithe of cattle, Leuit. 27.35. he shall
not look if it be good, or bad, neither shall he change it. In the same sense
as it is also said, ver. 10. He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a
bad, nor a bad for a good; for why (says Bechai on this place) the Law
pointing at man's corruption, if it should permit him to change a good one for
a bad one, he would in time also give a bad one instead of a good one, and say
that it is a good one; and therefore (says he) to prevent this fraud, the Law
does punish him, and says, that if he change beast for beast, then both this
and that which was changed for it shall be holy: and in this sense does Calvin
also understand this Text.

Now this that is spoken of a good or bad one, Iarchi does interpret to be
(...) i. Such a beast as is either perfect, or has a blemish. And certainly
such a beast as has a blemish, because it could not be changed, might happen
to be the tenth, for so the Text presupposes. But no beast having a blemish,
might be offered for a peace offering, Leuit. 3. and so much also does Iarchi
on this Text acknowledge. Therefore in this case it is plain, that the tenth
of cattle could not be offered upon the Altar.

I demand then, how was it to be disposed of? for here for this the Jews are
at strife among themselves. R. Bechai speaking to this point, of such beasts as
were unfit for sacrifice, says; (...) i. All such as these go not into the
Coat to be tithed, because they are not fit for sacrifice. But this will not
agree with the Text, that presupposes the tenth beast may be good, or may be
bad, that is, have a blemish, and so unfit for sacrifice. Iarchi he says thus:
(...) i. That if it had a blemish it might not be offered, but was to be eaten
according to the Law of the tithe. But what Law, or what tithe does the Rabbine
here mean? not the tithe of the beast; for the Law was in their conceit, that
that should be offered upon the Altar. Nor the second Tithe, for the Text it
self is against it; for that might be changed, and turned into money, to be
bestowed at Jerusalem, if the journey were long, but the Tithe of beasts might
not be changed. Neither can it be meant of the poor man's Tithe, for that was
only the Tithe of the third year, and to be eaten in the gates in the
Country, and not at Jerusalem. It remains therefore that it was to be eaten
according to the Law of the first Tithe, which was the Levites Tithe, and
without any offering, might be eaten in any place, Numb. 18.31. and in this
sense I have agreed with the Rabbine. And questionless Aben-Ezra in his
interpretation of the Text, is on our side against the common opinion of the
Jews; for whereas some of them interpret the 30 verse of the second tithe,
which was to be eaten by the householder at Jerusalem: and the 32 verse of the
Tithe of beasts to be offered for a peace offering, he here intends no such
matter, but says plainly, (...) i. And behold he shall give the firstborn,
and the tenth in cattle, and the seed of the ground which is the increase, the
first fruits, and the tithe. And so also speaking of Jacob's vow, Genesis 28.22:
says, (...) (...) i. It is not in the Law, that a man should give the tithe of
his sons, but the tithe of bullocks, and of sheep, and increase. In which
places, he mentioning the Tithe of Cattle with the fruits of the earth, and
confounding them here together, does plainly imply, that he takes them to be
holy all alike, and in the same manner to be given and disposed of. For when he
says, he shall give the firstborn and the tenth in Cattle, and seed of the
ground, etc. to whom think we, in his judgment shall he give the tenth, but to
the Priest, who also had the firstborn, and the first fruits here mentioned;
for if we should expound the Text, as some of the Jews do of the second
Tithe, that was not given to any, but the owner took it himself, and did eat
it at Jerusalem, as he did also the Tithe of cattle after the offering of the
blood, and combustible parts thereof. Again, the same Author writing upon this
Text of Leuit. says further, (...) etc. i. And behold Abraham gave tithe, and
also Jacob our father, etc. To what end should he use these words, applying
them to this Text, except he thought that such Tithes were here meant, as
Abraham and Jacob paid before the Law, and that they were also to be paid in
such manner, as they formerly paid them, which was in those times to the
Priest, as is plain in Abraham, Genesis 13. for he gave Melchisedek tithe of all,
say the Jews, because he was the Priest; so the gloss of Iarchi (...) because
he was the Priest, as the gloss of the Jews has it; and so in this place of
Leuit. here is a declaration of God's right in tithes, that they are holy to
him, and afterward in Numb. 18. he shows, that he gives them generally to the
Levites, under which name of Levites, the Priests are also comprehended. For we
have formerly showed, that every Priest is a Leuite, though every Leuite be not
a Priest.

The Answer to the Censure.
THe two maine points in controversy between the Author and Mr Seldom, are not
rightly propounded for,

I. The question is not whether the firstborn of other unclean cattle as
well as of asses, were not to be redeemed by paying a Lamb unto the Priest;
for Mr Seldom in his History makes no mention at all of the Ass; but the
question is, whether the firstborn of unclean beasts were paid to the
Priest in money, with a fifth part added: for this affirmatively is M. Selden's
position, set down without any proof, against which the Author thus reasons.

1 The firstborn of the Ass, which was an unclean beast, was not to be paid
to the Priest in money, but was to be redeemed with a Lamb. Exodus 15.13. and
34.20.

2 The Jews teach, that no firstborn of any unclean beast was paid at all,
but only of the Ass, which is evidently prooved by their testimonies at large:

Whereas therefore the Moderator here between Mr Seldom and the Author,
holds, that under the name of the Ass are comprehended by a Synechdoche all
other beasts, unclean for sacrifice, giving his reasons to confirm it; admit
without any further examination, that this were true, it nothing helps Mr
Seldom, but more strongly opposes his assertion: for if not only the
firstborn of the Ass was to be redeemed with a Lamb, but also the first of
all other unclean beasts, then was not the firstborn of unclean beasts
paid to the Priest in money with a fifth part added.

II. The other question likewise is not so, as it is here by the Moderator
expressed. viz. whether tithe were to be paid to the Levite of the increase of
Cattle, But whether it were paid unto him in the Jewish manner of tithing,
not what is required in regard of precept, but what was performed in regard of
practice: for this is that which the Historian professes to teach by the very
title of his book; calling it, the History of tithes, that is, the practice of
payment of them. And so in this second chap. his inscription is in the
beginning; How among the Jews, tithes were paid, or thought due. Now it is
evidently proved by such writings of the Jews (as he himself says) are
testimonies beyond exception, for the practice or Historical part, that their
practice for the tithing of Cattle, is contrary to that which he has
delivered.

If it be said, that the expositions of the Jews, and their practice here is
not agreeable to Scripture, as the Moderator seems to determine; To this I
answer; that the same thing likewise may be said of diverse other points
taught in his History, and urged from the authority of the Jews, concerning
first fruits, Therumahs, and tithes, which cannot be justified by Scripture, as
I have before declared.

If therefore now, leaving his former hold, he will disclaim and forsake his
Rabbines (for they here forsake him) and cleave only to the Scripture for the
right of tithing, omitting the Jewish practice* then I make no doubt but we
shall quickly shake hands: for though the tithe of Cattle was not paid to the
Levite according to the practice of the Jews, yet I hold with the Moderator
that it ought to be paid unto him, according to the precepts of the Scripture,
and yet that text of Scripture, Levit. 27 32. which they allege, does not
prove it, neither is it apparent by the 30 verse, which Mr Seldom for an other
purpose in his History, page 13. following Scaliger and some of the Jews, does
apply only to the second tithe, contrary to the judgment of this Moderator, and
contrary also to the true meaning of the Scripture, as has been showed
already. True it is, that in that text of Levit. 27. there is expressed a
declaration of God's right in tithes, and that the tithes are his reserved
portion; but the donation of them to the Levits, is elsewhere confirmed, as in
Numb. 18.21. For behold I have given the Children of Levi all the tenth in
Israel for an inheritance, etc. from whence I conclude, that if all the tenth
were given to Levi, then no doubt but the tenth of their Cattle, as well as
any other: and whatsoever the Jews write to the contrary, it is but frivolous;
for albeit the tithe of Cattle (as they argue) be not expressly named in the
number of the 24 gifts belonging to the Priesthood, (which also may be
avouched of many other particulars) yet without any exception, it is plainly
comprehended under the general grant of the tithes to Levi, which to any
reasonable judgment, is sufficient.

Touching the Kings tithe, if it were so that Mr Seldom did only write of
tithes due to the Church; he might well enough be excused, for not speaking of
it; but the second tithe, whereof he discourses at large, and likewise the
poor man's tithe, are not properly such tithes as are due to the Church, but
rather to the Commonwealth, for they belonged to the householder, and to the
poor.

Again, whereas in his History page 13. He speaks of tithes in this kingdom
paid to the Crown; it had not been much out of his way to have pointed at such
tithes as in the Kingdom of the Jews were paid also to the Crown.

And lastly, where he boasts in his Review, page 452. and says, Hitherto
could I never see any Christian that has fully taught what was considerable in
the general payment of tithes among the Jews etc: since he would have us to
expect more from him in this kind then any other Christian before him, we are
not much to be blamed for putting him in mind of omitting the Kings tithe, for
that is also comprehended under the general payment of tithes among the Jews.

I proceed now to the 7: Section, wherein to omit other passages, that is left
somewhat obscure and defective that is written of those kind of goods which they
called (...), whereof (says the Author) a special Massecheth or Treatise is
in the Talmud in the Seder Zeraim. David de pomis does interpret (...) to be
(...) fructus de quibus an sint datae decimae ignoratur, Such fruit as is
unknown whether the tithe were taken thereof or no. But Moses Ben Maimon in
his Commentary on Massecheth demai cap. 1. gives a larger exposition of it,
saying, (...) i. That which is doubtful and uncertain whether they have
brought forth from the same, the gifts that belong to God or no. Where under
the word, gifts are comprehended diverse other things beside tithes. And
although the Historian says, that no first tithe or poor man's tithe was paid
of any such things; yet the Jews teach, that they did usually give these
things to the poor for their relief and sustenance* as Baal Haturim does
signify on Deuteronomy. 15.8. (...) i. And shall lend him sufficient for his need
which he has, the beginning of the words contain Demai, that is, such goods
as is unknown whether the gifts due unto God, and tithes, were paid thereof
or no; to intimate that they did use to feed the poor with these things. And
this is again more fully expressed by Moses Ben Maimon in his Preface to Seder
Zeraim fol. 3. where he shows the reason of the order of the Treatises in
Seder Zeraim, and says, that in treating of the seed of the ground, they
begin with Massecheth Peah, i. the Treatise of the corner of the field, after
Massecheth Beracoth, the Treatise of blessings, because what gifts soever a man
was bound to give of the seed of the ground, they were not due till after they
were reaped in harvest: but the standing corn was due for the corner of the
field whilst yet it was upon the ground, and therefore they began first to
speak of that: and in the next place says he, after Massecheth Peah, follows
Massecheth Demai.

(...) i. Because the poor have a right therein, even as they have in the
corner of the field, and so they say they feed the poor with Demai. i.
uncertain, whether tithed or vntithed fruits.

What other things are contained in this Section, and likewise in the rest,
which I have willingly omitted, I refer the reader for further satisfaction
therein, to the answer of M. Mountague confining my self as near as I can in
this task, only to the writings and monuments of the Jews, and so I pass to
the next Section.

SECT. 7.
7 THat tithing of Luke 11.42.
(...), every herb which is spoken of in the Gospel, and observed by the
Scribes and Pharisees, was never commanded in Scripture, nor by their Canon Law
requisite, according to the opinion of their Doctors, who restrain the payment
of tithes to that Deuteronomy. 26.12.
(...), that is, thy increase spoken of by Moses; and comprehend not herbs
under that name.

To say that the tithing of every herb which is spoken of in the Gospel, etc:
was never commanded in Scripture, is an assertion somewhat too bold, and
peremptory, considering that the rules in Scripture touching payment of Tithe,
are delivered in such general terms, as do comprehend both herbs, and many
other particulars under them, as Levit. 27.30. Numb. 18. 2 Chronicles. 31.5. etc.
And as for the Jews Canon law, it is neither Canon, nor law to us, except it
agree with the Canon of the Scripture: neither are we to depend upon the
opinion of their Doctors, which in many things is most uncertain; for it is
well known, their Doctors oftentimes differ in opinion. But how shall we be
assured that they restrain the payment of tithes to (...) increase, and where
does it appear, or by what reason, that they do not comprehend herbs under
that name? For all this there is no evidence brought in, but only his bare
word, and we have no cause to trust him on his word, because we have found him
faulty already in other passages of this History. In the beginning of his
second Chap. he gives this word increase, a large extent, containing therein
both fruits of the ground, and Cattle: But here it is restrained, and must not
comprehend herbs; but wherefore not herbs, or what else it does comprehend,
we are yet to seek. David Chimki in his Miclol, tells us, that (...) increase,
is (...) i. A name that comprehends all fruit that is for meat; and if so,
why not herbs? And it is called tebuah (says he) because it is of the year
ensuing, for that of the year past is called Abur. And Ramban on Exodus, 22.29.
says, (...) i. The fruit of the field, and of the vineyard is called tebuah,
because they bring it into the houses, being derived from a word that signifies
to bring or carry in. R. Bechai on Deuteronomy. 8.8. says, that (...) contains these
five kinds, wheat, barley, rye, oats, and spelt, or beare-corne, as has been
mentioned before. But R. Chaskuni on Deuteronomy. 14.22. speaks more largely, and
says, that here also merchandise is comprehended as liable to tithing, (...)

And so the Commentor upon the Talmud Tagnanith, cap. 1. fol. 9. (...) makes it
to contain Usury and Merchandise, and every thing whereby a man gains. Which
comes little or nothing short of the practice of the Pharisee, when he said
Luke 18.12. I pay tithe of all that I possess.

But how can we be resolved, that the Jews restrain the payment of tithe
only to tebuah in that sense which he intends; when as in their writings
they usually make mention of the tithing of Mammon, which generally signifies
all kind of goods, or riches whatsoever. And therefore Abuhab speaking of
Abraham's tithing, Genesis 14.20. says, (...) i. That he gave tithe as a man
titheth his Mammon or his goods. And so says Aben Ezra concerning Jacob's vow,
I will give the tenth to thee: Genesis 28. (...) i. Of all the Mammon or goods
that thou shall give me. And so the same author on Genesis 35.1. says of him,
that he performed his vow, (...) and paid the tithe of his substance or goods.
And therefore that which is noted by the Historian in his Review, page 455.
That at this day, Qui religiosiores sunt iuter Iudaeos loco decimarum
eleemosynam pendunt. De omnibus lucris december aureos de centum, centum de mill:
though he call it alms, as he did also (before) Abraham's payment to
Melchisedek, in the Syriak translation, yet ten out of an hundred, and an
hundred out of a thousand, is in nature a true kind of tithing, and keeps the
just proportion therein required, and agrees also with their rules and
expositions formerly delivered. But let us see what follows in the History.

They deliver indeed that by tradition from their fathers, all things growing
out of the earth, and fit for man's meat, are titheable, Ramban part. 3. tract.
de Termoth cap. 2. and Mikotsi in praecept. 145.
which their Lawyers thus regularly express. (...) That is, every thing that
is kept as man's meat, and has his growth from the earth, must pay the
heaue-offering, and likewise tithe.

Where they make such herbs as are man's meat, tithable, but all such as are
not man's meat they discharge of tithes.

These later words are not consonant to that which is taught in the Jewish
History, and the rule here expressed in Hebrew Characters, for which he cites
Ramban and Mikotsi, is perverted, and plainly differs from that which is
delivered in the Talmud. For in the beginning of Massech. Meaishroth, i. the
Treatise of the Tithes, where this is recorded, it is not said, (...) Every
thing that is kept as man's meat, etc. but thus, (...) i. Whatsoever is fit for
meat, and that which is kept, and has his growth from the earth, must pay
tithe; and meat here being mentioned in general, though some expositors do
restrain it, contains not only man's meat, but also meat for Cattle: as
Iarchi shows in (...) i. Siliqua in Massech: Meaishroth cap. 2. And the
Commentor upon Maimon speaks of diverse kinds of grain that were tithed,
which ordinarily were accounted meat for cattle, albeit in time of dearth they
were used also for man's meat: as vetches or tares, and such like.

Again, that which is kept, comprehends something else beside meat, as is
evidently declared in the 3. Chap. of this Massech: fol. 63. where it is said,
(...) i. Orygan, hyssop, and sweet margerom, which are in the court or garner,
if they be kept, are subject to tithing: and yet these are not properly man's
meat: and Ramban in his Commentary in this place says; it is the manner of
these herbs to grow in gardens, and other places without any sowing of them,
and (says he) here it is said, if they be kept, (...), that is to say, in a
place purposely appointed for the keeping of them, they are liable to tithing:
and how much does this differ from the tithing of mynt and annise, and other
herbs observed by the Scribes and Pharisees, and yet we see the tithe of these
things are required by their Canon Law, and not repugnant to the opinion of
their Doctors. But it is further added in the words following.

And out of that rule also they except whatsoever was gleaned either out of
Leuit. 19 9. and 10.
ears of corn, or grapes, or had out of the corners of the field left in
Harvest.

He means that these are also free from tithing, where one thing more must be
reckoned among the rest, that is here omitted, and that is (...), which
signifies such fruit as is common: It is mentioned with the rest in the
Commentaries on the Text, and also in the Talmud, as in Massech: Termoth, cap.
1, fol. 48: and Iarchi hereby understands the fruit of such trees as grow in
deserts and woods, which are not in the possession of any one man, as are small
nuts, and such like, of which Iarchi and Ramban discourse in their Commentaries
on Massech. Demai cap. 1. And the reason why these are not tithed, is not
expressed by our Historian. But Iarchi on Deuteronomy. 14.2. says, it is because the
Leuite has a share in these, as well as others have; and therefore (says he)
they are not subject to tithing; which is likewise confirmed by Moses Ben
Maimon in Termoth cap. 1. fol. 48.

But it seems (says the History) that for this payment of herbs, the
Pharisees were of the truer side. Our Savior likes well their payment, and
expressly says, they ought not omit it, which admonition of his was to them,
while yet the Mosaicall Laws mere not all expired by the Consummatum est.

Albeit this History makes a difference betwixt the Jewish Lawyers and the
Pharisees, as if they were of two several sides, for the matter and manner of
tithing, yet no such difference appears in the due scanning of them: for does
not the tithing of Hyssop and sweet Marierom before mentioned, and the like to
these prescribed in the Talmud, reach as far as the Pharisees practice in
tithing of Mynt and Annise, and other herbs; notwithstanding let the Talmudists
and Pharisees agree or disagree as they will, the admonition of our Savior,
though somewhat too slightly here alleged, does fully decide the controversy:
for he approving and iustifyng the Pharisees payment, does herein teach us how
to judge aright, without any further question.

And though this admonition was given while yet the Mosaicall Laws were not
all expired by the Consummatum est, yet after those Laws were expired it is
not to be supposed that then all tithes ceased, or were to be consumed by the
Consummatum est; for it is evident that the payment of tithes has been duly
observed in the Church of God both before and also after the Mosaicall Laws.

8 After the second temple destroyed, and dispersion of the Jews, their Law of
first fruits, Therumahs, and tithes with them ceased: for their Doctors
determine that regularly no inhabitants but of the land of Israel w re to pay
any although also among them be a wise exception for the lands of Seuaor, Moab,
Ammon, and Egypt, because the first is near their land of Israel, and many
Israelits went thither and dwelt there, and the other three are round adjoining
to their land of Israel.

Whatsoever was ceremonial and typical in the Leviticall Law, we acknowledge
that it was abrogated by our Savior Christ, not after, but before the
destruction of the second Temple, and before the dispersion of the Jews: But
yet the Jews themselves do not hold that their Law of first fruits,
Therumahs, and tithes, with them ceased, but only that the practice of the
payment of these, according to the Law, ceased; because they were dispersed and
wanted means, having not wherewithal to pay them; for otherwise they
generally maintain their law to be perpetual and unchangeable; so does Chimki
plead against the Christians of his time, as appears by his objections and
answers to this purpose, set down at the end of his com. on the Psalm. and on
Mal. 3.4. his words are these (...) i. Hence ye see that the Law shall never
be changed, but as it was given to Moses, so shall it remain for ever, And so
much also says R. Bechai on Levit 27. fol. 161. And though the second Temple
was destroyed, yet, without doubt, as the Historian himself notes out of
Galatinus in his Review page 455. Most of them have long since expected a third
Temple, otherwise why were they so careful to have their laws and special
cases of first fruits and tithing so copiously delivered, in five whole
Massecheth, of their Talmud or body of their civil and Canon Law; which was
many years after the destruction of the second Temple made for the direction of
the dispersed of their Nation? and so they expound those Chapters in Ezech.
literally of a third Temple that they expect; although they are forced to
confess, and that according to the letter, that there shall be an alteration
in diverse particulars, differing from that which was before in the Law, as
Iarchi declares on Ezech. 41.5. first touching the Chambers of the Temple:
again Chimki on Ezech 41.22. notes an alteration in respect of the altar of
wood, which is there called a table. and on Ezech. 25. and 4.18. and 22. he
says, there shall be an alteration or innovation in the order of sacrifices,
and on Ezech. 44.17. he observes a change in the Priests garments; and in the
feasts Ezech, 45.25. and diverse other things there expressed. And yet
notwithstanding all this, they are constant in opinion that the Law of Moses
shall still continue without any change thereof: and therefore though the
practice for payment of first fruits, Therumahs and tithes with them ceased,
yet the law of these ceased not, but in their judgment is still of force, even
as it was also before the payment of these was in use. For the Law was given to
Moses in mount Sinai: but their Doctors teach that they were not bound to pay
the Therumahs and the tithes, until they did possess and inhabit the land,
which was long after, as Ramban testifies on Numb. 15.

But they deliver, that who so of them took the profits of land amongst the
Cutheans or Samaritans their old enemies (or elsewhere in Aram; and so it
seems by consequent in any other land, saving which they except) was not to
pay any: touching which point many special cases are put by In Iad. Chazeka
tract. de therum^h T. 1. and Mikotsi in praecept. 133.
Rabbi Ben Maimon.

This is clean contrary to that which they teach in the Talmud: for Aram is
Syria, whence it is that the Jews say, that Abraham was first called (...) i.
Pater Syriae; and after the promise (...), Pater multarum gentium, as Iarchi
notes on Genesis 17. Now of Syria they say plainly in Massech: Megnaishroth, cap.
5. fol. 64. that, he that has land there of his own, must pay tithe of that
land: or if he buy the fruits there of an other man's land, before the time of
tithing, he must likewise answer the tithe, but not after: and so do Maimon
and Iarchi in their Commentaries there explain the rules, directly against
that which is here delivered.

The Historian therefore (as it seems) perceiving this error, in his Review
page 455. goes about to amend his bill, and to distinguish, and say; That of
them that take the profits of land among the Samaritans, or in Aram, that is,
Syria, must be understood of a Jew dwelling among them, and tilling the land
there; for regularly if the fruits of lands in Syria were taken by a Jew,
residing still in his own Country, he was to pay tithe of them. Massech:
Demai cap. 6. and Meashar Perek 5.5.

But how does he prove that this must be understood of a Jew dwelling among
them, and tilling the land there? for no such distinction, limitation, or
exception appears in the Talmud, or in the Commentaries thereof. And if a Jew
dwelling in his own Country, and possessing land in Syria, was to pay the
tithe of that land, why should he not also pay the tithe thereof, if he
himself dwelt upon the same land, considering that both the person, and also
the place here specified, are both subject to the Law of tithing by the rules
and precepts of the Jews? The History tells us a little before, that the
Israelites dwelling in Senaar, Moab, Ammon, and Egypt, were to pay tithes
there: Senaar, that is, Babylon so called, says Rabbi Saadiah, on Dan. 1.2.
(...) i. Because they that perished in the deluge, were cast down thither. And
Moab has his denomination, quasi (...) of the father, says Aben-Ezra, and
Bechai on Genesis 19.37. because these two, Moab and Ammon, came by the incest of
their father. Now if the Israelites dwelling in these lands, were to pay
tithes, why not also in Syria, which had more affinity with Canaan, and the
Laws thereof, then the rest had? for as Maimon teaches in his explication of
Massech: Demai, cap. 6. fol. 18, (...) Syria which was subdued by David, was
reputed as the land of Israel, in respect of diverse laws to which it was
subject. And among other, they relate in Sedar Teharoth, Massech: Iadim cap, 4.
fol. 157. that the seventh year, the year of rest, commanded Leuit. 25.1. and
Deuteronomy. 15.1. was not observed but only in Canaan and Syria, for so are the words
of the Commentor there, (...)

In which year though no tithes were payable by the Law, yet in this place
they deliver it as a tradition of Moses from Sinai, that Babel, Egypt, Ammon,
and Moab, which were out of the Holy Land, did pay the poor man's tithe in the
seventh year. And Moses Ben Maimon in his Preface to Sedar Zeraim, says also,
that Ammon and Moab by the like tradition, paid likewise the second tithe in
the seventh year; for these are there his words, fol. 2. page 2.

(...) Therefore here the poor man's tithe, was not given instead of the second
tithe, nor one and the same with the second tithe, as the Historian has before
taught us: for here they were given as two several kinds of tithes in one and
the same year, as the traditions here testify. But of this I have spoken
enough already* and therefore I pass it over, and proceed again in the
History.

At this day by their Law they pay none, those that live in their land of
Israel for want of their Priesthood and Temple, those that live dispersed in
other Countries both for that reason, as also for the other, which restrain
the payment of them to Canaan, and herein they all agree.

True it is, that the Leviticall Priesthood and Temple is abolished by the
spiritual and everlasting Priesthood of Christ, who is a Priest for ever,
after the order of Melchisedek; Though therefore at this day by their Law they
pay no tithes, yet they themselves acknowledge (as has bin showed before) that
he which is a Priest after the order of Melchisedek, must take tithes as
Melchisedek did; for so says Aben Ezra on Psalm. 110. And these are the Tithes
that we plead for, as continuing still due to be paid.

Further where he says, that they restrain the payment of them to Canaan,
that cannot be understood, but only of the Leuiticall payment, and yet the
exceptions formerly alleged of Egypt, Ammon, Moab, Syria, and the like, do
cross this. Besides, I have before declared by the authority and testimony of
the Jews, that tithes were paid in the time of Job in the land of Vz, which
was no part of Canaan.

But the great Joseph Scaliger says, He ask't some of them, whether if they
might again build their Temple (as after the Captivity they did) their Laws
of sacrifices, first fruits, and tithes, would be then revived; and their
answer was, that to build it again, were to no purpose, because they had no
lawful Priesthood there, being not one of them that can prove himself a
Leuite, though many pretend to be so, and some bear also the office of a
kind of Priesthood amongst them.

The answer of these Jews to Scaliger, cannot well accord with that which
their Doctors teach: for it is evident by their writings, as has before bin
proved, that they expect the building of a third Temple, and the reviving of
their Laws; for though they have no lawful Priesthood, not one of them being
able to prove himself a Leuite; yet they teach, that they expect the coming
of Eliah, and that he at his coming will reduce every one to his own Tribe,
as Chimki shows on Ezech. 47.23. In these terms, (...) i. Hereafter when
Israel comes out of captivity, the Tribes shall be known, although they are
now mixed together, and know not any man his own Tribe; Eliah shall come, and
by distinguishing of families, shall refer every man to his own Tribe. And of
the coming of Eliah, on Leuit. 26.42. Then will I remember my covenant with
Jacob, Iarchi has this gloss. (...) i. Jacob in five places is written full,
and Elihu in five places defective, wanting the letter Vau: for Jacob took a
letter from Eliah's name, for a pawn or pledge, that he should come and
publish the redemption of his sons. And this, John the Baptist has already
performed, who was that Eliah that was to come, Math. 11.14. Luke 1.17. Mark
9.13.

But now for the building again of the Temple, and that future state of
happiness which the Jews dream of, there are many different opinions among
themselves; Elias in Thisbi writes, that some of them by (...) The world to
come, understand the world of souls which begins presently after death: and
some thereby, the time and days of the Messiah, and some after the general
resurrection of the dead. Moses Ben Maimon, in his commentary on Sanhedrin cap.
18. fol. ^0. speaks of this, more at large on these words, (...) i. All Israel
have a part in the world to come: where he relates 5 several opinions, most of
the^ much like the late treatise of the Calling of the Jews, dreaming
especially of an earthly happiness, and temporal kingdom in this world: But in
the end after the recital of them he reiects them all, and says: That as the
blind man cannot judge of colors, nor the deaf of soundes, nor fishes know
the element of fire, because their living is in the water which is the
contrary: so the joy of the spiritual world is not known in this corporal
world, in respect of the excellency, whereof the Prophet David says, Psalm.
31.19. O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee! And so say the Doctors. (...) i In the world to come there is neither
eating, nor drinking, nor washing, nor ointing etc: But the righteous sit with
their Crowns on their heads, and are sustained by the brightness of the divine
presence; and so in effect, he concludes there against the former opinions,
that the true blessedness of the world to come consists in beatifica visione
Dei. And likewise for the building of the Temple, which they often speak of,
some of their own writings show, that it must not be a material, but a
spiritual Temple; so much does R. Bechai intimate on Genesis 28.17. which place
he applies to the three Temples: The third whereof he would have to be
signified in these words, And this is the gate of heaven; where he says. (...)
i. And therefore here he mentions heaven, because it shall be the work of
heaven, and not the building of man, as the former were; in which he makes
mention of a place, and house. Moses also points at this in the blessing of
Benjamin, as the Jews write on Deuteronomy, 33.12: and on Ier. 7.4. The same thing
likewise is observed by Bechai, on Exodus 27.20. That they bring unto thee pure
oil olive beaten for the light that the Lamps may always burn, (...) Here
says Bechai, The first house stood 4 hundred and ten years, and the 2 four
hundred and twenty, according to the number contained in the Word, (...)
beaten, to signify that the two first Sanctuaries should be beaten down and
destroyed: But the 3d house which comes not under number, because the time
thereof is not limited, is signified by the word (...); For the light, to
which they apply that in Esa 60, 1. Arise, shine, for thy light is come: and
Psalm. 27.1. The Lord is my light and my salvation, and Psalm, 118.27. The Lord
is mighty and has given us light. In which texts they understand a promise
made of the return of the divine presence to the third house, which was
wanting in the second, for so the Jews teach, that five things were wanting in
the second Temple, that were in the first, viz: The Arc, the Vrim and Thummim,
fire from heaven, the divine presence, and the spirit of prophecy, as Iarchi
and Chimki show on Hagg. 1.8. and so it is recorded in the Talmud, in Massech.
Ioma cap. 1. fol. 21. But this defect is supplied in the 3 house: and because
(says Bechai) there is no time limited for the standing of it, it being to
continue for ever, therefore it is said (that the lamps may always burn) to
signify, that the excellency thereof shall last for ever, and the light thereof
shall never cease.

Whatsoever therefore these Jews answered Scaliger, touching the building of
the Temple; it appears by the writings of their chiefest Doctors, that their
third Temple must not be an earthly mass, or material building of timber or
stone, but a spiritual, heavenly, and everlasting Temple.

That which follows in the History, touching the High Priesthood of the Jews,
when they lived here in England, is taken out of the records of Richard the
first and King John, which testify a grant thereof, made and confirmed by
letters patents; Iacobo Iudao de Londonijs presbytero Iudaeorum etc. But this
being not at this time within the compass of my walk, I meddle not with it;
yet by occasion it puts me in mind that in the Bombergi Bible on Genesis 18. there
is mention of one (...) i. Rabbi Moses of London, who is cited there as a
Co^mentor on the text, which also shows that they lived here in former times;
but when this was, or by what means they had their maintenance when they lived
here, that is not so evident: I easily think with the Historian, that they
received neither Therumahs nor first fruits, nor tithes, as not belonging to
them; for it was not requisite that tithes here should be paid Presbyteris
Iudaeorum: It suffices if without respect either of Jews or Jewish fables,
they be paid in due manner as they ought Presbyteris Christianorum.

Hitherto following this Historian, we have bin travailing in the land of
Canaan, and are now upon the sudden brought into England, for multitude and
variety of blessings, a second Canaan, where I think it good to rest, without
any further rangeing; for as touching the news that he relates about the
payment of tithes in foreign countries, Greece, Italy, France, Spain, and the
like, it skills not much whether it be true or false, for it concerns us
especially in this case to enquire not factum, but ius, not what was done, but
what ought to be done, and yet even in this kind they that have traced the
History in those parts, have therein discovered diverse wanderings and
aberrations: But for my part I had rather stay where I am, and take things as
they are reported, then go so far to make trial: only for a farewell looking
back again to the places where we have been, a word or two also of the Jewish
part of his Review, and so an end.

In his Review p. 450. he remembers two adjuncts that belong to the story of
Abraham's tithing, that is, who Melchisedek was, and where the place of his
Kingdom of Salem was.

For the first he is generally reputed to be Shem by the common consent of the
Jews: but whether Shem or Iapheth were the eldest son of Noah, to whom the
Priesthood should belong, that is not so easily determined. For whereas he
says, that the Rabbis and diverse other of the learned, will have it, that
Iapheth was the elder brother, and for this writes in the margent, Eam esse
Rabbinorum sententiam not at D. Chimki. (...) Yet the same Chimki on 1. Chro.
1. contrariam sententiam tenet, saying that Iapheth was greater in dignity, but
younger in years. But Aben-Ezra on Genesis 10.21. applies the same speech to Shem:
and Iarchi there says, that it is not known whether Shem or Iapheth were the
elder. R. Chaskuni on Genesis 9.25. says, that Iapheth was the eldest, Cham the
second, and Shem the third. But in the Talmud Sanhedrin cap. 8. fol. 69. with
reference to Genesis 5.32. they say these words: (...) i. Shem was a year elder
then Cham, and Cham a year elder then Iapheth, so Shem is found to be two
years elder then Iapheth. For this therefore the Jews agree not among
themselves, and it being a question more intricate and disputable, then
pertinent or profitable, I pass it over, and come to the other adiunct
concerning the place.

For the place of his Kingdom, Salem, it is taken (says the Author) by St
Hierom (as he learned from some Jews) and from him by St Ambrose, Eucherius,
Primasius, and others, that this Salem is that which seated on this side of
Jordan, is some 80 miles distant from the plain of Mamre, where Abraham lived
and retaynes it is name in the Story of John's Ioh 3 23.
baptism. That St. Hierom learned this from the Jews how can it be thought
credible? for they generally hold that by Salem here is meant Jerusalem, where
Abraham gave the tithes; and so says the Targum plainly both on Genesis 14. and
also on Psalm. 76.2. where David Chimki writes thus.

(...) etc: (...) Here Chimki from Midras Tillim, relates a conceit of the
Jews touching this place, expressing it in such manner as if two Godfathers
did strive for the name of it, Shem called it Salem, Abraham, Iereh, Genesis
22.14. Therefore to end the strife, and please both parties, God caused it to
be called neither simply Salem as Shem did; nor Iereh as Abraham; but co^pound
of both in one word Jerusalem. Iereh signifies vision; and Salem, peace; for in
the true Jerusalem there is true vision, and true peace. And that this place
was first called Salem, and afterward Jerusalem, Josephus plainly testifies
antiq. 1.11. saying, (...). They called Salem afterward Jerusalem. It is also
called in Genesis 22.2. Moriah, as the Jews teach, where Solomon after built the
Temple, 2. Chron. 3.1. Therefore says Baal Haturim. (...) i. That the land of
Moriah by identity of number is the same with Jerusalem. In Iosuah 18.28. and
15.63. it is called Iebusi: as also in Judge. 19.10. and 1.21. And in Ezech.
48.35. (...) The Lord is there. Rab. Levi Ben Gershom and Chimki, on Iosuah
10.1. write, that all the Kings of Jerusalem both in the time of Melchisedek,
and in the days of Iosuah, were called by the name either of Melchisedek, or
Adonisedek Kings, or Lords of righteousness, as the name of the Kings of Egypt
was Pharaoh: and they are so called, says Chimki, (...) i. Because of
Jerusalem which is the place of righteousness. And says Ramban on Genesis 14.
(...) i. This place does justify or make righteous the inhabitants thereof, as
it said Esai. 1.21. (...) i. Righteousness lodged in it, 2. Pet. 3.13. compared
with Ier. 23.6. and 33.16. And here (say the Jews) was the place where
Abraham paid his tithes: whereby it appears that the tithes were paid both to
the Priests of God before the Law, and also were annexed to the place of Gods
worship, as Aben-Ezra shows on Genesis 28, 22. writing thus. (...) i. This shall
be the house of God, the place appointed for my prayer, and to bring thither
the tithes of all the goods that thou shall give me. In like manner Ramban both
on Genesis 14. and also on this text does assign the tithes to the place of God's
worship, thus expounding the text: etc: (...) i. When I return to my fathers
house I will serve the only true God in the chosen land, in the place of this
stone which shall be to me the house of God, and thither will I bring the
tithe. Again the same Author writing on Genesis 31.13. does in like words
further confirm this, that the tithes were to be brought to the house of God,
the place appointed for his worship. And thus much briefly for the two
adjuncts of person and place before mentioned.

There is yet on grand quaere, as it seems, in the opinion of the Historian,
which in his Review Page 455. he moves in this manner. Now, me thinks, he that
argues for tithes from the Mosaicall Laws of tithing had need more especially
then any I have yet seen has never done, examine which of the two kinds are
due in the Evangelicall Priesthood, why not the second as well as the first.

To this I answer, first that we challenge not tithes principally by virtue of
the Mosaicall Laws of tithing, neither do I think that he has seen any
purposely arguing for tithes, that does fetch his chiefest reasons thence; But
as the learned have taught who have handled this subject, we claim them thus;
As due to God by reservation, from the beginning, as following Christ's
Priesthood, as the only certainty mentioned in Scripture, as also consecrated
to God by consent of Churches, and Edicts of Princes; as agreeing with the use
and practice of the Church in all times. But as for the Mosaicall Laws and
mandate of God concerning Levi, we make it not the ground of our title to
tithes. And where he would have us examine which of the two kinds are due in
the Evangelicall Priesthood, why not the second as well as the first; This has
been fully answered by them that have written of this argument, and have made
a more perfect division of tithes, then this of first and second: but because
(as it seems) the Jews are in more credit with him then others, he may for
this point have also satisfaction from them: In the Talmud Rosh Hashanah cap.
1. fol. 12. on that text Deuteronomy. 14.26. which I have given you for your
inheritance; they write thus. (...) i. The Scripture joins the first tithe to
inheritance, to show that as an inheritance cease not, or has no end, so the
first tithe cease not, or has no end; and this is there twice repeated in
the same page, which can by no means agree with the second tithe, for that
ceased. Therefore the first tithe or tithe inheritance, which was sometimes
assigned to Levi for his service in the tabernacle, is now due in the
Evangelicall Priesthood.

But he would have us consider also how the payment of tithes from the Laity,
to the Priests of the Gospel, succeeds to the payment from the Levites, to the
sons of Aaron: But these considerations can only be, where the knowledge of
fact praeceedes: for without exact distinction of their several tithes, any
argument drawn from them, may soon be found a gross fallacy, that may both
deceive him which makes it, and those whom he teaches: Let the ingenuous
Reader think of it. And let the ingenuous Reader also think of this, that he
which grounds a disputation or an History upon false principles, must needs
deceive himself, and those whom he teaches, and make up his conclusion with
gross fallacies: for as the Philosopher says well, Physic: li. 1. cap. 2.
(...); One absurdity being granted, others will follow. But he has here
forgotten the Jewish proverb, (...) i. vpbraid not thy companion with the
blemish that is in thy self:

Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum. And indeed to speak plain, what
is it else but a mere fallacy, by way of insinuatio^, to teach that the
payment of tithes from the Laity, to the Priests of the Gospel, succeds to
the payment from the Levites to the sons of Aaron. Is there not herein a
manifest disparity betwixt the Levites and the Laity? The Laity were always to
pay tithes, and by no right to receive them; but the Levites were always to
receive them: For albeit out of the tithes that they did receive, they were to
pay a tenth to Aaron the high Priest, in acknowledgment of superiority: yet
this payment was merely ceremonial, and therefore it is called as Iarchi
notes on Number. 18. (...). i. The oblation or heave offering of the tithe, tied
only to the high Priest in person, and to Jerusalem for place: But the payment
of the Laity to the Priests of the Gospel, is not ceremonial. Again there is
no proper succession of the Gospel to the Law, in regard of Priesthood, for
the Priesthood of the Gospel is directly included in the Priesthood of
Melchisedek, which was before the Priesthood of Aaron: and therefore St. Hierom
in his questions on Genesis calls the one, the Priesthood of the uncircumcised
Church, and the other, the Priest hood of the circumcised Synagogue. And
whereas Melchisedek being uncircumcised, blessed Abraham, that after was
circumcised, and in him Levi and Aaron, of whom came the priesthood; therefore
he concludes thus; Ex quo colligi vult Sacerdotium habentis praeputium
benedixisse circumciso Sacerdotio Synagogae: And so by consequent in this
respect, he makes the Evangelicall Priesthood not to succeed but to be before
the Legal. It is further also to be considered, that the whole Tribe of Levi
is interessed in the tithe and not only the inferior Levites, as has before
been proved; for though they are divided, as Ramban notes on Genesis 17. (...) i.
Into two families, the Sacerdotall office apart by it self, and the Leviticall
apart by it self, yet it is but one Tribe, and one Prince over them, and that
was Aaron. And to this whole Tribe were the tithes given, and therefore St.
Hierom on Malach. 3. under the name of Levi comprehends the whole Priesthood,
saying, In filijs Levi, totam intellige Sacerdotalem dignitatem. Therefore the
whole Priesthood was partaker of the tithe, and not only the inferior
Levites, though they might sometimes be the servile receivers of them, as the
Gibeonites also in regard of their office were subject to the Levites, who are
therefore called Nethinim 1. Chron. 9.2. as Aben-Ezra and Iarchi show on Ezra.
2.43. Because they were assigned to servile offices in the Temple, and given to
the use and service of the Levites.

Last of all we have formerly proved in this Treatise that the first tithe or
Levites tithe, was given to the sons of Aaron, that is, to the Priests, and
namely in the time of Ezra, and that by the general consent and testimony of
the Jews, neither was that constitution ever after reversed.

I demand then to whom the Levites did pay their decimas decimarum, when as
the first tithe it self out of the which they were taken, was then given
immediately to the Priests? We read indeed Number. 18.28. that the Levites were
commanded to give the tenth of their tithe, the Lords heave offering to Aaron
the Priest. But concerning the sense and meaning of this text, the Jews
dispute and differ in the Talmud Sanhedrin, cap. 11. fol. 90. Rabbi Iochanan
argues from hence the certainty of the resurrection, and because Aaron did not
live to enter into the land of Israel, and receive the heave offering, therefore
(says he) this teaches, that he shall live heareafter, and receive it after
the resurrection. Rabbi Ismael, he says: (...) i The heave offering was given
to Aaron to signify, that as he was partaker, so also his sonns were partakers
of it, after him; Now the sons of Aaron were high Priests as well as Priests.
Therefore where it is added;

But these considerations can only be, where the knowledge of fact preceedes:

What certain knowledge of fact herein has he showed us, or how can there be
any such certainty found among the Jews, when as the greatest of their Doctors
differ in judgment for the exposition of this text, which is the ground of the
fact here mentioned; some of them appropriating the heave offering of the
tithe personally to Aaron himself, some to his sons successors, in the high
Priesthood, and some to the inferior Priests. Therefore in these matters, we
have from them much variety, but little certainty; yet still more proof for the
divine right of tithes, then either has, or can be showed to the contrary: For
since the Jews teach us, (as has been declared) that the tithe is God's
part, allotted and paid ever to the Priest, and that the Patriarchs Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and the rest paid tithes before the Law, and that they were
also paid in the time of Job, and that the Priest after the order of
Melchisedek has right to take tithes, and that the first tithe or tithe
inheritance must never cease; By these and such like conclusions, I take it,
they affoorde more arguments for confirmation of the divine right of tithes,
then either has as yet from them, or can be showed against it.

The last of his Hebrew sentences, wherein also I will join with him, and
conclude, is set down toward the end of the 2d chap. of his Review; that is;

That among their Aphorisms both divine and moral, they tell us, that as the
Masoreth is the defense of the Law, so (...) Meighsheroth seag Leaighsher, that
is, tithes paid, are the defense of riches; for which he quoteth in the margent
Pirke Auoth cap. 3.

And in the same place, such an other sentence presently follows, which if
this Author had well observed, I persuade my self, his History had never come
to light, and that is, (...) i. silence is the hedge or defense of wisdom. But
it is well yet, that now in the end not consonant to his former discourse, he
acknowledges this that is spoken of tithes, to be a divine and moral
Aphorism: and surely not only this, but also many other such like moral and
divine Aphorisms, are uttered by the Jews, both in their Comments on the holy
text, and also in the Talmud, which promise a blessing to them that duly pay
their tithes, and a curse to those that do withhold them.

That worthy learned Divine Master Hooker in his fifth book of Ecclesiastical
policy fol: 428. alleging this, that the Jews were accustomed to name their
tithes, the hedge of their riches, has there a further observation saying,
that an hedge does only fence and preserve that which is contained, whereas
their tithes and offerings did more, because they procured increase of the
heap, out of which they were taken; And for this he cites Malach. 3. Bring
ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in my house,
(deal truly, defraud not God of his due but bring all,) and prove if I will
not open unto you the windows of heaven, and power down upon you an
unmeasurable blessing. On which words Rabbi Bechai writing on Deuteronomy. 26. says:
Although it be unlawful to prove or tempt the Lord; for a man must not say I
will perform such a commandment, to the end I may prosper in riches, for it
is written Deuteronomy. 6.16. ye shall not tempt the Lord your God etc: yet says he
here, and the Jews also in Massech Tagnanith cap. 1. fol. 9. There is an
exception for payment of tithes and works of mercy in this text of Malach. 3.
and that other Proverb. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy substance etc, where
Iarchi and Ralbag understand it to be spoken of tithes, and Bechai also works
of charity to the poor; and for proof of a blessing to the performance of
these precepts, Ralbag applies that in 2. Chron. 31.10. Since the people began
to bring the offering into the house of the Lord, we have eaten, and have been
satisfied, and there is left in abundance, for the Lord has blessed his
people, and this abundance that is left: so on Deuteronomy 14.22. they write thus,
(...) i. Pay tithes that thou may be rich, pay tithes that thou come not to
poverty. This is recorded by Ramban, and Bechai, and others, and in diverse
places in the Talmud, as Massech Sabuth cap. 16. fol. 119. Tagnanith cap. 1.
fol. 9. on Number. 5.10. Iarchi thus glosseth, (...) i. The man that gives to the
Priest the gifts that are fit for him, he shall have riches in abundance: and
so it is in Massech Beracoth, fol. 63. And Baal Haturim on Deuteronomy. 12.19. Take
heed thou forsake not the Levite: he ioynes to that ver. 20. (...) i. When God
shall enlarge thy border, and to signify that a man's gift does enlarge him,
Prove. 18.16. Meaning a gift to the Priest. Deuteronomy. 16.4. And thou shall rejoice
in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy maid, and the
Leuite, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are within
thy gates. Here says Iarchi, and Bechai on Genesis 37.1. The Leuite, the
stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, (...) i. four that belong to me,
answerable to four that belong to thee: Thy son, thy daughter, thy man, thy
maids (...) If thou comfort those that are mine, I will comfort those that are
thine. Deuteronomy. 26.11. And thou shall rejoice in every good thing which the Lord
thy God has given thee. To this is annexed (says Baal Haturim) when thou have
made an end of tithing, ver. 12. (...) i. For by reason of the due payment of
tithes, thou shall rejoice in every good thing, according as they say, pay
tithes that thou may prosper. And to this purpose the same Author on Leuit.
4.14. and Iarchi on Numb. 5.12. have other speeches borrowed from the Talmud,
Massech: Beracoth, cap. 9. fol. 63. all which tend to show, that a blessing
belongs to those that duly pay their tithes.

But it will be said, what is all this to us? these things were spoken to the
Jews, and of their times. Ans. Yes, they pertain to us also, for God is no
changeling: as they show us how he would bless his own people, if they did
maintain his Priests and Levites as he appointed; so seeing God respects his
Ministers now no less then in those times, they do also signify, that he
will bless us too, if we do maintain them as he has appointed, the one is a
service and sacrifice no less acceptable unto him, then the other, as our
Apostle also shows most excellently in Philip. 4.10.11. and 18.19, etc.
Again on the other side, many are the punishments recorded by the Jews, which
follow the contempt and neglect of payment of tithes. Therefore says Iarchi on
Numb. 5.10, etc: (...) He that detaines the tithe, so that it is not given in
the due season thereof, in the end his land shall yield him but the tithe of
that it used to yield, agreeable with that sentence of St Austin De tempore,
sermo 219. Si tu decimam non dederis, tu ad decimam revoceris. And to this
effect they have an History related by the Commentor on the Talmud in Massech:
Tagnanith, cap. 1. fol. 9. and also by R. Bechai on Deuteronomy. 14. Of a certain
rich man that had land, which yearly bare him a thousand measures of corn,
whereof he duly paid an hundred for the tithe: At his death he gives this land
to his son, with a charge to do the like in tithing, as he had done before
him, which he did the first year after his fathers death, for the land brought
forth a thousand measures, as before, and he gave an hundredth thereof for the
tithe. But the second year he having an evil eye, began to think with
himself, that the tithe was a great matter, and therefore he forbade the
laying out of it. The next year after, the increase of that field was much
diminished, and it afforded but an hundred measures in all, in regard whereof
he was exceedingly grieved and discontented: His neighbors therefore hearing
of this, came unto him, clothed in white raiment, to make merry with him, and
to comfort him, to whom he said, It seems to me that you solace your selves,
and rejoice at my loss. But they answered him, should we be grieved for thee,
that have brought all this evil upon thy self? Wherefore then did thou not
set forth thy tithe duly as thou should have done? Consider how that when the
land came first into thy hand; thou wast the husbandman, or master and owner
thereof, and God Almighty the Priest; for the Tithe was his part to dispose of:
But now forasmuch as thou have not set forth his part unto him, God he is
become the householder, and owner of the ground, and thou the Priest; for thy
field does not yield as it yielded before, a thousand measures, but he has set
apart for thee an hundredth measures. And this is that which is written, Numb.
5.10. And every man's hallowed things shall be his; that is to say, when he
divides not as he ought, he shall have nothing himself, but the holy things
that is, the tithe. And for this cause our wisemen affirm, he that witholdes
his tithe, in the end it will come to pass, that he himself shall have
nothing but the tithe: as it is written Esai 5.10. For ten acres of vines shall
yield one bath, and the seed of an Homer shall yield an Ephah: that is the
tithe: For an Ephah is the tenth part of an Homer, as R. Chimki and Iarchi
declare on this text. And thus far also the Commentor on the Talmud. Again
Esai 5.8. Woe unto them that join house to house, and lay field to field, till
there be no place that ye may be placed by your selves in the midst of the
earth: Iarchi his gloss here is this: etc: (...) As though they thought that
neither God has any part in the land, nor the poor; his part in the tithes
they spoil, and rob the poor of their land, that they alone may dwell
therein. And after he shows the punishment hereof, That by reason of famine,
their houses and land shall be left desolate, as in ver. 9. Likewise Amos 4.6.
And therefore have I given you cleanenesse of teeth in all your cities, and
scarcenes of bread in all your places. Chimki here writes thus: As ye have
deprived my house of offerings and tithes, so have I deprived you of bread and
flesh in all your cities and places where you dwell. (...) requiting like for
like. And hence it is also that in Massecheth Sabath cap. 2. fol. 32. they say,
that through omission of paying Tithes, the heavens are restrained from sending
down dew and rain in due season, to which they apply that in Job 24.19. And
Iarchi writing on Deuteronomy. 14.21.22. compared with 2 King. 19.26. makes this the
cause, that the corn is blasted before it be grown up: and Bechai, that the
foreign enemy does invade an dspoyle the land, etc: And though the Jews paid
not their Tithe in the fields, but only after the fruits were carried into
their barnes; as it is said Deuteronomy. 26.13. I have brought the hallowed thing out
of mine house, etc: Yet Aben-Ezra and Chaskuni there teach, that it was a
profanation and contempt, to dispose of any part thereof till the tithe was
paid. And Maimon on Massec: Demai, c. 1. fol. 11. says, that he that does so,
is guilty of death by the hand of heaven. In Exodus 13.13. and 34.20. where it
is said concerning the firstborn of the Ass, if thou redeem him not, thou
shall break his neck. Salomoh Iarchi has this conclusion: (...) i. He that
spoils the Priests goods, his own goods also shall be spoiled.) The inference
stands thus; If the owner will not redeem his Ass, by paying the Priest a
lamb, then the Priest shall loose the lamb, which is his due, and then also
the owner shall loose his Ass, which is more; for it is said he shall break
his neck.

In like manner the Countreyman sometimes argues in an humor, and says, rather
then I Will pay so much tithe, my ground shall lie fallow, or I Will spend in Law
ten times the worth of it: If this be done, then the Priest must needs come
short of the tithe, which is his due, and then also the Countreyman shall come
short of the fruits and profits which are more: So that referring this case to
that of the firstborn of an Ass, we may conclude with Iarchi, He that
spoils the Priests goods, does also spoil his own goods. But the Scripture
says, Deuteronomy. 25.4. Thou shall not muzzle the ox that treads out the corn.
And again Deuteronomy. 22.10. Thou shall not plowe with an Ox and an Ass, the
clean, and unclean, together. For why, says Bavl Haturim on that place, when
the Ass looks upon the Ox, and sees him chew the cud, he frets and repines
at him, (as many do at the Priests maintenance,) because he thinks that he
always feeds, when he does but only chew the cud. Malach. 3.8. Will a man
spoil his goods; yet have ye spoiled me; but ye say, wherein have we
spoiled thee; In tithes and offerings ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have
spoiled me, even this whole nation.

Here (says Iarchi) The tithes and offerings whereof ye spoil the Priests and
Levites, (...) i. That is the spoiling of me. And Chimki on those words, This
whole nation, says: It seems that for other transgressions before named,
they were not all equal in them, but for the matter of tithes and offerings
they were all alike culpable, and therefore he says (this whole nation.)
Whereby it appears, that sacrilege is a general and bewitching sin, a fact
of evil conscience, and of perilous and pernicious consequence. It robs God,
it robs man, the living, the dead, them that are yet unborn. The living,
pastor and People, the Pastor of his portion, the People of the food of their
souls; The dead, patrons, founders, and benefactors, of their honor and
honorable memories, who have in their times over and be de tithes, out of the
bounty and zeal of their hearts, given many great and rich endowments to the
Church, and dedicated them to sacred uses; yea they rob them that are yet
unborn, to wit posterity and succeeding ages, which have a right in these
things; Nam dicata religioni iuris divini sunt non humani. But what speak I of
posterity, which as yet are not come? or of the dead which are now gone? and
can do neither good, nor hurt; for a living dog is better then a dead Lion:
yet as Joseph's brethren, when their father was dead, came unto him, and
entreated him first, in their fathers name, and after said unto him, Genesis
50.17. We pray thee forgive the trespass of the servants of thy fathers God,
meaning (as Iarchi notes) that if he would not forgive them for their fathers
sake, who was now dead, yet he should consider that his fathers God lived for
ever, and they were his servants, and therefore to be respected: so though our
forefathers, honorable founders, and benefactors are dead, and we forget
them, yet the God of our fathers still lives, able to right his own, and his
servants wrongs. Solomon says, Prove. 20.25. It is a snare for a man to devour
that which is sanctified, and after the vows to enquire. On which words that
worthy Knight Sr Henry Spelman in his book de non temerandis Ecclesijs, very
well observes, that a snare has three properties 1. to catch suddenly 2. to
hold surely, and 3 to destroy certainly, as he shows in the example of Vzzah,
Vzziah, 2, Chron. 26.19. Jeroboam, 1. Kings 13.4. Corah, and others. R. Levi
Ben Gershom on Iosuah, 7. speaking of the sin of Achan, who is also called
Achar 1. Chron. 2.7. because he troubled Israel, teaches this lesson; That in
every congregation assembled together, one ought to hinder another from sinning
against God: for sometimes a whole company is punished for the sin of one
private person, for Achan (says he) transgressed in the accursed thing, and
wrath came upon the whole congregation; And for this cause the law commands
Levit. 19.17. Thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to
sin.

In 2 Samuel 1.9. Saul being in distress when he desired the Amalekite to slay
him, says: (...) i. Anguish is come upon me. Thereby Chimki understands the
horror and punishment of his sin, for murdering the Priests of Nob, 1 Samuel
22.18. (...) i. That did wear the broydered coat, Exodus 18.4. And in this
sense also R. Bechai, takes it on Levit. 14. fol. 143. And hence it is that the
Jews faigne, that for his fact done to Amalek when he spared Agag and the best
sheep, etc: 1. Samuel. 15.9. A voice sounded from heaven and said unto him, be
not thou just overmuch. Eccles. 7.16. so for this of Nob the city of the
Priests which he smote with the edge of the sword, both child and suckling 1.
Samuel 22.19. it was said likewise, be not thou wicked overmuch, Eccles: 7.17.
If it be overmuch wickedness, occidere Presbyteros, to slay the Lords Priests,
as Saul did here, and Dioclesian in his time, Niceph. lib. 7. cap. 3. Then
much more occidere Presbyterium, to slay the Priesthood, by taking away the
maintenance, as Julian did. Theod. Lib. 3. cap. 6. and Niceph. Lib. 10. cap. 5.
And in this sin of Saul, Doeg also that was the instrument, was ensnared, and
therefore the Jews observe here, 1 Samuel. 22.18. that for (...) his name is
written by contraction (...) a fish; for he was taken in the net as a fish; for
when the Sergeants that were commanded, would not move their hand to fall upon
the Priests of the Lord, then the King faid to Doeg, turn thou and fall upon
the Priests, as who should say, thou have accused them, do thou slay them: so
does Chimki paraphrase on this place. Rabbi Saadiah Geon on Dan. 5.1. says of
Baltashar. (...) That his name signifies a searcher of treasure; for he
profaned the treasure and holy vessels of the Sanctuary; and to him and to his
company, Chimki applies that in Ier. 51.39. I will make them drunken, that they
may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, says the Lord Where,
says he, other drunkards sleep in their drunkenesse and after wake again; but
these that made themselves merry in drinking and carowzing in the vessels of
the Sanctuary, they slept a perpetual sleep, and never waked any more: for
they dyed in the midst of their drunkenesse, as it is written Dan. 5.30. The
same night was Baltashar the King of the Chaldeans slain.

It is reported in the Talmud Massech: Ioma, cap. 7. fol. 69. that Alexander
the great being solicited and persuaded by the Samaritans to spoil the Temple
of Jerusalem, when he came thither, and saw Simeon the high Priest, who being
clothed with the Priests garments, came forth to meet him, he presently
lighted down from his chariot, and prostrating himself to the earth, embraced
him with all humble and submissiue reverence, and being demanded the reason, he
answered, (...) i. The similitude of this man's form gets the victory before me
in the time of my war: that is, as R. Bechai expounds it on Exodus 31. (...)
i. That it was an Angel that appeared unto him in the likeness of the Priest.
Whereby it came to pass, that Alexander desisting from his purpose, did not
only favor the Jews, and spare their Temple, but also gave the Samaritans
their enemies into their hands, whom they with diverse kinds of torments did put
to death, and made a festival day for a remembrance, that they which sought
the ruin and destruction of God's house, were themselves brought to utter
desolation.

How detestable the sin of sacrilege is, it will the better appear, if
together with the punishment we consider the manifold pernicious consequents
thereof, as namely, the decay of learning, the ruin of Religion, and stopping
the mouth of the Gospel, the bane of hospitality, the desolation of the poor,
the dilapidation of Churches, the contempt of the ministry of the Church, and
neglect of all goodness, etc: For if the honos be taken away, the onus will
soon fall to the ground, if the oil be withdrawn, the lamp of the Sanctuary
will soon be quenched. And as the Jews write in their moral and dtuine
Aphorisms, (...) If there be no meal there is no law; no law, no law, no
meal: as it is in Pirke Auoth cap. 3. ol. 8. and Baal Haturim on Deuteronomy. 32.1.
At such time as the Tabernacle was built, though men were so liberal in their
voluntary contribution, that Moses was feign to stay them, Exodus 36.6. Yet as
Baal Haturim notes, he gave especial commandment to bring oil for the light,
that the lamps might always burn, Exodus 27.20. and Leuit. 24.2. because
(says he) this was a daily and continual charge, and required a common purse.
And whereas men's affections are mutable, and oftentimes their devotion soon
cold, therefore also the portion of the Priests and Levites was not left to the
will of the people, but God himself by his Law provided for them. And when the
people failed in this duty, God's Vicegerents here on earth stirred them up to
obedience; whence it was that good Ezechiah, 2 Chronicles. 31.4. commanded the
people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give a part to the Priests and Levites, that
they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord; that is, says Iarchi on this
place, (...) with more alacrity, that whilst their maintenance was duly
provided for the^, they might chearefully, without distraction, labor in the
Law of God; for the Law (says he) was given to those that did eat Manna, and
next unto them are they that do eat the Therumah: that is, as Baal Haturim
expresses it, and R. Bechai on Exodus 16.16. and 25.2. (...) He that
establishes the law, God Almighty prouides him his food without toil, as
those that did eat Manna. R, Chaskuni also speaks to this purpose on Number.
18.20. I might be copious in this kind, but I hasten to an end. It is written
Prove. 28.24. He that robs his father and mother, and says, it is no
transgression, is the companion of a man that destroys. The Jews as Iarchi
here, and Ramban on Leuit. 19.32. from Talmud Sanhedrim, cap. 11. fol. 102: do
expound this text thus: He that robs God his father, and the Church his mother,
is the companion of Jeroboam the son of Nebat; that made Israel to sin. For
as Jeroboam made of the basest of the people to be the Priests, 1 Kings 12.31.
and 13.33. So these by taking away the tithes and revenues of the Church would
make the Priests to be the basest of the people. And as Jeroboam by those
means, says R. Levi Ben Gersham on that text, (...) i. Did draw the hearts of
the common people, in that he freed them from the ordinary payment of tithes to
the Levites etc. So also the sacrilegious Politicians of our age, may happily
by the like practice, win favor with the people, as Jeroboam did. But cursed
is that policy that fights against piety? for what says the Scripture; 1.
Kings. 13.34. This thing turned to sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to
root it out and destroy it from the face of the earth. But on the other side,
those that have been gracious patrons and benefactors, noursing fathers, and
noursing mothers of the Church, careful of religion and the maintenance
thereof, God has ever multiplied his blessings upon them and their posterity,
as it is evident in diverse of the good Kings of Israel: among others, to
instance only in one, it is the observation of the Jews concerning David, that
when he had sinned in numbering the people, God said to the prophet, Go and
tell David, 2. Samuel. 24.12. and 1. Chron. 21.10. giving him no other title
but only David, as Chimki here notes: But when he had a purpose in his heart
to build an house for the Lord, then he said, go and tell my servant David, 2.
Samuel. 7.5. and 1. Chro. 17.4. showing what account he makes of such, and how
acceptable they are to him, when they seek his glory and his Churches good.
And for this cause though David intending to build an house for the Lord, could
not effect it, yet as Iarchi shows on 1. Chron. 17.10. God accepting his
endeavor for the deed it self, did therefore bless him and his seed after
him, and built up his house for ever, according to the promise Psalm. 99.4.36.
His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me. 37 It
shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful witness in
heaven. This in type was first performed in the flourishing Kingdom of Solomon
the son of David, of whom says Iarchi on 1. Chron. 29.23. As the moon is at
the full in the fifteenth day of the month, so was David's throne in Solomon,
that was the fifteenth generation from Abraham, but after was diminished and
obscured like the moon unto the days of Zedechiah whose light was made
darkness, who had his eyes put out, and was after brought to Babel, 2 Kings
25.7. But in truth this was fully verified in the eternal Kingdom of Christ
the true son of David, who also in the days of his flesh, following and
exceeding the example of David, testified his fervent love and zeal to the
house and Temple of God: when he was twelve years old, he was found in the
Temple in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them and asking them
questions. Luke 2.46. He taught daily in the Temple Luke 19.47. He cast out
those that bought and sold in the Temple, and said to them, It is written, my
house shall be called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of
thieves. Math. 21.12.13. Esa. 56.7. Ier. 7.11. And for the tithes he said,
these things ye ought to have done, and not to have left the other undone.
Luke 11.42. Math. 23.23.

And lastly teaching us our duty to God, and Caesar, has commended unto us
that sacred admonition. Mark. 12.17. Give to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods. Agreeable to which precept of our
Savior, the Jews also, (that I may end as I began) have a sentence among
their divine and moral Aphorisms, which is thus expressed in Pirke Aboth cap.
3.

(...)

Give unto him of that which is his, for both thou and all that thou have are
his: So it is said by David; for all things come of thee, and of thine own
hand have we given thee, Chron. 29.14. For who has first given to him, says
St. Paul, Romans 11.35. And therefore with praise and thanksgiving to God the
Author and giver of all blessings, let us here conclude, and shut up all with
the words of the Apostle, Romans 11.36. (...). For of him, and through him, and
for him are all things, to him be glory for ever. Amen. (...)

Let the absence of the Author from the Press, and the difficulty of the
character of the written Copy, excuse these faults to the courteous Reader,
which are thus to be corrected.
PAge 8. line 10, for son 3, read some 3. p. 9. l. 1. for (...) r. (...). p.
11. l. 2. for (...), r. (...). p. 93. l 20. for (...), r. (...). p. 17. l. 19.
for dayde, r. paid. p. 19. l. 15. for which, r. with. p. 24. l. 21. for (...),
r. (...). p. 27. l. 23. for (...), r. (...). p. 27. l. 28, for (...) r. (...).
p. 31. l. 20. for Deuteronomy. 8.16. r. Numb. 8.16. p. 33. l. 19. for Massech. cap. 2.
r. Massech, Shabath cap 2. p. 36. l. 28. for Deuteronomy. 2.8. r. Deuteronomy. 12.8. p. 41.
l. 30. for pays, r. paid. p. 43. l. 2. for (...), r. (...). p. 45: l. 5. for
Aben Ezrah, r. Aben Ezra. p. 46. l. 2. for (...), r. (...). p. 52. l. 16. for
(...), r. (...). p. 55. l. 10. for Heraim, r. Zeraim. p. 73. for above, r.
alone. p. 77. l. 21. for the tithe, r. the tenth of the tithe. p. 84. l. 30.
for whereof, r. whereas. p. 92. l. 19. for (...), r. (...). p. 96. l. 5. for
Ezrah 8, r. Ezra 8. p. 96. l. 9. for Iebamoth cap. 2. r. Iebamoth cap. 9. p.
77. l. 27. omittuntur haec verba; and some the second and third tithe one:
Sequitur, which last opinion. Et haec omittuntur p. 84. l. 8: Iarchi gives not
jointly the second tithe to the Leuite stranger, etc: but expressly and
severally the first tithe to the Leuite, and the poor man's tithe to the
stranger, fatherless, and widow: Sequitur And this testimony, etc: p. 98. l.
12. for (...), r. (...). p. 102. l. 2. for (...), r. (...) p. 102. l. 14. for
(...), r. (...). p. 102. l. 14. for (...), r. (...). p. 102. l. 15. for (...),
r. (...). p. 105. l. 29. for (...), r. (...). p. 107. l. 14. for quae, r. quia.
p. 107, l. 30. for (...), r. (...). p. 108. l. 31. for the first part, r. the
fifth part. p. 109. l. 4. for first part, r. fifth part. p. 113. l. 1. for (...),
r. (...). p. 113. l. 11. for (...), r. (...). p. 120. l. 6. for (...), r.
(...). p. 120. l. 8. for (...), r. (...). p. 122. l. 13. (...), r. (...). p.
125. l. 7. for Geofayle, r. Ieofayle. p. 133. l. 1. for wholly, r. holy. p.
135. l. 12. for vice, r. wife, Numb. 5.12. p. 144. l. 15. for (...), r. (...).
p. 140. l. 9. The Answer to the censure should immediately follow the censure in
page 133. line 20. p. 148. l. 30. for Syriacke, r. Arabique. p. 150. l. 2. for
(...) r. (...) p. 151. l. 6 for Termoth, r. Therumoth. p. 159. l. 25. for cap.
18. fol. 90. r. cap. 10. fol. 17. p. 164. l. 1. for (...) r. in radic. (...).
p. 166. l. 22. for (...) r. (...) p. 167. l. 5. for never, r. near. p. 170. l.
7. for Genesis 17. r. Numb. 17. p. 174. l. 20. for Deuteronomy. 16.4. r. Deuteronomy. 16.14. p.
179. l. 31. for Goods, r. Gods. p. 182. l. 7. for Exodus 18.4. r. Exodus 28.4.


