MORE NEWS OF THE DVKE OF BRUNSWICK. Relating The late and full overthrow
given by him to two Regiments of Monsieur Tilly. The continuance of Bethlem
Cabors warlike preparations. Some new propositions made by the Emperor unto
him. Count Mansfields march out of Embdenland, unto Meppen. With other news of
the Prince of (...) and Spinolaes last designs. Together with Diverse other
particulars, from several places AND The Continuation of our former News.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, and William Sheffard, 1623.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR FORMER news out of Turkey, Hungary, Austria, Bohemia,
Silesia, Saxony, Hassia, the Pallatinate, the Low Countries, and diverse other
places of the upper and lower Germany.
THere has in some former books, been mention made of the Emperors
proffering of the upper Hungary unto Bethlem Gabor, upon condition that he
would lay down Arms, and suffer the Emperor to enjoy the rest quietly: but
this proffer being as it seems refused, and Bethlem Gabor continuing his
preparations; there has it seems been advice taken since the Pallatine or
chief Governor of Hungary and other of the States coming unto Vienna, to
alter the person of the King of Hungary (though the kingdom should still
remain unto the house of Austria) which was by consulting how to make the
Emperors Son King of Hungary upon his fathers resignation. That so, as
Bethlem Gabors quarrel has been partly personal to the Emperor, as well as
titular, against the King of Hungary; much of the earnestness might this way
be broken, by altering the person of the King, with whom he maintained the
seud; which new King also, might likewise upon other and easier terms,
entertain a treaty of composition, then the Majesty of an Emperor might
readily stoop unto. And this great design to have been agreed upon, before
the Hungarians departure homeward, (who went to prepare the subjects against
the next Diet, to accept of this alteration) the letters from Vienna dated June
20, intimate unto us.

But whither this that follows be any thing to that purpose we cannot tell;
that is, whether this messenger was sent to propound this business unto the
Duke of Bauaria, and to prepare his assistance to the election of the Emperors
^^^^^, seeing it does also some way concern him, to divert Bethlem Gabors
Friends, or to make him more enemies, he being as formidable unto the Duke as
unto the Emperor. Howeuer thus the former letters write, that the Count of
Hohenzolleren was in great poast have presently upon the conclusion of the
former design for the Emperors son with the Hungarians, sent unto Munchen
unto the Duke of Bauaria. The letters name no more of the errand, but matters
of great importance and secrecy. From which town of Munchen the Count of
Hohenzolleren aforesaid (having treated with the Duke) is to go toward the
Imperial Diet either at Franckford or C^llen, as the Hungarians do to theirs
at Presburgh: And it is thought that if all hold on stilll, this business
shall also be propounded unto the Princes or their Commissioners, that are
there to meet at that Diet.

The prosecution against those of the religion in Bohemia, is not much
slackened in the mean time, And concerning those of the lower Palatinate, the
letters from Straesburgh lune 23. relate; how that his Imperial Majesty has
written to the town of Spiers; that they should freely and forthwith deliver
over all such places, as have been hitherto, and now are possessed by
Heretics (the style that he vouchsafes the Protestants) into the hands of
Catholic professors, and principally, has he recommended the godly Capuchi^
^riers (to whose order the Emperor seems to be much addicted) to be placed in
them. In the same letters, he has also given order, that there be dilligent
and strict enquiry made, whether any townsmen of Spiers* has any good^ of any
subject of the Palatinate, under his roof or custody, which have been in
these last wars sent thither out of the Palatinate to be kept there for the
more safety, which device seeing it was done since the wa^s, and the proscribing
of their Prince, and the giving away of his country; the Emperor will not
suffer that the goods be kept by any subject of the Empire, but be delivered
over, as confiscated goods, unto the Imperial officers, that with them those
Garrisons now left in the Palatinate might be paid: which has been partly
performed already. Thus far the lettters.

As for other business of the Palatinate; whereas upon the coming in of Don
Guilielmo, the new Governor of Franckendall, and of the other towns left by
Don Cordoua, there had been a new and intolerable taxation laid upon the
country of 45000. Rix Dollars a month, which was to continue for whole 18.
months, (that is during the whole time of the cessation of Arms) this time is
now by the gracious endeavors of his Majesty of great Britain shortened, being
to continue no more then 3. months, and yet is that sum of 45000, brought
down to 25000. And after this, as if all there were there secure and quiet,
Don Gulielmo has betaken himself to his solace this hot season with his wife
and family, in some garden houses at Creatznach.

The news in the other part of the Empire, is most about the unruly Cosacks;
who have made themselves so welcome, that the country of Silesia is resolved,
whatsoever come of it, to suffer no more of their Nation to come amongst them.
The S^^^^^ therefore and great men of the Country, have in their own name (it
seems) with the general good liking of the whole Country, every where affixed
Proclamations to incite one another, to take up Arms, and to keep out those
Cosacks which are coming after. The tenor is to this purpose: That seeing
these idle and unnecessary hangbies and followers of the Cosacks Army,
wenches and boys, have many times heretofore (being winked at) most shamefully
pillaged and spoiled their Country, to the great impouerishment and disgrace of
the Inhabitants, that these outrages are unfit to be tolerated by free men any
more: we wish and advise therefore all the serviceable horse and foot of this
Country to be ready to take the Alarm upon the first approach of the next
Cosacks, that they may by their public Arms conjoined, rep^ll or destroy so
wicked a people. And this is their Proclamations, which the Princes and States
have given out withal, that they will answer unto the Emperor* And thus they
write from Bresl^w in Silesia it self, June 20. Which way therefore these
12000 Cosacks, which have been levied by the Prince of Rac^^^d, and left upon
the borders of Silesia and Poland, will get into the Empire, does not yet
appear; which may be the reason that those 12000 Cosacks are said to have
enquartered themselves in and about the town and Duchy of Crossen by
Franckford upon Oder, (which belongs unto the Marquess of Brandenburg, and
touches upon Silesia) as if they would not adventure to come into Silesia
without the Countries le^ue, or the Emperors peremptory commission. This
resolution of the S^^estans to keep out the Cosacks, is confirmed also by the
letters from Prage* June 20.

Thus some of the Emperors friends having been hitherto as troublesome, as
others of his enemies; there have been many consultations held to make a fair
end of these foul matters. Half (that is the upper Hungary) has been as it is
said, offered to Bethlem Gabor before; but that seeming to little for him, who
in title had once all; that is the title of the whole kingdom of Hungary, and
having so sure a friend of the Turk, who has promised to reestate him in the
whole kingdom once again, maugre his enemies; there have been other and more
silken propositions made unto him under hand; and namely the Emperors own and
only daughter, has been offered him to wife, she having this twelve month
(or thereabouts) been a widdower. This having been pri^ady and ouertly done,
we have not yet heard of any success; or that he being a man of fifty years
of age, and one who has no apparent hope of issue from his own body, has
listened to a treaty of marriage with a fair Lady. But on the contrary rather
we hear, that he suspecting that it was not all of good will, and knowing that
he has lost so much time, as he should take to consider of it, did in the
mean time go on with his warlike preparations, as fast as ever. Lately
therefore has he drawn down his forces of the Walachians, in the upper
Hungary, nearer to the borders of the Empire* and his aids of Turks and
^artars are sent to Cantsia, and Erlarre. Thus they write from Vienna, lunc 18.
This Canisia is seated in the upper Hungary upon the little river Zala, near
the place where it falls into the reater flood Drauus, or the Thrab, which river
Drauus hereabouts parts Hungary from Styria, which is part of the Emperors
dominions.

While all this was a doing, the same letters mention a treason to have been
intended against Bethlem Gabor, which was to make him away by poison. Who was
the author of this we hear not, but the discovery was made by the honesty of
his own Cook, who should (peradventure) have been corrupted to have poisoned
his Lord in a dish of meat or broth.

The same Letters likewise relate, that after all the former Treaties, Offers,
and Propositions, made vnthis Bethlem Gabor, he perseuering notwithstanding in
his former intentions, had lately minted both gold and silver Coins, impaling
upon them his own Arms of the Principality of Transylvania, etc with the
Arms of the Kingdom of Hungary, writing himself upon that Coin, King of
Hungary ^^lect: by which it seems he means to make good his former Election
notwithstanding his after relinquishment of that Title unto the Emperor, in
lieu of diverse Towns and Honors conferred upon him by the Emperor, both in
Hungaria, where he holds great Wardein, etc. and in Silesia, where he is Duke
of Opp^lin and Ratibor: which Title how he will be able to make good, time
will show.

Concerning the Duke of Saxony and his proceedings, we hear no more then
this, how that he having an Army of about 24000 men of his own in a
readiness, it has been lately thought, and yet is, that he has an intention
to form a Camp in his own Country of Duringen, that so he might be near
both to Tilly and the Duke of Brunswicke, whatsoever should happen.

Lodowicke Landtgraue of Darmstadt, in whose quarrel, as it is thought, Tilly
came into Hessenland, is still busy about fortifying his Town of G^es^n,
fearing he may have use of his walls.

Turn we now unto Monseur Tilly and his designs, of whose removing his
former Quarters further into Hessenland, from the Duke of Brunswicke, and his
taking up the passages against him, and his beginning to leave the Land of
Hessen altogether, we gave you a very large Discourse in our last book printed
July 18. After which, thus they write of him from diverse place, July 5, and 6.
Monseur Tilly is now at last quite removed out of the Bishopric of
Hierschvels in the Land of Hessen, and he will do his best endeavor (as it is
thought) to cut off Duke Christian of Brunswickes passage, from going upwards,
upon which occasion drawing nearer one to another, they may happen to encounter.

He had sometimes before, quartered part of his Forces in the Duke of Saxonies
dominions of Duringen, about Isenach, which he has now also quit, re^y^ing
his Forces back again through Hessenland, to lie at Werra, expecting some
Forces, which were to come in unto him, where of those Crabats, which lay about
Wormbes in the Palatinate, were first looked for: who having been at his last
coming down toward Hessenland quite cashierd, and they upon that, being
marched upwards a whole days journey above Nuremberg in the upper Palatinate,
are now with all haste and earnestness called back again, to come to his
aid. And of their return through the Bishopric of Bambarg, we have by
other Letters heard how that they would not out from thence, until they had
gotten money of the Country people, which was the last that we heard of them.

Another Friend which Monseur Tilly expected to come with all speed unto him
was the Baron of Anholt, of whose march and neernesse to him, we told you in
our last, since when, we hear for certain, that the Landtgraue Maurice of
Hessen, has with 14000 men way laid him, and stopped up all the passages in his
own Country, to keep him from joining with Tilly. So that Anholt bringing
but 6000 with him, how likely they are to force their passage that way, through
14000 men laid with advantage, is easy to judge.

After this, Monseur Tilly, partly for that he was extremely pressed with
hunger, and partly for suspicion of Brunswicke neernesse and strength, and his
jealousy of his intention to make upwards, he quite removed with his whole
Army into the Bishopric of Eischvelt.

So that as on the one side he freed the Landtgraue of Hessen of his present
fear of him, and gave him liberty withal, to employ those Forces (which he
was before enforced to keep for the guard of his own person and palace, about
the Town of Cassel) in blocking up the passages against Anholt. So on the
other side has he both before and behind him, done his best endeavor to
stop up all the passages by which Brunswicke might come at him.

Leaving therefore the Land of Hessen with some few Forces only in it, in
Garrison, to assure certain places unto him, as at Witzenhowsen by name* he
left 500 Musketeers: At Allendorss 400 Musketeers, and at Eishwege as many,
he afterward marched in a good order, and in fair Battaglia out of the Land.

The Fort of Wanfreid they in their way spoiled and forsook, for having no use
of it themselves, they left it as vselesse to their Enemies.

These four a^ore mentioned Towns, of Witzenho^sen, Allendorss, Eis^hwege,
and Wanfriede, are on the East Confines of Hessenland, still touching upon
Duringen, Allendorss, and Eis^hwege, and being on the Western banckes of the
River W^^^a, on Has^^a side, and the other two on the East, toward Duringen,
and all four are in the way from Isenach, Cru^tzbergh and Ber^ka (where his
Quarters last lay) toward the County of Please and Bishopric of Eischvelt,
whither he then went, which is to the North of Hessenland. The Town of
Duderstadt, whereabouts Brunswicke lies, being left to the East and right hand
of him, and still somewhat before him.

And thus with driving away the Cattle, in getting up all the meat, Corn,
flesh, wine, and all such provision that Soldiers need, and use thus to make
booty of: they drew all up into the Bishopric of Eischvelt, all I say save
only the three insatiable Regiments (as our Le^e^s call them) of the Duke of
Saxen La^^nburg, the Duke of Holstem, and of Furstenberg, who being used to
pillaging, (for which they have been observed more then the rest of their
fellows) would not follow the Army, but falling to their old trade of
foraging, they came short home: of which adventure, with the manner also of the
archieuement, we shall now tell you more by and by.

We left Duke Christian in our last, at the Fort of Duderstad^ in the
^ishopricke of Eischvelt, of his march thither, with the order of his Army, we
have since received this following particular.

The 16 of June (stylo novo) the Duke Christian began to march upwards with
his whole Forces, being 28000 Horse and Foot, which fair Army was divided
into three Squadrons or Divisions: the Vantguard, the Battle, and the
Arrierguard: The Van was led by Duke William of Saxen We^mar: the Duke of
Brunswicke himself had the m^ine Battle or body of the Army. The Re^re was
brought up by Collonell Kniphowsen. In this fair and wa^like equipage, the 28
of June, they by fair and easy marches, came into the Bishopric of
Eischvelt, all the three Divisions together, both Horse, Foot, Baggage, Cannon,
and Ammunition, so that they were 12. days in this march from Halberstad^ to
Eischvelt.

This order of their march, with their number, strengths, provisions, and
resolutions, was (as the Letters do report) by private intelligence of some
Camp-Traytors, particularly described unto Mons^ Tilly, which was at last
discovered by an intercepted Letter, with a further practice also of
correspondency with the Enemy, how a plot should be laid to deliver the Duke
of Brunswicke into Mons: Tillies hands alive.

The Discovery being thus happily made, the Traitor was by his own hand
writing found out, apprehended, and sent prisoner unto Duke Christians Brother
the Duke of Brunswicke, residing at his town Wolfenbuttle.

Thus the whole state of the Camp being made known unto the Enemy, caused the
Duke to double his guards, and look to his watches more narrowly, and to
entrench and to fortify himself the more strongly; whereupon followed the
building of this Fort at Duderstads, (where the Army now rested) and to lay his
men at more security, the town of Heigerstad which belongs unto the Bishop
Elector of Mentz, was for the time taken in, and soldiers quartered in it. And
thus write the several Letters from the neighbor places: Brunswicke lying
hereabouts, and Monseur Tilly having drawn his Forces as near that ^ay as
should serve his own turn for the cutting off of the others passages, and
putting between him and those places, whither he suspected Brunswicke to be
likely to march.

The Armies lay at this distance and posture some few days, awaiting some
occasion of advantage; which thus at last presented it self, after some week
or 9. days expectation.

Tilly having given order that all his Army should follow him out of Hessenland
into Eischuels, the three insatiable Regiments of the Duke of Saxen Lawenburgh,
of Holstein and Furstenberg aforementioned, would needs try their fortunes
abroad awhile; thinking first to serve their own turns of sorrage upon the
Country, and then to recover to the place appointed for the general
Rendezvous safely and time enough. With this resolution, they first of all
pillage, and set fire afterward, to the town of Almer^de and other towns in
Hessenland, which lay between their last quarters of Bercka, and the River of
Werra toward Hisch^elt aforesaid: which towns they l^^uing burnt or aburning,
they came to the town of Witzenhowsen aforesaid, where their General had left
a Garrison of his own; There passing the bridge, the Regiment of Furstenberg,
upon what occasion I know not, would needs part company, and make toward the
Camp. But the other two Regiments of Saxen Lawenburg and Holstein not thus
contented, would needs turn again to the Northwest and left hand of the
Country, contrary to their Generals directions, who suspecting that he might
have use of his whole Army, had commanded all to keep together; but these two
being horse Regiments, and for that, trusting to come in at pleasure, fell upon
the Hassi^n Lordship of Plassa or Plessen, (as we take it) Gottingen and
Bodenste^n, all which are by name expressed in our Letter. To one of which
places, the Duke of Saxen Lawenberg would needs send 20. of his horse to be
quartered. But the Boers of the Country being frighted with this approach of
their enemies, whom they knew by their colors to be the Harpies that they had
before heard of, presently took the Hubbub, and away they go with it toward
Duderstad, to Duke Christians quarters, to which the town of Dodenstein was
something too near to be adventured upon to be for^aged by a party of horse,
in such a neerenesse of an Army Royal. Hrunswicke having by these frighted
Boers, and his own Skowts, gotten true and timely intelligence of these two
Regiments thus straggling from the drove; presently sent out the Count of St^rum
with 400. Dragoniers, and 300 other horse, together with Colonel ^^^ip^owsen
with 700. Muskettier^, and 3 troops of horse; how many were o^ these last 3.
troops of horse of Colonel Kniphowsen is uncertain; but it is likely that
they altogether made up enough to encounter the two Regiments of enemies, who
might well be betwixt three or four thousand men, if not full so many.

The Boers and Skowtmasters that brought the news, leading these Brunswickers
the right way to meet with them; an ambush was presently dressed in a place of
covert and advantage; the order of the forragers was thus:

The Regiment of the Duke of Saxen Lawenberg went before, their baggage and
pillage (wi^h which they had filled 160. Wagons, as ou^ Letters mention) were
disposed in the middle, and the Duke of Holsteins Troops closed up the Reere.

They were (it seems) drawing homeward, and their martial order was not, as
it appears, any better then that of foragers uses to be, wild, and in single
Troops and scattered Bands; or at least their enemies had taken such order
with them, that the place where they meant to give them the Bon jour, and to
set upon them, should not be so ^it for Battaglia.

Thus the forrage^s marching boldly and bravely on, were at unawares fallen
into the Ambush of their enemies; which was of purpose laid in such a strait,
that those of Monseur Tilly, could by no means put out their Troops into
order of battle, no nor so much as have room or time allotted them to make a
Barricado of their own Wagons and carriages, thereby to break the force of
the assailants horse.

But being thus on a sudden fallen into their enemies claws, where they had not
field room enough to show their valor, and how much men that are in passion,
would do to keep their own; those of Brunswicke start upon every side of
them, and resolutely gave the Charge. At the first onset 3. troops of those
of Tilly, which it seems were advanct foremost, and fatally before their
fellows, they presently beat down and cut to pieces; this being done, in the
heat of blood, and the first fortune, they set upon the rest, which stood all
this while coopt up between them; So that the Brunswickers ranging the
Dragoniers in the Vantgard, the Horse in the Reere, and the Musketeers to
flancker them in the wings, on both sides the way, both before and behind, they
gave a fresh Charge: the enemy being not able to ca^^ himself into order, his
thin Fyles were presently rowted; and those that could, breaking ou^, fled
toward Willzhowsen, (their own Garrison in H^ssen-land, where they had before
passed the bridge) those of Stiru^^ and Kniphowsen following in the heat of
blood and the vnslaughter, had the killing of them, some 3. hours together (as
some Letters mention) and even to the gates of Willzhowsen: Some of the rest,
did (for the time) save themselves in a neighbor Wood, whither they escaped:
but such order was taken with them, that diverse ^owt^s and multitudes of
Boores out of the near country of Brunswick, being employed upon it they hembd
in the Wood ^ound about, so pounding them in, that what for their hand gunnes
and Firelo^kes, which the Boores car^^ed, a Soldier could not peep out of the
Wood, but the Boores would take him off presently. So that our Letters being
written presently upon the end of the battle, reports, that there are very few
of those of Tilly in the wood, that are like to come off with their lives; for
as hunger and courage drives them out, they are snapt up by these Boores, who
being vsd to kill Crows and Vermin upon their own Lands, are very good
markesmen (especially the Aim being better, where the mark is alive) with
these firelocks, which are a great deal surer shooters, and fitter for their
handling, than the warre-like Musket.

But leaving these in a wood, and to their hard fortune, the rest of Brunswicks
men returning from the Chase, found, that besides those wounded men that
escapt, and those that were killed in the way, and those in the wood, (which they
held as good as dead) that they had left 700* men dead upon the place; which
number is the general report of all those Letters, that we can hear of to
have since his coming into England, about this business. There were taken some
300. or 400. prisoners, and amongst the rest, our Letters mention these men of
Note and Office. One Sergeant Mayor to a Regiment, a Ri^^master, or a Commander
of the Horse, and another Baron besides. All the baggage, arms, and horses,
were taken, and in the 160. Wagons, were found two tun of Gold in ready money.

And this is the Description of this Battle, and we believe, the most
particular, and the largest that has come into England. What was done since
the sight, our Letters could not stay to tell us, for they bear date the 28.
of our June (that is Saturday last was three-weeks) from the Land^graue of
Hessens chief town of Cassel in Hessenland; which was within a day or two of
the time, and a days journey of the place, where, and when, this Battle was
strooken.

And for the truth of it, our Letters subioyne this conclusion; how that
besides other reports and Letters, that one Faber, a very honest and
substantial man, being at that time Burgomaster or Mayor of Budensberg, whom
the former Regiments of Saxon, Lowenburg, and Holsteyn had taken and carried
away prisoner along with them, in chains, and with the white staff of his
office in his hand, until he should pay 600. Ri^e Dollars, which they required
for his ransom. This Faber, I say, breaking loose after this Battle, and
being restored to his liberty, came here to this town of Cassel; where upon
his own word he confirmed all this; affirming moreover, that the duke of Saxon
Sawenburg himself, was likewise left dead upon the place; which adds much
also to the Victory.

Our Letters conclude with this. Thus has Brunswick given Monsieur Tilly the
first blow, and found two tun of Gold amongst the spoils. Unto which, every
man's judgment can readily add this; that Brunswick being thus bloudded, will
now fight upon all opportunities, so that we may cr^ long, happen to hear of a
maine Battle.

About the time of this Battle, other Letters tell us, that the Duke of
Brunswick had again two other fair brass Pieces new cast at the town of
Brunswick in Brunswickland, which are now carried unto him; So that he has now
had 9. very excellent brass pieces from that one Town, and is very well
provided of all necessa^i^s.

Brunswick* having thus begun to play his part* let us next speak of the Count
of Mansfeild. Of whom our former Letters of the Hessenland tell us; how that
they had heard by a Gentleman of very good account, coming out of Holland,
that Mansfeild was now ready to rise with 24000. men; so that we hope (say the
Hessian Letters) that we shall be no more troubled with the hostile excursions
and passages of Tilly, Anholt, and Cordova, from all whom, we hope that
Brunswick and Mansfeild will ere long finally froe us for this year. But
nearer home, (that is, from Amsterdam) July 10. they write; how that Count
Mansfeld did then daily send diverse of his troops toward Weppen, and that
it is thought, that he will very speedily go himself with the rest into the
field. And from other places about the same time they write; how that he was
even then with all his Forces already gone out of Embdenland toward Weppen
aforesaid, where he lies at this present, and we understand (say the Letters)
that he will there form an Army.

There come daily great store of new French Gentlemen, and others, into the Low
Countries, who go all directly toward Count Mansfield. Who has lately by
sound of Tr^mpet proclaimed a free leager, to every man that will come to serve
him; which promise of due pay and provision, in the name of his Majesty the
French King, his High^^sse the Duke of S^^^y, and of the Illustrious Lords of
the State of Venice, whose General he has pr^claimed himself; whom,
whosoever are willing to serve under his Ensigns, public notice is given,
for them to repair to Mepp^n to give in their names, and they shall be
forthwith put into pay. Thus far the letters: by which means indeed he may
quickly have 24000. men, as the former letters mention that he then had,
although something with the most, as we believe.

To countenance all this, and to make good Mansfields Proclamation, is Marco
Antonio Merigini, Ambassador for the State of Venice (where he is also an
Illustrissimo) who has been in former times Ambassador from that State unto
the Duke of Sav^y, at Thurino, new arrived (before July the 10.) at Rotterda^:
whence he directly went toward the Hagu^, and is from thence presently to go
unto Count Mansfields Camp, where the Duke of Sav^yes Ambassador is likewise;
there to treat, and give direction and assurance unto the Count of Mansfield.
Thus write the letters from Amsterdam, July 10.

Other letters from Cullen, July the 6. affirm the same of Count Mansfields
going toward M^ppen, adding withal, that there i^ ^ suspicion, of his purpose
to besiege ^inge^. So that it is very likely that the wars will be settled in
those p^^^^, say the letters. Which also mention the former Proclamation, let
up in diverse ^ownes of East Frie^land, and there abouts, for a free leager at
Mepp^n. The meaning of the free leager is, that the soldiers shall there pay no
excise for their victuall^, but shall ^^^^ it at the same rate that the S^^^^
has, and without any other imposition: by which reason, victuals will be
cheaper in the Camp, then in the Cities. This town of Meppen is upon the river
of Hase, near where it falls into the greater river of Ems, not far from
Embdenland, and between that, and the other town and Country of Lingen.

Of the King of Denmark we haere no more, but that he daily increases his
forces.

Of Don Gonsales and Cordova, they write from C^llen, July the 5. that a few
days since, three foot Companies of soldiers, crossed the Rhine at Mulheim,
as also a ship of horse: marching all, both horse and foot, with sound of Drum
and Ensigns displayed in order of Battalia, from their landing place at
Mulheim, toward Wipper-port, in the land of Bergh. And again, July the 3.
and 4. there were diverse Companies and troops, both horse and foot, which
marching by land through the City of Cullen, went thence toward Mulheim, where
they were wafted over the river Rhine. And there are more Regiments both of
horse and foot, daily expected to come out of Germany, which are to go toward
Westphalia. So that Count Mansfield, makes still Don Cordova to wait upon him.

It is here confidently reported, that the Marquis Spinola is to come to
M^lheim. Thus far the letters. In the mean time is the Marquis Spinola said
to cause a strong fort to be made upon the front^ers of Picardy, at which the
French King is said to be much displeased: but we do not yet hear of any
thing, what he means to do for the hinderance of it. From Brussel^ is there
word brought, of a Poast newly come out of Spain, which letters of Exchange
for 400. or 500000. Crowns, for the payment of Spinolaes soldiers: who
brought word also, that there were three millions of Crowns more, to be
presently made over into Italy and Flanders. Which noise of money, may the
better persuade the truth of the coming home of the silver sleet, with nine
millions (as it is reported) of which the Kings part comes to one and a half,
and the rest is for the Merchants. This is the news of Amsterdam.

The Garrison of Saint Hertoghenbosh, labors hard and daily upon their out
work and new Sconces, and will by no means suffer any man, though they come
with pasport out of these Countries, to view their fortifications. It is
thought that Spinola will very shortly be in the field.

Of Prince Henry of Nassawes expedition, in company of Mounsieur Marquet, this
we hear more, that he arrived at Emmerick, July 8. and the next day he with
Monsieur Marquet went upwards: 200. horse, and a 1000 foot, which he brought to
Emmerick, he sent toward Rees before, and with the horse which lay about
Emmerick the night before, and those of Z^lp^in and Doe^burgh, they followed up
about no one. Our town gates were here kept shut about the same time, so that
no passengers go out to tell the design any where abroad. The report is, that
these forces went to provide the town of Meurs with men, victuals, and other
necessaries, seeing that the enemy begins to gather very strong there abouts,
and will no longer observe(...)


