THE RELATION OF ALL THE LAST PASSAGES OF THE WARS in the PALATINATE, And how
both Armies have disposed themselves unto further ENTERPRISES.

Wherein is set forth the vallourous Repulse of Monsieur TILLEY from
Heidelberg; with his great loss of men before it.

Together with his Journey into the Marquis of Tourlachs Country; and his plot
for the taking in of all the three towns, Heidelbergh, Manheim, and
Frankendale; with General Veres provision, to hinder that Design.

Moreover The Exployts of Count Mansfeild, and of Brunswicke in Alsatia; and of
their Passage thence through Lorraine toward Luzembergh, and Burgundy; with
the King of BOHEMIA'S Arrival at Sedan.

And lastly, The Siege of Bergen ap Zoon by SPINOLA.

Written from Frankendale the 20. and out of Lorraine the 23. of July. 1622.
Stilo novo. Printed this eighteenth of July.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nathaniel Newbery and William Sheffard, and are to
be sold in Pope's Head Alley. 1622.

THE RELATION OF ALL THE LAST PASSAGES OF THE WARS in the PALATINATE, And how
both Armies have disposed themselves unto further Enterprises.
IT was the happy counsel of Scipio, the Noble and vallorous Roman in the
grave Senate, for the recovery of his lost country, not to continue a Defensive
War against Hanniball in Italy, but rather to pass with the Army against
Carthage it self, the fountain of their troubled Vexation, as that which
would be a means, at least to draw their enemy from the gates of Rome into
Africa, to defend their own City of Carthage; Now of this advise he
courageously undertook the performance himself, at the command of the State
of Rome; and performed it most succesfully, to the safety of his Country; and
his own perpetual honor.

If this policy of his has oftentimes been accounted worthy of imitation in
the succeeding Ages; and always to deserve acclamation and praise; It is no
strange matter, nor need we to distrust their courage, or their success, who
at this day follow that course of proceeding in their Wars, and therefore
howsoever I doubt nothing at all, but that after the joining of Brunswicks Army
with the Count Mansfeilds, they might have opposed the Enemies in the
Palatinate, if it had not tended to the utter devastation of that poor
Country, which has languished so long under the miserable burden of so great
a War; yet for the preservation of that remnant which is left, they have now
happily taken the way, to transport the war, and consequently, the misery of
it, into the Enemies own Country, that they also may not be only spectators
of others calamities, but may at length taste of the same Sauce they have
served others withal, by a forced contribution at least of such money,
munition, and means as for such a populous Army is requisite; of which its
very probable, they had some wants, by reason of the disordered Disastar, which
befell the Brunswickers in passing the River of Maine, where as its said, much
Baggage was lost, and some men. Now, I say, for to furnish themselves again
with necessaries, and to reinforce their Army, by some new supplies from the
Switzers, and other friends; have they taken their way into Alsatia, and so
proceed, as this following Relation does amply declare.

From Frankendale, the 10. of July, The Count Mansfeild after that he had
ransomed diverse Towns and places in Alsatia, where he recovered a great Sum
of Money, he laid siedge to a town called Zanerice or Elsaszaberen, but it was
so well provided that he prevailed not, but raised the siedge, and marched away
toward Lorraine. Monsieur Tilly hearing of this, who lay before Heidelbergh,
raised his siedge likewise, and so marched away into Turlachs Country, with
the most part of his Army, having leaft only 7. or 8, Thousand at Wimpfen:
and Don Gonzalo with the Spanish Forces at Landenbergh, which lies now over
against Worms.

It is said here, That they were so bravely entertained by Sir Gerard Harbert
Governor of the Castle, and by the garrison in the Town, that they lost before
Heidelbergh, above 1500. men.

It is thought that Tilly will make a bridge at Wimpfen, some 3. Leagues off
Heidelbergh, over the Necker, he has one already below at Landenbergh: and
that Don Gonzalo will make one over the Rhine above Worms, and Tilly one above
Spiers at Ydenheim, to block up all the three Towns at once.

My Lord General Vere, has given order to the Governor of Germersheim, to
take possession of all the boats that he possible can, and to burn them,
that the Enemy be not served with them, Turlach has casseer'd his Army, and
is retired to his Country, his Soldiers are under the command of the Barron
of Helmstat, and entertained by General Vere.

Count Mansfeild has sent back one Regiment of foot, under Waldmanshansen,
and 600. horse of Vbertrants band they are put in Garrison at Mainheim and
Frankendale. In the said places, the Drum is daily beaten in his Majesty's
name, to take up soldiers.

From Pont a Mossen, in Lorraine, the 10. of July, Count Mansfeild and the Duke
of Brunswicke, have demanded passage of the Duke of Lorraine, and obtained it,
so they are entered into Lorraine, and are now within 6. or 7. Leagues of this
Town, all the country flying with their goods, into the Towns: He is strong
24000. men, what he will do is unknown as yet: all Lorraine is in Arms
likewise, All Burgundy, and all Luzembergh, take Alarm: The King of France
has sent his Brother, with 2000. horse to the Fronters to keep them.

The King of Bohemia is in Selan, with his uncle.

From Brussels, the 13. of July, The Governor of Bergen ap zoon, having
received commandment from his Excellency, the Prince of Orange, to attend him
with 2000 men of his Garrison, for accomplishment of some service in hand, was
marching toward him, but on the way had notice of the Enemies motion with
great forces toward that Town, to surprise it on the sudden in his absence;
whereupon advising well on the business, for he stood in doubt, whether he
should proceed foreward according to the command which he had received from
the Prince, for by that means he might hazard the town and expose it to the
Enemies hands, if the report of their intention that ways were true, or
whether he should retire back, for to safe guard the Town: but so he might
hinder the Execution of some exploit, which would be no less prejudicial to
the State: but being confirmed in their resolution who hold it better,
certainly to save that they have in possession, the^ to adventure it, upon an
uncertain hope of gaining more to it; he made back again with all possible
speed, and all little enough, for about an hour after his entrance, the Enemy
showed himself before the Town, and so have proceeded very furiously in the
siedge, and have received hitherto as valiant resistance, but being already
twenty thousand strong, they look for ten thousand more, with the Marquis
Spinola, who arrived here the leventh of ^uly at night, from Wezell, or
Lynberch, he is to depart again to day to his men, who have already besieged
Bergen ap Zoon, and do entrench themselves; There are within twenty two
Companies, that defend it bravely, and no doubt shall be releeved by the States.

FINIS.

