John Niccols Pilgrimage, whrein is displaied the lives of the proud Popes,
ambitious Cardinals, lecherous Bishops, fat bellied Monks, and hypocritical
Jesuits.

Apoc. xviii. It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great Cities, and is
become the habitation of Devils, and a cage of every unclean, and hateful
bird.

Apoc. xvii. And in hervvas found the blood of the Prophets, and of the
Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson, for Thomas Butter, and Godfrey Isaac.
1581.

Jllustrissimae, serenissimaeque Principi, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae
Reginae, Elizabethae, fidei Catholicae defensori, etc. Cum omni beatitudine,
salutem in Christo optimo maximo sempiternam.
SI vel priuatae vtilitatis causa mea aliqua, vel affectato gloriae studio, vel
leuitatis inductu, ac non communi potius multoque grauissima rerum ac temporum
ratione, me ad scribendum huius peregrinationis libellum potissimum contulissem
(serenissima Princeps, Regina Elizabetha (...)) optimo iure non vituperatione
modo bonorum, sed publica etiam ira inueterata dignus viderer, qui misellus
homulus ex Argilla and Luto fictus, quem miseriae, quem erumnae praemunt omnes,
humi reptans scarabaeus, hunc tuae Maiestati codicem dedicare minime sum
veritus. Inanis Iesuitarum, sacrificulorum and Romani pontificis alumnorum
ostentatio me valde excitauit, ad hunc peregrinationis libru Dialogorum formula
conscriptum, in lucem aspectumque omnium edendum. Publicu^ commodum mihi
stimulos admouebat vt hoc scribendi munus susciperem: non mercedem expostulo,
non applausum populatem expecto, no^ aestimatione^ vlla^ venor, no^ pingue
sacerdotiu^ (vt fingu^t Papistae) peto, non diuitias quae to, placeret mihi
tenuis in Vinea christi viue^di conditio, taceant Iesuitae, sileant Papistae,
obmutescant aduersarij mej, pudeat illos dicere me in edendis codicibus, aut
honorem aucupari, aut laudem aliquam exposcere, aut docti viri nomen mihi
inaniter assumere, aut denique diuitem fieri opinari, nihil horum posco, verbi
Dei propagationem sitio, and seductos erroribus liberare contendo, and postremo
hypocrisim Papistarum patefacere nitor. Quid me ad scribendum impulit ostendi,
superest vt ostendam quo consilio ftetus tuam maiestatem praecarer, and
suppliciter rogare^ huius inco^pti libelli Patronam fore, nam fortassis dicent
aliqui, nonne long inferiorem patronam aut patronum tibi satis fuerat eligere,
prae ter Reginam. Quid ei opus est hoc tuo libro* semel hoc anno ad illam nimis
audacter scripsisti, cur iterum ad suam Regiam dignitatem scribis. Quid ab illa
quaeris? opulentum sacerdotium, aut praemium aliquod in remunerationem laboris
tui. Primum vacans sacerdotium tibiconcessum est per bonosviros Christianae
Religionis fautores, atq, defensores, and hos a concilijs Reginae and in suis
literis Archiepiscopus Cantauriensis rogatus eratcum caeteris eius fratribus
Episcopis necessaria interim tibi subministrare. Multorum liberalitate^ cum
procerum, tum Episcoporum expertus es. Quid praeterea tibi opus est, nonne viri
eximij virtute praediti fideles Dei dispensatores prouiderunt, aut sine dubio
prouidebu^t quod ad victum, and ornatum tibi necesse fuerit? Quid aliud ergo
flagitas? Haec, and talia multi habebunt verba, and magnam arrogantiam, atque
mihi summam audaciam obijcient cum sim indoctissimus pene omniu^ Concionatorum
huius regni vt conarer (O Regina cleme^tissima) tuae serenitati dicare meum hoc
inornatum opusculum, dicatus est hic tibilibellus quem semel legere and
euoluere si placebit su^mae tuae amplitudini: videas quam perfide, nefarieque
agunt in te Domestici nostri papistae, videas qua malitia imbuti, qua animi
prauitate, nixi, quo infando scelere constricti, and quam solertes sunt in
peruertenda, and supplantanda fide Christiana, and propagando, and stabilie^do
Romano dogma te, and cu^ perspecta^ habueris perfidia^ and malitia^ papistaru^,
tuum est (pace tua dixerim) debita castigatione prauam illorum voluntatem
restringere: te Reginam huius imperij deus delegit, vt rebels and nefarios
homines acerrime punires, atque bonos ac humiles subditos diligeres,
extolleres, atque foueres. Domina, and Regina illustrissima, memor quaeso esto
tui, religionis, status huius Reipub. and ob occulos habeas, te rationcm
villicationis tuae reddituram fore: si tuo munere in regendo been defuncta
fueris, oh quantam habebis mercedem, si autem male (quod absit) iudica, quantum
supplicium. Christian huc vsque regnasti, and magis christian regnabis, si
cunctas Papistarum ceremonias funditus delere determinabis. Compellant te
literis sapientes, vt foeliciter cursum dirigas in omni sanctimonia, vt
magnanimiter verbu^ Dei defendas, and Anti-Christi dogmata gnauiter repellas.
Ad hoc te suadent mediocris ingenij homines, hoc inculcant docti, vt tuum
officium pie ac fideliter exequaris adhortantur etiam nulla doctrina exculti.
Audaciusscripsi, quam me decuit, sed spero te audaciae meae veniam daturam
multocitius procul dubiomihi ignosces, quod in me non cadit adulationis crimen.
Been tibi volo* been amimae tuae O Elizabetha Regina maxim catholica, vtinam
dignus Concionator essem in auditu tuo narrare gesta Papistarum stratagemata,
narrarem per id temporis muka, noua, and vera, sed ea horrenda and ab omni
Christiano pectore remota, veritatis Euangelicae inimicorum facta. Sed hoc
munus subeundi dignus non sum, non licet cuiuis adire Corinthum, vereor me
longior sit Epistola haec quam aequu^ est, persuasu^ habeo, satis longam fuisse
Epistolam si nihil aliud exarassem quam haec verba Asseclae Philippi quondam
regis Macedonum, Memento te mortalem esse. Dixi. Concedat Deus opti. max. tibi
quod bonus animus tuus postulat in hoc seculo, and in futuro, pacem in vtroque
Iam bis ad te scripsi illustrissima Regina primum librum laeto vt opinor front
exmanibus meis excepisti, spe ducor te and hunc alterum libellum eodem animo
bonam in partem accepturam esse, 1581.

Humilimus Subditus tuus, Ioannes Nicolaus Cambritanus.

To the indifferent reader.
NEw books of diverse sorts you have plenty (loving Readers) some books are
written for to comfort the afflicted in mind, and confirm the faith of the
godly, such are the books of the learned Divines, godly Preachers, and
faithful Ministers of God his holy word, some books are written to incitate
pleasure, to provoke carnal lusts, to feed fancies, to nourish vice, to
maintain pride, and to magnify unhonesty, the authors of these books are
men void of godliness, careless of their salvation, addicted to self will,
the instruments of Satan, and men pleasers in iniquity, they that buy and
embrace books wherein consists matter of defense in true religion, or a
plain discovery of the hypocrisy of the wicked, or the manifestation of the
corrupt lives of such as fight against their own conscience, (I mean
Papists.) What Papiste is there of any knowledge, learning, or reading in
divinity, but he knows, sees, and reads the truth. D. Alen. D. Bristow,
D. Nicolson, Parsonnes, Campion, and others, were sometimes Protestants, but
now as Demas, Crescens, Titus, and Alexander, they are departed from us,
because perhaps they would not, nor could not any longer abide with us, what
shall I say of the Seminary men the most part of them all, forsook their
Country for want of livings, for want of maintenance, there are fifty
Scholars in the English Seminary at Rome, that could not tell what shift to
make for their living here in England, therefore being loath to be taken as
vagrantes, and burnt in the ear as Roges, they thought it far better for the
avoiding of this infamy to hazard their souls, to keep their ears whole,
and their neck bone unbroken, they feared master Recorder of London very
much, they thought it good to prove the Popes liberality in renouncing the
truth, which before they professed, and in acknowledging him to be their
Christ, to be their Messiah, to be their Iesuah. And for some succor sake,
they outwardly feign themselves to be Papists, but inwardly the most part of
them do see the truth, and confess they are in a wrong way, some of them
oftentimes told me at Rome, whose names I omit to put in writing, hoping
their conversion, (that the Romish faith was not the true faith.) Four of
these with me determined very often, secretly to forsake Rome, and return to
our country. But these four Scholars, by their familiar frindes and fellow
Scholars, were with much a do persuaded to remain at Rome, until by their
Rectours they should be sent to England. But as for me, what I once determined
to do, by the suffera^ce of god, that I thought to bring to pass, persuasions
could nothing cause me to change my purpose, I was persuaded by diverse, both
by the Jesuits and by the scholars to remain at Rome, but I would not, nor
could not unless I had despaired of my salvation, as I did during the time of
my sickness, for that in hypocrisy I lived as a Papist, my conscience striued
so mightily within me, that I feared not in talk with my fellows to speak
against the Romish religion, insomuch that oftentimes I was at Rome called
heritique. I appeal unto them for testimony of this truth that have heard
me so speaking at Rome, but what is this to the purpose, greater was my sin,
that for any temporal living, I should forsake my God, wherefore very often
troubled I am in conscience, and grieved in mind that I committed such an
horrible offense in the sight of God. In deed I must needs confess that I
believed unfeignedly a Monastical life to have been allowable before God, I
granted invocation of Saints, and as for transubstantiation I doubted, these
two points of the Romish religion, I did hold a little before my conversion at
the Tower, to have been firm and agreeable to God his holy word, and as for
the third point which was transubstantiation, I could not tell what to think
thereof, but now God be thanked I am resolved in these three points as a
Christian ought to be, this treatise is called the book of Pilgrimage, for
that in my perigrinatio^ I have seen with mine eyes the most things which I
have written in this book for your instruction christian readers, not for any
profit of mine, estimation, fame, or glory to be gotten thereby, as the
Papists do surmize, I am briefer then I would be, and that because there
are certain books scattered against me, and against my works, which books
if I may geat, I mean God willing to pourge my self of the slanders and
false reports of the adversaries, I take no great pleasure in writing, greater
pleasure would I take to apply my studies, but seeing that the Papists seek
to deface my sayings, it is reason that I should defend mine own cause as
far forth as I may, if they flow in terms of Rhetorique, and seek to shadow
the truth with their subtilitie, I would be contented with a plain style, so
that I were able to bring forth somewhat in defense of truth. I crave the
spirit of mildness, and not the spirit of scoffing, and taunting, which
spirit they never want. Farewell loving readers, God grant you a perfect
faith and to me likewise, and also for my former sins and hypocrisy, the
fatherly visitation of God here in this world, that I may once feel Gods love
toward me a sinner, an abject and worms meat, God be merciful unto me, and
confirm my faith. God forgive me mine hypocrisy, my wicked life, and lewd
behavior, God give me grace never to commit the like trespasses against his
divine majesty, in word or deed. Be thou favorable O Lord unto Sion, build
up the broken walls of Jerusalem, forsake not thy Sanctuary, but save thine
elect from the pernitions customs of the wicke^ world, so full of poison, so
full of murder, so full of whoredom, so full of avarice, so full of contempt,
and so full of security, that (alas) even with horror it swells to the
top of the uppermost heavens, and it annoyeth the seat of the most highest.
Such as are gone astray, God bring them home, such as are converted, God make
them strong, such as are, and ever hereunto have been in the true faith of
Christ, God give the^ perseverance unto the end, and in the end, such as are
wicked, God make them good, God increase the number of his elect, God make us
all his faithful servants, to reign with him in glory, and bliss in his
kingdom of everlasting joy. Amen.

I. N.
If virtue fail,
as it does begin,
The people must quail,
and die in their siune:
And if it decrease,
Gods curse is at hand,
To destroy us, our peace,
our souls, and our land.
Therefore let us amend,
Gods plagues to prevent,
For when life is gone,
it is to late to repent:
Take heed then to preaching,
Gods word to embrace,
And learn to take warning,
least God you deface.
IN not well perusing my copy, through my default, Christian readers, five or
six gross words have escaped my hands to the print uncorrected, but yet they
are not so gross and obscure, but that others more learned then I am in a
matter more grave have written the like: wherefore let not these five or six
words offend your modesty, neither think the worse of my book, if any other
faults be escaped in the book, amend them I pray you, and construe them to
the best.

A Lessandro imperatore diceua, che il prencepe doueria sempre essere piu
pro^to and presto in dare, che in Pigliare. O nobil detto da un prencipe, fv un
altro che demando a Alessandro, dove erano tutte le sue richezze, che lui
hauena aquistate in tante guerre che lui hauena fat: lui fece segn^ verso i
suoi sudditi, and disse, ne li cuori della mia gente, o nobil prencipe dice lui
che piu gran cosa puo desiderar un prencipe da i suoi sugetti, che feed e
verita verso lui, che piu laudabil cosa in un prencipe, che liberalita and
lenita verso i suoi sudditi: la liberalita di un pouero si e il suo bon volere,
che piu gran dono puo dar le huomo, che quello chegli vien dal cuore, fu un Re
in thebe, che fu si liberale mentrevisse, che quando mori, non si gli trouo
ta^ti denari apressoper sepe lirlo: no^ si gli trouo denari in banchi, oro in
casse, richezze nascoste non giou in cofani, de quellise netroua pochi perch
piu che le huomo hae piu lui ha da temer la mutabilita di fortuna, ogni vno e
liberale in parlare ma pochifran chi in danare ogni vno parla contra innidia e
malitia e purci odiamo l' un l'altro noi continualmente esclamiamo contra
tirannia, e pur siammo senza miserecordia, noi dispreziamo superbia, e pur
siamo senza his ma^ita, noi abhoriamo glottonia e ebrieta, and pur sempre
siammo a banchetti, a feste: noi sempre gridiamo contraotio, e pur sempre
siammo otiosi: noi sempre diciamo male de la lingua che scandaliza, e pur non
sapiauo dir been dines vno. O Dio ache termine siamo, ogni vno ha inuidia al
suo prossimo, ogni vno cerca di auanza, l' altro. Io credo che il mondosia
quasi ala fine.

Essendo il prencipe giusto, il clero sancto, la chiesa ben fauorita, la
republica emendata and tutto il regno pacefico, quel pren cipe, quel clero,
quella chiesa, quella republica and quel regno saranno beneditti a dio. The
Prince being just, the Clergy holy, the Church favored well, the common
weal amended, and all the Realm peaceable, that Prince, that Clergy, that
Church, that Commen Weal, and that Realm shall be blessed of God.

The Argument of the Dialogue.
TRisander the Pilgrim, enters in talk with his father Panteleon, and
craves leave to depart the Realm into other foreign countries, humbly
beseeching his father to disburse him such sums of money as may suffice him
in all his peregrination. His father fearing lest his son were seduced by
some crafty Papist, asks the cause of this importunate request to forsake
his native soil and to wander he knew not whither. His son declares the
cause of this his petition, and the cause being known, his father yields to
his sons demand, and gives him so much money as is sufficient for him, he
exhorts his son to be virtuous in living, pure in religion, patient in
adversity, and humble in prosperity. He exhorts him also to be mindful
of God, and not forgetful of himself. His father more estee ming his sons
soul, then his body, and dreading the eternal destruction of the one, more
then the te^porall death of the other, to confirm his son the more in
religion, (which as yet he holds firmly to be true and agreeable to Gods
word) shows the corrupt lives of certain popes, that by the knowledge
thereof, he might the more warily look to himself, and the more prudently take
heed of Antichriste, the deceiuer of thousand seely souls, that are taken
captive by his great threatenings, princely gifts, glorious promises, Papal
countenance, singular hypocrisy, cauilling Sophistry. bulls of
excommunication, and other sinister means.

The first Diologue, Wherein the corrupt lives of certain Popes are
discovered, who arrogantly to the derogation of the divine authority, claim
to them selves the title, and name of supreme Pastor, and chief head in the
Church of God.
The speakers are Trisander the Christian Pilgrim, and Panteleon his father.
Trisander. OH out alas, my mind is sore troubled, I am grieved at the heart,
I know not what to do, day and night I pass over with grievous complaints,
bewayling the time wherein I was borne little rest I take, and less meat I
eat. In the day time I walk the fair green fields oppressed so sore with
diverse thoughts, that no man is able to assuage my pain and dolor, but only
my dear father. Wherefore I think it best to unsold to him the cause of this
my grief. Oh Father, whom, next under God and my Prince, I love above all
earthly things, whom I obey likewise, and whom I reverence with all humility.
Oh father, I say, you are he that has begotten me, nourished me, and
brought me up from mine infancy in learning and virtue: you loved me
dearly, as a Father should love his son. These five and twenty years I
lived under your regiment and all this while I wanted neither meat nor drink,
I lacked no apparel nor money in my purse, I had all things at my will, and at
my request: Such a father you were unto me, as to leave I am very sorry. And
yet alas I must leave you and depart from you, I cannot choose: I am so
constrained, will I, nill I, yea I must needs forsake you. And where
heretofore I have had plenty of all things belonging to the body, hereafter
I am like to feel scarcity to the maintenance of this my little corpse.
Notwithstanding, the very grief of mind wherein I languishe, moves me
perforce to crave your favor and license to be absent from you, for three or
four years space.


Panteleon. What son Trisander, how comes this to pass, that you are so
vexed in mind, and your countenance so soon changed? Is it, because you are
loath to dwell with me? What have I done against you? Have I grievously
offended you? or have I withdrawn my fatherly affection from you, that should
provoke you to be so sad, and so sodeinly too seek to depart from me? If I
have nothing degenerated from the nature of a father, what should then move
you to crave my favor to be absent from me? I pray you good son tell me
the cause of this your passioned mind: and without dissimulation utter the
same, then shall unquiet thoughts and troublesome imaginations avoid from me.
Speak on, be not afraid.


Trisander. You ask loving father, why I am in such perpleritie of mind,
fields oppressed so sore with diverse thoughts, that no man is able to assuage
my pains and dolor, but only my dear father. Wherefore I think it best to
unsold to him the cause of this my grief. Oh Father, whom, next under God and
my Prince, I love above all earthly things, whom I obey likewise, and whom I
reverence with all humility. Oh father, I say, you are he that has begotten
me, nourished me, and brought me up from mine infancy in learning and
virtue: you loved me dearly, as a Father should love his son. These five
and twenty years I lived under your regiment and all this while I wanted
neither meat nor drink, I lacked no apparel nor money in my purse, I had all
things at my will, and at my request: Such a father you were unto me, as to
leave I am very sorry. And yet alas I must leave you and depart from you, I
cannot choose: I am so constrained, will I, nill I, yea I must needs forsake
you. And where heretofore I have had plenty of all things belonging to the
body, hereafter I am like to feel scarcity to the maintenance of this my
little corpse. Notwithstanding, the very grief of mind wherein I languishe,
moves me perforce to crave your favor and license to be absent from you,
for three or four years space.


Panteleon. What son Trisander, how comes this to pass, that you are so
vexed, in mind, and your countenance so soon changed? Is it, because you are
loath to dwell with me? What have I done against you? Have I grievously
offended you? or have I withdrawn my fatherly affection from you, that should
provoke you to be so sad, and so sodeinly too seek to depart from me? If I
have nothing degenerated from the nature of a father, what should then move
you to crave my favor to be absent from me? I pray you good son tell me
the cause of this your passioned mind: and without dissimulation utter the
same, then shall unquiet thoughts and troublesome imaginations avoid from me.
Speak on, be not afraid.


Trisander. You ask loving father, why I am in such perplexity of mind, and
why my visage is so altered. You demand, whether by your means I was so sore
offended, that thereof my grief, sorrow, and woeful anguishe should arise.
You ask what moved me to ask your leave to depart from you. I tell you
unfeignedly, that I have found you ever a loving father, and such a one as
never offended me, or did otherwise then a father should have done unto his
natural child. But why I seek license to be absent from you for the space of
three or four years, is a desire that I have to go to strange Countries, to
veiw those things which are not to be seen in thie my native soil.


Panteleon. Oh my son, what? have you greater desire to travel abroad
amongst unacquainted people, then to tarry at home with your familiar friends.
But is there no other thing that embeldeneth you to forsake me your father,
and to wander you know not whither?


Trisa. Yes father, the love ye I have to diversity of tongues, and the hope
ye I have to be instructed therein, is partly ye cause of this great desire
which I have to forsake my native country for a while.


Panteleon. I see now my son, you desire to learn languages. It is very
well, and I commend your intent. But for this so light a cause, would you
depart from me, seeing you may learn la^guages at home?


Trisander. How can I, loving father attain to the knowledge of languages at
home, seeing that our Country men use but one kind of speech?


Panteleon. Though the people of this land have but one language in general,
yet some there be, as merchants, Gentlemen, and others, that understand and
speak diverse languages, and by such you may be instructed very well, without
traveling any further.


Trisa. By what means, (I pray you father tell me) came they to the knoweledge
and understanding of so many languages?


Panteleon. I tell you, by traveling to far countries.


Trisander. If they learned this and that language, by going to this and that
Country, wherefore then (loving father) will you deny me leave so to travel
as they have traveled that I may learn as they have learned, this and that
language?


Panteleon. They were merchants, and so are not you.


Trisander. But you have said that there were Gentlemen, as well as Merchants,
that could speak diverse languages. These Gentlemen in going from kingdom to
kingdom, have gotten this knowledge of tongues, which merchants have obtained.
Being a Gentleman then, as ye know me to be, grant me leave to travel, as
they have traveled.


Pante. Does the love of languages enforce you to forsake me, and to wander in
foreign soiles, is there nothing else that persuadeth you hereunto.


Trisa. I have told you my father, that it is the desire of la^guages ye thus
as you see disquieteth my mind, and moves me so earnestly to crave leave to
visit other Countries.


Panteleon. If there be nothing else than the desire of languages that drives
you into this perplexity of mind, I have an especial friend, that has been a
great traveler this long time, and now is returned home: he I am assured
will teach you my son what language you can desire.


Trisander. Albeit you have such a friend loving father, that can teach me
what language I can wish, yet I cannot so soon be taught to speak readily,
and perfectly the understanding of any language. But if I were beyond the seas,
I could in small continuance of time and with little pains, learn the
language of that country whereto I traveled.


Panteleon. I see son you will not be persuaded to tarry at home with me,
and enjoy that which shall be left you after my death. Oh how unfortunate am
I, that am father to such a son as will not be ruled by my counsel, nor
persuaded to forsake his fond fancy. Oh son, I love you so dearly, that
loath I am you should depart from me, and I am so careful of your life, both
bodily and ghostly, that by my persuasion, advice and counsel, I would have you
prevent ye evils and dangers incident to travelers, by tarrying at home. Ask
whatsoever I have of worldly substance to set you forwards amongst ye best of
your degree, yea boldly crave it, nothing shall thou want: if thou have a
pleasure to hunt, and hawke, I will give thee leave, and maintain thee so to
do, thou shall have all things at will and commandment if I may procure ye
same for thee. Why will thou then depart, and refuse all these proffers,
joys, and pleasures? be advised my good son, take counsel in time before it
be too late, and when time and place will not serve me when and where to help
thee.


Trisander. Oh father your mournful words do cause my heart to bleed. What
with sorrow and pain, what with grief and anguishe the very tears tricle
down mine eyes. Oh how heavy is my heart to hear such words? Why are you
more pensive then others have been, when their sons have forsooken them? be
not (I pray you) more unwilling to grant me leave to depart out of my
country, then others were to give their sons license to travail to foreign
countries. In one day I shall learn more in ye understanding of any tongue,
then hear in a whole year. For there I that hear nothing else but that
language spoken, we I covet to learn, but here not so. For here in this my
native country is spoken ye language which I speak and under stand, and which
my mother taught me.


Pan. Seeing my words are but wind, and will not prevail, tell me then to what
country chiefly art thou bent to go?


Trisander. My mind and purpose is, if it may please God, and you my dear
father, to make a voyage into Italy, there to behold the stately Cities, to
see the fertile fields, plesaunt hills, batefull pastures, shadowing woods,
the plenty of al kind of trees and groves, the abundance of corn, vines and
olives, fair cattle, sweet springes, fountains, lakes, rivers, and havens.
For the country of Italy, is as it were an open lap, to receive the trade of
all countries. My feet do covet to make haste to this noble land most dear
father, and therefore give me leave to travel forthwith into that famous
region.


Panteleon. You talk of Italy, my son, as though you had bin there: but in
Italy you were never I am sure, tell me therefore whom have thou hard to
praise Italy so much, that thou should with such words extol the same.


Trisander. One who was both a gentleman and also well learned, who had bin in
Italy, and passed through many a fair City, as Rome, Naples, Bolonia, and
Genoway, with many mo. He was a godly Gentleman always, and I take him to be
so still: for he cease not to pray to God, both night and day, nor to call
upon the name of the Lord: he fasteth twice a week, he gives alms unto
the poor very liberally of that he has. Now because this Gentleman is both
virtuous of life, and true in his reports, I am the more enflamed with ardent
desire, to see the Italian Country.


Panteleon. Good loving son, the Gentleman (of whom you spoke, before) and
whose person I do know) I will never discommend, he may be learned and
virtuous, I say not to the contrary, but yet tell me (my son,) was it he
alone, or else many in number, that caused thee to be so desirous to travel to
Italy?


Trisander. It was he alone, and none other that reported these words to me.


Panteleon. I like it so much the better, because thou said he was both
learned, and godly. But can thou tell where he was borne, and what is his name?


Trisander. A Saxonian borne, and his name is Rhodoman.


Panteleon. But what religion did he profess, can thou answer me to that?


Trisander. He counted the Pope as Antichrist, his religion profane, and of
his Church he esteemed as of the Sinagogue of Satan. He believed whatsoever is
written and contained in Gods holy word, he misliketh ye doctrine of meritu^
co^grui and condigni: and as for being justified by his works, it is no part
of his opinion. He denies the real presence of the Lord in the Sacraments.
He believes no other thing then the word of God wills him to believe,
therefore I am persuaded his religion is good.


Panteleon. I am glad thou have talked with such a Christian, and because thou
art so fully minded to travel to Italy and other countries, I am contented
to grant thy request, to travel whither thou will, for three or four years
space.


Trisander. I thank you gentle father, but I desire moreover, that you give me
so much money as may be sufficient to carry me throughout my voyage, so shall
not I having money enough, do that which I would not.


Panteleon. Hold, I give thee three hundredth pound in gold use it well, and
spend it not prodigally.


Trisander. I thank you good father, I request no more, this is enough for
me: I will use your money well, and will spend no more then I must needs.


Panteleon. My son, thou art young, lusty, and prone to commit folly:
wherefore I counsel thee to bridle thy fancies, to banishe evil thoughts, and
to cut off all occasion of any vice that may hinder thy voyage, and pronoke
the wrath of God against thee. If the lust of the flesh entise thee, and the
concupiscence of the eye allure thee to evil, tame thy self with fasting and
prayer, and call for the assistaunce of Gods spirit, be circu^spect in thy
talk, lowly in thy behavior, ready to suffer all raylings and reuilings: if
thou be abused with ill speeches, give sayre words again, and if thou be
offended with reproaches, offend not again: if thou be had in derisio^, deride
not again. Moreover to what country soever thou comst, use thy self gently,
soberly, mildly, and humbly: be ready to pleasure all, loath to displease any:
if ye manners of the people be rude, let not their rudeness move thy patience,
and feign thy self always needy, then thy expenses shall not be so great,
neither shall thou be in any great danger of thieues. Before you receive any
thing, ask the price: if the thing does like thee take it with thanks, and pay
that thou promisest: if the thing be proffered for more then it is worth in
value, refuse it we courteous speches. Now for thy lodging thou may be so
bold as to crave a view of thy chamber, and of thy bed if the same does not
content thee, pay for a buccale of wine, and seek another lodging for thy
contentment. In all thine affairs use thy self honestly, and practice
humility, so may thou travail whether thou will as safely as in thine
own country.


Trisander. Loving father I thank you, this counsel is good, and may save me
from many dangers: God grant I do, as I am councelled, then I am sure, I
shall give no occasion of wrath, to any man luing. Your exhortation good
father, I will accomplish if ye I may, in every respect. For I will so behave
my self, that no stranger shall be displeased with me, if I may choose.


Panteleon. If thou do so, thy state shall be the safer. But I must tell thee
one thing, and mark the same diligently, In traveling thou must needs fall
in the company of Papists, take heed they deceive thee not: and when thou
co^mest to Rome, suffer not thy self to be seduced, for they will make thee
believe (unless thou stand steadfast in thy faith) that the Bishop of Rome is
the universal head over the Church of God. Do thou not see (say they) how
beneficial the Pope is to Pilgrims, what Churches he builds, what high
ways he mendeth, what company of strangers he daily susteyneth, how many
hospitalles he finds, how many scholars he maynteyneth, how devoutly he
comes once and month into his chapel, how reverently he gives the peopls
benediction, how he never misseth twice a day to say his breuiarie, what pains
he takes, with orators, leagates, and such others, in hearing their causes?
surely this man, if he were not of God, he would not be so liberal, in
suppliyng the want of the needy: neither would he be so painful in causes
ecclesiastical: Therefore (say they) persuade thy self, the Pope is here on
earth in Christ's stead, he is Peter's successor, and may bind and loose whom
he list: he may save whom be loves, and destroy whom he hates, he has the
same authority here in earth, in heaven, in purgatory, and in hell, that Christ
himself has in all these places. Oh take heed my son, these words are
venomous, and as bitter as gall: beware, and never condescende to the opinion
of these stifenecked Papists. The Pope has no virtue in him, but all vice and
hypocrisy. Let them brag of the Pope, until they be weary, yea
nevertheless thou shall find (my son) that the Pope is very Antichriste,
as by his life and religion most manifestly shall appear. I will tell thee (my
son) of the parents of this Pope gregory the thirteenth, otherwise named
(and that properly) hugo, (that is to say) hugh: and by his surname
boncompagnion, good fellow. His father at the beginning was such a one as
sold old wares (which the Italians termed vechio) as old iron, old shows,
old apparel, and such like things. This man at last became somewhat rich,
and used the trade of merchandise. Now this Pope Hugh was borne at Bolognia,
and brought up in learning there, where he studied the Civil and Canon laws,
and became public professor of both those laws in that City, where he was
borne. At Rome, and else where, before he was made Cardinal, he bare many
offices, as it was reported unto me. Some in Bolognia, told certain of my
acquaintance, that this Pope was married, and by that wife begat those children
who are as yet alive. Some say otherwise, that he was never married, but say
that those whom he calls his sons, are in deed his Bastardes: but
whatsoever they be, they are Gentlemen, whether they be so in condition or
no, I can not tell, but I am sure they are noble men in wealth, and in
worldelye pomp. The Popes sir name is boncompagnion, good fellow, for that
one of his Graundsyers accompanied him self with another Italian, to kill a
Serpent, who did much hurt in the Country of Italy, in slaying both man and
beast: and for this cause the Serpent being stayne, by one of this Popes
Graundsyres, and by another Italian, from that day forwards he was called
boncompagnion, and so was his father surnamed, and this Pope likewise. This
Pope has a brother in Bolognia, who has the charge of many affairs, and
also the Popes bastard, though some call him his Nephewe, he has the rule of
all things at Bolognia.

This Pope has his protrature lively set forth in many places of that City:
and gave commandment to the Bolognians that his statute should be erected
there: In deed his stature is erected at Rome, is erected in the Capitol. The
Pope is liberal to those, by whom he hopes that the ruins of his kingdom
shall be repaired: he is beneficial to English men, and to Germans. For he
hops that by their wit and policy, by their industry and labor, he
shall recover to himself those countries again and have them in subjection.
What the life of this Pope is, thou may read (my son) in diverse books,
as thou trauaylest to other countries, but this I will say as I was infourmed
by credible persons that had been traueylers to Rome, that Omnia in curia
Romana sunt vaenalia. All things are to be sold for money in the Court of
Rome. If any man has committed murder, if any man has lived in adultery, if
any man has offended in gluttony, or drunkenness, or what so ever crime he
has committed, come to this Pope with your purse full of money, and for your
silver you shall be absolved and forgiven of all your sins. But if you come
with an empty purse, you shall depart as you come, without any indulgence
and pardon of your sins: no penye no pater noster. If any will release his
brother from purgatory, let him provide money, and an owl will fly with his
brother to heaven, will you have Agnos dei, graua benedicta, medalla, crosses,
beads, etc. Then go to this Pope and bring him a satchell of money, and you
shall have all these things. Oh my son I tell thee the truth before these
my neighbors. For a brother of mine has dwelt with the Popes chief
Chamberlayne, and has seen the practices of this Pope Gregorye the
thirteenth, and knows the fashions of his Court. Let not his hypocriste
delude thee, neither lef his magnificent gifts deceive thee: thou shall
peceiue by his supermaiesticall stateliness, that he is the son of
perdicion: he can not take the pains (being lusty of age) to go on foot
from his chamber to his chapel upon feastiuall days, but must be carried
on eight scarlette men's shouldiers.

Oh pride, Lucifer like. When he goes in procession, in the City he is
honored as Christ, over his head must carpettes be laid, the walls must
be covered with the same, and the streets strowed with flowers and rushes.

The swishers are placed as it were in battle arraye, the meaner forte with
their torches go before, the richer Citizens follow after, the Nouices of
moffe monasteries follow them, then come the fat belled Monks, Friars,
Abbotes, pryours, and such like, after them the Bishops, them the Popes
Chamberlaynes, with his Miters, and after them follow the Cardinals, then
appears the Pope, not going on foot, but carried on men's shoulders very
pontyfically, the trumpettes sounding, the double Cannons are charged. Which
pontificallitye Christ him self never used, and therefore this excessive
pride seuereth the the Pope from the Immitation of Christ's steps.

Thou shall see my soon, that the Pope is not virtuous in deed though he be
so accoumpted, but full of hypocrysie.

He is (as the brute goes at Rome) the cause of dissentions in diverse
Countries, and he only was the cause of the late rebellion in Ireland. For
commandment was given unto them of the seminary by the Pope, that they
should pray daily for the prosperous success of Doctor Saunders his
affairs in Irelande. This Pope succoureth rebels and traitors, that in the
time of the last commotion fled out of the North.


Trisander I understand now (father) that you are very well acquainted with
one or other, that lately has been at Rome.


Panteleon. Have I not told thee (my son) that my brother dwelt with the
Popes chief chamberlain? it was he that knew all these things, and
reported them unto me.


Trisander. Truly this report shall be a caveat unto me, to beware of the
Popes engine ready prepared to entrape imprudent and indiscreet persons. All
the perswasiue words in the world shall not make me brook him.


Panteleon. In so doing happy shall I be, that have such a godly and
obedient son.


Trisander. But father, by your patience I will ask one question: were all
Popes wicked in their living, as they are Heathenish in their religion?


Panteleon. Son, thou ask me a doubtful question. If thou ask whether
all Popes wanted moral virtues, and such as the Gentiles had, or whether they
all lacked those Christian virtues, which are the fruits of the Christian
faith: whether thy demand be of the first or of the second, tell me without
any dissimulation.


Trisander. I ask, whether all popes that arrogantly claimed to them selves
Supremacy in earth, and the false pretensed succession of Peter in the Sea
Apostolic, were profane in conversation of life.


Panteleon. There were no such arrogant Popes, but they lived only
Christianlike, and as their religion was repugnant to Gods word, so their life
and manners were contrary to the commandment of the living God.


Trisander. But father, can you tell their names, and how impiously they lived?


Panteleon. What their names were I know, and what their manners were likewise
I know of certentie: but forasmuch as I have said somewhat of Pope Gregory the
xiii. I think it not amisss to tell what his predecessor was, and how he
came to the Popedom, this Pope Pius Quintus descended of very poor Parentage,
as at Rome is reported of him. At Minerua, he was a Dominican Friar for a
certain space, then he became Pryor of that Monastery, at what time
Cardinal Morone was suspected for one that sauoured not of Popish religion.
Wherefore this Pryor Dominican was sent by the Pope to hear Cardinal Morons
confession, which when he undertook, and thought to have heard the Cardinals
confession, he was rejected, for that he was neither Bishop nor Cardinal:
But a poor Friar.

This Dominican returned back again to the Popes Court, and told the Pope
that Cardinal Morone disdained to take him for his confessor, being no
Cardinal, but a poor Dominican. The Pope hearing these words, was much out
of pactence, he was sore offended, and his wrath was so kindeled, that in his
angry mood, he called for a Cardinals hatte, and gave it unto this
Dominican, willing him forthwith to go again to Cardinal Morone.

Now when he came Cardinal like, Cardinal Morone submitted himself, yielded
to make his confession before him, to answer to any Article that he had to
lay against him, and in his examination he showed him self conformable to
the Popes Laws. It happened afterward, that this Pope dyed, and then, (as
the order is) the College of Cardinals assembled together, in a certain
appointed place of the Popes Court, to elect and choose amongst themselves,
some meet man to take upon him the charge of so great and Sathanicall
function. The whole College of Cardinals, that were present there, except
this one Dominican Cardinal, gave their assent and consent to this Cardinal
Morone, that he should have been Pope: but when this Dominican Cardinal was
asked why he gave not his voice with the rest, he made this answer, I will
never (says he) give my voice to any person suspected of heresy. Then spoke
Cardinal Morone I will not be Pope, though I might.

Hereupon all the Cardinals were willing, that this Cardinal Morone should
elect whom he best fansied, to be Pope of Rome, which thing being granted
unto him, he uttered these words, saying. I know none more worthy to be
made Pope, then the Cardinal of Alexandria, who refused to give his voice to
my election, for that some time I was suspected to be an Heretic: a worthier
man then he to bear rule, may seldom or never be found though we sought
for one through out the world. Therefore seeing your graces good will and
pleasure, was, that I should choose whom I best liked to the Popedom, I
nominate and pronounce this Cardinal of Alexandria. These words thus uttered,
every Cardinal in his degree doing obeisance, came and kissed this new Popes
feet. This Pope had a nephewe, (supposed of some Romans to have been his
bastard) whom he created Cardinal over that City Alexandria, whereof he
himself had been Cardinal before. This his nephewe (or rather as the common
brute or same goes at Rome) was bound apprentise to a poor Tailour, who
dwells in the English Seminary at Rome: and because he was altogether
unapt for that science, this poor taylour came unto his uncle, the aforesaid
Pope Pius Quintus, (but then a Dominica^ Friar in the monastery of Minerua)
and told him that his nephewe was unfit to be a taylour, for that he saw
no towardness at all in him touching that Art. But see now (my son) how
fortune favors fools, how she exalts the unworthy. For this fellow, the
Popes nephewe can scarce read his Mass book, much less understand it, and
yet lo, on a sudden he is created Cardinal of Alexandria. This Pope his
uncle, as the report goes, was a better practicioner in hearing Nuns
confessions, and fitter to play the Cook, then to supply an office and room
of such high dignity, to the which the Majesty of Emperors and kings, by
the judgment of the Papists, is counted inferior. This Pius Quintus at the
first was a beggar, then afterward he became a Dominican Friar, and
consequently, a Cardinal, and in fine a Pope. Thus fortune exalted him to high
degrees of promotion. The recordation and remembrance of his pristinate and
former state, before fortune had smiled on him, should by right have moved him
to be humble and lowly to all men in his Papal Majesty.


Trisander. Truly Father, as for his base estate of birth, if his virtues were
good, or if his excellency of wit was such, that it surpassed the wisdom of
others. I dde not weigh nor make any account, nor do so vilely think of his
simple Parents that therefore I should esteem him unworthy to have been (as
he was) promoted to a higher degree of function.


Panteleon. Loving son, to the derogation of his promotion I speak not a
word, and as for his Papal dignity, it does not touch me who has it, or
who ever had it, either noble or vnoble, poor or rich.

But mine intention was to tell thee, how at the first he became Chapline to
Saint Dominicke, then afterward Chamberlain to Beelzebub, and last of all,
son to Lucifer, by marriage. For he married his begotten daughter pride.


Trisander. From such offices and degrees of function good Lord deliver us. I
pray you father will you show me, if you can, what his life was, being Pope?


Panteleon. Yes that I can, and hew he lived I will declare to thee as
follows. He was a blooddy persecutor of the Christians, and caused many a
faithful believer of ye Gospel, most lamentably to be burned: yea he was
the cause of that butcherly effusion of Christian blood at Paris, and in all
other places of France. His successor Gregory xiiii. wickedly allowed, the
cruel handeling and formentes showed upon the great Admiral of France, the
instrument of God, for defense of true religion, and for the consolation of the
afflicted Christians. Which fact is entered in marble stone, in the imperial
hall of the Popes Court, artificially set forth: but to speak of Pius
Quintus, this Pope was certified by a certain Cardinal, that in Rome there
was an noble man, son to a Duke, borne in Germany, differing from the
Papists in religion and disagreeing with their doctrine. So soon as the Pope
had heard these words, being moved with furious indignation, he cried unto
the Cardinal, burn him, burn him: but the Cardinal being more merciful
then the Pope, desired his graceless Antichristian Majesty, to command the
young noble youth to appear before him, and so he did. When the young Noble
man came before his presence, he did prostrate him self at the Popes feet,
at whom the Pope began so to rail, and so to threaten him, that the Noble man
overcome with his threatenings of death, was ready to believe whatsoever he
would have him believe, and so with his grimme countenance and threatening
words he perverted this Noble young man to the religion of perpetual
destruction.


Trisander. Surely, this man was more bitter then prudent, and more greedy of
undeserved subjection, then careful over the life of true Christians. Fie upon
such a proud persecutor, from such Tirants, libera nos Domine. But father, it
was told me, that he was a great Coniurer or Nigromancer.


Panteleon. And in very deed (as I suppose) thou have heard nothing but the
truth in that. For surely at Rome it is reported that he did those things
which no man could have done, unless he had been skillful in Nicromancie:
He foretold of the victory of the Venetians, and Dun de Austria, over the
Turks. He came also up on a certain time out of his study and told them of
the victory that were then in his presence: Now, (quoth he) the Turks are
vanquished and slain. These words he might foretell by Nigromancie, as I
suppose, and not otherwise. For he had not the gift of Prophecy being a
Tyrant, and an open persecutor of the truth. This Pius Quintus was so
well-beloved of his servants, that some of his Chamberlaines had besmeered his
Crucifix with poison, so that when he came to pray, and approached to kiss the
Crucifix, it ran away: and when he saw the Crucifix remoouing it self after
that manner, he creeped nearer, but ye more he creeped, ye farther the Crucifix
removed. This thing I think was done by the Art of Nigromancie, but it was
one of the miracles of his Grandfather Satan. But the Romans report him to have
been familiar with God, and that he very myraculously preserved hun always,
and caused the stones to certify him of any iminent dangers. This man of sin
was so bent to the heavenly treasures, that he cared not for worldly riches:
for he gave all his goods to the poor, and made them Noble men and Gentlemen:
but they were such poor as were his kinsmen, some of them Cozins and
Nephews, to speak plainly his bastardes.


Trisa. Of this Pope Pius Quintus I also (good father) have heard much. Was
it not he (I pray you sir) that first excommunicated our gracious Queen
ELIZABETH.


Pante. It was even he, but she never prospered better, nor this Realm did
never florishe more then since it was by him excommunicated: therefore for his
cursing we pass not, neither do we regard the thundering Bulls of
excommunication of his successors.


Trisander. It is so, as you say, that the Popes curse can do us no hurt: but
can you tell me (father) whether they are chosen Popes by the means of their
virtue, learning, and wisdom, or by the means of briberie, gold and silver?


Panteleon. I have told thee (my son) that in the Popedom there is no
virtue, and therefore it is the more lightly to be regarded. Learned they must
needs be, not in Scriptures, for that they defy them, but in the Civil and
Canon laws, that they may know what is their own Iure illicito, and may
plead for that which is not their own Iure Pontificiali. Wisdom is requisite
in a Pope, whereby he may know gold from silver, gemmes and precious stones,
from common stones which be in the streets. He must have wisdom to count
them, wisdom to lock them up in his treasure house: he cannot be without
wisdom to pick out the best gold from the badde, to give to his waiting
gentlewomen at bed and boorde. He must moreover have wisdom to provide for
his bastardely children, which he begot whiles he was a soul Priest to the
Putanne in the Burdello or whilst he said Mass elsewhere for money, to
supply the necessity of any sober Curtezane, and defloured Virgin. Such
learning and wisdom, as before is recited, every Pope must have, and every
Gentleman. Bribery, large gifts, and great promises must help him to that
Papal dignity, or else he shall go without it, as most commonly it falls
out, unless perhaps some poor Cardinal be made Pope, and compoundeth with
the college of Cardinals that the Papal revenues be equally parted amongst
them all of the College of Cardinals.


Trisander. But what if a man had plenty of money? then peradventure he might
be made Pope, and rule the roste at his pleasure.


Panteleon. If a man had money, as thou say, great plenty, he should quickly
be made Pope of Rome, as it said of John the xviii. a Grecian borne, who
obtained the place by briberie, sedition, and hurly burly. This man brought so
much money to Rome with him, from Constantinople, as that he was able
therewithal to draw and tempt unto him, as well the wise and wary, as the
simple sort, to be of his faction: whereby he corrupted Crestentius the
Consul, violently to abuse Pope Gregory, and to drive him out being a Germane,
and so purchased the Popedom, and the sequel thereof. But of those things
that he and his train set to sale in his Popeship, Mantuan writes thus:

Pernices mercatur equos, vaenalia Romae,
Te^pla, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae.
John the xiii. being ye son of Albericus the son to Maozia, obtained to be
pope, partly by the briberie, and partly by the threatening of his father
Albericus being Prince. Before the Emperor Otho, in an open Synod, it was
laid to his charge (as Lutherandus writes in his sixth book) that he never
said Mattins, that incelebrating the Mass he himself had not communicated,
that he made Deacons in his stable among his Horses, that he had committed
incest with two harlots being his own sisters, that he played at Dice, prayed
to the Devil to send him good luck, ye for money he admitted boy as to be
Bishops, that he had ravished virgins, and strange women, that he had made the
holy pallance of Lateran, a Stews and Brothelhouse, that he had defloured
Stephana his Fathers Concubine, and one Rainera a Widow beside one Anna
another Widdowe, and her Niece: that he had put out the eyes of Benedict his
Ghostly father, that he used common hauntes, that he ware armor, and set
houses on fire, that he brast open doors and windows by might, that he took
a cup of wine and drunk to the Devil, and never blessed him self with the
sign of the Cross. These and many more odious Articles, were laid to his
charge: Whereupon the Emperor by the consent of the Prelates deposed him: and
Leo the eight was set up in his steed. But so soon as the Emperor was gone,
those Harlots that had been his companions, inueighed the Nobles of Rome,
promising them the treasures of the Church to depose Leo, and to place John
again: which they did out of hand for desire and covetousness of the
treasures of the Church. Thus Leo whom the Emperor appointed, was deposed, and
John established again. So that you see (my son) how this Pope who was once
deposed, is restored again to the Sea antichristian.


Trisander. But Father do they al climb to ye Popeship with money, with
briberic, and dissension?


Panteleon. Not all (my son) for some obtained the popeship by Magic, as
Benedict the menth, who before was called Theophilact, the son of Albericus,
and nephewe to Pope John xxi. As he by coniuring and devilish Arts, did first
advance his uncles, Benedict the eight, and John xxi: So now, by his Magical
Art, he brought to pass, that he succeeded them. This Benedict, after the
death of Conradus, conspired with his Councillors Laurence, and John Gratian,
to disherite his son Henry the third of the Empire, and to plant in his
steed Peter king of Hungary: and therefore he sent the crown of the Empire to
him with this verse:

Petra dedit Roman Petro, tibi Papa corona^.
The Rock to Peter gave Rome the town,
The Pope to thee Peter gives the crown.
Syluester the third, obtained to be Pope by Magical sorcerie, and that at
the hands of his father Laurence the famous coniuerer. For thus says Benno
after Benedict was driven out, and the Popeship sold, John Gratian being in
the place, John Bishop of Saba was thrust in upon him, and called Syluester the
third. Thus these three being Popes all at once, divided the Church of Rome
into diverse factions: For what with cruel wars, and great bloodshed, the
Church was torn in pieces, foully mangled with Scismes, and choked with
errors, while under the color of wine it gulled in poison. Thus wrote Benno
of that wretched time. This Syluester enjoyed the rowme of Pope but a while for
within xxix. days, the friends of Benedict, with great tumult restored him to
that which he had first both lost and sold. Anno dom. 1041. Pope Benedict
made one Cazamirus, a Monk in Clunace Abbey, and a Deacon, king of Poleland,
upon this condition, ye for every head in Poleland, he should pay yearly to
the Pope, and his successors, an ordinary sum of money: and furthermore,
that they should not let the hair of their head grow long, and that they of
Polela^d should remember for ever, how that this polling had given them a
shaven king out of an Abbey. Sergius the iiii. came to be Pope by Magical
charms, and in his Popedom he exercised the same sorcery still, by which he
obtained the seat. John ye xix. an Italian succeeded Syluester the second, and
gate to be pope by the Devils aid: for (says Benno) the scholars of the
said Syluester, every one gaped for the Popedom. John the xx. called Fasanus,
got the Popedom by magic and coniuring. For from the foresaid Syluester,
till Gregory the vii. (a notorious person) all the Popes were famous
inchaunters: by their charming they stirred up walking spirits, bugges,
goblins, fiery sights, and diverse terrible ghostes and shapes of things, with
howlings, and gronings, about dead men's graves, persuading the simple people,
that they were dead men's souls, and those spirits that being coniured up by
priests, deluded men, dissembling that they were ^e souls of the dead,
complaining of their intolerable pains in Purgatory ^^e, and craving to be
released by the me ^^torious deeds of their friends and kinded, bestowing
Diriges, Masses, and Trentals upon them. Syluester the se^onde, of whom
mention is made alrea^ie, betook himself to the Devil, both ^ody and soul,
to be made Pope, and ^iserablie ended his life in the palace of ^he holy
Cross, which is called Hierusa^em, as he said Mass, and the Devils were
ready to receive him into their hel^ishe habitation. He commanded ^is tongue
and his hands (as writes ^enno) to be cut of, because that by them he had
blasphemed God, in Sacrificing unto Devils: thus he dyed a reprobate, Anno.
Dom. 1003. The report of him is this, that the Tomb of this Syluester does
ever since Prognosticate the death of the Pope, by the rattling of the bones,
and the gushing out of the water that ri^eth out of the ground about it: as
also (says Platina) it is testified by the Epitaphe written upon his grave.
Many such Popes could I recite, which by enchauntments, and magic, obtained
the Popeship, whom for brevity sake I omit.


Trisander. Why then (father) i^ these forenamed persons by Magical Ar^ became
popes, it is easy for cunning coniurers to be made Popes. I though^ that the
holy Ghost chose them to be^ Popes, but now I see the Devil gets them the
Popeship: the Devil himself being the Author of Nigromancie, i^ he would
transform him self into the likeness of a man should be exceedingly
esteemed amongst the Papists.


Panteleon. And so he should in deed but because he is a spirit, he places
in his room some ambitious mortal wretch as his Vicegerent, with conditions to
be observed and kept of every Pope.


Trisander. Father, must they be all men, that are Popes? was there never woman
Pope?


Panteleon. There is no matter whether they be men or women that are made
Popes. For as long as they are Satan's Vicars here on earth, they may be both
he and she Popes: but I read ^f one woman that was made Pope of Rome.


Trisan. But can you tell me her name, where she was borne, and how ^hee
came to the Papacy?


Pan. Yes that I can. Her name was ^oan the eight, and because of her bringing
up under a certain Englishman, a monk of Fulda (whom she loved tenderly) her
name was altered, and she was called John English: she sat as Pope in the
Pontifical seat of Rome two years, and six months, she was a Germane by
birth, and borne in Mentz. She was called at the first Gilberta, a lecherous
beast, and such a one, as for the more inioying of her leuers company, and the
better avoiding of suspicion, dissembled her kind, and put her self into man's
apparel, and so traveled with the Monk her Paramour, to Athens who being
dead she came to Rome, still disguising her self, and counterfetting to be a
man. For through the promptness of her wit, and her ready tongue, she talked
eloque^tly in public lectures and disputations: and many had her in admiration
for her learnin^ she grew into so great credit, and wa^ so well liked of
all, that Leo the pope b^ing dead, they chose her in his room: (...) which
office, as other Popes had done she gave orders, made Priests and De^^cons,
promoted Bishops, creat^^ Abbots, said Masses, hallowed Alte^ and Churches,
ministered ye sacrament^ gave men her feet to kiss, and did al oth^^ things
belonging to the Popes: and h^^ doings stood in force. But in ye time of h^^
Popeship, Lotharius the Emperor being an old man, became a Monk, an^ Lewis
the second came to Rome, and r^ceiued of her the Scepter and Crown of the
Empire, with Peter's blessing whereby the whore of Babylon shew^^ her self so
mighty, that she made king stoop unto her. Apoc. cap. 7. Furthe^ more, (as
Houedemus says) in her tim^ Ethelwolphus king of England ga^^ the tenth part
of his kingdom to the Priests and Monks, to pray for hi^ soul: and his
son Ethelwaldus ma^ried Judith a widdowe, the late wife (...) his own
father, and his Stepmothe^ But as touching Pope Joan, she was gotten with
child by one of her familar Chaplines, a Cardinal to whom her fleshly
appetite caused her to disclose herself. For as she was going on Procession
solemply to Lateran Church, in the midst of the way, and in the open street,
between Colossus and Clement Church, she was delivered of child, in
presence of all the people, and dyed of her travel in the same place. For
which wickedness she was stripped, and spoiled of all pontifical honor, and
buried without any pomp or solemnity. Hereof Mantuan writes, describing
Hell in the third book of Alphonsus, thus.

Here long the dame that erst disguisd,
would seem a man to be,
Whose head the Roman Miter ware:
with crest of crownets three,
Who plaide a shameless strumpets part,
in place of Popes degree.
Lo, this is that seat that cannot err* being endewed with the holy Ghost by
succession, or rather an evident argument of the seat of Babylon. But the
Popes since that time, in their Procession do shun that place, where she
was delivered, as odious for the hap thereof Funcius says boldly, that this
was suffered by Gods especial providence, that this woman should be made
Pope, being also an Harlot, even then, when she^ should bring kings (as she
did Ethelwolphus and Alphredus) in subjection unto her, whereby Antichriste
might bee^ known. For then it was the Lords pleasure, to bewray the whore of
Babylon, in a Pope, being an whore. Wherefore the holy Ghost foretold it,
Apoc. 17 that the elect might beware of her. But to avoid the like
inconvenience of a woman for the time following, they devised that whosoever
should be chosen Pope, should be searched very narrowly to be tried a man,
and if he were, a cry should be made with a loud voice. Habet testiculos,
dignus est Papari: A thing shameful to be reported, but used without shame,
among such shameless shauelings. But now commonly they need not, when they
choose them Popes, mistrus^^ them to be women: for while they are Cardinals
they play such carnal parts that they are able to bring forth bastardes of
their own begetting, to prove themselves men. Whereof one John Pannonius
wrote a merry Epigram, in four Latin verses: testifying the truth of this
their doing, of the which I omit ye two first verses for civility sake. It may
be gathered by these latter two, what is meant.

Curigitur nostro mos hic iam te^porecessat?
Ante probat sese quilibet essemarem.
How happens that this groping then,
is used now no more?
Because each one does try himself,
to be a man before.

Trisander. And will not the people for all this be reduced from their vain
opinion, in taking the Pope to be Christ's Vicegerent, to the abhorring of that
usurped high ambitious title of Supremacy?


Panteleon. My son, many are so obstinate, that they will never confess to
the contrary: and the more wicked the Popes were in life and conversation, the
more godly they think them to be.


Triasander. But were they all doers of michiefe that became Bishops of Rome?


Panteleon. No, for all did not arrogantly claim to themselves Supremacy on
earth. Linus a Tuscane borne, a man of pure and godly life, was Bishop of Rome:
he was never puffed up with such pride, that he would name himself head of all
Churches throughout the world. But this good man, according to the example of
the Apostles, was not afraid to preach the Gospel, and for preaching of the
same, suffered martyrdo^e under Saturninus the Consul, while Vespacian reigned.
Diverse fancies are fathered upon this man, as that he decreed by the
commandment of Saint Peter, being dead, that no woman should enter into the
temple bareheaded: which cannot be, for there were no temples in Rome, till
the time of Constantine the Emperor. For Christian congregations were
constrained to live in deserts, woods, and mountains: they were enforced to
dig them Caves under the ground, whereof many are yet to be seen at Rome,
even to this day. Therefore these things may bewray the dotage of Platina, and
others, who charge these first godly Martyrs with diverse superstitions,
devised by other long after. Anacletus the first borne at Athens, is placed by
Irenaeus next after Linus: he was a man of an excellent and fervent spirit,
and of great learning, he planted the Church of God with daily labor, and
was put to death by Domitian. Anno. 94. Certain Epistles and decrees, stuffed
full of falsehood, untruths and ambition, touching ye ordering and primacie of
Bishops, are cou^terfeited in his name. But Flaccus Illyricus, in the first
Centurie, does so rip the seames of them, that every man may perceive what
botched stuff it is. Beside Mantuan says, that he lived not long in any such
estate, as to have occasion to write of such matters, but in Caves and Dens,
among woods. Clement the first, a Roman, advanced the Gospel by continual
preaching and good deeds. They forge of him that he did deuid^ Rome into
Parish churches, which had scant a lodging in it. Again, they slander him
that he made orders in Rome for confirmation of children, for Masses,
Apparel, Vestures, and other Popish Ceremonies: and yet he (seely man) was
of so small power and authority to establish these things in Rome, yt he was
a long time banished by ye emperor, and he wed marble stones, till at length
he was cast into the Sea, with an Anchor about his neck: Anno. 102. So
writes Mantuan. Fasto. 11. Euaristus the first, a Grecian, was especially
endewed with the grace of God, whereby in the time of persecution he ceased
not to increase the Church of Christ by his diligent preaching; till he was
martyred under Traian, An. 110. Alexander the first, a Roman, did travel
painefully, both in preaching and baptizing, he suffered great torments, till
he died thereof, under one Aurelianus fore^ president to the Emperor: Ann. 21.
Sixtu^ the first a Roman, did both preach diligently, and did many good works,
he^ beautified the Church with godly deeds, ^eing always vigilant and careful
for ^is flock, and died for it. Ann, 129. These three good Bishops are
slaundered with ^ertaine Popish decrees, as touching the ^onsecrating of the
Clergy, holy water, and holy vessels: but old verses made of these times, do
testify, that they were not at such leisure, to furnishe, or rather disguise
the Church with these superstious Ceremonies. Thus do some write of these
times:

Vrbibus antiqui patres fugere relictis, etc.
The tyrants did our Ancestors compel,
to fly to woods, and not in towns to dwell.
Many such godly men, who were Bishops of Rome, I could recite, as Telesphorus
the first, Higinus the first, Pius of Aquilia, Anacletus, Sother, Eleutherius,
Victor, Zepherius, Calixtus ye first, Vrbanus, Pontianus, Antheros, Fabian,
Cornelius, Lucius a Roman, Stephanus, Sixtus the second, Dyonisi us, Foelix,
Eutychianus, Gaius, or Caius, Marcellinus, Marcellus, Eusebius, Melchiades,
Syl^ester the first, etc. Except this one bishop Siluester, all the rest gave
their blood to be shed for testimony of their faith. these foresaid bishops
never claimed ye supremacy, as proud Popes do now a days, they never
desired to be decked with such vain glorious titles, it was a thing which
they never wished, nor never intended: yet were they bishops of Rome. And if
the Supremacy were lawful for their successors, it had been much more
lawful for the^, being ye succeeding popes of their Predecessors. They knew
well that Christ gave them no such prerogative above ye rest of their fellow
Bishops to be rulers over all: for they were Bishops, such as God loved, and
such as loved God: they became not Bishops of Rome, to the end they might go
in their Pontificalibus, to the end they might be richer then kings, or to
the end they might command Emperors, Kings, Princes, and all estates, to
do according to their fantastical mind, to make them kneel and kiss their
feet. These Bishops were no such proud Lucifer like Prelates, they cared not
for the vaineglory of man, the deceitefull pomp of his world, nor the
glorious shows of his life: but all their delight was ^o preach the glad
tidinges of the Go^pell, to preach faith fixed in Christ, and to preach
repentance established in the mind, to preach the Sacrament of the Supper of
the Lord, and to preach the Sacrament of Baptism: in confirmation of which
their sound and perfect doctrine, they shed their innocent blood. But as soon
as their successors vanquished with pride, and inflamed with ambition, took
to themselves the name and title of the universal Bishop, and would have the
Roman Church called ye head of all Churches, then they reigned in the church
of christians, without judgment or consideration of the heavenly spirit, they
did cast their eyes on earthly things, forgetting Gods everlasting Testament,
as if they regarded the flesh only, and not the soul. All their delight was
in new Traditions, Ceremonies, buildinges, pleasures, pomp, wars, treasons,
and translations of kingdoms, so that they seemed to live in ye glory of this
world, and in contempt with Christ. Thus the Church under their government,
is at length become the strumpet of Babylon according to the whole discourse of
the Apocalypse. Yet men blinded by their own affections, and nouzeled in their
own vanities, will needs confess these ungodly Popes to be Christ's Vicars
here on earth, albeit their life be abominable, albeit many of them have
believed the soul of man to have been mortal, and have taught that there was
neither Heaven nor hell, neither God nor Devil, and have procured general
disputations for that cause: as Clement the eight, who was a poysoner, a
murderer, a bawd, an unclean liver, and that in such sort, as (if it were not
for offending chaste ears) is not to be named. He is also charged with
Symonie, adultery, rauishing of women, perjury, coniuring, Church robbing:
finally, to be fraught with all kind of villainy. And therefore a certain
Poet wrote thus of him:

Clementi nomen dedit inclementia fati,
Belloru^ hic fomes cunctoru^ lerna maloru^.
The inclemencie of destenie gave this name to Clement. This man was a sturrer
up of wars, and a worker of all mischief. John the xxiii. a Frenchman borne,
^aide, and stubbornly believed, that the ^oule of man dies together with the
bo^y, and is consumed to nothing, like the ^oule of brute beasts: of which
error ^ee never purged himself. These Popes are they, by the judgment of the
Papists, that can never err: for the holy Ghost directs them in all their
doings. I would ask them this question, whither is the holy Ghost gone? or
how both he direct them in all their doings, when they believe there is
neither heaven nor hell, God nor Devil, and when they maintain this, that the
soul of man is mortal? Surely the holy ghost is gone to prepare a place of
miserere for such faithless Caitiffes. I could write many things touching the
Popes of Rome, that lived most wickedly, and denied the immortality of the
soul: but because thou art learned, thou may read (my son) of their
lives at large in the histories of Platina, Christianus Masseus, Carsulan,
Ptolomeus Lucensis, etc.


Trisander. The narration of the corrupt living, and horrible heresies of these
Popes before recited, shall make me beware how I give credit to any proud
Papist, that will have me confess the Pope to be Supreme head over all
Churches.


Panteleon. God grant thou may do so: hold here, I give thee two hundred
pounds, God bless thee, and make thee his servant.


Trisander. Fare you well my good father.


Panteleon. Adue my son.


The end of the first Dialogue.
The second Dialogue. Wherein mention is made of the lives of Cardinals and
Bishops etc.
The speakers are Trisander the Pilgrim, and Tiptelichia his mother.
Trisander. SEeing that I have obtained my fathers good will, and received money
sufficient for my voyage, I think it my duty likewise to request your leave
(O loving mother) to travel to foreign Countries. The cause of this my
request to travel to strange and foreign kingdoms I have already
declared. I have taken my farewell of my father, and I mean to take my leave
of you in like manner dear mother.


Tiptelichia. Son, seeing that your mind and pleasure is to depart from us:
and seeing your father my husband has satisfied your request, I am not to
deny what you ask of me in that behalf. But forasmuch as your father
tendering the safety of your soul, has told you many enormities of the
Popes, for your greater detestation of them, it behooves me being your
mother, to impart unto you my son a farther declaration of the corrupt lives
of Cardinals and Bishops.


Trisander. To hear your talk touching the abominable and hypocritical life
of Cardinals and Bishops, I would gladly give ear, that I may take heed of
their delusions.


Tiptelichia. Then listen to my words, and mark what I say, I will tell thee
but truth, and what I heard reported unto me by my brother that has been a
great traveler, and has seen with his eyes those things which I shall recite
unto thee.


Trisand. I pray you (mother) without farther tract of time, reveal unto me
what your brother (my uncle) has uttered unto you.


Tiptelichia. My brother being at Rome, hard of many that Cardinal Far ^n his
youth loved a boy better the^ a woman, and in his old age (as it is supposed
of many) of an Agent is become a Pacient. Nam succumbit libidini quorundam
Sodomitarum. Shamefastness prohibiteth me to tell this abominable practice of
his in English. This is he notwithstanding, whom certain of the Papists write
to be virtuous and learned.


Trisander. But is not he the chief and principal Cardinal amongst all the
rest in office and dignity?


Tiptelichia. Yes, and in his office is great: for he is the Popes
Vicechauncellour, and his revenues are likewise great. For his rents amount in
the year to sixescore thousand Crowns, his servants are many, his house is
sumptuous, and his going is maiesticall. This man wants no worldly pomp, no
glory, no majesty, that may be lawfully demanded in respect of his courtly
dignity, and princely revenues.


Trisander. I understand (mother) that his office is great, and his riches as
great: but can you tell (gentle mother) whether he be a temporal or
spiritual man, a secular or a Priest.


Tiptelichia. I understood by my brother, that his crown is shaven, and that
he says Mass, I suppose therefore he is a Priest after the order of Jupiter,
or of Venus, I cannot tell which.


Trisander. But is he learned? Can he preach? And does he keep
hospitality?


Tiptelichia. He is very well learned, for he understands the scriptures,
as though they had not been written: and he is as cunning in the Doctors, as
though he had never seen or heard of their writings. He speaks as good
latin, as there is in the Italian tongue, he is a singular good preacher, when
he is in his garden of pleasure, and repaste with his loving Neeces, he has a
good gift in teaching: for he teaches his curre dog to lick his Priestly
bearde. This man has such a grace in utterance, that all the whelps he has
would commend him, if they had the gift of speech. He comes as often to
the Pulpit, as the Pope does to England, to show himself Peter's Successor
by life and doctrine.


Trisander. I see that this man is more glutted with dainty dishes of meat,
the^ replenished with copy of wholesome places of Scripture: more fatted in
eating of crammed Capons, then well read in the ancient and grave Doctors: and
more occupied in playing with his fawning Spaniel, then exercised in preaching,
and delivering the word of God unto the flock committed to his charge. But
(mother) can you tell whether any other lives so corruptly as this Cardinal
has, and (as far as I know) does as yet?


Tiptelichia. Good son, to tell how the Cardinals of Rome lead their lives,
contrary to their calling and profession: some (whom declaration of truth can
never or hardely make pliable to embrace true reports) will think that
whatsoever I reveal unto thee, touching their wicked and hypocritical lives,
to be either feined, or else uttered of malice, no^ knowing yt which I report
unto thee t^ be either true or false. Be my words never so true, nor uttered
of malice, ye^ will the Papists say, that all things yt I speak are false, and
spring of a malicious and cankered stomach. But no faithfu^ Christian may
otherwise persuade him self, but yt the Cardinals may now live as licentiously
and lewdly, as they have in times past. What ye life of many Cardinals and
Bishops has been in times past, the histories of their lives in sundry
Historiographers books expressed may give sufficient notice unto the world
(...) and what I shall utter unto thee, shall be so true and manifest, ye
diverse that have been in Italy, and have seen the fashions of those
Cardinals and Bishops, may verify my words to be true.


Trisander. Are all Cardinals (I pray you) Priests?


Tiptelichia. All, for the most part, have shaven crowns, and are bound to
make a wheate^ god of a wheate^ cake, and to drink to Baal a carowse once every
week.


Trisander. But do they preach as ^he superintendents in Germany, and as ^ur
Bishops in England do?


Tiptelichia. They preach not after ^he same manner, for they preach in Co^hes
and in gardens, but the Bishops in Germany and in England preach in pulpets
both in Churches and else where.


Trisander. It was told me, that Cardinal Medices is a brave fellow, when he
comes to the pulpet, that he is a singular good scholar, and a passing
Divine both in the Scriptures and Doctors.


Tiptelichia. He is a brave fellow in deed, albeit he never comes to the
Pulpet, his apparel is gay and costly, and he has a comely body and a fair
complexion. But surely he has such an impediment (which they vulgarly call
the crampe) in his feet, that he is not able to ascend or go up to the
pulpet: and he has such an ache in his back, that he may not be carried to
the Pulpet without intolerable pain. Therefore, by reason of the crampe of
slothfulness, and the ache of insufficiency, he hates the Pulpet, as the
mouse abhors the sigh^ of the Cat. I confess he is a singular scholar to
dispute with any Doctor, i^ the knowledge of the making of goodl^ Rocks,
fair mountes, and artificial milles under the ground. Moreover; I d^ not deny
but that he is a passing divine in ye scriptures, and books of Venus, Diana
Jupiter, and Mercury, in the oracles of Apollo he is a skillful man, in the
writings o^ the Heathen doctors he is very well seen This Cardinal Medices, a
noble man by birth, a Papist by profession, and a shaueling by vocation,
bestows more cost and expenses in his garden, house, and mount, then will
satisfy the wantes and necessity of three hundredth poor men. This thing is
to be coniectured by the number of workmen, and by the cost linesse of every
thing that apperteineth to the workmanship in his house. He has caused the
likeness of a lively rock to be made, and on each side thereof to be
portraited the shape of naked women he has laid out great riches in this and
such like vanities, he has consumed much Church goods in his mount of
pleasure. For the charges that are bestowed in his ^arden, he is not much to be
discommened, for that I think it requisite, that ^pirituall as well as
Temporal men ^oulde have some worldly felicity. The ^auest dames in Rome may
be glad to ^ecreate themselves in this pleasant garden, the like whereof I
never saw, and ^et I have seen many, but ^^lacke, this Noble Cardinal
abuses himself to much, and abuses the name of a Christian, in fayning
himself to be one, where in deed he is none. Why does he if he were not a
Gentile) spend so much money in making such Gods as the gentiles had? No God
of great renown was amongst the Paganes, amongst the Gentiles, amongst the
unbelievers, but this Cardinal Medices has caused the like to be made.


Trisander. Mother you say that this Medices is a Cardinal, and therefore a
pillar of the Church of Rome: how can this Church stand, if the pillars do
fail? Is it possible that a Cardinal may be a Gentile, and a Christian? a
worshipper of God, and a runner a whooring after other Gods? I pray you
(mother) tell me, who told you that Cardinal Medices has made the Statue of
Venus, Diana, Mercury, Juno, Jupiter, Apollo, Hercules, and a hundredth more
Gods?


Tiptelichia. My brother was he that has seen these things with his eyes,
and has told me even as he saw them. There is no day in the year almost,
except Sundays and holy days, but this Cardinal has ten at the least that
are about the making of the gods of the gentiles: they are to be seen in his
garden, and in his house adjoining to his garden, I mean not his palace.


Trisander. But (mother) can you tell me whether all the rest of the Cardinals
reserve the Gods of the Gentyles?


Tiptelichia. All (for the most part) as cardinal Comedone, cardinal Columna,
Cardinal Sauello, Cardinal Farnefio, Cardinal Alexandrino, etc.


Trisander. Oh abomination of all abominations, that these worldly Cardinals
should thus profane themselves in making and keeping the Idols of the
gentiles, should thus usurp unto them selves the name and title of
Christians, should in word profess Christ, but in a^owing and having these
dumb, deaf, and insensible Idols, utterly deny him. Oh men void of the
grace of God, what should they do with these Statues, that were the Gods of
the Gentiles, if they would be counted Christians? But in deed they do as
Antichrist their graund-captaine does, and aloweth.


Tiptelichia. My son, seeing that thou art persuaded, that these Cardinals
are not the right worshippers of Christ, for that they make such unlawful
account of the Idols of the Gentiles, I am ye more beholding unto thee, and God
grant thou may never be otherwise persuaded then thou art at this time. I
have declared unto thee the manifest and express Idolatry of these Roman
Cardinals, for this one only cause, that thou knowing what they are, may the
more earnestly stick to the says wherein thou art now, and strive with thy
Ghostly and bodily enemy with all might and maine (as the Proverb is) that
the Papists may not have power over thee, nor ability, by their crafty
iuggling and feined Legendes of Saints to deceive thee. Mark the manners of
the Cardinals of Rome, and thou shall see them void of any virtue, or
godliness, mark their pronesse and readiness to idolatry, mark that
Paganism took such deep root in their forefathers, that they them selves
are infected with the spot of ^dolatrie, and worshipping of salfe Gods. To
dissuade them from this horrible crime, no man dare, without danger of his life
If a man should come to Rome, and make a Sermon before the pope and the
Cardinals, willing them to forsake their Gods, to break them in pieces, and to
cast the^ into ye rider Tyber, they would all with one consent and open mouth
exclaim against him, they would lay hands upon him, as Judas and Caiphas laid
hands upon Christ: they would shut him up i^^prison, and accuse him for an
Heretic. Therefore very few or none dare utter such words, for fear of
their great displeasure, undeserved indignation, and sore reuengement. If any
of these Cardinals have any moral virtue, be it never ^o little the Papists
will extol him to the kies, and commend him beyond all ^easure: but if they
he all naught, they shall not want but one or other will ^raise and magnify
their names.


Trisander. I understand by the proesse of your talk, that riches, and not
virtue, dignity, and not Pastorlike granitie make them to be beloved, to be
draysed, to be defended, and to be reverenced. If they were as poor, and as
humble as Christ and his Apostles were, ^o doubt there would not be so many
flatterers, and so many idle shauelinges, to commend these cardinals living in
wantonness, licentiousness, and carnal security.


Tiptelichia. Thou say true (my son) if is honor and dignity, it is pomp
and pride, it is cruelty and tyranny that vnholde the Church of Rome.
Poverty and humility, submission and loyalty, carfulness and Pastorlie
watching preserve not the state of Babylon, of that whoorish and idolatrous
Church of Rome. But to let these words pass, I will tell thee (my son) how
the Cardinals live at Rome. First it is said, that in their Gardens diverse
times are seen fair and comely Gentlewomen, whom they call either Neeces,
Cozens, or sisters: but what they be let the Romans judge, that know better
of their order, in that kind of dealing. They say plainly, that they are
chamberlaines to the Cardinals (I will not say their bedfellowes, for I know
not that.) These Cardinals ride gallantly in their coches, almost every day in
ye ^reetes of Rome, they keep their men lusty and brane in apparel, their
Pages are most galla^t, amongst all the rest, in their costly attire. There are
in Rome, above twenty Cardinals, but yet not one of them preaches. There are
bishops I know not how many, but yet not one exhorts ye people. In common or
private assembly, all their talk is of worldly matters, all their doings
tend to their own glory, to their farther promotion, and to their greater
gain. If ever there were Epicures and Saduces in the world, or are now in
these dages, surely they were and are the Cardinals of Rome: For they want no
pleasure, they want no treasure, they ^acke no promotion, and they want no
reverence done unto them. They have the world at will, soft beds, dainty
fare, stout geldinges, goodly mules, princely coches, gorgeous apparel, huge
buildings, and what flesh and blood can wish besides: I will not add bewtifull
women, and imagine more: Fie, I am loath to write Formosos pueros. These
forsooth (if you give credit to diffembling Papists) are virtuous priestly
Cardinals, devout, religious, sptrituall Potentates, clearkly churchly princes,
and holy reverend fathers.


Trisander. I see (mother) that the Church is weak, where the pillars are
feeble: and the Church must needs be naught, when as the Cardinals are
naught, who are ye holders up thereof. But I beseech you (mother) tell me
whether they imitate the Apostles in some point or other, or else follow the
gentiles in all their proceedings.


Tiptelichia. They altogether degenerate from the Apostles ways. For the
apostles preached, they never preach they study to please God alone, but the
study to please many Gods, therefore they follow not the Apostles. They seek to
become rich and glorious in the sigh of men, they are busy in seeking for the
Gods of the Gentiles, therefore it appears that Paganism is not clean roote^
out of their hearts.


Trisander. Is it not Cardinal Ferrara that keeps a great rowt of gallant
Gentlemen, and maintains them to do as they list?


Tiptelichia. I think it be the very same person, that has such Gentlemon
as you talk of, and if it be, he caused his men to kill one of the Sbirri,
whersoeuer they took him, though it were in the Church. It chanced, that his
men followed this poor Sbirri, even to Saint Peter's Church, and they would
hane killed him in the Vestiarie, had not the shaven crowns helped him, and
delivered him from the danger then imminent.

Cardinal Como, Cardinal Morono, cardinal Sauello, best favorers of the
English Seminary at Rome, are very pro^pt and ready to exhort the English
Priests ^o seduce the simple people here in England, and to stir up
dissension amongst ^he Gentry. But to warn the popes ^chollers to go
decently in apparel, to walk circumspectly in their calling, to deal with
all men simply and justly, and to live virtuously they never intend it. But
what crastie counsel may be given to make hurly burly in this land, they give
it. To speak a little of the Bishops I think it not amiss. The Bishop of
Versellis, and the Bishop of Pauia, were at great dissension for worldly
dignity, as my brother reported unto me, who was with them both, and heard
how the one backhited the other, and the one maliciously slaundered the other.
The one dealt with my brother very liberally, and willed him to certify the
Bishop of Pauia, what liberal gifts he had received at his hands: The other
knowing of the Bishop of Versellis liberality, gave him more Iuels, then other
wise he would have done, and willed him to tell the other Bishops, what he
had given. But when they gave him so much money, for that the one would seem
more vertrous then the other, I cannot tell: bu^^ surely, because the one
willed him to ce^tifie the other how much money he harece^tued, I think it
hypocrisy. The Bishop of Turym had the name in the town to be very much
fleshly minded, but when there he was such a one or no, I canno of certainty
tell: how beit thus went the report of him. Though the Bishop o^ Granoble has
vowed chastity, yet he^ has two or three base borne children, and keeps a
well complextioned gentlewoma^ to serve him at bed and at board. What livers
the Bishops are in France, they that have daily traffic in those countries
may soon know: and how wickedly most Bishops (I do not say all) lead their
lives, they that be travelers can easily show. I will not name all, whom I
have known (by the report of many) to have lived very hypocritically and
naughtilie in germany, where papistrie reigns. The Bishops in many places
live not spiritually but secularly, as my brother has seen with his eyes. Let
no man think that I report these things to thee of malice. How the
generation Papisticall Bishops have lived from me to time, histortes do
declare. He ^at was Bishop sometime of Cambray, (...) his book de vitis
Patrum, and de rebus estis Catholicorum, writes how that in ^raunce, Germany,
Italy, Spain, and Eng^ande also, when the saying was Viuat Papa Romanus,
Bishops lived more after the example of Sodomites, Tyrians, and Sydonists, the^
after ye example of true virtuous Christians. There was a Bishop (says this
writer) that was born in Germany and dwelt there: when this Bishop was a boy,
he was so dull of conceining any thing ye was taught him by his master, that
he provoked to himself more stripes then all the rest of the schollexs
besides. This lad being werie of suffering more stripes and beatinges, made his
prayer to our blessed Lady Marie, the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
being as it were overcome with his often supplication, asked him at the last,
what he would have: then answered the boy, the gift of learning. For now
through defect thereof I am beaten without compassion. Our blessed Lady powered
so much doctrine into his mouth, tha^ he was ready to cry, It is good? Ther^
she told him, that after the decease o^ the Bishop of his Diocese, he
should b^ created a Bishop, and be his successor This man soon after
excelled his master in perfect knowledge of good Literature, and after the
discease of the Bishop he became Bishop in his room: but afterward he
lived so sensually, and so voluptuously, yt he surpassed the beasts of the
field in sensuality and voluptuousness. For he took the Nuns out of their
Monastery and made them his bedfellowes, he ravished his neighbors maidens,
and defiled his neighbors beds, insomuche that upon a time there came a voice
unto him, and said, Thou have done enough repent now: but he lightly
regarding what the voice had told him, became worse and worse. Another time the
voice came, and told him again, Thou have done enough now repent: but the
next night, he took two Nuns out of a Nunrie, and stepped with them both. Then
the spirit of illusion came, as they were a bed, in the form of a man, and
willed ^e bishop tomake room: who asked him owe he entered into the chamber,
the ore being locked? The spirit answered, ^at he opened the door by his
cunning. Then he asked him again, how he durst ^ee so bold: but the spirit
making no ^nswere too this demand, bad the Bi^hop make room, without asking
any ^nore questions. Then the Bishop asked whence he was, he answered, from
Hell: ^hen said the Bishop, what is it ye thou would have: then said the
Hellishe ^pirite, come thy way, thou have lived too ^ong in pleasures and
delights. These words being said, he took the Bishop and lifted him up in
the air, and letting him fall, bruised and mangled so piteous^y; yt it was
horrible to be beholded. As ^oone as the day light appeared, the Bishops
servants being up saw their master ^ying dead on ye ground, very deformed and
dissigured by the furious spirits of Hell. He writes another history in his
book of a certain Bishop, who had a temporal princely dignity, beside his
reverend spiritual function. As this Bishop was on a day, riding abroad, there
beheld him a far of a poor husband man, whom when the Bishop saw, he
called vnt^ him, and asked why he beheld him (...) greedily? Mary (quoth the
poor man) was strange in my sight, to see you princely attire, and your
courtly rou^ of valiant champions, and noble Gentl^women. Do thou not know
that am both a Secular Prince, and a Spir^tuall Bishop? Then answered the
country man, I know not so much, but sur^ly I think it is hard for a man to
seru^ God and the world, to be chaste and (...) maintain waiting
gentlewomen. The^ said the Bishop, thou say truth, tha^ being a Bishop, I
must live as a bishop but whereas thou see I am a tempora^ prince beside, I
may flaunt in my bravery here in this world, and do God goo^ service: I may
keep as many men an^ women as I list. What follows i^ the History, thou
may read my son at thy leisure. Thou may see (m^ son) many such
pretty histories in tha^ Bishop of Cambrays book full of delectation. I will
tell thee my son of on^ Bishop that got a child by his own ^aughter, he
dwelt in Bauaria, and had ^is daughter to keep his house, whom he ^iked so
well, that he tried the maisterie with her whether he were able to geate a
child by her or no. But it so fell out, as it was reported at Inglestade that
his ^aughter was gotten with child by her father. The Cardinal of Trent that
^ately deceased gave himself so much to drinking, that he became a famous
Clarke in that science, especially in the assembly of swyll pottes. Many such
^elly Gods, horned Prelates, and oyled Priestly Bishops could I recite, but
these few already recited may content thy mind, until thou have seen with
thine eyes what many of them be in deed.


Trisander. The Papists blame the lives of our bishops very much: but surely
compare their lives together, you shall see, that they differ much the one
from the other.


Tiptelichia. Thou say truth, for albeit there be one or other that lives
not so uprightly as he ought, yet where as one or other lives otherwise then
well, yet have you the most part live very well, and are good Preachers. This
to be true all men know. To wade any farther in talk with thee at this
present time, I may not, nor will: I may not, in respect of my business: nor
will, for that I know the lives of these few Cardinals and Bishops, recited
according to verity, may serve thee for a sufficient warning how to take heed
of papistrie, being the religion of Devils, and not of faithful Christians.
Adue my son, God bless thee, and make thee his servant, to do his will as
he commands, to thy Parents joy, and thine own comfort and consolation in
Christ Jesus. Cleave to the truth, be mindful of thy calling be warned in
time to fly from iniquitie^ once again, farewell my son, and forget not my
words.


Trisander. As you have councelled me to do, so will I do God willing: Adue
good mother, god have you in his keeping.


Tiptelichia. Hold here, I give thee four score pounds, spend not too
liberally, least that thou want, and then find^ none that will succor thee.
Be wise, circumspect, humble, provident, sober, patient, and careful.


Trisander. I will: once again adue, god preserve you evermore, and grant
that I may return happily unto you again.


Tiptelichia. Amen, God grant that thy returning home may be as joyful to
me, as thy departure from home is troublesome and grievous.


THus are these two former Dialogues finished and ended: I must make have to
the third. And (courteous Reader) if thou be not already tired, in reading
the few leaves going before, proceed a little further, and thou shall see
very pretty stuff, and worthy to be noted.

The end of the second Dialogue.
The third Dialogue, Wherein the lives of certain Monks, Friars, my Lady
Nuns, and sister Nuns are discovered.
The speakers are Trisander the Christian Pilgrim, and Diawinckian^ the
wandering Papist. Trisander. NOW I have for saken the presence of my father
and mother, and bidden adue to my loving country. Now will I frequent and use
the company of strangers, and travel into sundry foreign soyles: now have
I hazarded my life to a thousand dangers, to danger of drowning, to hazzarde
of robbing, to peril of murdering, I fear the raging waters, I dread the
covetous robbers, and I mistrust the cruel murderers. Good God, what shall I
do? I am compassed round about, and environed on every side, how shall I
escape the imminent perils in every way? There lurketh a thief in most woods
through France, there are noterious murderers, I want company, I know not
the language. Good Lord, what shall I do? would God I were in England
again, I would I were with my father and mother, who loved me so dearly,
that no Parents more entirely could love their children. But seeing I am thus
far out of my country, and am at Rhone, not far from the famous City
Paris, I will go forwards in my journey, be the way never so dangerous. Si
Deus sit mecum, quis contra me? If God be with me, who can do me any wrong?
I see a man coming behind me a far of, I will ask him whether he
determines to travel. But I think by his apparel, that he is no scholar,
wherefore I will first expect and look for some words from his mouth, and if
he begin to speak French, I will answer him in Latin, and by that means I
shall prove if he be a scholar or no.


Diawinckiani. Dieu vous guard monfieur, ou voulez vous cheuaucher?


Trisander. Amice mi, externus sums, and sermonem tuum non percipio: I am a
stranger, and understand not your words, Sed pace tua diverim (ni fallor) tua
in Auglia familiaritate quondam vsus sum, tempore Mariano. But with your good
leave I speak it, unless I am deceived, in Queen Mary's time we were well
acquainted in England.


Diawinckiani. Ie suis bien ioy^ux vostre trouue compaignie: si il vous,
plaist, nous irons ensemble, d' ou estes vous? I am glad to have your company,
if it may please you, we will go together, whence are you?


Trisander. I understand you are no Latinist, but seeing that you speak
French, I will answer you in English, if you be he whom I mean, you can
speak the English tongue.


Diawinckiani. I understand and can speak your language, and I am glad you
have not forgotten me, in deed in Queen Mary's time I have lived in England,
and fared very well, with powdered beef, and fat mutton, good wine, and strong
^eere, in faring so daintily, and living so meerily, in fleeping so softly, and
carousing so stoutely, I served Thomas Becket, and my Lady Anne of Cleue, I
looked to their rotten bones, and swept the dust from their images, I did them
good service, and therefore by their intercession I deserved to redeem many
souls out of the boiling Cauldron of Purgatory.


Trisander. I rejoice, and am glad that it was my good luck to find you in
this foreign country. In deed I remember your state very well, your life
then surely was pleasant, you were cook in the monastery of Glastenburie,
about fifty years ago, you were then young and lusty, and could have
brought to your Abbots Chamber a pretty young damsel to keep him waking, and
to comfort his weery members feebled with overmuch studies.


Diawinckiani. Your words are true, I was such a one as you speak of, then my
diligence was acceptable to many an Abbot and Pryor, to many a Monk and Friar,
I have gotten wealth by the^, obtained much pleasure, enjoyed great estimation,
by coupeling Male and Female together: at the last they saw me so fortunate
in bringing to pass those things which they had wished, that they promoted
me to be the Clarke of the Monastery Chapel. I had the precious reliks of
Thomas Becket, and my Lady Anne of Cleue in my custody, I had their images
likewise in my keeping.


Trisander. I know my friend what you were in times past, therefore
superfluous it shall be to make many words of that matter: but I pray you tell
me, whither are you bounding, what is your state and condition? where dwell
you? and how long have you stayed in this Country?


Diawinckiani. For old acquaintance sake, courtesy moves me to give a
direct and resolute answer to every particular demand of yours. I intend to
travel to Italy, my state is not so happy as it has been, for now I am
poor, then I was rich, now and then I have money plenty, but then I had store
always. Haec est vicissitudo rerum. This is the course of the Cards. I have
no certain limited dwelling, but sometimes I dwell in this Monastery,
sometimes in that, now in this Nunrie, and to morrow in that, now in this
Hospital, now in that, now in this Country, in another soon after: now
here, now there: now I cannot tell where: Hanc viuo vitam, This life I lead
in spite of the Devil. Lastly, I tell you that in France, Germany, Italy,
Bohemia, Polonia, Flaunders, Brabant, and Freezeland, I have traveled ever
since the Coronation of this Queen* Elizabeth.


Trisander. Wherefore went you out of the Realm? and why return you not again?


Diawinckiani. I went out of the Realm for conscience sake, and because of
religion.


Trisander. What religion then do you profess?


Diawinckiani. Papistrie, otherwise (and that rightly) termed the Catholic
faith, which I do embrace with all my heart.


Trisander. What do I here? Are you still! a Papist* Will you never renounce
the Pope with all his Traditions and filthy abominations? With all his
idolatry and superstitious Ceremonies? I pity your case, alack my friend,
has Satan blinded your eyes with the cloudie mist of ignorance, and hardened
your heart as the flint or adamant stone? I lament your state, I bewail your
gross error, wherewith you are entangled. Oh my friend, for the love I bear
you, and for the old acquaintance that has beene-betwixte us these many
days, I council you, for your own salvation, for your own glory, and life
everlasting, to examine your unstable religion, grounded upon a sandy and
fickle foundation, which is easy to be overthrown with the least blast of
wind that can be.


Diawinckiani. To examine my religion I have no need, it is warranted and
grounded upon a rich rock, strong, and available against all storms, winds,
and tempests, My religion stands built upon a good foundation, as the pope,
^s Cardinals, Bishops, and Abbots, do ^ouch and declare in their assemblies and
councels general.


Trisander. Surely my friend thou ^iest truth. For I heard tell, that S.
^eters Church is builte upon a little ^ocke, very rich, I cannot deny it. For
the Pope dwells fast by-it, and has ^he most of his treasure in that plott
of ^rounde. But your religion should not ^ee contrary to the truth of Christ's
hea^enly Gospel, though Saint Peter's Church were richer then it is, and
though ^he Pope and his Cardinals, with the ^est of his adherentes, to keep
their great titles, honors, dignities, and promotions, boldly say that the
Romish faith is the true religion.


Diawinckiani. My friend Trisander, the Pope has larger revenues then any
Prince in Christendom, why therefore is he not Christ's Vicegerent? And the
Church of Saint Peter is the costliest Church in the world, in many respects,
why therefore is not the Church of S. Peter the holy Catholic Church? the holy
ghost, in the form of an ow^ has confirmed this faith before the fa^ of a
Council, and in the presence of t^ Pope himself. Therefore assure yo^ self,
this is the Catholic faith, whi^^ I hold and allow. This is the tr^^
religion confirmed by the Pope.


Trisander. O my friend, thou a (...) foully deceived. For the holy Ghost wont
to appear in the form of a Dou^ but not in the likeness of an owl. The Pope
is not able to establish true relig^on, but he can pervert all truth, for the
he fitteth in the chair of pestilence, an^ claims to himself supremacy on
eart^ But I purpose not to discuss of religion seeing that I have no
sufficient leasu^ and opportunity thereunto: but this brief^ I tell thee, give
over thy lewd opinion and let us both travel together as tw^ brethren, and
reconciled Christians. For sometimes I was of thy religion, albei^ not in all
points.


Diawinckiani. Let words of religion pass by, and let us talk of our long
and tedious voyage, which we have to take.


Trisander. I am content, let us do you have said. How many miles have ^ee now
to Paris?


Diawinckiani. Three short miles.


Trisan. What is it of the clock? ^ay we be at the City before night?


Diawinckiani. It is one of the clock, ^^d easily before the going down of the
^unne we may beat Paris.


Trisa. Let us ride a pace, where shall ^e find good lodging?


Diawinckiani. Do not you care for that, we shall be very well entertamed
^^y the Prior of Saint Dominicks Mona^erie, and our good fare shall cost us
nothing.


Trisander. But can my Lord Pri^r speak English?


Diawinckiani. Not a word, but he ^peaketh Latin, no man better then ^ee.


Trisander. I am glad that he speaks Latin so well, but is he so virtuous
that he will so friendly receive into his Monastery such travelers as I am?


Diawinckiani. He is very virtuous. But this I forewarne you of, that if you
see him with others of his Cloister walking after supper to the fields, and
many of the Parisian Clergy sporting in the fair meddowes, speak not a
word, if (after their woonted manner) man with man work filthiness, as Saint
Paul writes in the first Chapter to the Romans, That some men leave the
natural use of the women, and burn in their lusts one with another. This
thing has been done this long time, and this wickedness is as yet practiced
amongst them secretly.


Trisander. In the book of the Bishop of Cambray I have read of this
abomination, used most commonly amongst the Parisian Clergy: and whether in
those places as yet they use the like filthiness, I cannot tell: but surely I
am persuaded, that at home in their houses they are not ashamed to defile
themselves one with another. For I resorting to some of their houses as a
stranger, might easily gather by their unseemly playing one with another, that
their life is Sodomiticall: and by their carnal and venereal talk, a man may
rightly he persuaded, that they live as the Sodomites and Gomorreans did.


Diawinckiani. They had rather live like Sodomites, then be married, as the
ministers of ye reformed churches are, for the avoiding of all occasions of
these carnal and fleshly pranckes. I will bring thee my friend to many
Monasteries in the Popish Countries, where it is the Monks and Friars custom
to practice the vices specified by S. Paul, in the first Chapter to the
Romans. At Shalome in Burgundy three Monks were taken in doing this deed, and
were banished the City. A German Priest, and a French Priest of the
Cathedral Church there, in the said City, will not be ashamed to offer
this villainy to strangers that come to their houses. This vice, and iniquity
abounds in most places amongst the Monks, Friars, and Priests. At Troy,
albeit by the Magistrates they are sore punished, for associating themselves to
the company of lewd women, yet for all that, there is no woman but she shall
be welcome to their bed and board. I traveled the most towns in France, in
Anno, Dom. 1578. And I could come to no Monastery, but that I found one or
other in that Cloister having in his chamber a fair waiting Gentlewoman. On a
certain time it fortuned, as I came to a Cloister in the Dolphine of France,
to seek some relief of the Prior of that Monastery, I met the Subprior, and
he demanding from whence I came, and whither I would wander, caused me to
come to his chamber, and there was in his bed a woman groaning, as though she
had been with child. I was so bold to ask the Subprior what she was, and
he answered, his sister. I being a stranger and merrily disposed, I know by
her countenance, said I, and understand by her groaning, that your sister is
with child. Then spoke the Subprior, and are you a Physician, that you
understand so much by my sister, that she is conceived? Yea mary do I, quoth
I, and I am a Physician. Then smiled the subprior, and said, surely my friend,
thou art welcome, and be thou assured of any friendship that I can show thee,
thou have judged right by this woman, she is with child, she is not my
sister, but my Concubine, I had rather naturally deal with a woman, the^
unnaturally and Sodomittically defile my body with a man. Many of my brethren,
the Benedicts, keep maid servants to look to their chambers, and to be their
bedfellowes, and by that means they anoyde the offense of pollution, and the
other crime Sodomiticall: but my friend hold two franckes, go to the
butterie, take some meat, and go forwards in thy journey, tell no body those
things which thou have seen and heard. Garamercie with all my heart (quoth
I) good master Subprior, I will conceal whatsoever I have heard and seen. At
Lions in France, as I came to the Nunrie of Saint Bridgit, craving some
relief, I found them very courteous, sober, and quiet, and some of them so
still, that the brave youths might do with them as they would? Master Pound
(who is now gone to Jerusalem) as he himself reported unto me often,
secretly plaide with two of the Nuns, and in one bed with each one of them
said his breuiarie. One of ye Nuns loved this M. Pound a gentle man Priest so
well, that in all his journey to Rome, and the world throughout, she would
be his clarke, and forsake her sisters.


Trisander. Truly good companion, these Monks and Friars are manifest
hypocrites, and woe and sorrow shall be their reward. They pretend
chastity, and live (as thou say) Sodomitically: they suffer themselves over
easily to be snarled by the allurementes of the flesh, and yet they will he
counted holy Fathers, good livers, and the adopted children of Christ. But
unless they reform their vicious manners, and corrupt life, I cannot see how
these men may rightly be named the servants of the most highest, and the
lawful inheritours of the incorruptible crown of eternal happiness. How
do they think to excuse themselves in the sight of Christ our Savior, that
dissemble thus with the world? Do they persuate themselves that they are
virgins, and shall obtain the glorious and uncorrupted reward of virginity,
because the world does judge them chaste virgins: Let the people imagine of
them selves as they will, hyporrisie may not, nor shall escape unpunished at
the dreadful day of judgment. Do they think, that because they intrude them
selves into Monasteries and Nunneries, they are able to keep their virginity
undefiled, and able to perform the vow of chastity? nay surely, daily
experience teaches, and the eiesight testifies, that Monks and Friars, are
no otherwise able to refrain the lusts of the fleshs, then men living in the
world. These hypocrites say that they live out of the world, only for that
they are enstraunged and seigned from the common assembly of the secular
people: and that their conversation sauoureth not of the woolde. These are
their words, but their deeds are contrary: they say they forsake the world,
but yet they will not despise the things that are in the world, as high
titles, good estimation, great credit; large possessions, ample revenues,
full purses of gold and silver, fair buildinges, goodly orchards, and delight
some gardens. They say they are not of the world, but yet the pomp, pride, and
glory of the world, the vanity, wealth, felicity, bravery, and iolitie of
this earth, and of earthly things, with daliance, pastime, eating, drinking
excessiuely, and al other sensual delights and desires, serving to carnal
appetite, they highly esheeme and magnify. And albeit they sequester
themselves from the common company of ye secular people, yet their life is not
a whit more holy then theirs: yea, to say the truth, their condition is far
worse then theirs. They have vowed chastity, but who more unchaste then they?
They have named themselves virgins; but who more defiled, and more incontinent
then they? How periuriously they have violated their rash^ and unadvised vow
of continency, histories make mention. The artificial and secret places to
keep their concubines in many places of England, do plainly notify to us
all, that they were incontinent violatours of their professed vow, and abusers
of the people, in causing them to believe, that they were the ^hast and
undefiled members of the holy Ghost. Nigellus wireker says, in speculo
stultorum.

Quid de se^pingha^, quantu^ vel qualia suma^,
Nescio, nam noua res, me dubitare facit.
Hoc tame^ ad presens, nulla ratione remitta^,
Nam necesse nimis fratribus esse reor,
Quod nu^quam nisicla^, nullaquescie^te sororu^,
Cum quocunquesuo fratre manner licet.
Thus are these verses englished of Sempingham.

What should I much prate,
An order it is, begun but of late:
Yet will I not let, the matter so pass,
The siely brethren and sisters alas.
Can have no meetings but late in the dark,
And this ye know well is an heavy work.
The same Nigellus writes moreover, these verses following.

Canonici missam tantum, reliqu^que sorores,
Explent officii debita iura sui,
Corpora no^ voces murus distinguit in vnu^,
Psallunt, directo psalmatis absquemero.
Thus are they to be englished.

The Monks sing the Mass, the Nuns sing the other,
Thus does the sister take part with the brother:
Bodies not voices, a wall does disseuer.
Without devotion they sing both together.
Nigellus the foresaid Poet, does largely touch the corrupt living and
hypocrisy of his time, chiefly in bishops, priests, Abbots, Monks, Canons,
and Nuns. His book is all in old Latin verses, and is named the Glass of
Fools, that every dissolute Prelate might behold his folly therein. Of the
Monks and Friars he gives this judgment among other.

Qui duee Bernardo gradiuntur vel Benedicto,
Aut Augustint subleuiori ingo,
Omnes sunt fures, quocu^que charactere sa^cto,
Signati veniant, magnificentque deum.
Necredas verbis, ne credas vestibus albis,
Vix etenim factis est adhibenda fides.
Quoru^ vox lenis, vox Jacob creditur esse,
Caetera sunt Esau, brachia, colla, manus.
Rursus in Egyptum qua^ deseruerereuersi,
Dulce sibi reputant a Pharaone premi,
Carnis ad illecebras nulloretine^te ruentes,
In fouca^ mortis carne trahente cadunt.
They that pretend to follow S. Bernard,
Bennet or Austen which is not so hard,
False thieves they are al, seem they never so good
Nor yet so devout, in their cowle and their hood,
Believe not their words nor apparel right white,
For nothing they do, that before god is right,
As gentle as Jacob in words they appear,
But all in their works they are Esau clear,
To Egypt again they are come to dwell,
Under great Pharao fearing no peril,
They follow the flesh and seek no restraint,
Which will at the last with hell the^ acquaint.
This also he writes of the Nuns.

Haru^ sunt quaeda^ steriles, quaeda^ parientes,
Virgineo tamen nomine cuncta tegu^t,
Quae pastoralis baculi do tatur honor,
Illa quidem melius, fertiliusque; parit,
Vix etia^ quaeuis sterilis reperitur in illis,
Donec eius aetas talia possenegat.
Some Nuns are barre^, and some bearing beasts,
Yet all are virgins at principal feasts:
She that is Abbess, as her does befall,
In fruitful bearing is best of them all.
Scarce one shall ye find among the whole rout,
which is unfruitful till age comes about.
Much more of the Lecherous lives of Monks and Nuns has this Poet Nigellus
written. Geraldus Cambrensis declares in the 2. part of his work, called the
Glass of the Church, Cap. viii. that by the Sea Coast a she fish was found
of a wonderful greatness, called a Thirle Poole. The people in great number
came from al quarters there about, some to behold the monstrous shape of ye
fish, and some to cut it in pieces and to carry them home to their houses, for
some profitable use. Among all other there was a Monk more quick and steering
to perceive all things then any other there: This monk drawing very near to
the fish, beheld, viewed, and marked the privy part thereof above all which
(the history says) was as it had been the opening of a great door or gate:
he looked thereupon very seriously, and much wondered, neither could he in
any wise be satisfied with the sight thereof: at the last without modesty,
shame, and all bashefulnesse, he approached somewhat nigh, that by the stime
and fatness thereof, which then lay upon the sand, his footing failed him
and he fell flat into the foul hole, so he was swallowed up of that which
his lecherous heart most desired. This Adage then was found true, such Saint,
such shrine, such beer, such botell, and such treasure, such trust. Many
such vicious and lecherous monks could I recite, but because I am persuaded
these few may suffice the Reader, I pass them over, and refer the Reader to
the histories of every age, since the beginning of this monkish and solitary
life. When Antichrist chiefly reigned in the consciences of men, and when his
doctrine repugnant against GOD his word most floorished in all quarters of
Christendom, yet God did raise up some that boldly spoke in public
assemblies, and with great boldness wrote against the Pope and his poisoned
doctrine. In their books a man may read how wickedly and hypocritically the
Papisticall votaries lived. But loving companion I pray you tell me how do
the other monks, Friars, and Nuns, live in the Countries, which you have
traveled, besides the Cities before specified?


Diawinckiani. Surely they live very unchastly and loosely, as I have declared
of some already. At Granoble in France there was an Augustinian Friar, who in
his talk, apparel, and gesture, in the presence of the Citizens appeared
very religious, godly, and devout: but this man had no good fortune. For as he
Sodomitically meddled with a sworn brother of his own profession, he was taken
doing the deed: but this horrible fault being forgiven upon his denial, he
was at an other time apprehended and imprisoned, for ye under a rock, nigh the
foresaid City Granoble he cracked a louse in a whoores Codyeece. At Shalome in
Sauoy there were two Dominica^s, that were in outward conversation like Angels
of heaven, but yet they loved the woman kind so well, that they studied more
in making a Cave in a Rock, not far from the City before mentioned, to
entertain two young queanes, the^ they endeavored to perform their Frierly
vow of chastity. Their often walking from their Cloisters, to these caves,
bewrayed them at last, and made them infamous amongst the Citizens. This thing
was done in the year of the Lord, 1578; and the infamy thereof was bruted
in the City, at my being there.


Trisander. Oh my friend and fellow traveler, have thou seen the horrible
abuses of these monstrous and ougly hypocrites, and will thou not condemn
their idolatrous doctrine, and superstitious Ceremonies, tending to the
perpetual destruction both of body and soul? What do they profess, but a
religion invented by man, for his worldely gain and honor, not conformeable
to Gods word, but agreeable to the Popes will and commandment? What is their
life, but Pharisaicall, injurious, lascivious, lecherous, and sodomiticall?
They talk of heaven, but they walk not to heaven, they brag of chastity,
but they keep concubines, or else do much worse: they defile themselves one man
wc another they speak of justification by good works, but they have no good
works, but vice, as buggerry, adultery, fornication, fraud, tyranny,
ambition, covetousness, and all uncharitableness: they talk of Christ, but
have no experience of him, nor any acquaintance with him: they honor him with
their lips, but their heart hungreth not after him: outwardly they profess
him, but inwardly they pass not for him: in the hearing of men they utterly
forsake the world, but in the sight of men they embrace the world. The
Scripture calls the world, as it is written in the first of John. 2.5. The
ambition, the covetousness, the lechery, and all those other things, that
Savor of nothing else but the flesh: so that the flesh, the world, and the
Devil, are those three furies, that with their firebrands, and serpents, make
an interming ling and confusion of all things. The fat bellied Monks and
Friars, that say they forsake the world, carry it with them into the
monasteries. For without doubt, it is not possible to see the world better
than in the monasteries, where a man shall see nothing else, but affections and
passions of the mind, with the which they seek to advance themselves, or to
drive one another out of the doors. Oh that men will suffer themselves to be
thus mocked and deluded, by these Frierly shauelings, that endeavor as much as
they may in deceiving the people with counterfeit holiness, to live like
Epicures, and to be esteemed as Lordlinges. Oh that men should credit these
Pharisaicall hypocrites, that more regard the pampering of their bodies, then
the salvation of the souls of men, which is the end of our hope and faith,
yea, the very end of our life in this life. Oh that men cannot see how they
fight against the Gospel, and seek to overthrow faith with superstition,
covered with the cloak of true holiness. Oh that men will not perceive how
each one of these monstrous marked Friars trauelleth to seek out some new
toy, therewith to draw the common people unto him, who are full of wandering.
Do they not see that they prepare new fashioned hoods, strange and horrible
Ceremonies, not seen in the world past, but reserved to oppugn the truth of
the Gospel? What Christian is he that sees not their hypocrisy, that
understands not their fraudulent superstition, wherewith the foolish people is
inneigled? what true believer of the Gospel, thinks, that to wear the weed
of S. Fraunces, or to go clothed in that color, is good against the quartane
Ague, and other diseases, and (that worse is) that to be buried in that habit,
is the very right way to go to heaven? And therefore that cunning man
Longolius, leaving ye name of a citizen of Rome, (in whose practice he had so
long labored) would be laid in his grave a Fraunciscane rather then a
Roman. This self same honor had the Lord Albert of Carpi in his head,
Rodulphus Agricola, and other innumerable. But what need so many words? These
Friars are come to that point, with that opinion of holiness, that they have
rid themselves out of all other men's hands and authority, and have brought all
other men under their fee. Who knows not, that in old times pastil when
learning and good studies were laid a sleep, that all men held them for God
Almighties kinsmen? And esteemed more of their commandments, then of the
commandments of God. And they knew not Christ, whom the Gospel does
plainly set forth unto us, which they keep in prison. And since they only
had the handelyng of the book of peace and liberty, the common people thought
that they had taken all things out of that book, and with cursed and
abominable lies, they took out here a piece, and there a piece, and with
strange and fearful miracles, and feigned dreams of Purgatory, they kept the
poor people in so great fear and wonder, that they were constrained to
believe their wicked devises and lies. I^ we consider their laws, and the
waights and beauty burdens, that they have laid upon men's shoulders, we shall
truly say, that the Jews law is an hundredth times more pleasant and easy
than theirs: but let these words pass. Every Christian (I am sure) knows,
that by the Devils Rhetorike, they make the world believe too too many
manifest fashoods. and foolish toys of the Devils invention, these Monkishe
fathers seek to be Judges over them that are godlier then they themselves,
and less spotted with any worldly affection: they have the bare name of Saints
and nothing else. Oh what a presumptuous boldness is this? to usurp the names
of Saints, and under that godly name to deceive ye world? under the form of an
Angel of light, to work all their deceites? their Coats, hoods, and sundry
colors, are devised by the Devil, to deceive the world. For if they were the
same that they would be counted, what need should there be of such
disguised garments? the which (say they) do signify that which they ought to
be. This is a clear case, that while there is a shadow and signification of
the thing, there is not the thing it self. If they were so in deed, then what
should they need seek to be so in show? outwardly they are one thing, and
inwardly another. Of such the gospel makes mention, which says, that there
shall come wolves to devour us, cladde in sheep skins, because they will not
be known. For right well we know, that one sheep eats not an other. If
these Monks used not such strange garments, there should not be so many
seduced from the truth. The Devil is crafty, and he knows how prone and
ready we be to believe every toy and trifle, every counterfeit holiness, and
superstitious hypocrisy, he oftentimes transfourmeth himself in his members,
to an Angel of light, he informs and teaches his children to frame them
selves alter the manner of hypocrites. This ancient adversary of ours makes
his servants learned, and skilful in his art: he makes the^ to go bare
legged, and bare footed, to put on shirtes of hair, that by means of their
outward austeritie in apparel, and food, the people may proclaim them as
Saints, and honor them as Gods omnipotent, and finally believe (whatsoever
they teach) their words to be Evangelical. How Monks and Friars have lived
from time to time, I need not to write, for that others have sufficiently
written thereof.


Diawinckiani. Now loving friend Trisander tell me, how do the Monks and
Friars live now, in these Countries, which thou have traveled, I long to
hear, I pray thee inform me.


Trisan. Before I satisfy your petition, I am so bold as to request you, (for
that I think you have read more histories then I have done) to make rehearsal
of some notable Monks lives, of their enormities and ill behauiours in their
Diabolical and pernicious function.


Diawinckiani. I will tell thee of the iuggling of hypocritical Friars espied
at Orleance, as writes Sleydane in his ix. book of his Cronicles. In Orleance
a City in France, it is not long since the Presidents wife dyed, a noble and
great woman, who ordained by her Testament, that they should carry her to be
buried without light, without Masses, and without any manner of pomp: and in
deed she was buried so in the monastery of the Friars of Saint Fraunces.
Anon after they began to hear in that place horrible noyces, until one of
those Massemumblers turning his back to ye people, showed them their round
God made of dough. When this was once spread abroad, every man was moved, one
said he heard it, one said he understood it, and another said he saw all.
The husband hearing this, came thither himself. Then does the Coniurer bind
the spirit to answer to his questions, and asked it she were in Paradise,
and there was no answer made: he asked if she were in hell, and yet there
was no answer: he asked if she came from purgatory, and then the spirit made
a great rushing against the wall. Then did the Coniurer ask, whether he was
such a one, or such a one, naming many and sundry persons that dyed long
ago, and yet there was no answer heard, nor no manner of noise, but when he
named the woman ye was buried without pomp, then the spirit made two great
rushings against the wall, then did the Coniurer ask whether she were
condemned for this or that cause: and in the end the spirit said, because
she was a Lutheraue. Then was heard three great rushes against the wall. The
husband being a wise and circumspect man, marked every thing, and made as
though he had much marvelled at the matter, and desired those wolves to
Supper: and the day following, caused an hundred Masses to be said, and to
light a whole world of candles. The wolves howled, they sent their Gods into
Purgatory, wet the grave with unholy water, and perfumed it with Frankincense:
and when this was done, carried the Friars into dinner, and in the mean
season sent the officers to the place where this deceit was done, where they
found certain vautes and there within were three spirits hidden, whom they
took and carried away. But how could they do this considering that they are
spirits and no bodies?


Trisander. That is soon answered. For these were of those spirits that have
bodies, of whom Saint Augustine speaks, and of which sort almost all those
that dwell in Monasteries are.


Diawinckiani. But were they not spirits in deed?


Trisander. Thou art very gross, they were three Friars of those that they
call Nouices, that is too say, such as know not yet very well the sleightes
and falsehoodes of the Friars. And in deed the Monasteries are even full of
deceipres, and the world is very blind in that they epsy them not. In Turine
also of late, the like matter has been seen well, the officers having found
the bugs that made them a feared, lead them away like three little Devils (as
they were) into the place, where the other great Devils were at meat, who when
they knew their knavery bewrayed, as men all dumb, they began to look one
upon another, and with shame enough were punished afterward and rewarded
according to their demerites.


Diawinckiani. Such feats played by the Monks I have known full often.
Wherefore this is no rare thing whereof thou tellest. It was told me that the
like thing was done in Polonia, and forasmuch as this is an usual craft
amongst them, as histories do write, and as Cities and towns do testify,
who have seen these deceites practiced amongst them, I mean not to speak
hereof any more, but of their iugling in other respects I purpose to say
somewhat as shall be profitable for thee to hear, for thy greater instruction,
and shall not be hurtful unto me in uttering ye same for the observation of
true fellowship in brotherly company. Wherefore give attentive ear, and
diligently mark what shall be revealed unto thee.


Trisander. I will, say on.


Diawinckiani. At Versillis, a notorious false Friar desirous to get money,
under color of religion, entised a rich widow, and carried her away with him
to Naples and from thence to other Cities and Towns. At Verona a City in
Italy, in the year of our Lord, 1578. There was a false these, a Friar of
the order of the Minorites Franciscanes, that had put into the heads of the
foolish women this opinion, that they must give to the Church the tenth of al
things, and even in like manner, the tenth night as they do with their husbands.
In a Monastery not far from Palestro, there was a Monk named Padre
Francisco, that loved laced mutton so well, ye oftentimes he would take the
bridles bit in his mouth, and cause his Iillian to kick him with her feet,
and then he would gallop as though he had been a horse: But surely not as
wise as a horse. At Vigleuano in Lombardie, 1578. There was a Dominican
preacher, that was counted virtuous, learned, and eloquent, yet he loved
Nuns with all his heu^te, with this man I have kepts company, very often, at
the commandment of my Lord Bishop of that city Vigleuane. This man in the
Pulpet was very earnest, he made the place where he stood to shake, he spoke
very emphatirally to the cross that stood before him, he spoke mightily, and
sweated very much, a man would surely have thought, if he had heard him, that
he had been a Saint in living and conversation, for that so ^toutly he rebuked
vice, and in preaching maintained virtue. But from such hypocritical Saints,
libera nos Domine. This Dominican Friar, at evening time, would repair to his
brethren of the same profession, and the Prior or Subprior, with some other of
the society, always would keep him company to the Nunnery of Saint Brigit,
and there this gentleman Friar, with the rest of his company, would shriue the
Nuns in the dark. Their kissing and ungodly behavior, their unchaste
words, and unseemly handeling each other, were demonstratiue tokens of their
incontinencie. Prate they til their tongue be worn to the stumps, and write
they til their fingers be not able to hold a pen, they shall never make me
believe that Friars and Nuns be chaste virgins, when they commit such
unchaste dealinges secretly, let the Friars (if they will be chaste) bridle their
lascivious affections, let the nu^nes in like wise, forsake the suspicious
company of dissolute Friars, let them fast and pray, or if they have not the
gift of continency, let them marry according to the counsel and advise of S.
Paul, who aduertiseth the incontinent to live in holy wedlock, and thereby
to avoid fornication, it is hard for them to beguile now the world as they
have in times past, the people have already smelled out their dissolute and
lascivious living. Now it is time for the^ to repent and amend their sinful
lives it is time for to renounce their hypocrisy. For surely it is impossible
for the^ to bring the people in this belief ye their life is chaste, seeing by
daily experience they are taught, otherwise, yt they live unhonestly and
unchastly, so that unless they recant in time, before it be too late, woe and
destruction shall be their end.


These Friars and Nuns observe the saying of Bennet, who taught his disciples
if they could not live chastely, then to work closly. These Monks abroad in
the sight of the world look as though they cared for no women, but in the
dark, with Iilian and Ione, they love good iumbling, they dread not God that
sits above, For all is but play, and as they do say, the night must vade
away. This Dominican preacher I am sure, with the rest of his company, in the
face of the world appeared as saints: the words they spoke sauoured of
holiness, in gesture, in countenance, and in outward appearaunce, they were as
Angels, holy, and holy, and double holy, and more then holy: they blinded the
people with their counterfeit show of holiness, and made them selves to be
honored amongst the silly people as god almighties kinsmen. This Dominican
preacher, with the Bishops secretary, in my presence full off would use
Sodomiticall words. It is not possible almost to speak of that honestly,
which both preacher and secretary so vnhonesty spoke and did. I was ashamed to
hear their beastly talk, but they were shameless to utter such ribauldrie.
The like in England I never heard, and God grant I may never hear the like.
In another Augustinian monastery of that city, I was well acquainted, and
beloved also of many, so that in going with them to the Nunneries, I saw many
horrible practices, and detestable abuses amongst them, which shamefastnes does
forbid me to receite. An Augustian confessor, having heard the confession of
a Flemming, enjoined him in his penance, that he should visit Madonna
diloreto, and offer his gift at her alter, and crave her intercession to her
son Jesus Christ: In the mean while, this incontinent and unchaste Friar
sleapt with his wife, and being taken naked in bed by the officers of the
City: they let him go to his monastery wcout any trouble or punishment, for
yt he was a grave father and eloquent preacher. At Auspurgh in Germany, there
was a monk that craved leave of his superiors, to visit the holy sepulcher
at Jerusalem, and at Venice. As I was lodged with him at Realto, at the sign
of the George, I fell in acquaintance with him, and he made me privy of his
counsel very often: he would have intised me, (had I not avoided his
inticements by lawful excuses unknown unto him) to the Burdello, to the place
where lewd women dwelled, a street full of naughty packes, amongst whom he
was always conversant, and adjoining to the street where our lodging was. I
asked this M^nke on a time with what devotion he took his Pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, haunting (as he did) the Brothell houses? he answered, that what
sins he had committed in his life time, and in his pilgrimage, should soon
after his arriual to Jerusalem be forgiven and forgotten. At Bolognia I met
with a Friar and an Nun, that took their Pilgrimage to Madonna diloreto:
this Friar called this Nun his wife in ye viteling houses where he came: for
he traueiled like a Gentleman, and she like a Gentlewoman. For they had put off
their frierly and Nunnish weed. I went with them even to that idol of
Madonna, kept them company, and saw how in our journey one bed served them
twain. This Friar very craftily covered his head with a great coife, that his
shaven crown might not be seen. How when we came to Madonna diloreto, (a
little before they changed their garments) they went in their professed
weeds, and were as devout in any man's judgment, as saint Frances and saint
Clare. How they returned home I can not tell, for I bare them company no
longer. At Serauallis I met a Neapolitan, whom acco^paned with a brave Italian
who^ she called brother: these two slept in one chamber, and what they did, I
cannot tell, but surely I saw right well in the fields that under a hedge they
played as man and wife. I was a mere stranger, and therefore they had the
less fear to do what they would. I kept them company four days, and all
that while both brother and sister did as man and wife would have done in
secret. It is no news to hear how that Monks and Friars in their
Pilgrimage, resort to the Brothell houses: for it is a common thing amongst
them. At Pauia in Italy, there was a Benedictine, that asked leave of his
superiors to visit Madonna di loreto, and a Nun likewise craved license of
her Prioresse, to visit the said idol of Loreto. This Nun and Friar met
together at Venice and there renewed did friendship, in kissing and lulling
and in playing the part of man and wife: they forgot that they had vowed
chastity, they would no longer be continent he at a foil, and she at
defense made them selves ready and apt, they went forwards in their
peregrination, with kissing, embracing, and playing each one with the other
unchastly. A friar out of Cicilia came in devotion to Madonna di loreto
likewise, with a stolen Nun from his country, as I came from Madonna di
loreto in vrbin a city in Italy, I met this lusty friar with Itlian his
loving saint, whom he would needs have in his bed to pray unto: his
shaven crown was covered with a coife, that he might be taken for a
temporal man, for so he would seem to be, although he was not. In rome 1580 an
Augustinia^ Friar was imprisonned, for that he had slain a man. This friar (by
report) was a preacher, and of unchaste living, he had slain either two or
three, and yet was never executed, the fact being wilful: belike he had some
good friends, otherwise he had suffered as malefactor and Homicide. Travel
(my friend) al I talie, Polonia, Bohemia, part of Germinie, and throughout all
these countries thou shall hear people complain of their Buggerie, (for the
which no less then twelve Monks at once were hanged at Rome) of fornication,
adultery, incest, bloodshed, and the uerie. If they covet to satisfy their
carnal appetite, if they covet to steal, if they desire to fare delicately,
if they intend to raunge ye country from place to place, the^ must they feign
to their Abbots, or Pryors, ye they have vowed to visit either Madonna di
loreto, or the sepulcher of the Lord at Jerusalem, or the place where saint
Frauncis body hangs in the air, not touching the earth, but miraculously
hanging between the firmament and the earth, wearing a golden ring on his
singer, which a Pope of Rome in commandment gave him to put on. And in that
place (say the Pilgrim Papists) remains his body uncorrupted, being there
five hundredth years at least. Or else the Friars and Monks go on Pilgrimage
to the Tumbe of S. Andrew the Apostle, out of which flows clear oil,
profitable to heal many diseases. The Nuns obtain leave to the like places,
and on the way they meet their Paramours, whom in curtezane (courteous I would
say) manner they kiss and lick with stretched out tongue, and white lilie
lips. They use such daliance one with the other, as I am loathe to declare.
Their songues savor of nothing else but ribauldry, and abomination. God
grant them repentance, and make them his servants: for surely they do
amiss, and violate their oath, break Gods holy commandment, and woonderfully
abuse his divine Majesty. They would be counted holy Virgins, and devout
fathers, albeit they are painted sepulchers, and vicious hypocrites. At Millan
there were two Monks that so hated Cardinal Brhomeo, for that he endeavored
to reform their loose living, that as this Cardinal was at Mass, one of the^
charged a dagge toward him. But as Fortune favored this Cardinal, the
bullet flew under his arm, and was not found between his shirt and his
skin, as he that wrote in his book of the discovery of John Nichols falsely
reports. For at Millan the Cardinals confessor told me the contrary.
Surely it was a weak bullet, weaker then a bullet of paper, that could not
pearcethrough his body, having no other thing for defense, but his thin
Garments about him. He that shooted toward him, was not far from the
place where he said Mass. Therefore it is an untruth, that the bullet was
found betwixt his skin and his shirt. I could say much more then I have
recited of the ungodly lives of Monks, Friars, and Nuns, and yet not exceed
the bands of truth. A priest of their own order, and sometimes bishop of
Cambray, wrote very amply, at large, of the corrupt living of these lazy
lubbers, fat bellied Monks. If he being one of their crewe discovered so much
of their grievous and abominable wickedness, why should not I write what I have
seen with mine eyes, practiced lewdly amongst them? and why should I notify
to thee my fellow companion, the hypocrisy and dissimulation of these
unclean and incontinent Monks, Friars, and Nuns.

Trisander. Thou have delighted my hearing very much, in thy discouerye of the
lives of certain Monks, Friars, and Nuns. That I met such a companion I am
very glad, I hope by the grace of God, and ye recordatio^ of the wickedness of
these votaries, thou art free from all papisticall contagion, with
superstitious ceremonies, and venomous idolatry. Now let us in one faith, and
in one mind serve God daily, and hourly. Let us like true Christian Pilgrims
travel to farther countries, that we may see what religion they have, and how
they do live. Go swifter, amend your pace, the night approaches: we are
strangers, and if we come too late, we shall be unprovided of our lodging.


Diawinckiani. Content, let us go apace: here in this Inn I will take my rest
for this night: go you to the other, lest we be suspected for spies. Good
night, rise early in the morning.


Trisander. I will God willing, go^ give you good night also.


The end of the third Dialogue.
The fourth Dialogue, Touching the hypocritical lives of Iesn^es and
Theatines, who neither inhabit, nor in Ceremonies differ much the one from the
other.
The speakers are Trisander the Christian Pilgrim, and Diawinckiani the
wandering Papist. Trisander. GOod morrow loving companion how were you
entertained to night? What lodging have you found?


Diawinckiani. My entertainme^t was good, I pray you tell me how was yours?


Trisander. Truly loving companion, worse lodging I never found in all my
life: my Hostess did frown, and mine Host did chafe, because I would not
pay willingly three Iulies for one. My bed was very hard, and my sheets were
somewhat scabbed: yet durst I not speak boldly, and say, that I was sore
misused. But I healde my peace, and when I saw them angry, I did what I could
to content their minds by paying them more then was their due. Therefore I say
farewell that Inn, I will never lodge there any more. Now let us be going
forwards in our journey ye we may the sooner shorten both ye time, and the
way: and pass through it with the less tediousnes, let us talk of so^what
worth the marking. And for as much as thou art the better learned, and most
able to discover the wicked lives of idolatrous Papists, both by reading of
diverse notable hystories, as also by the experience that thou have had amongst
them, I crave of thee to tell me how the Jesuits live, and what their
profession is? For surely they are of great fame, and many think they are as
holy as the Scribes and Pharisees, who were the greatest hypocrites amongst
the Jews.


Diawinckiani. To tell thee the original of these Jesuits, I think it be but
lost labor: forasmuch as Master Hanmer has so displayde their original and
success, their vow and oath, their hyyocrisie and superstition, with their
docttrine and positions, that to speak more thereof, (except of that which I
have seen and heard) I think it but vanity. Thou ask me how they live? I
answer (as conference, familiarity, and acquaintance taught me) they live
spotted with hypocrisy, they pretend holiness, but work wickedness. For
they have feigned a new profession, a new and strange title, never heard of
before. They were ashamed to be named Christians, and for this cause they
called themselves Jesuits, that is of Jesus. And why? because they vamely
persuade themselves, ye perfect and absolute holiness consists in their
society only. Otherwise these sowgelders (Jesuits I would say) should be
afraid to take upon the^ such a glorious name, as passes all names, for this
name Jesus, and this title Christ, by the commandment of the Father, was given
as proper and peculiar unto the son of God, borne in the world: and
therefore no name for them. If this name were lawful for them to take by the
word of God, as it is not, why should not in like manner, this name be
proper to all by the same word of God? the Monks and Friars cry out in
private talk, and in public preaching against their presumptuous loftiness
of mind, in taking unto themselves such a name as excels all names. Why
say the Monks, and Friars, do the Jesuits arrogantly presume to say, that
they are only of the society of Jesus, and none other? What (say these
religious men) is their life holier then ours? Do they fast oftener then we?
pray oftener then we? or lead a more auste^re life then we? seeing that we
know they do not live more austerly then we, this prerogative to be of the
society of Jesus, above us that are their coequals in living, and doctrine,
they cannot justly challenge, as proper and peculiar unto them. But we would
gladly know why they term themselves Jesuits? Jesus signifies a savior, and
belike they term themselves Jesuits, because they are compartuers with Jesus
in saluing. O proud and arrogant Luciferlike monsters. O wretched creatures.
Would no other name serve your turn Gentlemen hypocrites, but Iesuita, the
name of a Jesuit? if Lucifer himself, your father and Progenitour, had taken
upon him the shape of a man, he would never have chosen a more proud and
arrogant title. What moved you (you blind creatures) to forgette your own
state, and miserable condition? What did you think by this title to be
magnified here in this world? What did cause you to take this name Iesuita
upon you, and refuse to be called Ignatians Layola? what are you ashamed of
your poor Patron Ignatius Layola, who although he were a crippled soldier,
oppreffed with extreme poverty, and well nigh spent or worn with sores and
infirmities of body, who although he were a wanderer, or (as you term poor
travelers) a roge yet take no scorn to use his name, seeing ye you allow as
favorers, follow as disciples, and practice as Pupilles, his superstitious and
idolatrous inuentio^s? The Monks and Friars blush not to be named according to
the name of their Patrones, the Monks of Dominicke, are called Dominicans: the
Monks of Benedict, Benedictines: the followers of James, Iacobines: of Basil,
Basilians: of Augustine, Augustinians: and of Bernard, Bernardines. And why
then will not you likewise be called by the name of the lame soldier Ignatius
Layola? But surely I think he was so infamous, so wicked, and superstitious,
that they are afraid to be called Ignatians, least their good name be called
in question. But yet, albeit he was (as far as I surmise, by his foolish
vows, rogishe peregrinations, and lewd practices in many countries) impudently
disposed and naughtily bent to pervert good manners, to establish gross
errors in the Synagogue of Satan, and besides that, busily occupied in
preferring many superstitious ceremonies: yet they should not disdain after
his name to be termed Ignatians or Layolans, because they acknowledge and
follow him as their Patron in doing according to his doctrine, council, and
precepts. For as they obey his will, so should they acknowledge his name, and
think no skorne, to be called thereby as for ye name Jesus, it is not for their
mowing, neither ought they to desire the honor due to so great a title and
name of Jesus: contrary to the godly meaning of all true Christians. Surely
(loving companion Trisander) there is such enimity between the Monks and the
Jesuits, (I speak not this of malice, but of experience) that greater is
hardly to be found between the Turk and the Christian. The Monks never
report well of the Jesuits, and the Jesuits never speak well of ye monks.
From cardinal Brhomeo, there came Jesuits oftentimes to my Lord Bishops house
of Vigleuano, now there were two Dominicans in his house, that always denied
to keep them company, for this cause only said they, for that they were
Hypocrites. I waited at their table, and marked their behautour, they would
drink but once at one meal, they would use such Ceremonies about the Cups with
crossing, double crossing, and mumbling I cannot tell what, that it would make
a man to wonder. But at the first time I was so weary in holding the cup, and
not knowing the meaning of their Ceremonies in blessing the cup, yt I took it
from them, and left them thirsty and dry, until I was taught yea with rebukes
of my ill manners, in taking the cup before they had drunk) to stay with ye cup
until they had quenched their thirst, The Jesuits must have patience if any
thing once be denied to them, they must not seek it twice, they eat but very
little at a meal, they are nourished (say they) by daily contemplation, and
the Angel feeds them as soon as they dyne or sup, after thanksgiving to GOD,
and our blessed Lady, as the manner of the Papists is, and after washing of
their hands, they go to the Temple, and there they kneel before a dustie
image: there is such crying and knocking on their breasts, that oftentimes I
was afraid their hearts should have leapte out of their Bodies. There was
such howling, and such weeping, that tears as big as milstones came out of
their eyes. Blessed Marie (quoth pardon me, for I have offended thee, not only
in thought but word, and deed. Oh help me holy saint with speed, thy
sweet son Jesus Christ also, I have offended alas for woe, but through thy
intercession, he will forgive my transgression, and as I hope will favor me,
and pardon mine iniquities. Then he knocks his breast, and boweth his body
to kiss the ground. Blessed Lady quoth the other, pray so, me to the Lord
Jesus thy loving son. For I am a sinner, and therefore I say ora pro me
peccatore, O beata Maria, matter vnigenti: O blessed Marie, the mother of the
only begotten, pray for me a sinner. This, and such like prayers do the
Jesuits use before the Image of Marie the mother of Christ; they go from
image to image, from stock to stone, from post to pillar, and pass by no
image but they touch it with their beads, and kiss it with their mouths. If
they find a rotten post, they think immediately that some saint was bound to
the same to be scourged. If there appear upon the pillars the picture of a
mouse, forthwith they would imagine it to be the picture of a Saint, and
therefore they will kneel before those pillars, and adore them, with kissing
them, and bowing their bodies before them. Doubtless the Jesuits are very
superstitious, and from them (as from a founraine) flows all kind of
Idolatry and superstition. Let the Monks and Friars bear witness of this,
let Balaams marks bear record of my words. There is such brawling and
chiding oftentimes amongst the Jesuits, and the Monks, in Cardinal Browmeo
his house at Millan, that greater can not lightly be amongst two scoldes:
first there is a question moved, then in the answer to the same there
follows great contention: one dispraysing each others insufficiency and
defect of knowledge, sometimes each one seeks to excel the other, with vain
bragges of their life and conversation. The Jesuits, more boldly then wisely,
say that their life is Angelical, and spotted with no spotte of iniquity. The
thing which we promise (say they) we perform, we vow chastity, and we
keep it: we never have access unto women, we never have conference with
them, we never come in their sight, and if they come to talk with us, we
avoid their company, by which means all occasion of carnal copulation is
clean cut off, and so is our vow kept, and never violated. These words of the
Jesuits are but bragges, the truth insinuates the contrary. For at Venice,
Ann. do. 1580. a Jesuit was found in bed with a Curtezane, or (as in English
I may term her) with a common strumpet: what he did in bed with her I can
not tell, for that certain venecians at my lodging, at the sign of Saint
George at realto told me that a Jesuit and a curtezane were found in bed
together, they told me not that they were both taken in doing the deed, but
found in bed, as I said. Alac good Jesuit, I think he came to bed to his
sister, to give her some ghostly comfort and to hear her confession being in
ashaking ague. I dare say the young gentleman Jesuit meant no hurt in the
world, unless perhaps we think it hurt, that he ventered to be in one
bed with her, without consent of his rectour: or else that he endeavored to
get a pretty boy by one that was a lay woman, and a strumpet, and not by
some nun being a spiritual sister, but yet a common woman, and common as well to
Monks, as to Jesuits. At Millan, as it was reported unto me by a Bargamesco
Gentleman in the Cathedral Church, there was a lusty stout Jesuit that loved
to haunte the stews very well. And that the Jesuits violate their unlawful
vow of chastity, these examples following may testify. At Auspurgh late in
ye evening there was a Jesuit found with his companions, that resorted to a
suspicious and defamed house of harlottes. When they came into the house, they
told the mistress of ye house that they brought with them holy water to
sprinckle about in every chamber, to the expulsion of Diuelles, that through
their absence they might do as they would, and that their offense might not
be known unto the Devil, and therefore not like to be punished. But these
holy fathers, when they had sprincled all their coniured water, they were rapt
in love with two queanes of the house, and because they had no money, they gave
their books unto the haudie drabs, that they should accomplish their venereal
lust and carnal concupiscence. In the Franciscan monastery, I heard this of
truth by three monks. At Florance a city in Italy the like thing happened
between two Jesuits, who could not for all their meditations and divine
contemplations, bridle the lusts of their fiesh: these were taken in the
stews late in the evening, and being examined what they did there, they
answered that they gave good exhortations, to the end that they might be
converted from curtezanes unto Nuns.

Better is a bad excuse then none. Thus they were dismissed, and their intent
commended, albeit it was suspicious that the Jesuits were naught, seeing that
they were found abroad so late, and also with infamous women: but let this
matter pass. I know not their intent, whether it was to begette two boys to
make them in time to become soul priests to say mass for their souls, or
else to begette two wenches, that in time they might become Nuns to serve the
greedy need and fleshly desire of them of their society. I tell thee not
(good friend Trisander) what is the chiefest cause of the Jesuits Pilgrimage
to Madonna di loreto, no other cause then to visit this idol and to serve
their incontinencie, their youthful toys, being not as yet set apart. I have
been in their company, and therefore with less fear I may report of them,
they would never remain in any other lodging, except in such, where they
might find Italian mares ready, and easy to be ride^, that was so sober that
every man might handle her as he would, they bowed unto that saint, and made
their offerings unto her, they loved a saint with wanton looks and rouling
eyes, better (I am sure) then Madonna di loreto. These Jesuits while they are
in their perigrination, are Venus lulibie babes, and her sweet darlings, they
love to play with women, they are so lascivious, luxurious, and vicious, that
they regard not how lewdlye they behave them selves, so that their habit be
changed, and their persons unknown. These examples recited may serve to daunt
the pride, and cool the vanting brags of wicked and lice^tious Jesuits. They
have ears more vigilant to hear themselves praised, then a purposed intent to
deserve praise. If it be possible that fire might be void of heat, then may
the Jesuits keep themselves chaste from women. For how much so ever they
punish their flesh, yet can that ielousnesse be never expelled. Naturam
expellas furca, licet vsque recurret. I will not says Christ, Matthew. 19. that
all men understand this word, but he which can understand it, let him
understand it. therefore the Jesuits are worthy of rebuke, that vow
chastity, and can not keep it.


Trisander. The Jesuits are hypocrites, and though they carnally know forty
women, yet they say they are blessed and sanctified virgins. They make their
belly their god, their lust, their heaven, their pleasure, their bliss: they
hunt greedily for such delights, they be drawn with a twine thread to the
company of a woman, and cannot be kept from them with a cable rope. For they
houer like feathers in the wind, and are blown away like chafe with every
blaste. They esteem this life for a woonderful pleasure and a great felicity,
that pretend chastity, and yet satisfy the lusts of the flesh. Their
esteminate minds are more addicted to fleshly pleasure, then the minds of
such as have not vowed chastity. They will take no warning to fly from
hypocrisy, seeing that the world knows thereof. Will they be counted
continent and have not renounced their filthy delights, that are so deeply
drowned in the durtie ditche of dissoluteness, wherein they neglect the
sauegard of their souls, in following of filthy pleasure, the only enemy to
virtue, then the which (as Cicero says in his book De Senectute, nullam
Capitaliorem pestem, quam corporis voluptate^ a natura datam, etc. There is not
a more deadly poison given to man by nature, then sensual pleasure of body.
Their importance and greedy desires, whereof, were set and bent outragiously,
to bring their purpose to pass: and (as he says a little after) Cuique
homini sieve natura, sieve quis deus, nihil tam esse inimicum, quam voluptatem.
Nec enim libidine dominante temperantiae locum esse omnino; nec in voluptatis
regno virtute^ posse consistere. That is. And seeing that nature, or God has
given unto man nothing more excellent then wit, and reason there is nothing
more enemy to this divine gift, then voluptuous pleasure, which sensual
pleasure ruling him, there is utterly no place left to tempera^ce, neither may
virtue remain where pleasure reigns. Whereby it appears how like unto a
beast it transformeth a man, during the which nothing can be exercised in
mind, nothing done by reason or study: for this drowneth a man in the
whirelepoole or gulf of all ungodliness. These Jesuits, for all their grave
and fatherly looks, do fix their dishonest love in fleshely filthiness, and
like the beasts of the field lie wallowyng in the mire, they take great
delight, by their auricular confession, to make a spoil or pray of maids and
wives: against these Jesuits, unless they repent, the heavenly gates are shut
for ever, to exclude them out, for their reward is appointed in darkesome hell,
there to remain amongst the cursed reprobate. I would they should repent, and
be heartily sorye for their hypocritical dealings. The world has spied their
hypocrisy already, and condemns them of folly, that will not confess their
lives, which are nothing inferior to the lives of the Scribes and Pharisees,
whom Christ often rebukes, and accuses of hypocrisy. Their deeds do bewray
them to be so holy as they would be counted, their words do condemn them of
plain hypocrisy, when with unmeasurable praise, they laud and magnify
themselves. God convert their hearts, and make them penitent: I wish them well
to do. God lighten their hearts with the bright beams of his holy spirit,
that the mistie cloud of ignorance expelled, they may see the truth, and
confess it, and according to the rules of Gods holy word, direct their lives
in all holiness, to his glory, and the good example of their neighbors, and
the benefit of their own souls. But friend Diawinckiani, tell me I pray thee
a little more of the Jesuitical manner of couersation and living.


Diawinckiani. As I gather by the history of Hierosolomitanus ye pilgrim, and
by the report of the Turks themselves, with whom I have had conference at
Venice, especially for such matters, to know what religious votaries they
had. It is this in the history of this Pilgrim I have read, and the Turks
with whom I spoke, confirmed the same, that there be two sorts of religious
votaries, the one is of them that dwell in Cloisters, where Magical Art is
taught, who when they have been Nouices two or three years, then they are
taken to be members of that Cloister, and are bound to pray for the Emperors
good success in all his affairs. The Emperors of the Turks oftentimes
consulte with these Monks, touching the state of his Empire, they foretell him
what mishap is like to chance in his enterprises, and prognosticate the event
of all his proceedinges. These Monks never depart out of their cloisters,
except upon some great and urgent occasion. This order is not far unlike to
the Carthusians order, for they are seldom seen out of their cloisters. An
other order is of them that go a begging from door to door, with great
beads about their arms and cry Allah Mahomet save you good dame and good
master, I will pray for the soul of your fathers and mothers and of your
Grandsiers, allah bless you little children. We see (say they) that these
children of yours are like to come to high degree of honor. This pilgrim who
lived fourteen years at least as captive amongst these Turks, in his
history makes mention of their begging from house to house: such flattering
I think they use, as these Jesuits do, when they are commanded to go a
begging. These Monks are like the Jesuits in superffition, and idolatry,
These Turkishe Monks never go a begging, but when their rectour, or their
provost commands them. So the Jesuits in like manner, when they are
commanded by their general or rectour to go a begging, they must needs obey,
yea, admit he be a preacher, a confessor, a public professor of
divinity, or philosophy, or of any other science, if he be commanded to
take wallet and bottle, he must needs do it, and may not deny, unless he
will incur his superiors displeasure. Father Peter, and father Joseph,
Jesuits of the English Seminary told me, that the vicegenerall, being a
gentleman man borne of most noble parentage, was commanded at his first
enteraunce into the society of Jesus, to carry a basket to be sold, which
basket being not worth vi.d. He was willed notwithstanding to receive no less
then a crown, and as for his dinner he should beg it at other men's houses
abroad in the city of Rome. This man being commanded to go and sell his
basket, did so, and as he sought to sell it, being very old and rotten, all
men laughed him to skorne, and when they knew the price, which he demanded
for the basket, they derided him the more, and cried, what meanest thou, thou
soole, to seek v.s. for thy baskette, being not worth v..d. This thing was
done by his superiors to prove his patience and to try how well he would frame
himself to their orders, as this Nouice, being sometimes a Lord by birth, and
rich in possessions, suffered himself to be laughed of all sorts of people,
and as he went about the marked places of Rome, and walked in every street,
he met by chance with one, that in time past had been his servant: this
Nouice Jesuit knew him not, but this man that had been his sernaunt in time
past, knew the said Nouice Jesuit very well, and saining as though he had
not known him, he came unto him, and asked him the price of his basket. This
Nouice answered v.s. then he that had been his servant, gave him v.s
according to his own demand. And when this Nouice Jesuit had added
moreover, that he was commanded to seek his dinner abroad, then this man
invited him to dinner. The duke of Millans son and heir, was inchaunted by
these Jesuits to forsake his father, his mother, and all the friends that he
had, yea, and to renounce his inheritance that should have befallen into his
hands after the decease of his father. This noble youth, tobecome a Jesuit,
regarded no worldly wealth, nor princely promotion. But this young Gentleman
was abused very much, as you may hear as follow eth. They caused him, not only
to practice the art of begging, but also to sast, and to whippe himself so
often, having neither respect to his tender and feeble state of body, by
reason of his delicate education on and bringing up: neither yet to his
unaccustomed manner, in so chastising him beyond al reason and measure, that
he fell into a pitiful consumption, in so much that being worn and consumed
to the bare bones, he died. The parents in sundry Cities of Italy cry out
against these new sect of Jesuits, for they seduce their children to their
sect, and with their flattering words, fatre speeches, and large promises of
great gifts at Christ's hands, in the heavenly city Jerusalem, they deceive
and corrupt the towardely dispositions of many a youth, to virtue and Christian
religion, and abuse them unto all ungodliness and heresies. In Rome, Anno
domi. 1579. There was a young Gentleman of great reputation amongst the
Romans, this man being heir to his father deceased, was beewitched with such
an immoderate desir to be a Jesuit, that neither his mother nor any freinde
that he had, could persuade him to the contrary.

At last he was admitted into the society of Jesuits, and being amongst the
Jesuits, his mother made earnest supplication unto the Pope, that her son
being commanded by his holiness letters, directed unto the general, might
be be put out of their society, and might return unto her, and peaceably
enjoy that which his father had bequeathed him in his last will and Testament.
Now as she demanded of the Pope, to have her son released, and set free
from the society of Jesus, so it came to pass. But yet the Jesuits having
access unto the youngma^, so incensed his mind with the love of their
profession, ye being kept for a space in a close chamberr under a false and
forged pretense of looking for his shyrt to be made warm before the fire, he
conveyed himself out of the chamber, and came directly to the Jesuits
College. Of many such could I make rehear all, but the time does not permit,
nor my leisure does suffer me to say more hereof, then is already said.


Trisander. It was told me, that the Jesuits take great pains to inform
youth in learning and virtue, what say you do they so or not?


Diawinckiani. They do inform the youth with such austeritie, and in such
ord^r, yt they are become odious too most Students, as may plainly appear by
this example following. In the Roman College, Anno Domini, 1580. there was a
Jesuit slain by a Student of the College, and because belike the Jesuit had
offended the Student too too much, the Superiors of that College suffered the
Student to depart without any manner accusation. The Jesuits in that College
oftentimes were hurt by the Students for their proud and hawty mind, in
seeking to ouerrule them. The like happened in many other Colleges of Italy,
as it was told me traveling the Country, but for this thing that was done at
Rome, I know it my self to be true, being at that present at Rome, and a
scholar in the English Seminary, For about this time, German a priest, ye
Popes Scholar appointed for the peruersion of Germany, threw himself headlong
from an high window, and so brake his neck. About this time one of our own
Students would have drowned himself in a Well, had not God delivered him from
that danger, by some of the Students.


Trisander. You went about once loning brother to compare the conversation and
doings of the Jesuits, with ye Monks of the Turks: I pray you proceed in this
matter, as you first began.


Diawinckiani. I will, then give ear. Trisander. I will be attentive to hear
you do so: then go forwards in your talk.


Diawinckiani. The Turkish Monks must have their garments very short, of diverse
colors, with many patches, and in all respects they must go like Fools, that
they may be a laughing stock unto the Beholders. So after this manner go the
Jesuits a begging, for they will follow Christ and his Apostles (say they)
their Jesuitical weed is very curtall, it reaches no farther then the knee,
it has diverse colors, and many patches, they go from door to door, and
cry, Date noi ^lcuna elemozina peramoredi Christo, del quale discipulisia^no:
Give us some alms for Christ's sake, whose Disciples we be. The Turkish Monks
have great heads, upon on the which they pray, they have the Picture of
Mahomet, about their necks, they pray in the streets, they go a Pilgrimage
to their pretensed God Mahomet, they take no money with them, but a staff to
defend them from the sharp teeth of Dogs: thus does the Jesuits, let them
deny it, and they shall be proved Liars. They have great beads about their
necks, about their arms, and in their hands, I brought a Jesuit a little
before night, from the English Seminary unto the Roman College, of whom I
demanded upon the way, why he had such great beads, that every bead should
be almost as big as my fist: he answered, that in the dark night he had
need ye his beads should be so big, for the better feeling of every beade in
saying over his beads. The Jesuits have the picture of S. Ignatius, their
Patron, or the picture of our blessed Lady Marie, in the streets, they pray
very often, and to Pilgrimage they go very often without any money given by
their Superiors unless they have somewhat of their own, as most commonly they
have, they use a staff, yea in the City of Rome are some nouices not twenty
years of age, and the cause is, for that they may be counted as the Apostles
of Christ. The turkish Monks shorten their lives with too much austeritie of
life, so do the Jesuits discipline and whippe themselves at the Evening of
every festival day, that the blood trickleth down from their bodies, as
streams of water, that it is lamentable to make report thereof. They scourge
themselves voluntarily so extreemely, that oftentimes many of them before the
due course of nature yield up their Ghost. They fast so often, and give
themselves to such contemplations, that sometimes seem of them are ravished of
their wits. I speak this with grief of mind. They follow the Turkish Monks
in life and conversation, and so they may be rightly Mahometaines, of the
society of Mahomet. The Turkish Monks praise themselves above measure, so do
the Jesuits brag, boast, and extol their names above the Clouds. The
Jesuits of the English Seminary would always be praising men of their
society, and discommending others, especially Dominicans. and Franciscans, who
are no better then sworn enemies: for the one cannot speak well o^ the other.
If any amongst the Jesuits has either disputed egregiously, or declaymed
Rhetorically, or done any thing learnedly, they publishe his name with great
bragges and praises, of his excelle^^ and ingenious capacity, and rare gifts
of knowledge. If any afflict themselves so severely, that they fall into
sicknesses, and danger of death, then they comme^d his dooinges every where,
and deem him (for yt he spared not to scourge his own body) a worthy Saint,
and a blessed disciple of Christ. The Turkish Monks, more boldly then
prudently, say they are saved, by reason that they lead a Monastical life: so
do the Jesuits brag that they are sure of life everlasting, because they
are secluded from the company of them that dwell in the world, for they will
not confess that they live in the world, and therefore must their Colleges
be counted heaven, or called by some other name, or else (I will say as I hau^
said) they live in the world. Father Benedictus reader in positive divinity,
entreating upon Predestination, said that he knew that he was sure of life
eternal in the kingdom of God, because God called him, as he said into the
society of Jesus: and if I had not been made a Jesuit I know (says he) I had
been a reprobate. This man's knowledge was greater the^ his wisdom, and his
words of greater force then his holiness. These Hypocritical Jesuits were
taught (as I think) by the Turkish Monks, for in their idolatrous practices,
and superstitious ceremonies, they differ little or nothing. From such Turkish
Monks, and Papisticall Jesuits good Lord deliver us. These Jesuits in
words profess humility, but in mind and deed they practice pride, they
seek great obeisance to be done unto the^, they look for capping and
kneeling, and they would be woorshipped. If any of the students of any
Seminary, where the Jesuits bear sway, forget to put off his hat in the
street as he passes by the Jesuits, and then will the Jesuits remember to
get these students a penance. They are sworn to keep no money, yet they have
money some of them plenty These Jesuits are full of scoffs and mockes, as I
my self have proved, the^ have vowed chastity, but I do not lik^ the
things that were practiced in the dark, between some of the Jesuits an^ the
English Seminary, and some of the fairest complexion of the English Students,
whose names I remember, bu^ for modesty sake I conceal them. These Jesuits
make great show of integriti^ of life, and mortification of the flesh, bu^
their deeds bewray them, and their va^nities are known to proceed from an
hipocritical habit. They more regard the praises of men, then the kingdom
(...) heaven, and the glory of the highest.


Trisander. I was informed by man Pilgrims, that the Jesuits, whereso^uer
they come, preach upon bulke^ stools, and such like things: they stan^
prattling unto the auditorie of the worth^nesse and excellency of their
profession and the Evangelical life of the Jesuits. (...) have heard a
Jesuit preacher, my self at Piacentia, that was so impudent, as (...) say
that the Jesuits were more acce^table to God, then the Angels of heaven.


Diawinckiani. Thou have been truly informed, for they preach in deed upon
bulkes, stools, chaires, or any other such thing, yea, they preach in market
places, in open streets, and bie corners, We are the disciples of Christ
(say they) we have his Angels, to guide us, we have the holy Ghost to move
us to preach unto publicanes and sinners, to curtezans and ruffians.


Trisander. A fair piece of work I promise you, they boast that they are sent
from Christ, to instruct publicans sinners, and curtezans: I would they
learned first to live godly themselves being publicans, sinners, and harlots,
bedfellowes, and play mates. I would to God they framed their lives according
to the will of God. They deserve more glory at Christ his hands, say these
Jesuitical helhoundes then the Angels do: they merits the kingdom of heaven
of their own works. What shall I speak of their erroneous doctrine, seeing
many, both learned and veriuous, have written at large thereof. And therefore I
pass it over, the rather because their pernicious doctrine is well known, and
published to the world in print. But brother Diawinck. can you tell whether
they say they have any conference wish Christ.


Diawinckia. Tush man, what speak you of conference, seeing that our blessed
Lady as you know brings them, as they are sleeping, both bed and all unto
heaven, and in their dreams they talk as familiarly with Christ as
Robinhood, and William of Clowdesly. All their talk with Christ is in dreams
and visions, and I think ever will be. There talked once with me a Jesuit,
traveling to Madonna di loreto, who told me, that Christ is a vision
appeared unto him, and said, that he should prove a notable Philosopher,
well esteemed of all men, and therefore said this Jesuit, this Aristoles book
which you see, I carty always with me. Then I asked him, why rather he
brought not with him the book of the new Testament* Then answered this Jesuit,
Aristotle's book is more profounde and learned then the book of the new
Testament. Thus we see, that the book of an Heathen philosopher, is more
esteemed amongst these Jesuits, then the book of the new Testament,
containing nothing else in it, but the heavenly verity. Had not the Rector of
the German College at Rome, seen in a vision our blessed lady come to him,
telling him he should be a Jesuit, he had never (as he thinks) been a
Jesuit, nor rector of that College. He that faineth best, and excels in
hypocrisy, shall be in great reputation amongst this new order of the Jesuits.
Here in this place I surcease to speak of the Jesuits any more. Now will I
speak a word or two touching the Theatines. The Theatines are a kind of
religious men, who differ nothing in habit from ye Jesuits: their shurt ba^ds
are scarce to be seen, so are the Jesuits: their gowns are sometimes of one
color, and sometimes of another. These Theatines have more revenues, yea and
they fare better the^ many an honest man does: they hear confession, and there
by so delude ye people insomuch yt they give the^ both money, and other things
necessary. this foolish generation goes never a begging, but al things
necessary for provision are brought to their houses, I have been at their
monasteries and have had such good cheer, ye better lightly is not to be
gotten. They have wine ple^tie, and al other things in great abundance. Now
because this generation is obscure and unknown to the world, therefore to make
the^ famous, is not mine intent, but this I say, that these Jesuits, and these
Theatines are in great emulatio^: the one speaks evil of the other, the one
enuieth the other. There is no difference almost between the Jesuits, and the
Theatines. I would speak more abunda^tly of this order of the Theatines, if
our English men were any whit molested by the name and sect thereof. God be
thanked, England knows not what they be, and by me surely at this time
England shall not know what they are. The remembrance of the present state of
this our miserable time, wherein so many sects and so many vowed orders of vain
profess^ds abound, does drive a marvelous sorrow and grief into me, who have
seen the^. I bewail and lament their cases. For considering the pitiful
plight of these our wretched days, what true Christian is there, but will power
out a fountain of tears, to bewail the calamity thereof. The ruin of our
adversaries is exceeded so far that it withdraws ma^s expectation to look
for amendment, unless God of his great mercy do work supernaturally the
restitution. Again none might now double his exclamation, in these days as
Seneca reports, which is: good life, law, good order, godliness, and faith
are now decayed. Therefore, calling to my remembrance this our careful case, I
mused with my self what might be the cause thereof, and suddenly came to my
remembrance the comfortable promises of God the father, made to the keepers of
his laws and commandments: and likewise I considered his intolerable
threatninges to the breakers of the same. Then comparing the wretchedness of
our lives to the sincerity of his holy precepts, I find a marvelous
difference. Good life was never in such contempt, malice at no time bare such
rule, the godly never more despised, and finally, God never more dishonored,
nor the Catholic faith at any time had in so little regard, especially of such
as of arrogancy challenge to themselves the name of true Christians, who in
very deed are utterly void of all christianity. To these the words of
Christ may be well applied, where he says in the 9. Chap. 15. If I had not
come unto them, they should have had no sin in them, but now their sin
does remain. Which words are verily verified in those false Christians, which
did err not only in faith, but also in all other points of religion, and yet
obstinatly seem to defend their religion. They will not yield to scripture,
they will not consent to reason, they will not acknowledge the truth. It is by
nature given to men, in some things to err, but to persist therein is against
nature. For (says Tullie Lib. 1.) We be al drawn and led to aspire unto
knowledge, wherein to pass other we think it a goodly matter: but to slide,
to err, to be ignorant, to be deceived, we count it evil and dishonest.
Therefore says he, one thing is to be avoided therein, which is, that we take
not things that we know not, as though we knew them, and rashly assent to them.
Wherefore, deliberation and aduertisment is to be required in such causes.
Now then it is the office and duty of man, to apply his will to the grace of
God, by whom truth is reueiled in time, whereunto he ought to consent: The
serpent Hydra, with whom Hercules fought, had not so many heads, as each of
these serpents had devised opinions: nor yet Ixion begat so many Centaurs, as
these monsters imagined heresies: insomuch that upon one point, which is the
chiefest comfort left here upon earth, there are Myriades opinionum,
innumerable opinions, and one so contrary to another, yt they agree like
germans lips. The monstruossitie of which opinions are such, that to
remember them, it yields a marvelous terror to the heart of many a good
christian. These adulterate Jesuits think it not sufficient, to effeminate
the minds of the simple with their false doctrine, and to defile the same with
the venim of their viperous tongues, but also therewith have so slain the
conscie^ses of many, that like me^ desperate of their own salvation, they make
haste to their own destruction, who being puffed by with presumption, seek to
clime up to the chariote of the sun. But as Phaeton was served, for going
about to aspire to his fathers secrets, and with a flashe of lightening was
set all on fire: so these presu^ptuous and ignorant people, shall be plagued
with the like, unless they repent, as a due reward of presumption. This it is
to follow the hissinges of the vipers brood, who never leave their haunte,
till they have infected whole countries.

For this cause (well-beloved readers) this present treatise is published, to
set before men's eyes, the abominable lives, and odious practices of these
papists, who in their own conceiptes presume, that they have the undoubted
truth: who^ (if you mark intus and incute) you shall well understand to be
quite contrary. And thus much touching the Jesuits: more of them (God willing)
shall be said in mine answer to the books written against me, most
maliciously, and slanderously, by a Jesuit as I guess. Belike he was ashamed
to write his name least that his ill quallities should be called in question.


The fifth Dialogue. Wherein the Lives of Certain Popish priests, with their
Concubinesare declared.
The speakers are Trisander the Christian Pilgrim, and Diawinckiani the
converted Christian. Trisander. I Would desire thee, if thy leisure were such,
louinge companion, as to tell me more at large the corrupt lives of the
hipocriticall Jesuits, who have none other care al their life time, but to
feed and pamper their panches with delicious wines, and delicate dishes to
seek their ease, and use all kind allurementes and entisementes to whoredom,
to keep themselves in all pleasures and idleness, and to give them selves
into all monstrous infamies: the which they may very well do, and that
freelye. For they have many privileges, wherein they are well armed, and
warranted to be exempted from all punishment. But for as much as your talk
extends no farther touching Jesuits, let me hear how the Popish Priests
do live?


Diawinckiani. As their life was two hundredth years ago, such is their life
now.


Trisander. How they lived then, and long time since, I find in histories. A
Curate of Clauenie in the Duchy of Guyen, as Stephanus reports in his
Apology upon Herodot. fol. 72. did seek to Saibborne the daughter of an
honest man of the same town to his leude lust and pleasure, whom he haunted
in all places where she went: notwithstanding, she still flatlye and
constantlye denied him, which bredde the greater fire to his beastlye desire.
And therefore on a day, as the maid was goinge to her fathers farm (somewhat
out of the town) this minion masked in blewe sarcenet, set all over with
little startes of gold, having a fine laune over his face, and his arms and
legs bare, but covered likewise with laune. In this attire he appeared unto
her on the way, and with counterfeit voice, showed her that he was the Virgin
Marie, declaring unto her that sondrye afflictions should fall upon the town,
for the Luterane heresy that was entered amongst them, (against the which
this Priest was a great Preacher) with sundry other purposes, touching the
same: and further willed her to show it to the town, that they might
celebrate her feast with fasting and prayer, tellinge her withal, how she had
refused the frendshippe and love of a holy person, who in the same place (not
long before) made suit unto her, but she denied him: and therefore, if he
sought any thing at her hands hereafter, she was admonished that she
should obey him, for in so doing there would great happiness fall unto her
by it: finallye she was charged that she should not discover this last part
to any Creatures: the simple wenche believed all for truth, and delivered it
as a Prophecy, and forewarneth them of that should happen to Clanuenie, for
the which cause (at the first) the inhabitants feared much: and in the mean
time this poor soul yielded to his villainy, which was shortly after spied,
the practice discovered, and he executed as well worthy. In a village near
unto Coignake, called Shermes; the Parson there abused his own sister so long,
that in the end he gate her with child: which the Curate so covered, as she
(being holden very holy through her deep Ipocrifie) was taken to be as
chaste a Virgin as might be: and therefore when this fault was spied, he was
not a shamed to publish, that it proceeded of the holy Ghost, and that she
was a second Virgin Marie. The brute whereof coming to the hearing of
Charles, the Earl of Angoleme, he sent of purpose to se how it was for that
he suspected some abuse in it. In whose presence the supposed Virgin (of the
age of thirteen years) being solemly charged by her brother, upon the
damnation of her soul, to deliver them the truth (repeating the second time
the same miracle) she aunsweared, I take this holy Sacrament to my damnation,
before you all here present, that never any man did carnally know me, or in
that sort of sin touch me, no more then that my brother have done: they
hearing so vehement a vow returned, and confirmed the shameless report that
was broached before. But the Earl being wise, and noting the order of her oath
nearer then they did, found the fire by the smoke, and therefore sent, and
commaundinge that they should be seuerallye committed, and they both
examined, wherebye the truth was confessed, and they both burned into ashes,
and dedicated unto Vulcane. An example of a horrible incest, joined with
blasphemy, which witnesses the continente and chaste lives of those that
were vowed from Matrimony: approving the godly fury of the Cardinal of
Lorane, who hearing that a Bishop was secreatly married, said, I marvel how
these Lutherans have given themselves over to all the devils, to marry,
seeinge they have liberty otherwise, after their liking to satisfy their
lusts, at their own pleasure. This did he speak generallye to those that
lived then of their holy mother the Church. For, what was it that those
wretches would not attempt, to fulfill (after their insatiate gluttonye)
their beastly and rompwood lechery, having this Privilege, Si non cast, tamen
caute. A Jesuit Priest in Vienna in Austria, made it no conscience to abuse a
marchantes wise (whom he had under confession) before all the Saints of
either kind, not simply in the church, but behind the Altar, and on good
Friday. This fellow being taken with the manner, although the fault deserved
as vile death as might be devised) yet he was only enjoined to do penance,
and to forbear saying of Mass three months. Their Legate (coming from
Rome) thinking this too sharp a punishmente for so small a fault, presently
absolved him, whose ordinary Masses were afterward found of as good savor,
taste, and digestion, to those that willingly devoured them) as if they had
been said of the most maidenliest Priest in the world. So that it one would
search the euilles of all sorts, committed by these ravening rabble that
feed on the Church, he should find them innumerable. But, as touching their
punishments, it was seldom, or for the most part so light, that it seemed (in
deed) but a mockery: where as, on the other side, if any were but suspected
to covet the true way to their salvation, fire and sword was laid upon them,
with all the rigor and violence that might be. Many such histories could I
recite, but because they are written in diverse books at large, I purpose to
make no more words thereof, but will refer the Readers to Stephanus,
Platina, and other Historiographers, who have written aboundauntlye thereof.
Now I am desirous to hear the enormities and errors of these late Priests,
whose life and conversation is altogether unknown to all this English land.


Diawinckiani. As I have begone to reveal the abuses of the Clergy, so will I
proceed to speak thereof in all degrees. Now there remains that I should
displaye the wickedness of the Mass Priests, I will speak no more, then
that which mine eyes have seen. At Gaunt in Flaunders, there was a priest
that told me Anno domnini. 1578. that if among the Turks he could find
better living, he would not be afraid to offer sacrifice to Mahomet. For (said
he) it is not the outward action that proueketh the indignation and
displeasure of the most highest, but it is the inward cogitation, being
rebellious and disobediente to Gods holy will and ordinances, that causes the
reprobation of man. I am not constrained (said this wretched caytife) to
observe the commandments of God in word and deed, but in thought only. How
void of reason, understanding, and Christianity these his words were, all
men may see. Amongst the Turks he would live as a Turk, amongst the
Papists, (the Turks cosen germans,) he would live as a Papiste, and
amongst the Christians he would feign himself a Christian. At Ausburgh in
high Almaine, there was a Priest at Mass, Anno domini 1578. that had his
Lemman to supplye the room of the Clarke that was absente, now sir she being
unfit for that place, when she should have said Suscipiat dominus hoc
sacrificium, etc. she said, Et cum spiritu tuo. What hoar (quoth he) can
thou not say, Suscipiat dominus hoc sacrificium etc. Master Parson (quoth she)
you are to blame to use such terms by me, in presence of this people. What
Drabbe (quoth he) avoid in haste, or else I will strike thee with my Chalice.
Hereat his Lemman ran away, cryinge, the deuell take thee villainous Priest,
thou have abused me too too much.


Trisander. I would, if I had been at the sight hereof, have laughed as
merrily as ever I did in my life. But I pray you tell me, did he make little
God Almighty, and eat him also then.


Diawinckiani. Yea that he did, but what manner of Sacrifice he offered then in
his rage unto God, surely I cannot tell, or with what charity he then
received his maker, let the reader of this s^^ry judge by the railing disorder
of his vehemente words. At Curtrike in Flaunders, Anno domini 1578. there was
a Priest who willed a little boy that was his Clarke, to fill his Chalice up to
the brimme: this drink is good (quoth he) and tastes well in my mouth,
therefore good child fill a little more.


Trisander. I think this Priest was glad to say Mass, to quench his
thirste and to please his palate. At a village called Westendorfe in high
Almaine, there was a Priest, by report of the Parishioners, that as he was
saying Mass, there came news unto him by a little lad, that a certain young
man was a bed with his Lemman. As Soon as he heard these words, he left the
residue of his Mass vnsayde, and came presentlye with his Clarke and two more,
and found his Lemman and the young man together in a bed: to whom he said,
what in the devils name do you here? Could you not have told me of this your
pastime, that I might have taken part with you? Now therefore I enjoin you
this penance, that you come in your shirte and smock to hear the rest of my
Mass. At Alberstat in Saronye there was a Cannon Priest that wanted money, and
could not tell what to do to get some wherefore he thought it good to con^^^e
up a deuell, with whom he compounded, that if he would procure him two
thousand Dollors, he would assure the deuell of a Baptized body. To the which
promise the devil assented, and procured the money. The day being appointed,
when the body baptized should be given to the devil, this Cannon Priest had
provided before hand, that a goose should be baptized in the Font, where
Christians were wont to be baptized, and this goose was given to the devil.
When the wicked spirit had perceived this policy, he said, thou have
beguiled me now, but I will deceive thee an other time.


Trisander. Is it not strange that men are deluded by these crafty Priests
seeinge the deuell himself is beguiled by their craft and policy.


Diawinckiani. It is nothing strange. In Italy there happened the like thing,
for in the Neapolitane kingdom there were certain (as far as I do remember)
Priests, that borrowed a great sum of money of the devil, and promised to
repay the debt by such a day, if not, that he should use them at his pleasure.
When the day came, these Romish Italian Priests were merrily banqueting, not
being mindful of their promise touching the discharging of the debt: the
devil came amongst them, and demanded his money: now, when it was told him
that they had it not ready, he stew them every one to the number, of five
and twenty Priests, and lay men. This thing was reported unto me to be true
at Sinegallie, whether it be true or false I cannot tell, but I suppose it to
be rather true then otherwise, because many avouched the same to be true,
and they were all Italians. At Ausburghe there was a Priest that had dronken
more then sufficient who when he was at Mass, he cried, ho la hosts, give me
some more beer for I am a thirst. This Priest notwithstanding was about to
make his Savior, in transubstantiating the bread and wine by a few words
uttered by him, into the very body and blood of Christ. This Priest was not
far unlike unto him that was at Mass, who when he was at his memento, his
boy came unto him, and told him that his neighbors swine were entered into
his garden: he had no sooner heard these words, but in a surie he brake forth
into this speech, forgetting his memento, and not remembringe the place wherein
he was, what in the devils name do the swine there: go thither (said he to
his boy) and kill them every one.


Trisander. No doubt this man wanted patience and charity, and received the
Sacrament of the Altar unworthily, not only for other causes, but also for
these his furious and unquiet Passions, he received the Sacrament as an ill
disposed Parson, no doubt.


Diawinckiani. In a City called Guntzburgh, there was a Priest so dron^ke,
that he could not stand to say M^s^e, and when he had filled his chlalice
with wine, he cried with a loud voice praysinge the wine: the Clarke whispered
in his ear that he had received the blood of Christ, God send me more such
blood (quoth he) and I pray thee good Clarke fill the Chalice again. Master
Parson (quoth the Clarke) I pray you dispatch your Mass, for surely good
bear has made your head so light, that you know not what you do. I tell thee
knave (quoth he) fill the Chalice, or else I will make thy pate ache. This Mass
was dronkenly begone and dronkenlye ended.


Trisander. Surely this Priest was (...) fit man for such a profane and
poluted Sacrament. To serve the devil a ^ronken man is most meet, for if he
shall transform himself into the like^es of a child and so appear in the
host of bread, he may bid him convey a potle of wine at a need, out of the
Popes sared Chaplains wineseller,.


Diawinckiani. Thou say well and ^uelye: but mark, I will tell thee a
^errie and a true story of a Priest of Palam, where a Queen a Virgin the
Emperors daughter albeit a Papiste, ^^t surely affable, amiable, and a
succourer and favorer of strangers) has her abode. This Priest Anno domini
1580. travailed to Italy, and as he came to Venice, there was brought him
such wine as pleased him so well, that he asked what drink it was: his
hoasts being a merry man, and knowing he was a German, told him that it was
the tears that came down from the eyes of Christ, in such abundance, they
his tears at three several times, when he wept filled a whole hogshed. Oh
(quoth the Priest) how is this credible, that he being a man, could shed so
many tears, and that his tears should be converted to so sweet a drink as
I taste of, then answered his hoaste, in that he was a man alone he did not
this miracle, but in that he was both man and God, this came to pass by that
means, this thing I say, that his tears filled a whole hog^ shead, and became
notable good wine. Then said the Priest, but how got you^ his tears converted
into this pleasant drink, whereof (I thank you) I have had a taste? then
said his hoaste, that Christ sent it by his Angel to all Italye, and the more
we drink thereof the more we have. Oh good God (quoth this Mass Priest)
wherein have we^ Germans offended Christ, that he sent nothing of tears to
us also to make our hearts merry therewith?


Trisander. Surely this Priest was a very witty man, I think that if a man
had told him that the Citizens of Venice brought their merchandise from
heaven, he would have believed them. Indede I must say that it was a strange
thing, for this Almaine Priest, to get such pleasant wine as he did then at
Venice and belike he never tasted the like drink before. At Eraneble in
France, there came a fellow to the Bishop, mindinge to take holy orders: the
Bishop willed him to read this place of Scripture, Faciemus hic tria
tabernacula, vnum tibi etc. this word Tabernacula, he could not well pronounce,
but thus he read that place, Faciemus tria traber^ula. The Bishop being angry,
said, three turdes: vnum tibi (quoth he, my Lord that sought to have been
made Priest) alterum for Mary your sweet ^arte, and tertium for Margaret your
^aughter. With these words the Bishop was so moved, that he called the
Reader knave. Then said the Reader, have you made me Deacon now my Lord:
whether this story be true or no, I cannot tell: for it was told me of
certain Frenchmen being merrilye disposed, and if it be a fable, let it pass
as a fable. But I will now speak of one that came to the Bishop of Graisoble.
Anno domini 1579. to seek for Priesthood, and when he came to be examined of
the Bishops Chaplain, touching doctrine, he put his hand in his pocket, and
said to his examiner, Ecce hic: and gave him a handful of money. Then the
Bishops Chaplain came to his Lordship, and told him that he had not a better
Scholar to be examined in three years before. Then the Bishop sent this man
to a singinge Cannon of the Qutere, to be proved whether he could singe Mass
or no, and when he came to be examined, he gave also a handful of money to
this singinge Cannon: and as soon as he received the money, he told the
people that he knew by a few interrogations propounded unto the said fellow,
that it was in vain to examine him farther in notes of singing. Thus by means
of his money, he was counted both learned, and also a good Qutereman, whereas
he was neither of both. This story I know to be true for the same thing
has been reported unto me by diverse, as well of the clergy, as of the laity.
Many such stories could I recite, but few may content the mind of the Reader.
And at Moleina, a little town in the Dolphin of France, there was a Priest
that kept his sister, instead of a concubine, as it appeared at last, in that
she was with child, and confessed her brother to be the father thereof.
Whereupon it was enjoined him by way of penance, to go and visit Madonna di
Loreto.


Trisander. Surely an easy penance for such an horrible crime, hanging had
been too too good for such an execrable fact: but one Popish Priest will bear
with an other.


Diawinckiani. Thou have said truth. But mark, I will tell thee of a story
worthy the hearings, wherein is to be noted the dissimulation of a
shauelinge Priest. In city called Langue in Picardie, there was a holy (as
they termed him) Priest, that took his pilgrimage to S. James in Spain: who
when he returned home, he boasted of so many revelations and visions, that he
would not otherwise have the people persuaded, but that S. James brought him to
heaven, and there showed him all the glorious buildinges that are to be seen.
The walls (said he) of that Princely Palace of God, were altogether of
cristall, Sapphire, Diamonds, Carbuncles, and such other precious stones. The
pauementes, both within and without that heavenly and celestial court of God,
were of gold, silver, and such other costly metal. The covering thereof was
bright shininge gold, the like whereof I never saw before. Then S. James
brought me to dinner, amongst the Apostles, where I refreshed my self very
princely: at the last I shook hands with all the Apostles, and so took my
farewell of them. Then S. James gave me his picture in silver, and promised,
that whosoever would offer to the same, during the time that I am at Mass, he
would carry his soul at his departure to heaven The people believed every word
that he spoke, and offered much money to the picture, which the Priest received,
and applied it to his own use. This Priest made simple women believe, that if
the would not condescend to his luxurious and fleshlye request, S. James would
take reuengemente upon them: so that by this his pilgrimage, he gate money
abundantly, and allured many women, to Venus follye. This is the fruit of
Priests pilgrimages, I would to God they considered the end of this their
counterfaite holiness. There was another Priest that travailed with me on
Pilgrimage in France to S. Sebastian, this man's life-was dissolute, his words
profane, and his manners leude, when any Massemonger had committed some
heinous offense, he determined with the consultation of his ghostly father,
and other of his anointed company, to make a vow to visit one or other holy
place, for expiation of his sins: and in his whole pilgrimage he meditated
upon nothing else, then upon liberal women of their bodies. Oh God, what do
these hipocrites mean, to vaunte of holiness, and meddle so much with the
world: do they not pass to dissemble thus with men, as they do, for
temporal gain, and to be disherited of life everlasting by this their folly?
Let not the Papists imagine that I have reported this of malice, or that I
untruly told the lives of their lascivious clergy: or pray for them, I wish
their conversion in the Lord. Their malicious and untrue reports of me have
troubled my patience never a whit: speak what you will, rail and revile,
skoffe and taunte me at your pleasure, count me what you will, a fool, an
ass, unlearned, and whatsoever besides, I am not offended, I am not moved
with these your uncharitable terms: God convert your mind to understand his
holy word, and unfeignedly to observe it, duringe life: and God make us all fit
instruments for his blessed kingdom, and grant that we may glorify him in
our doings, edify his church and congregation, and profit our own souls,
and so enjoy the crown of glory in the kingdom of the most highest. I will
recite three or four more incontinente Priests, and so make an end of this
matter. Lingano in Italy, a Priest kept his own daughter, in steed, of his
concubine, and being made great with child by this Priest she confessed, (as soon as she was examined by the Magistrates) that her father, the Priest and
parson of the parish had gotten her with child. When this Priest was brought
to be^ examined, he denied not his manly fact, but stood in proouinge the
same his unnatural deed, to have been lawful and commendable: for (said he)
she is my base daughter, I have nourished and brought her up from a child
unto woman's estate, and in recompense of all my charges, costs, and labor,
she ought to supply my want with her own body, being forbidden to marry: and
with whom can such a man as I am, being destitute of a wife, be better
pleased, then with his own daughter base begotten? If I had taken an other
man's daughter, I had offended none but the parents: but seeinge I have used
mine own daughter, to fulfill my lust, no man (I think) ought to be
offended. This bawdie Priest escaped unpunished, for they that had the
examination of him, belike were as had as he. How witty his words were, let
al men judge. If a Massemonger cannot get one or other to accomplish his
libidinous lust, he will then procure to himself his daughter, yea sister, yea
and his mother, rather then fail: such is the impretie of the idolatrous
Priests. At Viterbo in Italy, Anno domini 1579. there was a Priest borne at
Naples, that loved the Burdell house so well, that he said three or four
Masses in one day, to get him some money, to the end his often coming to
the Burdell houses might be more accepted. As I my self trauayled from
Millane to Rome, I have had them oftentunes in my journey, that woulds not
stick to play the part of a ingler in their maskinge garments at the altar,
before whom they would, yea even a sheep if you gave him but six pence. And
you shall find a popish priest, that will say Mass in the fields for the
safegarde of the sheep against the wolf. Let trauailers reprove me: if
this be untrue, that a man for a little money, shall have many Masses, and
that of one Massemonger, in one day. At Vigleuan a city in Italy Anno domini
1578. there was a rich citizen that had buried his wife, and afterward
could take no rest in his house in the night time, for the stir and noise of
his wives spirit. This citizen asked council of a Chaplain of our Ladies,
what was best to be done* this priests device was, for lucre and gains that
there should be many Masses soonge for his wives soul, which was (as he
said) tormented by the deuel in his house. This citizen demanded of the priest
what money he would take to redeem his wives soul by his Masses, from all
such torments, misery and grief, wherewyth she was perplexed and tormented.
The priest undertook for a hundredth crounes that his wives soul should fly
to heaven. The citizen, to be in quiet, was content to grant his request.
The priest used a long season to say Mass for the delivery of this spirit,
but it would not b^e: the more Masses were said, the more was the spirit
vexed, and made the greater rumblinge in the citizens house. The citizen being
in a chafe, came to the priest, and told him, that if he would not use better
Masses, to deliver his wives spirit from that vexation and trouble wherein
she was, he would not only have his money back again, which the priest had
received, but also take reuengemente upon him, for that he by his flattery had
been deluded: when the priest heard this being somewhat skillfull in magic,
he craved to come to his house that night, and I cannot tell how, whether by
his coniuration, or by any other means, it came to pass that the spirit
never appeared afterward nor yet was heard. But surely if he had not been
skillfull in Nigromancie, he had never chased away this spirit of illusion out
of the citizens house by his Masses. He tried seven or eight weeks by these
Masses to get this sum of money and could not for all that, but for one or
other couenante and bargain he made with the devil in one night, the citizens
wives spirit never did afterward once disquiet the house. Thus oftentimes it
happens with the papists, that when with their Masses they obtain not their
purpose and intent, then by their magical art they will do what they can.
There was a Priest at Hadocke in Bauaria, that made a woman believe, that she
should be transformed to a mare, and that the devil should ride upon her over
craggie mountains and stony places unless she would fulfill his fleshly lust.
This Priest, for that he had fallen out with her husband, durst not come to
his house, nor his wife to the priests house. The priest wantinge no craft
and subteltie, when the woman came to confession, he willed her to repair
home, and to feign herself very sick, and like to die, and to cry for master
Parson to hear her confe^sion again, for that she had concealed some
notorious crime from him. As soon as she came home she sounded, as though
the spirit was ready to take her, vitimum vale from the body. Why how now
frowe (quoth her husband) what ayleth you to be sick, and so sick, that you
are like to die? Oh husband send speedelye for master Parson, or else I must
say adue to you all, adue to this world, before I have confessed that to
master parson, which troubles my conscience, and from whom I have concealed
in my confession a thing which I could have uttered to day. Ah my body is
feeble, my heart pants full sore, my strength fails me, my feet begin to
ware cold, my breath is short, I am ready to give up the ghost: Oh call for
master parson, that I may be shriuen again. The priest was sent for, and as
he entered the chamber, he sprinkled the same with water, and then he said
so his patient, how do you neighbor, I am come hither to give you ghostly
comfort, and to hear your confession, and to minister the Sacrament of holy
unction. He caused all the^ that were in the chamber to depart thence, until
he had played his feats of actiuitie with her: but the morning following she
being recovered, was very merrye and ^ocand. The woman's husband being a wise
man suspected some secret friendship to have been between his wife and the
parson, in so much that ever afterward he invited the parson to dinner and
supper, twice or thrice a week. Upon a tune he feigned that he would make a
journey to Inghelstatte, and remained at home unknown to his wife in a counting
house of his, and then the good wife, not mistrustinge any thing, made the
priest of the parish to be called, and ordained notable good cheer for his
entertainment: at night, as they were merry and had made good cheer, her
husband took them both naked, and made the priest lighter by both his stones.
Oh villain (quoth the husband to the priest) have thou thus used me for the
great courtesy that I have showed thee? therefore I am revenged on thee: hold,
take thy stones, and keep them in thy purse at all times when thou say
Mass: now I am out of doubt thou will never make more kuckoldes. Then he
put his wife in a close chamber, and gave her bread and water once a day, for
the space of one whole year. There was an other priest but here in England by
report in Queen Mary's time that heard the confession of a gentlewoman, how
she used the carnal company of a young gentleman of that parish: the priest
being of a leacherous disposition practiced by all means possible to obtain
her favor, and by amorous talk he assayed her many ways, but all in vain:
at last there came a maid a servant of that gentlewomans to him to shrift,
and when she had made an end of her confession, he asked her where she was
borne, she told him in such a shiere, naming Yorkshire: he asked in what
place there, and she told him, the place, he asked the names of her parents,
and she told him, I am glad (quoth he) that I have found a cousin here, I
came from thence where you were borne, and your mother was my aunte. You know
I am parson of this parish (quoth he) and have some substance, I have no
kinsfolk here in this parish besides you good cousin, and therefore come often
and continualiye to my house, for I will make you executrix of all that enjoy.
The poor maid was glad to find such a cousin, but when she came unto his
house, he had boughte a pair of perfumed gloves to be delivered by his cousin
to her mistress, which being delivered, her mistress on a sudden was wrapte
in love with the priest, so that she from that time forewardes feasted the
priest full often, and took him for her second paramour. Thus the Priest, by
his knauish conceit, got his pleasure on the gentlewoman. Popish priests
want not their trains of subtelties, to bring that to pass, which they
desire: as by many histories of their lives it plainly appears. If I
should put in writing the abuses of those priests whom I have partlye known,
and of whom I have partlye heard, then this book should grow to a great
volume: but the christian reader may by the history of the ungodly
shauelinges here recited take heed of their hypocrisy, and count them as
false Prophets, and wolfes in shepes clothing. Their works do testify, that
among them, there is no God, but the Pope: and they say with the fleshly
Epicure, Give me that is here present, and let God alone with that is to come.
If they were true Christians, and had regard to their souls health, would
learn by the sermons of faithful preachers, and understand by the holy
scriptures, that besides this life, besides this world, this kingdom, these
things here present, there be other things, and much greater things, an other
life, an other kingdom, an other world to be looked for, doubtless they
would never dissemble with the people as they do. What do they think that God
knows not their secret sodomie, their pollution, and carnal copulation?
Will they be named holy virgins, sacred priests, and chaste sacrificers,
because many of them, follow the council of S. Benet. Si non cast, tamen
caute. If thou can not live chastely, walk closely. They pass not to
displease God in his heavenly sight, but the displeasure of man they dread: and
therefore they think themselves as happy as any Saints, if the people know
not of their wickedness. Here in this world, they hunte for praise, vaineglorie,
opinion of holiness, and for humble reverence: they will be esteemed before al
others, and saluted as holy fathers, and chaplains to our Lady. O English
men beware of these false Prophets, and you that are infected with the poison
of Popish superstition, ask council in time, use some good remedy to purge
the infection out of your soul, apply the salve of the word of God unto your
grief, and you shall be helped, and made whole, safe, and sound again: repent,
repent, fly from papistrie while it is time, ere it be to late, for our life
is very short. To write farther of the incontinencye of the Popes holy
priests, I think it not needful, for that the whole world knows, that
popish priests, for the most part (yea in a manner all) have ever lived and
do live incontinentlye, for all their bragges of chastity: they let loose the
raines to all the just of the flesh. Let trauailers to foreign countreies
bear witness with me, of that which I have reported by them. Mark the lives
of the popish priests that are in Flaunders, Brabante, Holland, Friseland,
France, Sauoy, Italy and Germany: you shall confess, albeit they are
wifelesse, yet that they are not womanlesse; albeit they are forbidden to
marry, yet that they are permitted to keep concubines: they have them, I have
seen them, I have talked with them, and both he and she have confessed that
they were dispensed with all. It is not one priest that is dispensed to take a
concubine: neither is it two, neither is it twenty, neither is it a thousand:
but al Massemongers, of what country soever, are suffered to have concubines.
Is it marvel then, that the Popes shauelinges do so vehemently inueigh
against priests marriage, saying it is tolerable for the^ to keep concubines*
if the Popes dispensation were good and godly (as it is not) surely better it
were to take a concubine, then to marry a wife. For a concubine if she were a
shroe, and sharp of her tongue, a man might put her away, and take an other,
and so he could take the choice and proof of two and fifty in one year,
and the Pope should dispense withal. Is it to be wondered that the Pope has
so many subjects, more loyal unto him, then to their natural Princes, seeing
he dispenses with them in all their wickedness, and allows their deuelish
practices, and furthereth their impious and Venereous inclination, with his
Antichristian permission? The whore of Babylon, the minister of Antichriste,
and the false Prophets prohibit matrimony, but allow all manner of whoredom.
They condemyne chaste wedlock and approve a lascivious life. These are the
enormities of the church of Rome, this is the imquitie of the Pope and of his
Cardinals, to establish impiety, and to suppress virtue, to punish yea and
count the heretics Priests, that seek under the yoke of wedlock to avoyde
fornication, and to leave others unpunished that keep concubines: yea to
permit them to take as many as they list. The law of chastity enjoined
unto Priesthood, the which was first ordained to the prejudice of women,
induces Sodomie into the Church: the delicate feeding and fare of the
Clergy, will have ryther a natural purgation, or some worse: the secret
trial and proof of such men is, that they do delighte in women. But God of his
might for priny sins does send open vengeance. And though the world spieth
their pronenesse to leacherye, yet never reckou they wedlock any godly estate
of living, though it were an only order instituted of God in the beginning:
yea for his Priests also But commonly they have diswaded both men and women
from it, as from a most pernicious evil, or from a mischief of al mischiefs,
calling it foolishnes, beastliness, a walking in darkenesie, a mainetenance
of leachery, a fullfilling of fleshlye desires, a ground of all vice, an
entrance of death, a corruptinge of maydenhoode, a lake of misery, a claye
pit of uncleanness, a thraldom of Egipte, a net of Satan, a snare of the
deuell, and a ponde of perdition: such perverse stomachs have they borne to
holy wedloeke, instituted by God himself in Paradise, and confirmed by
Christ's presence in Galile, and by the first miracle that he wrought there,
as some write, at the marriage of S. John the Evangelist, that they seek to
subuerte the same. Let the Pope disanull priests marriage, yet some will
follow the council of Paul in this, that it is better to marry then burn,
better it is to take a wife, then to shut a whore in his study, as Bonner
did, the which place was showed unto me. Pope Calixtus the second of that
name, was he that first forbad Priests, Deacons or Subdeaco^s to have wives:
whereupon one in England wrote a sharp Epigramme against him, thus much in
effect:

O bone Calixte, nunc omnis clerus odit te,
Quondam praesbyteri poterant vxoribus vti,
Hoc destruxisti, postquam tu Papa fuisti,
Ergo tuum merito nomen habent odio.
O good Calixtus now the Clergy does thee hate,
In former time the Churchmen might enjoy their spousall mate:
But thou haste taken this away to Popeshippe since you came,
Therefore as thou deserved have, they do detest thy name.
This was the arrogante and shameless impudency of this minister of Satan,
Pope Calixtus, to forbid the marriage of Priests. And who sees not manifestly
these men's impudencye, which contemn and disprayse that honorable estate of
holy wedlock, to the end that they might advance their own filthynes, and
bring unclean single life, and the abominable vows of their counterfeit
chastity in estimation, to the verefyinge of that in themselves which has
been long ago foretold by the holy Apostle. I will tell you of the knauerye
of one or two priests, in hearing the confession of two maids at Naples, as I
was credibly informed of certain marchantes that had been there when this
thing was done: and trauayled in my company, Anno domini 1578. This
Neapolitane Priest was incensed with the love of a fair maid of Naples, he
attempted many ways by large effers, and greater promises to win this maid
to satisfy his inordinate lust: but he labored in vain. At last, he devised
to allure her to folly after this manner, when the maid came to be shriuen of
him, and had ended her confession, the Priest sayned that our blessed Lady
appeared before him in his study, and willed him to tell the maid, that instead of absolution she should sleep with him that night. For of her (said
our Lady to the Priest) should a child be begotten that should be one of the
pillars of the Church. When the maid heard this, she aunsweared, oh good God,
what caused our blessed Lady to bid me sleep with you, but seeing our blessed
Lady has willed me to lie by your side to night, I will do as she has
commanded, for fear of her heavy displeasure. There was a Priest at
Sinagaglia Anno domini 1580. who wanted money, it may be to offer to the
Curtezans, and therefore he invented this shift. There was a rich widow that
had good store of money, and came to him to be shriuen: now when she had ended
her confession, he told her that it was revealed unto him in a vision, that
if this woman would not goue him tourescore crowns, he should not absolve her
of her sins, until she would vow a monastical life. This woman had
rather depart from sourscore crounes, then not to have been absolved. I have
written of these Iesurtes, for that they are sent by their Rectors to this
land, to pestre the same with heresies, and have given euidente notice to our
countrymen of their hypocrisy and dissimulation, exhortinge them to beware
that by their outward show of holiness they do not deceive them. They are as
crafty as the Scribes and Phariseyes, and they pervert the people as the
Scribes and Phariseyes did in Christ his time. These Jesuits preach not as
they ought, for they leave the word of God, and teach their own traditions,
they preach evil, for they wrest the very Scriptures, or rather rashly
gather them out of old rotten papers, ready wrasted by others. And for that I
say wrasted by others, the stole^ books of controversy that are scattered
here in England, who bring them but the Jesuits, and from whence came they
but from Rome, or from some other city where there is a Covent of begging
Jesuits? What written books of divinity soever the learned Jesuits of any
nation have, by the post they impart the copy thereof to all Jesuits of all
countries. And whereas he wrote, that I took some part of my first book
out of Philip of Norleyes book, what is that to the purpose? You take, to
aunsweare that part ye help of Bellar^^inus dictates, which have made D.
Bristow famous. For he commits his lesson to memory as a child does the
dictates of his master, and reads them publicly to the English students.
His books that are written against that learned man D. Fuilke, and others, are
gathered (as I suppose) out of father Robert Bellar^^inus dictates. Well, let
these things pass, until a more conueniente time serve to write hereof. But
this by the way I annswere to Parson (as I surmise) his malicious detractions,
where he says that they of the reformed church are driven to this exig^nt,
that they are glad to have such simple fellows as I am, and others whom he
named. But let him be assured that in England, at this day, there are a
thousand that can encounter with him, and all the whole crew of blasphemous
Jesuits. They are able (God be thanked) to confute them in their errors,
albeit in hugge^ mugger they are groate braggers, and little doers: they are
fearful barkers, but small biters. What praise shall the learned win by
meddling with these boasters and braggers of themselves, who when they come to
defend their cause, they allege elde wives tales, the lives of feigned Saints,
false miracles and such like trifles. As for the Scriptures, when they allege
them, they pervert the sense thereof. Now, should learned men trouble
themselves with such perverse men, that have no knowledge in Gods book, the
most unlearned minister in England is able by authority of Scripture to
overthrow them with their sophistical and fantastical religion. For these
great Rabines and masters, do never once read the bible orderly, and yet the
blind and ignorant people does reverence, these sowgelders in steed of Gods.
For in Germany these Jesuits are so termed in their language. These are they
which now leave their bellies, seekinge their own glory, and not the true
glory of God, which might be s^tfoorthy even by Balaams ass: much less then
ought we to contemn such abiectes, as preach the word of God. We have (says
S. Paul) this treasure in bricketh vessels that the glory of the power might
be of God, and not of our selves. God has chosen the foolish things of the
world, to confound the wise: and the weak things has God chosen, to
confound the mighty: and vtle things of the world and despised, has he
chosen, and things that are not, to bring to naught things that are, that
no flesh should glory in his sight. But now all men (in a manner) will be
wise, and therefore they are ashamed of the simple Gospel, and of vneloquente
preachers, they are ashamed (truly) to say with Paul, and to performent in
deed: I brethren, when I came unto you, did not come with excellency of
words, or of wisdom, preachinge the testimony of Christ. For I esteemed
not my self, to know any thing amongst you, but only Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. 2. Cor. 2. O voice of a true Evangelist? But now we are ashamed of
this foolish preachinge, by the which it has pleased God to save al those
which believe in him and beeinge puffed up with out own fleshly mind, we do
rather choose proudlye to deal in those things wherein we are slenderly
seen, preaching fables and lies, and not the law of God, which is undefiled,
and converting men's souls. God give the people grace better to esteem his
word then they have done hitherto, that they may geeue due honor unto the
ministers thereof, according as they are admonished in the Scriptures. For now
scarce the Bishops are steemed, as they ought to be: as for others, they are
had in contempt with the proud, rather the^ otherwise. Who now a days more
vile with the foolish people then a minister? who more abject then he? the
Papists have their Priests in greater reverence, who are better loved by a
great deal, then our ministers are amongst their own flock. I do not
write this, that me^ should come to the ministers with cap and knee: no, they
ought not to be so vaineglorious as to require such obeisance, but they ought
to be regarded and honored, as Christ himself has appointed. But of this
matter I will write no more, let the people if they will follow Christ, do as
Christ has commanded: or else let them be sure they are not the followers of
Christ. But least I might seem too tedious in this disc^uery of the Jesuits,
and Papists, I will here make an end directinge all the rest of my talk
wholly unto the^ both, whom this dialogue specially concerns, exhorting them
to be reformable, and to cease of from having the word of the eternal God in
contempt. Be ye therefore better minded then you have been hitherto, say with
Haule, It is hand to kick against the prick, O leave your erroneous
opinions, abhor heresy, and be reconciled to the truth, that you may be
received again into the perpetual favor of God, purchased by Christ to all
them that by faith and repentance come unto him. You have examples of diverse
that recanted and forsook the dregs of popish superstition, and spent their
blood for the testimony of their faith, as you may read in the histories of
the church of Christ. And as you have them, so follow them, to your own
salvation. Now as long as you are obstinate, and stiffenecked in your naughty
and perverse opinion, so long shall you be under the indignation and
displeasure of God and the Prince, so long shall your state be miserable, your
mind unquiet, fraught full of fear and dread, your heart out of comfort, no
safety in your life, brieflye you shall lack no calamity: but if you will
recant, your trespass shall be pardoned, and displeasure removed, then fear
shall depart, comfort shall come, and you shall receive hope of eternal
life. Your fear shall be turned to hope, death to life, damnation to salvation,
hell to heaven, malediction to blessinge, the power of Satan shall be dissolved,
your care shall be turned to consolation, finally all the felicities of heaven,
so many as Paradise can hold, shall belong to you as to all other unfeigned
beleeu^rs of the Gospel of Christ Jesus. O Englishmen, you that are Priests
secundum ordinem Antichristi Papae Romani, after the order of Antichriste the
Pope of Rome, be no longer enemies to the truth divided and sundred from God
and your loving Queen Elizabeth. Your obstinacy ingendereth wrath, and
provoke judgment: and judgment by law ministers death and damnation: with
death enters the devil, and with him heaps of infinite miseries and
calamities. In this pickle the impenitent lies for ever, without redemption of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. So long as you hold with the Pope, you shall
be execrable unto God, and odious unto your Prince: expend therefore and weigh
in your minds, cast with your selves, in what a miserable perplexity and
wretched case you Massemongers are, so many as be not yet reconciled unto the
truth in Christ. Turn unto the living God, and as you have long tasted of his
wrath so now begin to taste his friendship. A better friend you cannot have,
yea, to say the truth, no other friend ye lack but him, whom if you have
your friend, no enemy can do you hurt: if he be your enemy, no friend can do
any good: if ye desire his friendship, ye need not seek it far, it is
offered unto you in the Scripture, at what time so ever ye recante, God is ready
to receive you into his favor and grace. But then you must take it while it is
offered. Behold, now the acceptable year: yet is the good time, yet the golden
time, yet is the day of salvation, yet to day lasts, and yet the gate is
open, wherein the wise virgins may enter. But if it be once shut again, the
foolish virgins shall never have it open any more. Take mercy and pardon
therefore, while it is offered: refuse it not least ye be refused. The eternal
God, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is true in his promises, and
wonderful in all his works, have pity of al Papists, and speedelye conducte
you to the knowledge of the truth, that you may be saved through the merits of
Christ Jesus, our only redeemer and Savior.


Trisander. Amen, And I beseech the same God, to geeue them some portion of
his holy Spirit, to keep and confirm them in the knowledge of the eternal
truth of his Gospel: that we all, like brethren, and children of one father,
may laud and praise the name of the Lord our God, that exalts the humble
and meek, does throw and pull down the proud and high minded Papists. And
thus much brieflye touching this Dialogue of Popish Priests, and their
execrable abuses.


The end of the fifte Dialogue.
The sixth Dialogue, wherein is laid open the dissension that has been in the
English Seminary at Rome, and the orders of that Seminary.
The speakers are Trisander the Christian Pilgrim, and Theophilactus the
converted Christian. Trisander. Now are we come to Rome the famous City of
the world, and the seat of Antichrist: but before we enter into this City
can ye tell me how this Church is called, and who paid for the building of
the same?


Theophilactus. What the name thereof is I cannot tell, but Pope Julius the
third, when the state of true religion, was subverted, and altered, and
papistrie planted, erected the same Church, of his own expenses, and made
processions, and singing Te Deum with great solemnity, to declare the joy and
gladness that was pretended for this reconciliation.


Trisander. I think the Devil triumphed very much, and great ioies were then
in hell amongst his route of Angels. For this metamorphoses, and sudden
alteration in religion, the Pope his vice gerent here on earth reioysed, and
the Devil his master was glad that both king and queen, nobles and commons
disioyned and disseuered themselves from the unity of Christ's Church. The
Pope was more enriched, his authority amplified, and his kingdom enlarged:
the Pope had plenty of worldly goods, and Peter pence pleased him best, the
Devil sought nothing else but the silly souls of the wretched persecutours,
and their unhappy souls contented him most of all. But tell me (I pray you
good friend Theophilactus) what moved ye Pope to erect this Church without the
walls of the City?


Theophilactus. I know not in good sooth what caused him so to do, unless he
had thus conceit in his subtle brains, that K. P. and Q. M. should stand
without the City to see the repayring of the ruinous walls of Rome, the city
of iniquity, and there both K. P. and Q. M. should stand to pay the workmen
their hyre. And suerly so it came to pass in the days of K. P. and Q. M. that
a great part of the ruins of that City was repaired up again, to the
contentment of the Pope and his master, whom he serves, even the iayler of
hell. But now all praise be ascribed to the Lord, that by the means of his
faithful servant Queen Elizabeth our gracious princess, the light of the
Gospel shines throughout all this kingdom, the ruins that were once
repaired are now broken down again, Antechristes religion is exiled, and the
truth is preached of painful laborers in Christ's vineyarde, and their
doctrine is embraced of all true English subjects. Gods holy name be praised
therefore.


Trisander. Let us now enter into the City, where shall we take our loding
to night? can you tell?


Theophilactus. Yes that I can, we will go to the English hospital, and there
we shall be welcome, if we tell the scholars any news that are in the
college adtoyning to that hospital.


Trisander. What news shall we show them? they are of a contrary religion to
us, they are disloyal subjects both to God, and to their princess. And if
we would tell them any such news as they covet to hear, we should offend
both God and our loving Queen: therefore we dare certify them of nothing
done in England, without offense: and if we durst, yet we would not, for that
they are degenerated from the faith, and are unnatural unto their Country.


Theophilactus. Tush man, you are melancolique, you fear to utter that which
may be uttered for news unto ye scholars. Let us tell them that father
Edmunde Campion, Ignatius di layolas priest is highly promoted in England. For
he is Archbishop of the Tower of London, and retains in his service many a
stout Prelate. Let us tell the^ of their Catholic martyr William Sherwood,
which was executed and put to death, for that he committed a horrible murder
upon Richard Hobson, Gentleman, both prisoners in the Kings benche for the
profession of Popery. Let us bid them make haste to return home, they shall
want no preferment: the Bishopric of Newgate? is void, the Archdeaconship of
the Kings bench is vacant, and many rich benefices in the tower do wait and
tarry their coming home. For these recited places are receptacles of all the
worthiest unreformed priests that come from beyond seas. These news will
animate and embolden ye Popes scholars very much, to seek to have access to
Cardinal Modone, for their letters of presentation to this Deanerie, and that
Deanerie, to this Archdeaconship and that Archdeaconship, to this benefice and
that benefice. About a two years ago, there was such a brute at Rome, that
Queen Elizabeth was dead, that the scholars triumphed, and were at variance
between themselves, who should have the beast Ecclesiastical liuinges here
in England, some said he would be deane of Paul's, another would assign to
him self the Deanerie of York, and so every one would choose to himself, one
peculiar place or other, therein to be deane, archdeacon, or parson, one of the
scholars made suit to Cardinal Modone, to have his letters of presentatio^ to
be made M. Parson as soon as he came to England. And at another time there
was great stir, and controversy at Rome, between Goldwel Quondam bishop
of saint Ass: and Shelley, Prior of the order of the cross: which of them
should be Archbishop of Canterbury, for both of them were persuaded,
through a false surmised report, that our loving Queen was disceased, whom God
preserve from day to day, to his glory, and the public benefit of this
fortunat English Island. Their vain interrogations may be fed and pleased by
the news before mentioned.


Trisander. I am content to dee as you have said, for by the recital of such
news I will satisfy their inquisitiue demaundes. But tell me (good friend
Theophilactus) how long may we lawfully remain in the English hospital,
without offense unto the superiors of that house?


Theopilactus. Eight days may we stay there, and have both meat drink, and
lodging, which days being expired, we must depart thence.


Trisander. But shall we be examined of our religion of the Popes
inquisitours?


Theophilactus. There is no examination of religion, unless they have you in
suspicion of a contrary religion. You may be in Rome twenty years, and never
be examined touching your religion, unless some of your acquaintance to bewray
you, or else yt you speak one word or other inuectiuely against their Romish
religion: which if ye do, then shall you be straightly examined of the
inquisitours, and have no favor, without recanting the truth, but suffer
taunts and railing words which you shall not want nor any misery or sorrow
that they can procure you in any respect.


Trisander. But we will take heed what we speak, that we fall not into
their mercy. But let these words pass, and now tell me (I pray you) who were
the founders of this hospital, and what revenues has it, and what is he that
is protector of this hospital.


Theophilactus. Kings of England first founded this hospital, and bought
certain houses within the walls of the City of Rome for the maintenance
thereof: as for lands, it has none belonging unto it. Cardinal Morone is
protector thereof, and of the English college adjoining unto the same. D.
Morice, a welsh man, is the prouider and manciple thereof, which D. Morice was
sometimes Rectour of the English Seminary, but during ye time of his
Rectourship, there was such dissension in the College amongst the English men,
and the welchmen, that I think the spirits of darkness did better agree
together in hell. This D. Morice favored his own countreyme^ more then he did
the other, wherefore the English men could not abide him, nor allow him to be
Rectour. D. Parkar, if he used no parcialitie, but spoke uprightly, surely he
was worthy to be commended. D. Morice said he to me (being then at Millan in
his house) is appointed Rectour of the English Seminary, but he is so proud
and stately, that he rides in a Wagon, as though he were a prince, and
causes the English scholars to follow him all a long, aloof, a far of.

While he thus rangeth and wandereth abroad, the English scholars are sure to
fare hard: but the Welshmen will not be so used. Master Morice (say they) is
our countruman, and therefore we will fare of the best: and surely so they did,
as I understood by their own confession. For they had the best chambers, the
best apparel and the best commons: for the cook was a welshman, the keeper
of the wine seller was a welshman, and al were welshme^ that had any office: so
that they could control the other scholars at their pleasure. And when any
english scholar made suit to be of the College, he would ask him with a grim
countenance from whence he came, and what was the cause of his coming: then he
would tell him that there came more wandering fugitives out of england then
out of Wales. But if he understood there came a welsh man, he would receive
him very courteously and entertain him joyfully, and so would his countreimen
take him by the fiste, with many congratulations. O proud uncharitable
wretches, what distinction make you of Wales and England, that there should
breed in your poisoned breasts, such canckred malice toward them that be
of your own crewe, and superstitious sect of popery. This Morice the
welshman never loved the^ yt were borne in England, for proof whereof I will
bring his own slanderous reports, which I have heard with mine ears uttered
from his own mouth, even to his countreimen. The englishmen (said he) are
proud and ambitious braggers, and they are slaunderers of our nation. If he had
said, both we welshme^, and you englishmen are high minded, full of envy,
bragging and standering one of another, I would have holden with him: but
seeing he sought to clear himself, and his own countrymen, in shifting
their faults from themselves to the englishmen, I commend not his charity. He
would say often, that the english papists were plain hypocrites, and had no
more religion (to use his own terms) then a dog: that they sought for
vaineglorie, and a name of holiness. And so they did doubtless, and so did his
own countreimen too, albeit he spoke nothing against them, as hereafter in the
sequel of this chapter most manifestly shall appear, to the view of England.
I will speak the truth for both, I will not spare to discover the malice and
hypocrisy of the one and the other, I will not be partial, neither shall
affection draw me to display the offenses of the one, and keep in silence
the enormities of the other: but with an upright conscience and an equal mind
I will write of them both, as well of welshmen as of Englismen, as ye truth
shall give place. They never came to dinner or supper without iarring and
brauling one with ye other, they used such ignominious names the one to the
other, as I am loath to rehearse for Civility sake. I am a Gentleman quoth the
one: thou art a rascal, quoth the other. The welshman begins to fret and
fume, and says, albeit I came to Rome with broken and rent apparel, yet I am
borne of as good blood as thou art: stop there quoth the other: nay, I tell
thee plainly I am as good a Gentleman as thou art: where sir, quoth the
Englishman, in Wales I trow. For if a man of your country, be able to spend
forty groates a year, and pay thirty to the Queen, he is a Gentleman of
Wales. Then chafed the other, and said, there are as good gentlemen in Wales,
as in any place of England. Before you came out of Saxony, and conquered this
ancient Island of Britan, now named England by the trains of your subtlety,
we Welshmen ruled the coasts of England: but now being vanquished through
your policy, we are driven to Wales. Oh devilish minds to conceive such
wicked and ungodly thoughts: the Englishmen not able to abide such malicious
reproaches, called them vacabounds, variets, and beggarly rascals,
horsestealers, stealers of kye and oren. The Englishmen would abuse the^ with
quips, scofs, and mowes, that my mind is troubled sore to remember and put in
writing the uncharitableness, and mutual dissension of both countriemen, English
and Welshmen. At last D. Morice brought all the English students before
Cardinal Morone, and complained of the^ very uncharitably, and said they would
be ruled by noe aduertisements or exhortations which he used as he said, to
have them reconciled to the Welshmen, and to be contented to live orderly and
peaceably the one with the other. He moved the Cardinal of their dissolute
living, and unorderly behavior in the City of Rome. Whose complaints were of
such force with the Cardinal, that they were charged to depart the College,
and to get them packing out of the City. This charge being given to D. Morice,
that they should no longer remain in the College, Morice warned the
English-students to depart, and kept his own Country birds with him, to
solace and comfort him self with their company. Then the Englishmen took
their scrips and bottels, and went to an Englishmans house that was married, to
dinner: and after dinner, as far as I remember, they had access unto the Pope,
and the Pope having heard before (I know not by whom) how unruly they were,
asked the English students, as soon as he saw the^, how chance they went not
out of the City. For (said he) the gates of Rome are open, and you may depart
out of the City when you will, no man shall let you. Then said the English
students, if your holiness command us to forsake the City, we will and
must obey your holiness commandment: but this we tell your holiness, that
we are come hither to Rome for conscience: sake, and for refuge. Hitherto your
holiness has sustained our need, but if now (we know not for what offense)
we be banished the holy City of Rome, we shall be the most unfortunate men
living. For to our own Country we dare not return, being alienated and
severed from their religion, and whither we may go (most holy father) we
know not, we have neither lands, nor money to maintain our wretched state:
oh holy father have compassion upon us, and forsake us not utterly, seeing we
are ready to suffer martyrdom for your holiness sake, and that by our death
your authority shall be enlarged, your power increased, and your kingdom
enriched. We are yours (holy father) both bodies and souls, by our life to
do your holiness obedient service, and by our death to do you holiness
honor. Therefore (holy father) receive us again (we beseech your holiness) to
favor and grace, and we shall from henceforth give your holiness no
occasion of indignation or displeasure against us. The Pope having understood
before, the cause of their dissension with the welshmen asked why they would
not be ruled by their Rector D. Morice, they answered, because D. Morice
favored his own Countrymen more then them, being englishmen borne. The Pope
being persuaded by D. Lewis his Suffragane, ye if he should not maintain the
englishmen, they would the^ return to england, and revolt from papistrie, and
deny him to be Peter's successor and Christ's vickar here on earth, and fearing
the recantation and backslyding of his scholars* from him assented to their
request, and their petition was to have the Jesuits to be their superiors, so
that as they requested it came to pass. Then the Pope caused one of his
chamberlaines to place them in the college again. D. Morice was removed from
thence to be prouider of the english hospital, and father Alphonsus an Italian
Jesuit in D. Morice time of his rectorship, confessor, was chosen to be ye
Rectour of ye english seminary. Father Ferdinando a Neapolitane was chosen to
be master of the students and so now eight Jesuits have the rule of the
english seminary. And since the Jesuits came to bear office in that
seminary, at the request of the english students there were two welshmen put
out of the college, who as yet remain in the City, and live as the Popes
pentioners, much better then they did in the College, because there was such
enmity and serpentine hatred between one country man and another. And
because I perceived that the holy fathers the Jesuits used partiality, and
blind affection, to the one country more then to the other, full often I
attempted to escape out of the city secretly, and could not, for that fear
kept me back. I went to the Rector very often to ask him leave to depart to
Rheines, there to be made priest, and to study out my course in divinity. But
where as it is written, I was put out of the College, as non proficiens, how
can that be? For they could not put me out of the College, if I had been
such a one as he maliciously fayneth me to be: because I was half a year in
probation. And if I had been non proficiens, the laws of the college, were
such yt then the Rector should have warned me to forsake the college. But it
came not so to pass, for I stayed there afterward, somewhat more then a
tweluemonth I am sure, and I was in that College in probation, well near the
space of two years: and with much ado I got leave of the Rector, and the
Pope, to go to Rheines, as it is said in my book of recantation, etc. Now,
to proceed farther in the narration of the dissension of the students of the
English Seminary, there is such backbiting amongst the^) such slaundering,
such mocking, such railing and reuiling the one of the other, that their
college may well he named a Seminary of dissension, a Seminary of hypocrisy,
a Seminary of pride, a Seminary of treachery, and a Seminary of all
mischief. They have conceived such an inward grudge one toward an other,
they are so stiff necked, so waywarde, and so crabbed, that seldom or never
they will be reclaimed. As Soon as they have received the idol of ye Mass, and
are gone out of the Church, they fall out for some odd trifle or other, and
use such reproachful words one to another, that it is rather a Hell then a
house, a place of dissentio^ then a seminary of godliness. When they come to
confession, they kneel down before a picture, and there look as though they
came to Tyborne: they bend their eyes toward the ground, their faults are so
many, that they are ashamed to look up to the heavens, and there they tell the
Priest one venial sin or other, for mortal sin they never commit (as
they say, and as the Jesuits report of them. Such like faults as these they
tell their confessor, that they neglected to come to dinner at the first toule
of the Bell, or else left their beads behind, or came too late to associate
his fellows to the schole, or rose tardie to meditation. These faults are
counted venial, but as for mortal sins, they never commit any, for then
they should loose the name of holiness, and the Jesuits should be much
discomme^ded, to suffer them to offend mortally. The students must be counted
as holy as the Jesuits, for that these holy fathers are appointed by our most
holy father the Pope, to train up the Students in all virtue and godliness.
The Jesuits cannot abide to hear that they have sinned mortally, ever since
they became members of that society of Jesus. Amongst the students of the
English Seminary, and the Jesuits their overseers, it is a venial sin to
go to the Burdello, I mean the Stews secretly, they make it no mortal
sin. I could name some of the scholars, that in resorting to those places
got the French pockes, but their names, unless I be called to question, I
will bury in the pit of silence. When the scholars come to receive the idol
of the Mass, they look down so sad as may be, some weep, and some receive
it gaping and knocking of their breasts, with such sighing and sorrowful
looks, as though they should swallow up a Toade or a Frogge. And when the
Priest is at the elevation, they begin to knock their breasts apace, and to
kiss the ground, crying signiore mio, yt the Italians may understand their
holiness. When the Priest departs from the altar, they touch his masking
garments, and then put their hands to their mouths. They think there
proceeds some virtue from the Priests Cope, and when they put their hand to
their mouth, that the holy Ghost enters into their bodies. There they kneel
after Mass is said, rattling their beads, as though they meant to awake our
blessed Lady (being fast asleep) with the noise thereof. They are as busy
in counting their beads, as any usurer in summing his money, so they go from
image to image, with kissing, bowing, and kneeling before the^. But when they
come from the Church, all that show of holiness is quite forgetten, the one be
ginneth to praise himself for his virtue, and is not ashamed to say that
as soon as he received the body (as he terms it) of the Lord, he felt the
holy Ghost suggesting and prompting him to say over his beads. The other
begins likewise to extol himself: I have said (says he) so many Pater
nosters, and so many Creedes, so many Aue Mary's, and so many Psalms of our
Lady, only by the suggestion of the holy Ghost. By and by after, they will
hold a Parliament how all things shall be ordered in England, then they will
begin to name who are favorers of their side, and what jolly champions they
be: Oh (say they) if these were dead, it would be a happy world, with us:
or if these were received to the bosom of our holy mother the Church, then we
should be blessed, and have our hearts desire. These are the men of whom they
talk so often, my L. of B. my L. of L. my L. T. my L. of H. Sir F. W. S. F. K.
S. I. of C. Sir W. M. with diverse others, to whom God grant many joyful
years, with health both of body and soul: I hope they shall never see that
golden day, that day of Iubiley.

God prosper the reign of our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, and make her
an old woman in Israel: God defend her from all dissembling Papists. Now to
come again to our English students, the Popes scholars, they are ready to
fall down to painted walls, and fair Sepulchers full of rotten bones: they
are Saints in the sight of men, and Devils inwardly. They hunt for vain
glory, and lightly regard the portion of the godly in the kingdom of God.
They are devout in visiting holy places (as they term them) and in going to
Stations: they think that all their sins are forgiven, if they mumble up a
few prayers in a covert tongue, before a dumb idol, and a painted image
clothed like a living creature. What vice soever they commit, if it be not
against the Pope, nor against his proceedinges, indulgentiam plenariam
obtinebunt omnium suorum peccatorum. They shall be released of all their
sins, be they never so monstrous and execrable: yea, and they shall deliver
their parents out of Purgatory. I think a mouse will carry their souls to
heaven, upon his back, or else Robin Redbreast, for greater expeditio^, will
fly with their souls under his wings to heaven. They say it is impossible for
them to be out of favor with God, if the Pope love them, and grant them
indulgence. Oh Rome, Rome, What a holy City art thou, in thee all men shall
be saved that are rich, and will please thy ruler with frank gifts, and
humble obedience done unto his holy reverence: his scholars are happy to be
in his grace, and to dwell in his holy and more then holy City, the Pope will
grant his scholars a free pardon of all their sins, live they never so
wickedly, the Pope is their friend, and will give them heaven, which place
Lucifer holds in possession. But when the Pope his trusty servant sends
any of his welwillers thither, it is so large a rowme, that he prepares such
cha^bers for them, as are meet for their degrees: but if he will presume to
send any of his acquaintance, or of his favorers, or of his disciples to the
other heaven, where Christ reigns perpetually: Saint Peter the porter of
heaven gates will not suffer them to enter in, but will charge them to depart,
for that the Pope vsur peth the seat of an Apostle, and says, he is Saint
Peter's Successor, whereas he follows not Saint Peter in life, nor in
doctrine.


Trisander. You have sufficiently declared the dissension of the College, now
I pray you speak somewhat of the orders thereof.


Theophilactus. That will I do gladly to pleasure you, if I may therein.
First, they must rise early in the morning, as soon as they have heard the
second sound of the Bell. For the first sound is for the Jesuits, to rise
and fall down on their maribones, and fall to contemplation. The second sound
of the Bell is for the Jesuits, to cease from meditation and, for the
scholars to rise up to roll their beads, after the manner of a piece of
cloth: then to kneel down to contemplatio^ for one hour space, and when the
Bell has roung again, to rise up from contemplation, and to hear Mass, and
Mass being ended to repair to their chambers, and there to abide until the
Bell warns them to the schools. First the deuines scolasticall and positive,
then the philosophers and logicians, and afterward the rhetoricians and
gramarians. One form after another, at diverse and several ringing of the
bell, goes to hear the public lectures of the schools of Rome: and when
they are come home from ye schools, then one or other ringeth the bell to
washing of hands, over one of the Towels, which are there to wipe their hands
therewith there is written, pro sacerdotibus, no scholar dares to wipe his
hands therewith. Then one ringeth the bell to dinner, and one of the priests
is appointed by father minister a Jesuit, to say grace, and grace is said in
latin, and during dinner time, one of the scholars, who is appointed for that
weak, ascends and goes up to the pulpit, which stands in the lower end
of the refectorie or haule, and there-hee reads one history or other, and
afterward the Martyrologue. But if any of the scholars have committed some
venial sin, as they term it, then he pronounces his fault, and inioyneth
such penance as is specified by the superiors or written in his scedule, or
piece of paper and as soon as he has done reading, he comes down, and
immediately after wards, one or other ringeth ye bell, and the^ they rise up
from dinner to recreatio^, and their talk is of England, wishing and hoping ye
subuersio^ thereof, they had rather that aliants and strangers did rule the
land. And that I lie not, he that is reconciled to the verity of the Gospel,
and to the concord of the reformed Church, may bear testimony (for this man
was in my time in the English Seminary, and visited a scholar, once lying
sick in his bed) which scholar died within a while after. There were five
or six scholars, with the Neapolitane Priest, and a Jesuit then being of the
English Seminary, now reader of Philosophy in the common schools: these
perfect scholars talked of ye Spanish Navy, of D. Nicholas Saunders then
Captain general over the soldiers which came out of Spain with him, they
hoped (said they) to see the Mass openly advanced in England, for (say they)
we had rather have the Queen of Scotts, or the King of Spain to govern the
land, the^ our gracious Queen Elizabeth, whom God defend, for his glory
sake, and the maintenance of true religion. When I heard these unnatural
words pronounced of unnatural subjects toward their natural sovereign,
and Country: I could no longer forbear to speak somewhat after this manner,
against these most malicious and blooddy wishings. Though (said I) being then
moreinclined to superstition, then otherwise, the religion of our Queen and
Country differs from the Catholic faith, yet do I not read in Gods
word, that it is lawful for us to wish the death of our natural Princess,
ye overthrow of our loving Country, wherein we were borne. We ought say they
(as we may read in the scripture) heartily to pray unto God for the happy
conversion of our Queen and country to the faith of the Romans. Oh (say
they) we had rather have our parents and friends burned to ashes, then that
they should renounce the profession of the faith of Rome: but God sends a
shrewd cow short horns. Nevertheless, our hope and confidence is in the Lord
of hoastes, that yc wished day of theirs shall never come to pass: if the
event of all things should happen according to their wished mind, they would
not spare to imbrue their guilty hands in the innocent blood of their parents
and kinsfolk, that should boldly and constantly confess Christ to be the
invisible head of the Church, and not the Pope. Father Ferdinando commended
their villainous and Devilish wishes. For breuities sake, I omit to delate
upon their tir a^nous doyngs, desires, and demands. Now I proceed to
certify the courteous Reader of their manner of penance. If any had committed
some fault by negligence or through disobedience, or contrariwise, he has
penance enjoined him according to the quality of the crime. As if he comes
to late to aco^pany his fellow to yc schools, then he is commanded to stand
at dinner or supper, until the Rectour bids him sit down. If any other
rose somewhat too late to contemplation, he is charged to lie prostrate on the
ground upon some couerlet or blanket, and there he lies on his back, until
father Reetour, or father Minister, in the Rectours absence wills him to rise
up. Some for not coming to church, some for neglecting the hearing of
exhortations, some for passing by any Jesuits, some for one fault, and some
for another receue diverse penances. Some hold their fingers in their mouths
in the middle of the haule, some are forbidden to drink, some have not their
antepast their first dish of meat, or of fruits, or of roots: some of there
postpast their after dish, either of fruits or cheese. And thus much in
breuity fouching their manner of penances. Every one has his bed alone, for
fear of the abominable act of Sodomie, which is usual at Rome amongst all
fortes of people. And a little before midnight, one of the Jesuits comes to
the scollers Chambers, to see what rule they keep, and whether every one be
in his own bed. The scollers, both in winter and summer, wear two gowns,
the one upon the other, and a doublet, and brieches in summer: but in winter,
they have warmer apparel. Every week they are bound to say over their
beads, for the Popes health, and his flourishing prosperity: and for the whole
college of the the princely and Maiesticall Cardinals. The first time that I
came to the English Seminary, father Rectour asked if I had any holy beads,
I told him no: the next day the Rectour gave me a pair of beads, and warned
me diligently and affectionately to pray incessantly for our patron ye Popes
holiness, as he termed it. I will (said I) say over my beads as well as I
may: but I could not tell what to do with my swapping beads, unless to fray
away dogs. For I could better number the beads severally, the^ say my
prayers on them. I never learned to use my beads, but contented my self with
my little primer book, and when I lost them, I never sought any other.

I was complained of to the Rectour, for that I regarded no better the Devils
guts. To proceed further, to write of the orders of the english seminary, I
think it not amiss once a month, every student has given him the name of
some Saint, whom for that month he takes to be his patron and defendour to
him, he directs his prayers, and supplications, as to God him self. In that
little fragment of paper is written, to what purpose he shall pray, as for the
Popes health and long life, that he may see reuengement done upon princes, who
are favorers of the reformed religion, that he may subdue all countries fallen
from him under his servile subjection. They pray for the Queen of Scotts,
that she may be restored to her former dignity, that she may attain to the
Crown of England, establishe the Romish religion, and set abroche the Popes
supremacy. They pray for the prosperous success of D. Nicholas Saunders
proceedinges in Yreland. I think the saints, to whom they prayed were fast
asleep, and heard not their prayers, or else their minds were over much
troubled with she prayers of other men, so that they could not bend down
their ears to them, most heartely beseeching their divine graces so fight with
Saunders, disloyal to his sovereign, false to his Country, and enemy to the
truth. They prayed that certain hollow hearted papists, of great
countenance, and high reputation, should make an insurrection, and join all
their powers, mightes, and forces to assist and aid the rebellious caitiffe
and wickedly disposed wretch D. Saunders, captain general of a company of
Rakehels, and bloodde suckers. He that has defended both our Queen and
Country from all maltgna^t devises and treachiries, wrought and attempted by
disloyal and unnatural subjects, I hope (of his free mercy and bounty, and
not for any of our deserts) shall continue and preserve the royal estate and
dignity of our gracious Queen and the desired welfare of this woorthye
English Island.

Lushe, we Christians set not a rush by all the students ungodly prayers,
what evil they wish to their native soil, the same evil chances to them
selves: they prayed earnestly, seriously, and as a man would think by their
outward show, and by the often moving of their lips, very devoutly:
theyprayed, but their prayers took no place, the victory redounded to the
praise of the Christians, and to the shame of the Papists. D. Nicholas
Saunders was glad to run away, and leave his soldiers to abide the endelesse
woe of unfortunate destiny. One pair of feet were better then two pair of
hands to D. Saunders, and his adherents. Oh how vainly did the Students pray,
that he, for whom they prayed, should abide such loss of his soldiers, and
such infamy, with well near the hazard of the rope, that it had been
better for the English Students to have healde their peace, and not to have
wearied their brains, with unlawful invocation of the help of saints. For
sometimes the saints are wont (belike) to take their recreation, solace, and
pleasure being ouerwearied with the continual suits and supplications of
fantastical, and busy headed Papists. Thus much for this matter, and this I
add by the way. Examine the state of thy religion, oh thou papiste, how it
began with cruelty, is nourished with tyranny, and defended with forged
fables of lying spirits: whereas ye christian religion took her beginning by
lenity, was mainteyned with sincere and perfect simplicity, and is as yet
sustained with genilenesse, mildness, and amity. If any be gone out of the
pathway of faith, we exhort him brotherly and friendly to forsake his error,
and to become a reformed man. These means the Papists despise: by threatenings
and violence they seek to enforce Christians to their pretensed religion,
invented of man, through the malice of our ancient adversary the subtle
Serpent, that deceived Eve in the Garden of all pleasures and delights. Every
Saints evening, some of the Students are appointed to cover their bodies au^
their faces with sackcloth, and come to the common haule, whiles their fellows
be at supper, and there to whippe themselves, so long, that some of their
backs shall be altogether bloody. Some lay the strokes on their backs very
softly, some make their whipcordes not to smart, and these fellows will come
forth, when the Rectour has knocked his fingers on ye board, and say, Oh what
a good saint was he, whose feast we celebrate to morrow. I whipped my self
with joy, to remember the good deeds of this celestial saint. Oh (said he)
and took a deep sigh from the soles of his feet, my back aketh, I think it
be altogether blooddy. Well, no force, I will once again, for the saints
sake whom I serve, whip my self. And then he goes to his chamber, and in the
dark he lays on his gown, and not his back wc such mighty strokes, yt if
his gown could speak it would bid him hold his hands. When he has done
beating his gown in stead of his back, he comes down to his fellows, and
says: I will mortify this proud flesh of mine. For if I suffered but half
the grief and sorrows that this saint Agnes, or saint Lucia, or saint
Bridget, or any other saint did, I were not able to abide it: but yet I will
not spare my back, for my saints sake. If he had said: I will not spare my
gown in the dark, he had told the truth. Every chamber has one saint or
other to be patron or patronnesse thereof, as one Chamber has S. Katherine
of Stenna, another has our Lady the virgin Marie, and another saint Gregory,
and another saint Peter, and such like Saint has every chamber, to keep the
same: and every chamber is called according to the name of the saint. As for
example, one Chamber is named saint Peter's chamber, and another our Ladies
chamber, and another saint Gregory's chamber, etc.


Trisander. Have the Students once every fourtnight days of recreation?


Theophilactus. Yes they have once a fourtnight a day to recreate them selves,
and the Rectour provides vineyardes for them, for their recreation, and there
they practice Marshall feats. The one takes upon him to be the chief leader
of the camp, and some become Captains, as Divines: and all the rest are
soldiers. Sometimes they fight with the canes of reeds in sport, but at the
end of the skirmishe they fall out by the ears in earnest. The Jesuits are
glad sometimes to come and part them, least they grievously hurt each one
another. Twice a year there are priests sent from Rome and Rhemes, to
england, at Michaelmas and at Easter, and as soon as they are arrived in
England, they have their Patrones to maintain them. some go like serving men,
some like gentlemen, and some like countrymen. There go from both places, I
mean Rome and Rhemes, about the number of twenty priests. We may see what
untrue subjects there be in England, to maintain such a seditious brood
of pestilent shauelyngs. If they were al loyal subjects, there should not be
one mass priest in England: but seeing they are most delicately nourished,
and most bravely mainteyned in apparel. What pass they for Christianity, and
true religion. Amongst the Christians of the reformed Church, it is but in
vain to hope for such delicate feeding, and gorgeous raymentes. These Epicures
the papists, perceive very well and often speak thereof, how bare and poor
the Christian Clergy is, how it is pouled and pilled by Gentlemen, Esquires,
Knights, and others: we shall shortly (say they) see the spiritual liuinges
joined to the temporal, sir John lack latin shall be master Parson to serve
the parish, and the patron of the benifice shall reap the commodity. If the
benifice be worth threescore pounds a year, sir John shall have twenty or
scarce that: if it be worth more, the patron of the benefice has the greater
profit, and sir John lack latin not a whit the better. And when these popish
priests are apprehended, some had rather wilfully wear Stories Tippet, then
yield to the truth. They know their names shall be celebrated as the names
of Saints, amongst the viperous Progeny of wicked papists. They know moreover,
that their apparel shall be adored and woorshipped, if it may be bought or
gotten of the Papists: their bodies also should be holy relics in the
Pharisaicall sinagogue of Papists, if they could come by them, by some secret
means. Thus have I briefly, and without prolixitie of words, declared the
dissension and discord of the Students amongst themselves. I have written
also of the orders of the English Seminary at Rome, I have showed how
unnatural ye Students be to their natural and merciful princess, to rail
upon her majesty in their sermons, and revile her wc reproachful words: I have
showed likewise how much hurt they wish to their country, I mean England.
For they had rather it were destroyed with fire, sword, and famine, then if
should continue in the truth of Christian religion. Now the Christian reader
may easily understand, what cruelty they would practice upon their own
Country men, if power and strength were correspondent to their satanicall
desires. God has weakened the might of our adversaries, and I hope will hold
it enfebled continually. Let the Popes scholars, and all other papists wish
what tyranny they list to be used upon England, it will not be as they
desire: but it will be as it pleases the Lord. If persecution and misery fall
upon England, it is for the sins of England and not for that they reject the
Popes authority, and his forged religion. This English Seminary has four
thousand Crowns a year for the maintenance thereof. There was great suite
made unto the Pope, before he would grant any exhibition for the
maintenance of any number of scholars at Rome. There was an English Lady
that wrote unto him about it, and many Doctors, besides other Englishmen of
some worship and credit. Doctor Allen, the chiefest scholar of an English
man that is beyond the Seas, and president of the English Seminary at
Rhemes, came a foot to Rome, and was glad within these seven years, to have
been Thomas Beckettes Chapilan, and to receive four crowns a month, to buie
him meat, drink, and cloth. His favor then with the Pope was very small, but
yet he could not get this poor living, for that Doctor Morice, being a
malicious, and envious man, who under Cardinal Morone had the preferring of
him there unto, denied it him, partly for that he was an English man, and
partly fearing least that by such means, by little and little, he should
come in favor with the Pope as well as he.

At the first the Pope was entreated to give exhibition for six scholars,
secondly he was persuaded to maintain fourteen, and by little and little the
number is grown to threescore. So that in Rhemes he maintains fourscore,
and eight. But our English Gentlemen, (as I have heard D. Alen report to the
Rector of the English Seminary at Rome) supplieth the want of that College
with seuenscore pounds at a time.

I Have now (Gentle Reader) put in writing the dissension and orders of the
English Seminary, and have written so truly whatsoever I have heard and
seen, that my adversaries (except they have an impudent face) can say nothing
to the contrary. And yet I have not written all the disorders of that
College, but leave that for another time, when occasion shall better serve. In
all this book I have fained nothing, neither emptied my gal, neither spoke I
any thing of hatred or favor to any man, God (the judge of all men) is my
witness. But I have written thus much to this end, that our cake holy
Priests may not delude the people with the false praises of their fained
holiness. If proud, malicious, envious, slanderous, luxurious, and ambitious
men, deserve to be counted virtuous, why then, the Popes scholars are
virtuous? For they are proud, malicious, envious, etc. For when they come on
the Saturdayes to receive their shyrts, the one says to him that delivers
the shyrts, come give me a good shyrt, for a naughty shyrt does not become the
beauty of my face very well. There will be sometime such contention amongst
them, who shall have the fairest shirt, that it is a worlds wonder to see it.
One says, I am of better complexion then he, another does contrary him in his
saying, oftentimes I have looked two or three hours for a shyrt, and was loath
to contend with any, for my beauty was burnt with the heat of the Sun, or
(to say as it is) I never had any, and pass not it I never shall. There was one
honoredin that college as a saint for his beauties sake, but lo, now he is a
carkase: I saw him dead, but so deformed, that I scarce knew him, albeit I
used his company for a long time. Quid superbis terra and cinis? Why art thou
proud thou earth and ashes? The Lord gave thee that beauty wherein thou so
much gloriest, and within one hour will take it away at his pleasure, and leave
thee an ougly sight to the beholders. Repent you that are the Popes scholars,
repent you of your pride, repent you of your Romish religion, repent you of
your cankred malice both to Queen and Country, be humble, embrace the truth,
be loyal to your Sovereign, and love your Country. God grant you may do
so, for your own souls health, Amen.


The seventh Dialogue, Wherein is showed, that the Turks and Jews by the Popes
license, are permitted to have their sinagogue in his usurped kingdom, and
jurisdiction, and how he suffers Curtezans in their filthiness, for a
yearly tribute paid to his Treasure house, which tribute of theirs amounts
in the year to twenty thousand pounds.
The speakers are Trisander the Christian Pilgrim, and Mera^dulabasca, the
Turkish Merchant, and Rabbi Diacothelah the crafty Jew. Trisander. Seeing my
friend Theophilactus is gone away from me, to look unto his business, I
think it necessary for my comfort and greater ease to me in mine expenses, to
join my self to the company of some trusty traveler, and pilgrim which
intends to go to Madonna di Loreto.

As he bethought him self in this wise, how to find a faithful friend in
his journey, lo here he meets with a wealthy rich merchant Turk, that
determines to go to Ancona, a City not far from Madonna di Loreto, and
this man understanding that Trisander wanted a companion, says after this
manner as follows.


Merandulabasca. Your fair and clear co^plexio^ does make manifest that you
are an Englishman, your stature, behavior, gesture, and apparel does testify
the same: are you not? What say you?


Trisander. I am an English man borne sir.


Merandulabasca. So I thought by your countenance, you were an English man, but
whither are you bounding sir?


Trisander. To Madonna di Loreto to see what abuses are practiced there. I pray
sir let me be so bold with your patience, as to crave your name, and the
Country wherein you were borne: and if it may please you to have my company to
Ancona, I shall be heartily glad thereof.


Merandulabasca. I am glad I have met you, for I trust I shall find a trusty
companion in all my journey to Ancona, unto the which City I purpose to go.
And because you ask my name, and the Country wherein I was borne, I tell you,
my name is Merandulabasca, by birth a Turk, and by profession a Mahumetan.


Trisander. Bear with my rudeness Gentleman, I am loath to use your company,
seeing you are no Christian.


Merandulabasca. Why sir, do you refuse my company, for that I am no
Christian? Have you not read that Christ and his Disciples kept company with
Publicans and sinners, and will not you imitate them? Accept my company, I pray
you, and we will confer together of worldly matters, and not of religion.


Trisander. But how is it that the Pope does permit you to traffic in his
Country, being Turks his sworn enemies?


Merandulabasca. We pay yearly Tribute to the Pope for his permission, to use
our merchandise in his kingdom, and for money the Pope will grant us
whatsoever we request at his hands: and as for his subjects, they are so
gredie of silver, that they sell us their own native Country men. The Inn
keepers that are round about the Sea side, put up a Lantern with light in the
top of a turret, for a watchworde, unto our countriemen that are in little
galleys rouing near the Sea shore, expecting their pray. Thus very often in
one night, they appre hende twenty, and sometimes thirty guestes, that never
premeditate of the treachery of their host, who sells them to our
Countriemen, for such a price as he and they can agree. And if our countriemen
be taken, they are pardoned for a little money of the Pope. We have our
synagogue by the Popes sufferance.


Rabbi Diacothelah. What Merandulabasca, what talk you of with this lusty
Bentleman: and you Gentleman where were you borne?


Trisander. I am an Englishman borne Sir, and Master Merandulabascas talk and
mine is of the Tribute of all his Countriemen that are within the Popes
dominion.


Rabbi Diacothelah. That shaven Priest polleth us of more money then his neck
is worth. He receives tribute for five thousand of us Jews at Rome, and for
as many at Ancona: but the more he rateth upon us, the busier we are to
deceive his Priests: yea his Cardinals and Bishops, with our great usury,
maintain their Concubines so brave and gallant, that sometimes the most of his
Clergy are glad to crouch to us, for the lone of certain sums of money,
which if they want, then must they forgo the amiable countenance of their
sweet peragons, and fine minions. And they had rather be deprined of their
liuinges, then to be separated from their fair bedfellowes. When they stand
in need of our helps, then they begin with flattery, as a preparatiue
medicine to mollify lifie the mind: and as soon as they have received that
which they demand, they extol us for our virtuous charity, and say that we
are sure to be the children of God, and to be justified by works of charity.
We shall have the Popish Priests ready to do any thing that we request, if
we give them money, they will not stick to say Mass for a stolen dog, as once
it happened at Rome, Anno Dom. 1575. that Rabbi Solomon was meerily disposed,
to deride the palpable error, and gross ignorance of the whafer Priests, in
believing that Christ whom his countriemen the Hebrwes have crucified, is in a
little whafer cake, as really as he was on the Cross. Therefore he gave to a
Romish Priest two Iulies to say Mass for a Dog, which was lost. These
shauelinges will say Mass for a sick horse, to recover his health, if he may
have a little money. They will do any thing that they may perform, if they
be rewarded. We have a license of the Pope, to have our Sinagogue, and such
service, and Ceremonies as our Forefathers the Hebrwes used.


Trisander. The Pope has his kingdom here in this world, here is his joy,
pleasure, riches, and honor, seeing he may not hope for the fruition of the
kingdom of heaven, heavenly joys, celestial pleasures, and eternal
happiness. It is no marvel though he sets so much store by silver and
gold, the more treasure he gets, the greater his dignity increases, and
the larger possessions, and revenues his Bastardes are like to obtain.


Merandulabasca. Seeing you said you were loath to travel in my company as
far as Ancona, I must therefore bid you farewell, and provide me another
companion.


Trisander. Do so, and fare you well.


Rabbi Diacothelah. Adewe courteous Gentleman, do you lack my friendship to
the Pope in your behalf, tell me, and you shall find me ready if you will
promise to recompense my pains.


Trisander. Adue I say to you also, and if you will get me the Popes Cope, and
his triple crown, you shall do me a great pleasure, and I will give you an
hundred crowns for your pains.


Rabbi Diacothelah. His Cope, and triple crown, I am sure I cannot have, to
give you: but if you lack his blessing, or will have a dispensation to live as
you list, without danger of Hell, to marry whom you will, your Cosen, your
Niece, or whom you fancy best, yea if the same be your mother in law, if you
get a dispensation once, what sins soever you commit, shall be forgiven and
forgotten of God, if the Popes dispensation be true. If you have committed
murder, or any other crime as wicked: for a little money I will get you your
pardon of the Pope for he is Christ.


Trisan. I had rather the Pope should curse then bless, his dispensation and
pardon can do me no good, the Lord of heaven and earth is he that can
pardon mine offenses, and not the Pope, who is but a lump of clay, to day
rejoicing and laughing in his sleeue, to morrow wallowing in Hell, in
sorrows, pains, and torments: now a mighty Potentate, a worldly Monarke, a
pretensed Apostle, and a stately chief Priest: to morrow an abject, forsaken
of all men, worms meat, and a stinking carcass, whose soul shall be
carried to Hell, there to be tormented with endless woe, misery, and
calamity, both for his own sins, and the sins of others, that have been
perverted by him.


Rabbi Diacothelah. I perceive by your words, that you regard his riches but
not the power and authority which Christ your Messiah has given him.


Trisander Christ our Savior has given him no such power or authority, as he
arrogantly claims, and fasty challenges to himself. He is an adversary to
Christ, a corrupter of his word, and a persecutor of his Saints: from his
tyranny, and from his idolatrous and superstitious religion, Good Lord deliver
us.


Rabbi Diacothelah. Once again, I bid you farewell, and I thank you for our
courteous communication.


Trisander. If your business be such that you may no longer tarry, why then
adue, and I thank you for your talk.

If I should speak of the abominable practices of Rome, by way of discourse,
this little treatise should grow to a huge volume,: and therefore at this
time, as not having sufficient opportunity, I surcease. I need not to write
(for that I know the world is certified of such matters alredie) of the
sins of the Papists. There is not one City of any account in Italy,
especially of any that I have traveled unto, or could hear of, but has a
brothell house. These naughty women are so void of grace, and honesty, that
as men pass the streets, they seek with flattering words to allure them to
come to their chambers, they sit all day in the open street with their clothes
lifted up above their knees: how filthily and beastly they use themselves,
openly in the view of all men that pass that way where they be harbored,
modesty constrains me to be silent. But by report of my Lord Alexander
Cazalis chaplins, there are at Rome. above twenty thousand harlots, whose
tribute is xx. thousand pound by the year, which the Pope receives from the
Courtezans of Rome. Come to the Popes court, when you list, at morning, at
evening, at midday, or at midnight, you shall find Courtezans in one odd
corner or other, with some baudie Priest, or the Popes man. He that will bend
himself, but slightly to behold the dealinges of the Papists at this day,
shall perceive (even to ye great horror of his mind) the small ability of
well doing, that remains scant superficially rooted in the consciences of
them: he shall see their wills so bent to evil actions, their wits so prone
to ungodly inventions, their consciences so loose, wide and hypocritical, and
their hearts so full of dissimulation and fraud: that alas even the very
principles, as well practiue, as speculatiue, are quite and clean forgotten,
and the infallible doom of our conscience (which of the learned is called
Synteresis) holds no place of terror amongst them. Reasons as well
superior, as inferior, as well divine as civil, have no power to reclaim
them. And (to conclude) even humane mortality will not, cannot, nor (I fear)
shall not withdraw them: so great is their liberty, so secure their lives,
and so presumptuous their hearts, thoughts, and attempts. Chastity is
exiled, and whooredom is maintained, nourished, practiced, defended, and
provoked by them. What are Nunneries, but brothell houses? what are
Monasteries, but a receptacle of idle lubbers, and luxurious Epicures? live
they never so dissolutely, the Pope will pardon them, the Cardinals will
commend them. Amongst the religious men there is nullus ordo, amongst the
Canons and Cardinals there is horror inhabitans: go round about Rome, and in
every place, thou shall see lechery and buggerie, deccit and fraud in every
corner and place. Five thousand Jews are suffered to have their Judicial
ceremonies at Rome in their Synagogue: Turks shall live and have their service
in his kingdom: but three or four godly Christians or preachers, may not be
permitted freely to hear, or preach the word of God, as the Jews are
suffered to preach against Christ, and against his holy works. The Turk is
not forbidden to shawe the law of Alcoran, and to preach of Mahomet: the
Papists will answer, it is better to permit ye Jews and Turks to dwell
amongst them, then Heretics that are seducers of the people. I demand of
you Gentlemen Papists, do not the Jews and Turks, what they may, to convert
the people to their heresy? Yes no doubt, as by experience I have proved. I
know the cause why the Christians are not suffered to have the breathing of
the air amongst them. Christians would not give the Pope so many pounds of
money as the Turks and Jews do, and moreover, he sees the spirit of God
is mighty in operation with the Christians, so that if but xx. preachers were
suffered to preach throughout all Italy, the people would soon afterward
deny the Pope, they would doubtless take his crown even from his head, they
would make him give over his hautie title of pretensed supremacy, and content
himself with his own diocese.

But keeping silence, I will here abruptly leave the Papists in their sin,
and with hearty prayer commit their amendment to the will of our God: who for
Christ's sake, and for his holy name sake, frame their hearts to more love of
his truth, that his Gospel by them be no more hindered, nor the professors
thereof hated, nor the sound of his word stopped, nor the hearers thereof
afflicted or persecuted, which he grant for his sons sake Jesus, our only
mediator and advocate, to whom be all honor, glory, power, majesty, and
dominion, for ever and ever, Amen.


The end of the 7. Dialogue.
The Papists objection to prove transubstantiation.
In Queen Mary's time as there was in the North a priest at Mass, from heaven
Christ fell into the challice, he appeared like an unfeathered dawe and cried
gna, gna, was there not then in sight miraculously flesh, blood, and bones:
Ergo, there is transubstantiation in the sacrament of the altar. Albeit this be
not their objection, yet the like they have.

The Solution.
This miraculous Christ was a Dawe that fell from the nest into the chalice,
and belike the priest thought he had bin very Christ, and that he spoke that
which he could not understand, for gna, gna, was not in his mass book, nor
he never was taught what it meant, but he thought that Christ willed him to
eat him flesh, blood, and bones, and therefore the priest said, good lerde
hold thy peace, and I will eat thee up all, and so he did eat his master
Christ the Dawe, flesh, blood, and bones. Surely I grant the wine was
converted into an unfeathered dawe, and there was then transubstantiation, and
I counsel the Papists always to say mass under the nestes of such dawes,
for the dawes perceiving how weak the opinion of the Papists is touching
transubstantiation, will not stick to spare them one of their unfeathered
birds to fall into their chalice for a miraculous probation of their
transubstantiation, and the people being as wise as the priest hearing the
sound of the syllable gna, gna, thinks there in the challice to be Christ
corporally, and sensibly, this report I received from a Gentleman in presence
of three or four other persons, whither such an unfeathered foul fell into
the chalice in Queen Mary's time, ye priest being at Mass, I cannot tell, but
I write it as it was told me.

Another pretty story was told me by a man here in London, of good
reputation, and such a one as in Spain and Naples was persecuted for his
Christian profession, in a town of Galizia, there was a germane Merchant that
as the idol of the Mass was carried in the streets, he neglected to kneel
down, wherefore he was apprehended and put in prison, and being there, a Monk
came unto him to perua^t him, but could not, the Monk aske^ him if h^e could
make a hundredth Duccates, this Dutch Marchante answered that he could make so
much, why then said the Monk I will warrant thee thy life without denial of
thy faith, but thou must do as I will tell thee, when thou come before the
Inquisitour, whatsoever he demands, say I would gladly learn. The Dutch
merchant said, as I by you am instructed, so will I do, but my faith I will
never godwilling renounce. The Monk went before the Inquisitour, and told him
that he had conferred with this Dutch merchant, but with a verier fool he
never talked.

Therefore said this Monk, seeing I gather by his words that he is worth a
hundredth Duccates, take what he has and let him go to his country. The In
quisitour was contented to take the money, and caused him to be sent for, who
when he came was willed to say his pater noster, I would gladly learn said
the Dutch merchant, did not I say the truth quoth the Monk that this man is a
very fool, the Inquisitour bid him say his credo in Deum patrem, I would
gladly learn quoth the Dutch merchant, the Inquisitour asked him why he
kneeled not before the reverend Sacrament of the altar, then he said, that
cost me a hundredth Duccates. I perceive now quoth the Inquisitour to the Monk
that he is a very fool, well, go with him into his ship and receive the
money. As the Monk and ye Dutch merchant passed by a Church, the Monk stouped
down, moving his hoode and doing obeisaunce to the picture of Christ, and to
the pictures of saint Francis, and saint Dominick, the Dutch merchant never
touched his bonet. Wherefore the Monk rebuked him, the Dutche marcha^t asked
to who^ he should uncover his head, said ye monk to ye picture of christ, and
to the pictures of saint Francis, and saint Dominicke. Truly said the Dutch
merchant I was to blame for not putting off my bonet, there is Christ in deed,
for I heard tell that Christ was crucified between two thieves, and I think
that saint Frances, and saint Dominicke were those thieves, this Dutch merchant
paid to this Monk the hundredth Duccates, and gave the Monk a cloth gown.

Grant Lord that none within this land
no one that draws breath.
In heart disdain to cry God save
our Queen Elizabeth.

I Youth, when Fancy bare the sway,
Within my peeuishe brain:
And reasons lore by no means could,
my wanton will restrain:
My gadding mind did prick me forth,
a Pilgrims life to prove:
Whose golden shows, and vain delights,
my senses then did moan.
O mighty God which for us men,
did suffer on the cross,
The painful pangues of bitter death,
to save our souls from loss,
I yield thee here most hearty thanks,
in that thou do vouchsafe,
Of me most vile and sinful wretch,
so great regard to have.
Alas none ever had more cause,
to magnify thy name,
Then I, to whom thy mercyes shewde,
do witness well the same.
So many brunts of fretting foes,
Who ever could withstand,
If thou had not protected me,
with thy most holy hand:
A thousand times in shameful sort.
my sinful life had ended,
If by thy gracious goodness Lord,
I had not been defended.
In stinking pooles of Popery,
so deeply was I drownde,
That none there was but thee alone,
to set my foot on ground.
When as the fiende had led my soul,
even to the gates of hell,
Thou caldst me back, and do me choose,
in heaven with thee to dwell,
Let furies now fret on their fill:
let satan rage and rore,
As long as thou art on my side,
What need I care for more?
God save our Queen Elizabeth, and grant her many years to reign with
health, peace, and prosperity.
God defend her honorable Counsel and guide them with his holy spirit in
all their actions, the nobility, Bishops, Magistrates, and commons, their
hearts good Lord, incline, to all goodness.
The complaint of a sinner.
LIke as the thief in prison cast,
with woeful wayling mones,
When hope of pardon clean is past,
and sighs with dolelfull groans:
So I a slau^ to sin,
with sobs and many a tear,
As one without thy help forlorn.
before thy throne appear.
O Lord, in rage of wanton youth,
my follies did abound,
And eke, since that I knew thy truth,
my life has been unfound.
Alas I do confess,
I see the perfect way,
Yet frailty of my feeble flesh,
does make me run astray.
Aye me, when that some good desire,
would move me to do well,
Affections fond make me retire,
and cause me to rebel.
I wake, yet am asleep.
I see, yet still am blind,
In ill I run with headlong race,
In good I come behind.
Lo thus in life I daily die,
and dying shall not live,
Unless thy mercy speedily,
some succor to me give.
I die O Lord, I die,
If thou do me forsake,
I shall be likened unto those,
That fall into the lake.
Yet though my hard and stony heart,
be apt to run astray:
Yet let thy goodness me convert.
so shall I not decay:
Sweet God do rule my plants,
And sheelde me from annoy:
Then my poor soul this life once past,
shall rest with thee in joy.
H. G. G.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vinetree by Thomas Dawson, for
Thomas Butter, and Godfrey Isaac.

1581.


