THE STRANGLING AND DEATH OF THE GREAT TVRKE, AND HIS TWO SONS.

WITH THE STRANGE Preservation and Deliverance of his Uncle MVSTAPHA from
perishing in Prison, with hunger and thirst, the young Emperor not three days
before having so commanded.

A WONDERFVLL STORY, and the like never heard of in our M^derne times, and yet
all to manifest the Glory and Providence of God, in the Preservation of
Christendom in these troublesome Times.

Printed this fifteenth of July.

LONDON, Printed by I.D. for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are to be
sold at their shops at the Exchange, and in Pope's Head Palace. 1622.

HAud sic magni conditor orbis,
Huic ex alto cuncta tuenti,
Nulla terrae mole resistunt,
Non nox atris nubibus obstat,
Quae sint, quae fuerint, Veniuntque,
Vno mentis cernit in ictu,
Quem, quia respicit omnia solus,
Verum possis dicere solemn.
Boethius Metro. 3. Lib. 5. The Printer to the Reader.
I Am very loath to trouble you with a Preface, yet at this time you must
pardon me; for it is for Gods cause, to exemplify his glory and providence,
that has put an hook in the nostrils of Leviathan, and kept him from devouring
poor Christians, who yet are in Arms to devour one another: that has
thrown a stone from Heaven to strike the golden Image to powder, which was
stretching it self, to overlooke and overtopp the Provinces of Europe; that
has put an Axe to the great tree, and felld it at a blow, which was beginning
to overspread the earth, and be a shadow for the beasts of the field. What,
all Christendom almost in Arms, and yet the Turk not to take the advantage,
but to be pulld short by the hand of God, and thrown backward into a grave?
Where are your dreaming Gazettes, and Coranto's now, that talked of such
formidable preparation, and so many hundred thousand in an Army? Where is the
threatening of Poland, and terrifying the Cossacks with so many thousand
Tartarians? Where is their coming into Hungary, to begin a new War there?
What all hushed and quiet? Why, then thine be the honor O God, and all power,
and majesty, and goodness be attributed unto thee? For thou have taken pity
upon our afflictions, and wilt set upright thine own cause, when the children
of Edom and inhabitants of Babylon, cry down with the walls of Jerusalem, and
insult with clapping their hands, to see the enemies of the Gospel thrive in
their outragiousnesse.

This then is all I would say unto you by the way of Introduction, to give God
the praise, that the great Turk is dead so opportunely, whereby there is hope,
that Europe shall be preserved from their invasion, and those affrightings. And
the same God, that has compassionated the general distresses of Christendom,
take pity likewise on the particular passions of Princes, that they rage not
in their revenges, nor run too violently forward in their race of blood and
destruction; but admit of peace and pacification to the eternal memory of
their virtues, and worthiness.

THE STRANGLING AND DEATH, OF THE GREAT TVRKE, A STRANGE STORY.
THough I need not speak a word of former Emperors of Turkey, or their
actions, or their lives, or their Alcharon, from whence the special
impositions on their Governerment are, first, to erect some Famous Monument
toward the exaltation of their Religion. Secondly, and perform some memorable
enterprise for the enlarging their Empire: yet must I name Mahomet the third,
to keep my self closer to the Story, that you may know the several passages
in the same. This Mahomet left two Sons behind him, Achmet and Mustapha;
Achmet at 15. years old was chosen Emperor, and lived some 15. years longer,
or thereabouts and although by reason of the peace between the Emperor
Rodulphus of Germany, and himself, as also the contract between the Pelomans
and himself, wherein those Antiqua foedera were renewed, he did little worthy
of memory, concerning Heroijck enterprises, and military exploites: yet he had
the Fortune to keep corresponde^cy with his Basshawes, and Ianizaries, and
took a course by enlarging their entertainment, and other several donatiues,
to enlarge their hearts, and good liking toward him: so that he had very
seldom mutinies, or innovation, because the Viceer of the Army drew them still
into the field in the Summer, and the Viceer of the City, afforded them their
Ancient liberty in the Winter: but at last there was a rebellion by the
Serivano of Asia, whom some confound with the name of Basshaw of Alleppo, which
was fortunately, and wisely prevented: and in the end of his Reign the
controversies of the Princes of Moldavia, over wrought the Polacks to
commiserate the cause and wrought a mischief, which was not ended without
unspeakable trouble: For the distastings beginning in Achmets time, could
never admit of reconciliation: till Achmets Son came in person with terror,
and threatenings into the fields of Bogdonia.

Well? Achmet dies, leaving 2. young Sons behind him, Osman and another: yet
some will presume to say, that being not above 34 years old, he had many
Children, and 300 Wives or Concubines: but before he dyed, to make all sure, he
resolves to strangle his brother Mustapha, and according to custom will leave
no Competitors in such an Empire. For which purpose a Guard of Capagies attend
at the Iron gates of the Seralio, and the Mutes are placed in a room
accordingly. Now you must consider, that though they have many ways to enlarge
their cruelties, and dispatch offenders, yet none is so affrighting, as the
presenting of these Officers, for they never come along without death in their
company, and ghastlines in their looks. Sometimes an offender is carried from
the Seralio, by the Officers of their Tapinaco, such as we say Mr. of the
Ordna^ce, over the Sea, and in the midway a great stone is tied about his neck,
and he is cast into the bottom, and then according to his greatness, a greater
Cannon is shot off, unless the Emperor send a countermand; er he be from the
water: sometimes an offender is beheaded: sometimes thrown off a rock:
sometimes set upon by the Ianizaries, and cut in pieces, as the Haga or
Captain is limited, yet in these cases as the Emperors fury is leniated, they
many times escape: but when the Mutes come in place, all are displaced, against
whom their Commission is enlarged. Thus is Mustapha to be dispatched, but see
how the stronger arm puts out the strong men? the same night Achmet had a
dream or fearful vision, which some of the Deruices would needs presume to
rumor abroad, in this manner; that he thought as he was entering into the 7.
Towers, the princely prison of his Predecessors, his brother kneeled down
before him, and cried out, Oh when shall we leave this horrible custom of
shedding innocent blood? look among all the Heathens, and see, how quickly
they loathed and cast away that crying Sin of sacrificing of humane flesh? but
in steed of replying he drew his Semiter to strike off his head, had not one
as he conceited held it fast, that he could not strike; whereupon he demanded
angerly, what art thou? I am the good Genius of Mustapha, and will not suffer
him to perish, therefore leave: and very shortly shall strange things happen in
the Empire. Little thought the great Turk, to have found a greater Greatness
in his sleep, but such was the power of God, or as the Turks conceited the
fortune of Mustapha, that his brother Achmate contrary to all expectation the
next morning after his Dream, sent for him into the room of State, where he
lay on as stately a Pallet, with all his Viceroys and Bashaws groueling on the
ground, and the principal Mufty kneeling before him reading on a book. It
should seem that glad tidings came first to the City; For he was taken out
of the prison with great respect, and observation: he was admitted to his
Gally with high ceremonies, and yet solemn countenances: he was accompanied
on the Sea with thousands of boats, and ten thousand of weeping eyes: he
landed at the Emperors one Caska with great respect and modest stillness: he
walked through the Garden of Cipres trees, and at last came to an iron gate,
where his own company left him, except two Bashawes, who led him by the arms:
the gate opens and he must through a guard of Cupogies, they bend to the ground,
and yet look cheerfully: till at last the Prince spoke as cheerfully to the
Bashawes, saying What need all this quoile and ceremonies to a dying man? or
tormenting of my soul, when I go to the execution of my body? in all
extremities there is a courtesy in dispatch, and when a man must dye, Oh let
him dye at once, and not be more tortured with the fear and circumstances,
then with the thing it self: they durst not reply; but brought him into the
room, where the Mutes stood: whose presence did no more appall him then the
rest, but that he saw the cruelty confirmed, and their very sight was worse,
then an vnreuersable judgment: but when he perceived no violent hands laid
upon him, and that he must yet go further, he was the more astonished, and the
more vexed to endure such a procrastination.

At last he came where the Emperor lay sick on his Pallet, before whom his
prostitution was as the ordinary slaves: but contrary to all expectation he bad
him rise, and commanded certain Persian Carpets to be spread, and rich
Cushions to be laid; on which, according to their manner, he sat cross legged
by him, and when the Mufty had raised the Emperor up a little, with a faint
voice, he thus discovered an unlooked for loving heart.

Brother (said he) I am taught by story, and the story of Galba among the
Romans, to choose a Successor for the commonwealth, and not an heir in my
family. This made him look upon Piso, as worthy to be an Emperor, because he
had experience of his virtues, and not upon his kindred, because he was
unacquainted with their strength to bear so great a burden: I cannot compare
our greatness with the Romans, but I am sure we are too great for children,
or fools: I have fair issue of my own, but so weak arms cannot sway the
Scepter of our Othoman family, and to leave them under Tutelage, Who is there
worthy to advise such Princes, or what account can slaves make of the
government, when their own vices shall ouerflow their banks without
restraint, and the envy of others look upon them rather with disobedience,
then observation? therefore to avoid all tumultuous occasions, and to make thee
believe, thou art the charge of our Prophet Mahomet: in steed of death-like
presents it self in steed of a prison: this is thy Palace, and whereas thou
camst in groueling, thou shall go out triumphing: the decree of heaven will
have it so, and a voice from heaven commands it so; only this I must conclude,
that as I have remembered thee, thou will not forget me and mine, let not
custom ouermaster virtue, nor the jealousy in Sovereignty be an enemy to thy
pity: but let young Osman live as I have determined, thou shall not dye: yea,
the wonder is the greater, that of a captive I have made thee an Emperor, and
in steed of the terrors of affliction, brought thee out to the rauishings of
Majesty.

He had no sooner done, but he began to faint, and so read them all a lesson of
mortality by opening a book, wherein they saw death writ in Capital letters,
and himself sinking past recovery, which made them recover new Spirits, and
presently bring his brother out into the Sophia, where the principal Mufty
proclaimed Mustapha Emperor, intimating to the Ianizaries the charge of
Achmate, to the discharging (...) larges, which equalling the bounty of other
Princes, ouerswayed nicer exceptions, and so with great acclamations they
ratified the Election, and cried out, live and reign great Mustapha. The next
work was the solemnity of Achmets Funerals, for whom a sumptuous monument, and
Chapel was erected, not inferior to any of his Ancestors: then were
Commissioners appointed to ouer-looke the Seralios, and sequester such women,
as had been carnally known of Achmet to their accustomed Palaces, and
accustomed manner of magnificence, and expenses. Presently followed the settling
of the Bashawes in their authority, in their several Provinces, and
ouer-looking the City Officers with confirmation of such, as were worthy. Last
of all, his Armies and Nauies were mustred, not that he pretended any war,
but because he would commit no Sollecisme in government, or give the Soldiers
occasion to suspect, that he knew not, how to maintain his greatness: Thus is
Mustapha Emperor, and they had two years trial of his disposition, whereby
they found him harmless, and rather subject to the Epithites of quiet Princes,
then transcending Encomions of great and stirring Spirits.

But oh the condition of man, and instability of terrestiall blessings! Prince
Mustopha was scarce warm in this throne of Sovereignty, and setting forward in
the rare of imperiousnes, before Scander and Mehemet Bashaw takes the young
Osman out of the Seralio, and presents him to the Ianizaries, a comely, sweet
young youth of nine or ten years old, demanding withal, if such an heir of
the Othomon family were to be rejected without cause, or why they should bring
an harmless Prince (as they reputed Mustapha) into the danger of usurpation,
and differing no further from a Traitor, but that it was not imputed to him, as
for Achmats Will? Empires are not so translated, and what could they tell, but
private men for their own ends had wrought upon his weakness, making a diseased
tongue speak that, which a healthful heart, and perfect sense would not
consent to: For it was not probable, that a Father would disinherit his
children for any brother in the world: Besides, there was no trial, or cause
either of insufficiency, or disability, and (...) not believe it. La^t of all,
for any thing they saw, Mustapha himself was not stirring or strong enough to
play the Steeres man in such an high built ship, considering the Seas were
tempestuous, and many dangerous shores and rocks were to be passed by.

These speeches to the turbulent Ianizaries, were like fuel to fire, and the
presence of the lovely youth, made them amazed at their inconstancy: so that
by way of penitencie and satisfaction, they quickly altered the acclamation of
live Mustapha into the cries of, God save young Osman, and so without further
disputing, he was advanced into the Throne, and brought into the Seralio, when
Mustapha least thought of the alteration. But now there is no remedy, he must
needs be deposed, and sent prisoner once again into the seven Towers; his
friends more confounded to be so affronted, then amazed at the alteration: yet
suspecting the worst, they abandoned the Palace, and thinking it policy to
shift for themselves, had the less honesty to neglect their Emperor: but the
truth is, they saw manifest signs of a rebellion, and the conspiracy was too
great and too strong for them to resist, which made them give way to the
violence, least they should have been carried headlong to destruction.

Now does Osman begin his Phaetons flourish, and runs the course of
pleasures with his youth, spending four or five years in wantonness and
iollity, while his Bashawes spent the time in covetousness and ambitious
ouer-ruling others: yet not without careful ouer-looking the Ianizaries, and
provident preventing their discontents, and turbulent disposition: but all does
help; for they over accustomed to active employment, and living upon the
spoil of foreign Nations, as much as the Emperors entertainment, cried out
to the war, and when answer was made, that the Persians had contracted a new
league, and the Emperors of Germanies old covenants were not yet determined or
ended, They presently replied, the indignities which the Russians had offered
to their neighbors the Tartarians, were not to be endured, and they need go
no further, then the piracies of the black Sea, and the injuries of the
Cossacks and Polonians: Nay, why should they not march to the expugnation of
Locpolis, and the foraging of the Countries of Moldania and Bogdonia, and so
forward to teach Poland a better lesson, then to displease the Othoman Family
and mightiness.

The Bashawes knew, there was no replying, nor now the fire was kindled no
other quenching it, then letting it consume to cinders, whereupon they presently
answered, they were glad that the Soldiers were so memorable of the glory of
the Empire, and so ready to employ themselves for the dignity of the Nation,
and therefore they would not by any means hinder them, or the cause: But they
should find the Emperor as careful to satisfy their demands, as they were
willing to augment his Greatness: so that if they would give way unto time for
the preparing of all things fit for the Army, and the sending for the
Tartarians to accompany them in the journey, the Emperor should go in person
into the Field, and Poland soon find, what it was to exasperate such a
Majesty.

Whereupon some will have it, that there were Letters of defiance presently
sent against Sigismond, and the War proclaimed by sound of Trumpet to
affright all Europe: In what manner the Turk proceeded, I will not now
dispute, sure I am that the King of Pole made all Christian Princes acquainted
with the threatenings, and implored their assistance for the Opposition: He sent
unto the Emperor to hearken to a Peace, if it were possible, and correspondent
with his Honor, that he might spare his Forces rather against the general
Enemy of Christendom, then the particular reuenges of one another: Oh blessed
be the feet of those, that bring the glad tidings of Peace, and happy is that
Princely disposition, that would avoid the effusion of Christian Blood: he
sent unto his Holiness to remember the cause of the Church, and the affrightings
of Religion, so that now was the time to assist him with men and money, and if
ever Poland were reputed the Bulwark of Christianity, and to be maintained
accordingly, it was at this instant to be looked upon with the eyes of pity
and commiseration. For ^00000. Turks and Tartars were in readiness to
overrun the Country, and devour the Inhabitants: He sent into France by way
of intercession to spare his hand from taking such fearful reuenges on his
own people, and to spare him but those men, watch the wa^^es (...) confirm,
and the wrath of a Prince bring to destruction: he sent into England with
intimation of the terror, which so many barbarous Nations and people united,
must needs afflict one Country withal, and his well delivered discourse made
such impression on his Majesty's Princely heart, that he had a present supply
both of men and money: In a word, whether did he not send to set forward the
enterprise? and what did he not do befitting the goodness of a King, and the
greatness of a General, and heroyick Captain? his Army was soon ready, and
his Cossaches prepared: by the end of July he was encamped in the fields of
Bogdonia, and within 8. days entrenched with 20. pieces of Ordnance mounted:
but the Cossacks quartered by themselves, and after their accustomed manner
lying between two Rivers, were the more emboldened to make their daily
excursions upon the Tartars: For having a bridge in the rear of their Camp,
with which the Turks were unacquainted, they quickly transported their men,
and as quickly endemnified their enemies.

When the Gran Signeur was made acquainted with the forwardnes of these
Polonians, and understood they were already encamu^d, and expected his coming,
he was too young to apprehend any fear, and not old enough to lay the blame
of his retardance where it was: therefore they made the more have, when he
understood the occasion, and so according to former preparation, the
establishment of diverse Governments, the ordering the Provinces, the settling
the great City, the mustring his Gallyes, the guarding of his Castles, and the
watching of the black Sea: the Tartars united themselves to his Army, and both
together made a body of 200000. which with all magnificent preparation he
presented in the same Fields, and within sight of the Polonians, where he
pitched his Imperial Tent, and settled himself with unparalleled Majesty: the
high Priests and Doctors of Law attended him, the two great Bashawes
accompanied him, the throng of Ianizaries waited upon him, and the fry of
Tartars brought the Cariages up apace.

When all things were settled, the Tartars after their accustomed manner with
great clamours and outcryes, and with as great multitudes gave upon the
Polonians, and thought to have made but one battle and day of trial of the
business, but when they came to pass over Rivers, and assail Trenches, when
they heard the thunders of 20 Pieces of Ordnance, and felt the mischief and
damage: when they were encountered with 10000. well armed Horse, and driven
back with the fury of courageous hearts: they knew not what to say, and less
to do; nay, though the Ianizaries came as a second unto them, and brought many
field Pieces to answer the discurtesie of their Camp Ordnance, yet by reason
they had not the discipline of Gabions, they were subject to the greater
destruction, and the Soldier wanting Armor found themselves too weak for the
Cossacks: whereupon they retreated, and were altogether appawled to be so
disapointed, which when Scander Bashaw perceived, he took an opportunity of
exprobrating their audatiousnes, and chiding their ostentation, whereas now
they could perform nothing, which he did as some report to this or the like
purpose.

Now, you that are so powerful in insolency and tumults, and were so forward
to the War, that we must either take the Field to spend your humors, and
satisfy your impatience, or be taken by you, and suffer the indignity of your
outrages, what say you now to the War? what can you do to these men? nay,
what will you do for the Emperors Honor, and your own reputation? well, seeing
you see by experience, that the times are changed, and the discipline of War
must take you out other lessons of fury, leave your foolish finding fault with
your friends: and spend your courages upon your enemies? there is now no
retiring by Mutinies, but setting forward upon advantages, you must either
force these Trenches, or be enforced to endure a slaughter: But I will now
answer for you, what is past is remediless, we come to Fight, and I know, you
are resolute to play the men, therefore follow me, and I will lead you the way
to death or Glory: whereupon without any reply, they came forward with 50000.
and under the security of a rolling Trench gave a brave Camizado on the
Polonian Camp, with many pieces of Ordnance, which they mounted upon pretty
banks, as the Pyoners cast up the earth before them.

But as they were in this forwardnes the Cossackes came so violently upon the
unarmed Tartars, that they were subject to a great slaughter, so that both they
and the Ianizaries were glad to retire with loss, and the young Emperor
unacquainted with the War, was yet acquainted with Oaths and Curses, to
chide both himself and Fortune. At last the Bashawes seeing no remedy and
finding so great obstacles of their attempts, proiected the preservation of the
Emperors person; but it may be to secure their own lives, and so entrenched
themselves, being (as they said) the first time that ever so great an Army of
Turks was enclosed within walls, by which occasion, necessity compeld them to
confess, they had new work in hand, and that there was nothing so easy, as
to cry to the war, but nothing so difficult as to return with Victory.

In this manner they lay all the Summer looking upon one another with
reuengefull eyes, and taking the advantage of so many Sallies, that the Turk
lost at least in several Skirmishes 50000. men: For many times they met about
the seeking of Victual, and there fought it out: many times they encountered in
forraging, and getting provision for their Horses: many times their courages
were so exasperated, that with equal incounters and appointed Sallies they
returned home again, finding the issue nothing but slaughter and blood, and
many times they determined to deceive one another by taking the Rivers and
passing the Foords, which ended not without destruction, and perishing of whole
Companies. As for set Battails, or one days trial by equal agreement of both
parties, it never came to so formidable a business, or remarkable adventure: and
therefore I can but wonder at the shameless reports of strange men, and weak
Certificates by Corantes from Foraine parts, especially to have them Printed,
to talk of so many Thousands slain, the Prince killed, Sigismond defeated,
and the whole Army put to flight, when yet as I said, there was never any such
matter, nor any set Battle fought.

Yet although the Polonians had rather the better, then the Turks, they did
not run away so fast with prosperity, but they were subject to many
inconveniences, and they saw plainly the wars were no May-games: For they
endured both Hunger and Cold, slacknes of payment, and their entertainment
came many times short: The Noble

The noble General died in the Camp, the Prince lay sick of a Fever, their
horse miscarried, and other lamentable effects taught them extraordinary
patience, which made them attend good conditions of peace, and when they found
they might be entertained, they were not scrupulous or thought it any
desparagement to propose the same.

When the Bashawes were thus disappointed (especially Mehemet Bashaw) who was
ever an enemy to the Moldauian business, and that he saw the young Emperor every
way discontented, but especially with himself, as blaming his own
unhappiness, that he should in the first trial of his manhood be so
unfortunate, as to open the door of Christian apprehension; that the Othoman
fame was now at the highest, and the Turkish Empire subject to diminution: he
went another way to work, and persuaded the young Prince to make trial of
another time, and peace for the present: nay he did talk of another country,
to which when the Turk angerly replied, he would die first, he enforced the
argument that it should be to his honor, and the Polack should seek it with
great mediation.

It is said, the young Emperor shed tears, and was more afraid of his
disceputation among his soldiers, then glad of any pacification of the present
troubles; yet necessity had no law, and he was in the end compelled to the
proposed composition. But how? By a polliticke contriuing the business, and
secret workings of more nimble spirits: for presently a Priest of Moldauia was
set on work to go among the Polonians, and by way of general complaint
against the outrageous effects of war, to enlarge the happiness of peace,
and infer what a blessing it were to procure the same: whereupon he was
brought to the young Prince of Poland, and commanders of the Army, with whom he
at last prevailed so well, and so far, that they sent a solemn Embassy to
the great Turk, as he lay entrenched in the fields, to entreat a peace, and
desire the renouation of the antiqua pucta, which had been ever between the
two nations. The Turk had learnd his lesson so well, that he seemed to make
the matter strange and of great humiliation, if he should consent thereunto,
and rather a courtesy granted then a necessity imposed, and so deferred them a
while, till at last (as if he had bin ouer-wrought by the intercession and
mediation of his Bashawes) he was contented to capitulate the matter, and after
many meetings, and a great deal of conference, articles were drawn, and
confirmed with a kind of solemnity, and proclaimed by sound of trumpet in both
the camps.

But see the condition of men, and the inconveniences that great Emperors are
subject unto? for all the Ianizaries themselves neither durst, nor could
maintain the war any longer, and were indeed affronted with an ouer-mastring
power, and an ouer-ruling discipline of war: yet they rather complained of
the Emperor, as being unfortunate, then their own cowardice, as being
ouer-mated, and so brake up the camp with a kind of murmuring and repining.
The great Turk took easy iourneys toward Andrinopolis, where he discharged
the Tartars, and sent most of his Ianizaries before hand to Constantinople.
Sigismond king of Poland raised his army, and rewarding the Cossacks, dismissed
them home again into their country: he went in person to Leopolis, from whence
(by this time Osman was come to the great city) he sent a solemn Ambassador
to be there a Leiger, as it had bin in former times.

By Christmas Osman comes home, and had the accustomed acclamations of the
people, with all the ceremonies of his return, whereupon he goes in great
pomp to the Sophia, and had the useful guard of his Court Ianizaries to
attend him: but within short space many fearful accidents appalled them all,
and such a mischief followed, as they could not example by any president.
First, they were astonished at a blazing Comet, about which many men did rave
in the interpretation. Secondly, they were afrighted at a great fire happening
amongst the Jews, which they presaged ominous to the government. Thirdly, a
sore earthquake made their hearts quake for fear: but this is so usual in
those parts by reason of the ascending up the hills, and many Cauerns under
ground, that they needed not have made it, or taken it for any sign of
displeasure. Fourthly, the Sea swelling extraordinarily, and the wind from the
Southwest driving the billows into the corner of the harbor, made such a
noise and formidable sound, as catching the tackles of the ships and galleys in
his whistling, that they were afraid even of common accidents.

Last of all, and worst of all, by reason of the great concourse of people, and
resort of strangers, such a famine happened in the city, and dearth in the
country, that every one complained, and though it was remediless by the
policy of man, yet was the fault laid upon Superiors, and the Emperor
himself did not escape scandal and calumniation.

For while the Viceers and principal Officers endeavored the common good, and
studied the Weal public, which could not be done, but by discharging the
City of multitudes of Inhabitants; all was interpreted to be done for their
private wealth, and ambitious ouer-ruling of others: but when it came to the
discharging of many Ianizaries and soldiers out of the City, to live as it
were in garrison in the Country, and that the Emperor was slack in their
Donatiues, and former allowances out of his Treasury; they stormed beyond
measure, and threatened the Viceers and Bashawes to have a better account of
the Business; crying out, they would not be quiet, till they were employed in
one Service, or other. To this the Viceer replied, that he wondered at their
baseness and audaciousnesse, that having failed in all their Enterprises, they
durst yet complain of any accident, more then their own cowardice. As for the
satisfying of wilful men, they would not violate the Laws of Nations, or
infringe the contracted Peace with other Kingdoms, to appease the mutinies of
turbulent spirits, who, if they might have their own demands, knew not what
to demand. As for your selves, what would you have? you know the treasure is
exhausted, and the dearth is so great, that we have not sufficient to buy us
bread: and for your murmuring and repinings against the Majesty of the Prince,
as if he alone were branded with misfortune, or borne under some disastrous
constellation; how can this be, that with the same hands whereof you boast to
uphold the Empire, you will presumptuously pull it in pieces; but I see the
reason, this is for lack of discipline to make you know your selves, and so I
cannot resemble you better then unto stinking weeds and nettles, which crushed
hard, loose their force, and cannot hurt at all; but gently handled, will sting
and endamage one.

Till this they were not much enraged, but now no flames could exaestuate more
then fury and rauings: for they dared to condemn the Viceeres, and cried out
on their childish and unfortunate Emperor, that having neither sufficient wit,
nor courage to govern the State, must be ouer-ruled by such, as made policy,
covetousness; and ambition, the supportation of their greatness, and the
commanding voice to do what they list, without control: yea such was the
refractary disobedienee of them at this time, that many offered to lay violent
hands both on himself and his servants, and had not the Haga or their Captain
come in to their pacification, they had questionless begun a war of
mischief, and insolent trouble.

Well, they are quieted all this time; the suspicion of further vprores and
mischiefs made the whole city to stand upon their guard, and every Bashaw
strengthened himself with as many friends as he could, and the Viceer for
security of the Emperor assembled the Chauses, Cappogies, Spahies, and
Ianizaries of the Court to guard the Seraglio, and watch the passages. Now you
must consider that there has been ever enmity and emulation between these
Ianizaries of the palace and Ianizaries at large, whereupon when these
understood, that they were appointed for opposition, and saw plainly there was
a devise to single the^ out, that so they might be brought in question for
their mutinies: they resolved with Herostratus, that burnt the temple of Diana,
to perform some nefarious and notorious outrage, to be remembered to
posterity, or be registered for an exorbitant action: and so in multitudes past
belief, they set upon the Emperors Seraglio, broke open the iron Gates,
dissipated the Guards, seized on the Women, took as many Bashawes as they
could: but the chiefest reason why they offered this outrage, is as follows.

Sultan Osman having taken out of the Treasury of seven Towers a good
quantity of Gold, and being therewith passed over into Asia, with resolution
to go unto Mecca: the great Mufti, his father in law, having labored with all
the greatest of the Court, whom it pleased not at all, that their Emperor
being so young, should make so far and long a Voyage; not being able to
remove him from his resolution, as he desired, did in policy spread a rumor
abroad, that the Emperor had taken so many Millions of Gold away with him,
purposing therewith to make new Wars against his Enemies, notwithstanding the
small satisfaction he had given in the late Wars against Poland. Which
coming to the understanding of the Spahi and Ianizaries, they rise, and in a
fury ran unto the Tower wherein Sultan Mustapha was imprisoned, and taking
him thereout, saluted him Emperor, who was lawfully elected by the father of
Osman. This coming to the knowledge of the young Emperor, he sent his Grand
Vizier and the Aga of his Ianizaries, to appease the same, who were presently
slain by the soldiers in their fury. By which accident, the young Emperor,
to remedy this disorder, being forced to come himself in person, was
instantly made prisoner, and brought to the presence of his uncle Mustapha;
who having framed Judgment against him, caused him to be carried prisoner to
the same Tower where he himself had been prisoner, and the night following
to be strangled, with two of his sons but lately borne: Which was most
inhumanely commanded by Mustapha, his own uncle; who for the more security,
to keep the Empire from another vsu^pa^ion, caused it to be effected.

It is also written, that although he condiscended to deliver into their hands
all the chief men they required, which were the principallest of the Ottomans
Court, who afterward were all slain with the sword; though he proffered them
great gifts, yea to increase their stipends, and other preferments: all could
not avail, to assuage the anger of the soldiers.

It is further reported, that the Emperor had given in charge to the Keeper of
the Tower, that he should suffer Mustapha to die of hunger, to avoid those
disgraces and accidents which since are befallen him: and it seems he had
already sustained some want of food; for so soon as he came to be set at
liberty by the people, he presently cried out for Water, saying, he was
ready to die of thirst, and that if he had not come out of prison when he
did, he presently had yielded up his life, being (as he said) wonderfully
preserved by his God Mahomet.

When the young Emperor Osman was brought to his presence, he kneeled on his
knees, and craved pardon of him for his life, as heretofore Ottoman had done
the like to him: but Mustapha answered, saying, that favor I have received
comes from heaven, and not from your hand.

He afterward caused the Grand Mufti, the great Turks uncle, to be put to
death, who had formerly bereaved him of so great an Empire, and made him a
Masul, which is as much to say, as a man deposed from his Office. He placed in
the room of the dead Vizier, Daut Pascias, a man of great wisdom, and one
that had demeaned himself well in matters of greatest importance.

It is also said, that the death of the young Emperor is very ill taken by the
soldiers, for they desired the death of none of them, but that they might be
reconciled, and govern them as their natural Lords and Princes, as they best
could agree; and the rather, for that by reason of the death of the aforesaid
Osman, the whole race of the Ottomans is extinguished, if the two children are
put to death, as is reported, for that Sultan Mustapha, now Emperor, is held
unable for generation.

Others report, that Sultan Osman was not as yet gone over into Asia, but was
upon going, and that the Mufti and other his adherents not being able to remove
him from his resolution, did use this but as a device to divert him, casting
this rumor among the people, viz. the Spahi and the Ianizaries, as is
aforesaid, which happened to his ruin, and a declination and ending of the
Ottoman Empire.

To come to a conclusion; never was so violent an act so suddenly performed,
nor so quickly repented: For the Ianizaries stood amazed at their own
villainy, and by night there was not a man seen, that durst justify their
treasons; for they fled for the present, no man knew whither, and those which
remained, were afraid to stand for the glory of the House of Osman, but they
would live and die in the obedience of a worthy Emperor.

But how this uproar ceased, or tumult was appeased: what offenders be taken,
or how punished: what Bashawes be slain, or from whence others are admitted:
by what means the Doctors of the Law came together again, or whether they
escaped; if you long to know, I long as much to inform you: which (if I may
do) I will do, according to the next Certificate that comes.

FINIS.

