Sir THOMAS OVERBVRIES Vision.

With the ghoasts of Weston, M^. Turner, the late Lieftenant of the Tower, and
Franklin.

By R. N. Oxon.

-- In poenam insectatur and vmbra.


PRINTED FOR R. M. and T.I. 1616.

SIR THOMAS OVERBVRIES Vision.
WHen poison (O that poison and foul wrong,
Should ever be the subject of my song!)
Had set loud Fame upon a lofty wing,
Throughout our streets with horrid voice to sing
Those uncouth tidings, in each itching ear,
How raging lust of late, too soon did bear
That monster murder, who once brought to light,
Did slay the man whose vision I recite:
Then did the inconstant vulgar day by day,
Like feathers in the wind, blown every way,
Frequent the Guild ball.
Forum, where in thickest throng,
I one amongst the rest did pass along
To hear the judgment of the wise, and know
That late black deed, the cause of mickle woe:
But from the reach of voice too far compelled,
That beast of many heads I there beheld,
And did observe how every common drudge,
Assumed the person of an awefull Judge:
^ description ^f the vulgar.
Here in the hall amidst the throng one stands
Nodding his head, and acting with his hands,
Discoursing how the poisons swift or slow
Did work, as if their nature he did know:
An other here, presuming to outstrippe
The rest in sounder judgment, on his lip
His finger lays, and winketh with one eye,
As if some deeper plot he could descrie:
Here four or five, that with the vulgar sort
Will not impart their matters of import,
Withdraw and whisper, as if they alone
Talked things that must not vulgarly be known;
And yet they talk of naught from morn till noone
But wonders, and the fellow in the moon:
Here some excuse that which was most amiss;
Others do there accuse, where no crime is,
Accusing that which they excused anon,
Inconstant people, never constant known:
Censure from lip to lip did freely fly,
He that knew nothing, with the rest would cry,
The voice of judgment; every age shall find
The ignoble vulgar cruel, mad in mind:
The muddie spawne of every fruitless brain,
Daubed out in ignominious lines, did stain
Papers in each man's hand, with railing rimes
Against the foul Actors of these wel-knowne crimes:
Base wits, like barking currs, to bite at them
Whom justice unto death shall once condem.
I that beheld, how whispering rumor fed
The hungry ears of every vulgar head
With her ambiguous voice; night being come,
Did leave the Forum and returned home;
Where after some repast, with grief oppressed
Of these bad days, I took me to my rest:
And in that silent time, when sullen night
Did hide heavens twinkling tapers from our sight, A description of midnight.

And on the earth with blackest looks did lowre,
When every clock chimb'd twelve, the midnight hour,
In which imprisoned ghoasts free license have
About the world to wander from their grave;
When hungry wolves and wakefull dogs do howl
At every breach of air, when the sad owl
On the house top beating her balefull wings,
And shreeking out her doleful ditty, sings
The song of death, unto the sick that lie
Hopeless of health, forewarning them to die:
Just at that hour, I thought my chamber door
Did softly open, and upon the floare
I heard one glide along, who at the last
Did call and bid me wake; at which aghast
I up did look, and lo, a naked man
Of comely shape, but deadly pale and wan,
Sir Thomas Ouerburies ghoast.

Before me did appear, in whose sad look,
As in the map of grief or sorrows book,
My eye did read such characters of woe,
As neither paintings, skill, nor pen can show:
With dreadful horror almost stricken dead
At such a sight, I shrunk into my bed,
But the poor Ghoast to let me understand
For what he came, did waft me with his hand,
And sorrows tears distilling from his eyes,
His poisoned limbs he showed, and bad me rise,
Which fearful I, not daring disobey,
Rose up and followed, while he lead the way
Through many uncouth ways, he led me on
Over that Towers fatal hill, whereon
That scaffold stands, which sithence it has stood
Has often lickt up treasons taynted blood:
Thence over that same wharfe, fast by whose shoares
From Londons bridge the prince of rivers roares,
He in a moments space by wondrous power,
Transported me into that spacious Tower,
Where as we entered in, the very sight
Of that vast building, did my soul affright:
There did I call to mind, how over that gate,
The chamber was, where vnremorfefull fate
Did work the falls of those two (...) and (...)
Princes dead,
Who by their foes were smothered in their bed.
And there I did behold that fatal green,
Where famous Essex woeful fall was seen:
Where guilty Suffolks guiltless daughter Jane
The scaffold with her noble blood did stain:
Where royal Anne her life to death resigned,
Whose womb did bear the (...)
praise of women kind:
And where the last (...)
Plantaginet did pore
Her life out in her blood, where many more,
Whom law did justly, or unjustly tax,
Past by the sentence of the bloody axe:
And here as one with sudden sorrow stroke,
The Ghoast stood still a while, with doleful look
Fixed on the ground, and after sad sighs given
With eyes and hands vp-lifted unto heaven,
As calling them to witness of his woe,
In sad complaint, his grief he thus did show.
Great God of heaven, that pittiest humane wrongs,
To whom alone revenge of blood belongs;
Thou, that upon the wings of heaven do ride,
And laugh'st to scorn the man, that seeks to hide
And ouer-burie guiltless blood in dust,
Thou know the pains of my impoyson'd ghoast;
When men more changing then the inconstant wind,
Or do not know, or knowing wilful blind,
Will not behold dead Ouerburies grief,
But think his loss no more then loss of life*
(Ye friends unkind and false) that after death
Do let your friendship vanish with the breath
Of him that is dead, and think since truth begun
To try my cause, more satisfaction done
Then all my wrongs require; give ear, and say
When I have told my grief, if from the day
That man's first blood to heaven cried out of earth,
For vengeance against the first man's eldest birth
Until this time; if man for life so lost,
More justly may complain, then my dead ghoast.
I was (aye me, that I was ever so)
Beloved in court, first step to all my woe:
There did I gain the grace of Prince and Peers,
Known old in judgment, though but young in years;
And there, as in this Kingdoms garden, where
Both weeds and flowers do grow, my plant did bear
The buddes of hope, which flowring in their prime
And May of youth, did promise fruit in time:
But lust, foul lust did with a hand of blood
Supplant my plant, and crop me in the budde:
Yet to my self had I my counsels kept,
Or had I drowned my cares in rest, and slept,
When I did break my quiet sleeps, and wait
To serve a false friend, and advance his state,
I had not met with this inhumane wrong,
But might perhaps have happy lived, and long.
Did ever fortune pinch him with constraint?
That little wealth I had, supplied his want:
Did ever cares perplex his feeble brain?
What wit I had, his weakness did sustain:
Did ever error make him do amiss?
What wisdom I had learned, was ever his:
My wit, my wealth, and wisdom with good chance,
In his great honors May game, lead the dance.
I do not falsely boast the gifts of mind,
Best wits can judge, my Wife I left behind
Unto the world, a witness may remain,
I had no dull conceit, no barren brain:
But as a dog that at his pray does ame,
Does only love the water for his game,
Which once obtained, he playing then no more,
Shakes off the water when he comes on shore:
So my great Friend, no friend, but my great Foe,
Safe swimming in that way which I did show,
Through dangers waters after honors game,
Did shake me off when I had gained the same.
Vain man, too late thou do repent my wrong,
That huge great sail of Honor was too strong
For thy great boat, wanting thy friend to steare:
In this, thy weakness and my worth appear:
O had thou kept the path by me begun,
That other impious race thou had not run:
In ways of vice thy steps I did not guide,
Only for virtue Ouerburie di'd:
But had in gratitude no further gone,
I had not wail'd with many a piteous groan
These poisoned limbs; O how will future times
Blushing to hear such execrable crimes
Believe report, when then it shall be said,
Thou wast that man, that man that me betrayed,
That savage man, that wanting means or heart,
Or rather both to meet with my desert,
Too cruel did devise to stop my breath,
To end thy care, and my dear life by death:
Death, oh no death, but thousand deaths in one,
For had it bin but mere privation
Of loved life, my greiued Ghoast had fled
Without such pain and anguish to the dead:
O wretched foes! why did ye take delight
To exercise your hate with such despite
Upon a guiltless man? what had I done?
But that ye might, when as ye first begun
Your tragic plot, and did my life awaite,
With single death have satisfied your hate?
Was it, ah was it not enough to give
One poison first, and then to let me live?
Till ye did please to give an other, then,
An other, and an other; but as men,
All made of flint, to laugh my plaints to scorn,
And scoff at me, while I alas did mourn:
When in my chamber walls, the very stones
Sweat drops for tears to hear my greiuous groans;
As senseless, they would simpathize my woes,
Though my sad cries were music to my foes.
Let ages past until the worlds first day,
Show all records of antique times, and say
If ever any did by poison die,
That at his death had greater wrong then I.
It was not one days space, nor two, nor three,
In which those cruel men tormented me:
Month after month, they often did instill
The diverse natures of that banefull ill
Throughout these limbs; inducing me to think,
That what I took in Physic, meat, or drink,
Was to restore me to my health; when all
Was but with lingering death to work my fall.
Oh how my Ghoast does quake, when it suruayes
This fatal house, where I did end my days!
And trembles, as it suffered now again,
Only to think upon that woeful pain;
When the slow poison secretly did creep
Through all my veins, and as it went, did sweep
All ease with pain, all rest with grief away,
From every corner of my house of clay:
Then did I loath my life, but could not die,
Sometimes to God, sometimes to men I cry
To give me ease of my tormenting hell,
Whose pain no pen can write, no tongue can tell:
In vain my tongue thou vtterd'st forth my cries
To wicked men, with teare-tormented eyes;
In vain mine eyes in you the tears did stand,
While I to heaven for help did lift my hand;
In vain my hands were ye stretched forth to heaven,
My time was set, my life to death was given:
Tongue, eyes, and hands did often plead in vain,
Nothing but death could ease me of my pain:
And death at last to my desire did yield,
Who with such furious force did take the field
T'assayle my soul, that against his matchless might,
In greater torment never man did fight;
With poisoned dart he at my life did strike,
The venom seazing on me vulture-like,
With torment tore my entrayles; thence did run
Into my veins, and boiling there begun
A fresh assault, which being a while withstood
By natures force, at last did seize my blood:
Then victor-like, possessed of every part,
It did assail my yet not yielding heart,
The souls chief seat, where having vanquished all
The powers of life, while I to God did call
For grace and mercy, after sad sighs given
With greiuous groans, my soul fled hence to heaven.
O thou sad monument of Norman yoke,
Whose great foundation he, whose conquering stroke
Did stoop our necks to Norman rule Out of a ^^^^ster book of the acts of
the Bishop of Rochester in (...) suruay.
first laid,
Look thy records of those, to death betrayed
Within thy fatal chambers, and there see
If any murdered, lost his life like me.
Those royal roses of Plantaginest,
Which that white boar of Richard the third.
York, that bloody beast
Has rooted up, within those walls of thine,
In death felt little pain compared to mine:
Thou know that Henry the (...).
King, son to that kingly Knight,
Beneath whose sword in Agincourts great fight,
France fell upon her knees, thy flore did stain
With his dear blood, by bloody Richard slain:
Thou did look on, when Clarence blood was shed,
And did behold, how he poor Duke half dead,
Yet bleeding fresh, in Malmesie-but was dround,
Whose body sithence never could be found:
Thou sawst when (...)
Tirrels bloody slaves did smother
This kingdoms vncrownd King, and his young brother:
Those princely babes of York, thou heardst them cry,
When they betwixt the sheets did strangled die;
But to their pain death did swift end assign,
Thou know their greifes were not so great as mine.
It Was not for naught, that thy first builders hand
Did temper (...)
blood with burned lime and sand,
So to conglutinate thy stony mass,
And bring the Conquerours will and work to pass:
Well may it be, thy walls with blood were built,
Where so much guiltless blood has since bin spilt.
But here an end of all my pain and woe,
Death shuts up all our greatest greifes, for so
All men would think; but past all thought of mind,
My greatest grief, alas, is yet behind.
Oh why should fiercest beast of all the wood,
When he has slain his foe, and lickt his blood,
End hate in death, and man with man in strife,
Not end his malice with the end of life?
Can they be men and lords of beasts, that bear
Their Makers image, and will yet not fear
That ill, which beasts abhor in brutish mind?
Men, O no men, but monsters against kind:
Such monsters were my tyger-hearted foes,
Who vnremorsefull of my forepast woes,
When from their cruel hands my soul was fled,
Did with their tongues pursue me being dead;
And yet not dead, for heaven such grace does give,
My soul in heaven, my name on earth does live:
My name, as great Apollo's flowring bay
Looks green when winter clads the earth in gray,
Did flourish, blown upon by fames fair breath,
In every eye, long time before my death;
When my proud foes of great and glorious name,
Were blasted by the breath of foul defame:
At good report, that on her golden wings
Did bear my name, their tongue like adder-stings
Did shoot foul slanders poison, so to spill
The same with foul defame, as they did kill
My body with foul death, that men might loath
My living name, and my dead body both,
False rumor, that mad monster, who still bears
More tongues about with her, then men have ears,
With scandal they did arm, and sent her out
Into the world, to spread those lies about;
That those loathed spots, marks of their poysning sin,
Which di'd with ugly marble, paint the skin
Of my dead body, were the marks most just
Of angry heavens fierce wrath for my foul lust:
O barbarous cruelty! oh more then shame
Of shameless foes! with lust to blast my name,
When wonder it was, heavens judgment did not seize
Their wanton bodies, with that great disease,
Since death to me by poison they did give,
That they in am'rousiolity might live.
Now when false rumors breath throughout the court
And city both, had blown this false report,
Many, that often before approved my name
With praise for virtue, blushed, as if the shame
Of my supposed vice, thus given forth,
Did argue their weak judgment of my worth;
My friends looked pale with anger, and my foes
Did laugh, to see too light belief cause those
That loved me once, to loath that little dust
I left behind me, as a lump of lust.
O most inhumane wrong! O endless grief!
O sad redress! where sorrows best relief
Is but dead hope, that help may chance be found
With those that live, to cure my credits wound:
For this, my restless ghoast has left the grave,
And stole through covert snades of night, to crave
Thy pens assistance, ( O thou mortal wight)
Whose mournful Muse, but whilome did recite
Our Britain Princes, and their woeful fates
In that true ( Mirror for our Magistrates.)
O let thy pen paint out my tragic woe,
That by thy Muse all future times may know
My stories truth, who hearing thy sad song,
At least, may pity Ouerburies wrong.
This said, the grieved ghoast with sighs did cease
His rufull plaints, and as in deep distress,
Under the Towers gate with me he stood,
This accident befell on Thames great flood.
South by this house, where on the wharfe fast by
Those thundering Canons ever ready lie,
A docke there is, which like a darkesome cave
Archt ouer-head, lets in Thames flowing wave,
Under whose Arch, often have condemned men,
As through the Stygian lake, transported been
Into this fatal house, which evermore
For treason hoards up torturing racks in store:
At landing of this place, an iron gate
Locks up the passage, and still keeping strait
The guilty prisoners, opens at no time
But when false treason, or some horrid crime
Knocks at the same, from whence by laws just doom,
Condemned men but sieldome back do come:
(What'ere thou art may chance to pass that way,
And view that place, unto thy self, thus say;
God keep me faithful to my Prince and state,
That I may never pass this iron gate:)
There in the docke the flood that seemed to gape,
Did suddenly give up a dreadful shape,
Weston ghoast.

A man of megar looks, The description of Weston.
deuoy'd of blood,
Upon whose face deaths pale complexion stood;
Of comely shape, and well composed in limme,
But slender made, of visage stern and grimme;
The hairs upon his head and grisly beard
With age grown hoarie, here and there appeared;
Times iron hand with many a wrinckled fret,
The marks of age, upon his front had set:
Yet as it did appear, untimely death
For some foul fact had stopped his vital breath
With that great shame, which gives offense the check,
The fatal rope, that hung about his neck:
Trembling upon his knees in great affright,
When he fast by beheld the poysned Knight,
He humbly fell, and with sad grief oppressed,
Wringing his hands, and beating on his breast,
While sorrows drops upon his cheeks did run,
To utter forth these words, he thus begun.
O worthy Knight, behold the wretched man,
Who thy sad Tragedies first scene began,
Through whose each act, unto this last black deed,
With bloody mind, unblessed, I did proceed:
My hands, alas, did mix the poisned food,
Which kindled cruel fire in thy blood;
Mine ears did hear thy lamentable groans,
When the slow-working-poyson wrackt thy bones;
Mine eyes without one drop of sorrow shed,
Beheld thee dying, and beheld thee dead;
For which both hands, eyes, ears, and every part,
Have suffered death, and conscience bitter smart.
I was that instrument, alas the while,
By thy great foes instructed to beguile
Thy lingering hopes their mighty state did whet
Me on in mischeife, and their bounty set
A golden edge upon my dull consent,
At once to work thy fall, and their content.
The doctrine of that Whore, that would dispense
With subjects for the murder of a Prince,
Taught me that lust and blood were slender crimes,
And he that serves his turn, must serve the times.
Oh had I never known that Doct. Turner.
Doctors house,
Where first of that Whoores cup I did carouse,
And where disloyalty did often conceal
Romes frighted rattes, that over seas did steal;
My thoughts perhaps, had then not given way,
Thy life for gold with poison to betray.
But ye that do, and who do not condem
My black offenses? when ye think on them,
In such imaginations, ponder too
What with weak man, the power of gold may do.
Ye servile sycophants, whose hopes depend
On great men's wills; what is the utmost end
At which ye aim? why do ye like base curres,
Upon your Patron fawn? why like his spurs,
Will ye be ever ready at his heels,
With pleasing words to clawe him, where he feels
The humor itch? or why, will ye so wait,
As to lie down and kiss the feet of state?
And often expose your selves to wretched ends,
Loosing your souls to make great men your friends?
Is it not wealth ye seek? and does not gold
Ingenuous wits ofttimes in bondage hold?
The stout sea-rangers on the fearful flood,
That hunt about through Neptunes waterie wood,
And over a thousand rocks and sands, that lie
Hid in the deep, from pole to pole do fly;
Who often, when the stormy Ocean raues,
Fights with fierce thunders, lightnings, winds and waves,
Having but one small inch of board, to stand
Betwixt them and ten thousand deaths at hand,
Expose themselves to all this woe and pain,
To quench the greedy thirst of golden gain.
O strong inchauntment of bewitching gold!
For this, the Sire by his own son is sold,
For this, the unkind brother sells the brother,
For this, one friend is often by an other
Betrayed to death; yea even for this, the wife
Both sells her beauty, and her husbands life:
And I, ay me, for this did work thy fall
By poisons help, having this hope withal,
That great men's greatness, would have boren out
My crime, though known, against all dangers doubt.
But now too late, my wretched ghoast does prove,
That his all-seeing eye from heaven above,
To whom black darkness self, is far more clear
Then the bright sun, makes guiltless blood appear
Out of our deepest plots, to murders shame,
Though greatest men do seek to hide the same.
Ye hapless instruments of mighty men;
Ye spunges, whom the hands of greatness, when
That they by you have wiped out the spot
Of that disgrace, which did their honor blot,
Do squeeze so long, until that ye be dry,
And then as needless things do cast ye by:
Where one of these your service would employ,
Our makers heavenly image to destroy,
By violence of death in other men,
Thereby with blood to satisfy his spleen:
O do not trust the hopes of such a man,
Nor think his policy or power can
Hoodwinke all-seeing heaven, nor ever drown
The cry of blood, which brings swift vengeance down.
When many men, but one man's life will spill,
Their lives for his, heaven evermore does will.
Offend in murder, and in murder die,
No crime to heaven, so loud as blood does cry.
In other wrongs, when man does man offend,
We restitution may in part pretend:
But where the wrong is done by murders knife,
No price for blood the Law says, life for life.
The eye of wakefull justice, for a season
May seem to wink at murders bloody treason;
Yet from the hour of so black a deed,
The worm of conscience on the soul does feed*
And dreadful furies, whose imagined sight
In every place, does horribly affright
The guilty man, pursue the steps that fly,
While swift-wing'd vengeance makes the hue and cry
Justice to me did seem to sleep a while,
And with delay did all my hopes beguile;
But in short time now in my riper years,
When grauer age on my gray head appears,
Death and reproach attach't my life and name,
To bring me to my grave with greater shame:
To you therefore that hunger after gold,
To you, whom hope of great men's grace makes bold
In any great offense, henceforth let me
For evermore a sad ensample be.
This said, he sighing shrunk into the flood,
And in a moments space, an other stood
Mist. (...) ghoast

The description of Mist. Turner.
In the same place; but such a one whose sight
With more compassion moved the poysned Knight:
It seemed that she had been some gentle dame,
For on each part of her fair bodies frame,
Nature such delicacie did bestow,
That fairer object often it does not show:
Her crystal eye beneath an yuorie brow,
Did show what she at first had been; but now
The roses on her lovely cheeks were dead,
The earths pale color had all ouer-spread
Her sometimes lively look, and cruel death
Coming untimely, with his wintrie breath
Blasted the fruit, which cherrie-like in show
Upon her dainty lips did whilome grow:
O how the cruel cord did mis-become
Her comely neck, and yet by Laws just doom
Had been her death: those locks like golden thread
That wont in youth t'enshrine her globe-like head,
Hung careless down; and that delightful limme,
Her snow-white nimble hand, that wont to trim
Their tresses up, now spitefully did tear
And rend the same: nor did she now forbear
To beat that breast of more then lilly white,
Which sometimes was the lodge of sweet delight:
From those two springs where joy did whilome dwell,
Griefs pearly drops upon her pale cheeks fell,
And after many fighes, at last with weak
And fainting voice, she thus did silence break.
Thou gentle Knight, whose wrongs I now repent,
Behold a woeful wretch, that did consent
In thy sad death: for I, alas therefore
By gold my servant did suborne to pore
That death into thy cup, thy dish, thy diet,
Whose pain too long did rob thy ghoast of quiet:
Yet neither thirst of gold, nor hate to thee
For injuries received, incensed me
To seek thy life; but love, dear love to those
That were my friends, and thy too deadly foes:
With them in Court my state I did support,
Ah, that my state had never known the Court!
Virtue and vice I there together saw,
But like the spider, I was taught to draw
Foul poison, where sweet honey might be had,
And how to leave the good, and choose the bad:
At last, through greedy going on in sin
Made senseless, by degrees I did begin
To rise from great to greater, till at last
Mine own sins did mine own destruction have.
O heavy doom! when heaven shall so decree,
That sin in man the plague of sin must be.
But here let chastest beauties when they blame
My follies most, and blush to hear my shame,
Remember then best beauties are but frail,
And how that strongest men do often assail
Our weakest selves; so may they pity me,
And my sad fall may their fore-warning be.
Ye tender offspring of that rib, refined
By Gods own finger, and by him assigned
To be a help, and not a hurt to man;
How is it possible your beauties can
Be pure from blemish, treading such vain ways
As now you do in these prophaner days?
Must flesh that is so frail still fear to fall,
And ye the frailest flesh not fear at all?
Can ye, ah can ye, with vain thoughts to please
Your wanton souls, on yuorie beds of ease
Spend precious time, and yet suppose in this
Ye do no ill, nor think one thought amiss?
Can ye to catch the wandering thoughts of him
Whom ye affect, deck every dainty lim,
Powder your hair, and more to please the eye,
Refresh your paler cheeks with purer die,
Lay out your breasts; and in the glass thus dressed,
Observe what smile, or frown becomes ye best?
And yet not fear heavens judgment in the end,
At least in this, not think ye do offend?
Can ye on wanton meats to move desire,
Though of your selves too full of Paphian fire,
Feed every hour, and when hot blood begins
To hurrie you unto those horrid sins,
That spots your beds, your bodies, and your names,
Blot your black souls with many greater blames?
And yet not think, ye do deserve heavens hate,
At least to turn, do think no time too late?
O do not sooth your selves in these foul crimes,
Hear not the tongue of these enchanting times:
Your too much idle ease, which opes the gate
To vicious thoughts, I know is counted state:
Upon your curious pride and vain array,
Fond men the name of cleanlines do lay:
Your lust whose sparkles, in your eyes do shine,
On wanton youth, is called love divine:
Thus they that would for each foul fault excuse you
And turn your vice to virtue, do abuse you.
But be ye not so blinded, look on me,
And let my story in your clossets be
As the true glass, which there you look upon,
That by my life, ye may amend your own.
Observe each step, when first I did begin
To tread the path, that lead from sin to sin,
Until my most unhappy foot did lite,
In guiltless blood of this impoisned Knight:
After I had in Court begun to taste
Of idle ease, I daily fed so fast
Upon false pleasure, that at last I did
Climb Citharaeas hill, like wanton kid
In fertile pastures playing; naught did fear me,
I thought that roaring Lion would not tear me.
Two darling sins, too common and too foul,
With their delights did then bewitch my soul;
First pride aray'd me in her loose attires,
Fed my fond fancy fat with vain desires,
Taught me each fashion, brought me ouer-seas
Each new devise, the humorous time to please:
But of all vain inventions, then in use
When I did live, none suffered more abuse
Then that phantasticke ugly fall and ruff,
Daubed over with that base starch of yellow stuff:
O that my words might not be counted vain,
But that my counsel might find entertain
With those, whose souls are tainted with the itch
Of this disease, whom pride does so bewitch,
That they do think it comely, not amiss:
Then would they cast it off, and say, it is
The baud to pride, the badge of vanity,
Whose very sight does murder modesty*
Ye then detesting it, they all would know,
Some wicked wit did fetch it from below,
That here they might express by this attire
The color of those wheels of Stygian fire,
Which prides plu^g'd offspring with snake-powdred hair,
About their necks in Plutoes Court do wear.
Thus pride, the pandar to luxurious thoughts,
Did guide me by the hand through those close vaults,
That lead to lusts dark chambers, dark as night,
The eyes of lust do never abide the light.
But here perhaps some curious dame, who knows
No good, but what her outward habit shows,
Will judge my true complaint, as most unjust,
In that I call her pride, the band to lust:
But had her body windows in each side,
That each one might behold her heart of pride,
There might one see the cause, why she does trim,
Trick up, and deck defects in every limme;
And having seen the same, may justly say,
Her loose attire does her loose mind bewray.
Of this the sad effects of yore were seen
In Lady (...)
Alfrith, sometimes Englands Queen,
Whose Lord Earl Ethelwald, at first held dear
To her affection: when that he did hear
That his great Sovereign, royal Edgar, he
Whom eight Kings rowed upon the river Dee,
Unto his house did purpose to repair,
Knowing his dearest Lady wondrous fair,
And the King young and wanton, did desire
That she would lay aside her rich attire,
And choosing meaner weeds, her art apply
To dim that beauty which did please the eye:
But she, inconstant Lady, knowing well,
That beauty most set forth, does most excel;
As precious stones when they are set in gold,
Are then most fair and glorious to behold;
Arai'd her self in all her proud attire,
To set victorious Edgars heart on fire:
Who caught like silly fly into the flame,
At sudden sight of such a dainty dame,
To cool the heat of his lust-burning will,
Her wronged husbands guiltless blood did spill.
With pride thus tasting of that wanton cup
Which lust did give me, I was given up
To loose desire: which brutish sin, since here
In it is own shape it may not well appear,
Least it offend all modest eyes and ears,
I only do lament with my true tears:
Yet give me leave, in some few words to tell
This wanton world, into what horrid hell
Of wicked sins, foul lust did make me fall,
That unchaste youth from lust I may recall.
As every evil humor, which is bred
In humane bodies, couets to be fed
With that ill nutriment which does increase
The same, until it grow to some disease
Incurable; so did my loose desire
In vain delights, seek fuel for the fire
So long, until (aye me) unto my shame
It did burst forth, and burn me in the flame.
I left my God t'aske counsel of the devil,
I knew there was no help from God in evil:
As they that go on whooring unto hell,
From thence to fetch some charm or magic spell,
So over Thames, as over the infernal lake,
A wherrie with their oars I often did take,
Who Charon-like did waft me to that Strand,
Where Lambeths town to all well known does stand;
There Forman was, that fiend in humane snape,
That by his art did act the devils ape:
Often there the black Inchanter, with sad looks
State turning over his blasphemous books,
Making strange characters in blood-red lines:
And to effect his horrible designs,
Often would he invoke the fiends below,
In the sad house of endless pain and woe,
And threaten them, as if he could compel
Those damned spirits to confirm his spell.
O profane wretches! ye that do forsake
Your faith, your God, and your own souls, to take
Advise of Sorcerers, again to find
Some trifle lost; why will ye be so blind
On some base beldam for lost things to fawn?
To gain whose loss, ye leave your souls in pawn.
Too many, too much wronged by the time,
Do think this great idolatry no crime;
But let them mark the path which they do tread,
And they shall see, that in it they are lead
From hope and help, to hurt and all annoy,
From him that made, to him that does destroy.
But without mercy here, let no stern eye
Look on my faults; alas for charity,
Let all with pity my offense bemone,
Since that it was not my offense alone:
The strongest soon do slip, as I did fall,
For woe is me, I was seduced to all.
Ye that detest my now detected shame,
And think that ye shall never meet the same,
Think how the friendship, and the ancient love
Of some great Lady long enjoyed may move:
And think with that, how much the rising state
Of some great man, my sex might animate:
I was not base, but borne of gentle blood,
My nature of it self inclined to good,
But worms in fairest fruit do soonest breed,
Of heavenly grace best natures have most need.
Just heaven did suffer me, as I begun
To hasten on from vice to vice, and run
My self in sinful race quite out of breath,
That sin at last might punish sin by death:
For when those wantons, whose unjust desire
Had urged me on so far, that to retire
I knew was vain, as I before to lust
Had been a minister, so now I must
Join hands in blood, which they did plot and study
O who would think that women-kind were bloody!
But when our chastity we do forgo,
That lost, what then will we refuse to do?
This did that Roman proud (...) anna^ (...)
Scianus know,
Who hating Drusus as his deadly foe,
And basely seeking to betray his life,
Did first allure fair Liuia Drusa's wife
To poison her own Lord, that in his stead
The base Scianus might enjoy his bed;
Who raised by Caesar from ignoble place,
In Liuiaes lustful eye did find more grace
Then Drusus, Caesar's son, a manly youth:
O who knows how to feed a woman's tooth!
In mischief I went on, and did agree
To be an actor in thy Tragedy,
Thou injured ghoast; yet was I but a mute,
And what I did was at an others suite:
Their plots I saw, and silent kept the same,
For which my life did suffer death and shame;
For see, ah see, this cord about my neck,
Which time sometime with precious things did deck,
Revenge has done, and Justice has her due,
Let none then wrong the dead, let all with you
O gentle knight, forget my great offense,
Which I have purged with tears of penitence:
For thousand living eyes with tears could tell,
That from my eyes true tears of sorrow fell:
Then judge my cause with charitable mind,
Who mercy seeks with faith, shall mercy find.
This said, she vanished from before our sight,
I think to heaven, and think, I think aright.
She gone, the poisoned ghoast did seem with tears
To chide her fate: but lo, here straight appears
(...).

An other in her place, The description of Sir ^arius ^^lo^^^, the late
Leiftenant of the Tower.
who seemed to be
When he did live, some man of good degree
Among men on earth; one of so solemn look,
As if true gravity that place had took
To dwell upon; his person comely was,
His stature did the meaner size surpass;
Well shapt in every limme, well stepped in years,
As here and there appeared by some gray hairs.
When first he did appear, with woeful look
He viewed the Tower, and his head he shook,
As if from thence he did derive his woe,
Which with a sigh he thus begun to show.
O thou sad building, ominous to those
Whom with thy fatal walls thou do enclose,
For thee, I hapless man, as for the end
Of my desire, did falsely condescend
Unto that plot, by others heads begun,
Through which in thee such wrong was lately done.
Thou that did poisoned feel thy foes despite,
See here the ghoast of that unhappy Knight,
Which whilome was Leiftenant of this place,
Though now a wretch, thus haltred with disgrace.
I was, alas, what boo^s it that I was,
Of good report, and did with credit pass
Through every act of my lives tragedy,
Upon this world the stage of vanity,
Till the last scene of blood by others plotted,
Concluding ill, my name and credit blotted.
I must confess I did conni^e at those
That were the ministers to thy proud foes,
Closely employed by them thy life to spill
By secret poison, though against my will:
Fear of their greatness, and no hate to thee,
Inforst my coward conscience to agree.
When first to me this plot they did impart,
O what a tedious combat in my heart,
Unto my soul did feelingly appear,
T'wixt my sad conscience, and a doubtful fear:
Fear said that if I did reveal the same,
Those great ones great in grace, would turn the shame
Upon my head, but conscience said again,
That if I did conceal it, murders stain
Would spot my soul as much for my consent,
As if at first it had bin my intent:
Fear said that if the same I did disclose,
The countenance of greatness I should lose,
And be thrust out of office and of place;
But conscience said that I should lose that grace
And favor, which my God to me had given,
And be perhaps thrust ever out of heaven.
Long these two champions did maintain the field,
Till my weak conscience at the last did yield*
O let those men that do condemn my fear
And folly, most in their remembrance bear,
What certain danger stood on either side
As I should pass, and how I should have di'd
In either way, at least with some great fall
For ever have been crushed: and think withal,
How prone our nature is in fear, to rest
Upon those seeming hopes that promise best.
I speak not this to mitigate my sin,
O no, I wish my fall may others win
From the like, fear, and that my life may be
A president to men of such degree,
To whom authority does think it fit,
The trust of such a function to commit.
Let such men to remember still be moved,
That which by sad experience I have proou'd;
It Is good to fear great men, but yet it is better
Ever to fear God more, since God is greater:
If Gods good Angel had imprinted this
Into my thoughts, I had not thought amiss;
Nor I, unhappy I, should have consented,
But all this mischeife I had then prevented.
Here some perhaps will think the former race
Of my sad life, to have been debosht and base,
Because at last it had so base an end;
But for our selves, might modesty contend
In opposition, I might justly say,
How many now live glorious at this day,
Whose honor greater stains do daily spot,
Then any which my former life did blot:
Yet those my crimes which did my God offend,
For which his finger did point out this end,
Unto my life I Will show, though to my shame,
That others as from death may fly the same.
Note.
My Father, from whose life my breath I drew,
When sick upon his bed he lay, and knew
That at his door of flesh deaths hand did knock,
And did perceive weak nature would unlock
To let him in, did with his blessing give
This charge to me; that I while I did live
Should never seek for office at the Court,
But with that means be left my state support:
With reverence his will I did obey,
Until (O that I might not tell the day)
In which I did with greedy eye affect
That place in this great Tower, without respect
To my dead Syres behest; yet since it was
A touch to conscience, on I would not pass
Until by some I was resolved amiss,
That as in other things, so I in this
Which in it self was of indifference
And lawful unto others, might dispense
With my obedience to my Fathers will,
And that mine own intent I might fulfill:
Yet one there is (O ever may he be
Beloved of heaven for his great love to me)
Who by the light of truth did show the way
Which I should go, but I did not obey:
Ambitious mist did blind my weaker eyes,
I thought by this preferment I should rise;
Yet no desert but gold did gain me grace,
Mine own corruption purchased me that place:
For brib'rie in the soul a blemish makes
Of him that gives, as well as him that takes,
And bribing hands that give, must guilty be
Of their own want of worth: for who, but he
That in himself the want of merit finds,
Will be the baude to base corrupted minds?
Ye, that neglect performance of the will
Of your dead parents, thinking it no ill
To disobey their precepts, now in me
The curse of disobedience ye may see:
And ye whose golden fingers, as in sport,
Like lime-twigges catch at offices in Court,
In which obtained ye ever after live
Corrupt in mind, to gain what ye did give;
Behold, untimely deaths disgraceful come
About this neck, my bribing hands reward.
Before this sudden, and unlooked for fa^e
Did fall thus heavy on me, when my sta^e
Did flourish among men, to mind I call
An accident of note which then did fall. Note.

Bewitched with love to that too common vice
In this our age, of hazardy and dice,
I loosing once my coin (for few thereby
Have ever gainers been) did wish that I
When I again did use the dice, might come
To die this shameful death, which by the doom
Of righteous heaven, again I using game,
As I had wished, to me unlooked for came.
Vain gamesters that too commonly use
Strange deprecations, when ye do abuse
Your selves in game, by my sad fall take heed,
And let your word be ever as your deed;
Least your hand meet mine in the selfsame dish,
For heaven does often hear when men do wish.
But of no sin had my most sinful soul
Been ever sick, yet this one sin most foul,
This act of poison, to my house a stain,
With future times for ever shall ramaine:
The die of blood on murderers hand does stay,
No tears, no time, can wipe the same away;
But if true tears of forrow may with you,
(As all true sorrows tears with heaven may do)
Move pitiful regard of my sad fall,
Ye then remembering how I fell withal,
Will out of charity, with lesser blame
Censure my fault, when ye shall hear the same:
Thus quit by death from doom of Law, and heaven
Out of free mercy having me forgiven,
Let all calumnious tongues their malice cease,
That so my soul may ever live in peace:
O let the world abate her sharpened tongue,
And since I have done penance for thy wrong
Thou wronged Knight, what can thy ghoast now crave?
Grieve thee no more, go rest thee in thy grave:
Thy foes decline, proud Gaueston is down,
No wanton Edward wears our Englands crown*
This said, he vanished; and an other stood
In the same place, midway above the flood,
The description of (...)

Whose strange demeanor with amazement struck The description of (...).

Us that beheld him; for with startled look,
And hair stiff standing, as a man aghast
He star'd upon the Knight, from whom in have
Into the flood he would have shrunk away,
Had not, I think, that fury forced his stay,
Which while he lived his guilty soul pursued,
Till he his own offense had freely showed.
A man he was of stature meanly tall,
His bodies lineaments true shaped, and all
His limbs compacted well and strongly knit,
Natures kind hand no error made in it;
His beard was ruddie hew, and from his head
A wanton lock it self did down dispread
Upon his back, to which while he did live
The ambiguous name of Elfe-locke he did give:
And now fantastic frenzy, as before
When he did live, did seem to vex him sore;
The shameful rope which 'bout his shoulders hung,
Hither and thither carelessly he dung,
And as a catiffe of that cursed crewe,
Whom sad despair does after death pursue,
Howling and yelling, while the tears did run
Down by his cheeks, at last he thus begun.
Since that sly serpent of soule-slaying-sin,
Which feeds upon the guilty mind within
Each wicked breast, does force me to reveal
Unto my shame, what I did long conceal:
Give ear, ye cursed Atheists all that been,
Ye unbelieving dogs in shape of men,
That think the name of God and his great Law,
But things devised to keep the world in awe,
Who mock the times last dreadful day to come,
Which at the length your wicked deeds shall doom:
And ye blasphemous Exorcists, that are
With Plutoes factors so familiar
Here upon earth, that ye each day do deal
For transportation of blind souls to hell:
Whom fools do wisemen call, give ear to me,
And in my wretched fate your follies see.
I was (aye me, that still I was not so)
When April buddes of youth themselves did show
Upon my chin, a Student in the Law,
From which fantastic thoughts my mind did draw
To the more pleasing study of that art
Of Physic, to the which though little part
Of learning gave me help, yet strong desire
To know that worthy science, set on fire
The fond affection of my forward will,
To search the secrets of that noble skill:
But he who from that faculty shall fall,
To which inevitable fate did call
Him at the first, forsakes that happy way,
Which he should go, and hapless runs astray:
Diseased with vanities fantastic fi^tes,
Which ague-like does vex our English wits,
Who think at home all homely, and do plough
Deep furrows upon Neptunes waterie browe,
From foreign shoares to bring the worst of bad,
And in exchange leave there what good they had;
The seas I past to help out my weak skill
In the Aromatike Art, but O the ill,
Which there our ignorant English often do find,
Did first corrupt my uncorrupted mind:
O vain conceit of those, that do repute
In every Art the most admired fruit
Of any brain; if of domesticke wit,
But base and triuiall, if compared to it
Of foreign heads, that only us can please,
And such has been our Englands old disease:
There did I find, O never had I found,
Murders close way to kill my foe, the ground
Of that devise (thou wronged Knight) whereby
Thou most untimely were inforst to die:
There was I taught, with vain words to command
The spirits from below, who still at hand
Will ready be, as seeming to obey
Those soule-blind men, whom they do most betray.
Thus having, as I thought, my mind enricht
With deepest knowledge, and with pride bewitched,
To blow that vain blast on the trumpe of fame,
Which through the world I thought might bear my name,
I back returned for England, there to show
That wondrous skill, which I would seem to know:
There as the Fowler does with whistle call
The silly birds, until they hap to fall
Into his net; so did my name each day,
Once blown abroad, lead simple fools away
From helpful heaven, to seek advise in hell,
And there for toys themselves and souls to sell:
But in this path long thus I did not tread,
Which down unto the house of death does lead,
Before that old sly serpent did begin
T'entice me, to that selfe-accusing sin
Of horrid murder, showing me the way
By art of poison, closely to betray
What life to death I would, nor did he leave
Until my soul he did so far bereave
Of every feeling sense, that wicked I
Did closely poison her, that used to lie
In mine own bosom, that she being dead
Might to me living leave an empty bed:
After this fact, that to my gultie soul
It might not as it was, seem ugly foul,
My subtle foe did whisper in my ear
These seeming happy news, how fame did bear
My name upon her wings, with loud report
Of my strange deeds as far as to the Court;
Where having been employed, I with all skill
Applied my self to please; no damned ill
I did refuse, not making any doubt
While greatness wings did compass me about.
Forman that cunning Exorcist and I,
Would many times our wicked wits apply
Kind nature in her working to disarme
Of proper strength; and by our spells would charm
Both men and women, making it our sport
And play, to point at them in our report.
Thus fatted with false pleasure for a while,
Still with good hope of hap, I did beguile
My self in all employments, till at last
Thy death (thou injured Knight) did with it have
My unexpected fall: I was the man,
That did prepare those poisons, which began
And ended all thy pain, which I did give
Unto that man, (...)
who did attendant live
On thee in thy distress, who since that time
Was he, that first did suffer for this crime.
O what a sudden change of cheerful thought
To sadness, selfe-accusing conscience brought
After this bloody deed: before all ease
Did seem to wait on me; for what could please
Which I did want? that idol gold, which all
Or most men closely worship, seemed to fall
As thick upon me, as the golden shower
That fell on Danae in the Dardin Tower.
Swimming in streams of false delight, and pricked
With pride and self conceit, at heaven I kicked:
The names of God, and Maker, I did slight
As bug-beare words the childish world to affright:
I did impute the spheres eternal dance,
And all this all, to nature and to chance;
But all men laugh my follies unto scorn:
For who so blind, will say being mortal borne,
He has a reason, and will yet deny
The same to this Universality,
Of which, alas, he is the lesser part:
As who should say, his feet, his hands, his heart
Might well be wise, and he himself a fool,
Such is the wisdom of th'Atheisticke school.
The eye of heaven, from whom no heart can hide
The secret thoughts, my close intents espied;
And when I did with most inuentiue brain,
Devise to wipe away my conscience stain,
And thy sad death most closely to conceal,
Heaven forced my self, mine own self to reveal:
The shadow of the dead, or some foul fiend,
Or fury, whom revenge did justly send
To punish me for my detested sin,
With snakie whippes did scourge my soul within;
Forbidding me my rest, or day, or night,
Till I had brought mine own offense to light:
For which condemned unto that shameful end
Of strangling torment, still the frantic fiend
Did follow me unto my lives last breath;
As was my life before so was my death.
This said, he vanished, and with him that night
The vision ending, our empoysoned Knight
Thus spoke: O England, O thrice happy land,
Who of all Isles most gracefully do stand
Upon this earths broad face, like Venus spot
Upon her cheek; thou only garden plot,
Which as an other Eden heaven has chose,
In which the tree of life and knowledge grows:
Happy in all, most happy in this thing,
In having such a holy, happy King;
A King, whose faith in arms of proof does fight,
Against that seuen-headed beast, and all his might:
A King, whose justice will at last not fail,
To give to each his own in equal scale:
A King, whose love doue-like with wings of fame,
To all the world does happy peace proclaim:
A King, whose faith, whose justice, and whose love,
Divine, and more then royal, him do prove:
O thou just King, how has thy justice shined
Upon my injured ghoast, which being confi'nd
From hence for ever, never had, unless
Thy justice had been great, obtained redress.
If earnest pray^rs wi^h heaven may ought avail,
And earnest prayers with (...) do sieldome fail;
Let all good men lift up (...) ^earts with me,
That what I beg, of (...) granted be.
If ever heart with wicked ^^^ught, shall aim
To harm thy State, let heaven reveal the same:
If ever hand lift up with violent power
Shall seek thy life, heaven cut it off that hour:
If ever eye of treason lurk about,
Or lie in wait for thee, heaven put it out:
If heart, hand, eye, abroad or here at home,
Shall plot against thee, never may they come
To their effect, as they have ever been
So may they be; and let all say, Amen.
Here my dream ended, after which a while
Soft slumber did my senses so beguile,
I thought the Towergate was o'r^ my head,
Until I wake and found my self in bed;
From whence arising, as the wronged Knight
Had given in charge, this Vision I did write.
FINIS.

