The epistle of one friend to another, of a strange fire that was seen in the
air both long and broad almost through al Germany, and what as well the godly
as the ungodly may or ought thereof to look for or fear.
MY due salutations remembered right worshipful brother, this shall be to let you
under stand that in the beginning of the year of our lord. M. D. LXI. wherein
we are now, the third after the feast of the birth of Christ, that is on
childermas day: there appeared over our city and all the borders of
Swicerlande, two hours before day the air being clear a very red fire, in
manner whole together, but that white furrows or strakes came between, and it
stretched out long and broad almost a furlong broad, although in another place
it se med narower, but in length three or four times so much. So that unto
all the beholders in manner a whole mile long toward ye North it seemed that
some village or many, or else some town had been on a great fire. And in many
places the neighbors ran together as it were to quench the fire of some of
their neighbors: and there were which thought that they saw in this fire of
bloody color mani white forowes or strakes, very like unto bundels of spears.
But it continued not long in one place, but removed many furlonges further,
and when it was day or rather toward ^^ye, by little and little it vanished out
of sight being first gathered together at San gallie in manner of a great tower.
By this ye may easly conjecture that this fire was on the higher part of the
air, because it was seen so far of, and almost followed the mouinge of the
air, and yet not on ye highest air yt there like unto the comets or blasing
stars might be kindeled by the element of fire. And this was also faithfully
showed us, that it was so seen at Zurich, Glaroua, Sa^gale, Consta^ce and every
where round about ye lake of Aezon, and Venice, and so likewise at Basil, and
in the most part of the places of Swicerland, and the Recians or Grisons. But
whether it were seen any further we shall know shortly. And in certain places
between Suricke and the little town Elgia they say that flames of fire fell down
to the ground and amassed therewith a certain man that traueiled by the way.

And a certain credible man of the teritorie of Surike told me all the
matter, which he did diligently mark.

First, when the night was clear, and yet ear it was day it became darker,
even in the setting of the moon it seemed unto him as it were a certain light to
rise from the earth as if diverse beams and of sundry colors (as when the
Sun by the drops of rain makes diverse colors) should so by and by arise
from the ground as it werdrawen up toward heaven, and there gathered a rednes
as though a certain cloud had wared red, and stood so a little while, and
anon after a certain cloud went through the midst thereof, and then was
seen a shuting out of fire as it had been stars out of a burning cloud.

The signification of this wonderful matter, right learned sir, which I have
studied upon to exercise my self withal, and to styre up my mind to ye author
of it, I write unto you therefore that I may hear your judgment upon the same
which I much esteem.

The signification of the vvonder.
1 For as much as such prodigious wonders chance seldom in this our time, and
old men far stryken in age can not remember to have seen any such, therefore
it is to be feared and looked for some unaccustomed hap to follow. 2 The bredeth
and bigness of it was notable, through which it was seen every where long and
broad, and as it were every where nere hand, where of we divine and pronunce a
great evil to follow, and that not to one region alone, and therein al men to
be perplered and doutfull, to what place they may chiefly go, and where they
may resist the ragyng fire. 3 The color of the fire it self like to blood
what betokens it but war: In which the land shall abound in the blood of
the slain and all things wasted with fire? 4 And this calamity is thiefelye
threatened to those people to whom so ever this wonder was seane nearest. 5
And because it apeared before day light and of a sodeyne and unlooked for and in
manner to al persons as yet slepyng, therefore it betokens the calamities
approchynge to be looked for to come upon many not thinking nor preparyng
them selves, or repenting, and over careless in themselves and not only such
particular calamities to come, but shortly an vphoped judgment of the whole
world. 6 And that within a short time after this: because this burning of the
air was seane every where as it had been present and nere as I have said. 7
And because it endured but a short time, therefore it makes us hope that the
persecution shall not continue long. 8 And because by and by after it being
vanished away the Sun arose, we hope the clear light of the wurde of god to
be the end of all persecution. 9 And that rednes was not al whole together, but
divided as it were with certain clear and bright spaces or furrows by the
which also stars appeared, that signifies, that in the midst of those
calamities and persecutions God will comfort his elect, and in that fire shall
issue out the heavenly brightness of the gospel. 10 And now seeing this wonder
was seen in the beginning of the year, there fore shall we doubt whether this
calamity shall endure a whole year? For now also great mocions do begin to
come forth, and they will come further except god turn away great evils, or
rather dare we hope because it appeared by and by after the birth of christ
that is the third day after, within so many years hence, that our lord Jesus
Christ's doctrine will be setfurth far and brod and as it were restored again
all falshold being expulsed and so the godly to look for to begin a new year
and a new kind of living. 11. And because that bloody fire appeared on
childermas day we do not deuteronomy but that he which was sometime a revenger of the
blood of the innocent children will now also become a revenger and punisher
for those godly and faithful men, which have suffered persecution and death for
his name sake. And for them which as yet remain he will be a defender and
maintener, so that finallye they will acknowledge him to be a father of their
cause, and by amendment of life answer thereunto and prepare them selves with
prayer and sobriety for the grace that is to come. 12. The shuting of stars
as it were the falling of them do doutles signify unto us, that the day of the
great judgment is at hand. A little before the which day that such fore
warning signs should be seen our Lord Christ has warned us before hand
long a go.
But in no age at any time has there be seen so many and so great and strange
wondrous signs every where abroad as within these few years: that we oght
altogether already to consider that it is by tokens signified unto us that the
latter day is not far of, and both by other wonders and chiefly by this which
is not particular nor terrestrial but almost universal and celistiall except
we utterly sleep with overmuch carelesnes and security. But first must that
Babilonicall beast being stuffed with the blood of saints and yet not filled
nor satisfied be cast down, and the sincere gospel preached again through
the whole world. The which that it may very shortly come to pass we shall
pray unto the almightye gracious and great God by our lord Jesus Christ in
the holy Ghost.

And yet therefore we oght not to promise a careless security to our selves
that the kingdom of the prince of Christ's enemies shall decay and fall: but
except we do thoroughly take heed to our selves by and by with amendment of
life, and cease to brag of a vain faith, being our selves instruted and
furnished with no good works, we shall first be punished by the same. For
seeing our life of all in manner for the most part answers not to our
profession we have many ways deserved most grievous punishments: and more
truly then our adversaries, for this cause that in so great light of the
known truth, we be kyndled or moved with no feruencye of sincere religion but
wallowe and are wrapped in all kind of vices and will almost suffer no
disciplyne either private or publyke: And for the most part all Magistrates
will not only have Dominion in the commune wealth and in Cities, but they
also will have rule in the church, but they will not commyt them selves to the
common discipline of the same.

Finally, the pastors and ministers of the churches for the most part be full
of ambition, conetonsnes, wantonness, and other vices, and be no better than
those whom they ought to teach and feed with the word of GOD, but rather
much worse.

Wherefore it is greatly to be feared yt nere the day of the lord draws upon
us, and that to us that wax so cold shall be moved and not to a few of us and
privately as has been hertofore, but a common public and universal sore of
persecution wherewith we shall be warned more then enough: for from the
adversaries of Christ's church and his members (except God turn it away) shall
go out the fire which has been of long time prepared for us, and from Italy
unto us and toward the North (ye which way ye wonder and prodegious for
warning did incline) shall it come furiously upon the christians. Not
withstanding we hope and humbly pray unto the most gracious and mighty god the
father of our lord Jesus Christ with lowly and deuot hearts, that this evil
may sone after be turned from us: not for us but for his name sake, and the
holy worshippers of his anointed. For the blood of those which long ago
already has been most abundantly spylled and shed or consumed with fire
throughout al Germany, France, Italy, Spain, and other regions (by that seven
headed and horned and bloody Babilonical beast with whom the kings and
princes of the earth have committed and do commit fornication) may now seem
altogether to have burste out of the bowels of the earth with a flamynge
brightness, and that the same burning in the air betokening a revenging from
the Lord (which is the defender and revenger of his) has mingled together:
That al men may see and understand the evident cause of this wonderful for
warning. Therefore god will punish together his who^ he loves that they may be
amended, and with them or at the least by and by after the enemies of his name
which go forward obstinatly in their malice, and in the persecution of the
saints. It becomes us to acknowledge our fauts and to ask forgiveness and
not to despair by and by at the first cruel assaute of Antichrist whatsoever
they be. For he says that he is in danger and assauted himself and that on
every side is great falling aways from him, and lest he should utterly be
forsaken he proves al things to the extremity. We if we will continue in the
sincere calling upon the Lord and remember to keep our selfs in prosperity,
so many as god will have kept safe from these calamities shall prove and see a
happy success and spreadyng abroad of the gospel, through out the whole
world: and the ruin and decay of that prince or ruler which under the title
of the name of Christ is against him being now of late begone wholly to be
performed. For this enterprise of his as it is to be thought to be the greatest
so is it to be supposed that it shall be the last: and as he did sever this
wonder from the day that was coming, even so it is to be hoped that at the
clear preaching of the Gospel and the last judgment shortly coming upon it,
al evil shall have an end. So we for our selves oght for to guess well with
good and valiant minds. For the almyghtye can if he will deliver us from all
calamities, at the least if he do not those are happy ones which die strongly
in the confession of his name for Christ and the truth. But unhappy are they
whosoever think them selves conquerours against Christ.

That prodigies or wonders be done or styrred up by god* contrary to the
sayings of the Epicures.
ARistotle in his first book of celestial speculation and. v. chapter, in
mencionyng of other things which he calls fyrye speculations, writes thus.
There be seen sometimes in the night the air being clear many appearinges (he
calls them horrible sightes) to mete in the air. As be gapyngs pittes bloody
colors the cause whereof is even the same, which is of the other aforesaid.
But next before he had said that of a certain vapor or exaltation that is
whot and dry kindled in the high air be made both certain other
speculations, as beams, Goats, blasyng stars, and also that which is called
Thlora, that is a flame or burning: and he says if that vapor be kindled and
shut forth it self wide and broad, it seems oftentimes to burn like a flame
as straw when it is kyndled in the field. etc. Of vapors truly (by the
opinion of the said Philopher) which be seen in ye high air in the clear
nights, some in deed burn and that long time, as blasyng stars: some a
short time, as flames torches, goats, shutyng stars. Some other appear to
be somewhat that they be not and they may properly be called horrible syghtes:
as clouds somewh^^ clear of color, but chiefelye red of color and purple or
bloody: for other colors can scantly appear, namely such as arise by ye
reflection of beams or such as by co^mixion be white and fiery. Likewise such as
be called gapings or pi^res. etc. And there be also which think that there be
such colors in deed. And it may be thought that sometime bloodye clouds be in
deed and sometime do apeare so. For we have red often that there has rained
blood and sometime that it only appears so, by the reflection of the light.
Truly it is not to be douted but that both there be and also appears or seems
a bloody color of burning in ye night and of flames, chiefly seeing the flame
or the inflamed matter and substance so thick. And perchance more in the
winter when vapors to be inflamed or in deed in flames break out of the earth
go up, by an air that is cold and moist and gross, even as of a grene peace
of wood the flames appear to be more red. Per^duenture some being persuaded
by these philosophical reasons, will thynk this our wondrous or strange token
(or bloodye color or fire they will name it rather a flame or celesti all
burning) vttterly to be a natural thing, and such as the causes thereof may
be sufficientlye gathered out of the very bosom of nature: and to betoken
nothing else but peradventure some natural effect: as some mutation of the air
and of the constitution and course of the year: or some pestilence at hand or
immediatlye following: among the signs of the which nature they learned are
wont to put fyry speculations, as gapynges, burnynges, comets, shuttyng
stars, and other things that by night may be perceyned in the air. For
although in this time of the winter vapors hoate and dry, and to be inflamed,
are not wont to break out of the earth: notwithstanding (he says) it is to be
thought that they being the longer shut in the earth with great frost, being
the more abundantly gathered together, break out at the length with more
violence when the ways be opened, and being raised upon high in the highest
air the heat being restrained by a repulsion and let, or else that that color
was made by the beams of the son then being near to the risyng being either
kindled or else only appearyng by reflixion and turning back again: and those
white furrows were beams of the Sun brought in that part only whereon the
substance of the vapors being gathered together was thin. For the beams of
the Sun appear much more in the high mountains then in the lower places.
Also as it is written in histories, this has also happened in other places.
And great burnings have appeared for many vapors were gathered being long
shut within the earth by the strength of cold, and chiefly in places of
mountains whose bellies and ways be for the most part full of such vapors.
These and such like things perchance me^ that are curious in philosophy, or
also utterly godless, as Epicure and such other covetous persons will put
forth, and so persuade us by this mean to fear nothing. The author Cicero
of divination (says) this only reason, by the opinion and testimony of the
expositors of monstrous things avails against all shows monsters and
wonders. If that which could never be done, be done, if it may not be to be
meruailed at. And so it to be no monstrous thing or wonder that may be done.
But it was some great strength which opened the shutting of the earth, by it it
may appear. Because that in some places about midnight an earthquake went
before: as certain watchmen did observe it at Surick, and certain other hard
the shaking of iron instruments and plats of glass, other saw gapyng in manner
of pittes, and the dai before the earth opened near unto Tubinga. So they do
judge that are endued with man's wisdom. But we out of the holy scriptures,
and out of the treasure of the eternal and divine wisdom, and out of the true
mouth of our lord, say that such wonders be sent from god, god doing it other
above nature, or contrary to nature, or else vsyng natural things to the
signifiyng of his will, we say and do believe it, also histories do witness, that
always great calamities have followed after such wonders.

Out of the book of Julius, of prodegies or wonders: made. 505. year after the
making of the city.
T. Gracco M. Inuentio Coss. among other wonders that he rehearses, says:
that the form of two Suns were seen in the day, the air burned there was
often lightnynge, storm and tempest.

P. Scipio Nasica Cn. Martio Coss. it is red, that the air in the night
burned, and much lightning fell.

P. Affrican and Lelio Coss. ryuers of blood flowed out of the earth, and in
the night ye air was seen to burn A star did burn by the space of two and
thyrtye days.

C. Cecilio Cn. Papyrio Coss. in the night the mount of Albane was seen to
burn, houses burnte with lightning and tokens out of heaven. The land of
Lucensis gaped abroad. In France the air was seen to burn. The Danes and
the Dutchmen passed the Alps, brake the league and made murder of the romans
and their fellows.

C. Lelio. L. Domitius Coss. among otherr prodigies or wonders which he
rehearses says: In Italy a burning torch appeared in the air, and all the
air was seen to burn.

L. Martio, S. Iulio Coss. in ye land of Anaria the earth opened and a flame
arose up, and did shene in the element. About the land of Rhegium, part of the
City that is toward the Sea was overthrown with an yearthquake.

Seneca in his first book of natural questions and. xv. chapter describes a
wonder or strange thing like unto ours.
Among the lightnings (says he) which the Greeks call Sela, may put that
fire that was in the air, and we have red it often times in histories, the
which burning was so high that sometimes it was seen among the stars, and
sometimes so low, that it seemed some fire a far of. A company of men of war
under Tiberius the emperor (being amassed when the air for the most part of
the night did burn) ran to Colone for succor, the fire not being clear
but gross and smokye. Of these lightenyngs no man douteth but they have a
flame which they show, it is a certain substance of them. But in the former
lightnings was a bow and a crown of some certain substance, but it pleased
us not. etc.

Out of the book of Polidor Virgill of wonders and strange things.
IN the year of our salvation. C. xii. a burning light in manner of a tower with
great bryghtnes was seen to fall out of the air: when Jerusalem was taken of
the Turks.

Wonders or strange things taken out of the rehearsal of M. Frytschy of Laubany.
IN the year of our Lord. M. C. xl. the air was seen to bourne oftentimes,
and many stars were seen to fall from out of the sky into the earht. Burning
lights, fyry darts, and flyinge fires, were often times seen in the air.
New stars were seen. Celestial fires arose mani wais. There was seen in the
air a brighte fire, a company of horsemen and footmen to fight together, and
cities, and swords, and bloody wapours, were also seen. etc.

In the year. M. C. and. xx. There was seen in the air bloody clouds, a
cross, and a white man. Even at yt time men thought a destruction should come
upon ye whole world. It is written in Chronicles, that such strange things do
signify civil wars.

Of those things which followed, you may read at length in ye Chronicles of
Boem, set forth by Auentyne in the leaf. D. C. xv.

In the year. M. CCC. lxxv. the air was seen to burn all night.

In the. M. D. L. three fyrye globes were seen in the air in ye night in Misnia
Lipsia, which certain students and famous men did behold.

The year M. D. L. I. the xxviii. day of January at Vlisbon in Portingal were
seen in the air bloody rods, and horrible fyres, and it rayned blood also.
Furthermore there was such an earthquake that two hundred houses were terriblie
shaken and thrown down in ye which shaking more then a thousand men perished.

The year. M. D. L. IIII. the first day of February at Cathalane a city of
France, after the musteringe of the host which the king of France had
commanded to be done in that place, a wonderful strange sight was seen about
the Moon. For a great fire arose from the East part, and went to the west.
And the Moon seemed in manner of a mighty great fire brande. The flame of this
fire raged with great noise, often castyng out blasyng sparks in the air,
none otherwise then when a smith beats upon hot iron: thus says Fritschius.
Aristotle names such fire a goat.

The answer of a godly learned friend unto the aforesaid lettter or Epistle.
THy letters. V. C. were given unto me with the book of wonders. For the which
your gentleness I give you most heartye thanks. At your departure you did
declare all things abundantly and very plainly. In the mean time I pray God
that for his mercy sake he will turn al things to ye best. For to stir you
up, I have added many things which you shall here read.

The signification of the strange wonder.
AS all men do confess with one mouth, this unaccustomed strange wonder to
signify some great evil to these countries: so I think ye causes of the said
evil, to be so near unto us, that it shall perse ye eyes and minds of all
men. And seeing for the most part the calamities of mankind be sermons of
repentance, although the common people through error do allege mani other
causes of evils notwtandyng this fire of ye air is an evident argument and
token of ye wrath of god, that without it be a few I think there is none so
foolyshe or so mad, which understands not that it is to come. We believe
verily that we shall not be cast out of bliss, because it seems that we shall be
so punyshed for our sins: because that the cross and adversity does bring
always more profit unto the church, then rest and slothfulness. Of this
comes the common Proverb.

The blood of the Martyrs waters the Garden of the Lord.

But although our enemies far excede us in all kind of evil, yet
notwtstanding we be not much inferior un to them. Superfluity is a profitable
instrument and occasion, you will say the most part of us do want it, not
superfluity. Religion also on our part is a little neglected and begins to
be gainful, no less truly then the Romans in time passed. For we shall find
but a few divines which will vouchsafe to seek poor Christ in the cotage and
stable. Many of them covet fat benefices, for the which they serve none
otherwise then they would serve for ye sacrifice of the altar. For that cause
is there so much hatred, so much privy backbiting which increases daily and
hourly more and more, yt there is none more divided the^ they, in who^ ought to
be most love and concord. These be the times which Eusebius sets forth in
the beginning of his his eyghte book upon ecclesiastical histories: who
desires any Dioclesian which may restore the weak me^bres unto their health
again.

God truly governs his church by fire, the which name is called in
scripture cross and persecution, which notwithstanding as I hope shall not be
long, no more then this monsterous fire was long, which lasted with us no
more then an hour, and that before day light. For the Psalmograffe compares
the furye of the ungodly like unto fire amongst the thorns, which makes a
fervent fire and when it appears to be most vehement, then soddenly it
falls and is turned into ashes.

But although this fire with his heat did in wrap the highest mountains,
therefore not only the base states but also the high monarchs shall come to
ruin: notwithstanding the stars which shone between, that is, the ministers
of the church shall not be put out of their seat: which setting the word of
god before their face, shall shine in dark night of persecution by the clear
light of the gospel until the day wished for ware bright, and the Sun of
righteousness shine upon me^. But one star was seen to fall from heaven, which
being drawn by ye fire did furrow in the midst. It is to be thought, that
one doctor or other, either for fear of the great threatnyng, or else being
drawn by hope of some promosion, shall be cast out of his degree. Therefore the
Lord is to be prayed unto, that he will defend us standing in the confession of
a sincere faith. For this cause it is good for all godly men to think that the
scourge of the lord is before their doors: whom notwithstanding they by the
mouyng of chances shall get, god only knows which rules the causes of all
things. We will only bring those things which be like the truth, and seem not
dissagreble from the word of God. For the word of the lord ought to be a
lantarne to our feet, and a light to our steps. By it we may learn better
ye cause of our adversities, then may be perceived by any such wonders, which
god sends commonly for the reprobate and stiff necked men, amongst whom
the word of God takes no place, that all their exscuses may be cut away.
Notwithstanding I do not deny that there be Sermons of repentance, which not
wythstandynge they that are destitut of the government of the word of god do
take never the latter. For we see ungodly and wicked men which being associat
with ye unbelieving Jews, require a sign from heaven, which if it apeare,
then with full voice they cry out, our sins require such wonders: but they
of the part of the evangelical doctrine, do bear these things patiently and
derive part from them selves to other, and every one that speaks of
repentance with the mouth, seldom does it in deed. The only Christians in who^
the light of the word of god shyneth knowledge their sins, and by the help
of god studieth to reform their life to a better state, whom in these present
calamities this one thing can comfort them, that they understand god by his
syngular grace to turn their deserved pains into martyrdom: through which
is caused that they also comfort themselves, in who^ is this gift of God, that
not only they believe in Christ, but also suffer for his name sake. For
although our sins be great, yet nothwythstandyng we shall not feel the
furye of the chief enemies of Christ, but for the sincere confession of the
faith, which we may declyne from if we will go from the doctrine of the
gospel. The almightye and great God for his divine grace, and singular aids
of the holy ghost, vouchsafe to keep us Amen.

The author answers again to this first epistle: and approves it,
notwythstandyng (says he) the stars which fell out of that fyrye wonder, I
had rather interpretate to signify the aduersarye of Christ with his, which
as hitherto have been counted as stars, and shall fall headlong out of heaven
as Lucifer did. etc. That is they shall fall from that usurped authority which
they now have, which the author of all wonders and effects grant. So be it.

Certain Eglogs taken out of diverse epistles of credible men, and certain
prynted books, prynted at Norynberghe and Vinaria, briefly set forth upon the
same wonder: so that it does agree with those epistles or letters set out
before, which were almost omitted.
THat mo^sterous fire was not seen at August, Vindelictoru^, nor near about it,
but it was seen not far from August: as about Neurza^, Landspergen, Norinberg,
and in the dukedom of Wirtenberge, in Belgicke, and also toward Hungarye,
within three days after Christenmas, but not in all these places on one day:
So that many of the neyghbors thought that it did burn, and ran to quench
it: and the fire falling from heaven in another place made them sore afraid:
This did a certain noble man write in his epistle or letter. We read in a
printed leaf that this fire was seen toward Eccelshemy, Frochhemy, and
Bamberge: likewise at Campodune and in many other places. And a credeble man
wrote unto us that it was seen in the region of Vlme and in Athesina: Likewise
at Lindauia, and in the monarchy of Bauaria, near unto August (notwtstandynge
it was not seen in the city of August) also toward Vienna, and about Anwarpe.
In the book printed at Vinaria, we read that this strange wonder was seen, the
air being clear and no clouds at all, so that it occupied ye fourth part of
the heaven with such brightness that one might easily see and perceive any
thing. For the fire was great broad and long (in manner as if some great city
had been wholly al of fire) disseuered with three white strakes or furrows of the
which the one part appeared of the color of blood tempered with some other
thing, and the other part was somewhat thicker, and the last part at the going
away of it, it was compassed about with a dark and thick cloud. Other said
that the white strakes were seen at the beginning with the fire, not being
very red about the midst, but a certain clearnes mixte with redness,
through which also the stars appeared. In some places warning was given by
ringyng of ye belles to quench the fire. The foresaid fire, as far as men
could judge, removed from the East unto the West: other write that it began
from the North in ^^aner of a cloud: and it seemed as it were castyng flames of
fire from it like unto stars. At the first it was seen three days and a
half, at the lest an hour and a half before day, it lasted about an hour
and an half, and vanished away almost an hour before dai. Out of letters
written from Constance to us. The next day after Childermas day in the air
were seen certain great and long spears: two crosses the one of them was
white, what the other was it is not showed, and a rod was seen in the air in
manner of red blood, so that some were ready to cry fire. Certain fishermen
that were on the river about two of the clock after midnight did see this
great and bright monstrous thing which continued until six a clock, but
toward Turgauia and Heluitia was seen a star with five several beams
which were about three yards long, and in other places it seemed in manner of a
Hunters staff.

The report goes, that about Roteuilla a certain heat was heard in the
air, even as it had been liquor boylynge in a pot, the which by and by went
down into the next hill, and there within a while after it made the same
noise in the earth that it did before in the air. And as the letters do
testify, which were sent from Memminga.

On Childermas day between five and six of the clock in the morning, moore
then the space of an whole hour, was seen in the air a great and an
unaccustomed rednes, toward the north: in manner like un to the fashion of an
hemicycle and then it removed somewhat toward the Southe, and bare before it
the lykenes of burning fire, by reason whereof in certain villages the bells
were ronge to give warning, to help to quench it.

In another part of this rednes appeared white forrowes: the which by and by
went out of sight like unto red firye flames, so that they were seen shynyng by
reason of the brightness of the flame.

Another part of it was discolored and al red in manner of blood, and terrible
of sight. The air at first was not perceived, and through this rednes the
stars were seen to cast out their beams. A man that watched in a tower at
Suricke, said that about midnight he felt an earthquake.

And a certain crafts man which was a glasier marueyled at the sodden sha kings
of the glass in ye night, where of I marvel that it was noted of none other,
nor seen any where else that we can hear. Out of another epistle written by
a certain learned man. This wonder of the fire in the air was not seen at
Berne, but in ye field there were many that saw it. I hear of nothing that
was seen beyond Berne toward France, nor at Friburge, nor at Lausanne. They
do show of a certain monsterous thing seen in the field of Berne there
appeared a fyry globe in the which a bear and a lion seemed to fight
together. In the dominion of Gruenensis they write that a globe of fire did
fly so nere a vyllage, that a husband man was a frayed of the burning of his
house, because the fire was seen so near unto the top of the house. These
things I write by report to satisfy your request until I know them more
certainly. Thus said he.

Another writes that in the field of Berne was seen another wonder of an
host of men fyghtyng together but the author I know not.

Also after this foresaid wonder of fire that was seen in the air, that is
the thyrty day of December, which was the last year. M. D. LX. at eight a
clock before none, there was seen a fire to arise about Bade of Heluetia with
a great thick cloud. And when the husband men of Regenspurge (which* town
is in ye field of Surick) saw it they ran together being ready to quench it: by
and by it vanished away, so that it was not perceived whether any fire had been
in that place or no. Not withstandyng, this also may be thought to be a
certain wonder.

The interpretation of the strange wonder, set forth by the author, written un
to a friend of his dvvellvng in Vindelick a country of Germany.
I Give you most hearty thanks, that you do part amongst us your
interpretation upon that fearful and monsterous syghte, which you did not
only se in the air at Heluetia and Ranie, but at Algea and thorough out all
Sueuia, except at Auspurge, in which no man, no not the watch men, did see
any thing that day, when not withstandyng it was seen two or three mile of, and
the good neighbors there thought Auspurge did burn, and they did lamentablye
behold the dukedom of Wirtenberg Franconia and Thuringa, at the same hour and
moment when ye did se it. I have no natural philosphie that thereby I might
conjecture it to com, for in such a dead and cold time there could not happen
such vapors nor such exhalations, that might cause such fire to appear every
where: nor yet was the cause of the earthquake known among you, seeing it was
heard to be no where else. Therefore I come to your interpretacion: and I hope
that Christ will come shortly and revenge his word* and judge the world by
fire: without you had rather thus to expound it, that in all places where this
fire was seen, the fire of ye gospel shall so purely cleanse the people that all
sparks and ashes shall be blown quite away. But at Bauar and Austria where this
fire did not appear, they shall peryshe in darkness, except God be
merciful unto them.

Of certain other strange tokens and wonders.
THe day before the fire was seen in the air, that is the seven and twenty day
of December, in the end of the year. M. D. LX. between the town of Tubinga
and the duke dome of Wirtenberge and the village of Iesingam, which is two
miles distant from Tubinga, soddenly in a certain field there appeared a
golfe which was sire and thirty foot deep, twenty foot broad. and about ye
earth no more then a common pit, round of compass, co^teinyng of depth in
water nine foot. Other spread false rumors abroad and say that it was of such
a depth that it could not be expressed. Also it is said, that it rained blood
about the same time in many places of Germanye.

The thirtene day of December, the year. M. D. LX. at Vienna and Austria,
there was an earthquake and a great tempest, and fearful lightenyng. Towers,
houses, and the Cathedral church of Saint Steven was burnte with lightenynge.
The air was seen burn a long time, as a certain noble man of Vindelicke in
his letters does witness unto us.

We know for a suertye that lately in France, when the king had assembled ye
head men of a citi together into his own presence: behold there appeared a
great comet over the city which continued as long as ye assembly endured: that
is. xxviii. days, in the year. M. D. LX. in the month of December.

Of wonders or strange things seen in the country of Pymont. Taken our of the
letters written to a certain prince in the year. 1560. in the month of
December.
AT Chirasyn a fire was seen in ye air which lasted three hours. At Trauilla
it rayned blood as many hours, that is to wit, three ho^ures. At Fosan were
seen as it were, three fyry cometes. In the plain next vn-Sentaly there
appeared a great number of horsemen in the air. At Caragnan there was seen an
earthquake which sounded like the wheles of a wagon. At Pinaroly was seen in
ye air the manner of a fyry linen cloth: and many other strange wonders were
seen in sundry other places.

Of the heavenly goat (for so Aristotle calls it) there was seen at
Cathaline, a notable town of France commonly called Cholos, in the year of
our lord. M. D. L. IIII. the syxte day of the month of March, between seven
and eight of the clock at after none, about the Moon a burning fire, in the
which was seen, as it had been the point of a spear, going from the East unto
ye West, and castyng out flames and fearful great burnynges. As Conrade
Lycosthenes writteth in his book of monsterous and strange wonders.

Of strange wonders and prodegious things, seen in the air in the beginning
of the year. 1556.
IN the beginning of the year of our Lord, a thousand, five hundred fiftye
and six: On a Sunday after Christenmas day about the evening tide, was seen
with us that dwell about Lauinga (as a certain contre man of ours writ in a
letter to a friend of his) a great lyghtnyng and it thundered erceadinglye, and
not far of from us, a house standing in a village was strycken with lyghtnyng
and burnte down.

And the air opened very wide and broad, and did belche out great and bright
flames of fire. The which tempest was about nine of the clock at night, many
of the people were wonderfully astonished and sore afraid in so much that many
of them were domme a long time after.

Out of another Epistle or letter of the same wonder: the same day at night in
Bohem, Silesia, and Misnia, there was a terrible tempest, and many men,
cattle, great towers and churches were stricken with lightnyng and perished
with fire. Also it rayned blood and fire. A town of Melnicca four miles
distant from Praga, all the ground of it was well nigh consumed with fire. The
church of our Lady at Praga was burnte with lightnyng: and the church of S.
Anne that is in the mount was like wise burned. Two Churches being about two
mile distant from Lipsia, were also burnt with lightning. And it rained blood
abundantly in ye same place: and two camelles were seen in the air devouring a
harnessed man.

In the same year. M. D. L. U^. the eleventh day of January, at August and
Vindelick toward the Alps, in the night the air opened, and burned for a
while most fearful to behold, and seemed to threaten to be the latter day. At
Miccenhusa in Bauaria, there was seen in ye night such brightness, that ye candle
light in Zeta waxed dark, and when the candles were put out, the brightness of
the air sufficed the^ for light, three hours space.

The same year of our lord a thousand five hundred and three score, the fyfth
day of September in the town of Marchia and Custerine, at nine a clock at
after noone. Innumerable flames of fire did shine on every side in the air with
great brightness. And in the mids of the element there appeared two fyry
beams. To conclude, as I read moreover, in an unknown author, a voice was
heard which said woe, woe, unto the church. Thus says James Fincelius,
writing of the wonders done in his time

Of certain vvonDERFVLL STRAVNGE visions and merueylous tokens.
Out of the Prolong of Ioachim Camerary of Pabe, in the Chronicle of
Nicephorus, translated by him into Latin and expounded, which book was printed
at Basil by John Oporinus.
AFter that I chaunsed to live in that time in the which the common wealth
hangs either in miserable ruin, either in pernicious alteracion, or else in
very vehement and troublesome affairs. Truly (good reader) I can not heartely
rejoice, nor inwardly be merye, with any riches or honor that is coueted or
desired in the publik weal. For I pray you what is done or attempted almost
in any place, that pertains not unto ye decay of ye common wealth? What
obstinacy is in men? What malice and hatred? What covetousness and gredy
gatheryng? What desire of reuengement? What ambitious lust to rule? Not
withstanding these things be covered, and do cloak them selves under most
honoste names, as constancy, magnanimity or baliaunt courage, severity, and
dignity or honor. And by the law of God and man, many are compelled to obei
their malice. Among these things nothing almost is done by deliberat
counsel, and neither is any pains taken in prouidyng and lokyng diligently to
things of importance, neither any chaungyng of sentence or any correction for
vice. All things be lawful to them that be in authority and are mighty.
Holy things are made unholy: publycke things are made private: peace is
turned into strife: so that there is no order set in things. Every state, and
degree, and condition, is given over to mocking and disdeyning. Deadly hatred is
exercised in every place: to the fulfilling of the which hatred help is sone
called from every side. They do practice cruelty and tyranny like unto the
brutishe Barbarians. The which being of them selves most silthye and vile, do
all things contrary to the laws and ordinances of the elders: the common
wealth which the good men left unto their posterity, among these, must of
necessity peryshe and utterly decay. But although the situation of the
stars, and many strange and monsterous things do foreshe we and warn us
of this: not wythstandyng the most evident tokens of the mutations of the
former causes, by the which may lawfully be taken most certain conjectures
of that which is to com. Which to declare in a few words shall not be (as I
think) disagreable to the matter. And the foretellings of astrologic, of the
moving of stars, of the eclipsis and conjunction of the Sun and moon and of
the flames of the comets, be almost known unto every man: other wonders also
for their oftenes do the less move men's minds. But what visions have been
seen as well by the that waked as them that slept (enter pretated by sothsaiers)
it were to long to declare or rather infinite.

One thing I do remember well, (if a man may lawfully speak on this fashion)
I did se in my dream one holy and heavenly likeness or picture. A certain good
and godly man did see with in these few years in a vision (as it seemed unto
him) a great army of men did skermishe and fight together, and were ready
with their weapons in their hands to fire villags, towns, and cities, and to
waste and destroy the fields: many men fell down: yet not wythstandyng it
could not be perceived who had the victory Also this battle was so intermeddled
that it could not clearly be seen of whom it was done nor against whom. In
one place also he beheld, and saw five wrytynges or scriptures, of five
distinct and chaungeable colors, in ye which was showed diverse names and
diverse sentences, which were seen in ye air after this manner.

Black for the Jews, and Moses law. White for the Christians and only faith
of Christ. Yelowe of the pardons of the bishop of Rome. Red for the Turks,
Saracenes, Mahometh the messanger of only God. Yelowishe, for the works and
liberties of the Anabaptists. What these things do signify can not be hyd to
any man that will study to know what shall happen within these few years, and
what is now done.

About the same time, the manner of a long historye was seen in the clouds:
which afterward was set forth in a picture, drawn out and published at
Belgicke, in this manner hereafter following.

There appeared an armed man on horseback with a spear charged in his hand,
and ready for to run a course. And besides this, was seen the likeness of
the Emperor Charles the fyfth, with a crown upon his head: and near unto it
a hogs snoute, somewhat higher there was seen two Lions rampynge and leaping
against three other Lions: and a little beneth them, two great Dragons spuyng out
flames of fire.

And after this was seen great armies of men of war, as well by sea as by
land, and every where was cruel burning of towns and castles and villages.
And there was also seen in the air a Pecocke without feet having no wings:
and near unto him there was a Dragon. Also in the same place was an Egle
having the greatest part of him hyd behind a bank: and about the bank was
a little Egle. Likewise was seen a Lion crowned lying on his back, who^ a Cock
did strycke on the throat. After this there were gathered together many and
diverse beasts, with horrible forms and shapes: and all monsterous beasts,
except the wild Unicorn which the Greeks do call Monoceros and a very fair
and great huge Elephant. By and by another army of men appeared again burning
and destroying: and a Cock defendyng him self against a Lion whose head was
seemed to be cut of.

And last of all, there was seen a great lake, in the which were drowned (as
they do declare) towns, and great Churches, their steples being seen to
appear above the water: and a Camel was seen alone upon the bancke, with his
head in yt lake drinking. Wonderful many flaming Dragons were seen,
breathynge out flames of fire and much venym every where.

Unto me truly these things seem not impossible to chance, specially and
chiefly to those people which do trouble and molest the world in this our
age, with great vexations and sore afflictions.

Furthermore, it is declared unto us, that this year there are very many
monsterous byrthes, both of mankind, and also of many and diverse other kinds
of beasts.

Among the which, was the notable great Monkecalfe (that is a call like a
Monk) and before him an Ass, a man, and a fish, of mixed forms and diverse
shapes. And after that there came forth another monster which was a fyshe like
a Monk.

For in the bowels of the man was found iron (as we have often times proved it
true) what does that signify but inward commocion or civil hatred or stryffe?

Therefore these things showing them selves so often times, and so wonderful,
verelye we ought to understand and to think, that the moving and workyng of
nature is wrasted out of frame, and the state and condition of men to be
turned out of course, and that the effects of nature being weak and sick
may no longer continue nor endure: for even as monsterous byrthes do not live
long, so likewise the degenerate and monsterous state of this corrupt world
shall not last long.

As I do remember (and as I said before to certain men which told me, that
a maid at Rhenie lived without meat and drink) I did tell the^ how that she
could not live long nor continue without food: as if one should say, it were
a wonderful and a merueylous thing to be done, if that common wealth should
not decay and peryshe, where the rulers (which ought only to norishe and to
uphold the same) either be not able to govern it, or else be far absent
and a great way from it.

But we see most manifest signs and evident tokens of forewarnyng.

For as by the rysyng and the going down of the Sun, we know the coming of
the day and the night. So in like manner I do suppose, that after the breakyng
up and dissoluynge of the law and discipline of the christian common wealth,
some great fall and destruction must of necessity follow, and after like sort
we may conjecture other ieoperdyes and dangers for to come.

To God be all honor and glory, for these and all other his wonderful works,
declared and showed unto us. So be it.
PSALM. 19. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the fyrmament shows
the work of his hand.
Imprynted at London by Roulande Hall dvvellynge in Goldynge Lane at the sign
of the three arrows. 1561.


