The 4. of October: 1622.

A TRVE RELATION OF THE AFFAIRS of Europe, especially, France, Flanders, and
the Palatinate. Whereby you may see the present estate of her Provinces, and
conjecture what these troubles and wars may produce.

TOGETHER WITH A SECOND overthrow given the French Kings forces at Mompelier,
by those of the Protestant League, wherein were slain a great number of the
KINGS Army.

Last of all.

The remove of the famous siedge before Bergen, upon the 22. of September last,
with the retreat of Spinola to Antwerp, as taking advantage of the time, and
not able to continue, for fear of utter dissipation.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, and Nicholas Bourne. 1622.

A TRVE RELATION OF ALL THE Affairs of Europe, especially the business of
France, Flanders, and the Palatinate, wherein you may see what is now acted for
the present, and conjecture, what these Wars and troubles may in time produce.
From Naples.
I Begin with Naples, because as near as I can I will come orderly forward
with the Provinces as they lie, and in regard the several Letters bear not
one date, I have thought good to Muster the News, which belongs to the same
place, as it were into one Army, and so you shall receive the occurrences all
together.

From hence they write, that the Catholic Majesty understanding of the
pacification of the troubles in this Kingdom, and accustomed to perform all
the duties of a noble Prince in gratifying, or at least recompencing the
services of his worthy Captains, Governors, and Soldiers, has granted an
annual pension of sixty thousand crowns to Aadiuta de Cista Duke of Brattana,
and a present disbursement of a 100000. crowns, both for money laid out for
the provision of corn in the time of famine, and disbursed to soldiers in the
tumults of that Commonwealth.

Secondly, that there are certain directions for the leuying of two thousand
men at his Majesty's charge of Spain to pass into the Valtoline.

Thirdly, that diverse soldiers were leuyed about Otronto and Brindisi in
Apulta, but the Venetians would not let them pass over the gulf to land
either in Dalmatia or Histria.

Fourthly, that the Popes Nuntio arriving in Spain aduercised the Conclaue of
his welcome and entertainment, writing withal, that the Catholic King had
declared himself concerning the Valtolina, and indeed the whole country of
the Grizons, that what he had gotten he would defend and keep to the uttermost
of his power, as minding to incorporate it to the Duchy of Milcaine, and what
was to be got he challenged, as formerly forfeited to the Duke de Osanne; to
whom the whole country was morgaged for 200000 crowns lent unto them, when
they first enterprised the war against those of the religion.

Fifthly, and last of all, that the noble men of Naples are more strictly looked
unto for going at their pleasure into the country, or maintaining greater
guards and attendants, then the Viceroy has limited them.

From Rome.
The Letters of Rome have likewise several dates, but after the ouerlooking,
afford us thus much.

First, that the Pope has created four Cardinals, two of Spain, one of
Italy, and one of Poland, who has commission to determine the controversies
between the Jesuits and the Nobility.

2 That the Duchess of Peteliano is deceased, being the Popes Niece.

3 That there is a Nuntio sent to the Emperor for the release and delivery of
the Cardinal of Steall taken at Peang and now prisoner in the Aponte, the
agreement is, that the Emperor is contented with the Popes mediation, and his
Holiness will examine the cause, and so punish him, if he have been a
delinquent in the matter accused of against his Imperial Majesty.

4 That there are certain letters writ from Naples unto his Holiness, about
the dangerous sickness of the Duchess of Montelione, who is very
importunate for the prayers of the Church and the Popes blessing.

5 That by reason of the want of corn in Naples, there was a great imposition
on all the Popes territories, and they that could not spare their grain, were
contented to disburse their money: so that at last Arnigo Antonio Captain of
the foot did convey much corn to Abruzza, for the relief of that City, and
country.

6 That the solemnity of the Exequies of the Duke of Parma were celebrated,
and the Cardinal Pernese sent thither to remain with the widow Duchess for
the establishing of her estate* who so ordered the matter, that the Nobility,
Officers, and better sort remained in their places, but many inferiors were
altered and discharged.

7 That the Bishop of Cortona in Tuscane was dead, whose revenues was a
thousand five hundred crowns a year, out of which the Pope challenged diverse
arrerages, and other duties belonging to the Conclaue of Cardinals.

8 That Count Robert Sherley Ambassador for the King of Persia had
particularly visited the Cardinals, and was on the day of Saint Rouo to pass
to the seven Churches, where were showed him the relics and treasure; which
solemnity finished, he took his leave and departed toward Persia.

9 That the Duke of Montileone remaining in Spain desired to be dismissed from
the Court, and that there was expected in his place Monsieur de Massimi as a
new Apostolical Nuntio.

10 That his Holiness went in procession to the Basilica of Sancta Maria to
celebrate the feast of the Ascension of the blessed Virgin, and while he
remained in the Chapel, he created the Cardinal Melino with the dowry of the
Chapel, and so when he had confirmed the company of Consalone, returned home.

But the day after the festival of Saint Rouo great pastime was on the water,
like the Regatius of Venice, with painted Boats, diverse sorts of Music
warlike instruments, gilded Galleys, with Streamers and Penons, and, the
Gentlemen well appointed.

11 Last of all, that presently followed the death of Monsieur Marcabrow, which
a little rebated this iollitie.

From Venice.
Because commonly our Post lettters of Italy come from Venice, or at least
those of Venice make mention of the affairs of the petty Provinces, especially
Millaine: I have therefore thought it convenient to put in the Items of Italian
affairs into this section of Venice, and so make up as it were one bundle in
this matter.

First, that it is written from Millaine, that the Duke de Feria, Leopoldus of
Austria, and the Switzers have agreed upon a treaty of peace, and appointed a
place of meeting at Loudray, the better to accommodate the company, which must
needs be very great, considering there is expectation of several Embossadours
from France, Venice, the Archduke Leopoldus, the the Duke of Feria, the Cantons
of Switzerland, and the Grizons, who shall be commissioned to treat of
conditions between Millaine and them: notwithstanding the expectation of this
fair weather, every day almost has had his interposition of clouds, and
warlicke preparations: for there is nothing but killing, and intercepting of
passages among the Grizons, and preparing of soldiers in Switzerland, so that
they have still an army on foot of seven thousand, as resolved to defend their
country against the usurpation of strangers, whosoever.

Secondly, That though the Archduke Leopold be gone himself to recover his
Towns in Alsatia; yet have his soldiers forraged the Alps, and the Valleys
of the Grisons, as far as Tiroll, with the taking of 500 Head of Cattle, and
still and still increases his Forces, as if he meant to subiugate that
Country wholly to the use of the Spaniard.

Thirdly, That for all this fair show of Pacification, they write from Venice,
That the Spaniard will have no Peace, but are resolved to continue the War,
till either by force they make their own way, or by composition free the
Country, that his Armies may pass from Millan into Germany, without
interception.

Fourthly, That whereas there was a payment of 25000 Crowns yearly disbursed
to the Valtolina, the Governor of Millan has denied the same, and stopped it
in his Chamber of Accounts, by directions from Spain; and therefore they
suppose those propositions of Peace to be in vain, considering there is an
Army mustring in Millan.

Fifthly, That Monsieur di Sugli coming post from France with six Horses, and
some carriages of Spain, was surprised by the Huguenots near unto Molins, and
all his Money and Carriages rifled, he himself hardly escaping; the Country
being every where in an Uproar, and the people in Arms.

Sixthly, That there came from Vienna by the way of Millan, to return into
Spain, the Count Rambuldo Collulto, and that the Master of the Camp, Giou.
Tornazo Carrauich^, coming from Naples to go to Madrid, was requested by the
Duke of Feria to be (as it were) a Remembrancer to his Catholic Majesty, that
a new Army were sent to Millan, either under his command, or some other worthy
Captains, as his Ambassador should give directions.

Seventhly, That there was newly arrived from Spain Doctor Peribelto, to go
as Commissioner into the Valtoline, well rewarded with a chain of 1000
Crowns, and better furnished with sufficient Treasure, to defray his charges,
and an annual pension for the honor of his place.

Eighthly, That the Diet, which was once appointed to be held for the Switzers
and Grisons in their own Country, shall now be kept in Lindo, belonging to
the French King, whither Leopoldus will come in person, and means, as it
should seem, to stand upon higher terms, then in former times.

Ninthly, That one of the Gentlemen of Venice, named Illustrissimo Gironimo
Lando, having bin their Ambassador, was on a Sabbath day made a Knight of Saint
Marks, and admitted into the College of Ten, being well gratified with a
sufficient recompense of Zecchinos.

10. That in the Church of Sancta Maria, two young Turks were baptized, who had
brought to Venice great store of Treasure, and diverse Jewels.

11. That the Letters of Bollogna assure us, that among other prisoners, there
were taken certain unruly persons, who had in a riotous night spoiled the
Image of our Lady, and disrobed other Saints; but after great search, they were
found, and are likely to endure severe punishment.

12. That on a Tuesday in September, in the Piazz^ of S. Marks in Venice,
there was a publication of the Banishment of La illustrissima Signora Bianca,
sister to the illustrious Almenio Balli, for poisoning her Husband
Illustrissimo Gironimo Seranco; and whosoever could bring in her Head, should
have 2000 Livers: her Goods were publicly sold, her Vecchia bandited, and a
servant of trust proscribed.

13. That in the open Marketplace of S. Marks, one Antonio Strauariol did
deadly wound in the head Giacomo Lauoradi, a Musician of S. Marks Church: for
which he fled, and is not yet taken.

From Vienna.
You see what Method I have used, to draw the account of Europes* Business by
Items, which I am persuaded is not unpleasing, and therefore I will continue
the same: For breuities sake, and to avoid discoursing, know then, that the
Letters from Vienna contain these particulars.

First, That the Emperor and Empress are returned from the Diet of Hungary,
which was determined and ended to the applause of the Hungarians, and
contentment of the Prince of Transyluania: For it was concluded, that all their
Fortresses and Holds on their Confines, should be natural Hungars, and no
strangers; and that the Emperor should presently send to the solemn Meeting
at Ratisbone, where all the great Lords and Princes of Germany have appointed
an Assembly, for the setting upright the staggering affairs of the
Commonwealth, and rectifying the disorders of the Empire.

2 That Bethlem Gabor had entertained some suspicion against his Subjects,
because they repined at his impositions, and had bin hurried out to unnecessary
and unprofitable Wars, as having spent three years to no purpose. 3 That Ill
Signeur Don Pietro Aldabrandino had dismissed all his foot Soldiers, but
retained his Horse, with which he resolved to pass into the Valtolina against
the Grizons. 4 That there was a whispering of an innovation in Transiluania, by
reason Bethlem Gabors Brother had Mustred an Army of 30000. as if he meant to
usurp some of his Provinces from him. 5 That there is a Bashaw sent from the
new Emperor Mustapha in Constantinople with 300. Horse well accompanied both
to renew the League, which has formerly kept these Princes in good order, and
to afford an account of the insolency of the tumultuous Ianizaries in rising
against their Lord, which have been severely punished, and seem strangely
penitent, as wondering at their own handiworke: but now all is quiet, and the
Sacra Porta stands open, as in times past, yea the two young Brothers of Osman
are not Imprisoned in the 7. Towers, but only well tutored, and guarded as it
becomes such great Princes. 6 That about the 10. of September, the Empress
after her return and Coronation in Hungary to Vienna, did solemnize a
sumptuous Mask, in which her greatest Ladies were Actors, and to which the
Noble Princes, Ambassadors and many Strangers were invited. 7 That mong others,
after great intercession, the Count Hollocke has made his peace with his
Imperial Majesty, but upon very hard Conditions as it chances in all thriuing
business, where the dejected must be at the will and pleasure of the Conqueror,
8 Last of all, that the Bashawes of Buda and Belgrade, have had an Army in
readiness of 40000. ever since that mischievous attempt upon the person of the
great Turk, as suspecting some furions innovation by their own mutinous
Soldiers, or watching an opportunity to encroch further into Hungary, but of of
that there is little fear, because there wants a sufficient Majesty to
Command and control them.

From Prague.
They write from hence. 1 That those of Clerenbergh came to Composition with
his Imperial Majesty's Army, and had promise to depart like Soldiers with
their Amor and provision, but they were no sooner out of their Trenches and
fastnes, but they were taken and carried Prisoners to Prague, both the Captain
and the Company, contrary to the faith proposed, and the conditions of their
Promise. 2 That the Emperors Soldiers returning from Hungary, Morauia, and
Silesia, were so tattered, torn, and in a manner out of countenance, when they
came to civil places, that he was compelled to take order for their new
Arming and apparelling, disbursing great sums amongst them for their further
satisfaction. 3 That the Emperor had new preferred Il Signeur Sluuato to the
Government of Morauia, who presently advertised his Majesty of the resolution
of Glatz, which was, to hold it out to see the uttermost, though no succor
came to them at all. 4 That hither came certain Letters out of Poland, whose
originals belike were sent to his Imperial Majesty, containing thus much; that
by the wisdom of the Bashaw of Aleppo, a man of great years and greater
wealth, now the principal Viceer, the Government of the Turkish Empire was
cast as it were in a new molde: For having wisely settled a general Peace with
foreign Princes, and iudiciously confirmed the government of the several
Bashawes, he by little and little got the vpperhand of the Ianizaries, and did
so tractate with the Chawse and Spahies that in one place or other he put
2000. Ianizaries to Death: For after he had pollitickly proclaimed them all
Trators, that were consenting to the Death of Osman, and as pollitickly
promised great rewards to the discouerers of these mutinous Soldiers, many
were detected, and as many Executed: yea such was the mischief, that even
powered down a tempest of destruction upon their heads, that their very Wives
(a custom newly begun amongst them to marry) did detect them to the
Magistrate, wherein sure the Judgment of God was seen to punish such
audacious impiety in any one, that durst boast they had laid violent hands on
a Prince. 5 That there is newly come from Tabor 6. pieces of Ordnance, and 200.
Soldiers: from Morauia 800. from Silesia 800. from Saxony 1000. with 12.
pieces of Cannon more, who are presently to be sent to the siedge and battery
of Glatz, which is now the only Town of same, that holds out against this
Imperial Majesty. 6 That in the Town of Glatz is the Count de Thorn, and in
the Fields abroad the Marquise Ieggensdorp, and the old Count Thorn, who
keeps as it were a running Army, whereupon the Father understanding what
danger his Son must needs be in, if the Emperor proceeded so violently
against the Town, caused 2000. Foot and 500. Horse of Crabuts to be put into
the same, for the better defending the place, and opposing their Enemies.

7 That the said Forces as they were Marching, encountered with many of the
Emperors Soldiers, who were coming to the Siedge, and not only defeated
them, but rifled their Carriages, which when the young Count Thorn understood,
he presently made a Salley with 200. Horse and 1500. Foot only, wherein he
so prevailed, that that Quarter of the Emperors Army was dispersed, and the
Cannon clogged, and so they returned with some booty and a great deal of
honor.

From the Palatinate.
These Letters come from Franckfort and certify thus much, that the rumor
after the taking of Heidelburgh of putting all to the Sword, is not true: For
the 300. English and Scots, that were in the Town had safe conduct to pass to
Franckfort, where my Lord of Belfast was, and so by his directions either to
go into England, or disperce themselves, as they could to other places, only
they might not return to Mainhem, nor Franckendale, for fear of further
trouble or resistance, if these places were so supplied: That since the taking
of Heidelburgh, Leopoldus and Tilley have by a Counsel of War, resolved to
make an end of the troubles in this Province, by surprising or enforcing the
rest of the Towns, yet for a time they desisted from the siedge of
Franckendale, and set themselves down before Mainhem, as casting up this
account, that if they could any way prevail here, the lesser would be more
easily obtained either by surrender, or composition: When they were thus
resolved, they marched forward with 12000. foot and 500. horse, which when
General Vere understood, and saw plainly that mischiefs now followed one
another, as the waves of the Sea, seeing he had endured so much to his
eternal fame and memory, he would sure put up the rest in the account of his
Honor, and bear all with patience whatsoever might chance: whereupon he sends
for two Companies from Frankendale, to add some little strength to the
business, which made up 8. Companies of English, besides 4000. Dutch and other
Strangers, with whom he is determined to preserve the place to the last man,
as long as any provision or supply will last, unless he shall receive further
directions to the contrary form England. But before Mainhem was thus
affrighted, Leopoldus and Tilly put in stronger Garrisons into Worms and
Spiers, for fear of new reuolts and hurliburlies: for they saw plainly, that
the people bare a great good will to the Palatine, and would with all
conueniency attend the restitution, and return of their first Lord.

Bauaria on the other side was not so confident of his security, but that he
fortified his own Towns, putting certain Cannons into Mriken, which he had
taken from Amberg, and were once the Switzers, called the man and the woman,
being Pieces of principal account: but when he had salued this sore of the
diffidence of his own Country and people, he sent the rest of his forces to
Tilly and Leopoldus, who were now marched from Heidelberg by Spiers to take in
the Castle of Magdenburg which yet held out with diverse other against them,
which when they perceived, and that they should be as much troubled with
matters of less importance as the greater, they left that course and returned
(as you have heard) toward Mainhem, where they resolve to continue, until the
affairs in the Palatinate be cast in a new molde, or the Country settled to
quiet: but here I cannot but remember a saying of Stephens King of Poland:
Kings may commanud bodies and lives, but not hearts and consciences: so may
some other Prince presume on the Emperors Donation of this Province, but the
Inhabitants will ever love their own Prince, and burst out (no question) upon
any occasion of revolt or alteration: which the Archduke Leopoldus and Bauaria
knows too well; and therefore, whereas report has been lavish, concerning
Tillies descending into Brabant: believe it, he cannot second their
expectation: For Bauaria will not spare him, nor Leopoldus consent to his
dimission, considering the Countries are still grudging and repining, and they
must detain them within obedience by strong hand. Besides: the Winter
approaches, and the Germans expect some rest after their great toil, being
ever as much encumbred with a long march, as with a furious skirmish. Therefore
I conclude this point, there is no fear of Tillies coming into Brabant, or
joining with Spinola.

From Spain.
The Letters from Spain have great variety in them, and have written into
Italy concerning some things done in England; but because I will meddle with
nothing but justifiable actions, I will also tell you of nothing, but shall be
befitting for any auditory; the perticulars then may be thus welcomed.

First, that the business of the Valtoline supposed to raise a war and
disturbance in Italy, is ouerpassed, from the Kings resolution to have the
Country at his command: and whereas the French King by his Ambassador made
intercession for the appeasing of the troubles, especially that it would please
his Catholic Majesty to forbear their disturbance, and give way, that his
great Fort might be demolished according to a former treaty by his Ambassador
Monsieur Bassompier with Philip 3. it pleased his Catholic Majesty to answer
in this manner to the French Ambassador, that he should advertise his King by
Letters to appease the troubles of his own Kingdom, and seek the quietting
of those tumults, before he intermedled with other Princes affairs: and
therefore not to take further care, but leave the disposing of this war to
the Catholic Majesty and his Counsel.

Secondly, they write, that Don Pietro de Lieua being dead, the Duke of
Ferandina is made General of the Galleys of Spain. Don Diego Pimentelli
Commander of those of Naples and Don Octauio de Aragon, Governor of those of
Sicila.

Thirdly, that the Duke of Ossuna has the liberty of the prison, yet under
guard, so that his wife, children, and friends may come and see him.

Fourthly, that the Duke of Alua is created a Counselor of State, and shall
presently depart from Italy into Spain.

Fifthly, that the Prince of Ascoli has an augmentation of 500. crowns a
month, and is returning into Spain either from Naples or Millane.

Sixthly, that in Italy diverse Bishops and Lords were newly dead, by name
Monsieur Marcabrano, the Bishop of Torcona in Tuscane. Richardor Piauan the
Rector of St. Nicolay: the great Master of Ruuenna John Dominico Inquisitor
General of that City, of 77. years age, and continuing in that government
22. years.

Seventhly: Last of all, that in the midday in Venice of late arose so great a
tempest of wind with such horrible and fearful whistlings, that many Boats
were splitted and drowned, many trees overthrown, many men destroyed on the
water, and diverse other stupendeous mischies chanced, especially the hurrying
of the Priest of St. Vidal from the Port of the Palace to the pillar (or very
near) of Angelo di Angoli: so that he was carried home to his bed all bruised
and battered.

From France.
The Letters of France come from diverse places, as either the wars are
prosecuted, or the King in person visites the Provinces and Cities: as they
write from Lions, that the King took in all the Towns as he went round about
Montpelier, but when he came thither, it seemed as a damme to an inundation,
and so he was stopped a while, and enforced to tractate about conditions,
demanding 200000. Florins, and the raising of a Citadell for the commanding
of the Town, which being denied, though that Madame d'Agusta came under
hostages to capitulate the matter: the King much incensed, commanded a general
assault, wherein failing, he returned to Lions with great loss, and greater
coffeehouse.

From Rochell the Letters give us to understand, that the Count Soysons,
General of the Kings Army in those parts, consisting of above 6000. has lost
most part of the same this Summer, lying before it, without performing any
great piece of service against it: whereupon the King is enforced to raise a
new supply out of Poiters, Gascoine, and Angolesme, to the number of 6000.
more, who are already marched to maintain the said Camp, but they have
prevailed little or nothing: For the Rochellers pass and repasse to and fro at
pleasure, yea, day by day skirmish with them, killing thirty or forty at a
time, and taking diverse prisoners.

Besides, though as yet their approaches are far off, yet the Ordnance from
the Town, shooting at random, kill many of them in the fields, so that they
wonder, what the King means to do, that he proceeds not more orderly in the
business, then to come only with such a handful of men, and they to lie so
far off, without endamaging them. As for the blocking up their haven, or
intercepting their out-roades by Sea, true it is, that many Ships and Galleys
from Burdeux, Marselles, and other places, lie before their haven, to intercept
their passages, but to so little purpose, that the Ships of the Town have this
Summer taken above a hundred Barks and Ships, laden with Salt, Corn, and
other provision, so that Corn is better cheap in Rochel, then in any part of
France or England, yea, these Ships lie in harbor for want of men to manage
them, or Merchants to buy them, that they know not what use to put them unto,
except burning, unless their troubles end, or that they may certify the
Hollanders, what good penni-worth may be had in marchandizing for them, and
this they resolve to put in practice by public Proclamation in such Cities,
as they can conveniently send unto. Other Letters from hence assure us, that
they have of their own fourscore men of War, well provided, and manned, who
have at the least this four months given attendance on the Kings Armado, and
Galleys, but still they take the Sea and fly from them, as belike loath to
hazard themselves with resolute men, and desperate persons: but in truth, the
Galleys are not for these great Seas now Winter is approaching, and therefore
they are retired to Breast in Britain, and there determine, either to watch
for Subiss, as he comes home out of England, or take opportunity by her
hayry foretop to set upon the Town, or the haven at advantage, etc.

From Paris they write, that both the Queens are at Lions, whether the King
means to come and feast with them, for which purpose many Ambassadors repair
thither, and expect him daily, to whom at last, after great loss at Mompelier,
he comes: yet some say, he went to Auignion, sending an Ambassador to his
Holiness, to allow him that Town for his retyring unto, until he had either
expelled the Hugonits, or Heretics, according to the Jesuits phrase, or
compounded the War upon honorable conditions for his Greatness.

But notwithstanding these affrightings of his Country, and threatening his
people, while he was in Lions he left the Constable Desquiers with his whole
Army before Mompelier, and if need were, to go also to Montalbon, yea, he was
Commissioned, and had full power to treat with the Duke de Rohan about a Peace,
or fair conditions of atonement, so it might be effected to his Majesty's
honor, and the dignity of the Commonwealth: the place appointed was named
Arles in Prouence, whether it should be lawful for all the Commissioners to
resort under safe conduct, and the royal word of the most Christian King,
which concluded, he went to Auignion; but such is the chance of War, and the
condition of Princes themselves, to be subject to misfortunes, that while he
recided in those parts, Monsieur de Rohan, with the Garrison of Pismes,
Montalbon, and other Towns of the Religion, having united themselves, marched
a whole night, and came with such speediness, and courage to Mompelier, that
early in the morning they assaulted the Kings Army, and so continued fighting
till noone, which when they of the Town perceived, they made three several
Sallies at the several ports of the same, so that the Kings Army was set upon
both behind and before, and the success thriued so well, that a great
slaughter followed, and the whole Army was routed, so that if you would have
particulars, they say, there perished four thousand at the least, some
Ordnance surprised, six pieces of Cannon clogged* the Popes Nuncio and his
letters intercepted, and in a word, the whole Army much dissipated.

From Sedan the Letters certify thus much, that it is true, that Mansfeild
left most of his Carriages behind, and six Pieces of Cannon, yea, the Duke of
Bulloigne did also cast down the mount before the Town, but with no intent,
either to oppose his Majesty, maintain any rebellion, or support the
Protestants themselves in any violence against their King: but merely to stand
upon his guard, least such as durst inform against him, might also procure his
destruction by violent courses, and force of arms.

Besides, a Prince in distress, his kinsman, and a maintainer of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ was come, as it were, under his roof, and therefore the Law of
Hospitality, Religion, and honesty, tied him to observation, and took him
out a lesson of care and regard both to see himself, and defend him, if need
were against his enemies.

In this manner as they will have it, the Duke of Bulloigne justified himself,
and the King was contented to be pacified, and admit of the atonement, so
that like a Noble Prince indeed, this effect followed, that the Duke was
received into favor; that the King of Bohemia might pass and repasse at his
pleasure; that the Duke de Nauers made a Retreat with his Army, commanding the
chiefest to retire to their own houses, and sending the rest to attend the
King, where he should appoint.

From Provence, Delphinate, and those parts, they assure us, that the
Congregations of the Protestants met daily with the reformed Ministers, and
continued the exercises of fasting and prayer, for the good success of their
brethren, and sent one another reciprocal comforts, and gratifications, as
far as they could, or durst: yea, when they found dispersed Libells, and
inuectiues, as though their ruin were threatened by Massacres, or other ways
of circumventing, they sent them to the new Constable, and entreated him for
preuentio^, that although his honor was engaged to the Kings service, yet his
soul was in the hands of God, who would limit his actions to the sparing of
blood, and destroying of innocents.

To this they added certain points of justification, and discoueries of the
Jesuits doctrine, and cruel intents, to keep France in an uproar, and
combustion, not for the love of Religion, which was none at all: but for
political purposes, which time would bring to light. All which Lesdesquiers
showed to the King, and in such humble manner, that he took pleasure in his
conference, so that there is some hope, he will be more tractable, and look
upon dilacerated France, with the eyes of judgment and compassion.

From the Low Countries.
There are so many Letters from the several parts of the Low Countries, and so
much contradiction, as men on either side favor the cause, that I know not how
to satisfy the Reader: yet considering there is but one truth, and to be
honest in a plain enarration of the same, is allowable, therefore as near as
I can, I will relate, what is most probable and worthy of your acceptance.

Know then, that the East India Company of Amsterdam have taken a great Caricke
from the Portingalls, supposed worth a million of Crowns; for therein is much
gold, and rich Commodities, but neither the honor, nor profit of this exployt
does belong to them alone: for they had the help of the English, with whom
they seem now better to agree, then in times past. They are also building
diverse men of War, and almost in every Maritime Town of Holland, the
Ship-wrights are at work; For the States are resolved to man and set out
sundry Vessels, as well to watch Dunkirke, as defend Sluice; but of late Sluice
has better confidence, that the enemy will not attempt her expugnation.

From Brussels the Letters certify, that the Marquis Spinola, lying before
Bergen, resolved upon some Stratagem, as disappointed in the attempts, which he
had made by force, and several assaults, therefore he gathered together
diverse thousand loades of Casshes, or long Fagotts, either to dam up the River,
or to make some Mounts, whereby he might neighbor their Trenches, and so annoy
their Courts of guard, but as you shall hear, he failed in this likewise.

From the Hage, the last letters assure us of a Dutch man of War, to
encounter with a well laden vessel of Spain, going to Dunkirke with much
provision for the Army, but after a long fight, she was taken, and brought to
Amsterdam, from whence by turns, and in their several watches, diverse ships
took the narrow Seas, to attend their enemies, especially, the Dunkirkers,
amongst whom some three or four lighted upon a great ship, called one of the
twelve Apostles, and built in Dunkircke, who being now at sea, and lying at
advantage to catch the Hollanders, as they for them, was at last set upon by
them, and chased some five or six hours, even to the Coast of England: but
when she saw that her vnder-greatnesse as being five hundred tun, hindered her
from sailing, and that to fight it out, would return to her damage, and to
be taken, to her great dishonor: she first blew up her deckes, and so thought
to set her self on fire, which when the Hollanders perceived, they made have
to board her, and she made as much have to be delivered from them: but such
was the fortune of either, that she presently sunk before their faces, and so
that fight ended: But concerning the Land-businesse; after his Excellency was
resolved to do something, he mustred his whole Army; that is to say, his own,
Count Mansfields, and the Duke of Brunswicke, who was returned for all his
wound unto them again. By whom, and a Council of war, it was thus
determined; that if they did rise at all, that they would order the business in
this manner: To divide each Nation by themselves, and so the Germans, English,
Scots, French, Dutch, and Wallons, might march with their several colors, to
be distinguished apart: the gross sum, or if you will, the whole body of the
Army, consisting of eighteen thousand foot, and eight thousand horse, which
were also to be divided into two parts; five thousand horse, and eight thousand
foot to be left with Mansfield and Brunswicke, to remain on the North-side
of Bergen, where Spinola lay about Steen Bergen: the other three thousand
horse, and ten thousand foot, he would take with himself, and encamped
between Antwarp and Bergen, compassing in the Fort of Lillo with his trenches,
by which division of his Army, he determined to intercept all succors and
relief, as well of victual, as supply of men, which might come to Spinolas
Camp on either side. Likewise, he also provided three hundred Boats by water,
with four thousand Mariners, well armed, and of great experience: but what his
design is unknown; unless to watch the Scheld, a river coming from
Antwarpe, or terrify that town, which is not only afraid of a siedge, but
in a manner in an uproar, even murmuring against Spinola, for sending so many
hurt Captains, and Gentlemen, and dead bodies unto them to be buried: and when
they heard how many were buried, and unburied in the Camp, they lamented
outright, and complained much on that disastrous enterprise. But this
determination, as you shall hear, was not put in practice: For the States came
to Dort, and protracted this rising of the Prince of Orange, whereby Spinola
had time to prevent the mischief.

Mansfield and Brunswicke yet began their business very prosperously: for,
they supprised the Villages, where Spinola laid in his provision, whereby he
was much disppointed and appauled: then they came nearer and nearer to Bergen,
and put him as it were out of all hope of receiving any further supply: For
although Grave Henry Vanderbergh was on foot, and come down from Wesell with
6000. foot, and 1500. Horse, who lay about Horstrat, within ten miles of
Mansfield; yet there was great doubt of his weakness to do any good upon him,
or clear the passage, considering now he was so well appointed. But the truth
is, the Prince of Orange had left Grave Henry of Nassau in those Quarters, to
watch his proceedings, and to attend his progress, which way soever he took.
And in this perplexity stands the whole Country, and these Enemies continue
watching one another, as a Hawke houereth over her prey; so that nothing is to
be expected but blood and death, war and confusion, unless the God of mercy
either take pity upon them, or will have a punishment light upon some
offenders.

Besides all this, Count Ernestus of Nassau Gouer^or of Freesland for the
States, is come down to Emricke with 5000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, to intercept
the forwardness of the Baron of Hanow, who is marching with 4000 Cossackes,
and certain Dutch Horse, under the pay and entertainment of the Bishop of
Cullen. The Cossackes they will have those which the Duke of Bauaria either
spared or casheired in the Palatinate: but it should seem, they dare not
encounter with Ernestus, neither in skirmish nor battle. For as yet they only
run up and down spoiling and forraging the Country without any settled
resolution to assault the Enemy.

From Bergen.
THE last Letters were altogether about a Mine, or if you will, two Mines; the
one made out of the Raueling into Spinolas Camp, which blew up the mount, that
so annoyed their Courts of guard, to which was added (after the blow was past)
a salley from the town, wherein many of the contrary side were slain: the
other was attempted by Spinola himself against the town, wherein he had
labored above five weeks with excessive pains, and charges, they will have
it so great and effectual, that if it had taken, it would not only have given
him entrance into the Rauelings, but blown up a great part of the wall,
whereby it does appear, that they were almost in despair of taking the town
any other way then by a Stratagem, which is the last act of the Tragedy of
war, and does commonly bring with it all rerror and confusion: But the God of
mercy, who stays the rages of men, and withholds the fury of bloody
Soldiers, prevented this likewise; and it proved like Perillus Bull, to the
deviser; for they within Bergen, as cautelous, and every way as resolute as
themselves, countermined and stopped them as it were in the midst, before
they had placed any powder: only they had brought certain barrels to the mouth
of the Mine, which upon the alarm of the enemies being in the earth, were at
last by the hasty coming in of the Soldiers, set on fire, so that the blow
was so violent and impetuous, that in a moment it destroyed above 1200 persons
which was both lamentable and fearful for the time.

But see the misery of war, and the dangers and turmoiles this occupation is
accompanied with; no sooner was this smoke as it were ouerblowne, but they of
the town made a salley, and were so glorious in their forwardness even far
into the Camp, that besides the slaughter of many Soldiers, they killed 40.
principal officers, and commanders, amongst whom the brother of the Duke of
Ascot was shot in the cheeks, so that the bones were broken, and the bullet
made his way by sliding by, not killing him out right.

In this salley many of the Earl of Argiles, and the Lord Vaux his Regiment
were slain; but there was a commandment presently, that all should be kept
from the knowledge of the other side of the Camp, especially that they in
Antwerpe took no notice of the same, lest the Soldiers might be altogether
discoraged, and the town distracted, who were more and more in continual
fears: yet it ended not thus neither; for the great General Spinola was so
incensed with this disasterous chance, that he not only laid the blame of
the misfortune on the ignorance or hastiness of the principal enginer, but
presently commanded him to be hanged up, notvvithstanding he had performed his
endeavor, and had formerly been a well deseruer.

Now you must consider, that all this business and hurli-burly was done and
ouerpassed before the rumor was that the Prince of Orange raised himself, and
brought his armies to Spinolas quarters, or if you will, by way of
interception to lie bevveene them and such places, as were appointed to supply
the wants of the Camp.

But now that it was suspected that Mansfield was come and Brunswicke in the
field, the Soldiers incensed, and every one ready to play their part, Spinola
knew not what to say, or to do, considering the martial court dibated the
particulars of the business in this manner:

First, that whereas they expected the coming down of Mounseur Tilley out of
the Palatinate, the Letters came to Brussels to the contrary, that considering
they intended the siege of Manheim, and that many towns in the Bishopric of
Spiers and Worms, would not yield to Leopoldus, he could not be spared;
besides; the Germans were loath (winter coming on) to take so long a journey,
after their great toil, but cried out already for rest, and a Garrison.

Secondly, that the town of Antwerp, from whence they had their greatest
suppliment, was almost weary of the war, and began to find fault with the
enterprise, either that Spinola had ouerprized himself in a presumptuous
resolution to get the town, or undervalued the States, as weak and unable to
resist the forces; or was not well informed of the strength and situation of
the place.

Thirdly, that the slaughters were so great of his armies, and decay of his
soldiers, that although it might be passed over with the chance of war, and
malignity of circumstances, yet time would consume them more and more; and
which way could the wit of man invent how other Soldiers should come forward,
as their enemies lay to affront them.

Fourthly, that the wants of the Camp were intolerable, as enduring famine,
and cold, even to the eating of horses, yea many other inconveniences which
must needs be aggrauated and increased both with the time, and diverse other
circumstances, wherein they saw no prevension, as the case now stood.

Last of all, that if the States armies were raised, then would the Prince of
Orange lie on one side, and Count Mansfield on the other, who meant not to
fight with them but when they list, and then upon great advantage, but were
sure to consume them, and weary them out, or torment them with daily eruptions
and encombrances, and that without any manner of prevention.

All which considered, the Council thought it meet by one means or other to
raise the siege, and rather save the lives of so many brave men, who might in
some other project, and at some other time recover this loss, and reintegrate
their fortunes; then to endure a certain destruction, and irrecouerable
wretchedness; and although the Marquess Spinola objected, that his honor was
so far engaged, that he had rather perish in the misfortune, then endure the
indignity of being thus disappointed; yet they answered, necessity was a
commanding mistress, and there was no withstanding of Fate and Destiny, yea
there was judgment and reason in enduring some inconveniences, rather then a
mischief or assured destruction.

As for the honor he enterposed, what was it more to him, then to the former
Duke of Parma, who had raised his siege in the same place, after he had layen
there with 32000. men almost half a year: yea the great Turk went from
Vienna and Malta, disappointed; and diverse other Princes have been enforced to
cast up another account with the disposing of a higher power, then their own
presumptions at the beginning: whereupon when he saw there was no remedy,
he with much ado condiscended to their importunities, and so taking the
advantage of a dark night, raised his camp indeed very covertly, the
particulars you shall now know more at large.

THE MANNER OF The raising of the Siege of BERGEN
WHereas a little before, the Letters make mention, that his Excellency the
Prince of Orange, with Count Mansfield, the Duke of Brunswick, and their Forces
had a purpose to divide themselves and block up Spinola in his Trenches, and
as it were set down the manner of their marches, if they should ^ise indeed,
and how they would quarter themselves: the truth is, they did only capitulate
the matter, but not put it in execution, as either prevented by Spinola's
covert escape, or the advice of the States, who they say came to Dort for the
same purpose, and to whom his Excellency with some special Commanders resorted

But this was not so effectually done, but that Her Highness at Brussels had
notice of the same just in a manner at the same time as Letters came from
Bauaria, that Mounseur Tilly could not be spared out of the Palatinate:
Whereupon, when she considered the danger eminent and imminent, and in what
peril her whole Army stood, (besides the infinite inconveniences it was
subject unto, as you have heard) if the Prince of Orange should come one way
with his Forces, and Count Mansfield the Duke of Brunswicke another way with
their Armies, she very considerately advised the Marquisse Spinola, by speedy
messengers and several Letters to raise his siege, and follow the Law of
Nature, which teaches all her Creatures the means of preservation.

Whereupon, both this Imposition and the necessity of the business, with other
malignant circumstances, led him out of the wild fields of peremptorinesse and
presumption, into the orderly bounds of safety and security; so that he lay
in wait for an opportunity to pass quietly without interception; which (as
it should seem) he effected in this manner: When he perceived that his
Excellency did not rise, or was not ready, on Sunday our 22 of September he
made a fair show of his Army before the out-workes of the Town, both Horse
and Foot, yet somewhat more remote then he was accustomed when he determined
any Onset: whereby, as it appeared afterward, his whole camp was blinded from
the discovery of the Courts of Guard, and the Town, who prepared to defend
themselves, and thought upon nothing less then an escape.

This done, by twy-light his Cariages were ready, which still kept the left
hand of the march; within them went the Ordnance which he meant to convey with
the Army, and here attended the Pioners, the Camp-followers, and all such
unnecessary people, as belongs to such a business. When they were ready, and
the scoutes brought word the coast was clear; for all it seemed a windy and
duskish night, he seemed to welcome the opportunity, and set forward the
munition with great silence, and taciturnity, allowing them a sufficient conuoy
of horse, and the pioners convenient arms for their purpose: they marched very
near six hours before he stird, coming close by the wet ground, and drowned
land, on the east side of Bergen, where as they say they met with Gonzales de
Cordua, and that other part of his Army, which lay between Antwerp and
Bergen: Thus they go on, and before noone the next day came within six
English mile of Antwerp, having spent above eighteen hours in the travel.

By that time the Army was thus rid of her encumbrances, and all this while
heard not of an enemy, and that the great General conceived they had overgone
their affrightings between midnight and one a clock in the morning, the
horseboies and certain men appointed of purpose, set fire on all their
quarters, and burned those things which were left, which made so great a smoke
and smother for the time, that nothing was perceived till the Army was very
forward, and then the fire had ouergone the moisture, making all things
combustible, so that the flame showed the glory of her brightness, and the
neighbor places said apparently, he was departed: this was the light that
appeared in Zealand, so that the pinckes and passengers in the sea, without
searching further after particulars, only coniectured the siege was raised, and
so gave it forth accordingly.

To this, may be added, that of a hundred pieces of ordnance, he carried away
but 30, and what is become of the rest, time will discover, those which he
saved, are now brought to Antwerp: besides they say, that having many wounded
and diseased people, he provided for all manner of nations, but Scots and
English, whom he left to the fury of the fire, and terror of extremity, but
that some recovered and creeped as it were to the town, where they found a
sanctuary contrary to expectation, and the town heard strange things of them,
not to be believed in the report. Last of all they relate, he was not fully
18000 horse and foot: for having lost very near 10000 by one means or other,
it was a good account to bring his Items to such a reckoning; and thus much for
the rising of the Marquess Spinola before Bergen. The next thing (as I
suppose) will be the searches of his Camp place, the demolishing of his
mounts, and fortifications, the refreshing of the town, the repairing of the
decayed places, the watching of the Enemies actions, the mustering of new
forces, the providing of munition, and if the winter make much haste, the
Garisoning of soldiers on all sides; but as yet the eyes of jealousy are in
every corner, and therefore I believe they will be sure of Spinolaes settling
his Army, before the States remove theirs.

A true Relation of the cruel Execution done in Ommelberg, a Town in the
Bishopric of Mentz upon the persons of two Ministers, or Preachers of the
Gospel, by the instigation of the IESVITES.
Hereunto is annexed, in what manner Count Henry of Nassaw has taken about
VENLO in Gelderland, 400. Wagons laden with certain bags with Gold, besides
ammunition, victuals, and baggage, which were with a Conuoy going to the Camp
of Count Henry of the Bergh.
IT is manifestly known to all the world, that hatred, envy, and dissension
reign mightily now adays: The son is against the father, and the sister
against the brother, and in general we are so exasperated one against another,
that if we could drown one another in a spoone with water, we would not fetch
a paile, as partly appears by this present example. Johannes vander Veeck and
Lambertus Liber, being two Protestant Preachers, and having disputed against
certain Priests at Kruysganck, the Jesuits caused them to be apprehended, and
afterward most cruelly to be executed within the Town of Vmmelberg, the 30.
of August 1622. where the Hangman with red hot pinsers pulled the flesh from
their bones, (so that a heart made of stone would have taken compassion of
them) and put them to death with great martyrisation. But they have suffered it
patiently, as a sheep that is brought to the slaughterhouse. But three days
after the same, one of the Jesuits, called Pater or Father John, aged 96.
years, was taken about 12. a clock from his Table, and was never seen
afterward: wherein surely God had a hand. Therefore let us pray unto God that
he will not judge us according to our deserts, but grant us the everlasting
salvation.

COunt Henry of Nassaw being advised that a Conuoy was to be sent to Count
Henry Van de Berg, with 400. Wagons, which were laden with money, ammunition,
victuals, and other necessaries: He took with him 1000. musketeers and 5.
Cornet of horse, to wait upon them; and about Venlo he dispersed and slew the
same Conuoy, (whereof some retired to Venlo, Remunde, and Naseijcke) and took
the said Wagons with their loading aforesaid. We lost not above 12. men, which
were partly hurt and partly slain. Whereby we may see how miraculously God
works in our behalf, and to the preservation of our and the neighboring
Countries, to whom we are therefore bound to give thanks, and to mend our
sinful lives, leaving all pride and bitterness, so that we may live in peace
and amity, and receive Gods benediction and grace, avoiding the punishments
which ten thousand times we have deserved. Therefore let us pray the Almighty,
that he will forgive us our sins, and assist us with his mercy, that we may
once be delivered of all Tyrannies, and cruel Wars: Which God grant through
his infinite mercy. AMEN.

FINIS.

