Nouem. 22. Numb. 42.

The continuation of our weekly News, Containing these particulers following.

The warlike proceedins and good success of the French and their Confederates
in the Grisons and Valtoline.

The great Victories which the Hollanders have gotten in Perue.

The taking of several Towns in the land of Mark by the Forces of the
Marquis of Brandenburg, and the States of the united Provinces.

The Incursion of the Tartars upon Podolia, when the Turks invaded Hungary.

The Command of the Emperor to bring in all the protestant Books in Anstria,
and a summons of all the Protestant Preachers to appear at Vienna whether
private in Gentlemen's houses, or others.

Certain Letters from Thu^in concerning the meeting of several Ambassadors of
France, of Venice, of England; with their consultations with the Duke of Sauoy
concerning the recovery of the Valtoline.

The Death of the Lord of Southampton and his Son the Lord Wriotheously, with
the valiant exploit of these Lord of Oxford and Essex upon the En^mies Conuoy,
whereupon the Lord of Oxford received some hurt; ^^ey g^ined of the Enemy some
20. W^gons besides o^ther spoils.

With the News of diverse other Parts of Christendom.

London Printed by E. (...) for Nath Butter and Nicho. Bou^^, 1624.

The continuation of our weekly News, from Italy, Germany, Spain, France,
the Low Countries, and diverse other places.
From Vienna the 29. of October.
WE have received tidings from Cashaw, that many thousands of Tartarians ^aue
made of late an inroade in Podolia, and have done great hurt both with the fire
and sword, and taken many Christians prisoners, even about the same time when
the Turks did the like about the Towns which lie on the hills and mountains
of Hungary.

His Imperial Majesty is yet here, and the Stationers which dwell in Austria
having been commanded to send all their Protestant books into Germany, have
pack't them up to be carried thitherwards.

The Protestant States of Austria are appointed to meet here on the next day.

All the Protestant Preachers and States of the Land of Ouer-ens are cited to
appear here and to answer for themselves within the space of six weeks and
three days; for the Empretendeth that they have lost their lives, lands and
goods, by reason of their former rebellion, and has therefore commanded that
none shall alter the possession of their estates or of any part of them.

There is likewise published by an open Proclamation, that all the Protestant
Preachers which live yet with such Lords in Austria, as have been faithful to
the Emperor must go out of the Land.

The States of the Land of Ouer-ens having gotten notice of this Proclamation,
sent the young Lord of Staremberg to his Imperial Majesty (who makes great
account of him, to intercede and speak for the Preachers that they might not
be banished.

But being come to the Emperor to declare his Commission, he charged him
presently to stay with it, until the Ambassadors of the Land of Ouer-ens
should come to Vienna, and gave him warning that although he should be sent
again, he should not speak in the behalf of the Protestant Religion.

From Breslaw in Silesia the 24. of October.
The Cossacks being many thousands strong, have made an inroade in Silesia, and
pillaged amongst other places the whole County of Please, so that the Princes,
Lords, and States of Silesia have been compelled to summon many of the
Dukedom of Silesia, to resist them by main force of arms.

From Prage the 26. of October.
The Regiment of the Count Colaldo which lies some 14. leagues hence, is
commanded to march toward Alsatia.

Few days ago were the Protestant Burgers of this City warned, that
unless they paid fully (within the space of few days) such moneys as were
demanded for their pardon, that they should be banished*

From Prage the 29. of October.
The Land-graue of Lichtenstain makes great preparation against his journey
toward Vienna: And the Count of Waldtsteyn prepares all manner of necessaries
to bring an Army in the field.

From Cullen the 1. November.
The Spanish leauy yet many Soldiers, and them which they have taken up in the
County of Rauensberg, they inquarter there at the charge of the Country people.

From Arnhem the 4. November.
It is here still rumored that there shall be leauyed for Count Mansfield and
the Duke Christian of Brunswicke 20000. foot, and 4000. horse. And the Prince
of Orange and the States of these united Provinces have chosen some Officers
out of their Companies, and Cornets to leauy them.

From Antwerp the 5. of Noue.
We understand by Letters written from Madrill the 6. day of October, how that
the Duke of Ossina dyed on the 20. day of September last past, having been
some three years in Prison, and that he was very repentant, and admonished his
Bastard Son (who leads the Neapolitan Regiment in Austria) that he would
not acknowledge any Princes for his sovereign but the King of Spain or the
Emperor.

By the same Letters we learn likewise, how that the Fleet which is to Sail
toward Brasiel, to take the Bay Todos Los Sanctos again, was not likely to be
soon ready; and that they hoped there that the Inahbitants of Brasiel shall
recover it themselves, before their Fleet comes there.

The Ambassador of the King of Denmark having dispatched his affairs in the
Court of the King of Spain, he made himself ready to go homewards. And it is
rumored that the King of Spain had restored the Danish ships which were
arrested in Spain.

The King of Spain sent lately many Horse to several Princes: Namely, 24, to
the Emperor, 6. to the Elector of Saxony, and 6. to the Duke of Bauaria.

From Brussel the of 2. Nouem.
They write from Antwerpe, that some 3. days ago, the Ordinance played very
fiercely about Preda, and that some soldiers of the united Brouinces have
fought very cruelly with one of the Spanish Conuoyes.

Moreover this same Letter relates a strange thing which happened there, if we
will believe the Author, his words are these.

On the 26. of October was here one that went out of this City to make a
trial to go on the water, which he did afterward, for he went on a deep
pond being in his harnish, and armed with his rapier and pistol, in the
presence of many Lords of the Court and Burgers of this City, and leaped and
walked upon the water as if it had been land, and discharged there his Pistol:
He desired entertainment, and offers to instruct some thousands that they
shall be able to do the like, and be fit to make any great enterprise.

Turin the 27 of October. 1624.
SInce my last Letter to you, we have been at Susa, where my Lord Ambassador
went to accompany the Duke of Sauoy and the French Ambassador, and the Venetian
Ambassador, to treat and negotiate with the great Constable of France
concerning the present affairs in these parts, the Constable being accompanied
with Mons: le Mareschall de Crequi, and with Monseur de Bullion; the first
being one of the greatest men in all France, the last is privy Councellor to
the French King, being both annexed in commission with the Constable, and both
in quality of extraordinary Ambassadors.

The Marshall de Crequi was likewise to condole with the D. of Sauoy in the
King his Masters behalf, the death of Prince Philipert. After their ariuall at
Susa they had diverse meetings and conferences. Having been ten days in the
said place they departed, we for Turin, the Constable for Grenoble. What has
been treated, and the conclusion of the Treaty is not known to any as yet,
but the common coniecturation is, that they have resolved to recover the
Valtolina by force: and the Constable for the execution has determined to make
his Troops pass the Alps with all possible speed, notwithstanding that
Winter draws near.

This is all I can say concerning the negotiation, time will show us the event
of the business: but one thing I fear much, the Jesuitical predominant
power. Fiat voluntas Domini.

In the State of Milan they are all in arms, and in readiness to oppose any
that dare come.

Those of Genoa are more afeard then hurt, they take up men alla Gagliarda to
secure their Commonwealth.

The Venetians have sent for Colonel Obenstraut, being stipendiated by them,
and consequently for all those that draw pay of S. Marco, what their intention
is I cannot tell.

Monseur de Tilly has quartered his army in the Marquisate of Baden, and
finding his forces too weak to keep it, has sent for a supply.

The S^visses are all sick of a Lethargy, and will hardly be put out of their
drowsiness, especially being kept in this sleep by the Spanish pistols, for
the which by degrees they have almost sold their former liberty.

The Archduke Leopold makes a great show of leauying troops, ma non ha
danari. God keep him in that case. The Emperor has sent certain
Commissaries to the City of Strasburg, with three propositions. First, he
desires that the Magistrate of the said city should deliver all that are fled
out of the Palatinate, with all their goods into his hands, and annexed to this
is, that all that Count Mansfield has within that City (for they say he has
a great quantity of goods and money) should likewise be delivered unto him.
Secondly, that they should prepare a great sum of money for to pay the
Emperors soldiers. Lastly, they should keep victuals and munition in
readiness, that whenever occasion should present it self that any troops of
the Emperor should pass that way, to furnish them withal.

The first proposition they answered them, that in consideration of the
privilege and liberty of their City, they could not condescend unto it: as for
the other two, they answered, that in an Imperial Diett they would resolve as
other States and Imperial Cities should do.

From Prage we hear that the plague reigns there: and that the Protestants
Church has bin taken from them, and given to the King of Spain his Ienesaries,
(that is to say) his Jesuits.

From Tarim the 9 of November.
Very little News are stirring now being a dead time of the year, Winter
coming on apace: being rather a fit time to consult, then to effectuate any
martial Designs.

From Milan we have certain news, that the Spanish ministers have
intercepted a Packet of letters, sent by Monseur de Bethunes Ambassador,
resident at Rome for the French King, to the Marquis of Corvare, likewise
Ambassador for the said King, resident in Suisserland: the contents of the
Letter were these; He earnestly entreats the Ambassador in Suisserland, to
use all means possible to gain the Suisses to leauie some thousands of men,
the number not being exactly known by me, and those to be employed for the
recovery of the Valtolina: whereupon the Duke of Feria, Governor of Milan, has
caused sundry copies to be made of the said Letter, sending them where he
thinks they may most turn to the prejudice of the French, as to Rome to the
Popes holiness, entreating him to consider how little the French do respect
his holiness, in respect that the Garrisons in the Valtolina were Milite di
Santa Chiesa, and that coming against those of the Valtolina, was as much as
if he made war against the Church. Another Copy he has sent unto the Suisses
in their Dieta at Baden.

From Berne we hear that all our Protestant Cantons have leauyed a competent
number of men, for the defense of themselves, so that if Tilly should dare to
make any incursion, they may be able to withstand him.

The King of Spain has sent an extraordinary Ambassador to Germany to assure
those Princes and States that the Troops he keeps in the Empire, or is to
send, is not with an intention to usurp any imaginable thing, but that his
only intent and purpose is to settle a quiet and and stable peace in the
Empire, and for the advancement and propagation of the Roman Catholic
Religion.

NEWS FROM the Low Countries.
From Bergen op Zoom, Noucmb. 12.
WE received Letters from Bergen op Zoom bearing dare this twelfth of
November, 1624, that the handmaid of War, and scourge of great armies, a
cruel Pestilence, rages and reigns in his Excellencies army in the
Netherlands: by the contagion whereof more have perished then by the enemies
sword or bullet. It does not only rage in the field, as at Rosendale and
Longstraten, where the Prince of Oranges forces lie encamped, but the next good
towns feel a portion of this calamity, as Breda, Bergen op Zoom, and others.

The Prince of Orange, to the great grief of every good man, was grievously
sick of this malady, but God be thanked, he is reasonable well recovered, to
the unspeakable comfort of al those who fight under his banners.

The enemies did much rejoice at the report of this disaster: and it was given
out in the Spanish quarters, that either he was dead, or else so desperately
sick, that he was past all recovery. Quae volumus, facile credimus: It being
an easy matter to believe those things which our wills with affectation and
earnestness do desire. But yet he lives, and long may live to fight the
battles of the Lord of Hosts, and defend the innocent from the sword of the
oppressor.

But see how the Sunneshine of this joy is suddenly ouershadowed with a cloud
of sorrow for my Lord Wriothesly, son and heir to that honorable Lord my
Lord of Southampton, who went over in this last expedition into the
Netherlands, Captain of a foot Company under his fathers command, being
Coronell of one of the four new Regiments, fell sick at Roscndale in the
Princes Leaguer; and to avoid the discommodities of the field, he retired
himself to Bergen op Zoom, a town not far distant, there to use the best
means he could for the recovery and re-establishing of his health.

But mark how Gods providence ouerswayeth men's provisions and purposes. He had
not lain there many days under the tortures of this contagion, but he
exchanged this mortal life into immortality, deceasing upon Sunday last was a
sennight, it being the seventh of November. His noble father coming to visit
his son to Bergen, fell sick of this Pestilence also, and what with the
violence of the sickness, and the grief of mind for his sons decease, he
gave up his glorious and now glorified ghost into the hands of his Creator, the
Wednesday following, the tenth of November.

These two, both the father and the son, we cannot too much condole nor
mourn for their losses, they being as truly honorable in their conditions, as
they were in their dignities and callings.

My old Lord in his younger years had took a taste of the French and
Netherland wars, and after that he was thought worthy by Queen Elizabeth of
famous memory, to be General of her horse in that expedition, which was made
under the conduct of the Earl of Essex, against the Earl of Tiroan, and other
Rebels of Ireland, where he carried himself bravely and unblemished. He was a
brave Soldier, both for his execution and knowledge, and likewise learned, as
he was military and valiant.

Besides he was a great fauorer and Mecaenas unto Arms and Arts, and a
liberal acknowledger and rewarder of those who could challenge any dignity
from these professions.

His Son was the True Image and Character of his Father, so that without
wronging others by way of comparrison, he was as hopeful as any young
Nobleman in Christendom whatsoever. But Is fear me that my poor
Panegericke, and commendation does rather disgrace them: then dignifie their
Worthynesse; wherefore I will fall from it and a little look upon Marquis
Spinolaes: Leagur, where you shall see the sickness rain as bad, as in our
Mauritian Quarters.

The Famine griping the hungry maw of your poor soldier, the Itallians and
Spaniards two Nations who can better endure the Schorching heat, then the cold
of Winter, most vehement for the most parts in these Northern Countries,
cursing the ambition of their Prince, which must make their bodies fight
against the insufferable difficulties of nature; and therefore for these
respects inclining to mutiny and hardly to be commanded.

To aggriuate which calamities, the Marquis his Soldiers run away by parties
every day, their pay falls short, and their Conuoyes which bring their
Ammunition bread and other victuals, are daily cut off by the States Soldiers
coming from Rosendale, Long straten and elsewhere. Amongst the rest it is
commonly reported, and most certainly auerred by Letters written from
Geertruydenbergh, and dated the ninth of this Month, that my Lord of Essex,
and my Lord of Oxford, going out upon a party to seek some adventure, met
with a Conuoy of the enemies as they were travailing from the further most
parts of Brabante, unto Marquess Spinolaes quarter.

Our English greedy of the pray and Honor besides, give in roundly upon these
Conuoyes, and after some resistance make themselves Masters of the Waggon-men,
and victuals.

But yet it was not Incruento Victoria, for some men were lost of both sides,
and my Lord of Oxford carried away an Honorable Skarre, and the testimony of
his valor, being wounded in this conflict.

There were twenty wagons or upwards lost by the Enemies with diverse spoils
of good vallew, which was truly and equally divided amongst the Soldiers who
were Actors in this exployt.

News from SPAIN.
We received certain information by letters dated at the Growine, about the
midst of this last Month, that there is great preparation for a mighity
Fleet in Gallicia, Bisca, and other the more Southern parts of Spain.

There are besides the Seamen and Mariners, ten thousand Land Soldiers to
be embarkt in this action. And few of these are Behemies or fresh water
Soldiers, but such as are of the Tertiues of their old Garrisons. There is
likewise a great impresse and stay of shipping of several Countries, as
English, Scots, French, and Easterlins to the great grief and discontent of
their poor masters and owners, who are like to suffer great detriment and
loss by this means. The conjectures of this new preparation are diverse: For
some give out that it is for scouring the Leuante and strengthening of their
Garrisons in Naples, Sicilia, and Lumbardy: Others think it is against the
Grande Signior, and his Vice-royes of Tunes and Argiers, who make their
Sanziake ships, and those Harbors which are in them a receite of custom for
all Pirates. But those whose judgments are most curious: Judge these
preparations to be made against the Hollander for the recovering of Todos los
Sanstos in Brasilia, which we may the sooner be indust to believe, if we shall
but once consider, how loath the Spaniards are to part with any thing which
they have once appropriated and made their own.

Out of Swisserland the 25. of October.
His Majesty of France leauieth yet daily many men, and our Commissioners which
have been sent to his Majesty are come back again with great satisfaction,
and have reported that they dispatched their affairs according to their own
mind, and that he has promised to lend us continually his helping hand, and
has moreover given charge to Monsieur Ladiguera to look to us and to leauy
yet eight regiments of foot, and 2000 horse to assist us.

They of Basil being affrayd of a siedge, have received yet 3000 men into their
City, besides great store of powder and lead, and they are moreover fetching
daily more provision of victuals for them out of the Country there about:
Monsieur de Chrich^ as was mentioned before, is with 15000 foot, and 2000.
horse gone into Sauoy: And Monsieur de Convre who has taken some passages of
great importance in Veltolina, has both there and in Swisserland, leauied many
thousands of Soldiers: And the three Sons of the Governor of Lions have
likewise gotten Patents to leauy each a Regiment.

Those Soldiers which are leauied in the City of Bearne, and are many
thousands strong, have had the first sk^^mish with them of the house of
Austria, which are in the Veltolina, and have slain many of them, and have
s^op^ all the passages about Chur, with a resolution to besiedge the same
Town: whereupon the Governor of chur has written to the Archduke Leopoldus
for aid.

They of the house of Austria do m^^he mean time likewise what they can, and
fortify the Castles of Cleue^, and of Della Riva, and provide them with all
manner of necessaries.

From Lions the 31 of this Month.
The Secretary of Mounsier Ladiguiera is sent to this City as a prisoner by
his Master, because he has given intelligence to the House of Austria.

We have here tidings that the Duke of Boulion is gone with great store of
money to Mounsiur Lad^guiera, by order of our King of France: who has given him
order to set with his powerful Army upon Voltolina, if the House of Austris or
the Pope will not restore it presently.

From Rosendale the 7 of November.
Few days ago sent the Prince of Orange many horse abroad, without any
Cornets upon good intelligence which he had received, and they returned within
a while: with many prisoners and rich bootyes of our Enemies.

The Marquis Spinola is now expecting some provision which is coming out of
Arto^s, and Henegow: with some 4000. wagons, and seeing that he has
understood that our Forces are waiting upon it, he has given order that all
the highwayes which it is to come, shall along be entrenched: and that they
shall have 3000 horse and 6000 foot to convey them to his Camp.

From hence are many fire-lookes carried to the Camp of Count Henry of Nassaw,
and we understand by good intelligence that although the Conuoy of the Marquis
Spinola was lately twice upon the way to come from Shertogenbosh to the Camp,
that it returned nevertheless every time, seeing it was not strong enough in
respect of our Forces which waited upon it.

From Amsterdam the 9 of Nouemb.
With the last Letters of Spain we understand that they were there very
confused, by reason of the confirmation of the last news, namely how that the
General L'Hermite has not only taken and Pillaged Lima, Arika, and Poidsi,
but likewise many other strong Holds, and Fortes, and was ^ortifying himself
upon the Seacoasts of Peru, where was come such a fear amongst the
Inhabitants, by reason of the great aid which he has of the King of Chilly,
that they forsook in many Places both Houses, and Lands.

They write from Bremen, that the Drum was there daily sounded, to leauey
both Horse and Foot, for the High and Mighty Lords, the States General of the
United Provinces, and that the Count of Lip was likewise gone into the Lan^
of Hessen, to leauie there a Regiment of Foot for Count Mansfield.

Moreover we understand by several Letters, written out of the Dukedom of
Gelderland how that some souldi^^* of the Marquis of Brandenborg, and of the
Stat^ of the United Provinces have lately taken d^u^rs Towns in the County of
Mark from the ^p^nish.

FINIS.

