NORFOLKES FVRIES, OR A VIEW OF KETTS CAMP: NECESSARY FOR THE MALCONTENTS OF
our Time, for their instruction, or terror; and profitable for every good
SVBIECT, to encourage him upon the undoubted hope of the Victory, to stand
faithfully to maintain his PRINCE and COUNTRY, his Wife and Children, goods,
and Inheritance.

With a Table of the Majors and Sheriffs of this Worshipful City of NORWICH,
ever since the first grant by HENRY the Fourth: Together with the Bishops of
that See, and other Accidents there.

Set forth first in Latin by ALEXANDER NEVIL. Translated into English, for the
use of the common People, by R. W. Minister at Frettenham in Norfolk, and a
Citizen borne, who beheld part of these things with his young Eyes.

ROMANS 13. 5. Wherefore ye must needs obey, not only because of vengeance, but
also because of conscience. LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Henry
Fetherstone, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Church yard, at the sign
of the Rose. 1615.

To the right Worshipful Sir Thomas Hiren, Knight, Mayor of the Worshipful
City of Norwich, and his brethren the Aldermen, Master Sheriffs and the whole
Comminaltie, R. W. wishes all increase of Worship, Prosperity, and Peace,
from God even our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.
RIght Worshipful, and my beloved Countriemen Now more then twenty years
since.
the Citizens of Norwich, when in the house of my friend, among other Books I
found (unlooked for) this Treatise written in Latin, by one Alexander Neuil an
English man: The very Title of the Book drew me into a farther desire of
looking into the matter: the rather because lying at that time, and in that
place where these Furies were committed, I beheld something with my young eyes:
and receiving many strange things from the report of others, I desired, and was
glad to see the thing in order* which when I entered upon, the elegancie of the
Phrase, together with the Argument, promised me a double fruit, viz. not only
to know the Story in order, but also to revive, and sharpen my poor skill in
that Tongue, now through disuse and tract of time declining: so as I made it
from my other Studies, my recreation. In the pursuit whereof, I found (as the
Queen of Sheba says of the wisdom of Solomon) that the one half of the
calamities, and miseries of this worshipful City (my Mother) was never
sufficiently known unto me: Neither the miraculous deliverance, sufficiently
acknowledged by me, for I find it far greater then I thought. Wherefore
reading it over now once, and again, and communing with diverse of my friends
about the matters therein contained: I found a general desire in them all to
have it in English. Whereupon, my self having found such pleasure mixed with
profit in the reading hereof (if I should not be envious: having also
certain intelligence that it was not extant by any particular Treatise)
thought good to satisfy their expectation, though of many the unfittest: That
so praise might be given unto God of many. And as the benefit increases in our
eyes, so our thanksgiving might grow, and abound. Wherefore unto that godly
order taken, already for the yearly remembrance of this deliverance, and
solemnity of Thanks giving, as the Poet says in the like.

Annuus assuetum Domine natalis honorem, Tristibus Elegia. 6.

Exigit: ite manus ad pia Sacra meae.
Go thou the labor of my hands, and receive under your Worshipful
protection, the good meaning of a poor friend, which wishes well, as he has
good cause, to your Worships, and this City.

Your Worships for life, R. W.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, having read over this Treatise with great pleasure, and not
a little profit: both in regard of the matter, and elegancie of the style (in
respect whereof, in my simple judgment, the Author has deserved great
commendation) I wished with many other, that some man would take the pains to
translate the same into our Mother Tongue: that the thing which concerned so
many, might be known of all. But seeing hitherto no man has undertaken the
Work: especially being now This was translated twenty years since.
twenty years old, since the first setting it forth in Latin by the Author:
fearing also le^t the matter might be buried under obli^ion in the ages to
come, I have ventured upon the labor my self, and by the goodness of God
have finished the same for thy benefit. Wherein I have omitted nothing (to my
remembrance) but delivered truly as I received it from the Author, neither have
I, in my simple judgment, altered the sense, though through the daintiness of
the Phrase, not fitting our English Tongue: I have sometime (and that very
seldom) altered his words, as the Learned can bear me record. Wherefore I
beseech thee (courteous Reader) accept of my poor labor: and let not Dame
Disdain, nor Idle Envy, offer me^ that discourtisie, to ^arpe at my travail,
while I mean well to all, and meddle but with the refuse of other men. The
Work is worthy the looking upon, and especially in these days, when the like
is wished of many, and looked for of some. For who can be ignorant of the
malice of the enemies of the grace of God against us, having known their
se^erall attempts for our destruction in the days of our late Sovereign of
blessed Memory, and seen, and heard of the continuance thereof, (no less
cruel) since his Majesty's coming to the Crown? whereof their Powder Plot (a
thing m^st immane, and barbarous with many practices besides) is sufficient
witness, and testifies their malice to be implacable (as those that had
sworn against Paul, never to eat nor drink, till they Act. 23. 12.
had s^aine him) whose hope lies not so much in their own provision, as in
the intertainment, and help they look for amongst us: which was the cause
that sometime they attempted so far upon our Coasts, as was made known unto
us by Proclamation, in the days of our late Queen, and the like by his
Majesty (that now swayeth the Scepter) since. To the which end, a number of
^esuites at that time were dispatched into the Land, and at this day, under his
Majesty have been, and are still creeping, and croking in corners like the
Frogs of Egypt: that persuading his Majesty's Subjects to defend their
Catholic Religion, they may be ready to stir up Ciu ill Dissension at home,
or else prepare themselves to join with Foreign Forces, if at any time (which
God forbid) they shall in^ade the Land. Both which are most dangerous, and
bring (as our Savior Christ says) ruin, and destruction to Kingdoms or
Cities. Moreover it is a thing against Nature: for Dogs of the same Kennell
seldom fight together, except at meat: servants of the same Family commonly
make a side. Abraham used it for a great reason to Lot, Let there be no strife
I pray thee, between Genesis 13. 8. Exodus 2. 13 Act. 7. 23.
thee, and me; neither between thy Heardsmen, and mine: for we are brethren.
And Moses would have pacified the matter between the two Hebrews contending
together, because they were brethren: that is, both Jews, and Countriemen*
Wherefore you my brethren of the Ministry, let us not weaken our selves,
among our selves, while we bitterly contend about matters of Circumstance, but
let the rule of the Apostle take place among us. Let not him that eats,
despise him that eats not, and let not him Romans 14. 3.
which eats not, judge him that eats; for the Kingdom of God stands not
in these things. If any man think otherwise, God shall reucale it unto him:
but let us join together in love. Vis vnita fortior. And let the earnest suit
of the Apostle be heard, and prevail with us, that nothing be done of
contention or of Phil. 2. 2.
vain glotie: but follow the truth in love. If any man list to be contentious,
we have no such custom, neither the Churches 1. Cor. 11 ^^.
of God. Let not the unjust challenge of the P^pists be found true among us, at
the last: that we agree not among our selves (although of all men they might
w^rst have said it, that have so mary Sects among them) for how shall we draw
the people to unity, while our selves or at odds, and one brother smites
another?

Again, you my Countrymen, and natural borne English Subjects, be not
deceived by the subtlety of Popish Jesuits, and th^^r Fa^ourites, which make
it no matter of Conscience to set at liberty natural Subjects from true
obedience to their Li^ge Princes, and to take up Arms against them: Yea*
persuade it meritorious, to lay violent hands, and take away the li^es of the
Lords Anointed: that they may not be unlike themselves: a Bl^udie Generation,
whose Kingdom stands only by blood. But lo^k^ thou upon tho courtesy of
Papists where they prevail, and learn to love thine own Coun^rey, and
natural Government: for truly was it said of Augustus Caesar, of one who had
^led from Anthony, and b^^sted much of his great Facts for Caesar, at the
Table, Proditionem amo* Proditores non item. I love Treason, but I commend not
Traitors. And let this be a caveat unto thee: And suffer not a conceit of thy
Religion, and of Rome to carry thee against the Commandment of God: for God
has not allowed at any time the breach of his Royal Law, neither has he
given any one Commandment* to tolerate the breach of another, as the Pope
would persuade. To join with thy natural Princes enemy is monstrous, and
against his Commandment, yea though they were evil. Wherefore fear him that
has power to cast thy body and soul into hell, and fear not the Bugge, of
Rome, whose Bulls are but Lead, and his Thund^rb^lts feathered at the wrong end:
which returns upon the Discharger: whose cursings are turned into blessings,
as this Land witnesses: and her Majesty, which never prospered better, then
since he began to curse. And make use of this History, where thou shall see
the end of such as take up Arms against their Prince, and Country.

Moreover, you that are faithful Subjects to his Majesty, encourage you your
hearts, and strengthen your hands, and furnish your selves willingly: for the
confidence of a good cause is great, as having God not an idle Beholder, but an
effectual worker, which teaches our hands ^o war, and our fingers to figh^:
which gives Victory to Kings, and helps his Anoi^ted: unto whom it is all
one (if we respect himself) to obtain Victory with few or no power. And
fear not railing Rabshake, nor so^tish Sennacharib: for there are more with
us, then are with them: with them is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord
of Hosts to fight our Battles.

Wherefore be valiant, my good Countriemen, and fight with your God* for his
worship, for your Country your King, your selves* your Wives, Children, and
inheritances, and make use of this Book, where you shall see the truth
prevail, and Rebels receive their just hire. And now you Malcontents, which
desire a change, or disturbance of States, and watch for such oportunities,
that you might be ryfling, and inuert all order, thinking thereby to become
Lords, and to make the Noble, and Honorable vile, and care not what come, or
who come, so you might be scuffling: settle your selves in some honest
calling, that you may live by the sweat of your own brows, being blessed of
God. For you that now promise your selves golden hills, shall (as you may
perceive in this History) find that you are but in a golden dream, drenched
in all filthiness. And you that covet to fly so high with Icarus, shall fall
shamefully by an Hempen String: and take heed, lest (as you may find beer by
experience) being carried with an idle hope, and the vain promises of some,
you bind not your selves aforehand, or enter too far: for you cannot get out
when you would. They that are in Authority, are to be admonished (as they do)
to look unto the beginnings.

-- Sero medicina paratur,
Dum mala per longas inv^luere horas.
Thus Gentle Reader, lest I should increase the Volume too much, I commend thee
to God, and the guiding of his Grace, to establish thy heart in true obedience:
first, toward his Majesty, next, toward our Sovereign Lord King James in
all bodily duty. And if you receive any fruit of my labor, my pains is
recompensed. Let God have the whole praise, and help me with thy Prayers: Who
of his infinite mercy convert, or soon confound his Majesty's enemies,
establish his Scepter in his hand, and the Crown upon his head, that he may
triumph over all his and our Enemies in this life, and may after life remain,
and reign in the Kingdom of his Saints, for ever,

Amen.
Farewell, Gentle Reader, thy poor brother in Christ, R. W. Minister at
Frettenham, in Norfolk.

ALEXANDER NEVILL OF THE FVRIES OF NORFOLK, under Captain Kette.
I Would have wished verily, that those popular sturres, and seditious storms,
wherewith our Country, in the days of King Edward the sixth, was smitten and
afflicted, by the villainy, and the treachery of beastly men, had either never
happened (or if it could be) the remembrance of them were utterly rooted out of
the minds of all men. But because things past cannot be altered, or changed,
and this stain of treason, branded in the forehead of our Country by
pernicious Citizens, sets deeper in the name of the people of Norfolk (to
the perpetual remembrance of that wickedness) then can be utterly blotted out,
or altogether taken away: I easily yield to the committing this Story to
writing, that all men may perceive from what beginning these so great tumults
did arise; and by what means at the length they were suppressed, and may
perfitly understand those wounds, and seditious villainies, to have been brought
upon our Country, not by good and valiant persons, but printed upon her by the
routs of most desperate, and ungracious men.

This surely is evident to all, that an incredible gain comes to posterity,
by the knowledge of such things: and no doubt, great fruit shall good men
reap, if they give diligent heed to the instructious of these examples, and
make use of them in their conversation. On the otherside, ungodly and
troublesome Citizens (if any such there be) as I hope there be none, or not
many in this Kingdom, may lea^^e to be wiser from others miseries: Or at the
least, if they cannot do that, (for they cannot do what they will not do)
yet they may tremble, beholding the fearful end of these men.

In the year of our Lord, 1549. when many grievously complained unto King
Edward the sixth, that their Commons were taken from them, and enclosed by
certain private persons: The care thereof, by the authority of the King was
committed unto certain most grave, and discreet persons: and a Commission
appointed, they were commanded above all things, to inquire of such complaints,
and to understand, and consult of the whole matter, with as much expedition as
might be. Which coming abroad, and made known to the common people, sundry
rumors were spread hereof, and among other things done, the ditches in Kent
were filled up, and fields sometime common (now enclosed with ditches, and
hedges) were laid open. Now because the like was not done in the Country of
Norfolk, certain light, and seditious persons of the common people began to
murmur, and be grieved; and from thence-foorth they bound themselves with
brutish rage and villainy, that (against right, and without the commandment of
the King) they would do the like here, as they had heard done in Kent:
Desiring (as the event declared) not only to lay open the common Pastures,
enclosed by the injury of some men, but to power forth their ungodly desires
against the Commonwealth (hidden before in the wicked intention of their
hearts) to the spoil, and overthrow of all things. Whence they procured
mortal wars to their Country, and destruction to themselves. For when the
report of this cursed Society came abroad, they began every where to enter
secret counsels, and many base and vile persons in sundry places complained of
their estate, and bitterly inueighed against the authority of Gentlemen, and
of the Nobility. For, said they, the pride of The Rebels complaint.
great men is now intolerable, but their condition miserable. These abound in
delights, and compassed with the fullness of all things, and consumed with
vain pleasures, thirst only after gain, and are inflamed with the burning
delights of their desires: but themselves almost killed with labor and
watching, do nothing all their life long but sweat, mourn, hunger and
thirst. Which things, though they seem miserable and base (as they are indeed
most miserable) yet might be borne howsoever, if they which are drowned in the
boiling seas of evil delights, did not pursue the calamity, and miseries of
other men with too much insolent hatred: but now both they, and their miserable
condition, is a laughing stock to most proud and insolent men, consuming with
ease and idleness. Which thing (as it may) grieueth them so sore, and
inflicteth such a stain of evil report: as nothing is more grievous for them
to remember, nor more unjust to suffer. But that condition of possessing land
seems miserable, and slavish, they hold all at the pleasure of great men: not
freely, but by prescription, and as it were at the will, and pleasure of the
Lord. For as soon as any man offend any of these gorgious Gentlemen, he is put
out, deprived, and thruft from all his goods. How long should we suffer so
great oppression to go unrevenged! For so far are they now gone in cruelty
and covetousness, as they are not only content to take by violence all away,
and by force and villainy to get, which they consume in riot, and effeminate
delights: except they may also suck, in a manner, our blood and marrow, out of
our veins and bones. The common Pastures left by our predecessors for the
relief of us, and our children, are taken away. The lands which in the memory
of our fathers, were common, those are ditched and hedged in, and made
several; the Pastures are enclosed, and we shut out: whatsoever fowls of the
air, or fishes of the water, and increase of the earth, all these do they
devour, consume and swallow up; yea, nature does not suffice to satisfy their
lufts, but they seek out new devices, and as it were, forms of pleasures, to
imbalme and perfume themselves, to abound in pleasant smells, to power in
sweet things to sweet things: finally, they seek from all places, all things
for their desire, and provocation of lust: while we in the mean time, eat
herbs and roots, and languish with continual labor, and yet envy that we
live, breathe, and enjoy common air. Shall they, as they have brought hedges
about common Pastures, enclose with their intolerable lusts also, all the
commodities and pleasure of this life, which, Nature, the Parent of us all,
would have common, and brings forth every day for us, as well as for them? We
can no longer bear so much, so great, and so cruel injury, neither can we
with quiet minds behold so great covetousness, excess, and pride of the
Nobility; we will rather take Arms, and mix Heaven and Earth together, then
endure so great cruelty. Nature has provided for us, as well as for them; has
given us a body, and a soul, and has not envied Ahellish paritie.
us other things. While we have the same form, and the same condition of birth
together with them, why should they have a life so unlike unto ours, and differ
so far from us in calling? We see that now it is come to extremity, we will
also prove extremity: rend down hedges, fill up ditches, make way for every
man into the common pasture: Finally, lay all even with the ground, which they
no less wickedly, then cruelly and couerously have enclosed. Neither will we
suffer our selves any more to be pressed with such burdens against our
wills, nor endure so great shame, as living out our days under such
inconveniences, we should leave the Commonwealth unto our postcritie,
mourning, and miserable, and much worse then we received it of our fathers.
Wherefore we The Rebels desire.
will try all means; nei her will we ever rest, until we have brought
things to our own liking. We desire liberty, and an ind^fferent use of all
things: this will we have, otherwise these tumults, and our lives shall end
together. With these waves of wrath and complaints, tossed, as it were, with a
Tempest, desperate persons, and banckeroute varlets (with their sales spread)
st^red up one another* and were drawn on to those villainies, where by they
b^ought great danger to their Country, and dest^uction to the^ selves.

Not long after it happened, there was a Play at Windham, Windham game.
by an old custom, which lasted two days, and two nights: whereunto, when a
multitude of all degrees came, these wretched conspirators hereunto only bent
their wits, to power forth the venom of their envy against their Country,
watching so fit an opportunity of time and place. First therefore were secret
meetings of men running hither and thither, then withdrawing themselves, secret
conferences: but at length, they all began to deal tumultuously, and to rage
openly. And when they heard, that Robert Ket, a Tanner, a man of stout, rude,
of an impudent boldness, and unbridled violence, had Rebels suit to Ket.
enclosed a piece of Common, they ran unto him full of fury and madness,
and signified unto him, what advice they had taken for the disturbance of the
peace of their Country; and do earnestly entreat him, that whatsoever of the
Common feed he had enclosed, the same he would presently (their Country and
they requiring it) yield to common profit, the hedges and ditches being thrown
down, and made even with the ground. Ket, as one burning with the same flames
of fury, wherewith these were set on fire, easily suffering himself to Kets
answer.
be drawn into this cursed fellowship, answered, That he was ready, and
would be ready at all times to do whatsoever, not only to repress, but to
subdue the power of Great men, and that he hoped to bring to pass, that as
they of their painful labor, so these of their pride should repent ere long.
And further declares many horrible things, which of late years they have
endured many wrongs and miseries, wherewith they had been vexed and afflicted:
and wi^^eth them to be of good cheer, for this so great severity, so
exceeding covetousness, and so seldom heard of cruelly in all sorts, seems
to be hated, and accursed of God and men: And promises moreover, to revenge
the hurts done unto the Weal public, and common Pasture by the importunate
Lords thereof: And that he would do his endeavor, that what lands soever he
had enclosed, should again be made common unto them, and all men, and that his
own hands should first perform it: Adding moreover at the last, that he would
never be wanting Ket a rank Rebel.
to their good: and that they should have him, not only a companion, but a
Captain: and in the doing of so great a work, not a fellow, but a Leader,
Author, and principal, and not to be present only at all their consultations,
but always president.

These wretched men, and vilest of all that ever lived, being set on fire with
these words, when with thankful clamors they had compassed him about, on the
sudden, as it were gathering an assembly of men, into a certain field of
Ketts, next adjoining to the town of Windham, all the multitude flocked
thither. And as they had decreed, there they threw down the ditches, and made
them even with the ground: which when they had done, as unbridled horses
lusting after liberty, which in the error of their conceit, they fained unto
themselves: partly through their own boldness, and trusting to this vain
success of things; partly through the encouragement and cries of their
Captain, being set on fire as with burning lights, it is incredible to tell
with what flames of fury, to the disturbance of our peace, and overthrow of our
Commonwealth they burned.

From thence they came to Hetherset (which is a village The Rebels came to
Hetherset.
not far from Windham) and there they forced into the fields of one
Flowerdew, filled up the ditches, brake down the hedges, and laid open the
Enclosures. At these stirs a great contention, and altercation arose, when
Flowerdew, with grief and anger much moved, had rebuked Kett, and laid all the
fault upon him as the cause of that unruly and rebellious rout, calling him
often wretched man, the baine of his Country, and Captain of Fugitives. And
by this means (as much as lay in him) their villainy was resisted, and their
enterprises some what abated: who persuaded with all his skill, that they
should dutifully lay down their weapons, which undutifully they had taken up:
with which words and deeds of Flowerdew they being more vehemently incensed;
when compassing Kett about, they had filled the air with cries, and
complaints, and had encouraged one another, at length they implore and require
of him, the true performance of that help, whereunto he bound himself of
late. He, as one that put all confidence of the future villainy, in the event
of this present mischief, supposing also it were not good for him to prolong
the time any longer, exhorts them to be of good courage, and to follow him
the author and revenger of their liberty: Affirming, he had not forsaken that
charge which the Commonwealth had The Common wealth of Rogues.
put upon him; neither was any thing more dear unto him then their welfare,
which he preserred before all things else: for the which he would spend
cheerfully both goods and life, the dearest things in their account.

The report of these most vile, and ungracious words, gathered together all
lewd, and desperate persons from all parts, insomuch as on the sudden, great
routs of servants, and Runnagates, came flocking into Ketts Camp. With which
wicked instruments of mischief he being now guarded: when he had left at
Hetherset and Windham, the marks of his lewdness, and had wasted in a manner
all places wheresoever he came, the tenth day of July they came to a place
near Eton wood. Unto this wood are near adjoining Common pastures of the
City of Norwich, called the Town Close, in which Town Close*
place many needy, and poor men's Neat are pastured, and a common Heardsman
appointed keeper of them, which by custom received of the owners an
halfe-penny weekly for a beast. Unto those pastures ditched, and hedged in
(for the safer keeping, and lest the cattle should stray abroad) came certain
of the scumme of the City (the day after the Rebels came toward Norwich) with
violent rage and fury, complaining that they were common pastures (as they were
indeed) and that they would not suffer any longer common pasture to be
enclosed, and were carried with so blinderage from all judgment and reason: as
that which (by the providence and industry of their betters) was enclosed to
common profit, they would pull down with their own hands. They had now scarce
thrown down the ditch in the upper part of the Close, when many pestilent
persons, into whose ears a rumor of this pernicious conspiracy came (escaping
secretly out of the City) and joined with Ketts soldiers. Which men were led
hereunto, the rather, because these wretched conspirators pretended always the
benefit of the Commonwealth, and care of common profit, to cover their
wickedness withal.

When tidings of these things was brought into the City, the Mayor (who at that
time was Thomas Codde) fearing at the Mayor Tho. Cod.
strangeness of the matter, thought good out of hand to provide against this
inconvenience, and to labor that these tumults (if by any means it could be
brought to pass) might be repressed in the beginning. Whereupon, calling the
chief of the City together (namely the Aldermen, which always are with the
Mayor in the counsel) to appease these tumults, he goes with them into Ketts
Camp. There he found them all wickedly occupied, giving themselves to riot and
excess. And first he allured them by money, and fairer promises to leave off
their enterprise, and every man to depart quietly to his own house. They
notwithstanding continued still their purpose, throwing down whatsoever was
enclosed. The Mayor when he had tried all means in vain, and perceived that
neither entreaty nor reward could prevail any thing at all, to draw the minds
of the Conspirators from so great wickedness, to the consideration of peace,
presently returns into the City.

After whose departure, the Rebels conceived (as it was indeed, A sign from
the Citizens to the Rebels.
which also they began to perceive by little bows in the hands of certain
men, which fled unto them out of the City) that if they tarried any longer
scattered, and separated one from another, their enterprise presently, without
any difficulty, would be disappointed, and they resisted. To prevent this, they
thought it safest, that all their cursed companies should be drawn together
into one place. Whereupon without delay they went to Eaton wood, which when
they had viewed thorowout, and found no convenient place to pitch their camp
in; by public consent it was agreed upon, that from thence they should
presently depart to Moushold. And chiefly they did choose that place, wherein
they might appoint seats for their wicked purposes, and dens for their
robberies. Therefore when this advice liked them all, and night before Rebels
request to the Mayor.
they were aware came on, they sent messengers unto the Mayor to signify unto
him, that they intended without injury to any man, to pass through the City,
because that way was more easy and readier, and therefore they request to do
it with his good leave.

Hereunto the Mayor answered, that they were men of a The Majors Answer.
lewd mind, and enemies to the weal public, and therefore he would give
them no pass through the City. Moreover, he rebuked them sharply and with
threatening words, as men seditious, and desirous to trouble and ouerturne all
things, that so striking a fear into them, he might by all means possible
terrify them from so great mischief, and cruelty. Moreover, he gave them to
understand, that if they proceeded in their fury and rage, it would sho^tly
come to pass, such desperate attempts would come to a fearful end. But this
speech of the Mayor was so far from terrifying them, as they departed from
him more obstinate, and confirmed in their resolution then when they came. Thus
Ketts Company disappointed of their hope, and intention, lurked all that night
in Eaton wood. In the mean season the Mayor with his Brethren called a
Council, The Mayor calls a Council.
as it behooved them, for the Commonweal of their City; There it was longtime,
and much debated: as of them whose minds were carried into doubtful opinions.
Some thought there is need of expedition, and that without delay they are to
be put to flight: For being desperately mad, and raging, if they be not in the
beginning repressed, they would bring a plague and destruction to the whole
City. Other thought otherwise, that it is a matter of great danger,
deliberation, and advice, and that this speed in resisting, coming as from
courage, and magnanimity: so it may seem uncertain, and unadvised, whose
whole commendation is in the event. Which course, as it brings always a
doubtful, so for the most part a doleful end. And therefore they persuade, to
fortify the City, and appoint watch and ward carefully, and to bestow the
Citizens upon the walls, and other convenient places of the City. As for other
things, because by the Law of raising Force, and Arms, it is provided that no
Bands be mustered without the commandment of the King, therefore nothing to
be attempted (as they advise) but to expect his will and authority: All men
easily inclined to this sentence, as held for the best, proceeding from the
matter in question, and most safe against every assault of Fortune. And
forthwith messengers are sent post with letters unto the King, wherein all
things are carefully reported, commanding that with as much speed as was
possible, they should be delivered to the Kings Council.

The next day after, that was the eleventh of July, when they The Rebels go
over at Hailsdon Bridge.
could not obtain liberty of the Mayor to pass through the City, and all hope
thereof being taken away, it seemed best to them, and they all agreed, to go
over at Hailsdon Bridge, which because they could not easily do, for the
straightness of the Bridge, the way whereof was too narrow for the drift of
the Cattle, and carriage, they threw great store of wood into the river, and
so upon the boughs, and bodies of the trees heaped up together, men, horse,
and cart, might pass over the River. After this manner being gone over, the
night following they lodged at Drayton. The next day they went toward
Moushold, casting down on every side hedges and diches. Moreover they pulled
down a Chapel of one Corbetts, and brought a desolation and miserable ruin
upon all places. Into this cursed rout of wretched men destroying, and wasting
all things, and rushing into all places with headlong rage: wheresoever they
came, Roger Woodhouse Knight, and Roger Woodhouse Knight taken.
the brethren of the Appleyards, fell into their company, while unwarily they
went to see which way these Rebels came. These they took, and against their
wills carried with them. Then they took the hill called Saint Leonards hill,
right over against Norwich, in which place the Earl of Surry had built a fair
and sumptuous house, which has beneath it the maine River running betwixt the
City, and has on the East, and South the wood, and a little village called
Thorpe: but on the East, and North, Moushold Heath, which contains in length
and breadth, more then six miles. Here they placed the Chambers (and as it
were) tents of their furies, and lurking those thick woods, as dogs in their
kennels, they violated all Laws of God and man. Moreover, they entered that
goodly house, and in all places thereof left the marks of their villainies.

And now whatsoever of the vilest, and basest of the people were in any place,
these came running thither; and all the dregs, and filth of the people of
Norfolk joined themselves to this Camp: besides, a great number out of
Suffolk; also of men dwelling in other places, and Countries, by the ringing
of Belles, and firing of Beacons, come stocking thither. Moreover, they add
one mischief to another: for this so horrible villainy and desire (seldom
heard of) of destroying all things, they cover with a certain show of
counterfeit holiness: for they got unto them a certain Minister of the City,
whom they To Rebellion, they join devotion.
appoint to say prayers Morning and Evening. Furthermore, they endeavor to
join to the society of these outrages, men any way excellent for Religion and
Doctrine, and for virtue and innocence of life commendable: Among whom, was
Robert Watson, Preacher; Thomas Cod, Mayor of Norwich; Thomas Aldrich of
Mangreene, a man while he lived, beloved of all men. These three because they
refused to be bound to their wicked agreements, and treacherous Covenants,
against their wills, they constrained to be present at all their
Consultations, and to take upon them the administration of all things with
Kett, the chief Rebel.

Which thing fell out marvelous well; for if it happened at any Gods providence.
time (which happened often) that Kett, or any of the principal Conspirators
(as they were prone, and headlong to all villainy) stirred up by the mad
multitude, to go about any wicked, and ungracious work, which might tend in
conclusion to the spoil, either of the City, the Fields or Towns near the
City, the wise and careful diligence of these men, often hindered such pestilent
enterprises.

Although Kett set on fire with mischief, and spurred forward by the rude
furies of his companions, was wont sometimes to send forth Commandment, as
from authority of prescript forms, which were called Ketts writs, whereunto
sometime this importunate beast abused the names of these honest men. The
Coppie of which writs follows.

WE the Kings Friends, and Delegates, give authority Ketts Writs.
to all men, for the searching out of beasts, and all kind of victual to be
brought into the Camp at Moushold, wheresoever they find it, so as no
violence, or injury be done to any honest or poor man, charging all men by
the authority hereof, that as they wish well unto the King, and the afflicted
Common wealth, they be obedient to us his Delegates, and unto them, whose names
are underwritten. Robert Kett.

Then in order other followed: for the number of Delegates were many, for
besides the chief of this wicked society, they chose two out of every
hundred, and there were six and twenty 2600. Rebels at this time.
hundred: and with these, and the like Warrants, many worthy and Great persons,
whom the fury and rage of the common people made guilty, were arested. And
many, as though they had been guilty of great crimes, were led away to
Moushold, and there shut up in hold and prison.

Moreover, the ditches and hedges of common Pastures enclosed, by the
authority of the same Commission were thrown down, and in diverse places,
many were charged to be assistant, and helpers in these tumults. And all these
things were done, these three, the Mayor Watson and Aldrich, not only holding
their peace, and winking at the matter, but also in show sometime consenting,
being often compelled to serve the time, whereby they might relieve their
Country tossed to and fro, in the deep seas of sedition and discord, lest, if
not resisting at all* the adversary, and cruel common people, should have
perceived it, and so they should have brought present death to themselves, and
destruction to their Country, which then without doubt (if they had openly
resisted, or plainly denied (as far as man could perceive) such was their
rage, and unbridled madness) had utterly perished, overthrown with robberies,
burning, and all kind of common calamity.

In the mean season, the City of Norwich, careful of this estate of things,
with an uncertain hope, and continual expectation for relief, remained
doubtful of these sturres: for hitherto no answer was brought unto them from
the King, neither understood they what the Council had decreed to be done; and
the Citizens without commandment, durst attempt nothing, but remained in the
City, still looking for the Kings authority.

And it chanced at that time, many obscure and vile persons were in arms in
sundry places, as bound by a common consent of villainy: they had conspired to
tear in sunder the bowels of the Common wealth: for although the fury of rude
and beastly men, did much more, and cruelly rage in the County of Norfolk,
then any where else: yet the same mortal plague of destroying all things, was
spread abroad almost through all parts of the land. Not only Norfolk, but
Buckingham, Oxford, Surrey, Essex, Kent, Cambridge-shire, and many other places
were troubled with the like sturres* Whereby it came to pass, that when all
the counsels, care and study was occupied in quenching the flames of so great
seditions (lest, if they had not gone presently against the fire, all the
Commonwealth had burned) they came somewhat later to repress these Norfolk
Commotions then they wished.

In the mean while sedition grows, and loses nothing, but daily increases,
in so much, that of beastly men in Kets Camp, there were almost sixteen
thousand; and these 16000. Rebels in the Camp.
went about to fortify themselves with all means of defense, Kett being their
Captain; and they brought from diverse parts provision for the wars, and al
kind of weapons into the Camp.

Moreover, great store of Gunpowder, and Gunnes of all sorts a great number.
To the obtaining whereof, they ran into all places, and entered the houses of
Worshipful persons and Gentlemen, robbing them; and whatsoever cattle they
found in the field, money in the houses, or corn in the barnes, that ungodly,
and wickedly they took away, (yea, the owners looking upon them) and carried
it into the Camp.

And many, when after this sort they had wasted, powled, The Rebels rob one
another.
and emptied all places, and left miserable monuments every where of their
villainies, and made a discomfiture of all things, a great part of the prey was
privily turned another way, and thrust into holes and corners, and every one
heaped up by stealth for himself, as much as their dens could hold.

This being known, and brought before Kett, and the other Governors (for so
would they be called) they being desirous above all to provide against this
inconvenience, by common consent they agreed, that some place should be chosen
where they might sit to minister Justice. Now there was an old Oak with great
spread boughs, this they laid over with raftes and balkes acrosse, and made a
roof with boordes: where (for the most part) the people standing round about,
they determine and decree of complaints, and quarrels, (if any were done to
any) as the cause required, and sometime they bind with straighter bands, the
insolent and overmuch greedy covetousness of some, by violent taking all
away. This Oak was called the Oak of Reformation, whereunto at the first The
Oak of Reformation.
none came, but Kett, and the Governors: of the which some, and among these
the Mayor of the City especially, Aldrich, and others (of whom we spoke before,
against their wills appointed in this number) contended vehemently by all means
possible (as much as was in them) to restrain the needy, and hungry common
people, from this importune liberty of rifling, and robbing. To the which end
they went often upon the Oak, and with their grave speeches persuaded that
there might be at the length, if not an end, yet they would provide some means
against such rapine, and so general violence in all excess. There were
besides also other grave Persons, and good Divines, who endeavored by all
means possible, study and diligence, to reduce the tumultuous people (having
now cast off all fear of Law) and glutting themselves in all villainy, from
robbery, and burning, wherewith they had confounded all things, unto the
consideration of peace. And these in the day preaching, and in the night
watching armed in the City, omitted nothing that belonged unto them as they
were faithful Ministers, or lay upon them as they were good Subjects. At this
time, among the rest, the wisdom, faithfulness, and integrity of D. Matthew
Parker was notable, a worthy man, and every way adorned with virtue, then
Professor of Divinity, at this day in the time of our most renowned Queen
Elizabeth, Archbishop of Canterbury. He minding to do the office and duty of
a good Pastor, seeing all places environed with the flames of fury, and
mischief; did that which became a prudent, and behooved a resolute man. For in
rebuking of wickedness, he showed himself stout and valiant, and in wary
avoiding of perils, witty and careful: so as he performed the faith that he
ought to God and the King, and diligently providing for himself, he showed
that providence that is principally in wise men. But it came to pass one day,
what time he went with his friends into Ketts Camp, he found Kett and other
his Companions of that fellowship, standing Ketts request.
under the Oak, communing of matters between themselves. At which time the
notable courage of the Mayor M. Codde The courage and fidelity of the Mayor.
appeared, and his worthy voice was plainly heard, beseeming a valiant man.
For when Kett, the Captain of this conspiracy, was earnest with him to deliver
the keys of the City, and all his authority, and to resign his government
into his hands, Codde stoutly answered, he would first give his blood, and life
out of his body, before he would by villainy trecherously leave the City, or
cast off wickedly through fear and cowardice, his allegiance to the King. The
matter thus debated on both sides, and night drawing on, Matthew seeing the
miserable common people drowned in drink, and excess, thought that sober and
wholesome communication would little profit drunkards, ouer-charged with meat
and drink, and strooken with the heat of the weather and sun, therefore
thought good to say nothing unto them that day. Wherefore leaving all things as
he found them full of fury, and tumults, he departs into the City. The next
day early, which was Friday, he returns again into the Camp with his
brother Tho. Parker, (which was after Mayor of Norwich) where (it is lamentable
to tell) he found them all under the Oak, hearing prayers, and in the midst
of them one Thomas the Vicar of S. Martins at the Palace, reading the Letanie.
Matthew having Matthew Parkers Sermon.
gotten this opportunity to teach, went upon the Oak, and there made a Sermon
full of wisdom, modesty, and gravity. All his Sermon was chiefly divided
into three parts.

In the first he wisely admonishes them, that those things which for their
sustentation they had brought into the Camp being consumed, and spent, they
would not spoil wickedly the fruits of the earth, and the gifts of God.

Next, that they should not defile their hands with blood, following private,
and secret displeasures, rashly carried with a desire of revenge, neither to
punish them with imprisonment and bands, whom they held as Enemies: or take
away any man's life wickedly, or cruelly.

Lastly, in regard of common profit to surcease from these enterprises, and not
distrust the Kings Herald, or Messenger: but to give unto the King due honor,
even in his young and tender age; whereby they might use him hereafter, when he
came to more ripe and flourishing estate, (the valor and prowess of his
Ancestors being confirmed in him, and, as it were deep rooted) with incredible
delight and pleasure.

When in this place he had enforced all the strength of his speech, and all
the company had heard him attentively and willingly, standing round about him
while he preached: at the voice of one wretch of the basest of the people,
they began to cry out, one by one tumultuously; How long (says he) shall A
Tumultuous wretch.
we suffer this hireling Doctor, which (procured for his hire by the Gentlemen)
is come hither bringing words of sale, and a tongue bound with rewards? but we
will cast a bridle upon their intolerable power, and will hold them bound with
the cords of our Law, spite of their hearts.

Then the common people began to murmur, and openly to rage, and many, stirred
up with the speech of this Varlet, urged the matter with more bitter words and
threats, yea, and fearful speeches of some, were heard, and dangerous, which
came also to his own ears. Some of them cried out fiercely* It were good that
he which has spoken so well, and has powdered his Sermon with such eloquent
words and sentences, were compelled to come down, being shot through with
pikes and arrows. Whereupon a great fear came upon this good man at that
time, and unto this fear was added the terror of another evil suspected:
Conceit is strong.
for he himself felt under his feet the points of the spears, and Iauelings,
and was in great doubt, lest he should be thrust through of the raging
multitude. Nevertheless, it was afterward perceived, that there was no such
cause of fear: for all that were under the tree (for the most part) had
Matthew in great reputation, and embraced him with all love and kindness, and
were greatly glad of his coming thither. For they hoped it would have come to
pass, that the people being strooken in conscience with his words, and made
more tractable, or afraid of their wickedness and villainy, would repent of
their doing, or at the least, remit somewhat of their wonted fury and
cruelty; and by this means, all that were present against their wills, might
obtain more liberty. Howsoever it was, he was exceedingly afraid, and seemed
to be in great danger.

At what time on the sudden came Thomas, of whom we spoke before, Vicar of S.
Martins, having gotten two or three Musicions unto him, who began to sing, Te
Deum, in English, with solemn Music, and distinct notes, elegantly set for
the delight of the ear: by the sweetness of which Song, they being ravished
(for they were unwonted to Music) their cruel and raging minds (bewitched
with these unaccustomed delights) by little and little were appeased.

Matthew having gotten this opportunity, thought it not good to tarry, while
either these had made an end of their Song, or the other should begin a new to
rage; therefore coming down from the Oak with his brother (as he could get
out) he went from the Camp. And as they were going down Saint Leonards Hill,
toward Pockethorpe Gates, they came upon him, and other ministers of that
society, following him with tumultuous clamours, which contended with him
chiefly Rebels desirous of the great Scale.
for the great seal, whereby he had license to preach.

Matthew therefore perceiving, that all were infected with this villainy, as it
were, running headlong with deadly fury and madness, being wearied with such
tumults, and lamenting the evils of his Country, escaping privily what way he
could, leaves his brother Thomas Parker behind him, to reason with them of the
matters, and by this means, withdrew himself from their fury.

The next day after, Matthew Parker going into Saint Clements Church, from one
of the Lessons appointed to be read, takes up the cause again, to speak some
thing of these pernicious tumults; many of the Conspirators standing round
about him, at what time they said nothing: but waiting his coming out of the
Church, full of rage they stood round about him, and being come out, they
followed him presently, saying; They understood he had three or four good and
able Geldings, which might serve the King; therefore they willed him, that
immediately after dinner they should be ready, for they were to use them
presently. Hereunto Matthew answered little or nothing, but called unto him
speedily a Smith, and taking the shoes off the feet of some of them, he caused
them to be pared to the quick. The other he willed to be anointed with green
Coperasse all over, as though they had been tired with overmuch travel, and
dressed with medicine. The Rebels supposing the matter to be even so indeed
(for anon after, The Rebels deceived.
as they were led to pasture, seeing some swadled about the feet, and other
anointed with green medicine) they left off their purpose. Matthew not long
after going out at the gates, as it were, to walk about two miles from the
City, had his horse brought him to Kringelford bridge, where he took their
barks, and began his journey toward Cambridge. But in the way, what he saw,
what he heard, what furies and villainies by the seditious (which met him in his
journey) he beheld, to speak of all, were an infinite labor. Nevertheless,
by the goodness of God (when he had escaped all these garboyles, and popular
hurliburlies) at the length, being free from so great dangers, he came safe to
Cambridge.

The speech therefore of this worthy man (as an Oracle from heaven) was after
this manner wickedly neglected and despised of most vile and beastly persons,
forsaken not only of all health, but of all hope; which, although at that
time, blind and headlong through fury and madness (as deadly, and to so great
means of recovering their liberty, an enemy and dangerous) they despised and
refused, yet without all doubt, from the most doleful chances which insued,
the horror of Gods vengeance possessed all their souls. For (as we said
before) he was the minister of this heavenly voice, that quenching as it were,
so great a fire of mischief in their minds, they would speedily repent: lest
the impiety of Treason, spreading further, should at length become lamentable
to their Country, and in the end sorrowful, and deadly to themselves: for all
things that were divinely, and wittily spoken by him (as though they had been
fitted by destiny to the people of Norfolk) came to pass: And the Rebels
falling from one villainy to another, received at the last condign punishment
for their so great furies.

In the mean time, the Rebels (of whom we spoke before) thirsting after the
goods, and fortunes of Great men, had filled all places with robbery and theft.
Being now satiate and glutted with the spoils, they turned at length from the
desire of the prey, to violence and cruelty; going through all the Country of
Norfolk, threatening terror and peril to all that would not stand on their
part. And now the worshipful, and Gentlemen (in all places whithersoeuer their
rage carried them) being taken and brought into the Castle, it caused such a
general fear upon all men; that many forsaking house, and inheritance, and
changing their apparel, lest being perceived in their flight and journey, they
might be known, escaped by obscure and by-pathes: and fearing all extremity
from the Enemy, hid themselves in Caves of the earth, and thick woods. And
many having horse and cart, were constrained to serve; and Great cruelty.
if they had none, were compelled to get elsewhere. And unto these was
commanded (that bestowing their labor and bearing their own charges) they
should carry corn and victual to the Camp at Moushold. To whom, except they
presently obeyed, was threatened the destruction of their houses and fields, and
violence to their wives and children. Moreover what worshipful persons and
Gentlemen soever they took (and they took many) them they bound surely with
cords, as though in all villainy they had exceeded themselves. Many were
delivered to be kept in Norwich, and some committed to the prison, commonly
called the Guild Hall, others to the Castle. Some shut up in the Earl of
Surryes house, as thieves and felons: Yea heereunto it came* that if at any
time they wanted money (which they wanted often) they compelled The City
treasury forced to aid the Rebels.
the Mayor of the City, out of the common treasure, always to supply their
necessity. Whose importune demands, if the Mayor had denied, without all doubt,
they had emptied the treasury, and set the house on fire, and brought a
miserable plague and destruction upon all men's goods. And surely they often
entered wicked counsel for the rifling of the City; and the thing had been
done undoubtedly, if by the industry and diligence of the Mayor, they had not
been always put by their hope, and endeavor. Notwithstanding many Gunnes, and
much Artillery, and instruments of war, whatsoever could be found in the
City, they took and carried away (fearing lest any thing might happen
hereafter at any time against them) and carried them into the Camp, charging
moreover all the Citizens, they should be ready at The Rebels pretense.
the first call to defend and help them, if need require: Crying out, that
they were the Kings friends, and being unjustly oppressed, had taken upon them
the defense of the Laws, and of the Kings Majesty. And not contented with
this, they abused the Kings name to serve their villainy, and wretchedness.
Moreover there were certain Commissions sent from the Kings Majesty, giving
authority unto diverse worshipful, and Gentlemen, whose names were inserted in
the Commissions, with commandment carefully to prevent the dangers that might
ensue to the Commonwealth, and to provide that these sturres and commotions
might be repressed in the beginning. When they had gotten these letters,
putting out the names of the men of Worship, they caused their own names to be
written in, and pulling off the Kings Seals, set them to fo^ged A treacherous
forgery.
Commissions of their own, and setting them up in open places, abused the
ignorant people that knew not this great deceit. And now they were come to
such rage and madness, as the fury and force of so great tumults, could not be
restrained neither by the governors, nor yet by Kett himself, the arch and
chief Rebel.

Moreover, they held them for enemies (not only) which refused to join with
them in their villainies, but many good Citizens (which to save themselves fled
out of the City, with their wives and children) they accounted enemies: Who
being driven out of their houses, through the fear of so great danger (when
they durst remain no longer any where) wandered here and there, separated and
dispersed, by the means of this general rage and violence: And with exceeding
lamentation, and many tears bewailed the iniquity of those times, and the
miserable condition of their Country. Moreover, they threaten the City with
fire and burning, insomuch as they which remained in it, looked for nothing
else but the overthrow and ruin of all things. In the Camp was an horrible
and lamentable fate of things; for when there met together a great multitude of
thieves and bankrouts, from all parts of England, whom the hope of prey, and
desire of ease called Idleness the mother of mischief.
from their daily labor, and tilling of the ground: such monsters of mischief
were conceived, and such unlawful lusts in all kind of daliance, that my
tongue abhors, and is ashamed to tell.

This also is most evident, that as they had brought an unspeakable waste, and
desolation upon all fields and houses on every side, so whatsoever was brought
into the Camp, was quickly spent in most gluttonous manner, surfeiting and
reuelling: Insomuch as it seems almost incredible, how so much provision
could be devoured in so short a time. For besides Swannes, Geese, Hens,
Ducks, and all kind of fowls 3000. Bullocks and 20000. Sheep spent in few days
without number, about three thousand Bullocks, and twenty thousand Sheep,
were royotously spent in the Camp within few days. Besides paled parkes, and
hedged (wherein Dear were kept) were pulled down and laid open, and what
Dear soever they could any way come by, them they violently took and carried
away. Nothing was shut up to their lust, no regard had of future times, no
foresight of the evils that might ensue, no measure of wickedness and wasting,
but Good (...)
all places were overthrown and emptied in a miserable sort* and such a
slaughter was made of Sheep, and other cattle every where, as they sold
openly a Wether for a groat, the head and purtenance, as contemptible and vile
meat, were cast away, because there was none in the abundance of more dainties
that would eat them. What should I remember the spoiling of Groves and Woods,
which were almost utterly rooted up, and cut down by the ground? all which, as
much as could be cut, they burned, or which is more vile, they consumed in
building their dens and lodgings. Moreover, there is added to this so
terrible licenciousnesse (the companion for the most Wretched cruelty.
part of such practices) cruelty. For these filthy beasts, and of all people,
the vilest, laid chains upon the most honest and harmless men, and manicles
and fetters upon many, wherewith they coupled them, two and two together, and
made them endure long the most bitter torture, and butchery of the Jail.

Moreover, they appoint to every of the gates, and entrance into the City,
Porters, that none should issue out, and command the Constables of the Wards,
to see that none went out of the City. And a great company of rude Countrymen
were gathered together; who were appointed to watch and ward in certain
places: these men were provided for by the Constables, to the satisfying of
their desire, insomuch as many honest men, consuming their stocks in so great
and wastfull expenses, became utterly impouerished for ever. And the hatred
conceived against all in general, that, most cruelly they uttered upon those
that they could come by.

There was at that time one Wharton (a man of great courage, Wharton hardly
carried alive to prison.
but not favored of the people) he being led toward the City to the Castle,
bound with cords as a thief, a great company of Rebels went round about him
to defend him, lest he should have been slain in the way by the unruly
multitude. But neither his good behavior toward them, nor honest promise,
neither the diligent care of the Rebels appointed to guarde him, were
sufficient to defend him, who escaped hardly that he was not murdered: for
many attempted his death and spoil, his body also in many places was stabbed
in with the points of their Spears, and Pikes.

Moreover, it happened about the time that this was done, that the Rebels were
going toward the City, and haling one of Molton as prisoner, against whom they
burned with most cruel hatred; because he was always a subtle fellow, and a
man set to sale for money (for he was a Lawyer) and as men thought of a
revenging mind, and one that used to raise up Spirits, with fearful signs,
and superstitious wonders. While therefore (as is said before) this man of
Molton was drawn out of a wood (by the bewraying of a certain woman) where he
had hid himself a little before among thorns and b^yers, for lack of better
provision, him they haled with them with all reproach and contumely, the heavens
thundering horribly (not A horrible thunder, rain with hayle.
without the great astonishment of them that heard it) also mighty showers
fell, mixed with hail, which covered the earth, and was very deep, not far
from the Oak, called the Oak of Reformation. But this fearful Tempest, as a
sign from heaven, was so far from appalling, or terrifying them, that, as if
they had been stirred up by a heavenly voice, they are more fierce to all
kind of villainy, and more incensed then before. And The Gentlemen in great
danger.
with no less Tempest were the minds of the worshipful Gentlemen, whom the
Clownes (with notable cruelty, and detestable fury, raging, unjustly held in
bands) afflicted.

All which either feared death every day (whereof some surely are reported to
have felt) most undeserved; or else more grievous torture then death it self:
and whatsoever else might be devised by these filthy Robbers. For certain of
them (as if they had committed some notable villainy) were summoned before the
company of these desperate Persons, as unto judgment; and being set before the
Oak, as at the Bar, were compelled Ketts trial of prisoners.
to plead their cause out of chains: and when the ignorant and rude multitude
were asked what they would have done with them; all as with one mouth cried
out: Let them be hanged, Let them be hanged. And when the Gentlemen inquired
again of them, why they should use such cruel speeches, especially against
them whom they knew not, and were guilty of no crime: they fiercely answered;
Such words of others A Rebels reason.
were used toward them, and therefore they would use the same again to them;
and had nothing else to object. Though there were others that gave this a
reason of their cruel sentence, that they were Gentlemen, and therefore to be
taken out of the way: for they knew well, if once they might get the Victory,
they should endure at their hands all kind of torment, and cruelty. And
therefore it were better their lives should be taken away, whom now they had
in bands (so should they enjoy their ease, and security) then to give unto them
the use thereof, (if it were but one hour) of whom anon after they might be
slain as sheep. So enuyed, at this time, Hatred of the Gentry.
and hated, was the name of a man of Worship, or Gentleman, as the basest of
the people, burning with more then hostile hatred, desired to extinguish, and
utterly cut off, not only the Gentry themselves, but if it were possible, all
the offspring and hope of them.

In this sort, when all the Country of Norfolk in a manner was shaken and
beaten with the bloody tempests of these dangerous tumults, and now almost
twenty days had passed from the beginning, and nothing in the mean season any
where done, but wasting, burning* robbing, and all things not only miserable to
behold, but horrible and fearful to hear: so great grief had now possessed
all good men, and especially the Citizens of Norwich: as at the sight of this
lamentable fate of their Country, they were almost, with continual sorrow,
and tears, consumed. To resist so great an inconvenience they could not, by
reason of so great multitude of desperate persons which now were gathered
together from all parts, into the Camp. And that which is more, to take up
Arms without the commandment of the King, was forbidden by Law, as is
aforesaid. And because nothing as yet was heard from the Kings Council,
fearing daily the destructions, and fireing of the City, all hope of safety for
the most part being taken away, and being destitute of all counsel, they
remain within the walls of the City.

There was at that time by chance at London, one Leonard Sutterton at London.
Sutterton, a Citizen of Norwich, which fled thither for the safety of his
life, as out of the common flame, and burning. The Kings Council sent for him,
to enquire and find out all the purposes and intents of the Rebels. Sutterton
declares that which he knows: namely, that a great multitude of ungodly
persons were gathered together, as mighty waters, that these brought calamity
and a lamentable plague upon all places where they came. That the number
increases every day, that no villainy can be thought of, which they have not
determined, that the best men are laid hold off, and led away bound with
chains, houses rifled, fields wasted, Woods burnt and cut down, all kind of
beasts killed, through rage and fury, nothing left any where untouched, but by
a popular frenzy all things consumed. Also destruction and ruin hang over the
City, except it be very speedily prevented. Notwithstanding he hoped, yea, and
he heard some secretly say, that there were many in the Camp, and in those
dens of wretched men, which if they had any hope of the Kings favor, and
that they might escape without punishment, would willingly cast off their
weapons, and embrace the Kings pardon. Therefore he besought, and earnestly,
and most humbly entreated, that by public proclamation, he would of his
clemency grant pardon, and impunity to as many as would depart from that
assembly, for so he supposes those meetings will easily be dissolved.

His advice and counsel being approved, by the authority and judgment of the
King, they appoint and decree; that it pleases the Kings Majesty, to provide a
remedy in time for the distressed, and troubled Commonwealth: whereby she may
recover her health again, being once eased of those dangerous sturres, and
hurts of sedition, whereinto the plague of disloyalty had now brought her.
Notwithstanding, he would try all means, before he would cut off that which
is corrupt, and contagious (lest he should bring a maine upon the rest of the
body.) Therefore he decreed, that the punishment long due unto there
obstinacy, unthriftiness, ungraciousness, and sensuality, should be deferred
for a time, and hope of safety should be offered, if they would abstain^e from
their enterprise begun. The fidelity of the King is pledged, and all fear of
severity taken away; so as by clemency and gentleness, they may be brought
to peace, and a better mind.

These things, after this manner, being consulted upon, and decreed, this only
remained; that this clemency and favor of the Kings Majesty, might be made
known without delay to the common people.

To this end an Herald of Arms is sent post to Norwich, An Herald sent to
Norwich.
and for the more expedition, Leonard Sutturton is joined fellow with him. When
he came to Norwich, from thence they go presently into the Camp; where the
Herald standing with his coat of Arms before the Oak with a loud voice, so as
all that were round about him might hear, he said:

HArken all you that be here, and thou Kett, Captain of mischief,
Proclamation.
and as many of you as are present give ear. Although the manner of our
Ancestors, and the dignity of this Empire, and the Majesty of the name of a
King, seem to require, that you which have wickedly taken upon you Arms
against your Country, and have cast your selves into open Conspiracy and
Rebellion, being put to flight by sword and fire, should receive due punishment
for the wickedness which ye have committed: yet notwithstanding, so great is
the kindness and clemency of the Kings Majesty; that those, whose heinous
offense craves for conding punishment, of his singular, and incredible favor,
he will have preserved with safety. And therefore commands* that forthwith
every man cast off his armor; that they forsake the Camp, and this Den of
thieves; and every one to depart to his own house. And if you have done this
thing being deceived, ye have your pardon, and warrant of impunitie, of all the
evils ye have done: but if ye shall remain in your former mind, and purpose
of wickedness, he will surely revenge all the hurts and villainies that you
have done, as is meet, and with all severity of punishment. Neither will he
suffer any longer remain, to the overthrow of the whole kingdom, the things
that are to be cut off, and cannot be healed.

When he had thus proclaimed with a loud voice (as is said before) almost all
the multitude cried, God save the Kings Majesty. Which cry, when they renewed
again, many kneeled down on their knees, commending with tears this kindness
and clemency of the King, seldom heard of, which no doubt, al would have
embraced, as those, whose minds began by little and little, with shame and
fear, to be overcome and mollified, had not the most wretched speeches of
some, and the most perfidious persuasions of Ket himself, turned them from the
study of peace, and drawn them back again to consent to their wickedness.
For Kett very fiercely and stoutly answered: Kings are wont to pardon wicked
persons, not innocent and Ketts Ansswere.
just men; they, for their part, had deserved nothing, and were guilty to
themselves of no crime; and therefore despised such speeches as idle, and
unprofitable to their business. And so turning to his company, he desired them
not to leave him, nor to be fainthearted, but remember with what conditions
they bound Unholy League.
themselves, either to other; and that he, for his part, was ready to bestow
his life (if need were) for their safety.

When he had, in rage and fury, spoken these words, the Kett pronounced
Traitor.
Herald charged this beastly man (and infamous in so many points of villainy)
with treason against the Kings Majesty, and pronounces him a Traitor, and
guilty of high Treason. Moreover, commands Ioh. Petibone, the Majors
Sword Bearer, to arrest this cursed Caitife of an actio^ of treason, against
the King: but then they began a stur on every side, this way, and that way
striving with no less stout, then dangerous contention. The Herald seeing the
minds of the people so soon to fall away again (whom before, through the
denouncing of peace, he had somewhat mollified) and with Ketts words, as with
spurs of fury, to be stirred up again; and from the hope of health, which
before they seemed to embrace, to be entangled again, in their former
wickedness and villainy, departed from the Many forsake the Camp.
Camp. Yet many, notwithstanding, followed him, and forsaking their former
purpose, and casting off their weapons, betook themselves to the Kings mercy.
All these, with the Mayor, and Thomas Aldrich, went into the City, and
forthwith the Mayor commanded the gates to be shut, especially Bishops Gates,
because from thence directly (except speedily, by this advice they had been
prevented) the Rebels might break into the City. Moreover, all the Gentlemen,
of whom Gentlemen set at liberty, admitted to Counsel.
we spoke before, that were thrown into the Castle by Ketts company, were
loosened from their bonds and imprisonment, and set at liberty, and were
admitted into Counsel with the Mayor, and his Brethren, and their advice
required which way best, the assault of the Enemy might be let and hindered.
Again, they devised for the defense of the City, lest by the breaking in of
the Rebels, and licentiousness of the Soldiers, all should go to hauock. It
was thought best in conclusion, that the City should be defended on every side,
the Gates and walls kept, watch and ward to be had, all entrance to be shut
up: whereby the means of transporting victuals, being cut off, and taken away
on every side, the minds of the Rebels being strooken through want of
victual, and weary of the Wars, might faint at length.

Of these things which they long time debated between Delay breeds danger.
themselves, deliberating, and consulting, without Judges, there came
messengers unto them from the Gates trembling, and bringing fearful tidings:
that many of the Citizens had bound themselves to the fellowship of this
villainy, and that some of them had let in many of Ketts Camp into the City.
When this great and sudden danger, unlooked for, came to pass, and the Rebels
were now entered the City, all things immediately seemed to go to ruin, and
fear possessed the minds of all. Request was made therefore, (and it was
easily obtained The Ge^^lemen shut up in prison again.
of the Magistrates of the City) that the Gentlemen should be shut up in the
Castle as before, lest peradventure while they might be seen at liberty in the
City, and free from bonds, wherewith of late they had been holden, the minds
of the Rebels full of fury and rage, should by that occasion be stirred up to
murder, and bloodshed. Therefore they were all called for, and again
committed to close prison. Notwithstanding it was afterward understood, that
the enemies were gone again out of the City into the Camp the same way they
came. When this danger was over, the Mayor and his Brethren, perceiving the
Conspirators to plot on every side the death and destruction of men and goods,
they gave themselves wholly to study for the preservation of the City.
Wherefore ten of the greatest pieces of Ordinance were planted against the
enemies Ordinance in the Castle ditch.
in the ditch (called the Castle ditch) and well placed for the defense of the
City, if any force and assault should be made. Moreover, they appoint watch
and ward, especially in those places, where through tract of time, the walls
were weak and decayed: Who were commanded forthwith to remain in those
places; that if any danger should happen from the enemy in the night, they
might presently with stones* Pikes, and other provision, be driven from the
walls, and Gates of the City. The rest of the multitude were commanded, that
all of them armed, should be ready in the Market place, and cross streets of
the City, for every occasion.

And because it seemed that the Ordinance (whereof we spoke) placed in the
Castle ditch, and ruins of the walls, did not much annoy the enemy, not bring
any defense unto the City: At the commandment of the Mayor they were all
brought into the plain, and speedily bestowed in the Meddowes which lie to the
lowest part of the City, and all the night following A fearful night.
(for the most part) was spent in fearful shot on both sides.

The next day, the Rebels (perceiving of all that tumult in the night, more
fear then hurt to the City: because the bullets from their Ordinance,
mounting over the City, had done no harm) brought all the Ordinance they had,
from the Hill, into the Plain, and planting them at the bottom of the Hill,
began to assault the City afresh: but because soon after, the Camp began
to be distressed for victual, that they might more commodiously being
provision from the places near adjoining, they agree to make truce with the
Citizens for a time. Therefore they ordain to this office as Ambassadors, one
James Williams, and Rafe Sutton, beastly men, and of the common people of the
City of Norwich the basest. These came presently from the Camp to the City
Gates, with a Banner of Truce in their hands, and by the permission of the
Citizens, were brought to the Mayor and his Brethren, and are said to speak
after this manner:

Our Captain Kett and his Soldiers, entreats of this City, Ketts truce
and of you the Mayor, and your Brethren Peace and Truce, for a few days,
whereby he may have liberty (as the custom was of late) to transport victual
through the City, which thing, except ye grant, he will break in by force
into the City, and threatens destruction by fire and sword.

HEreunto the Mayor answered, that they were most wretched The Majors ^^swere.
Traitors, cladde with all disloyalty and villainy, seldom heard of. Therefore
he would yield nothing unto their unjust demands, neither was it lawful for
him, if he would, especially unto them the vilest men that ever were borne.
That they had committed so many, and such intolerable villainies, whereby they
deserved, not only to be shut out of the City, but also (if it could be) raced
out of the nature of mankind. That they despised the Kings Majesty, wasted
the Country, destroyed the City of Norwich, almost on every side had branded
an everlasting note of reproach for villainy and treason upon themselves and
their posterity, all places through force and cruelty polluted, troubled,
vexed, and destroyed. Notwithstanding do they entreat to be admitted into the
City? to be Citizens? to be partakers of the benefits thereof, and divine
exercises? And do they entreat at the last that their want might be supplied?
What? do they not repent of the wickedness whereto they have vowed
themselves? What? not so much as are ashamed? Verily I know not whether are
more wicked they that have done these things; or more shameless they that make
request for them. Do they hope of the Mayor? And of the same Mayor, whom of
late they made to suffer the shame of imprisonment? Of this City which they
wish overthrown by the foundation? Of the people of Norwich, upon whom they
have brought violence, and the danger of War on every side? Corn and
victual, to be ministered unto them (as meat to the furies?) What madness
were this at length to see? Let them be packing therefore let them be packing,
and tell Kett, that wicked Captain of these outrageous villainies, these
things: The Citizens of Norwich will obey the Kings Majesty, not Traitors to
their Country, and most cruel beasts: And that he esteems little of the
dangers and fears, they intend against the City. Let them break in, destroy,
cast down, cut off, lay even with the ground, and make spoil of all things:
but let them know, that God is the rewarder, and the revenger. And let them
tremble at length in the conscience of so great wickedness: for they shall, no
doubt, ere long, be severely punished, which they have justly drawn upon
themselves by their fury and madness.

These things with speed returned to Kett, and his companions in the Camp,
being much moved hereat; with a brainsicke rage (as wild furies) they came
running down the hill with a cruel and despitefull noise, crying out. And
when they came near the Gates, they practiced with all their forces to break
into the City, but being driven back with pikes and arrows, they left that
enterprise. At that time all the Ordinance (as was said before) being placed in
the meddowes beneath the City, was spent upon the enemy: but for lack of
powder, and want of skill in the Gunners, to small or little purpose. Yet many
being shot with arrows were wounded; which when they fell thick upon the
ground, the beardlesse boys of the Country (whereof there were a great
number) and others of the dregs of the people, men most filthy, gathered them
up, and carried them to the enemy: And the minds of them all were so inflamed,
as the very naked, and unarmed boys (as though a certain frenzy had bereaved
them of the sense of understanding) running about, provoked our men with all
reproachful speeches. There was added also to their importune cursed words, an
odious, and inhumane villainy: A beastly villainy.
for (with reverence to the Readers) one of these cursed boys, putting down
his hose, and in derision, turning his bare buttocks to our men, with an
horrible noise and outcry, filling the air (all men beholding him) did that,
which a chaste tongue shameth to speak, much more a sober man to write: but
being shot through the buttocks, one gave him, as was meet, the punishment he
deserved. It is reported also, that some having the arrows sticking fast in
their bodies (a thing fearful to A fearful and desperate cruelty.
tell) drawing them out of the green wounds, with their own hands, gave them
(as they were dropping with blood) to the Rebels that were about them, whereby
yet at the least, they might be turned upon us again: so great a desire was
there almost in all ages of spoiling, and so great a thirst of shedding blood.

In the mean season, when on the other side of the City, a fearful cry
began; To your weapon, To your weapon; Citizens, The enemies policy.
if ye be men, to your weapon, the enemies are entered the City: and all men on
the sudden ran thither, as is the manner of men in fear, where especially the
greatest tumult and noise is heard. The Rebels beholding these things from the
hill, and perceiving the Citizens thin upon the walls, and before the Gates
of the City, resolved presently to enter the City where it was void of
defense. There the boys (of whom we spoke before) and a great company of
Country Clownes, did hazard a thing not only marvelous to see, but incredible
to hear. For the unarmed multitude, and others, part with Clubbes and Swords,
others with Spears, Staves and Iauelins, (as chance could arm every man on
the sudden) cast themselves headlong into the River that co^passeth the City,
at the Bridge, called Bishops Gates Bridge. Who, without fear, swimming over,
and flying to the Gates with outcries, and most tumultuous noise, struck such
a terror in the minds of all men, as there was none almost, which thought not
that day, the day of doom, both to their City, and to themselves. Therefore
all for the most part (being afraid and discomfited) fled, and as every man
could find the way to his house, and the secret places thereof, they creep in,
leaving the City undefended. But the Rebels, pulling off the bars of the
Gates; whatsoever Ordinance, or instruments of war they found in the City,
they carried with them into the Camp. There when some of our friends among
them upon the miserable sight of these things, were strooken with sorrow and
compassion, and with lamentable voice, and waterie eyes, prayed God to turn
these calamities from the City: The Boys and Country Clownes, which stood
round about, mocked them, calling them traitors, and in most vile manner they
were vexed, and grieved, with cursings and reuilings. But the Gates after this
sort set open (as was said before) when all things were disordered through the
boldness, and violence of the Rebels (for they came to and fro out of the
Camp into the City.) The Herald (for as yet he was in the City, neither was
the last day appointed by the King (for the multitude to lay down their
weapons) yet past) came with the Mayor into the market place, accompanied with
a great number of Citizens.

There again in the Kings name, he commands them to Pardon offered again.
put off their armor, to leave the Camp, every one to depart home to his own
house, and to use reverently and humbly the Kings mercy and clemency. If they
would so do; then they should be safe, and free from all punishment.
Otherwise, there is nothing to be looked for; but grievous torments, bitter
death, and all extremity. When he had made an end of speaking, the Rebels
cried out very arrogantly and fiercely, Pardon refused.
saying; Let him depart with a pestilence, and on the devils name, with his
idle promises: He was mad, that infusing such flattering speeches into their
ears, did believe that they being bewitched with such intising words, would
be oppressed, and circumuented in the end. They detested such mercy, and
utterly defied it; as which in apparent offering a slender and vain hope of
impunity, would cut off treacherously all safety.

The Herald perceiving now all of them given over, and (as it were) bondslaues
to fury and villainy; and that they could neither by the fear of punishment,
nor hope of impunity be brought from their intended wickedness: without
anything done presently, leaves the City, and returns to the Court. Soon
after whose departure, the Rebels commanded Leonard Leonard Sutterton sought.
Sutterton to be brought before them, that so they might lay him in chains:
because he had been companion with the Herald in his journey. But Sutterton
understanding the matter: fearing also lest the mad, and turbulent people,
burning toward him with malice (as they did toward all good men) might deal
cruelly with him, hid himself privily in the City amongst his friends and
kindred. The Mayor put in prison.


Then Kett took the Mayor, Robert Watson, William Rogers, John Homersone,
William Brampton, and many others, and commanded them to be brought out of the
City into the Camp, and so to prison, where chains were put upon them all,
and they were shut up in Mount Surrey, and there remained prisoners, and in
irons, until the last day of this conspiracy; at the length some of them were
set at liberty, others cruelly slain.

While these and the like were tumultuously done in the Kett distressed makes
the worst choice
Camp; Kett perceiving the matter was come to this pass, that he must of
necessity, either have a bloody victory against his Country, or else shortly
receive an end worthy his deserving, thought it best for his affairs, if he
could draw a huge multitude together, for the increase of his Army. Wherefore
he allured by rewards, and fair promises, all fugitives on every side, as many
as could be gathered together, and men that had nothing to take to, and were
without hope of any thing, to join themselves to the fellowship of this cursed
company. Whereupon, it is incredible to tell, how great, and almost innumerable
multitudes of graceless persons, on the sudden were assembled.

But the Citizens took it grievously, that their Mayor, a The Citizens
careful of their Mayor.
worthy and upright man, should be holden bound of wretched murderers, and as
it now seemed, thirsty of blood: moreover in bonds should sustain the
contumely, and shame of the prison: fearing also lest in the end he might be
slain by violence: because some of them threatened him many grievous things:
others scurrilously and scoffing, iested at the good man's name, and that
dangerously, as pretending death unto him after a sort. For being called Codde,
by name, and there is a fish of the Sea called after the same manner (in Latin
called Capite) in contempt of the worthy Majors name, and to his no little
danger, one varlet ministering occasion The Mayor in great danger.
unto another of laughter and scoffing, they made an O, yes; and cried, As many
as would come to the Camp to morrow, should buy a Cods head for a penny.
Hereupon the Citizens fearing lest the seditious should determine any thing
grievously against him: and being marueilously troubled in mind, and careful
of the Majors danger, having deserved so well of them; they came unto Thomas
Aldrich, complaining one by one, of this importunate boldness, and unbridled
violence. This Aldrich (as we said before) was a man beloved of all men; and
ruled with such wisdom, gravity* and modesty (for he was a man of a fine and
sharp wit) that even his name was fearful to the most barbarous enemy. For,
when al men loved him exceedingly, maruailing at his singular courtesy and
modesty, in as much as among the chief of the Rebels, he had that command in
short time, as neither his advice, nor enterprises were at any time in vain.
Therefore, much of the goods that were taken away of the Rebels by violence,
through his industry were restored again to the owners, and many pestilent
attempts of the seditious, by his providence and diligence were restrained.
When therefore he understood in how Aldrichs speech to Kett, for the Majors
liberty.
great danger the safety of the life of the Mayor was: being moved with the
indignity of the thing, he went to Kett into the Camp, and wills him to set
at liberty, and out of bonds, the Mayor of the City. Hereunto, when Kett, as it
were perplexed in mind, said nothing, Aldrich cried with a loud voice, Art
thou not ashamed, wretched Traitor, to hold in prison and irons, I say, not
alone an harmless man, but a Mayor, which is the Kings Majesty's most
faithful Lieutenant? Art thou so fierce and cruel, that when through riot and
excess, thou have wasted the goods and commodities of all men, thou can now
not be satisfied, nor filled, except thou may drink up at last also the
blood of innocent persons? Therefore thou the wretchedst man the earth bears,
command him forthwith to be brought out of prison.

These words, as flashes of lightning, sharply bent against Kett (whether it
were for the reverence of the man that spoke, or which is most like, of a
conscience of his wickedness) struck such a fear and terror in him, as the
thing which others could not obtain with entreaty and all persuasion, he
brought to pass with threats and gravity of speech. By whose wisdom, the
Mayor having obtained his liberty, although he could not altogether avoid all the storms of that turbule^t time: yet he escaped happily both the grieuousnes
of imprisonment, and danger of his life. Wherefore, having liberty to go all
about in the City, his care and diligence was a great comfort to many of the
Citizens afterward, against those evils which at that time oppressed the City.
And for as much as he could not sit continually in the government of the City,
because (for the most part) he was constrained to abide in the enemies Camp,
he deputed one Augustine Steward in his room, to take the charge of desending,
and governing the City in his absence. Who taking unto him, Henry Bacon, and
John Atkinson, then Sheriues of Norwich: ruled the City carefully, and kept all
the Citizens easily in order (except the unruly) who^ no good order could
command. But here must needs be remembered, what severe, and sour Judges, the
seditious were upon them; whom having in prison and bonds, they afflicted with
all opprobry, and shame: whose cruelty and wickedness was so great, as those,
whom they had first oppressed with unspeakable villainy, and seldom heard of,
them (at the length vexed, and afflicted with extreme miseries) they delivered
to the mad multitude to be slain. For a day was appointed, when they that were
in hold, should be brought forth openly as malefactors, The order of trying
innocent men.
that (after a preposterous manner of Judgment) a quest might pass on them.
Then Kett openly, all men beholding him, went upon the Oak (which they called
the Oak of Reformation) and there fate down: every one of the prisoners in
order were called by their names: then his manner was to inquire of his
favorites, and companions in that villainy, what they thought of them. The
furious varlets being made Inquisitors, and Judges of the lives of innocent
men; if they found nothing of the man in question, cried out, A good man, be
is a good man; and therefore ought to be set at liberty. But if by the least
suspicion of any small crime, his fame that was named, was but once touched; or
if any thing (though the least) were found wherein perhaps he had offended any
one of them: some one (of the people) answered; whose voice the other of the
common sort followed, as it were stirred up of the furies; Let him be hanged,
Let him be hanged: although they were utterly ignorant of the man in question,
whether white or black, old or young (as one whose name was never heard of
before) yet after this manner they were always wont to cry out.

And in this manner these pestilent Traitors, not led by judgment or reason
(lest they should be unlike themselves) but led by a certain blind and
headlong rage of the mind, (as by a mighty Tempest) oftentimes with a word,
and as it were with a mad nod of their furies, they inflicted most cruel
punishment upon innocent and just men. And surely so great was the strength of
the disease, and as it were corruption that possessed the minds of them all:
as being almost without sense, and through the cruelty of so great villainy
hardened; they violated all Laws of God and Man, with their great fury and
boldness.

Not many days after, by the commandment of the King, authority was given
unto William Pari Marquess of Northhampton, to leuy an Army of men, with
commandment to go in all haste to the City of Norwich, and there to do his
endeavor: that because these so great furies could not by clemency and lenity
be appeased, to pursue with fire and sword, Kett and his Confederates, as
Traitors and most cruel Enemies to his Majesty. Northampton, all things
prepared and Northamptons Army. 1500.
made ready to his liking, with fifteen hundred Soldiers (as was commanded)
goes shortly after toward Norwich. There were with him in his Army two
Lords, Sheffield and Lords. Knights.
Wentworth* besides, Anthony Denny, Richard Southwel, Ralph Sadler, John Gates,
Thomas Paston, Henry Beding field, John Suliard, William Wilgraue, John Cuttze,
Thomas Cornwallies, all Knights: to these of Esquires and Gentlemen as well of
England Ge^tlemen.
as of Italy a worthy train. When they were now but a mile from the City, the
Marquess of Northampton sent presently an Herald, which (as the manner is)
should denounce War to the City, except they would presently obey. By whom al
things which are accustomed to be done (being proclaimed and performed in the
City) Augustine Steward the Majors Deputy sends speedily Messengers, to
signify unto Codde the Mayor (who was, as we said before, most against his
will detayned in the Camp) what commandments were imposed upon the City in
the Kings name by the Marquess of Northampton. Hereunto speedily answer from
the Mayor The Majors answer.
was returned to the Herald: That never any thing happened more grievous unto
him al his life time, then these evils, which brought in of most seditious
persons, have almost ouer-turned with an implacable villainy his Country and
City of Norwich, flourishing before. That (as much as by man's reason could be
foreseen) he had used all diligence that these tumults might have been
restrained at the beginning: yet could he not bring to that pass, by reason of
the rage of the mischiefs, wherewith the minds of all were holden entangled.
That he had endured the terror of imprisonment, the peril of death, finally
all extremity at their hands, and at this time was holden in the The Mayor kept
by a guard in the Camp.
Camp, with a guard of Soldiers round about him. Otherwise he would come
himself without delay (as was meet) to the Marquess of Northampton.
Nevertheless, that the City might be kept the better in order, he had given
his authority of government to Augustine Steward, a very careful and wise
man: lest, in his absence, the people through ignorance might fall away from
their duty. That the City should be at his commandment, and himself (if Kett
would permit) would willingly come out of the Camp and receive him, and commit
his own, and the state of the City to his protection. This answer of the
Mayor was carried with speed by the Herald to the Earl of Northampton. The
Majors Deputy, with the Sherifes, and a great multitude of Citizens following,
went presently into the Army of Northampton, unto whom he delivered the Sword
(which is a sign of the Kings Majesty's presence, and of his Authority, and in
the chief Cities of England is wont always to be carried before the Mayor)
declaring as the Mayor had done before, that he could not come himself (which
he most desired) but that he and the chief of the City were come to deliver
the City themselves, and all that they had, unto the faith, and authority of
the King: they confess there are many of the Citizens which could not be
terrified: but that they would needs consent to the Rebels: but yet the
greatest part of the best Citizens do remain still in their faith, and
allegiance, and have not joined themselves with the others, nor in any respect
have conspired against the Kings Majesty: and that this part is ready, and
willing to do that which shall be enjoined them and most willing to receive
him and his Army into the City. Northampton again encouraged the hearts of
the Citizens with good words, and promised he would have care of the City, and
had good hope* that ere long these great furies, wherewith now almost all
things were set on fire, should be suppressed. When he had made an end of
speaking, he delivered the Sword to M. Southwel, who carried the same
bare-headed before the Marquess into the City. This honor by an old and
soiemne custom, is given always to the Kings Lieutenants. And coming in at
Saint Stephens Gate, he gave commandment that all the Citizens should come
unto him into the Market place. There they long consulted, and many things of
many were devised, as well for the defense of the City, as for restrayning the
assault of the Enemy.

Then were appointed Watch and Ward upon the Walls and City Gates. And in all
places, if any were thought too weak, were appointed armed men that might be
ready upon every occasion.

These things thus appointed and performed, Northampton went at night unto the
house of the Majors Deputy, and supped there with his company of Nobles and
Gentlemen: when supper was ended, although through the tediousness of the
journey, and heat of the weather, all in the house were weary, yet they rested
that night in their Armor, lest they might be taken unawares.

And here it came to pass, whether by chance, or of set purpose, I cannot yet
tell, that certain Italians skirmished with a great company of the Rebels; and
many wounds were given on both sides: but one of the Spaniards, while he went
very boldly into the midst of the Rebels, being a valiant man, first, the
multitude beset him round, at the length they took him, and put him to a
shameful death: for taking away all his garments and furniture which were upon
him (very costly and cunningly wrought) they stripped him naked, and so hung
him upon an Oak in Mount Surry house, not without many reuilings, and shameful
contumelies before his death. All men surely took great grief from so cruel,
and miserable a death of such a worthy, and most noble Soldier; and would with
a great sum of money willingly have ransomed him (if it had been possible)
from so cruel ignominy and shame. But from this man's calamity now in the
very beginning was easily perceived, how great and detestable cruelty reigned
in those, that had wickedly taken up Arms against their Country: although not
long after by the providence of God (for he suffers not the wicked to endure
long, nor the shedding of innocent blood always to go unrevenged) Cayme
himself the Author Cayme the author of this murder.
of this dreadful villainy, with the same manner of death (though somewhat too
late) received conding punishment of this so great cruelty.

But the Earl of Northampton fearing the breaking in of the enemy in the
night, commanded that the Porters and Watchmen (which before we said were
bestowed upon the Walls and Gates of the City) should now more painefully and
diligently (then commonly they were wont) walk round about the City. Whereby
both their eyes and minds prepared, and attending upon the enterprises of the
enemy, if peradventure any tumultuous rage should be raised in the night,
might easily with their help, and without any great ado be met withal, and
resisted. Which surely was faithfully performed by the Captains over hundreds.
And all the other soldiers watched in the Market place, where gathering great
heaps of wood together, they set them on fire, lest if any thing should happen
on the sudden, our men being hindered, by reason of the darkness of the night,
and ignorance of the place, might be enclosed unawares, by the practices of the
enemies.

Edward Warner (one of the company of the Gentlemen) and at that time Governor
over the soldiers (commonly called Marshall) gave the Watchword. And unto
Thomas Paston, John Clear, William Walgraue, Thomas Cornwallis, Henry
Bedingfield: men of approved valor and wisdom, diverse parts of the City
were disposed for the defense thereof, which took their charge, and with all
their indouour performed their parts valiantly, continually coursing from place
to place, encouraging and animating our m^n: sometime with their words,
sometime with their countenance, sometime with their own travel and labor.
And thus by their wise counsels they prevented the pestilent enterprises of the
Rebels.

All things now done to their liking, the Earl and all his company (they only
excepted, as was said before, to whom the care and defense of the City was
committed) being wearied with three days travel, purposed now to take their
rest. But when our men were in their sweet sleep, and in the dead of the
night, the Rebels, as if they should presently break into the City, with a
terrible peale of Ordinance, and most fearful with outcries, filled all
places: Although by Gods providence it came to pass in this business, as the
iron bullets discharged from the great Ordinance against the City, flying
continually over our heads, did no great harm, whether it were by reason of
the violent force of the powder mounting them, or the unfaithful hands of the
Gunners, of set purpose leueling Some think Ketts Gunners corrupted.
somewhat higher then was requisite (for there be some that think the Gunners
were corrupted with money) for the nonst. Which things verily while they were
done after this manner (though always without hurt) yet they were very often
done of these vile and importune robbers, which with their continual rushings*
and horrible echoes, brought such a terror, as our watchmen on the Walls,
and keepers of the Gates cried often, To your weapons; which while they did
many times (for the enemy never left raging) the Earl (which gave charge,
that if the Rebels should tumultuously in the night attempt any thing against
the City, he should have knowledge, being awaked by one of the Captains) came
presently into the Market place, guarded with his Nobles and Gentlemen that were
with him. Afterward, the better to provide for the fewness, and seldom
return of the soldiers, and that the City might be the easier defended, they
took this Counsel, that all the Gates that were on the other side of the City
from the enemy, and the breaches of the walls should be blocked up, supposing
that so, neither the soldiers should be wanting to desend the Walls, if the
Forces were drawn to a nearer strait, and the Enemy (without danger) might be
driven from entrance into the City.

While matters began thus to be ordered, and were almost brought to an end:
The Rebels all at once, as a violent stream, came running from their dens with
confused cries, and beastly howlings, and ran into the City. There some go
about to set A fearful fight in the night.
the Gates on fire, and to hew them down: others clime up upon the Walls,
some swim through the River; many convey themselves into the City by the lower
places, and breaches of the old Walls. On the other side, our men begin to
practice all means against them, and to resist with all violence, and repulsed
valiantly the enemy on every side, being already entered into the City, and
manfully drive them back (now coming, and flocking thither) and with Pikes,
Arrows, Swords, and other instruments of war put them to flight, and brought
the matter to that pass, as the force of their incursions by little and little
being broken, and cut off, they began somewhat to waver and doubt of the
matter. But the fight was on both sides, with most inflamed minds (cruel,
fierce and bloody) while these by force (if by any other way) go about to
convey themselves into the City, and our men endeavor to put them from all
entrance. Therefore by the space almost of three hours, they fought with most
deadly hatred between themselves, and the battle was performed more fiercely
in diverse parts of the City, then a man would believe or think; even with so
dangerous, and doleful an event, as except the exceeding desire of our men to
fight, and the worthy valor of Paston, Walgraue, and the rest of the
Gentlemen, had remained invincible; that night without doubt, had been unto us
all the most miserable night that ever was. For the minds of the Rebels
Desperate rage.
were so set on fire, and incensed, and the desire to fight so exceeding, as,
although they were fallen down deadly wounded, yet would they not give over,
but half dead, drowned in their own, and other men's blood, even to the last
gasp, furiously withstood our men. Yea, many also strooken through the breasts
with swords, and the synewes of their thighs and hammes cut asunder (I tremble
to rehearse it) yet creeping on their knees, were moved with such hellish
fury, as they wounded the buttocks and thighs of our soldiers, lying amongst
the slain almost without life. But our men perceiving at the length the force
of the enemy to abate and weaken, rushed upon them with such violence, as they
could no longer abide the fight, nor stand to resist: but their forces being
overthrown, and beaten down on every side, with a mighty slaughter, they
were chaced, and driven out of the City, (for three hundred fell in that
fight) and betook themselves again 300. Rebels slain in fight.
to their filthy dens and caves. The battle ended, few of our men were found
dead, but many wounded. And now at the last, being secure from all practices of
the enemy, the rest of that night that remained (and there remained but little)
they gave unto their rest.

In the Morning, as soon as it was day, certain of the Citizens signified unto
the Earl of Northampton, that there were many of the Rebels in Ketts Camp,
whose fury was greatly abated, and the heat of their rage quenched; these
easily, and without any great ado, might be persuaded, that forsaking that
cursed fellowship of desperate persons, they would suffer themselves to be
drawn to the remembrance of their duties, and more wholesome counsel; for they
were weary of the wickedness they had long committed: and there were now
abiding at Pockthorpe Gates, four or five thousand men, which wait for
nothing else, and desire nothing more then peace and pardon. Which if now at
the last might be offered unto them by him, they hoped that forth with they
would cast off their weapons, and commit themselves to the Kings favor and
mercy.

The Earl from this message conceived singular joy and gladness, as one that
had rather obtain an easy and unbloody victory, then (although they were
Rebels, and guilty) a woeful, and imbrued with Civil blood. Therefore he
sends the Herald presently with a Trumpetter, commanding him to promise upon
the faith of the Kings Majesty, that all shall escape without punishment that
will forsake their Arms. These coming speedily to Pockethorpe Gates, found
none there notwithstanding: yet the Herald gave a sign by a Trumpet. Whereat,
when they came flocking (from the Camp) down the hill: He be holding one
Flotman, a fierce and cruel fellow (for he as principal came down the hill)
with a loud voice, commanded him to stand. Who demanding what the matter was,
and why they drew them to parlie by the sound of a Trumpet. The Herald answered:

Go thy way ( says he) and declare unto thy company from the Earl of
Northampton, Governor of the Kings forces, that the Kings Majesty does
command and admonish them, that now at the length they would repent, and make
an end of these so great outrages: which, if they will do, they shall be in
safety, and by his elemencie free from peril, and no man to be charged with
the villainy they have committed.

Hereunto Flotman (as he was a man always of a voluble Flotman an Arch-Rebell.
tongue, and ready by nature to speak reprochfully) is reported to have
answered arrogantly and threatningly.

AS concerning the Earl of Northampton, he made no reckoning of him, a man of
no courage, nor counsel, nor good success, but despised, and mortally hated
him as in^awous, light and vile, and always standing in need of others help:
finally, one stained with all d^s^^ialtie, and filthiness of treason. They
(for their parts) had always been earnest defenders of the Kings af^tie and
dignity, and of his Proge^^tors, and would be ever of that mind to spend, for
his welfare, all their goods and fortunes. They had taken Arms not against the
King, but for those things which they hoped should be hereafter for his, and
their welfare. Neither were they guilty in conscience, either of wickedness
conceived in heart, or stained with treason against his Majesty. For what else
do they but defend the Kings name and dignity; provide for the common safety;
defend the laws and liberties thereof preserve themselves, their wives,
childrn and goods, and finally deliver the Commonwealth (vexed many ways
unjustly) from the detestable pride, lust, and cruelty of their enemies?
Wherefore being void of offense, so ought they to be free from punishment. For
whereas that gorgious proclaimer, blazed with golden Arms had colourably
propounded unto them of late, certain notable and large offers it was
undoubtedly done to this end; that either under the treacherous conditions of
peace, he might restrain their endeavor of recovering their liberty, or else
being deprived of those good means wherewith they were now furnished, and so
shut from all defense, he might deliver them up to most cruel beasts to be
dououred. Let them therefore (quoth he) that have offended, receive the promise
of impunitie for all us. We that are defended with these weapons, and our own
innocence* are secure and in safety, and have purposed never to crave mercy
of any man. For we are to restore to her former dignity the Commonwealth, now
almost utterly overthrown, and daily declining (and enforced through the
insolency of the Gentlemen) out Resolution is good in a just cause, not in
Rebellion.
of her miserable (...) wherein she has long continued, either by th^se
courses, (...)liant men, and such as are endued with courage) ^^g^ting boldly
(with the peril of our lives) to dye in battle, and never to betray our
liberty, though it may be oppressed.

This most vile Traitor of all men living, had scarce made an end of his
fuiious speech, when on the sudden unlooked for, a fearful cry went through
the City, and horrible speeches were heard of men afraid, crying, To your
Weapons, To your Weapons, which filled every man's ears in all places. For at
this instant, while these things were thus in doing at Pockethorpe Gates, the
Rebels stirred up with a most desperate rage, and impudent boldness, were
broken in at the Hospital Meddowes; destroying, and wasting with Sword and
Fire, as they went: But they were met withal speedily 140. Rebels slain.
of our men, in the Plain against the Bishop of Norwich his Palace; and there
was a long and hot skirmish, in which place about one hundred and forty of the
enemies were slain, and some of our Soldiers, and many on both sides
grievously wounded.

But the miserable death of the Lord Sheffield was lamented and pittyed of all
men. Who (as it came to pass) while he was more mindful of his birth and
dignity, then of his safety, swift, and fierce, and desirous of performing
the work he had in hand, setting upon the thickest of the Enemies, and
fighting too boldly and carelessly, by chance in his swift course, fell from his
horse headlong into a ditch, where this Noble man was most cruelly slain of a
villainous murderer. L. Sheffield slain.
And when he besought him and his company (by all means possible, as by
promising great rewards, by signifying his Nobility, and the account of his
name) to spare his life: yet was it far off, that either the man, or his name,
could move any compassion, as they grew the more cruel. And after, they
Traitors without natural affection.
contended among themselves for the glory and commendation of this villainy
(seldom heard of) as of a most noble act. So all of them boiled in mind, as
it came almost to blows, while on both sides the desire of commendation and
vaineglorie carried them, which seemed to be due unto him, that gave that
fatal and deadly wound unto this worthy Noble man; but by the opinion of them
all, Fulke carried away the praise, which openly protested (calling God to
witness) that he gave him his deadly wound with his Clubbe. And Fulke himself
not long after (by the just judgment of God) was paid home: a just recompense
for so great villainy. But surely it cannot be told how much always it avails
on either side to the victory, the death and overthrow of excellent
Personages: for the enemy taking knowledge of this so lamentable chance,
began to be more hostile and ready to make war. But on the other side, the
hearts of our men discouraged, began to languish. Insomuch as the Rebels
puffed up with exceeding joy, making a mighty Alarm on every side, as having
already gotten the victory, rushed into the City (by what way they could get
in) following upon our men, and as mortal enemies set upon them, who partly
ouer-charged with The Rebels are 20000. ours but 1500.
the multitude (for they were almost twenty thousand; and ours were only one
thousand and five hundred) and (partly strooken with the death of this Noble
young Gentleman) went out of the City* and (escaping by diverse iourneys through
by-waies, hiding themselves all the night in Caves, Groves, and woods) returned
at the length all of them to London. But the Citizens laden and ouer-whelmed
with so many evils, when all places were now filled with Enemies, fearing
violence and murder, and all hostility, which is accustomed to be done of
Enemies The City in a miserable case.
to Cities overcome, and all hope of redress being taken away, fled out of
the City. All men's hearts, for the most part, were smitten with so great
fear, as many (through sorrow and anguish) having their minds alienated from
the regard of their goods, left their wives and children, and all their
possessions, in the power of the Enemy. But many, when all men's conditions
were lamentable, followed every man his own hope and advice: for whatsoever
gold, silver, plate, or good household stuff they possessed; that they hid in
Priuies, Wells, and Pits dug in the ground. Sorrow and lamentation occupied
the City on every side. And the crying of Women and Children, mixed with the
shouting of the Enemies, cracking of the fire, and fall of the houses, filled
all places with an horrible noise. For the Rebels, after the departure of the
Earl of Rebels fire the City.
Northampton, threw fire upon the tops of the houses, which did fly from house
to house with fearful flame, and from one street to another, which in small
time consumed a great part of the City. For all the houses in Holme-street
were consumed Holmstreet and Hospital with diverse Gates burnt.
with fire on both sides thereof. Also the Hospital dedicated to the relief
and maintenance of the poor diseased. Moreover, Bish^^s Gates, Pock Thorpe,
Magd^lyn, Bearstreet Gates, and diuer^ other buildings besides in many places,
were consumed with fire. But it happened fitly by Gods special providence,
Gods providence.
that there fell great store of rain at that time. Whereby the fire being
speedily quenched, did not so generally prevail as the Enemy wished.
Moreover, the Rebels entered the houses of the rich men in the City, and rifled
them, and after they had emptied them, set some of them on fire, and committed
so great and sundry examples of cursed cruelty: as every where it seemed at
this time, not men endued with reason, were entered the City: but wild beasts
under the shape of men. Whence manifestly appears, how lamentable and
miserable the state of the City was at thi^ time: when nothing was seen or
heard; but lamentation and weeping, of those that were vexed and troubled: and
contrary, the rejoicing of the Enemy, the weeping of women, the crying of men,
and the noise of them that ran about the streets, then the clashing of weapons,
the flames of the burning, the ruins and fall of houses, and many other
fearful things (which that I may not make less in speaking) I willingly let
pass, which so filled with ^or^our not only the minds, and eyes of the
beholders; but struck with incredible sorrow the hearts and ears of all that
heard it.

The City therefore taken after this sort, by the conspirators, set on fire,
spoiled and wasted, when desolation occupied all places every where (except the
enemies) for they that remained in the City, shutting their gates and doors
hid themselves in the most secret places of their houses. The Majors Deputy
alone, as it were reserved to behold the miserable spectacle of his Counties
downfall, void of all advice and help, when he beheld, from the upper part of
his house, all things consumed with fire, and ruinated: supposing the enemies,
as they had brought destruction upon the houses, would not long after offer
violence, and death unto men, shutting his doors, kept himself within his
house. But the power of the enemies, in the mean time waxing great, and
gathering a band of men together: they broke into the City, at Saint Augustines
gates, and Augustine Stewards house abused.
all of them being armed with clubs, and such weapons as every man's lotte could
afford him: they came running unto the house of the Majors Deputy, and assayed
to break up the doors: at length when they began to set them on fire, he
being greatly afraid (for all his servants were fled from him) himself alone
unshut the gates: whom presently they took, and plucked off his gown (which
he used at that time) calling him Rebel; and threatening him a most shameful
death, except he would tell them in what place the Earl of Northampton was
hidden: when he answered, They were all departed.

All of them took that answer, with great indignation and outcryes, most
tumultuously rushing with all violence into his house, they searched furiously
all the corners thereof. Afterward turning to the prey, they depart laden with
the spoil. But many (being restrained partly by reason of money, and other
things which they received of the Deputy: and partly by the speech of a
certain person, which said unto them, such doings were intolerable: yea, theft
and villainy; by all kind of punishment to be revenged and repressed) brought
again their packes and burdens, which they had carried away before, and laid
them in the shops and warehouses. Nevertheless many of the Citizens, into
whose houses the Rebels had entered, only under pretense of seeking the Earl
of Northampton, were utterly robbed of all that ever they had. Chiefly they
spoiled their houses, which were gone out of the City, proclaiming them Rebels,
and open enemies to the Kings Majesty; and therefore their goods to be
confiscate. Notwithstanding, some of the Citizens took order, there should be
delivered to the furious multitude, bread and drink, and all kind of
victual, whereby it came to pass, that the miserable and hungry people being
pacified, they were somewhat stayed from the rage of spoiling. Nevertheless,
very many (upon this sudden calamity) sustained great loss and injury; and
were so ouercharged with such great expenses, that ever after while they lived
(and many live at this day) in their household affairs, fared the worse. In the
mean season, the remembrance of future times (as it seemed) came into the
minds of the Rebels. Wherefore being now turned from violence, they begin to
think of their own safety: therefore they commanded the Majors Deputy, and
the chief of the City: that watch and ward should be kept from house to house,
by the Citizens every day at all the gates of the City, which if they shall
refuse to do, they threaten death and grievous torments.

Moreover in the Temple (which is fearful to tell) in the Christ's Church
abused of Rebels.
Temple of the great God, the Rebels (as often as it rained) placed the tents of
their furies. And so far grew their malapertnesse, boldness, and desire of
ouerturning of things: as neither the speeches of the wise, nor the fear of
Gods vengeance, nor the tears and lamentations of women, could remove them
from their villainies. For the women (when they saw the The women entreat.
slaughter of harmless naked men) often times offered themselves in the
streets; entreating them to have compassion, upon their Country, upon them,
their husbands and children, and remember that they were men themselves,
begotten of men, and that they had revenged themselves sufficiently upon those,
for whose cause they took up Arms: that they would at last cast a bridle upon
their rage; so should they obtain without doubt peace and pardon, and all good
things else of the Kings Majesty: but (as we said before) neither
threatenings, Rebels inexorable.
nor the counsel of the wise, nor flattering prayers, nor any thing else could
restrain them from so great rage of villainy, until they had brought a
miserable destruction upon the Country, and drawn upon themselves at last, an
end worthy such wickedness. For the King, after he understood that his
Majesty was daily more and more despised, the company of lewd persons to
increase, all things confounded with this execrable and raging tumult, the
clemency of the King set at naught, and now no place left for mercy, soft
medicines to avail nothing at all, their minds to be without cu^e, and
infected with deadly pestilence: Finally, all hope of recovery taken utterly
away: but only that which consisted in force, and severity of punishment, he
thought good to put this first in execution.

Wherefore in the Country of Lyncolne, and other shires of the Kings Kingdom,
he commands, and appoints a muster, and press of Soldiers. Also a great
number of Swyssers to be sent for, supposing (as the thing required) that this
wicked rout, and their followers, ought to be utterly taken away by the sword.
Otherwise, if it should spread further, and infect the neighbor Country
people, with the contagion of this villainy, it could very hardly be stayed,
when the heat of that infection had spread further, and fallen as it were, into
the veins and bowels of the Kingdom, and had enclosed all the parts thereof,
with that deadly flame of disloyalty.

Unto this army was John Dudley, Earl of Warwick, a Earl of Warwick appointed
Lieutenant
man of great Nobility, and marvelous courage, appointed Lieutenant, and unto
him the chief soueraignety is committed, by Letters and Commandments from the
King. At that time the opinion (by the report of all men for the most part) was
received among our Countrymen of him: that this Noble man was of such
Magnanimity, and experience in Martial affairs: as it was thought the Rebels
should be suppressed by him, or else surely put to flight by none.

Therefore these speeches of the Kings preparation and power being dispersed
abroad, and entering the ears of the common people, came at the length unto
the hearing of the Camp. And when they understood of a surety that they were
mustered, and a Captain, Armor, Bands of men, and all instruments for the
terror of War, provided against them to be ready, and at hand: they began
every day to fortify The Rebels fortify.
themselves, and to look about for all things necessary, and to train
themselves, that they might be the more able to make resistance. So far was
it from them, that either reason could mitigate their cruelty and boldness,
or terror break their stout minds.

To this end, when some of the Citizens observed that many things were done
every day more tumultuously, fearing all violence, slaughter, robbery,
burning, and a lamentable ouer-throwing of all things: At the length (lest if
they should abide in the City, they might be constrained to be on the Rebels
side) gathering all their goods together in heaps, as much as they could
conveniently, and hiding them in the ground, or Citizens fly the City
else by Masons help, covering them with lime and stone, they fled privily in
the night out of the City.

The Earl of Warwick, after he had furnished himself with Soldiers at home,
and from beyond the Seas, with Money, Weapons, and all things necessary for the
Wars, departs from London, accompanied with all his forces.

There were in that Army the Marquess of Northampton, (who of late had the
Government of the Wars against the Warwicks Army 14000.
Camp) Ambrose and Robert Dudley, Warwicks sons, Willoughby Poijsi, Bray,
and many other noble and famous Captains, besides of Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen: of the Switsers, and of all kind of common Soldiers, about
fourteen thousand. When they came to Cambridge, some of the Aldermen of the
City of Norwich, and other of the Citizens met with Warwick at the Towns end.
Which Citizens (as we said before) being afraid and astonished at the fearful
and mad boldness of the Conspirators, had fled the City. These pale and
forlorn, and falling upon their knees, cast themselves every one at his feet,
and with weeping, and lamentable voice, began earnestly to entreat him, that
he would lay no grievous thing to their charge; for they were innocent persons,
and guilty of no crime. Yet they besought the mercy and favor Citizens suit
to Warwick.
of the Prince: For they had verily conceived an incredible grief of this
miserable destruction, and spoil of their Country, and had further endured
all extremity at the Rebels hands. In the end to provide for their lives, they
were constrained to fly the City, and with sword and fire were cast out, not
only from the City, but from their wives and children, and all their friends.
In so great misery where with they were pressed on every side; they crave
nothing else, but if in this common and exceeding fear, through ignorance and
folly, unwittingly they have wrapped themselves in any offense, the same might
not be imputed unto them, but upon their repentance and humble petition it
might be pardoned.

Hereunto Warwick answered that he perceived how great His answer.
peril they were in, and that without doubt the strength of those desperate men
was great, which had driven them from all these things as de^re unto them as
life it self: Affirming, that they had done nothing amiss to his knowledge.
In that they had left the City in so great fear and danger, it was but the
infirmity of man, and to be borne withal. Notwithstanding in one thing they
were somewhat over* seen, that they withstood not these evils in the very
beginning: for a few valiant and wise men might have dispatched those companies
in a moment, if while the matter was in the beginning, they had opposed
themselves for the health of their Country. Notwithstanding he granted pardon
at their request, and offered the Kings favor to them all, willing them, when
they have furnished themselves with weapons, and with the furniture of
Soldiers, to be in a readiness to follow the Host, having Laces Laces fur
distinction.
about their necks, to be discerned from the rest. These things done after
this manner, he departs from Cambridge: And the tenth of the Kalends of
September he came with all his Army to Intwood. Intwood is distant from
Norwich The 23. of August.
about two miles. There Thomas Gresham Knight had a fair and large house,
where Warwick abode that day and the night following with his company. All the
men notwithstanding were armed and ready to the battle, if peradventure the
Enemy should raise up any tumult on the sudden; which surely beheld from the
holes in the Walls and Towers what should be done. Warwick in the mean
season, while (as is said before) he made his abode with all his Army at
Intwood, sends his Herald, which in the name of the King (as the manneris)
proclaymeth war against the City and Citizens, except forth with they set
open the Gates, and admit the Kings power into the City.

Kett, when he understood that the Herald was come to the Gates, willed
Augustine Steward the Majors Deputy, and Robert Rugge, chief men of the City
to go unto him, and inquire what he demanded. These being let out at a back
Bras^n door.
gate, the matter being understood, made answer to the Herald, That they
counted themselves the miserablest men alive, which had endured so many and
great discomfitures both in mind and body, as at the remembrance thereof all
the parts of their body tremble. Nevertheless, this one thing was added unto
the rest, which increased the height of their calamity, grief, and shame;
because that fidelity which they ought* and earnestly desired to perform to
his Majesty, they were not able to fulfill at this time, and iudg^d themselves
the unhappiest that lived in this age, wherein they were ever compelled, either
to undergo the danger of their life, or the hazard of Two great extremities
their dignity. Notwithstanding, they hoped well of the Kings Majesty, as
those which had no ways bound themselves in any consent of these villainies,
but had restrained (as much as was in them) the rest of the Citizens, with
great loss of their goods, and ever with an incredible danger of their lives.
Moreover, they most humbly besought this one thing of the Earl, that because
there were in the City an innumerable company of Ketts Camp, unarmed, poor,
and naked, (who besides that through fear and conscience of their own
wickedness were holden guilty: Moreover, were weary of this cursed society, as
which had filled the very desire of working mischief with the sacietie of
their furies) it would please him once again, to try that which has been
often proved in vain: signifying, that they greatly hoped (if at this time
might be offered unto them again the hope of impunitie) it would come to
pass, that forthwith they would lay down their weapons, without slaughter and
bloodshed. Which thing (if it might A glory exceeding all Victory.
come to pass) would be an eternal memory unto posterity, and a glory
exceeding all victory, if they might carry home peace, and their weapons
unstained with the blood of civil dissension.

The Herald presently departs from the Majors speech into Warwicks Camp,
declaring all things as he had received. The Earl, unto whom nothing was more
precious (if by any means it could be brought to pass) then that this flame
so dangerous and dreadful, might be quenched without slaughter and bloodshed,
decreed himself also the advice in this matter, that it should not be measured
according to the villainies they had committed, but according to the dignity of
the King, and the utility of the Kingdom.

He feared moreover lest the Gentlemen that were holden bound in the Castle,
and other Prisons, every day tossed, and turmoiled with the great waves of
fear, at the length might Roger Woodhouse used cruelly.
be cruelly slain of them. For many were threatened death every hour; and
many, chiefly Roger Woodhouse, Knight, was continually reviled with
contumelious speeches, upon whom, without all doubt, they exercised the
insatiable cruelty of their minds, vexing and abusing him. For these causes
therefore, it pleased him to prove, whether now at the length, by the hope of
pardon and impunity, they might be drawn from the error of their mischief.

To this end, the Herald was presently sent, with a Trumpeter, who entering into
the City, were met with forty of the Rebels, marching two and two together
(for they were Horsemen) with great joy and loud cries, from Saint Stephens
Gates to the Bishops Palace. From thence the Trumpeter sounding his Trumpet,
gave a sign: whereat, when great routs of Rebels came flocking by heaps unto
them from the hill: The Horsemen with a swift course ran unto them,
commanding, that dividing themselves, the one half should stand in rank right
over against the other in order. Which when they had presently done, the Herald
with his Trumpeter, and two other of the principal of the City, going in the
midst between the ranks of the Rebels, were received on every side with great
shouts and outcries. For every one uncovering their heads, as it were with one
mouth and consent all at once (for the most part) cried, God save King Edward*
God save King Edward: becommended therefore of the Herald, and chief of the
City, and willed to keep their order awhile, as they were appointed of late.
The Herald, when in this sort he had passed between them two hundred and
fifty paces, at the length came unto the top of the hill, having on his rich
Coat of Arms, as solemn ensigns of his Office. There he stayed awhile (for
Kett was not yet come) at the last he spoke after this manner.

THey were not ignorant from the first time ever since they had The Heralds
oration.
wickedly taken up Arms against their Country; how many, and sundry ways by
all means possible, labor and study, the Kings Majesty had employed his
care, to the end to bring them from the cruelty of those villainies, whereby
they have violated all Laws of God and men, to some consideration of their
duties, and regard of their own safety; and had sent unto them messengers and
Proclaimers of Peace, not once, but often, again and again. Notwithstanding,
they regarded not, but ever despised; and by all means misused them, through
their de^estable madness and disloyalty. But (now in the sight of God)
whither would they rush? whither would they throw both themselves headlong, and
their goods with deadly fury? what measure would they put to their most
treacherous madness? or what end of their most filthy counsels? How long
being stirred up through pestilent lusts, which false and idle confidence of
living better, had once suffered to enter into their minds, would they pursue
always with deadly folly? How long would they adorn with counterfeit titles
the most foul impiety of mischievous treason? How long would they wrappe in
the garments of virtue, horrible filthiness, and deceivable villainies?
Finally, how long would they be holden bound with the mortal desire of those
things, which, if it were lawful for them to obtain, the destruction of the
Commonwealth would ensue presently, much more intolerable and lamentable? but
rather now at the last, they should look about them awhile, and apply both
their minds and understanding, and mark thoroughly with more intentive eyes,
their Commonwealth, of which in all their talk, no less foolishly, then
wickedly and ungodly they are wont to boast of. Surely then may easily be
seen, whether they be faithful subjects, and worthy the name of good Citizens,
which have taken up hostile Arms against the Kings Majesty, which have
gathered together routs of wicked men, despised and vile, which have brought
upon their Country (the common Parent of us all) ungodly, and sacrilegious
hands: which have let in the scumme of the people, and the vilest of all
mortal men (cast out, for the most part, of all English Societies) into the
Commonwealth, to the destruction of the good, and overthrow of the Kingdom;
which have defaced, with merciless fire, the greatest part of this most
worthy City; which has laid in most filthy Prison and Bands, many worthy
and excellent persons, and have slain some with most extreme torture; which
have utterly emptied the best furnished houses, and polled, and shaven the
neighbor Uillages; which have alienated to their own use, the goods of many
(of late rich men, but now through their cruelty* miserable and needy) and
carried them into their wretched Camp by most cruel robberies: which have
forged fained Laws, false Letters and Commissions in the Kings name: which
have profaned the Temple of the great and mighty God; overthrown the houses
of private men; wasted, and spoiled the fields on every side: which have
converted all their thought, studies, and enterprises to destruction,
slaughter, wasting, burning and stealing? Finally, which knew nothing
remaining, whither the rage and madness of their fury could further carry
them: but either their riotous lusts utterly devoured, or their filthy
importunity scattered abroad. When they see themselves bound by these so many,
so great, and so horrible pollutions of wickedness, to God, the King, and the
Commonwealth, and when now they see all their goods and substance to be
brought into that place, and so confiscate and lost, that to be in a worse
condition then now they are in (for they are in the worst) they cannot be, if
they would, then let them think with themselves, into how large a Sea of evils
they have thrown themselves headlong, and let them think what they may fear,
over whose heads always hangs the just wrath of God (which surely by no
means can be avoided) and the inevitable power of the King offended and
displeased. For his Majesty had decreed, not to suffer any longer these so
great evils to abide in the bowels of his Kingdom, neither to leave any longer
unpunished* and unrevenged, this so brutish cruelty, and intolerable
boldness. And therefore has chosen the Earl of Warwick, (a man of renowned
Honor, and of great name, and unto this work appointed General from his
Majesty) who must pursue them with fire and sword: and has further enjoined
him never to leave off, until he has utterly rooted out that cursed and
horrible company. Notwithstanding, such is his great bounty and clemency,
that whom he has appointed a revenger of this desperate and wickee rout (if
they persevere) the same also he would have, to be (if they shall do
otherwise) a messenger and minister of his mercy: The which, except they would
embrace at this time, refusing al sinister advice, Warwick has most solemnly
sworn, shall never hereafter be offered unto any of them again: but (as he was
commanded of the King) he would pursue with fire and sword all the companions
of that most pernicious conspiracy, the officers, ministers and abetters
thereof, as the most pestilent enemies to the Kings Majesty; neither would he
make an end of pursuing them, until they (which had defiled all places with
their new, unheard of, and unpardonable treason, and had drowned themselves in
such furious waves of wickedness) had received condign punishment of God and
the King.

When he had made an end, although many were very doubtful of the event of
things and trembled: what for the guilt of Conscience, and remembrance of their
wretchedness: yet nevertheless all of them (for the most part) being
grievously offended with his speech; so inwardly burned in mind, as presently
they reviled the Herald on every side, with shouts and cursings: some calling
him The Rebels revile the Herald.
Traitor, not sent from the King: but had received his lesson from the
Gentlemen, and subo^ned by them, to bring them asleep with flattering words,
and fairer promises to deceive them in the end, whereby napping as it were, and
careless, they might the easier be taken, while they feared no such things.
Others said, that pardon in appearance seemed good and liberal, but in truth
would prove in the end lamentable and deadly, as that which would be nothing
else; but Barrels filled with Ropes and Halters. And that painted coat
distinct, and beautified with gold; not to be Ensigns of an Herald: but some
pieces of Popish Coapes sewed together. Many things besides (in their pestilent
madness, turbulent and headlong) raging, and furiously they laid upon him,
while every one round about powered forth the bitterness of their venom, in
most cruel speeches, savoring of death it self. Notwithstanding, the Herald
goes from thence with Kett, into another place, where he proclaims the same
thing to the rest of the people (for before, all could not hear for press.)

It happened before he had made an end of his speech, that an ungracious boy,
putting down his breeches, showed his bare buttockes, and did a filthy act:
adding thereunto more filthy words. At A boyly trick justly punished.
the indignity whereof, a certain man being moved (for some of our men were on
the river, which came to be hold) with a bullet from a Pistol, gave the boy
such a blow upon the loins, that suddenly struck him dead. Which when the
Traitors perceived, there came twelve of the horsemen most furiously coursing
out of the Wood, and crying: O my companions, we are betrayed. Do you not see
our fellow Soldiers cruelly slain before our eyes, and shot through? what
shall we hope for, being dispersed, and unarmed, when yet being in arms,
violence is offered? For surely this Herald intends nothing else, but we
being enclosed, all of us on every side with traynes, and weakened, may most
cruelly be slain of the Gentlemen.

When he had spoken these words, they were all scattered (and as it were
stirred up with a certain rage) they fled asunder. Notwithstanding, Kett
joined himself with the Herald, and minded to have Kett would have spoken with
Warwick.
spoken with Warwick, face to face: but now when they were almost come to the
bottom of Sturt hill, a mighty rout of Rebels followed him with cries,
inquiring all at once whither he went, saying, they were willing to undergo
with him what fortune soever (though never so sharp) and if he would needs go
any further, he should have them his companions and partners, both in life and
death. The Herald, when he looked behind him, and saw such a company of men
following, willed Kett to go back again, and and stay this concourse, and
tumult: who being returned to his Company, they were presently quiet, and went
back all of them again into the Camp.

But the Earl of Warwick, when he perceived that they were all carried
headlong (with a certain frenzy, and as it were, a blind rage of the mind)
to destruction: and that neither by entreaty or fair promises; nor yet by the
fear of punishment, they could be won to cease from their filthy
enterprise: It seemed best unto him, to leave off for ever the hope of peace: a
thing as well by himself, as by others often proved in vain, and now at the
length to deal by open war. Therefore, he leads his army to Saint Stephens
gates, which the enemies had shut up, letting down the Portcullis, and he
commanded the Kings master Gunner, to place the Ordinance before the gates,
that being thrown down and battered, way might be made for the soldiers to
enter the City. Which while they were about to do, the Earl had knowledge
from Augustine Steward, the Majors Deputy: that there was a gate not far off,
which the common people call Brazen door. This the enemy had made fast with
great beams, and pieces of timber, and rampired up with stones and earth;
notwithstanding, with no labor might easily be shaken, and broken down. The
Pyoners are sought for; and Commandment given to break up the gates, which
broke open, there they first entered the City, and killing many, they easily
remove the enemy from that place. And now the Master Gunner had shottred and
broken the Port-cullis at Saint Stephens gates, and overthrown the one half
of the gates, being shaken with the often shot. Where the Earl of Northampton,
and one Drury (a man of excellent valor) with their Bands hasting into the
City, drive the Campers from thence, many being wounded, and many slain.

Also on the other sides of the City, the Majors Deputy brought S. Bennets.
to pass, that the gates, called Westwicke gates, were opened, which being
unlocked and set open, Warwick with all his Host were let in (almost none
resisting) and came into the market place. There 60. Rebels hanged.
they found almost threescore of the Rebels, whom in warlike manner they
punished. For without hearing the cause, all of them were presently (as the
manner of wars is) manifestly convict of their wickedness, and received
their last punishment. Not long after, all Carts and carriages, which could not
come in, both by reason of the hardness of the draft; as also the often, and
sudden incursio^s of the enemies, are brought into the City at these gates
also. But it came to pass (as it chanced) by the rashness and folly of the
keepers of the carriage (while our men were occupied about their weighty
business) that they went out of the City through Bishops gates, toward
Moushold; which certain of the Rebels perceiving, they sent some of their
company to set upon the careless keepers The K. carriage taken by Rebels.
thereof, and bereaved our men of the whole carriage. Whereat greatly rejoicing
(for before they were utterly unprovided of such things) they carried into the
Camp, Carts laden with Gunnes, Gunpowder, and all kind of instruments of
war.

But in very good season, Captain Drury came upon them Captain Drury.
with his Band, which recovered part of the carriage from the enemy: yet not
without some loss of his Soldiers. Then the Traitors took this counsel to
lay wait in the Lanes, and cross Streets by Companies, supposing to stay our
men quickly and unawares, being ignorant of the ways, not accustomed thereto,
and by reason of the greatness of the City. Wherefore, they divided themselves
by Parishes. Some of them stood at Saint Michaels of Mospoole, part at Saint
Simons, others at Saint Peter's of Hungate, and others in East Wymer Ward; all
ready to battle. There, setting upon some of our men on the sudden: they most
cruelly slew three or four Gentlemen, before any help could come. The matter
3. or 4. Ge^tlemen slain.
being known, and noysed in the market place; Warwick goes with all his Host
to remove the enemy. When they came through the Street (called Saint John's
Street, and were now come to Saint Andrews Church, the enemy (unlooked for)
with his Bowmen discharged upon us a mighty force of Arrows, as flakes of snow
in a tempest.

But while they were yet shooting, intending to mix heaven and earth together:
On the sudden came Captain Drury the second time with his charge of
Harquebusiers, young men, and of an excellent courage and skill, who paid them
home again with such a terrible volly of shot (as if it had been a storm of
hayle) and put Three hundred and thirty, Rebels slain at S. Andrew, alia
Editio 130
them all to flight as in a moment, trembling. There were slain at this
skirmish about three hundred and thirty. And many being found creeping in the
Churchyard, and under the Walls, were taken and put to grievous punishment.
All the rest of that filthy company flowed again to the Camp at Moushold, as
into a sink. Which being avoided, the Citizens seemed at the length to be
greatly relieved and comforted, because they had vomited up and cast out so
grievous a plague. The Rebels after this sort chased out, and driven from the
City: Warwick, the better to fortify the same, furnished the walls with
Soldiers, and other provision, fit for the repulsing of the Enemy, and gave
commandment, that armed men (out of hand) should be placed in every street,
and that all the passages into the City and Gates (one or two excepted) should
be blocked up. For by those Gates our men carried out great store of
Ordinance, which stood there ready charged to be conveyed the next day to
Moushold. But Ketts company supposing our men to be greatly distressed for
powder, and all other necessary furniture for Ordinance, perceiving also some
few to stand straggling with our Carryage and Carts, and not careful for any
sudden event of war (whom through the rage of the swelling pride of their
heart, being mad) they greatly despised (both because of their small company,
as also being negligent, and fearing no such danger, they supposed they might
easily overcome) they thought there was offered unto them great opportunity of
doing some notable exploit.

Therefore, while Warwicks Soldiers (what for the defense of the City, and the
number of other weighty business) were hindered with greater cares: One Miles,
a man (as it seems) most bold, Miles killed the Kings Gunner.
and skillful in discharging of Ordinance, watching the time and opportunity of
this villainy, shot through the Kings Master Gunner with a bullet. Whom, when
they perceived to be fallen down dead; some of them naked and unarmed, some
armed with staves, b^ls, and pitchforkes, moved as it were with a frenzy, made
an assault upon our men, running down the Hill: Who abode not so much as the
first encounter (so great was the fear on every side, and force of the enemy
unlooked for) but astonished and terrified with the disordered cries, and
horrible noise of their feet, as they came running down the hill, leaving all
the Baggage and Carts, ran away on all sides, with great outcries, and a
swift course. A few therefore after this sort put to flight by many, the Rebels
took, and carried away into the Camp, certain Ordinance which they found
there, and Carts laden with all things necessary for the wars, before The
Rebels took the Kings provision the second time
any help of our men could come. Which thing was very hurtful unto us, and
much out of our way. For besides that, afterward we wanted those instruments
and weapons, wherewith the enemy had furnished himself, Ketts Gunners
discharged often upon us, and most cruelly those iron bullets from the
Ordinance and Gunnes which they took from us, and battered the City
grievously. And many being slain, torn and rent in sunder with the rage of
the shot, this villainy and wickedness they add to the rest; that they beat
down most furiously a great part of the Wall, and the Tower upon Bishops
Gates; though surely (through the goodness of God) such was the lot of the
people of Norwich at that time, as the bullets flying every where, whether by
chance, or of set purpose; or which rather I suppose, by the rashness and
ignorance of the Gunners, which sometime happens, leuelling somewhat too
high, mounted over the tops of the houses, without doing any great harm:
which, except it had so come to pass, with the continual force of shot from
those vile and wretched Rebels; the houses being shattered and shaken, the
greatest part of the City had been beaten down, and made even with the
ground in short time: And without doubt, in the opinion of all men, a greater
loss that day had come unto all common affairs, except Drury with his valor,
and slaughter of his Drury satisfies the former inconvenience
soldiers, not to be despised (making satisfaction for this inconvenience, by
putting the enemies to flight, and chasing them,) had recovered the greatest
part of the provision they drove away.

Warwick, (these things done after this manner, some of Warwick fortifies the
City.
the Gates of the City being broken and fallen down, and now ramperd up
again) placed upon the Bridges, and winding Streets of the Parishes and
Lanes, diverse of his Garrisons, and appointed a great company of Armed men at
Bishops Gates, and committed the charge thereof to my Lord Willoughby, and so
compassed and fortifyed all places, as the same night he cut off from the
Enemy all entrance into the City.

Notwithstanding, the next day the Rebels came over the River, called
Contsford, and confounded all things with a terrible fire, Rebels come over at
Co^tsford and fire the City.
and lamentable to behold. For all the houses in two Parishes being burnt
down; the fire so spread abroad, as it got hold with an horrible flame upon
many of the Neighbor Parishes. There was a certain house wherein the
Merchants of Norwich did usually bestow their merchandise, which they received
daily from Yarmouth (called the common Stathe.) Hereunto the Rebels set fire,
Common Stath burnt
whereby within a moment the house it self, and great store of Corn, and much
other commodities of many honest Merchants, were utterly burnt with fire and
consumed. The report goes (and it is not unlikely) that they intended to have
destroyed the whole City with fire, and to that end threw fire upon the roofes
of many houses, whereby they might bring to pass, that while all men should
run to save the fired houses, the Rebels at the same instant, Rebels policy.
casting down the Rampires, and opening all the Gates, might distress our men
(being scattered, and helping one another) having the fire on the one side, and
the sword on the other. Which thing being wisely observed, both disappointed
the device of the Rebels, and brought our men in the mind, to suffer the fire
(spreading every where upon the tops of the houses) with a speedy wasting, and
consuming of all things, neither would they so much as quench it in the very
beginning.

But when in this sort unhappily these things (for the most part) Better a
mischief, then an inconvenience.
befell the Citizens; God bringing always one calamity on the neck of another,
great astonishment and sorrow struck many men's minds, in so much as
languishing through despair and fear, they almost faynted, now deuoide of all
counsel. These came unto Warwick, declaring unto him, that the City is great,
and all the Gates either broke open, or burnt down; the number of men for the
war but few, the power of the Enemy to be great, and cannot be resisted.
They humbly besought him, in regard of their safety, The coward linesse of the
Citizens.
he would leave the City, and not suffer the matter to be brought to utter
extremity. Warwick (as he was a man always of a great and invincible courage,
valiant, and mighty in Arms, and thought scorn of the least infamy) said,
What, are ye so soon dismayed? and is so great a mist on the sudden come over
your minds, which has taken away the edge of your courage, that you would
either desire this thing, or think it can come to pass while I am alive, that
I should forsake the City? I will first suffer fire, sword; finally, all
extremity, before I will bring such a stayne of infamy and shame, either upon
my self, or you. With these words he drew his sword; so did the rest of the
Nobles (for they were all there gathered together) and he commanded after a
warlike manner (and as is usually done in greatest danger) that they should
kiss one another sword, making the sign of the holy Cross, and Soldiers
kiss one another swords.
by an Oath, and solemn promise by word of mouth, every man to bind himself
to other, not to depart from the City, before they had utterly banished the
Enemy, or else fighting manfully, had bestowed their lives cheerfully for the
Kings Majesty.

While these things were in doing, the Rebels broke in at another side of the
City, where our men little thought they could enter: but when they were almost
come to the Bridges, they were speedily incountred by our men, and with a
mighty slaughter and many wounds were driven back again, and retired headlong
the way they came.

But Warwick, the better to take utterly away from the Rebels all ability of
entrance into the City, commanded all the Bridges on every side to be cut on
sunder, yet after, for certain causes it was commanded otherwise; and only
that which is commonly called white Friars bridge, was broken down. All the
rest were defended White Friars bridge broken.
with good Soldiers. And al places else, and especially the gates (because for
the most part they were all, either broken down, or else fired) were delivered
in charge to men of courage, and experienced in warlike affairs, to be
defended upon every sudden occasion, whereby it came to pass, that all the
desperate and night incursions of the Enemy, were void and of none effect.

The next day after, which was the seventh of the Kalends of September, The 26.
of August. 1040. Switsers sent to Norwich.
one thousand and forty Switsers, valiant and notable Soldiers (as the report
goes commonly) came from London to Norwich. These were joyfully received of
our men* who testified their gladness and cheerfulness by many vollies of
shot. At the length being divided by Parishes and houses, and liberally and
courteously intertayned, and invited of the Citizens, as it revived the hearts
of our men, and stirred them up unto a sure hope, with confidence of performing
the business well: So it danted the hearts of the Enemies being now confounded
with a new fear and astonishment, at this doubtful knowledge of their future
overthrow.

In the mean season, the seditious, coveting nothing more then to suck out
the blood of all good men (whereof they had now drunk in their most greedy
minds some hope) thought all the weight of the matter to consist in this, if
Warwicks Army might be put to flight at the first assault. And surely as they
forsook the good and mighty God: so again, being despised and rejected of
him, they gave over themselves bond-slaues to the Devil: Who bewitching their
minds with an old wifes superstition, brought to pass, that being once
entangled with the blind illusions of Southsayers, they chose a certain
Valley, not far off, as appointed to this war by destiny: Although surely
(as is recorded) there wanted not strange and evident tokens of Gods heavy
displeasure against them. For a Snake leaping out of a ro^ten Tree, did spring
directly into the bosom A Snake in Ketts wifes bosom.
of Ketts wife; which thing struck not so much the hearts of many with an
horrible fear, as it filled Kett himself with doubtful ca^es. But here
peradventure it will not be impertinent to remember how these men puffed up
with the opinion of an idle error, turned themselves to pestilent things.
Which, when surely they portended, the anger and vengeance of God (as it
seemed) yet swelling with raging cruelty and obstinacy, they all neglected. So
great a mist of darkness undoubtedly is Satan wont to bring upon the minds of
men, as often as he finds them drowned in mischief. For while there were many
doting Prophecies among the People, out of which they sucked I know not what
hope of victory; yet they embraced certain vnsauo^ie and sottish Verses
(tokens of the foolish cruelty of their minds) above all the rest. Which they
used every day, often speaking of them (for false prophets almost every hour
instilled such fopperies into their ears.) For example there was a toy never
heard of before, which exceeded all credit, as at the mention whereof how their
furious senses were stir^ed up, may appear, and with how great and vain
delight they carried themselves, may easily be seen; although by these Verses
alone had been prophesied to them prosperity and victory, but unto us
destruction, and a miserable ruin of all things:

The Verses were these,

The Country gn^offes Hob, Dick, and Hick,
With clubbes, and clou^ed shoone, The Devils Oracles are obscure and
doubtful, and as men are aff^cted so they choose.

Shall fill up Dussyn dale:
With slautered bodies soon.
While these Verses were sung continually every where, the Devil infused such
poison into the minds of these most wretched men, as they decreed to commit
their hope of good success to a doubtful event of a false place. Therefore
all their Dens and lurking places every where, which they had made on
Moushold of timber, and other provision, being now set on fire (insomuch as the
smoke rising from so many places distant one from another) seemed to bring
night almost upon the whole skeyes, and covered the Plains with thick
darkness.

From thence they went to the Valley called Dussyns Dale, with The Rebels were
twenty ancients.
twenty ancients, and ensigns of War. So great was the Rebels hope of prey,
and the multitude allured through impu^ity. There they practice all they can,
and begin to devise how to take away from our men the assault and hope of
giving the charge. Insomuch as they entrenched then themselves as in a moment,
and made Bulwarks, and other defenses. Moreover, they brought a ditch over the
high ways, and cut off all passage, pitching their Iauelins and stakes in the
ground before them.

When Warwick had intelligence hereof, he also purposed to try the event of
war, that whom by lenity and patience, he could not persuade, those he might
by force of Arms subdue. Therefore the Aug. 27.
day following, that was the sixth of the Kalends of September, setting his
Army in order, he marched against the Enemy through S. Martins.
Cosleny Gates. There joined with him the Marquess of Northhampton,
Willoughby, Poijsie, Bray, Ambros^ Dudley Warwicks son, and besides of Noble
and valiant men a choice company.

Notwithstanding, before they came into the fight of the enemy, Behold the
difference between a natural Prince and a Tyrant.
they sent Edmund Kneuet, and Thomas Palmer, Gentlemen, and famous in the
Court, and as many other with them, to inquire, whether they would leave off
their furies, and forsake their wickedness, cruelty, and purpose of making
war against their Country now at the last: for so great and incredible is
the goodness and clemency of the Kings Majesty, that although with an
impiety (never to be forgotten) they had abused his Majesty and dignity, and
stained themselves with everlasting notes of villainy; yet he has commanded
once again to be offered unto them peace; and pardon (notwithstanding all that
they had committed) yea, to every of them (one or two excepted) so as they
would turn to duty now at the last (being led with repentance) from this
course of malice and wickedness: but if they purposed peeuishly, and ungodly
to persist in their madness, and to try the end: Now let them know, there was
come at the last the just punishment of their foolish lightness and
disloi^ltie; and Warwick himself, although late* yet the sure revenger of so
horrible a conspiracy.

Hereunto they all stoutly made one answer: Obstina^ie will not suffer a man
to be amended. Warwicks exhortation to the battle.


That they would not.

Which answer returned to Warwick, he without any long exhortation, persuaded
his soldiers (already burning with a fervent desire of the battle) that they
should valiantly invade the enemy, and cast no doubts, but repute and take the
company of Rebel^ which they saw, not for men, but bruit beasts, endued with
all cruelty. Neither let them suppose, that they were come out to fight, but
to take punishment, and should speedily require it at the h^nds of these most
ungracious robbers; that they should lay even with the ground, afflict, punish,
and utterly root out the baine of their Country; the overthrow of Christian
Religion and duty: Finally, most cruel beasts and striving against the Kings
Majesty, with an irrecouerable madness.

When he had thus spoken, because the enemy was within shot, he gives a sign
of the battle* but the Campers perceiving our men coming against them so
d^sposed their company, as first they placed A cruel policy.
in the sore-ranke of the battle, all the Gentlemen, which they carried with
them after the manner of condemned persons, chained together* and bound with
gives and fetters. Which they did to this end, that our friends might be slain
of our selves: but by the providence Gods Providence.
of God, using the incredible courage of our Soldiers, it came to pass
otherwise then the enemy looked for, so as they escaped safe almost all of
them. For Miles, who (as we said of late) was Ketts Master Gunner, and most
skilful in that Art, with an iron bullet, Miles stew the Kings Standerdbearer.
struck the Kings Standerd-bearer through the thigh, which struck also the
horse he rode on through the shoulder, so as both died with the same shot. Which
thing our men taking grievously, discharged also their pieces again, with such
a terrible volly of shot upon the enemy, as it brake their ranks, who by this
occasion continually forced and disordered, all the Gentlemen which were in the
fore-f^ont, flying, escaped the storm of the battle. Our horsemen, after they
perceived the enemy to be scattered, and put to flight with the often shot of
the Gunners, and Harquebus^ers, ran upon them suddenly, with all their
troops, and gave them a charge, where they were so farte from abiding the
encounter; as like sheep co^fusedly they ran away headlong, as it were mad men.
But throug the noise, and cry of our men following, even now in the last
obstinacy of treason: when their fierce and boiling minds had taken up, I wot
not what secret flames of hatred and grief (as wild beasts) being returned
from their desperation, and remembrance of their villainies, into rage and
madness (turning themselves speedily from their flight) with deadly obstinacy
they withstood our men a little while: Yet such was the force of the shot, and
the heat of our men rushing upon them, which like unbridle horses (being greedy
of the victory) broke into the Host of the enemy, that Ketts Army being beaten
down, and overthrown on every side (with the hot assault) were almost with no
labor driven from their standing. Therefore Kett himself, as he was a stout
Captain in villainy, so was he Kett flied cowardly.
a cowardly governor in war. For, when he saw all went against him: their
ranks broken, their soldiers overthrown, our forces fiercely to invade, and
that there was neither hope of safty, nor means of a^de, perplexed in mind,
and pressed in conscience, with his exceeding Traitors can have no hope.
villainy, secretly fled out of the Camp from his company. Which as soon as it
was known, the Captain to be fled out of the field: it is incredible to
think how it weakened the minds of the Rebels, and brought to pass in a short
time, as all that heat of late, and eatnest desire to fight again (forth with
at this strange and unlooked for report of his flying) fainted, and waxed
cold. Whereupon were heard murmurings, and secret complainings: after, cryings
out: at last they began to run away on every side. 3500. Rebels slain.
Our horsemen standing round about followed swiftly, and made a great
slaughter, for there were slain about three thousand, and five hundred, and a
great many wounded: when being scattered, they might all have been wounded or
slain. Which some of the Rebels perceiving, all hope of pardon (as they
supposed) being utterly taken away (their p^indes now waxing sauag^, through
many cruel facts) they stirred up one another, in that despai^e of life, to
the doing of greater villainy. Wherefore, with an obstinate bolnesse, presently
recovering themselves by companies from their flight, they intended to renew
the battle, ^ffirming that they had rather die manfully in fight, then flying,
to be slain like sheep. After, when they had furnished themselves with
swords, and other weapons, which lay scattered upon the ground, every where
among the heaps of the dead bodies, and had pitched in the ground before them,
Spears. Iauelins, and sharp Stakes, they swore either to other, to spend in
that place their lives manfully, or else at the length to get the victory.
Therefore, when they had drunk either to other (for that was in-signe of good
luck, and of their minds vowed to death) with prayers and ^owes, made after a
solemn manner, they fortify themselves to the battle. Warwick understanding
this, sends an Herald, willing them to lay down Magnanimity stands not in
the outward revenge.
their weapons, which if they would yet do, they should escape unpunished: if
otherwise, they should all of them, even to the last man, perish. They answered
again, that they would willingly leave their weapons, if they were persuaded,
that promise of impunity would prove for their safety: But, they have had
already experience, of their cruelty upon their companions in all places; and
therefore the same to be such an undoubted sign unto them: as they suppose
this mention of pardon, deceitfully offered by the Nobles; to be nothing else,
but whereby, being circumuented and overcome; by a false and vain hope of
favor (as by ^ua^es) they should all at the last be led to torture and death.
And in truth, whatsoever they pretend, they know well and perceive, this pardon
to be nothing else, but vessels of Ropes and Halters, and therefore have
decreed to die.

This answer being returned, Warwick is reported to lament the multitude*
even now ready to perish. And* being led with compassion toward them, sent
again to inquire: whether if he came himself, and gave his faith, and bound
themselves before their faces, they would then lay down their weapons. They
all answered, if that were done, they would believe, and resign themselves to
the Warwick goes himself and they inbrace Pardon.
will, and authority of the King.

Whereupon without delay, Warwick goes presently unto them, commands the
Herald openly to read the Kings Commission, which being read (because therein
undoubtedly, pardon was promised to all) trusting to it, they laid down their
weapons every man, and all of them as with one mouth, thankefully cried: God
save King Edward, God save King Edward. And thus many men (as it were taken out
of the jaws of death) were saved by the Wisdom and Compassion of Warwick.

The battle being ended, all the prey the same day was given to the Soldiers,
and openly sold in Norwich market. Moreover, this thing is in Record, that many
Gentlemen, and some of the chief of the City, were slain in this tumult, and
heat of the fight: although they gave money, and great rewards to the
Soldiers, to spare their lives.

The next day, tidings was brought by certain messengers to Kett taken.
Warwick, that Kett while his Horse tired, and fell down in his journey (as
it came to pass by Gods providence) being weary of his flight; hid himself in
a Barn, and was found by two servants of one Riches of Swannington, and taken
and carried home to his house, and kept safe. Presently there were sent twenty
horsemen for him, who finding him there in his filthiness all forlorn, lying
lamenting and howling; pale for fear, doubting and despairing of life: they
took him, and brought him bound to Norwich.

The same day began Judgment in the Castle, and an inquiry was made of those
that had conspi^ed, and many were hanged, and suffered 9. hanged on the Oak.
grievous death. Afterward, nine which were the Ringleaders, and principalls
were hanged on the Oak: Called the Oak of Reformiation, and many companions
with them in these villainies, were hanged, and then presently cut down, and
falling upon the earth (these are the Judgments of Traitors in our Country)
first their priu^e parts are cut off, then their bowels pulled out alive, and
cast into the fire, then their head is cut off, and their bodies quartered: the
head set upon a Pole, and fixed on the tops of the Towers of the City, the rest
of the body bestowed upon several places, and set up to the terror of other.
But these wild and rude heads, after this sort being taken away, many of the
Gentlemen carried with displeasure and desire of revenge, labored to stir up
the mind of Warwick to cruelty. Who not contented with the punishment of a
few, would have rooted out utterly the offspring and wicked race of them, and
were so earnest and eger in it, as they constrained Warwick to use this speech
unto them openly.

THere must be measure kept, and above all things in punishment men Warwicks
speech to the Gentlemen.
must not exceed. He knew their wickedness to be such, as deserved to be
grievously punished, and with the souerest judgment that might be. But how
far would they go? would they ever show: himselues discontented, and never
pleased? Would they leave no place for humble petition; ^^^^ for pardon and
mercy? Would they be Plowmen themselves, and ^^^row their own lands?

These speeches appeased greatly the desire of revenge, and brought to pass,
that many which before burned wholly with cruetly, afterward not withstanding
were far more courteous toward the miserable Common people. The same night
the bodies of the slain were buried, le^t there might breed some infection, or
sickness from the savor of the dead bodies.

The day after (that was the day before the fourth of the Kalends of September)
the most worthy Earl of Warwick, and famous for wisdom and courage, with all
his Nobles, and a great company, not only men, but women of all degrees and
ages, and an Assembly Warwick after praising God, departs the City.
of all Estates, went to Saint Peter's Church, and there made prayers, and gave
thanks to Almighty God, for the thing so worthily performed: which being
ended, he departed the City with all his Army.

But the Citizens being filled with joy and gladness, all with one consent
extolled Warwick, with commendations to the heavens, and spoke all manner good
of him, with clapping of hands, joy and thankfulness, filled, and confounded
all things, and renowned with most excellent speeches, the fame of so worthy a
Captain, and the memory of so great courage; and attributed to his wisdom
and good success, the preservation of their lives, their wives and children:
Finally, all their goods and possessions: And morcouer decreed (for the
eternal note and ignominy of those times) that upon A Law made for the
continual remem brance.
the same day, wherein the enemies were discomfited, and put to flight, all men
should repair to their Churches, and make Prayers unto Almighty God, with the
Ministers of the Congregations every year by a solemn custom established.
Which being received for a Law, they decreed moreover, that a Sermon should be
made at the common place, to the which all the Citizens should resort; which
ordinance, from such beginning, has continued until this day. But Ket, the
Ringleader of these villainies, together with William Kett, Kett tried and
condemned at London.
a man famous for many lewd behauiours, and his brother (not so near joined in
communion of blood, as in lewdness and wretchedness of life) were drawn to
London, and laid in the Tower.

After certain days, although they were manifestly convict of treason against
the Kings Majesty, and by the judgment and reproaches of all men, together
with the gilt of conscience for their villainies condemned; yet were they drawn
to open judgment after the common manner, and a quest passed upon them for
their trial: and being condemned, they were led away, the one to Norwich* the
other to Windham, where a deserved punishment passed upon them both. For Robert
Kett (at the Castle in Norwich) had chains put Executed.
upon him, and with a rope about his neck, was drawn alive from the ground up
to the Gibbet, placed upon the top of the Castle, and there hanged for a
continual memory of so great villainy, until that unhappy and heavy body
(through pu^rifaction consuming) shall fall down at length.

But William Kett ended his life with the same kind of death at Windham,
whence all these Furies flowed as from the Fountain, for there they both
dwelt. But after this sort, the City and all the Country of Norfolk (when
this vile and deadly plague of treason, to the destruction of many, had
continued a most three score Camp lasted 60. days.
days, and had shaken all things with most lamentable ruin) at the length,
through the goodness of God, and wonderful valor of Warwick (that excellent
noble man) these so bloody and woeful tumults ended, and the Country had rest.

Da Deo gloriam.
FINIS.
The Names of the Mayors and Sherifes of Norwich, from the first of HENRY the
fourth, until the eleventh year of King JAMES.
Anni Dom. Anni Regn. The Names of the Bai^ifes of the City, for four years
before the grant of Mayors. Bish. of Norwich and other accidets 1399 Ann. 1.
Hen. 4 Wall. Daniel. Rob. Dunston. Ric. Whit. Geo. Eaton. H^n. Spencer B. sat;
6. years 1400 2 Wat. Daniel. Bar. Blackney. Tho. Garrard. H. Skeyi Alexander B.
the 9. of H. 4. sat 6. years. 1 3 Io. Daniel. Edm. Warner. G. Apleyard. W.
Euerara 2 4 To. Hunworth. Io. Harston. W Sedman. Io. Coppin Anni Dom. Anni
Regn. MAYORS. SHERIFES. Bish. of Norwich and other accidets 3 5 W. Appelyard
Rob. Brasier. Io. Daniel 4 6 W. Aplyard 2. Sampson Barker. Io. Skeye 5 7 W.
Aplyard 3. Io. Harston. Ric. Spurdance 6 8 Gual. Daniel Edm. Warner. Ric.
Dreue This year it did freeze so greatly, as the Frost continued 15. weeks. 7
9 Io. Daniel Tho. Gerrard. Io. VVurlike 8 10 Edm. Warner. Tho. Bartlet. Io.
Bixley 9 11 Gual. Daniel 2. Gual. Mozley. Io. Manning 1410 12 To. Brasier Io.
Scotham. Geo. Au^ley 1 13 W. Aplyard 4. Io. Leuerech. Io. Wake 2 14 W. Aplyard
5. Ric. Whit. Io. Gruntho^p 3 Ann. 1. Hen. 5 Ric. Dreue VV. Sedman. Rob.
Luffyeld The first year of Hen. 5 a great part of the City of Norwich was
burnt, and consumed with sudden fire. 4 2 Io. Bixley Tho. Cook. Hen. Raffman
5 3 Io. Manning Ric. Mozley. Tho. Occle 6 4 Hen. Raffman Io. Asger. Io. Michel
7 5 Io. Daniel 2. VV. Roose. Hen. Iacques Richard Courtney Bishop. 1. H. 5. and
sat two years. 8 6 VV. Aplyard ^ To. Baxter. Io. Cambridge 9 7 Gua. Daniel 3.
Hen. Pecking. Io. Scothan. 1420 8 Ric. Spurdance Tho. Ingham. To. Asger Io.
Wakering Bish. began 3. Hen. 5. sat nine years. 1 9 VV. Sednam VV. Nich. Simon
Cook 2 Ann. 1. Hen. 6. Io. Manning 2. Io. Gerard. Tho. Daniel 3 2 Io. Daniel
4. Io. Wright. Io. Hodkins. 4 3 Thomas Baxter W. Gray. Peter Brasier W.
Amwicke, ten years Bishop. 5 4 Tho. Ingham Thomas Welbei. Rob. Chaplin. 6 5
John Asger John Copping. John Gleder 7 6 Thom Wetherby John Wilby. Ric. Pilbey
Ione a Sorceresse in great estimation with the Dolphin of France rode armed and
in man's aparrell in war, the space of 2, years, and did many wonderful
feats, and got from the Englishmen many Towns and Holds. 8 7 Richard Mozley
John Alderford. Greg* Draper 9 8 Robert Baxter 2 W. Ifelham. John Sipater 1430
9 John Cambridge Rob. Toppies. John Penning 1 10 Tho. Ingham. 2. W. As Well.
Thomas Graston. 2 11 Tho. Wetherby. 2 John Dunning. August. Bange. 3 12 Ric.
Spurdance 2 Rob. Langley* W. Hempstead 4 13 John Garrard Roger Boten. Thomas
Ball 5 14 Robert Tops Ed^. Bretion. Peter Roper Thomas Brown Bishop nine
years. 6 15 Rob. Chaplin Rich. Brasier. Gualter Crump This year for four
years together, the City of Norwich was deprived of all their liberties, and
lost all government. 7 16 Io. Cambridge. 2 Sim* Walsoker. Clem. Fishman 8 17
Io. Wells governor. Watt. Eton. John Lingford* 9 18 Io. Wells Custos Wat.
Eaton. John Lingford 1440 19 Io. Clisto^mileust John Brofiard. John Spicer
Printing invented in Mentzs, 1440. other think 1458. 1 20 Io. Cliston Cust^s
John Gosling. Hen. Stirmin 2 21 W. Hemstead Thomas Allen. Rob. Seygrim 3 22 W.
As Well. 2. John Intwood. Rob. Allen Paul's steeple burnt 1443. 4 23 Rob.
Toppies. 2. John Brosiard. Rob. Spicer Walter Heart Bishop sat 26. years. 5 24
John Cliston John Intwood. Rob. Allen 6 25 W. As Well. 3. John Intwood. Robe^t
Allen This year all England was shaken with a horrible Earthquake. 7 26 Tho.
Catworth John Intwood. Rob. Allen 8 27 Tho. Catworth. 2 Rob. Furbusher. John
Whighton The year before the Kentishmen made John Cade Captain over them, and
with a mighty Army marched toward London, where they spoiled, wasted, and
burned, and took away al things, and beheaded diverse of the Nobility, amongst
other the Lord Say Principal of England. But at last by the Divine Providence,
they were all put to flight, and received deserved punishment. 9 28 George
Draper Robert Brown. John Drol 1450 29 Thomas Allen John Chittoke. Rob. Machin
1 30 Ralph Seygrim W. Barley. John Gilbert 2 31 Rob. Toppies. 3. Thomas Ellis.
Robert Lyred 3 32 John Droll Edward Cutler. John Clarke 4 33 Rich. Brown Ric.
Beer. Geoffery Quinch 5 34 George Draper 2 W. Norwich. Rich. Alboone 6 35
Richard Brasier Tho. Buckingham. John Blount 7 36 John Chyttocke* Geoffery Iey:
John Humworth 8 37 Rob. Toppies. 4. Tho. Owdolfe. W. River 9 38 John Gilbert
Geof. Godfrayes. Edm. Colman 1460 39 Thomas Ellis Rob. Best. John Auberis 1 Ed.
4. 1 W. Norwich John Northal. John Coocke 2 2 John Bu^t John Burton. Rich.
Host 3 3 Rich. Brasier. 2. Hen. Spencer. W. Willis This year the Cathedral
Church at Norwich was burnt down with sudden fire. 4 4 John Gilbert. 2. W.
Swanne. Rob. Portland 5 5 Thomas Ellis. 2. Walt. Frenfeld. Rich. Aniel 6 6 John
Chittock. 2 John Rose. John Beckels 7 7 Roger Best. John Laws. Rob. Hickling 8
8 G^al. Fronsield Rich. Ferrer. Thomas Veil 9 9 John Auberie Tho. Buckingham.
W. Peper This year the Kentishmen in Co^motion did much hurt at London and
thereabout. 1470 10 Edward Cutler John Haruie. Hen. Owdolfe 1 11 John Butt John
Wellis. Rob. Atmer 2 12 Roger Best. 2. Edm. Static. Thomas Storm. Edm. Statie
held his Shriualtie at Trowse. 3 13 Richard Ferrer John Coocke. W. London 4 14
Thomas Ellis. 3. James Goldbeter. John Bright John Goldwel sat 26 years. 5 15
W. Swain Tho. Cambridge. W. Lound. 6 16 John Wellis. Ham. Claxton. Rob. Coocke
This year Edward 4. came to Norwich. 7 17 John Portland Greg. Clarke. Phil.
Curson 8 18 Rich. Ferrer. 2. Rob. Osborne. Thom. Beafield. This year in July
was such a Earthquake in the fields of Norwich, and almost all England over,
that in many places diverse buildings were shaken down with the force of it. 9
19 Tho. Buckingha^ Rob. Wellis. Thomas Philips 1480 20 John Aubrey. 2. Rich.
Gardener. Thomas Zorth 1 21 W. London Richard Ballis. Ralph Este 2 22 W. Almer
Rob. Belton. John Denton 3 Ri. 3. 1* Rich. Ferrer. 3. W. Rosa. W. Ferrer 4 2
John Coocke John Ebbes. W. Curties 5 Hen. 7. 1 Ham. Claxton John Tells. John
Swain Sweat first in England. 6 2 Th. Buckingha^. 2 John Wilkins. John Iowel
King Henry came this year to Norwich. 7 3 John Wellis. 2. John Picamor. John
Castin An Earthquake again shook all England. Also th^^ year a great Plague
in Norwich, whereof dyed in one year, 57104. from January until July, besides
Religious men, Anno 1487. 3. Hen. 7. 8 4 Tho. Beafield John Reed. Rich. Howard
9 5 Rich. Ballis Thomas Cause. Nich. Dauie 1490 6 Rob. Gardener Nich. Cowlich.
W. Gogion 1 7 W. London. 2. Stephen Brain. Thom. Coocke 2 8 Rob. Aylmer. 2.
John Warnes. John Rightwise 3 9 Rich. Ferrer. 4. Rob. Long. Bartholmew King 4
10 Ste. Bryan John Horsley Rob. Burrow 5 11 John Wellis. 3. Thomas Cause.
Richard Brasier. Robert Best. 6 12 John Reed. John Francis. John Pethode 7 13
Nic. Cowliche. Greg. Clarke. Tho. Aldich 8 14 Rt. Ferrer. 5. W. Ramsey. Tho.
Hemming 9 15 Rob. Gardener. 2 John Randolph. To. Pichamor Tho. Ian 1. Bishop.
1500 16 John Warnes. George Steward. John Crome Richard Nyex. 36 1 17 John
Rightwise. Richard Aylmer. W. Drake 2 18 V. Ramsey. Simon Reed. John Smith 3
19 Thomas Cause. Tho. Warus. Thomas Gaunt London this year almost consumed
with fire. 4 20 Rob. Bu^row. W. Heart. John Henry. John Walters.
5 21 Greg. Clarke. Thomas Large. W. Godfrey 6 22 Rob. Gardener. Thomas Clarke.
Io. Swayn Norwich this year the 25. of April, was hor ribly affl^cted with
fire, which burned continually 4. days together, most fearfully. And again
the same year the 4. of June, by the like casualtie it was again fired. 7 23
Tho. Aldrich. John Clarke. Robert Ferrer. 8 24 W. Ramsey. 2. Edward Reed. Rob.
Broom 9 Hen. 8 1 Robert Long. Hen. Meir. Robert Iannis 1510 2 Rich. Brasier.
John Marsham. Ralph Wilkins 1 3 Rich. Aylmer. Robert Bell. Stephen Stallon. 2 4
W. Heart. Stephen Stwan. John Corpusby 3 5 Ioh. Rightwise. 2 John Busting.
Thomas Pickerel Christ Church in Norwich, the 1. of Hen. 3. a great part of it
burnt with the Books, and all the Ornaments thereof. 4 6 Greg. Clarke. 2. Hen.
Scoolehouse. John Terry. 5 7 John Clarke. To. Baker W. Broom Rich. Farrer Tho.
Wilkins 6 8 Tho. Aldrich 2 Tho. Bawber. Gregory Cause 7 9 Robert Iannys. Rob.
Green. Thomas Corie In the eight year of King Henry the eight, Frost and
Snow, so as Horse and Carts laden, went over the Thames, and the same followed
the Ill May day at London. 8 10 John Marsham. Rob. Hemming. Ham. Linstead 9 11
W. Heart. 2. Ioh. Brown. Bartho. Springal. 1520 12 John Clarke. 2. Nich.
Syphas. John Westgate 1 13 Edward Reed. Thomas Moore. Robert Hawle 2 14 John
Terry. Regi. Litleprow. W. Norffolk 3 15 Robert Iannys. 2 Stephen Rainbow. Hen.
Salter 4 16 Tho. Pickerel. Robert Leech. John Swain Sweat second, the 10. of
He 8. which grievously afflicted almost all England. 5 17 Robert Ferrer. Aug.
Steward. W. Layer. 6 18 Robert Burrow. W. Russel. John Watts senior. 7 19 Ralph
Wilkins. Thomas Grew. John Clarke S. Leonards Flood 11. year of Hen. 8. in
Norwich. 8 20 W. Rone. Thomas Cranke. Henry Fuller 9 21 Thomas Green John
Curat. John Corbet The French Queen at Norwich 21. of He. 8. 1530 22 Thomas B.
where. Tho. Neiton. Nic. Sutterton 1 23 Edward Reed 2. Richard Catlin. W.
Rogers 2 24 Regi. Litleprow* John Groot. W. Have Bilncy ^urnt at Norwich, 23.
Hen. 8. 3 25 Tho. Pickerel. 2. Adam Laws. Rog. Cowper 4 26 Aug. Steward W.
Lin. Thomas Greenwood Lady Elizab. borne the 2^* he 7. of Septem. at
Greenwich. 5 27 Nicholas Syphat Robert Brown. Henry Crook 6 28 Robert Ferrer.
2. Edmund Wood. Tho. Thetford 7 29 W. Layer Robert Rugge. Robert Palmer 1532.
Monk of Aye burnt at Norwich. 8 30 Tho. Pickerel. 3. Nic. Osborne. Io.
Humberste^ Rugge Bishop 14. 9 31 Nic. Soterton. James Marsham Th. Walters John
Tracie
Six Articles. 1549 32 Tho. Grew^ Thomas Codde. John Spencer 1 33 Robert Leech
Foelix Puttocke. John* Quasse 2 34 W. Rogers. Thomas Cock. Richard Dauie 3 35
Edward Reed Rich. Alee W. Morrant Tho. Marsham
4 36 Henry Fuller. Edmund Warden. Rob. Martin 5 37 Robert Rugge Ric. Suckling.
Robert Ling 6 38 Aug. Steward 2. Rob. Michels. Bern. Vdbeard 7 Edw. 6 1 Robert
Rich. Thomas Dowsing. W. Heed 8 2 Edmund Wood 2 W. Rogers. 2 Henry Bacon. John
Atkins 9 3 Thomas Codde Richard Fletcher. W. Ferrer Ketts Camp this year.
1550 4 Robert Rugge 2 Thomas Morley. John Walters Thomas Thursbey Bishop sat
4. years. 1 5 Richard Dauie John Aldrich. Thomas Gray 2 6 Thomas Cock Rob.
Norman. John Bungey Sweat 4. July 8. this year was the Voyage to Muscouie.
1651 3 Marie. 1 Thomas Crook Nicholas Norgate. John House 4 2 Tho. Marsham
Foelix Puttocke. Thomas Marsham. W. Mingay 5 3 Thomas Goddez Thomas Green.
John Bloome John Hopton Bishop sat 6. years. 6 4 Aug. Steward 3. Tho.
Sutterton. Leo. Sutterton 7 5 Henry Bacon. Edm. Wolsey Thomas Lin John Benjamin
S. Quintens won Aug. 18. 8 Eliza. 1 John Aldrich Thomas Parker. And. Quash
Calice lost in four days after 216. years possession. 9 2 Rich. Fletcher
Thomas Culley. Tho. Tesmund 0 3 Robert Michels Thomas Whale. Richard Heed. John
Parkhurst sat 16. years. 1 4 W. Mingay Robert UUood. Thomas Pecke 2 5 W.
Ferrer Thomas Ferrer. Tho. Beomund Many Noblemen came to Norwich, to visit the
Duke of Norfolk and to shoot. 3 6 Richard Danie 2 Christopher Some. Eliz. Bate
4 7 Nichol. Norgat Rob. Suckling. John Gibbes 5 8 Tho. Sutterton John
Sutterton. Tho. VVinter Strangers, Dutch and Wallounes had leave from her
Majesty, to exercise such trades not used before in Norwich. 6 9 Henry Bacon.
2. Thomas Pettis. John Sucklin 7 10 Thomas Whale John Worsley. Thomas Layer 8
11 Thomas Parker* John Reed. Simon Bowde 9 12 Robert Wood Christopher Layer.
Rich. Bate 1570 13 John Aldrich. 2. Tho. Gleane. Robert Gostling. John
Throgmorton and his Company suffered for rebellion. The same year was
Candlemasse Flood. 1 14 Thomas Green Henry Greenwood. Edm. Pie 2 15 Robert
Suckling Nich. Sutterton. Fran. Rugge 3 16 Thomas Pocke George Bowgeon. Thom.
Stokes 4 17 Christoph. Some Nich. Baker. Thomas Gooche The Massacre in France.
August. 26. 1572. 5 18 W. Ferrer 2. Rich. Baker. Clement Hirne 6 19 Thomas
Layer Cut. Bryarton. Fran. Morley Edm. Freeke Bishop 9. years. 7 20 Thomas
Culley Richard Howes. Rich. Bauges 8 21 Robert Wood. 2. John Elwin. Thomas
Sacker Queen Elizabeth at Norwich, August. 16. 9 22 Simon Bowde Robert Dauie.
John Pie 1580 23 Christoph. Some 2 Laurence Wood. Nic. Bradford Haman the
Blasphemer burnt at Norwich. 1 24 Christoph. Layer Richard Ferrer. Thomas Pie.
Plague great also this year at Norwich. Earthquake, April 6. at 6. of the
clock in the afternone* 1580. 2 25 Rob. Suckling. 2. Rob. Yarrou. John
Wilkinson 3 26 Thomas Gleane Henry Pie. Edward Iohnsons 4 27 John Suckling
Laurence Watts. Titus Norris 5 28 Thomas Layer. 2 Rob. Welles. John Tesmund
Edmund Scambler Bishop sat 9. years. 6 29 Thomas Pecke. 2. Henry Dauie. Ios.
Culley 7 30 Francis Rugge Aliz. Thurston. Greg. Howlton Cole the Anabaptist
burnt at Norwich. July. 8 31 S^mon Bowde. 2 Robert Rooke. VV. Ramsey Ket the
Jewish Arria^ burnt at Norwich Ian. 14. 9 32 Christo. Layer 2. Randol Smith.
John Silver 1590 33 Thomas Pettis Robert Hall. VV. Peter's 1 34 Robert Yarrom
Nicholas Layer. Thom Lane The Invincible Navy of Spain, destroyed in the Sea
by GODS hand, August and September, 1588. 2 35 Tho. Gleane. 2. John Sutterton.
Roger Ramsey 3 36 Clement Hirne Rob. Blackbornt. Aug. VVhale 4 37 Christ. Some.
2 Richard Tooley. VV. Johnson Edm. Brown. Rog. Gaywood W. Redman Bishop sat
9. years. 5 38 Thomas Layer. 3 Ri. Sadler Cales sacked. 6 39 Richard Ferrer
Tho. Anguish. To. Gybson This year Christ's Church spoiled by thunder and
lightning A fearful Earthquake about noone, the 24. of December, 1600. 7 40
Thomas Pie Tho. Hirne. Pet. Barker 8 41 Francis Rugge John Pettis. George
Downing. 9 42 Roger UUelles To. Gatshead. Hen. Galyard 1600 43 Alex. Thurstone
Thomas Pettis. Robert Debney 1 44 John Tesmund Tho. Gleane 3 Ioh. Chapman.
Spen. Peterson Another the 8 of April following about midnight. 2 45 Francis
Rugge John Mingay. VV. Drake 3 James. 1 Thomas Lane 1 Ed^. N^^ting. John Simons
John Gyggons Bishop 1. Iacobi. 4 2 Thomas Hirne 1 George Birch. George Cock A
lamentable chance about able men and women were in the crowde, trodden to
death, at night. 5 3 Tho. Sutterton Mic. Aldrich. Fran. S^^al piece 6 4 Iosi
Culley Thomas Blosso. John Shouel 7 5 Geor. Downing Rob. Craske. James Allen
The Bishops house at Ludham, utterly consumed with fire by negligence as
thought. 1611. 8 6 Sir John Pettis Knight. Rob. Hernsey. H. Fasset 9 7 Sir Tho.
Hirne Knight. Bas. Throgmorto^. Th. Doughty Prince Frederick, Count Palatine
of Rhene, and the Lady Elizabeth the Kings daughter, was married February,
14. 1612. 1610 8 Roger Ramsey. Peter Gleane. Rich. Goldman 1 9 Thomas Anguish
Ric. Rosse. Simon Dauie. 2 10 Thomas Blosse Bussey. John Norris 3 11 George
Cock Lionel Claxton. Mich. Parker 4 12 Thomas Pettis Th. Spendelaw. Matt.
Peckeuer 1614. Two great Floods in Norwich, 1. the 30. of November. Second not
so great, the 15 of March. 5 13


