A LOOKING-GLASS FOR PETITIONERS.

Wherein every Christian man and woman, may clearly see, what they are to beg
at Gods hands, the manner how they are to beg, and the assurance of those
things which they do beg.

In a Sermon preached at Framlingham Castle in high Suffolk.

By JOHN NEVVMAN Master of Arts.

IOH. 16.24. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: Ask, and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for John Barnes, and are to sold at his shop
in Christ-Church walk. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sr HENRY MILDMAY Master of his Majesty's JEWELS.
Right worthy Sir,
I Little thought of printing this Sermon, when I preached it, much less of
dedicating it to your Worship, after I had resolved to print it. But I was
persuaded unto the one, by many of my friends and auditors (who do better
conceit of it then I my self): and I am emboldned unto the other; first,
quadam affinitate, by some small alliance, which makes me to presume more upon
you, then upon any other. Secondly, by the report of your Worships love toward
virtue and learning, which, as most men say, exceeds your greatness: and
herein you do no whit degenerate from your Ancestors and forefathers, whose
love unto learning did so abound, that their famous and charitable deeds, (of
which both the University of Cambridge, and many other places, can testify)
do aeternize their memories, in the Register of everliving fame: There let
them live, and may your Worship continue in treading their footsteps, that
your virtues may as long continue also after your obsequies. And as I am bold
to present unto you this small gift, this plain Looking glass; so I humbly
entreat your Worship, as willingly to accept of it, and to look in it, that
being shrouded in the chamber of so worthy a Gentleman, it may be kept from
being cracked by the calumniations of censorious tongues. So shall I remain

Yours in all dutiful service J. N.

A LOOKING-GLASS FOR PETITIONERS.
LVK. 11.9. Ask, and it shall be given you.


THese words are part of a lesson, which our Savior Christ taught unto his
Disciples; being desirous how to pray aright that they might be heard. In the
first verse of this chapter one in the behalf of the rest puts up this
petition: Mr. teach us how to pray as John also taught his disciples. In the
second verse he as a loving and careful master as willing to profit his
scholars, as they to learn: he sets them down this absolute form of prayer,
teaching them what to ask, in these words when you pray say, Our Father which
art in heaven etc. As follows unto the 5. verse. In which 5. verse and in the
6.7.8. verses: least they should be discouraged if they did not incontinently
and at the first, obtain that which they prayed for: he brings the
similitude or parable of the importunate borrower of three loaves of bread,
teaching them not to be weary but to persevere in prayer; and in this 9 verse,
in these words which I have now read unto you least they should be fearful,
and so not pray at all, or faint hearted and so make weak prayers: he emboldens
them, willing them to pray, and to be confident in prayer, giving his word unto
them that he will hear them: and promising that he will grant their requests:
Ask, (says Christ) and it shall be given you.

In these words I will observe two things, first an Inuitation in this word,
Ask: secondly a promise, in these words, and it shall be given you. In the
inuitation I will observe. Quid, and Quomodo; quid? what we must ask,
Quomodo? how we must ask; in the promise, I will observe: the promiser, and
the thing promised; the promiser God, the thing promised; whatsoever we shall
ask; in the promiser, I will observe first his ability: in that he is able to
perform, whatsoever he promises. Secondly his willingness: in whatsoever he
promises he is willing to perform. In the thing promised: I will likewise
observe these two two things; first the generallitie, in this word It. Secondly
the certainty of it, in this word, Shall; It shall be given you; Ask, and it
shall be given you. And first of the first thing observed, in the inuitation,
Quid? what we must ask.

Saint Augustine in a certain homely says, that the first condition of prayer
is, that that which we do ask, ought to be something; that when we do pray we
must pray for something; now his opinion is: that temporary matters, that the
things which belong unto the body, be nothing, and therefore are not to be
asked, but above all things he would have us seek the kingdom of heaven and
the righteousness thereof and then al these things below shall be cast upon us,
and therefore he says that it was but one thing, that the Prophet David did
require of the Lord: Vnum petij Psalm. 27.4. one thing have I desired of the
Lord, which I will require, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord; all the
days of my life; Qui vere christianus est, (says he) non ista temporalia
appetere debet, sed totum pondus orationis and intentionis suae ad aeternam
beatitudinem debet impendere; He that is a true christian, ought not to ask
and beg of God temporary matters, but the whole intent of all his prayers,
ought to be bestowed in begging of the summum bonum the vnum necessarium,
aeternall blessedness; but he thus expounds himself saying, Sed tamen haec
absolute petenda non esse, intelligendum est; But not withstanding it is to be
understood: that these things ought to be asked; but not absolutely; he does
not say, that we must not ask them at all, but he says we must ask them
sparingly, and conditionally and comparatively, not at all in respect of
spiritual blessings these temporary matters are not to be asked; temporary
blessings we may pray for, but above all things, let us ask of God those
spiritual graces which will bring us to the kingdom of heaven. Ecce alius in
oratione (says St. Gregory) postulat vestem: alius sibi dari alimentum et:
quidem si haec desint, ab omnipotenti deo, sunt petenda: haec petere, non est
errare, sed tamen non nimie petantur; one (says he) desires of God i^ his
prayer raiment, and clothing, another begs for food, and nourishment, these
things if they be wanting, must be asked of the almighty God; to beg them is
no sin, but yet we must not too greedily desire them. But Barnard de
oratione, although mellifluously, yet plainly comes unto the matter: for he
sets down what we must pray for, and also the condition of our prayers what
they must be: The prayers of the heart (says he) I do believe do consist in
these three things; neither do I see what else besides these three things any
child of God can pray for: two of which concerns this world: the third
concerns the world to come; all that we can pray for, in this world, is that
God would bestow upon us, the goods of our bodies and souls, all outward
blessings necessary for the body, and all inward graces convenient for the
soul, and all that we can desire in the world to come: is aeternall
Blessedness: that God as he has given us the kingdom of grace: so he would
give us the kingdom of glory; that he would in his good time bring us out of
this transitory world to his perpetual kingdom, there to reign with him
world without end. And therefore we pray Thy kingdom come. There is nothing
else that we can pray for; All our prayers tend to this end that whilst we
live in this world, we may have sufficient nourishment for our bodies
spiritual food for our souls, and in the world to come, we may have life
everlasting. And in begging of these three things, three things must be
avoided: in the first, Superfluitas; in the second, Impuritas; in the third,
Arrogantia. In the first, superfluity; we must ask of God those things only,
which be necessary, for our bodies. In the second, Impuritie; we must not ask
and beg of God, spiritual graces, to brag and boast of them. In the third,
Pride and arrogancy; not seeking salvation in our own works and merits, but
in the mercies of God, and in the merits of our Savior and Redeemer Christ
Jesus. In the first, in begging of things for the body, we must avoid
superfluity: for God will not grant our greedy desires; neither will he listen
unto our prayers, if we do not ask those things, which be meet for him to
give, and convenient for us to receive. In oratione (says Zegedine) duo
spectanda: In prayer there are two things to be considered; necessitas vel
decorum; the necessity of those things which we ask; and the comeliness and
meetnes of them: the necessity (that is) those things which concern the
sustentation, the nourishment, the health, the freedom, and liberties of our
bodies. Food and clothing, health and liberty, is necessary for our bodies:
and these things must be asked of God, and so much of them, as will suffice,
and no more: If we ask more then will suffice, to spend upon our pleasures, or
to satisfy our lusts, we shall not be heard, because we ask amiss: Ye ask
and receive not (says S. James 4.3.) because you ask amiss, that ye might
consume it on your lusts. We must pray, as our Savior Christ commands us;
Fanem nostrum quotidianum, da nobis hodie, Give us this day our daily bread:
that is, give us those things, which be sufficient both for our bodies and
souls; give us the staff of bread, which is sufficient for our bodies; give
us Christ, which is the bread of the faithful, the food of our souls; give
us panem praeter panem and super panem, above bread and besides bread; Da nobis
vtrumque panem corporis and animae, give us food both for the body and soul.
This I take to be the meaning of the words in general. But if we come to
handle the words in particular; we shall find that these three words, panem,
nostrum, quotidianum, affords us three special doctrines, fit for our purpose;
for whereas he says Pan m, he bids us ask for bread which is the common
sustinance for our bodies, he would have us to be content with that which the
Lord sends: and not to lust after the flesh pots of Egypt, to be fed with
delicates and fare deliciously every day, for if we have bread, if we have
wherewithal to satisfy our hunger, to quench our thirstes, and to clothe our
bodies; we must learn with the Apostle Paul, therewithal to be content. And
whereas he says, panem nostrum, our bread he would have us to be content with
that which is ours, which is our own, and not too greedily desire that which
is other men's: he would not have us to live upon usury, oppression, theft,
deceit, falsehood, he would not have us, so much as to covet our neighbors
goods: neitheir Oxen, nor their asses, their man-seruants or their maid
servants, their wives or their cattle nor any thing which belongs unto them;
much less by force or violence, by craft or cunning to steal, or to purloine
any thing from them: but to be content with that which is our own: desiring of
the Lord only (panem nostrum) our bread and no more. And whereas, he says,
panem nostrum quotidianum, our daily bread, he would not have us be too
careful for the time to come, for what we shall eat, and what we shall
drink and where withal we shall be clothed; but to take that which is
present thankfully, confidently reposing and putting our trust, in the
Almighty, that no want shall happen unto us, in regard we have him for our
loving father, who will be as careful over us as we can be over our selves:
neither would he have us to be gluttons, and drunkards, and eat and drink as
much in one day, as would serve for many days; but he would have us to be
sober and temperate, and take no more in the day, then will serve for the day:
avoiding all superfluity, taking that only which is necessary, no more we
must use no more we must pray for, if we do our p ayers shall be in vain, we
shall not be heard, because we ask amiss. And as we must respect the
necessi ie, so also must we keep a decorum in our prayers. We must ask of
God that, which is meet for him to give and convenient for us to receive; all
superstitious, all wicked, unjust, curious, rash, presumptuous, and
unprofitable prayers must be laid a side; and in all our prayers the special
thing we must aim at is the glory of God; that those things, which we pray
for may be to Gods glory and our own comfort. The prayer of the mother of
Zebedeus children, was unlawful, because it was full of ambition, for she
dreaming of a temporal kingdom desired of our Sau our Christ honor and
preferment for her sonns, that the one might sit on his right hand the other on
his left hand in his kingdom; Mat: the. 20.21. Our Savior Christ answered her
with Nescitis quid petitis, you know not what you ask, rebuking them for their
presumption for asking those things, which were not meet, for him to give, and
convenient for them to receive. The request also of Herodias daughter who asked
of the king, John Baptists head, was not to the glory of God; but altogether
abominable and unlawful and if we must not desire of men those things which be
unlawful: much less of our heavenly father. If she might not ask John
Baptist head of the king; who was her mothers enemy: much less ought we to
desire of God, the hurt, destruction, or confusion of our enemies as they be
our own enemies. Indeed, if in being our enemies, they be the enemies of God:
then we may pray with the prophet David: Oh Lord confound our foes, let shame
and confusion smite them, so that they may not be able to prevail against thee
and against thine anointed; but the deprecations that we daily use, the curles
and the plagues, which we pray for, to light upon one another heads, nay, and
upon our selves be most fearful and most abominable; we pray the plague, the
pox, the gallows, sudden death and a l manner of punnishments, to light upon
our selves and others: whereas if God were not more merciful in hearing and
granting, then we be in desiring, there is no day but many of us should be
consumed: there is no hour but many of us should perish; there is no minute of
an hour, but many of us should have one punishment or other light upon us;
Epicurus was wont to say, as Maximius
Maximius reports: breui spatio homines omnes perituros esse, si hominum preces
sequeretur deus; that in a little time, all men should perish, and utterly be
consumed, if God should grant all men their desires; and his reason is this,
quoniam multa and acerba alij in alios precantur; because men pray so bitterly
one against another. If he might say so in his time: well we may say so in our
times: upon whom the latter ends of the world be come: amongst whom iniquity
abounds; for, whereas we should pray for our enemies, and for one another,
either we neglect it, and pray not at all: or else we pray for curses to
light upon them; witness the continual and common deprecations, which be as
rise in men's mouths, as their ordinary talking For which of us amongst us, (I
speak of the most part of us) does not curse his enemy? nay curse his friend?
nay, the fruit of our own bodies? we do not spare, but many of us commonly
curse and bann our own children: nay, our selves we curse: wishing plagues to
light upon our bodies, our souls, we do not spare, but many of us commonly
wish damnation unto them; which prayers and curses if the Lord should hear,
(as no question but he does hear them) but if he should grant them, fearful
and lamentable were our estates? beloved; he does grant them, and many times
according to our own hearts desire, our bodies consume and come to untimely
ends; our wealth decays and no way prospers; our children turn disobedient
riotous, unruly and evil conditioned, and our souls are finally (...) in hell
fire; how fearful and lamentable be these our prayers? and yet how ordinarily
do we use them? which of us (if we examine our selves) be free from them?
take heed, and take the psalmists council; stand in awe and sin not; Be
careful how thou make such prayers unto God; for as sure as he lives in
heaven, he will hear them, and will send such plagues and curses upon thee and
thine as thou desire: unless thou speedily repent, such prayers we must not
use, for they be neither meet nor convenient, meet for God to hear,
convenient for us to receive, rather let us pray with the heathen man: Da bona
sieve petare deus seu nulla petare and procul a nobis mala quaeque petentibus
aufer, and mala sieve petare nega, seu nulla petare. Grant oh Lord that we may
pray for such things as be to thy glory, or else that we may not pray at all:
and remove far from us, we beseech thee, all wicked prayers, either deny us
those things, which be hurtful and not convenient for us, or else grant, that
we may make no such prayers unto thee. And as in praing for temporary matters:
we must respect the necessity, and keep a Decorum: so in praying for
spiritual graces, and for life everlasting we must respect the end, why we
pray and the manner how we pray: we must not pray for spiritual graces, to
the end we may be puffed up, and so bragg and boast of them, as Hypocrites do;
for then the Lord will not hear us; neither must we seek the kingdom of
heaven, relying upon our own works, and merits: as did the proud Pharisie,
for then the Lord will not regard us, but with the Apostle Paul, let us beg
for the graces need full for our souls in all simplicity: and with the
Publican for the kingdom of heaven in all humility: and then the Lord will
give us those things which we desire, and then he will hear us in those things
which we pray for: Ask, (says Christ) and it shall be given you

Thus much for the first thing observed in the invitation; Quid, what we must
ask: the second thing observed, is Quomodo, how we must ask. For as the Lord
will not hear us, if we do not ask those things, which be meet and
convenient: so he will not grant our requests, unless we pray as we ought to
do; therefore it is very necessary, for us to learn how to pray. Now if we
will pray as we ought to do, we must pray after this manner, Innocenter,
humiliter, fideliter, amanter, constanter, and audacter; innocently, humbly,
faithfully, lovingly, constantly and boldly: for if with our prayers, these six
virtues be not joined, Innocence, humility, faith, charity, constancy, and
courage, our prayers can be to no effect: neither can they enter into the Lords
ears. For the two first: Innocence and Humility, be the wings of prayer,
whereby our prayers pierce the skies, and ascend to heaven gates. The second
two, Faith and Charity* be the keys of heaven gates, to let in our prayers
when they are ascended: and the third two, Constancy and boldness, be prayers
advocates to deliver our prayers unto the Lords ears, and to plead for such
things as we pray for. Now if they want Innocence or humility, our prayers
cannot ascend: for they cannot fly without wings, neither will one winge
suffice them to fly withal: If they want faith and charity, they cannot
enter into heaven gates, although they do ascend; for heaven gates cannot be
opened without these two keys: neither can one key open them. And if they want
constancy and boldness, they cannot enter into the Lords ears; for unless
these two prefer them, the Lord will listen to no petitions, neither dare one
of these, come in Gods presence without the other. So that we may see, if any
one of these virtues be wanting, we had as good not to pray at all; for our
prayers shall be in vain; and if with our prayers, these six virtues be
joined, pray for what we will, (secundum voluntate^) according to his will, our
prayers shall be heard, our requests shall be granted; he himself does promise
it, Ask, (says Christ) it shall be given you.

First, say, we must pray with innocence, with pure hearts, clean hands,
innocent tongues, with hearts purified from idle thoughts, and world y
cogitations: Long est enim a Deo animus qui in oratione cogitationibus saeculi
est occupatus: For that heart is far from God, which in the time of prayer is
busied with the cares of this world. With hands washed from evil works, from
all manner of wickedness and ungodliness; Citius enim ad preces index flectitur,
si peccator a prauitate sua corrigatur: For the judge is sooner moved to listen
unto us, when he sees our lives to be amended: with tongues seasoned with godly
speeches, Nisi enim lingua sit pura, orationes impuras esse necess^ est: For
unless our tongues be pure, it must needs be that our prayers must be altogether
unholy. Therefore when we come to pray, we must come with repentant hearts, with
souls and bodies washed clean, with the tears of repentance, hating the
sins that we have committed, hating our selves for committing of sin, then
our prayers shall be offered upon the Altar of our hearts, as the Lamb upon
the Altar of the Tabernacle Exo: 2. without spot or blemish: Then our prayers
will smell sweet, will be as a sweet savor in Gods nostthrills; then our
prayers will be powerful, and will wrest blessings from the Lord: Nay then the
Lord will willingly hear us, and will willingly grant our requests: Si enim
obedierimus Deo, obediet Deus orationibus nostris: If we serve God, God will
not fail, but he will be sure to serve us. But if we come unto him, in the
midst of our sins, having our hearts polluted with wicked imaginations, our
tongues poisoned with odious blasphemies, and our hands besmeared with the
blood of his only son, with the blood of Innocents, being full of wrongs and
oppressions; hear what the Prophet Esaias says 1.15. When you spread forth your
hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea when you make many prayers, I will
not hear you. Now we know that the Lord will not hear sinners, says S. John
2.31. But as the Unicorn will not be taken with the singing voice of a
corrupt, but of a pure Virgin: and as the fish, will not come into or suffer it
self to be enclosed, in an impure vessel, which is before moystned, and
besmeared with the blood of other fishes: So the Lord will not (as we may say)
be taken, with the hymns, psalms nor songs, neither with the prayers of the
wicked, and ungodly; neither is he inclined to hear those, whose hands be
imbrued with cruelty, with wrongs and injuries, and the blood of poor
innocents. The Prophet David often sung unto the Lord, often cried, often
fasted, and often prayed, yet hear what he says Psalm. 66.8. If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. For as Bernard says, Neque
ietunium, neque silentium, neque vigilia, neque orationes, and alia bona opera
grata sunt Deo, vbi virtus obedientiae deest: Neither fasting, nor silence, nor
watching, nor praying, neither any good works, are acceptable unto God. if
obedience unto his laws he wanting in us: for to obey is better then
sacrifice, to harken is better then the fat of Lambs. Therefore when we come
to pray, with David let us wash our hands in innocence, let us cleanse our
prayers in the deep sighs of contrition, let us wash them in the watery ears
of Attrition, and embrue them in virtuous actions, and in holy cogitations,
then they will shine in the Lords sight, then they will sound in the Lords
ears, then they will turn unto us not empty, but laden with many blessings.

The second virtue, that we must join with our prayers, is Humility; thy
prayers must be humble; thou must pray, verecundo affectu, not daring to speak
unto the Lord, with the woman, Luke 8. Et duro affectu, not daring to appear
in his sight, with the woman Luke the 7. In the 8 of Luke, the woman who had
the issue of blood, being ashamed to speak to JESUS; she durst no more but
touch the hemme of his garment: and Mary Magdalen in the 7. of Luke, being
ashamed to appear in his presence, she stood behind him weeping, being
wonderfully affectioned, she washed his feet with her tears, and wiped
them with the hairs of her head. When we pray, let us be ashamed of our
selves, let us be ashamed to come before God, let us stand a far off, with the
Publican, let us hold down our heads, knock our breasts, and judge our selves
altogether unworthy to be heard, or to be regarded of the Almighty, and then
our prayers from our lowly hearts, will no question fly unto the highest
heavens: Nam quando humilis oration fuerit, (says S. Bernard) coelum sine dubio
penetrabit, vnde certum est, quod vacua redire non possit; When our prayer is
humble, it will without all question, pierce into the highest heavens, from
whence it can by no means return empty. Let me speak unto the Lord, who am
but dust and ashes, says the holy father Abraham: He was a holy Patriarch, a
man of great substance, one beloved of God, one who was reputed faithful,
and one in whose seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed; yet
we may see, how in his prayer he humbles himself; he brags not of his
riches, he boasts not in his good works, he glories not in his promised
posterity, but acknowledges from whence he came, namely, out of the earth; he
confesses what he is, made of, Dust and Ashes; and as dust and ashes he
humbles himself at Gods feet, before he durst make his prayer unto him: Haec
est vera oration this is true prayer, which is made in all humility: so says
Gregory in his Mor: Ille Deo veram orationem exhibet, qui semetipsum cognoscit,
quia puluis humiliter vi it, qui nihil sibi virtutis tribuit, qui bona quae
ugit, esse de misericordia conditoris agnoscit: He prays rightly unto God,
(says he) which knows himself to be but just and ashes, who attributes no
goodness unto himself, but ascribes all unto his Lord and maker. So did the
Prophet David, who makes himself a worm and no man, he makes himself a worm
the least of all creatures, and by that means, becomes to be one of the
greatest in Gods favor: He sinned, and acknowledged his sins, he prayed in
all humility, and by his humble confession and lowly prayers, he obtained
pardon for all his transgressions. So must we pray, if we will be heard, if we
will have our prayers ascend: we must descend, not down into earth, but cast
our selves upon the earth: we must become lowly in our own eyes, and little
in our own conceits, if we will have our prayers mount, if with the archer
we will have our arrowe fly very high, if we will have our prayers fly to the
highest: we must bend backward very low, we must humble our selves in all
humility and then they will pierce the skies, for the prayers of him that
humbles himself, (says the son of Sirach) Eccle: 35.14. goes through th
clouds, and cease not until it come near: and will not depart until the
most high have respect thereunto.

The third virtue that we must join with our prayers is faith, we must
Credere Deum, we must believe that there is a God that does hear our prayers
and we must Credere Deo, we must believe that God, who does hear our
prayers, will perform our requests, it he shall see them convenient for us: If
we do not believe there is a God, how shall we call upon him; How shall they
call upon him, in whom they have not believed? says the Apostle Paul, Romans
10.14. And if we do not believe, that this God will hear us, and will grant
our requests, let us never look to receive any blessing, so says S. James,
speaking of the wauering-minded man; Let not that man (says he) think that he
shall receive any thing of the Lord, Iam. 1.7. If any man lack wisdom, let
him ask, and it shall be given him: But let him ask in faith, and waver not,
for he that wauereth (as you may read in the former verses) is like unto the
waves of the sea tossed in the wind, and carried away, he is unconstant in all
his actions, and therefore unconstant in all his prayers; he believes every
thing, and therefore he believes nothing: as the waves of the sea be tossed
here and there, and seldom at quiet; so his mind never rests upon one thing,
but he is subject to much variablenes, for now he thinks he shall be heard,
presently he thinks not, sometimes he thinks that there is a God, another time
doubts whether there be or no; at one time he make no question of Gods ability
and all-sufficiencie, another time he makes a question, as in his actions does
plainly appear, whether God can hear if his necessity should require. How
can God hear this man, who is so suspicious of him? he cannot hear him: and
why? because he does not pray; for prayer without faith, is no prayer at all.
Sola enim fides invocat eaque sola impetrat, fieri enim potest vt citra fidem
quis Deo placeat: For it is faith only that prays, it is faith only that
calls upon God, and without faith it is impossible to please him. Hebr. 11.6.
for he that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that seek him. Therefore says our Savior Christ, Mar. 11.24. I say
unto ye, whatsoever you desire when you pray, believe that ye shall have it,
and (...) be done unto you. This counsel the Prophet David took Psalm. 17.6. I
have called upon thee, o God, for thou shall hear me: and in the 55.17. As for
me I will call upon God, and the Lord shall save me. He prayed without wavering,
he prayed without doubting; he was so confident in prayer, that he said the
Lord should hear him: he binds God to perform that which he promises. God
promises to hear all those who faithfully call upon him, and therefore David
according to Gods promise will be heard. This counsel of our Savior Christ
let us also embrace, that which we pray for, let us make no question but to
obtain; let not the least doubt at all enter into us; let us pray without
doubting, and then without doubt we shall be heard.

The fourth virtue that we must join with our prayers is Charity; and if we
will have this virtue Charity accompany our prayers, dandu^ est egentibus,
ignoscendum est delinquentibus and orandum est pro omnibus: We must give to
others, we must forgive others, and we must pray for others. We must give unto
others, we must join with our prayers, Alms; and then our prayers and our
Alms shall come up into remembrance before God, as did the prayers and Alms
of Cornelius, Act: 10. Then our prayers will enter into the Lords ears, Esaias
58.7. Deal thy bread to the hungry; bring the poor that wander unto thine
house, and when thou see the naked cover him, then shall thou call, and the
Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I am. Secondly, we
must forgive others, if we our selves will be forgiven, we must forgive them
that trespass against us: It is a petition we daily use, Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. Thus we say: Sed vide
quid dicas (says Ambrose) quomodo dimitto sic and tu dimitte mihi, si
dimiseris, been conuenit vt dimittat tibi: si non dimiseris, quomodo convenit
vt tibi dimittat? Take heed and mark well what thou say, as I forgive, so
do thou O Lord forgive me; if thou do forgive, it agrees well that God
should forgive thee: but if thou do not forgive, it does not agree with Gods
Justice to forgive thee thy sins committed against him. If thou do not
forgive, thou shall not be forgiven; if thou show no mercy, thou shall find
no mercy in the time of need; for there shall be judgment merciless to him
that shows no mercy, says S. James. 2.13. Quod serimus metimus, quod damus
accipimus: That which we sow we shall reap, that which we give we shall
receive. If we sow no forgiveness, we shall reap none; if we give no
forgiveness, no forgiveness shall be given unto us when we pray for it.
Therefore says our Savior Christ Mar. 11.25. But when you shall stand and
pray forgive, if you have any thing against any man, that your Father also
which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses: for if you will not
forgive, your Father which is in heaven will not pardon you your trespasses.
Thirdly, we must pray for others: We must pray for all men, first of all
sorts: I will that first of all supplications and prayers, intercessions and
giving of thanks be made for all men, for Kings and all that are in authority;
for all men: that is, for all that be the children of election, for those that
be of the household of Faith: For all men, that is, for all men in general: for
if we be bound by the words of the Apostle to do good unto all men, I see no
reason, no more do many other Divines, which I have read upon this place, but
that likewise we should pray for all men; be they either Turks, infidels,
heathen, the enemies of God, or the enemies of our selves; we must pray for
their conversion, if it be the will of God, that they may be converted. But
most especially we that be Christians, we that be of the household of Faith, we
ought to pray for one another; Charity bids us, God commands us: Non dicimus,
pater meus, (says Cyprian de orat: Dom^) sed noster, nec da mihi, sed da
nobis, quia Christianitatis magister, noluit pri^atim precem fieri, vt scilicet
quis prose tant^m precetur: vnum enim orare pro omnibus voluit, quando in vno
omnes ipse portauit. We do not say when we pray, as Christ has commanded us,
my Father, but our Father; nor, give unto me, but give unto us: because he that
is master of Christi anitie, would not that private prayer should be made, that
is, that a man should pray for himself only, or for his private household: but
he would have us to pray for all in one, because as all in one he has borne
our infirmities. And the same Father writing upon Matthew, uses these words:
Pro se orare necessitas cogit, pro alijs autem Charitas fraternitatis hortatur:
To pray for our selves, necessity compells us; to pray for others, brotherly
Chatitie exhorts us. Let us therefore when we do pray, pray not only for our
selves, but for others; not only for our friends, but for our enemies; not only
for some particular men, but for all men in general. Pray for one another
(says S. James) that ye may be healed, for the prayer of the righteous man
avails much if it be fervent. Iam. 5.16.

Fifthly, we must pray with constancy, with perseverance, holding out unto the
end: Pray continually (says the Apostle Paul, Thessal: 5.17. that is, continue
in prayer: not all the time of your lives; for the Wiseman says, Eccles. 3.1.
That to all things there is an appointed time, a time to be borne, a time to
dye, a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted, a time to
weep and a time to laugh. But he would have us spend as much time as may be in
prayer: we must with our Savior if need require, spend whole nights in prayer:
we must with Daniel, pray thrice a day, in the morning, at noone, and at night:
we must begin our work with prayer, go forward with prayer, end it with
prayer: and not only do thus one day, but all the days of our lives; we must
hold out unto the end, and then we shall obtain the crown. Let perseverance
plead for thee, and then thou shall be surely heard: leave not the Lord, but
call upon him continually from time to time, and at the end he will hear thee.
The Cananitish woman with her constancy and perseverance in calling upon
Christ, moved him to heal her daughter: the borrower of three loaves of bread,
with his often knocking, obtained his request: and the widow with her
importunity, moved the unrighteous Judge, to do her justice: And shall not
God avenge his? shall he not hear his Elect, which day and night call upon
him? yea though he suffer them long, I tell you he will avenge them, he will
hear them, and that quickly. If we continue to call upon God, he will hear us
although not at the first time, yet at the second; if not at the second, yet at
the third; if not at the third time, yet at many times; if not at many times,
yet once amongst many times he will hear. And if he once hear us, we shall be
sure to have, that which is convenient for us; and if before he had seen it
necessary for us, we should without all question have had it. Fideliter enim
supplicans Deo (says Aug. in lib. Sent:) misericorditer auditur, and
misericorditer non auditur, quid enim infirmo sit vtilius, nouit magis medicus
quam aegrotus: He that makes his faithful and humble supplication unto God, in
mercy he is heard, and in mercy he is not heard: because he who is the
physician of our souls knows better what is needful for us, then we who be
his weak patients. Therefore let us be constant in calling upon God and
continue to cry unto him: knowing that although he tarry long, that yet at last
he will hear us to our greater benefit.

Sixthly and lastly we must pray with courage, with boldness, the Devil must
not scare us, desperation must not out face us, our sins must not dismay us:
but throwing down the devil, casting aside desperation, treading down our
sins under our feet, let us runn unto our redeemer, fly unto the mercies of
our creator, and lay hold upon them: then let the devil roar against thee l
ke a roaring lion, desperation assault thee like a hellish hagg, and thy sins
encounter thee like so many enemies, yet thou needs not fear, for thy
redeemer will defend thee, and the mercy of thy creator will ouer-shadow thee,
though the Devil whisper in thy conscience and tell thee, that it is needless
for thee to pray, yet pray: the Devil is a liar, be not ruled by him: though
desperation tell thee that there is no hope of pardon; yet for all that pray
for pardon and believe me thou shall have it: though thy sins say they be
greater then can be forgiven: mentiuntur peccata, thy sins lie; for the
mercies of God be greater then thy sins, if they were ten thousand more then
they be. If thou be'st bold, and of a stout courage, the devil cannot hurt
thee, for as Lacta^tius reports, the Devil hurts none, but the faint-hearted:
And if thou do confidently trust in the mercies of God, thou shall be saved,
let thy sins and desperation do what they can against thee. Pray boldly and
the Lord will hear thee although thou be in depth of misery, yet he will
hear thee in height of mercy. Si turbata fuerit anima (says one) memor esto
multitudinis misericordiae eius, and respira in eum. If thy mind be troubled,
be mindful of the mercies of God: and stay thy self upon them. By all means
be not faint hearted, for ex pusillanimitate spiritus, and timore immoderato,
impeditur oration. For there is no greater enemy unto thy prayers, then faint
heartedness and immoderate fear. Qui enim timide rogat docet negare: for he
that asks fearfully, teaches him of whom he beggs how to deny him. Pray
therefore boldly and with a confident courage, seek to thy creator: although in
respect of thy self and thy sins, thou may fear: yet in respect thou
have a loving Savior, and a merciful creator, thou may be bold: let
boldness plead for thee, and then thou mai'st be bold to expect thy desires,
for boldness will have no denial, but will be heard.

Thus have I showed you how we must pray in respect of the inward man, the
outward manner of praying, the Lord does not so much regard: I mean the
outward gesture of ours, which we use when we do pray: some when they pray
fall upon their knees, as Daniell when he p ayed thrice a day our Savior
Christ, when he prayed in the garden: and Paul when he prayed for the church
of the gentiles: Ephe. 3. others lift up their hands to heaven: as Solomon. 1.
kings. 8. others, cast up their faces, Mat. 16. others lie groueling: Psalm. 35.
some, humble themselves in sackcloath: Jonas. 3. some pray sitting, as Elias.
Kings. 19. some standing Luke. 18. some lying upon their beds: as Ezekia. 1.
King: 20. These indeed be the signs of an humble mind: for as one says,
Humiliatio corporis, est signu^ humilitatis mentis: that the humility of the
body, is a sign of the humbleness of the mind: Yet it skilleth not how we
pray outwardly, either sitting, kneeling, lying, walking, or standing, speaking
or not speaking for it is not the body that the Lord looks upon: neither is it
the words that he does respect: but it is the heart. If we pray with an humble
heart we shall be heard: pray after what manner we will pray. For (as Isidorus
says in his book de summo bono:) oration cordis est non labiorum, neque enim
verba deprecantis, deus intendit: sed orantis cor aspicit: melius est enim cum
silentio orare, cord sine sono vocis quam solis verbis sine intuitu mentis.
Prayer (says he) does not belong unto the body but unto the heart, neither is
it the words of him that prays, that the Lord does mark: but he beholds the
heart for it is better to pray with silence, with the heart without the voice:
then with words with the voice, without the heart. And so much concerning the
inuitation, both quid what we must pray for: and quomodo, how we must ask;
the promise follows: in which if you remember, I observed these two things:
the promiser: and the thing promised: in the promiser: I observe also two
things: his ability, in that he is able to perform, whatsoever he promises:
secondly his willingness, that whatsoever he promises he is willing to
perform. And first of the ability of the promiser, who is able to perform
whatsoever he promises. If we do but consider with our selves, who the
promiser is, we cannot make any doubt at all, of the thing promised: the
promiser is God, and not such a God, who is without motion, who has no ears
to hear, no eyes to see, no tongue to speak, no hands to give: but such a
God, who hears all things, who gives all things, who sees all things, who is
able to do all things, whatsoever him pleases, both in heaven and earth: his
name shows his nature, he is powerful Iehoua, Quod infinitum significat;
which signifies infinite. Infinite in greatness, infinite in majesty, infinite
in mercy, infinite in power, able to do things impossible to man's capacity,
and to bring that to pass, which the reach of man cannot imagine. The Hebrews
call him Ethau; Quod fortem significat; which signifies strong, and mighty;
Quoniam omnipotens est, because he is Almighty: In Greek he is called (...),
which signifies Currens, running; quia vbique est, and omnia implet sua illa
infinita essentia; because at one time he is able to be, and is every where,
and with his infinite essence fill all places. And in Latin he is called Deus,
a do, ^as, which signifies to Give, quia omne datum optimum de sursum est,
because he is able to give all good gifts, and because every good gift comes
from him. He is Clemens and misericors ad dimittendum, potens ad auxiliandum,
ad beatificandum copiosus: He is pitiful and merciful, to forgive; strong
and mighty to help; and to bless most bountiful. He is called a Rock, a
fortress, a strong tower, a shield, a horn of salvation, a refuge, the Lord
of hosts, able to deliver us from ten thousand enemies: He is the Angel of
great counsel, wisdom and understanding, able to direct us in all our
consultations. He is the Treasurer of the earth, and all that is therein; the
world, and they that dwell therein, able to relieve us in all our wants and
necessities. He is the only earthly and heavenly Physician, able to cure all
our maladies: and he is the only Comforter, able to succor us in all our
miseries. The gods of the Gentiles, be stocks and stones: the gods of Papists,
be crooked Crucifixes, which have ears and hear not, eyes and see not,
tongues and speak not, the works of men's hands, the devises of men's wit, made
of base earth, of rotten wood, of consuming metal: but our God is the Creator
of the deviser of these gods, who is able and will confound these gods and
god-makers. Our God has ears to hear, and able to hear all in all places;
eyes to see all in all countries; hands to give, able to satisfy all that be
in need; whose hands be always open to give unto them, which faithfully call
upon him. Let us not therefore be so ignorant with the Gentiles, as to pray
unto Idols; nor so wilfully blind with the Papists, as to pray unto Saints or
Angels, who be the creatures, of our Creator: but let us pray unto the Almighty
Iehoua, the Lord of Hosts, who is only able to help; who is only able to
deliver us, in the time of trouble. Call upon me (says the Lord, Ps. 50 15.)
in the day of trouble; so will I deliver thee: Here is no mention of any Idol,
here is no mention of any Saint or Angel; therefore let us not turn the glory
of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of the image of a corruptible man,
of birds, of foure-footed beasts, and of creeping things, Romans 1.23 for cursed
be the Image and Image-maker Deuteronomy. 2.15. Neither let us give the worship of the
Creator unto the creature, and direct our prayers unto Saints or Angels, which
we should direct unto God. For the Angel in the Revelation, which forbad John
to worship him, is able to satisfy a million of Papists, and sufficiently to
prove unto them, that neither Saint nor Angel is to be worshipped. They know
not when we pray, nor how we pray, nor how we pray, nor for what we pray: how
can they then give and grant unto us, that which we pray for? there is neither
Angel or Virgin, nor Patriarch, Saint or Martyr (says S. Augustine. in his
book de cura promat:) that knows, more what we do in earth, then we know what
they do in heaven. Which he proves by this place of Esaias 63.16. Doubtless thou
art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not; yet
thou o Lord art our father and redeemer, thy name is for ever. There is neither
Abraham, nor Isaac, nor Jacob, neither any Angel in heaven, knows what we do
upon earth, more then God himself reueales unto them at such time as he is to
use them upon his message. If only God be our Lord, and if he only is able to
hear and see, and to relieve our necessities; then is he only to be called
upon, according to the commandment of our Savior Christ, Matthew. 11.28. Come
unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. He is able
and only able, to succor us in all our wants and necessities: in the time of
pestilence, he is only able to send deliverance: in the time of famine, he is
only able to send sustenance: in the time of drought, he is only able to open
rivers in the tops of hills, and fountains in the midst of the valleys. When
the poor and the needy seek for water (says the Lord by the Prophet Esaias
41.17, 18.) and there is none; so that their tongue fails for thirst. I the
Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them, I will open
the rivers in the tops of the hills, and fountains in the midst of the
valleys, I will make the wilderness as a poole of water, and the waste lands as
springs of waters. Seeing therefore it is he and he only, that can help and
send releife, let us with the Prophet David, take him only for our rock, and
fortress, and Call upon the Lord only who is only worthy to be praised. And as
he is able, so he is willing; he is as willing to hear us, as we are to cry;
as willing to help us, as we are to request: he invites us, he bids us ask;
and withal promises to hear us, and it shall be given you, says he: he is
willing to hear us, and therefore he bids us ask; and because we should ask,
he promises to grant those things that we do ask. God promises nothing, but
that he would have us ask of him: and therefore he promises it, because we
should ask it. Deus (says a Father) vult a se requiri quod pollicetur: and
ideo multa quae dare disposuit, prius pollicetur, vt ex promissione deuotio
excitetur: God (says he) would have us challenge his promises, and therefore
those things which he purposes to bestow upon us, he first promises, to stir
up our devotion to pray for them. Ipse facit vt ipsum quaramus, atque
invocemus: he himself is the cause that we seek unto him, and call upon him.
He calls us and bids us come, and if we do come, he tells us, that we shall
have, that for which we come. Come ye oppressed, come ye greiued, come ye
distressed, come ye vexed, come all that are heavy laden, and ye shall have
ease, Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you: he cries
unto us, he makes proclamation, to the poor and the needy, to the hungry and
thirsty, either corporally or spiritually: If any man thirst, let him come unto
me, and I will satisfy him, Ioh. 6.35. he invites us to come unto him, that
is, to pray unto him; not once but many times; not in one place, but in many
places. In the 26 of Mat: Watch and pray (says he): Pray continually, 1 These.
5.17 Continue in prayer, Col. 4. Be sober and watching in prayer, 1 Pet: 4.7.
All which promises, and all which places, show unto us, how willing the Lord is
to help us, when we pray, seeing he is so desirous, that we should pray,
whenever we pray, and whatsoever we pray; for he is at hand to help. For what
nation is so great (says Moses) unto whom the gods come so near unto them, as
the Lord our God is near unto us, in all that we call unto him for? Deuteronomy. 4 7.
yea, before we call upon him, he will answer us, and whilst we speak, he will
hear us, Esaias 65.24. Though he withdraw his hand from us, for a time; we must
not think, that his arm is altogether shortened, and though a while he hide his
face from us, we must not think that he will be angry with us for ever; for his
arm is not shortened, that it cannot help; neither does his anger endure longer
then the twinkling of an eye. If he be forced to plague us, he is sorry for
our afflictions; and willingly would he help us, if we would come for help
unto him: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest
them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered you together, as
the hen does her chickens, and you would not? As the mother is willing to help
her children, and the hen naturally her young ones: so is the Lord as willing
to help those, which willingly call upon him. He is so willing to hear us, and
to help us in all our necessities, that if in our afflictions, we do do not
come unto him, he is angry with us, and lays the more crosses and troubles
upon us, to make us more spedily, to seek unto him. Thus he deals with us, in
the time of his plague and visitation: thus he deals with us in the time of
famine: thus he deals with us in the time of drought: thus he deals with
us, in the crosses, plagues, and punishments, that he lays upon us: he
suffers them to tarry the longer upon us, and to be more greiuous unto us,
because he being willing to help us, we are unwilling and negligent in going un
to him for help. If the plague continue at any time any long season in our
la^d; if the windows of heaven be long shut, so that the earth is dried up for
lack of moisture (as now of late it has bin): let us not think, that it is
the Lords fault, and that he is unwilling to hear us when we pray: for indeed
it is our own faults; for either we do not pray at all; or else we prolong to
pray; or else we mingle our prayers with murmurings or grudgings, praying not
as we ought to do: for if we do pray, and pray as we ought to do, the Lord
without all question, will hear us without all fail; he will help us, and
for the time that he has plagued us, he will comfort us, and for the time of
scarsitie, he will send us a time of abundance: for the Lord will be found of
those that seek him: if we seek him, we shall be sure to find him Ego
diligentes me ailigo, Prou. 8.17. I love them (says he) which love me; and
they that seek me early, shall find me. Seeing therefore, that he would have
us pray unto him, and if we do not pray, when we stand in need, he is
offended: I say, as Cassiodorus says upon the Psalms, Iustu^ est vt iugiter
rogetur, qui si non peratur, offenditur. It is meet and requisite, that we
should pray unto him, seeing he is so willing to help us; that if we neglect
to pray, he is offended with us. And also seeing the promises of Christ, both
to give and forgive: to give graces and other necessaries; to forgive sins and
offenses, be so many; and seeing he that has power, it is he that has
promised; we may be fully resolved of this point, that as he is able, so he is
willing; and promising, he willingly will perform, whatsoever he promises.
And thus much of his abilite, and of his willingness, in that he is able to
perform, whatsoever he promises; and in that whatsoever he promises, he is
willing to perform.

Now I am to speak of the thing promised, of the generality of it, in this
word, It: then of the certainty of it, in this word, Shall, it shall be given
you: Ask, and it shall be given you. And first of the generality of the gift:
it is general; he excepts nothing from us, which is good for us; if it be
convenient, it shall be given us: be it what it will be, that we do ask; be it
what it will be, that we need, he can give it us, he can bestow it upon us.
Quicquid enim opus est ipse habet: for whatsoever is neeedfull for man, he has
it, and whatsoever we can desire, it is in his hand to give: Would thou have
life, and do thou desire to see long days? would thou feign go to heaven,
and do thou not know the way? do thou desire to search the scriptures, and
would feign be acquainted with the truth? ask them of God; he can give thee
them: he can give thee life: he can show the way unto heaven, and acquaint thee
with the truth: for Ego sum vita, via, and veritas: He himself is the way, the
truth, and the life, and none can go unto the father but by him, Ioh. 14.6.
Do thou want the sight of the body, the light of thine eyes, which is more
precious unto thee then all the gold and precious things in the world? go unto
the fountain of light, go unto God, and he can give thee it. Est enim lux a
Deo splendens, vt inaccessibilis dicatur: for he is a light so gloriously
shining, that no mortal man can, or ever could, once behold or come near him.
Do thou want reason and would feign have understanding? Intellectu^ tibi
dabo, says the Lord in the Psalms, I will give thee wisdom. If thou be
hungry, he is the bread of life; unto whom if thou go, thou shall never
hunger, Ioh. 6.35. If thou be thirst, he is the true vine, of which
whosoever tastes, shall never thirst. Ioh. 15 1. whereupon says S. Amb:
Christus via est o^nibus si vulnera curare desideras, medicus est: si fabribus
aestuas, fons est: si grauaris iniquitace, iustitia est: si auxilio iudiges
virius est: si morie^ times, vita est: si coetu^ desideras, vta est: si
tenebras fugis, lux est: si cibu^quaeris, alime^tu^ est. Christ is all unto
all: if thou art wounded and desire to be healed, he is a physician: if thou
art possessed with a burning fever, he is the fountain wherein thou may
cool thee: if (with Mary Magdalen) thou have seven devils in thee, he is thy
righteousness, which must cleanse thee from thy filthynesse: if thou be
oppressed, and want one to succor thee, he is thy power that must defend
thee: if thou fear death, he is the life: if thou would obtain heaven,
he is the way: if thou fliest darkness, he is the light: and if thou be
hungry, he is thy food; therefore says S. Augustine: cur per mult a vagaris
homu^cio, quaerenda bona anima and corporis, quaere vnum bonu^, in quo sunt
omnia bona, and suffi^it: ibi enim est quicquid amas, quicquid desideras,
Wherefore do thou o man (says he) weary thy self in going about, seeking
for the goods of the body and the soul, seek one thing, which is Christ, in
whom is all things, and thou have enough: for in him is all things, that you
love, all things that thou desire; and he will deny thee nothing, that thou
do faithfully call unto him for, he has all things, and he can do all
things; thou can not ask, that thing at his hand, which he will not grant
thee, if with fervent prayer thou desire it. For so great is the force of
prayer, that there is nothing that can withstand it: if prayer once command it,
be it a thing impossible, it must obey: contrary to all natural reason; if
Paul be in prison and pray for deliverance, the prison doors must open of
their own accord: and his bands fall from him contrary to all expectation. The
child of God must have deliverance, or else the foundation of the prison must
be shaken by the power of heaven. Acts. 16.26. If Peter be in prison, another
child of God, although he be kept and watched, by two soldiers, bound with to
chains the prison doors watched by two soldiers, bound with two chains, the
prison doors watched by the prison keeper: yet if the church, that is the
children of God, pray for him: the angel of the Lord must come himself, the
child of God must be loosed, and Peter, (do the soldiers what they can with
their wepons, the bands what they can with their strengths, the prison doors
what they can, with their bolts, and the prison keepers what they can with
there narrow watching) must be delivered, must go out of prison conducted by
the Angel, Act: 12.7. The Israelites being oppressed by the Philistines. 1.
Sam. 7.8. they come to Samuel and desire him to pray, and cry unto the Lord
for them: Samuel cried unto the Lord; and the Israelites were delivered as you
may read in the 10. verse. The Lord sent his thunder, which fought for the^
after a most wonderful manner: that scattered the^ so, that they all lay
slain before Israel. And Joshua by his prayer: Ios: 18.14. made the sun to
stand still in the firmament after it had run his ordinary course: he made
it (I say) stand still to give him light, until he had made an end of slaying
his enemies* O potens praecatio! O powerful prayer! that cammandes all things.
It commandes the Angels in heaven, for at the prayer of Hezekia. 2. king.
19.35. The Angel of the Lord smote a hundred fowerscore and five thousand of
the soldiers of blaspheming Saneherib in one night, so that in the morning
they were all found dead corpses. It commandes the heavens, for at the prayer
of Elias the heavens were locked up for three years, and six months, so that
no reign fell upon the earth in all that time: and again he prayed and the
heaven gave reign and the earth brought forth her fruit. James. 5.17. It
commands God judgments: for at the prayer of Aaron, the plague (that great
judgment of God) being begun among the Israelites ceased. Numb: 16.47.48. It
commands Gods afflictions: for at the prayer of Moses Miriam was healed of
her leprosy Numb. 12.14. And at the prayer of the man of God, Ieroboams hand
that was dried up, was restored. 1. King. 13.6. It commands the barren womb,
for Anna being childlesse, praiing unto the Lord, obtained a son: 1. Sam.
1.20 It commands life, for at the prayer of Eliah, the widows son of
Zarepthah being dead was restored unto life. 1. King: 17. At the prayer of
Elisha, the Shunamites son being dead was revived. 2. King. 4.35. And at the
prayer of Paul, the sleeper, which fell down dead, was carried away alive.
Act: 20.9. Superat tentame^ta inimicorum, vincit demones, superat immundos
spiritus, It beats down the temptations of our enemies, ouercomes devils,
drives away unclean spirits: and dominum mundi flectere vota valent. Martial:
lib. 8. epig: ad Domit. Prayer commands God himself, makes God obedient unto
man's voice: and when our prayers cannot come unto Gods ears, it brings Gods
ears unto our prayers. Ask therefore and it shall be given thee, what soever
thou do ask, his promise is general: he will keep nothing from thee, if
thou do faithfully pray for it. Therefore in all thy needs and extremities
pray: pray and thou shall have help. If thou be in prison, pray for liberty,
if thou be oppressed, pray for succor: if thou have enemies pray for
deliverance: if there be famine, pray for plenty: in the time of the plague,
pray: if we want reign, pray: if thou art diseased pray: if thou art
afflicted, pray: if thou art childlesse, pray: if thou art tempted, pray: pray:
and thou shall have what thou will: for Ask, and it shall be given thee (says
christ). And so much for the generality, of the thing promised, which is laid
down in this word It, It shall be given you. Now a word or two of the
certainty of it, and so I will conclude. If he were not able to give us those
things, which we ask, or if he were unwilling to grant our desires, then we
might well fear the obtaining of our requests; but he is able to help us, and
he is willing to hear us, as we have heard in the two last points: if he were
a stranger unto us, or an enemy against us, that might breed suspicion in us;
or if he were only a familiar friend, or a near kinsman, still we might doubt
of the matter: but he is no stranger, neither is he an enemy, for he is of our
familiar acquaintance, with whom whenever we pray, we talk familiarly: as S
Aug: says upon the 85 Psalm: Oration tua locutia est ad deu^: qua^do legis,
deus tibi loquitur: quando oras tu cu^ deo loqueris. Thy prayer (says he) is a
talking unto God, when thou read, the^ God speaks unto thee: but when thou
prayest, then thou talkest with God: Nay, he is not only our familiar
acquaintance, but he is also nere unto us, as nere as possible can be: for he
is our father: our father by creation, our father in education, our father in
instruction, our father in compassion, our father in correction, our father in
adoption, as M. Boys wittily observes in his exposition on the Lords prayer. He
is our father, and therefore wishes us well; he is our father in heaven, where
there is all good things, and nothing wanting, and can give us all good things.
Therefore I will end, with this admonition of S. Bern: Nemo nostru^, parui pe^dat
oratione^ sua^: dico cui^ vobis, quod ipse ad que^ oramus, non parui pe^dat
ea^: postqua^ egressa est ab ore nostro, ipse scribit ipsa^ in libro suo: and
vnu^ e duobus indubitanter sperare possimus, quoniam aut dabit quod petimus,
aut quod novit vtilius. Let no man set lightly by his prayer: for I say, that
God does greatly esteem of it, after it is once out of our mouths: and does
write it in his book, and without all doubt, we shall have one of two; either
we shall have that, which we pray for; or else we shall have that, that is more
profitable for us.

FINIS.

