NEWS from diverse countries. AS, From Spain, Antwerpe, Collin, Venice, Rome,
The Turk, and The prince Doria. And how the Archduke of Austria is intended
to resign his Cardinal Hat; through his marying with the King of Spaines
daughter.

Seen and allowed.



Printed at London by Valentine Sims, and are to be sold in Gracious street.
1597.

News from Antwerp, the fifth day of May. 1597.
THe Cardinal Archduke which is yet at Bruxels, has (as it is reported)
assembled about 5000. men near Calice and those parts to spoil the country,
and it is thought likewise that in the end of this month himself will take
the field with 6000. fighting men to attempt somewhat against the town of
Ostend whether the states have sent five other ensigns of footmen for the
farther strengthening of that garrison.

The states had of late intended to surprise Graueling: but the practice being
discovered, their men returned without perfourming any thing.

The Frenchmen increasing still in power make toward Amiens whereinto there
is entered a certain number of horse and the said Frenchmen inuading the
country of Luxembrough, did on a sudden surprise the town of Iunix, which
after they had sacked they set on fire, and thence marched toward Lafertei,
where not being able to effect their purpose, they roue up and down the
province, doing every where great hurt. For which cause the Cardinal has
sent thither Colonel Berlotta with other Captains to withstand the French, who
seek by such attemptes to cross and hinder his proceedings.

We are advertised here by letters from Holland, of the arrival there of
sundry ships laden with diverse merchandises, and store of ready money, who
report that the Englishmen having taken and sakt the Port of Saint Martin, did
afterward set it on fire with all the ships within the harbor.

On sunday the bodies of Saint Flauia Domicila and of S. Hereo and Archileo
Romans, were removed from the Church of S. Adrian to their own Church, which
is the title of Cardinal ^^^ronio.

On monday a counsel was called at Montecauallo, wherein the Archmadrite of
Messina was bestowed on a Sicilian. The Archbishop of Roan received his pall,
and Cardinal Farnese propounded a monasterye in the Kingdom of Arragon in
Spain.

On Tuseday the Cardinal Marc Antonio Colona departed this life, leaving for
heir of all goods, the Lord Martio Colona his nephue.

On wendsday toward evening the Cardinal Cesis and Monsignor Bonuisi gave
commandment to the Captains which were appointed for Hungary, that on monday
next they should cause their soldiers to depart; whereupon certain companies
did yesterday set forward, and the said Bonnisi who does likewise to morrow
take his journey, has already sent his comissary to make provision for the
voyage.

The Spanish Agentes here are advertised by letters from Praghe, that the
Admiral of Arragon has published in that court by order of the Catholic
King, that the Lady Infant of Spain was married to the Cardinal Archduke, and
that the Emperor will resign the kingdom of Bohemia unto him, as also that
he shall be made king of Romans, which is as much to say as heir and successor
in the Empire. Otherwise the Catholic Majesty will not give him any state lest
he should diminish the Crown of Spain, unless perhaps he bestow on him the
Duchy of Britain having recovered it from the French, as a thing belonging
to the Lady Infants mother. That the Cardinal shall resign the
Archbishopricke of Toledo to Archduke Maximilian one of the brethren of the
Prince of Spaines bride which shall be. Who (as it is reported) must be conveyed
to her husband in October next: upon the publishing whereof the Ambassadors of
Venice, the great Duke, and Savoy did in their princes names visit and
gratulate the catholic kings ambassador.

It is likewise reported, that the prince Doria his journey into Spain, is to
fetch the Kings daughter, and convey her into Italy, whence she shall be
accompanied into Flanders by the count of Fuentes, who has order to conduct
her to the cardinal Archduke.

The other night there were sent from hence two Dispensations into spain, the
one whereby the kings daughter may take to husband the cardinal, the other
that the prince may take to wife her that is betrothed unto him, who shall this
summer be conveyed to Barcellona by the prince Doria in his gally royal with
other galleys to the number of 30. whither the said prince will come to receive
her.

The great duke understanding that the catholic King wanted powder and other
munition wherewith to furnish his towns on the sea coast of spain and
Portugal, especially at this time, because he fears they shall be assaulted by
the English fleet, his highness did therefore cause a ship to be laden with
20000. barrels of powder and other munition, which he sent into Spain for a
present to the catholic majesty: but the Florentines say that he sent the
said munition, to have therefore so much corn grain. And the Jesuits which
are lately come, report for a certainetie, that the said ship is long since
arrived at Allicante.

They write from Naples, that the viceroy has built 4. new galleys, wherewith,
together with other ships he purposes to imbarke and carry into Spain the
third part of the footmen that were levied in that kingdom, and there should
be levied another third under the conduct of the marquis of Treuiso.

They write from Florence, that the fort of Casteldit ouer-against Marsiglia,
holds for the great Duchess in the French kings name, because the said fort
was taken by the soldiers of the other fortress below which are kept there
at the said great duchess cost, by whose order the ambassador of Tuscane
conferring with him of France on tuesday, told him that whatsoever was done
herein, was for the service of the most christian majesty, and by the Duke of
Guise his consent, which, perceiving that the captain of the said place had
inteligence with the prince Doria sent post for him to Marsiglia, that the
soldiers might the more easily atchieue their enterprise.

On thurseday the ambassadors of Venice and of the great D. were together with
the Catholic Kings Agent by the space of four hours in a chamber locked unto
them, but it is not known what or whereon they treated.

Here are news of the archbishop of Siena his death, who deceased in his own
church, which place (it is thought) shall be given to the cardinal Taruggi.

News from Antwerp the 14. of May. 1597.
The Cardinal Archduke does what he can to put an army into the field; but
through want of money his purpose goes slowly forward: neither is it yet known
what enterprise the Spaniards will make, since the troops which were sent forth,
are returned unto their garrisons, which moves some to think that they will
only strengthen and furnish the frontier-townes.

The forces which his highness sent to succor Amiens, have done nothing,
because they were not strong enough to withstand the French, who have
entrenched themselves not far from the army where they remain, keeping good
watch, and the Spanish horsemen in Arras appointed to succor Amiens, can find
no means to enter the town, since all the passages are stopped, and the
soldiers within the town reposed small confidence in the Burgesses, who begin
to grow weary of perfourming the duty of soldiers.

The French men in the country of Luxembrough under the D. of Niuers do watch
their opportunity to work, some spoil (and as the voice goes) they will lay
siege to Harlam, not far from Bastague, if they be not prevented by colonel
Berlotta, whom his highness has sent into those parts,

From Rome the 24. of the said month.
On wednesday toward night there came a post from the Prince Doria, and
departed presently to Naples to solicit the footmen, and brought word that
the said prince did on the twenty day depart for Spain, to fetch thence the
kings daughter, and to conduct her into Italy: the which princess (as it is
reported) shall be entitled the Queen of Bohemia, for the Emperor and his
brethren have already granted this title to the cardinal Archduke at the
catholic Kings instance, by whose means the said Cardinal shall be made
King of the Romans, through help of his voice as king of Bohemia: and shall
furthermore be confirmed in the government of Flaunders.

They write from Naples that the galleys of Sicilie brought eight great canons
from Palermo, which (as it is thought) shall be employed in some attempt. That
six miles from the haven a ship laden with corn belonging to the Centurion of
Genoa, was cast away, and therewith 100. mariners, 70. soldiers. That the
8000. footmen which were levied in that kingdom, shall meet near to the
said city to be embarked in twenty galleys; and certain ships and vessels
which were made ready: and that there was order given for the leuying of more
men in the said kingdom. They write from Sicilie, that there departed from
Palermo four ships, laden with biskets, and five more ready to depart laden
likewise with biskets.

On wednesday morning a counsel was called at Montecauallo wherein was
propounded by the cardinal of Aquauma the church of Onarem under the
principality of Berna, there was also propounded the bishopric of Cardoua in
Spain in the behalf of the bishop of Conia, and this must be propounded in
the person of an other Spaniard.

The knight Tomaso Tomasi, who was sent ambassador into Spain by the duke of
Parma, is gone (they say) to thank his majesty, for having given him a wife,
and in particular, one that is alied to the prince his son.

On saturday there came a post unto the Pope, sent to him from the cardinal
Taruggi with news, that he had labored and concluded a peace between the
Dukes of Mantua and Parma: and therefore (say they) that these two princes will
personally meet each other at Rlegio in Lombardy where the said Cardinal, and
the most excellent duke of Ferrara will be present: which news has caused
marvelous great joy in this court.

On Sunday there was an abiuration of twelve men, whom they called heretics,
in S. Mineruaes church, where many cardinals were present: and it is
reported, that of these twelve, three shall suffer death, of which one is a
Florentine of the stock of the Duzzi, who because he is constant in his
opinion, shall be burned alive, the other two first put to death, and then
burnt, the rest condemned, some to the galleys, some to prison.

By letters from Spain bearing date the 24. of April, and of the third of this
present month, we are aduertized that the agreement of the merchants was
accorded on, because the king will give the said merchants very good
assignements after the rate of ten and an half pro cento for the old parcel,
and touching the new, he will pay them the one half presently in ready money,
and for the rest will give very good assigns. It is also reported, that the
Englishmen have won the Island of saint Martha near the Tercere.

It is said, that the promotions of the Cardinal at the french Kings requests
shall not be until September or Christmas: and that cardinal Farnese shall be
sent ambassador into Flanders to the cardinal Archduke.

Monsignor Bonuisi departed for Hungary on Wednesday: so did also yesterday all
the companies that were in Rome, by order from the pope. The Celso Celsi, and
the captain Bisasone du Tese shall be made sergeants of one third a piece,
besides the companies which they have already. And of the horse men which
shall be laid in these parts, seignior Flamino Delfino is appointed to have
charge.

News likewise is brought that Monsignior Fabio Orsino is arrived at Praghe to
treat with the Emperor of very great and weighty affairs which are not
openly known.

The cardinal Bandini is departed on his Legacy into Romania: And the
cardinals of Prinli and Verona are gone for Loretto to imbarke themselves in
Ancona for Venice.

It is reported that the Cardinal Dauilla is set in the Congregation of the
Council, and Gueuarra in that of the Bishops.

By reason of the Bishop of Cattanaes death, that seat is void, and rests in
the nomination of the Catholic king, yielding 25. thousand crowns yearly.

From Cullen the 19. of the same month.
WE are here advertised by letters from Bruxels, that the Cardinal Archduke
has renounced his hate in the Cathedral Church, with the accustomed
ceremonies, and that the Catholic King will both cause him to be made King of
Bohemia by the Emperor and Princes Electors, and has also assigned him a
perpetual reuenew of the Archbishopric of Toledo.

From Antwarpe, the 21. of May 1597.
THey say that the King of France, with the Duke of Maine is come to Corbi,
having 60. pieces of Artillery, and that his Majesty has called back the
Horsemen which were about Amyens, for want of Corn and other things, yet the
footmen are very well entrenched, neither is there any preparation made here
as yet to succor the said Town.

They write from Amsterdam the 17. of this present month, that they have
news, that part of the said Spanish fleet was arrived in Britain: That
Grave Maurice is departed from the Haghe, with purpose to take the field, and
that there are sundry Ships laden with Corn come into Holland from diverse
parts, whereby the price is fallen more then a third part.

From Coleine the 26. of the same month.
THe Spaniards are of late gone toward Berghe in certain Vessels built on the
Rhein, carrying with them great provision, and much store of powder, but it is
not known what they purpose to attempt. There are also other Spaniards in the
field in Gielderland.

They write out of France, that the King having musterd and paid his Army,
made toward Amiens, his forces every day increasing: and there was little hope
that the Cardinal could succor the said town, by reason of the great
scarcity of victuals through all Picardie.

It was here reported, that the States Soldiers had woone Venlo in
Gelderland, but that at the last they were repulsed and beaten back by the
Townsmen.

It is said for certain, that the Popes holiness will by all means have the
rents of all the offices for two months for the wars of Hungary, for which
cause also it is thought that the people shall be charged with a certain sum
of money.

They write from Parma of Sinior marco Farnese his ariuall, who is looked for
here, being sent by the General Aldobrandino, to inform the Pope what power
the Emperor shall have for his war against the Turk: but some suppose that
the said Lords return is for certain discontentes.

It is here reported, that Don John de Media is gone to Casteldit with the
great Dukes Galleis, and certain ships laden with Munition, to assure
altogether that Fortress, by building a new Forte in the Island of
Cachastrasse, from whence they may batter Casteldit.

On Thursday these companies of Soldiers did all depart on their journey
toward Hungary, marching with great speed, so that there is hope that they
will shortly ariue in those parts.

They write from Bologna, that Sinior Marco Pio, and Ottauio Anogodro, came
near to the walls of the said City, and were discovered by the Court as
banished men: they were pursued, but in vain, for they saved themselves within
the territory of Ferrara, only a Gentleman of their company was taken and
imprisoned.

Sinior Ottauio Massimi, who was kept in prison by the Duke of Segni upon
suspicion and jealousy of his Wife, being set at liberty and on his journey
toward Rome, had six Harquebuzies discharged on him, about three miles on
this side S Fiora, one of which struck him into the head, whereof he dyed
presently.

News came on Monday that the Cardinal of Saint Clement, Legate in la Marca
d'Ancona, has taken either alive or dead, all the Banditi which troubled that
province.

Signor Cumillo Capizucchi will depart from hence toward Hungary, and the
voice goes that he shall be made Campe-maister in the Christian Army.

Cardinal Taruggi arrived this evening, being returned from Lombardie, who
has established a firm peace between the Dukes of Parma and Mantua, and has
for some respects suspended as yet the enterview of the said Princes, but they
have assigned their deputies, and there have passed letters between them for
confirmation thereof. And it is reported, that amongst other things agreede on,
this article is one: that all their former writings touching this matter shall
be burnt.

On Thursday morning the aforesaid persons condemued for religion, were first
beheaded in the tower of Nona, and afterward burned in Campo de Fiore. The
other recanted all that they written or spoken against the Pope.

From Venice the 23. of May.
THey write from Genoa the tenth of this month, that two Galleys of Sauoye
arrived there to join with the other, for the conueying of the Prince Doria
into Spain, with Sinior Gambacortas footmen, which arrive daily at the Forde:
and the voice goes, that the said Prince will not depart until the coming
of the Neapolitane footmen for whom he has sent.

They write from Alba-Iulia the 14. of April, that the two Ghraussi which were
sent from the great Turk, to the Prince, were dispatched back again by his
Highness, who sent with them a Gentleman of his Court, on what affairs it is
not known. That the Turks have built a Bridge on the River of Danuby,
whereupon some great hurt is doubted. There was likewise report of a mighty
Turkish army setting forward, whereof his Highness did speedily advertise
the Emperor, counselling him to prepare for war with all expedition.

They write also from Vienna on the tenth of the same month, that there was
made provision for war, but not so thoroughly as were requisite. That they
fortified certain Bastions there, the voice still holding, that the Gardens
and houses near the walls should be thrown down, and the Trenches enlarged.
That 170. footmen of Strigonia being all Wallons and Italians, put to flight
1500. Turkish Horssemen in the Isle of Strigonia, of which number none escaped,
the most part perished in the water, which seems miraculous. That the Boores
were still executed, and a hundredth more of them brought to Vienna, amongst
whom were some of the chief.

They write from Craconia the third of this present month, that the Palatine
of Chionia did still persist in his contumacie, leaving Soldiers, and
preparing for war of his own authority: whereby the King shall be
constrained to use force against him, which may breed some greater matter, but
there is hope that the Estates will be mediators between them for the
preventing of farther troubles. And there is no farther talk of his Majesty's
journey into Suetia, since the Palatine of Vilnas answer at the Parliament, to
his Commissioners.

There are more certain news by letters from Constantinople, that Cicala was
not called back unto Port. But contrariwise that the great Turk has
appointed him to tarry still at Argyrore, toward which place a certain
number of Soldiers was to be sent to renew and strengthen the garrisons of
those frontiers. The Persian having in vain demanded restitution of certain
Fortresses, according to promise made in the articles of the peace: and
therefore the voice held, that he purposed to take arms against the said gran
Sinior the great Turk, which intended not to make any restitution at all. And
that Mahomet Bassa was made Captain general of the army in Hungary.

There are news from Turin by Letters, of the first of this present month,
that the Duke of Sauoye made preparation to pass the Mountains, so soon as
Mendoza Captain of the Horsemen of Millaine should join with him, and has in
the mean time sent a Garrison to Susa San Genis, (which is not taken by
Digniere, as it was reported) and to other places. All which, notwithstanding
some suppose that there is hope of prolonging the truce, although Dighera be in
arms, and has raised all Daulphine, Prouence, Auuerne, and other countries
adjacent, having likewise attempted to raise the Switzers.

There are farther news brought from Vienna, that the aforesaid overthrow of
the Turks at Srigonia, has much encouraged the inhabitants both of the upper
and lower Hungary, which offer themselves with all readiness to perform
their uttermost against the common enemy. It is yet farther reported, that the
Emperor will march forth in person, if the Turk come to the siege of Vienna.

But others affirm, that there is a treaty of peace, and that the Prince of
Transiluania will be a mediator between them, which seems to many a thing very
unlikely.

For so much as is yet known, the controversies between the Dukes of Parma
and Mantua are very well determined, and through the diligence of Cardinal
Taruggi, and the great wisdom of the most excellent Duke of Ferrara.

They write from Praghe bearing date the tenth of this present month, that
Sinior Gio: Francisco Aldobrandino, did on the same day depart toward Vienna
with seven Coaches, and that the Marquisse of Borgari must shortly follow
him. And they had intelligence that the Turk having sent 6000. Ianisaries to
assure the passages through Transiluania, Moldania, and Valachia: the
Transiluanians and Valachians joining their forces, had encountered and foilde
the first Squadron, in such sort that few escaped, and that they went
forward to serve the other Squadrons in like manner. As also that the
Bulgarians taking arms have done some spoil unto the Turks.

There are letters sent from Rome, that the Cardinal Archduke has renounced
his Hatte unto the Pope, and his Archbishopric of Toledo to Don Sacio de
Valori Tutor to the Prince of Spain, reserving to himself the pension of a
hundred thousand Crowns, and that his Highness has in Dowry the
assignements of Portugal, which amounts to four hundredth thousand Crowns
with the pretentions of the Infant (daughter to the King of Spain) his Wife to
the Duchy of Britain.

We are advertised from Augusta, that there arrived at Olimo six thousand
footmen, and two thousand horsemen, all Vallons, which march into Hungary.

It is also reported that the most excellent Prouiditore Benbo having taken
certain of the vscorchi and sent them to Segna, they were presently trussed us
up: which is an evident sign that the house of Austria is willing to make all
the setisfaction he may, to this most excellent state.

There came also the Lord Arrideo Borgonia Cup Bearer to the Emperors Eaiestie
sent aout the same matter, and being dispatched here he must paffe presently to
Vrbine, to treat with that Duke, but upon what affairs, it not as yet well
known.

They report from Millain that the Florentines have driven the Frenchmen from
Cacastras or castledit.

That the truce with Sauoy, was prolonged until the fifteenth of this month,
and that the said Duke had sent another Gentleman to the most Christian King,
it is not known wherefore.

That the Knight Landriano was taken at Millan, and sent to Malta, for what
cause, it is not known.

From Venice the thirtith of May. 1597.
THey write from Genoa the seventeenth of this present month of the arriual
there of Signor Francesco de Vera a Spaniard, and of the Senator Maionoldi of
Millane, which is now made Regent of that City in Spain, in the place of
Brugnolo, who is chosen President of the Counsel of Millane, as also of the
arriual of the Comendator Tomaso Tomasi the Duke of Parmas Ambassador, all
which purpose to pass into Spain with the Prince Do^ia, who has license from
the Senate, and is gone toward poglio and Loano, whence on monday next he
will depart, there being already twelve Galleys sent to the foorde to take in
the footmen.

There were news from Cremoua, that they understood by letters from Millane,
where there arrived a post from Lions, that the Spaniardes have taken the
town of Masiers in Champaigne. But small credit is given to these news, since
the last letters from Millane do mencino such matter.

There came letters from Constantinople bearing date the seventeenth of the
last month, that Cicala having finally cleared himself to the Sultane,
should return to Constantinople, and that it was likely he should be made
chief Visir, it being also thought that he should be sent General into
Hungary, and that then the grand Signor would not go himself.

That there is a wonderful scarcity, especially of beasts.

That there are sundry speeches and opinions touching the Army, some
supposing that only some few Galleys shall be sent forth: But if certain
articles between the grande Signor and the King of France were agreed on, that
then his Highness would send 70. or 80. Galleys to his aid.

That the report of the Catholic Kings proceedinges in prejudice of the
French kings Majesty, was much displeasant, and that the great Turk was
desirous that the most Christian King should accept the capitulations offered,
that he might afterward send forth a Fleet of 150 Sails to hurt and spoil
the Catholic King by all means possible. That upon Cycalas coming the great
Turk would go to Adrinopoli to encourage his people, being enforced to draw
them forth by wonderful threats, they were so dismayed, fearing some greater
loss then they had sustained the year before. And that to make them believe
that he means to take the field, the Standerd which is wont to be borne before
him was again displayed. That the Mulsti and other Papassi consulting together,
had plainly told the grand Signor, that he should not suffer himself to be
ruled by the Sultan which were herewith much offended.

It is signified by letters from Vienna, bearing date the 17. of this present
month, that the Bassa of Bossina with a good number of Soldiers will lay
siege to Canisa, expecting the grande Signors power: and the imperial Captains
have now thought on sundry means for the rescuing of that place. That the
Turks of Papa. Vesprino. Palotta. S. Martin and other places assemble
themselves at Iaurino, scouring the plains and making no account of our
Forces, that on the day above written the General Aldobrandino came to Vienna
and was met by Archduke Mathias: that the Marquisse of Borgari and Signor
Ferranti di Rossi will shortly likewise be there: that the Prince of
Transylvanias wife was looked for, as also the Prince of Anholt which (they
say) shall be made Archduke Maximilians Lieutenant. That the Transylvanian has
ouerthrwn sixteen thousand Turks and Tartars of Valachia and Moldavia.

They write from Turin of Mendozzas arrival which offered great aid to the
Duke of Savoy if the Frenchmen should stir. That it was again reported how
the said Governor of Me^z had intelligence with the Cardinal Archduk, the
said Governor being somewhat suspected by the King. And it was thought that the
said Cardinal had resolved on that enterprise, making show outwardly as if he
purposed to assault some other place. That his Highness of Savoy has sent
away Martinengo with other Captains and all the footmen, toward Ciamberi,
where the whole Army should assemble, it being held for certain that the war
shall continue, howsoever the truce be prolonged

They write from Lions the 14. of this present month that Diguiere and the
Governor of la Franche Contee did meet together and after conference
determined that the said Diguiere should make roads into Savoy and Piemont, the
Baron of Luz into la Franch Contee and that Mounsieur du Perault should scowre
the country above from Montezelo. Although that the forces of Sauoy together,
with the aid sent from Millan, did exceed their number. They write from Paris,
that the King was still at S. Germans, purposing immediately after he had
cleared himself, to go unto the Camps in Picardie, which consists of a
thousand footmen and 1500. horse besides as many more which are to come with
the King.

They write from Marsiglia that those inhabitants were all moved with the
news of Cachastrasse, and did therefore build a fort over against it to beat
and reduce it again to their subjection.

We are advertised by letters from the sea that the Clarrissimo Pasqualigo,
Captain of the Gulf has taken three Turkish Foysts and two Brigandines being
part of those that spoild the ship Syluestra. The Turks were all put to the
sword: and it is reported that they found above seven thousand Crowns in ready
coin and much of that merchandise which was aboard the said Ship, which
together with the money shall remain to the said Signor Pasqualigo and two
Captains of two other Galleys, which at that time were with him.

They write from Alba Iulia, that the Turkish power does daily increase toward
Danuby, that they are now already fifty thousand strong, and have built a
Bridge, for which cause the Transiluanian made all provision necessary,
doubting great inconvenience, if the Turks should bend their force against
him, and his succors be slow in coming.

They write from Milane the 28. of this present month, that they have
intelligence from Spain, how the Catholic King is in perfect health and gone
to Escuriall. That the Earl of Fuentes does with all diligence prepare for
war. That the King of Fez is in arms against the Spaniard, and has laid
siege to Centa. That the Duke of Sauoy made provision to withstand Dighera,
who was counseled by Monsieur Jacob late being returned from Paris, that he
should provide for war, because the Soldiers of Don Alfonso de Aualos were
not yet gone, but would tarry certain days at the said Dukes request.

From Venice the 6. of June, 1597.
WE were advertised by the last months letters from Constantinople of the
Greek Patriarchs death, in whose place he of Alexandria a Grecian also shall
succeed, with condition that he labor for a peace with the Emperor, the
Transiluanian and Michael the Voiuoide of Vallachia.

They write from Genou the 24. of the last month, how the Galley Royal with
others, went toward Poggio, there to take in the Prince Doria, who was on
the fifteenth day to depart for Spain.

There came letters from Vienna, bearing date likewise the 24. day, how the
Christians going by night to Totta threw down 1 of the gates, and so taking it,
slew all the Turks within. Whereupon new provision was made of men and
munition for the keeping of that place, being a very fit passage from Buda
to Alba egale. They signify also how the Siculy offered the Prince of
Transiluania, that if he would grant them their their ancient Liberty, that
then they would aid him with fifteen thousand men, alleging that the cause
of their return to the obedience of that house, whereof the said Princes Wife
does linneally descend, is to eschew the dangers which are likely to ensue of
the wars.

They write from Tautinio, that Dighera, besides his great preparations for
war, has levied a new six thousand men more in Doulphine, and in Burgoine a
far greater number. For which cause (as they signify from Millain) the duke
of Sauoy has most earnestly entreated the Cunstable that he should not send
away the troops into Flaunders.

It is farther reported that they of Ciambrie did mutiue and refused to have
Soldiers in their houses.

They write from Marsiglia, that the Duke of Guise was at high words with
certain Lords of Prouence: Whereupon the Parliament of Aix, undertook to
pacify and agree them.

They write from Cracouia, that there are great forces sent daily to the
frontiers of Hungary, and fifteen thousand horsemen in a readynes to march
into Toldania, upon some new suspicions of the Transiluanian between whom and
the two breethren Battori: there are some controversies newly sprung: But
Malasp^na the Popes Nuncio sought by all means to accord them. The Russian
Emperor is yet alive, contrary to the former report, but true it is, that he
was even at the point of death. There was speech that another Ambassador should
be sent unto him with presents and offer of aid against the Turk, who has of
late greatly molested him by stirring up against him a faction in the favor of
one who intends to succeed in that kingdom after the said Emperors disceasse.

There came letters from Paris, bearing date the twelfe of the last month,
which signifies that the King did on the same day depart toward Picardie,
Monsieur Tremouille being in the field with 1500. Horse, and 2000. footmen
levied out of Poictou. That there do daily resort unto his Majesty great
forces from all parts of the kingdom, whereby it is thought the number of his
army will amount to thirty thousand fighting men all French, besides the
Switzers, English, Scottish, and Dutch, which he will have in pay: so that the
war will now be greater then ever it was. Corso is gone into Languedock to
assault the Spaniards from the side of Perpignan. The Marquess du Pont is at
the Court about his marriage with the Kings sister, which together with a
hundredth other chief personages should become Catholic.

The news from Sicill is, that in some ports of that Island certain Venecian
ships were stayde to be sent into Spain with men, Biscots and other
provisions, out of which said ships the great part of the Mariners fled,
because they would not be employed in that voyage.

There are farther news from Vienna, that the surprise of Tatta was achieved
by Signior Polfi, who having left there a thousand Soldiers for defense of the
said place, went to join himself with Nadasdi and other principal Captains,
whose number will be in all eight thousand footmen, and two thousand horse,
all old Soldiers, with which power and other forces that daily resort unto
them, the said Captains purpose to undertake some other enterprise, before
the enemy shall have assembled his whole army, which he cannot do before the
24. of July. That there were sent many spies from Vienna to certain Villages,
and about a hundredth more of the chiefest of the rebellious Bores were put to
death.

Besides the two hundredth footmen which were brought hither the other day by
Todino, there are come two hundredth more, leuyed by Conte Vgocione Rangone, who
are on the Sea side, and must be sent to the General Bembo into Dalmatia,
unless this most excellent Senate shall otherwise determine.

They write from Flaunders, that those of Amiens have put forth of the Town
to the number of eight hundredth women and children, by reason of some want of
victuals, and that they might the better hold out.

They report yet farther from Vienna, that the Garrisons of Comar and Viuar
joining themselves, made a rode within eight miles of Buda, and woone a place
called Feluar, killing many Turks, and taking twenty prisoners, which place
having sacked they set on fire.

That Sinior Polfis Lieutenant in Strigonia had sent unto him a Turk who was
taken with letters about him. That at the winning of Tatta they took the Begh
and other principal Turks. That they have intelligence from Transyluania, how
that people has granted to the Prince four Florence of every house.

They write from Milane that Don Alfonso de Aualos his troops began to march
through Flaunders toward Sauoye, and that the Duke thereof would have no
longer truce with France unless it were for two or three years, but either
absolute peace or war, because these short prolongings did put his Highness
to as great charges, as he should be at an action of war: wherefore he made
great preparation, as did also Dighera on the other side.

FINIS.

