THE TRVE COPIES OF TWO ESPECIAL LETTERS VERBATIM SENT FROM THE PALATINATE BY
SIR. F. N. Relating the dangerous encounter which hapened betwixt the Duke
Christian of Brunswicke, and Monsieur Tillies passing over the bridge lying
upon the river Main about Ausbourge.

With the uniting of his forces with the King of Bohemias, as also the
fearful expectation of the great Turks coming down into Germany.

With the late proceedings in the Low Countries, in their Proclamations set
forth by the States of Holland, the first showing the last appointed time, as
well for forrayners as inhabitants of this Country to come into the West India
Company of the Nether-lands: the second a letter of Mart, the last prohibiting
the inhabitants not to assuer any goods of the Spaniards.

Printed this 21. of June.

LONDON Printed by William Jones for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are
to be sold at the Royal Exchange, and in Pope's Head Alley. 1622.

A COPY OF THE FIRST LETTER.
SIR,
I wrote to you at large on Sunday last and have little to add since, but am
like to have enough very shortly, I pray God it prove good. The Duke of
Brunswick was four days since at Nidda in the land of Hessen, about five
leagues from Francfort. Mounsuor Tilly etc. are gone toward him, and if they
be once on the same side of the Main, there will in all likely hood be blows
between them. Archduke Leopold is not gone to the Grissons, but does now
assemble his forces again, with desseigne as we judge to besiege Hagenaw
again, or else to fall down to join with his party, neither of which must
be suffered by the Count Mansfield, and he is likely therefore to go to the
Archduke we hope to morrow, for as yet he lies between the two rivers by the
town, and is not himself well able to stand. This is all we have here.

From Vienna we have that the Diot of Hungary goes not on the Emperors mind,
and that the Turk is like to giue'vs peace here, we have small signs of one
else, and that is a bad one. The King of Bohemia to obey his father, is minded
against his mind to stay here or at Heydelberg, in expectation of the issue of
the treaty at Brussels. Manheim the 6. of June.

A Copy of the second Letter.
IN my last Letter you know that Monsieur Tilly was then marching toward the
Duke Christian of Brunswick then in the land of Hessen, not far from
Frankford. The Duke soon after took Hoest a town and castle of the Elector
of Ments, standing upon the Main before Frankford, where he had news that
Tilly and Gonsales joined and marched to him over the Main at Aschburg with
an army of 40. m. as was given out, I think not much less then 30. m. yet he
resolved to abide it rather then the hazard of a retrait. And they thereupon
marched on furiously by Hanaw and Frankford. The Duke in the mean time
provided himself the best he could to receive them, seeing on the advantage of
the ground, intrenching himself, and burning the villages by which the enemy
were to march to him. This done, he sent hither to the Count of Mansfeld, to
let him know in what poshire he stood, and that he would do the best he could
to hold himself so, till the Count might march to him, for whose passage, or
his own retreat if he were forced to it, prepared to make a Bridge over the
Main, This news came to the Count Mansfield as He was Marching over the
Rhyne, with desseigne to have gone to break the bridge at Oppenheim, or that
failing, to have made some other diuersion on that side, thereby to have eased
the Duke of Brunswyck, by giving Gonzales occasion to look backward. But
hereupon He the same instant commanded sixty troops of horse to march over
the Neccar toward the Duke intending to have followed himself with the rest
of his army this day. But we have this morning news, that the Duke was beaten
yesterday. The manner and measure of it. is yet variously related, but I hope to
add it to this before I close it. In the mean to do all I may, against the
suddayne dispatch of the post, I heartely take leave rest.

(...) I must close this Letter and yet have no more certainty of the defeat
of the Duke of Brunswick, but that he never gave Battle, but having been
extremely molested by the Enemies Cannon, who had twelve pieces at least,
whereas the Duke had but two: through some confusion among his men he was
forced to retire over the Bridge he had made over the Maine, by the breaking
whereof, many of his foot were drowned, others cut off being hindered by
carriages, they all are lost as well of baggage as munition, saving the Dukes
own wagons, wherein his money was, His Horse escaped well, some over the
Bridge, other are forced over the deep that they were put to Swim, by which
means some number of them also are lost, and among them the Count Lenestlin
who married Mistress Dudly, thought to be one, the number can not yet be
estimated, but diverse came hither will not believe there were above one
thousand men lost, yet I doubt more, The rest are retyring through the
Bergstrate hither in great confusion, and I doubt most of the foot will have
cast away their Arms, which is a great vnreparable loss, whether the Enemy
do pursue them on this side the Main or no, is not yet known here, But to be
sure the Count Mansfeild has drawn out his whole Army into the Bergestrate,
who being fresh we may redeem loss if the Enemy do follow, the Duke of
Brunswicke is for himself safe for certain, and extremely discontented that
he fought not.

Mainheim the 11. of June 1622.
A PROCLAMATION OF THE HIGH AND MIGHTY LORDS, THE STATES GENERAL of the united
Provinces, whereby is prohibited unto the Merchants, and Inhabitants of those
Countries, not to make any assurances of goods, Merchandises, or ships
belonging to any Subjects of the King of Spain, or Enemies of these Lands.
THe States General of the united Provinces to all them that see or hear
these read greeting. Whereas We have been certainly informed, that diverse.
Merchants and inhabitants of these Countries, (notwithstanding We after the
expiration of the Truce, are compelled to encounter the King of Spain, and his
adherents, in all hostile manner) to assure the goods, Merchandises, and ships,
belonging unto the Subjects and Inhabitants of the King of Spain, and other
enemies of these Lands: Whereby it happens, that the said goods and ships
being taken by Our men of War, or those that have Commission of Us to
endammage the King of Spain, or his Subjects, the said Assurances and
Securities, claim and follow them as if they were their own, to have them
released: And besides, the said being declared good Prises and forfeited, the
damage does not light upon the Enenemies aforesaid, but upon the Inhabitants
of these Countries, by the means of the aforesaid assurance and security, who
enjoy but a small reward or profit for the same, In such manner that the
Inhabitants of these Countries, and not Our Enemies hereby are impoverished,
being the fame likewise very hurtful to the equipations and setting forth of
Ships, which many Inhabitants of those Countries with more mind and zeal
would make otherwise against Our Enemies, which now are kept back in regard of
the reclamations and pursuings of such assured goods.

Now to prevent the same and to order this conveniently, We have directly
forbidden and interdicted, forbid and interdict by these Presents, all
Merchants, and other Inhabitants of these Provinces, neither directly nor
indirectly to assure any goods, Merchandises, or Ships, of whatsoever Fort or
kind the said may be appertaining to any Subjects of the King of Spain, or
his adherents, in any manner whatsoever: Declaring all and every one of such
Assurances made, or here after to be made for naught, and of no value.

Prohibiting likewise all Justices, Courts, Commissioners of the Courts of
Assurance, or other whom this may concern, to give judgment of such
Assurances: And here besides the Assurances, that shall be found to have made
such Assurances since this day, shall forfeit upon every sum small or big,
that they shall have signed, hundredth pounds Flemmish, one half to the
Informer, and the other half to the officer to be paid that shall do the
execution.

And because none here after shall pretend ignorance, We require, and entreat
the States, the Governors, the committed Counsels, and the States of the
respective Provinces of Gelderland, Zutphen, Holland, and Westvriesland,
Sealand, Vtrecht, Vriesland, Overyssell, the City Groeringen, and the Lands
about it, and all other Justices and Officers, whom this may touch, that they
Commannd this Our Order presently to be Proclaimed and Published where it is
usual, Proceeding and causing to be proceeded against the Transgressors and
offenders of the same, without any favor dissimulation or composition, seeing
we find it convenient for the good of these Lands.

This concluded in the meeting of the High and mighty the Lords States General
aforesaid, at the Hage the first of April, Anno 1622. Was subscribed A Ploos.
And lower was written, at the Order of High and Mighty Lords the States
General, signed

C. Aerssens.

WARNING CONCERNING THE WEST INDIA Company of the Netherlands.
THE Committees appointed to collect a stock for the West India Company, in
Poland and Sealand, being authorized thereunto by the States of the said
Countries, make known by these: That besides other advantages, it is granted
unto the said Company by the High and mighty Lords, the States General of the
united Provinces, to traffic only for Salt at Punto del Key. And that the
last time prefixed for the Inhabitants of the united Provinces, to come in the
said Company, is the last of July style now, and for Forraigners the last of
September following, both inclusiue, and according to the new style. Wherefore
if there be any that will participate in the said Company, let them direct
themselves unto the Committees, appointed into the Cities, and deliver there
their Signatures and subscriptions of such sums, as they shall be desirous to
participate in the said Companies, which are to be paid in three payments:
viz. a third part at the expiration of the aforesaid time: and the other two
third parts in three next following years, unless afterward at the general
meeting of the Assistants or Committees, it be thought fit to prolong the said
Payments for any longer time, in which case the Participants shall be warned by
bills affixed. And after the expiration of the time aforesaid, shall none be
admitted into the said Company. Giving notice besides, that according to the
resolution of the Lords, the States of Holland, and West Freesland, the chief
Participants of the Company, shall be qualified to be Assistants, in this
manner, that those who in the Chamber of Amsterdam, shall for themselves bring
in the sum of six thousand, and in the respective Chambers about the Mase,
and in the Northern parts four thousand Karelies Gilders, shall have power to
nominate three, for to choose out of them (according to the Patent) the
Assistants. Item that the Cities in Holland where are no Chambers, and shall be
brought in upon one name, an hundredth thousand Gilders, shall have power to
appoint an assistant after precedent denomination, and to put him in any of the
other Chambers. And after the expiration of the aforesaid last of July (agree.
to the Patent) shall be presently proceeded to the election of the Assistants,
to go immediately in hand with the equipation and octroyed Navigations. This
done, the tenth of June, in the year of our Lord, 1622.

A Letter of Mart, Granted by the Lords States General, to them of the United
Provinces.
BY these presents is Given notice, and made known unto every one out of the
Name of the High and Mighty Lords, the States General of the United Provinces,
That whosoever (to endamage the King of Spain his Adherents and Subjects,
as well of Spain, Portingall, Brabant, Flaunders, as also other places being in
his Dominions) shall be desirous upon a due and fit Commission to set any Ship
or Ships at Sea to go upon free Booty, that they shall henceforth pay no more,
except otherwise be ordered, then Eighteen in the Hundred, whereas they did
pay here before Thirty in hundred, which the Country and the Prince of Orange
as Admiral of the Sea out of the Prizes were used to Enjoy as their right,
whereof Twelve shall be for the Country, and Six for the Prince above
mentioned. And because an equal order may be kept concerning the putting in of
Security, every one that shall be unwilling to go upon Conditions aforesaid,
shall be bound to put in Security in the Court of the Admiralty of the place
from whence they intend to depart, for Ten Thousand Gilders, which is 1000.
pounds Sterling, and that above the Ship and what therein, with action shall
serve only to give security that the Court prizes to be gotten by such a Ship
shall be brought in to be censured in the College of the Admiralty, where the
security has been given, which being done, the Securities shall be
Discharged, Provided always, that if the said Ship goes afterward with like
Commission, there must be put in new Security, And if any body shall pretend
that he is wrongfully Damnified, he may enter his Action against the
Captain, and those that have Indamaged him.

FINIS.

