AN HISTORICAL DISCOVERY AND RELATION OF THE English Plantations, in NEW
ENGLAND.

Containing their Aventurous passages, their happy Arivall and comfortable
planting, manifesting the goodness of God in their preservations from many
apparent dangers.

WITH A Relation of such Religious and Civil Laws, and Customs as are in
practice amongst the Indians, with their natures and habits.

AS ALSO A Naration of the Air, Earth, Water, Fish, and Fowls of that
Country.

Continued from the first beginning, in the year of our Lord 1607. and so
handling all passages of Moment successively from time to time.

LONDON Printed for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his shop at the 3
Golden Lions in Cornehill, near the Exchange, 1627.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, be entreated to make a favorable construction of my
forwardnes, in publishing these inseuing discourses, the desire of carrying the
Gospel of Christ, into those foreign parts, amongst those people that as yet
have had no knowledge, nor taste of God, as also to procure unto themselves and
others a quiet and comfortable habytation: (...) amongst other things the
inducements (unto these undertakers of the then hopeful, and now
experimentally known good enterprice for plantation, in New England, to set
afoote and prosecute the same and though it fared with them, as it is common to
the most actions of this nature, that the first attemps prove diffecult, as the
sequel more at large expresses, yet it has pleased God, cue beyond our
expectation in so short a time, to give hope of letting some of them see
(though some he has taken out of this vale of tears) some grounds of hope, of
the accomplishment of both those ends by them, at first propounded.

And as my self then much desired, and shortly hope to effect, if the Lord
will, the putting to of my shoulder in this hopeful business, and in the mean
time, these relations coming to my hand from my both known and faithful
friends, on whose writings I do much rely, I thought it not a miss to make
them more general, hoping of a cheerful proceeding, both of Adventurers and
planters, entreating that the example of the hon: Virginia and Bermudas
Companies, incountering with so many distasters, and that for diverse years
together, with an unwearied resolution, the good effects whereof are now
eminent, may prevail as a spur of preparation also touching this no less
hopeful Country though yet an infant, the extent and commodities whereof are
as yet not fully known, after time will unfold more: such as desire to take
knowledge of things, may in form themselves by this ensuing treatise, and if
they please also by such as have bin there a first and second time, my barty
prayer to God is that the event of this and all other honorable and honest
undertakings, may be for the furtherance of the kingdom of Christ, the
enlarging of the bounds of our Sovereign Lord King James, and the good and
profit of those, who either by purse, or person, or both, are agents in the
same, so I take leave and rest

Thy friend, G. MOVRT.

CERTAIN VSEFVL ADVERTISEMENTS SENT in a Letter written by a discreet friend
unto the Planters in New England, at their first setting sail from
Southhampton, who earnestly desiresh the prosperity of that their new
Plantation.
Loving and Christian friends, I do heartily and in the Lord salute you all,
as being they with whom I am present in my best affection, and most earnest
longings after you, though I be constrained for a while to be bodily absent
from you, I say constrained, God knowing how willingly and much rather then
otherwise I would have borne my part with you in this first brunt, were I not
by strong necessity held back for the present. Make account of me in the
mean while, as of a man divided in my self with great pain, and as (natural
bonds set aside) having my better part with you. And though I doubt not but in
your godly wisdoms you both foresee and resolve upon that which concerns
your present state and condition both severally and jointly, yet have I thought
but my duty to add some further spur of provocation unto them who run
already, if not because you need it, yet because I owe it in love and duty.

And first, as we are daily to renew our repentance with our God, special for
our sins known, and general for our unknown trespasses; so does the Lord
call us in a singular manner upon occasions of such difficulty and danger as
lies upon you, to a both more narrow search and careful reformation of our
ways in his sight, lest he calling to remembrance our sins forgotten by us
or unrepented of, take advantage against us, and in judgment leave us for the
same to be swallowed up in one danger or other; whereas on the contrary, sin
being taken away by earnest repentance and the pardon thereof from the Lord,
sealed up unto a man's conscience by his Spirit, great shall be his security
and peace in all dangers, sweet his comforts in all distresses, with happy
deliverance from all evil, whether in life or in death.

Now next after this heavenly peace with God and our own consciences, we are
carefully to provide for peace with all men what in us lies, especially with
our associates, and for that end watchfulnes must be had, that we neither at
all in our selves do give, no nor easily take offense being given by others.
Woe be unto the world for offenses, for though it be necessary (considering the
malice of Satan and man's corruption) that offenses come, yet woe unto the man
or woman either by whom the offense comes, says Christ, Math. 18. 7. And if
offenses in the unseasonable use of things in them selves indifferent, be more
to be feared then death it self, as the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 9. 15. how
much more in things simply evil, in which neither honor of God nor love of
man is thought worthy to be regarded.

Neither yet is it sufficient that we keep our selves by the grace of God from
giving offense, except withal we be armed against the taking of them when they
are given by others. For how imperfect and lame is the work of grace in that
person, who wants charity to cover a multitude of offenses, as the Scriptures
speak. Neither are you to be exhorted to this grace only upon the common
grounds of Christianity, which are, that persons ready to take offense, either
want charity to cover offenses, or wisdom duly to weigh humane frailty; or
lastly are gross, though close hypocrites, as Christ our Lord teaches, Math.
7. 1, 2, 3. as indeed in mine own experience, few or none have been found
which sooner give offense, then such as easily take it; neither have they ever
proved sound and profitable members in societies, which have nourished in
themselves that touchey humor. But besides these, there are diverse spetiall
motives provoking you above others to great care and conscience this way: As
first, you are many of you strangers, as to the persons, so to the infirmities
one of another, and so stand in need of more watchfulness this way, lest when
such things fall out in men and women as you suspected not, you be inordinately
affected with them; which does require at your hands much wisdom and charity
for the covering and preventing of incident offenses that way. And lastly your
intended course of civil community will minister continual occasion of
offense, and will be as fuel for that fire, except you diligently quench it
with brotherly forbearance. And if taking of offense causlesly or easily at
men's doings be so carefully to be avoided, how much more heed is to be taken
that we take not offense at God himself, which yet we certainly do so often as
we do murmr at his providence in our crosses, or bear impatiently such
afflictions as where with he pleases to visit us. Store we up therefore
patience against the evil day, without which we take offense at the Lord
himself in his holy and just works.

A fourth thing there is carefully to be provided for, to wit, that with your
common emploiments you join common affections truly bent upon the general
good, avoiding as a deadly plague of your both common and special comfort all
retiredness of mind for proper advantage, and all singularly affected any
manner of way; let every man repress in himself and the whole body in each
person, as so many rebels against the common good, all private respects of men's
selves, not sorting with the general conueniencie. And as men are careful not
to have a new house shaken with any violence before it be well settled and the
parts firmly knit: so be you, I beseech you brethren, much more careful, that
the house of God which you are and are to be, be not shaken with unnecessary
novelties or other oppositions at the first settling thereof.

Lastly, whereas you are to become a body politik, using amongst your selves
civil government, and are not furnished with any persons of special eminency
above the rest, to be chosen by you into office of government: Let your
wisdom and godliness appear, not only in choosing such persons as do
entirely love, and will diligently promote the common good, but also in
yielding unto them all due honor and obedience in their lawful
administrations; not beholding in them the ordinarinesse of their persons, but
Gods ordinance for your good; nor being like unto the foolish multitude, who
more honor the gay coat, then either the virtuous mind of the man, or
glorious ordinance of the Lord. But you know better things, and that the image
of the Lords power and authority which the Magistrate bears, is honorable,
in how mean persons soever. And this duty you both may the more willingly,
and ought the more conscionably to perform, because you are at least for the
present to have only them for your ordinary governors, which your selves
shall make choice of for that work.

Sundry other things of importance I could put you in mind of, and of those
before mentioned in more words, but I will not so far wrong your godly minds,
as to think you heedlesse of these things, there being also diverse among you
so well able to admonish both themselves and others of what concerns them.
These few things therefore, and the same in few words I do earnestly commend
unto your care and conscience, joining there with my daily incessant prayers
unto the Lord, that he who has made the heavens and the earth, the sea and all
rivers of waters, and whose providence is over all his works, especially over
all his dear children for good, would so guide and guard you in your ways, as
inwardly by his Spirit, so outwardly by the hand of his power, as that both you
and we also, for and with you, may have after matter of praising his Name all
the days of your and our lives. Fare you well in him in whom you trust, and in
whom I rest

An unfeigned well-willer of your happy success in this hopeful voyage, I. R.

A brief RELATION OF THE DISCOVERY AND PLANTATION of New England.
ALthough it be a course, far from the mind of us, that are undertakers for
the advancement of the Plantation of New England, to seek by any vain
ostentation to extol our own endeavors: yet we cannot but strive to vindicate
our reputation from the injurious aspersions that have been laid upon it, by
the malicious practices of some that would adventure nothing in the beginning,
but would now reap the benefit of our pains and charges, and yet not seem
beholding to us; and to that end they disualew what is past, and by sinister
informations derogate what they can from the present course intended: the
rather because the good Orders appointed to be put in execution there, are
likely to restrain the licentious irregularitie of other places. And this has
induced us to publish our proceedings, whereunto it has pleased God to give a
blessing: as to any of indifferent judgment may appear by that which
follows.

WHen this design was first attempted, some of the present company were
therein chiefly interessed; who being careful to have the same accomplished,
did send to the discovery of those Northern parts a brave Gentleman, Captain
Henry Challons, with two of the Natives of that Territory, the one called
Maneday, the other Assecomet. But his misfortunes did expose him to the power
of certain Strangers, enemies to his proceedings, so that by them, his company
were seized, the ships and goods confiscated, and that Voyage wholly
overthrown.

This loss, and unfortunate beginning, did much abate the rising courage of
the first Adventurers; but immediately upon his departure, it pleased the noble
Lord chief Justice, Sir John Popham knight, to send out another ship, wherein
Captain Thomas Haman went Commander, and Martine Prinne of Bristow Master, with
all necessary supplies, for the seconding of Captain Challons and his people;
who arriving at the place appointed, and not finding that Captain there, after
they had made some discovery, and found the Coasts, Havens, and Harbors
answerable to our desires, they returned. Upon whose relation the Lord Chief
Justice, and we all waxed so confident of the business, that the year
following every man of any worth, formerly interessed in it, was willing to
join in the charge for the sending over a competent number of people to lay
the ground of a hopeful plantation.

Here upon Captain Popham, Captain Rawley Gilbert, and others were sent away
with two Ships, and an hundred Landmen, Ordnance, and other provisions
necessary for their sustentation and defense; until other supply might be
sent. In the mean while, before they could return, it pleased God to take
from us this worthy member, the Lord Chief Justice, whose sudden death did so
astonish the hearts of the most part of the Adventurers, as some grew cold, and
some did wholly abandon the business. Yet Sir Francis Popham his son,
certain of his private friends, and other of us, omitted not the next year
(holding on our first resolution) to join in sending forth a new supply, which
was accordingly performed.

But the Ships arriving there, did not only bring uncomfortable news of the
death of the Lord Chief Justice, together with the death of Sir John Gilbert,
the elder brother unto Captain Rawley Gilbert, who at that time was President
of that Council: But found that the old Captain Popham was also dead; who was
the only man (indeed) that died there that Winter, wherein they endured the
greater excremities; for that, in the depth thereof, their lodgings and stores
were burnt, and they thereby wondrously distressed.

This calamity and evil news, together with the resolution that Captain
Gilbert was forced to take for his own return, (in that he was to succeed
his brother, in the inheritance of his lands in England) made the whole company
to resolve upon nothing but their return with the Ships; and for that present
to leave the Country again, having in the time of their abode there
(notwithstanding the coldness of the season, and the small help they had)
built a pretty Bark of their own, which served them to good purpose, as
easing them in their returning.

The arrival of these people here in England, was a wonderful discouragement
to all the first undertakers, in so much as there was no more speech of settling
any other plantation in those parts for a long time after: only Sir Francis
Popham having the Ships and provision, which remained of the company, and
supplying what was necessary for his purpose, sent diverse times to the coasts
for trade and fishing; of whose loss or gains himself is best able to give
account.

Our people abandoning the plantation in this sort as you have heard; the
Frenchmen immediately took the opportunity to settle themselves within our
limits; which being heard of by those of Virginia, that discreetly took to
their consideration the inconveniences that might arise, by suffering them to
harbor there, they dispatched Sir Samuel Argall, with commission to displace
them, which he performed with much discretion, judgment, valor, and
dexterity. For having seized their Forts, which they had built at Mount
Mansell, Saint Croix, and Port Real, he carried away their Ordnance he also
surprised their Ship, Cattle, and other provisions, which he transported to
the Collonie in Virginia, to their great benefit. And hereby he has made a way
for the present hopeful plantation to be made in Noua-Scotia, which we hear
his Majesty has lately granted to Sir William Alexander Knight, one of his
Majesty's most honorable Council of the Kingdom of Scotland, to be held of
the said Crown, and that not without some of our priuities, as by approbation
under writing may and does appear. Whereby it is manifest that we are so
far from making a Monopoly of all those lands belonging to that coast (as
has been scandalously by some objected) That we wish that many would
undertake the like.

In this Interim there were of us who apprehenedd better hopes of good that
might ensue by this attempt, being thereunto persuaded, both by the relations
of our people that had endured the many difficulties whereunto such actions are
subjected chiefly in the Winter season; and likewise by the informations given
them by certain of the Natives, that had been kept a long time in their
hands; wherefore we resolved once more to try the verity thereof, and to see
if possibly we might find something that might induce a fresh resolution to
prosecute a work so pious and so honorable. And thereupon they dispatched
Captain Hotson, of the I Will of Wight, together with Captain Herley, Master
John Matthew, Master Sturton, with two Saluages, the one called Epenow, the
other Manawet, with commission and directions fit for them to observe and
follow, the better to bring to pass what was expected. But as in all humane
affairs, there is nothing more certain, then the uncertainty thereof; so
fell it out in this; for a little before such time as they arrived upon the
coast with the foresaid Savages, who were Naturalls of those parts, it happened
there had been one Hunt (a worthless fellow of our Nation (set out by
certain Merchants for love of gain; who (not content with the commodity he
had by the fish, and peaceable trade he found among the Savages) after he had
made his dispatch, and was ready to set sail, (more sauagelike then they)
seized upon the poor innocent creatures; that in confidence of his honesty
had put themselves into his hands. And stowing them under hatches, to the
number of twnety four, carried them into the Straights, where he sought to
sell them for slaves, and sold as many as he could get money for. But when it
was understood from whence they were brought, the Friars of those parts took
the rest from them, and kept them to be instructed in the Christian Faith; and
so disappointed this unworthy fellow of the hopes of gain he conceived to make
by this new and devilish project.

This being known by our two Saluages, formerly spoken of, they presently
contracted such an hatred against our whole Nation, as they immediately studied
how to be revenged; and contrived with their friends the best means to bring
it to pass; but Manawet dying in a short time after the Ships arrival there,
and the other observing the good order, and strong guard our people kept,
studied only how to free himself out of our hands, and thereupon laid the plot
very orderly, and indeed effected his purpose, although with so great hazard to
himself and friends, that labored his rescue, that Captain Hobson and his
whole company imagined he had been slain. And though in the recovery of his
body they wounded the Master of our Ship, and diverse other of our company, yet
was not their design without the slaughter of some of their people, and the
hurts of other, compassed, as appeared afterward.

Hereupon Captain Hobson and his company, conceiving the end of their attempt
to be frustrace, resolved without more ado to return, and so those hopes,
that charge and voyage was lost also, for they brought home nothing but the
news of their evil success, of the unfortunate cause thereof, and of a war
now new begun between the inhabitants of those parts, and us. A miserable
comfort for so weak means as were now left, to pursue the conclusion of so
tedious an enterprise.

While this was a working, we found the means to send out Captain John Smith
from Plymouth, in a ship, together with Master Darmer and diverse others with
him, to lay the foundation of a new Plantation, and to try the fishing of that
Coast, and to seek to settle a trade with the Natives: But such was his
misfortune, as being scarce free of our own Coast, he had his masts shaken
over board by storms and tempests, his ship wonderfully distressed, and in
that extremity forced to come back again; so as the season of the year being
almost spent, we were of necessity enforced to furnish him with another ship,
and taking out the provision of the first, dispatched him away again, who
coming to the height of the Western Islands, was chased by a French Pirate,
and by him made prisoner, although his ship in the night escaped away, and
returned home with the loss of much of her provision, and the overthrow of
that voyage, to the ruin of that poor Gentleman Captain Smith, who was
detained prisoner by them, and forced to suffer many extremities, before he
got free of his troubles.

Notwithstanding these disasters, it pleased God so to work for our
encouragement again, as he sent into our hands Tasquantum, one of those
Saluages that formerly had been betrayed by this unworthy Hunt before named,
by whose means there was hope conceived to work a peace between us, and his
friends, they being the principal inhabitants of that coast, where the fire
was kindled. But this Saluage Tasquantum, being at that time in the Newfound
land with Captain Mason, Governor there for the undertakers of that
Plantation: Master Darmer (who was there also, and sometimes before employed as
we have said by us, together with Captain John Smith) found the means to give
us intelligence of him, and his opinion of the good use that might be made of
his employment, with the readiness of Captain Mason, to further any of our
attempts that way, either with boats or other provision necessary, and
resolving himself to go from thence, advised us to send some to meet with
him, at our usual place of fishing, to aid him in his endeavor, that they
joining together, might be able to do what he hoped would be very acceptable
unto all well wishers of that business.

Upon this news, we dispatched the next season Captain Rocraft, with a
Company for that purpose, in hope to have met with Captain Darmer; but the
care and discretion of Captain Mason was such, finding Captain Darmers
resolution to go beyond his means, that he persuaded him first to go for
England, that providing himself there, as was requisite, he might proceed in
time expedient, which counsel he observed (as fit it was) although our
expectation of his joining with Captain Rocraft was thereby disappointed. Yet
so it happened, that Captain Reoraft at his arrival in those parts, met with
a French Bark that lay in a Creek a fishing, and trading, which he seized on,
and sent home the Master and Company in the same Ship which he went out in.

With this Bark and his own Company, he meant to keep the Coast that Winter
quarter, being very well fitted both with salt, and other necessaries for his
turn: but as this was an Act of extremity (the poor man being of our own
Religion) so succeeded it accordingly. For in a short time after, certain of
this Captains company, conspired together to cut his throat, and to make
themselves masters of the whole spoil, and so to seek a new fortune where
they could best make it. This conspiracy being discovered to the Captain, he
let it go on, till the time that it should have been put in execution, when
he caught them in there own train, and so apprehended them in the very
instant that they were purposed to begin their massacre.

But after he had prevented the mischief, and seized upon the malefactors, he
took to his consideration what was best to be done with them. And being loath
by himself to dispatch them as they deserved, he resolved to put them ashore,
thinking by their hazard that it was possible they might discover something,
that might advance the public; and so giving them some Arms for their
defense, and some victual for their sustentation, until they knew better how
to provide for themselves, he left them at a place called Sawaguatock, where
they remained not long, but got from thence to Menehighon, an Island lying some
three leagues in the Sea, and fifteen leagues from that place, where they
remained all that Winter, with bad lodging, and worse fare, yet came all safe
home save one sickly man, which dyed there, the rest returned with the Ship we
sent for Rocrafts supply and provision, to make a fishing voyage.

After these fellows were landed, the Captain finding himself but weakly
manned, and his Ship to draw too much water to coast those places, that by his
instructions he was assigned to discover, he resolved to go for Virginia
where he had lived a long time before, and had (as he conceived) many friends,
that would help him with some things that he had occasion to use. Arriving
there, he was not deceived of his expectation; for Sir Samuel Argall being
their Governor, and one that respected him much for his own sake, was the
readier to help him, in regard of the good he wished to the business wherein
he was employed.

But all this could not prevail, for after that Sir Samuel Argall came from
thence (his departure being more sudden then was expected) it fell out that
the new Governor entered the Harbor: and finding Rocraft ready to be gone,
sent to him to command him to come aboard to speak with him, which he readily
obeyed, as soon as he could fit his boat and men for that purpose. And so
leaving his Bark with her great Anchor a head, and taking with him the half of
his company, he was forced to stay aboard the new Governors Ship that night.
In the mean while a storm arising, our Bark wanting hands to do their
labor, drove a shore, and there sunk. But yet the Governor and Captain so
labored the next day, when they knew thereof, as that they freed her again,
but that occasion forced our Captain to stay so long in the Country to fit
himself anew, as in the interim a quarrel fell out between him and another
of that place; so as Rocraft was slain, and the Barque sunk the second time,
and finally disabled from yielding us any benefit to this present.

But we not knowing this disaster, and Captain Darmer arriving with his
Saluage out of New Foundland, dispatched him away the next season, in a ship
we sent again for the fishing business, and assigned him a company to join
with Rocraft and his people.

Captain Darmer arriving there, and not finding Rocraft, was a little
perplexed, and in doubt what to do: yet hearing by those Mutiners which he
found there, that he was gone for Virginia; he was hopeful of his return; and
lived in that expectation, till such time as he heard (by a ship that came from
thence to fish for the Collony) the confusion of his fortune, and the end of
his misery in this world. Then he determined to take the Pinnace that the year
before was assigned to Rocraft for him to make the trade with, and with her to
proceed on his design, and so embarked himself, and his provision and company
in her. And leaving the fishermen to their labor, he coasted the shore from
thence, searching every Harbor, and compassing every Cape-land, till he arrived
in Virginia; where he was in hope to meet with some of the provision, or
company of Rocraft, to help to supply him of what he wanted; as also to lay a
Deck upon his Pinnace, that before had not any, and now was taught by
experience the necessity of having that defect supplied.

But those hopes failed him (al being before that time ruined and dispersed) so
far, as he saw it in vain to hope for help by that means, and therefore
attempted to make the best of what he had of his own. And going to set his
men a work, they all in a few days after their arrival, fell sick of a
disease which happened at that time in the country, so as now he was not only
forced to be without hope of their helping of him, but must labor himself all
he could to attend and sustain them; but so God favored him, that they
recovered, and in time convenient he dispatched his business there, and put
himself to Sea again, resolving to accomplish in his journey back to
New England, what in his last Discovery he had omitted.

In his passage he met with certain Hollanders, who had a trade in Hudsons
river some years before that time, with whom he had conference about the state
of that coast, and their proceedings with those people: whose answer gave him
good content. He betook himself to the following of his business,
discovering many goodly Rivers, and exceeding pleasant, and fruitful coasts,
and Islands, for the space of 80. leagues from East to West, for so that coast
does range along from Hudsons River to Cape James.

Now after we had found by Captain Rocrafts relation made the year before,
the hopes he conceived of the benefits that coast would afford, toward the
upholding of the charge for settling our Plantation by reason of the commodities
arising by fishing and furs, if a course might be taken for the mannaging of
that business, as was fit for such a design; as well as for the advancement
of the public good of our whole Nation, and satisfaction of every well
disposed person, that had a will to be interessed therein.

It was held to be most convenient to strengthen our selves by a new Grant to
be obtained from his royal Majesty: the rather, finding that those of
Virginia had by two several Patents settled their bounds, and excluded all from
intermedling with them that were not free of their Company; and had wholly
altered the form of their Government, from the first ground laid for the
managing the affairs of both Collonies, leaving us as desperate, and our
business as abandoned.

These considerations (as is said) together with the necessity of settling our
affairs, bounds and limits, distinct from theirs, made us resolve to petition
his Majesty for the renewing of our Grant.

By which time the rumor of our hopes was so publicly spread abroad, and the
commodities of the Fish, and trade so looked into, as it was desired, that all
that coast might be made free, as well to those of Virginia, as to us to make
their commodity: How just or unjust that motion was, we will not argue, seeing
the business is ended.

By this means, our preceedings were interrupted, and we questioned about it;
first, by the Counsel of Virginia, whom we thought to have benefully satisfied
therein, before we could have way given us for a new Patent, (...) having been
heard by certain of the Lords of the Council; and the business by them so
ordered, (...) we were directed to proceed and to have our Grant agreeable to
the liberty of the Virginia Company, the frame of our government excepted; but
this order not being liked of, it was again heard and concluded. Lastly, the
Parent being past the Seal, it was stopped upon new suggestions to the King, and
by his Majesty referred to the Council to be settled, by whom the former
Orders were confirmed, the difference cleared, and we ordered to have our
Patent delivered us.

These disputes held us almost two years, so as all men were afraid to join
with us, and we thereby left hopeless of any thing more, than that which our
own fortunes would yield to advance our proceedings, in which time so many
accidents happened unto us at home, and abroad, that we were feign to give order
by the ships we sent a fishing, for the retiring of Master Darmer, and his
people, until all things were cleared, and we better provided of means to go
through with our design: but this worthy Gentleman confident of the good
likely to ensue, and resolutely resolving to pursue the ends he aimed at, could
not be persuaded to look back, as yet; and so refusing to accept our offer,
began again to prosecute his Discovery, wherein he was betrayed by certain
new Saluages, who suddenly set upon him, giving him fourteen or fifteen
wounds, but by his valor, and dexterity of spirit he freed himself out of
their hands, yet was constrained to retire into Virginia again the second time,
for the cure of his wounds, where he fell sick of the infirmities of that
place, and thereof dyed: so ended this worthy Gentleman his days, after he
had remained in the discovery of that coast two years, giving us good content
in all he undertook; and after he had made the peace between us and the
Saluages, that so much abhorred our Nation, for the wrongs done them by others,
as you have heard: but the fruit of his labor in that behalf we as yet
receive to our great commodity, who have a peaceable plantation at this
present among them, where our people both prosper, and live in good liking, and
assuredness of their neighbors, that had been formerly so much exasperated
against us, as will more at large appear hereafter.

But having passed all these storms abroad, and undergone so many homebred
oppositions, and freed our Patent, which we were by order of State assigned to
renew, for the amendment of some defects therein contained, we were assured of
this ground more boldly to proceed on than before; and therefore we took first
to consideration how to raise the means to advance the plantation. In the
examination thereof, two ways did offer themselves: The one was the voluntary
contribution of the Patentees; The other, by an easy ransoming of the
freedoms of those that had a will to partake only of the present profits,
arising by the trade, and fishing upon the coast.

The first was to proceed from those Noblemen, and others that were Patentees,
and they agreed by order among themselves to disburse a hundred pounds a piece,
for the advancement of such necessary business, as they had in hand.

The second was to be accomplished by settling such liberties and orders in the
western cities, and towns, as might induce every reasonable man, in, and
about them, affecting the public good, or a regular proceeding in the
business of trade, to embrace an uniformity, and to join in a community, or
joint stock together How reasonable, or unreasonable those orders were, is
hereafter to be seen, and judged by every well affected person, or any truly
loving the public good of our Nation, whereunto is annexed the difference of
trading by a joint stock under government and order; and the promiscuous
trading without order, and in a dis-joynted manner, as of late they have done
to the infinite prejudice of others already, as also to the loss of many of
themselves, that contemptuously and greedily have leapt into that course, as it
were in despite of all Authority, whose reward, in time, will follow.

Before these Orders were to be tendered to those cities and towns, it was
desired that there might be letters sent from their Lordships, admonishing them
of his Majesty's royal Grant, that prohibiteth any not free of that business,
to intermeddle within our limits, upon pain of confiscation of ship and goods.
These letters expressing withal the good affection of those that were
interessed in the business, to entertain any that should be willing to
conform themselves to such orders, as had in that behalf been established.

But those letters how full of Justice soever they appeared, were as
distastefull, as was the rumor of Order unto them: for by it every particular
man thought himself strait debarred of liberty to run his own current, in
which he thought his freedom did only consist; and by debarring him thereof,
his private ends were overthrown, which was to endeavor to prevent his
neighbor of the market he aimed at, or the Harbor he resolved to go unto, or
the present trade he expected to have by his private industry, but as for the
public he cared not, let that fare as it would. While these things were in
dispute, and likely to have taken a good foundation, the news of the Parliament
flew to all parts, and then the most factious of every place, presently
combined themselves to follow the business in Parliament, where they presumed
to prove the same to be a Monopoly, and much tending to the prejudice of the
common good. But that there should be a conformity in trade, or a course taken
to prevent the evils that were likely to ensue, or to appropriate possessions,
or lands, after a generous manner, in remote parts of the world, to certain
public persons, of the commonwealth, for the taking care, and spending their
time and means how to advance the enlargement of their Country, the honor of
their King, and glory of their God; these were thought crimes worthy the taking
notice of, and the principal Actors in this kind, must be first traduced in
private, then publicly called upon in Parliament, to answer such other
scandalls as could by malice be invented.

But as this business was in it self just, and righteous, so was it as
earnestly desired, they might have had the opportunity to have answered it
before so impartial Judges, and so reverend persons; if so it might have been
without offense to the authority of his royal Majesty, that had extended it
self by virtue of his Prerogative so far off, and without the Laws of this
Realm, and to be put in execution without the public expense, or charge of
the commonwealth, or prejudice to any other former employments of our Nation,
and indeed without offense to any that coueted not to put their sickle into the
harvest of other men, or whose envious and covetous humors stirred them not up
to shame themselves in the conclusion.

These troubles thus unfortunately falling out, have notwithstanding hindered
us from the hopes we had this year, to give some life extraordinarily to those
affairs, and therefore we are forced of necessity to refer the maine of our
resolution, till a more convenient opportunity, and till we have gotten our
ships and provision fit to serve our turns both to give the Law along those
coasts, and to perform such other service, as is thereby intended for the
public good of our Adventurers, and defense of our Merchants, that shall
frequent those places, according to such Orders, as shall be found behouefull
in that behalf.

The Clime and condition of the Country, and the present estate of our affairs
there.
YOu have heard already the many disasters, calamities, misfortunes,
oppositions, and hindrances we have had, and received. Howbeit many are
omitted, in that we desire not to trouble the Reader with more than enough; or
to affright the minds of weak spirits, that will believe there is no better
success to be looked for from such attempts: although it be true that the best
designs do oftentimes carry with them the most impediments, whether it be that
God will have it so, to try our constancy, or otherwise to make us know, that
it is he only that works after his own will, according to the time he has
assigned, and that there is nothing done but by him, as also that, that is
only best which he will have to be done, and that time most proper which he
has assigned for the same.

But by these you may imagine (seeing we have none other helps than our own
fortunes to build upon) there can no great matters be performed in these
storms and tempests. Notwithstanding, you may know we have not been more
hindered one way, than blessed an other: for, as our patience, constancy,
travels and charge has been great, so has it (indeed) manifoldly been
required: For, by GODS favor, and these Gentlemen's industry; we have made a
most ample discovery of the most commodious Country for the benefit of our
Nation, that ever has been found.

For better satisfaction of the Reader in this behalf, we have thought it fit,
by the way, to acquaint him first with the nature of the place where we have
settled our selves, whereby he may see reason for what we have done,
remembering him likewise, that in settling of plantations, there is principally
to be considered: The air, for the health of the Inhabitants. The soil, for
fertility fit for corn, and feeding of cattle wherewith to sustain them The
Sea, for commodity of trade and commerce, the better to enrich their public
and private State, as it shall grow to perfection, and to raise employments, to
furnish the course of those affairs.

Now for the quality of the Air, there is none of judgment but knows it
proceeds either from the general disposition of the Sphere, or from the
particular constitution of the place.

Touching the disposition of the Sphere, it is not only seated in the
temperate Zone, but as it were in the Center, or middle part thereof, for that
the middle part of that Country has about three hundred and ten degrees of
Longitude; and stands in the forty fourth and forty fifth degrees of the
Northern Latitude, that is, twenty degrees from the fiery Tropicke, and as
much from the freesing Articke Circle: Under the same climate and course of the
Sun that Constantinople, and Rome, the Ladies of the World; Italy, and
France, the Gardens of Europe, have their situation, within the limits of the
fifth and sixth Climate, after the later computation; having their longest day
fifteen hours and some odd minutes.

Touching the constitution of the place (which is about sixty two degrees by
Sea from our Continent Westerly) The Maritine parts thereof are somewhat
colder, then the nature of the Clime otherwise affords; for that the beams
of the Sun are weakened, partly by the unstable reflection of the same upon
the Sea, and partly by being laden with abundance of moisture it exhales out
of the vast Ocean, whereby the nature thereof is not so violently there
expressed, as in the like parallel further into the maine is accustomed. Nor is
that Sea coast so subject to droughts or want of rain in seasonable times, as
other parts are of like Latitudes, and by that reason the Sea coasts are at all
times more cold then is the Inland. And the Eastern coast which receives the
rising of the Sun, is likewise colder then are the Western parts, toward
the declining of the same, as our morning aires (for example) even in the heat
of Summer are cold and quick, when the day and evening are very sweltring. And
this makes those parts more suitable to the nature of our people, who neither
find content in the colder Climates, nor health in the hotter; but (as herbs
and plants) affect their native temperature, and prosper kindly no where else.

And indeed, the hot Countries yield sharper wits, but weaker bodies, and fewer
children; the colder, more slow of conceit, but stronger of body, and more
abounding in procreation. So that, though the invention of Arts has risen from
the Southern Nations, yet they have still been subject to the inundations,
and invasions of the more Northerly people, by reason of their multitudes,
together with the strength of their body, and hardness of their constitutions.

But this Country, what by the general and particular situation, is so
temperate, as it seems to hold the golden mean, and indeed is most agreeable
to the nature of our own, which is made manifest by experience, the most
infallible proof of all assertions; in so much as our people that are settled
there, enjoy their life and health much more happily, then in other places;
which can be imputed to no other cause, then the temperature of the Climate.

Now, as the Clime is found to be so temperate, so delicate, and healthful,
both by reason and experience; such is the soil also, some parts thereof
yielding wonderful increase, both of the Corn, the Natives have most use of;
as also of our own, of all sorts: with infinite variety of nourishing roots,
and other herbs, and fruits, common among them, but rare with us.

Besides, the Coast does abound with most convenient Havens, and Harbors, full
of singular Islands, fit for Plantation; replenished with Plants and Wood of
all sorts; as Oak, Cedars, Spruce, Fur, Pyne, Walnut, Chestnut, Elm,
Sassafras, Plumtrees, and Calamus Aromaticus, etc.

The people are tractable (if they be not abused) to commerce and Trade
withal, and as yet have good respect of us. The Seas are stored with all
kinds of excellent fish, and in many places upon the coast, fit to make Salt
in. The Country abounds with diversity of wild foul, as Turkeys, Partriges,
Swans, Cranes, wild Geese of two sorts, wild Duckes of three sorts, many
Doves, especially when Strawberies are ripe.

There are several sorts of Dear in those parts, and some that bring forth
two, three, and four young at once, which is a manifest proof of the
fertility of the Soil, or temper of the Clime, or both together.

There is also a certain Beast, that the Natives call a Moss, he is as big
bodied as an Ox, headed like a fallow Dear, with a broad Palm, which he
mues every year, as does the Dear, and neck like a Red Dear, with a short
mane, running down along the raines of his back, his hair long like an Elke,
but esteemed to be better then that for Sadlers use, he has likewise a great
bunch hanging down^e under his throat, and is of the color of our blacker sort
of fallow Dear, his legs are long, and his feet as big as the feet of our
Oxen, his tail is longer then the single of a Dear, and reaches almost down
to his huxens, his skin makes very good Buffe, and his flesh is excellent
good food, which the Natives use to Ierkin and keep all the year to serve
their turn, and so proves very serviceable for their use. There have been
many of them seen in a great Island upon the Coast, called by our people Mount
Mansell, whither the Saluages go at certain seasons to hunt them; the manner
whereof is, by making of several fires, and setting the Country with people,
to force them into the Sea, to which they are naturally addicted, and then
there are others that attend them in their Botes with bows and weapons of
several kinds, wherewith they slay and take at their pleasure. And there is
hope that this kind of Beasts may be made serviceable for ordinary labor
with Art and Industry.

The known Commodities of that Country, are Fish of several sorts, rich
Furs, as Beauers, Otters, Martins, black Fox, Sables, etc. There are
likewise plenty of Vines, of three kinds, and those pleasant to the taste, yet
some better then other. There is Hemp, Flax, Silkgrasse, several veins of
Ironstone, commodities to make Pitch, Rosen, Tar; Deal boords of all sorts,
Sparres, Masts, for Ships of all burdens; in a word, there comes no commodity
out of France, Germany, or the Sound, but may be had there, with reasonable
labor and industry.

Further, we have settled at this present, several Plantations along the
Coast, and have granted patents to many more that are in preparation to be
gone with all conueniencie. Those of our people that are there, have both
health and plenty, so as they acknowledge there is no want of any thing, but of
industrious people, to reap the commodities that are there to be had, and they
are indeed so much affected to the place, as they are loath to be drawn from
thence, although they were directed to return to give satisfaction to those
that sent them, but chose rather to perform that office by letters, together
with their excuse, for breach of their duty in that behalf. And thus you see
there is no labor well employed, but has his reward at one time or other.

These encouragements have imboldned us to proceed, to the engaging of our
selves, for the building of some Ships of good burden, and extraordinary Mould,
to lie upon the Coast for the defense of Merchants and Fishermen, that are
employed there, as also to Waft the Fleets, as they go to and from their
Markets: and we purpose from henceforth to build our shipping there, where we
find all commodities fit for that service, together with the most opportune
places, that can be desired.

Lastly, finding that we have so far forth prevailed, as to wind our selves
into familiarity with the Natives, (which are in no great number) along the
Coast for two hundred Leagues together, we have now dispatched some of our
people of purpose, to diue into the bowels of the Continent, there to search
and find out what Port, or Place, is most convenient to settle our maine
Plantation in, where we mean to make the Residencie of our State and
Government, as also to be assured, what other commodities may be raised for
the public, and private benefit of those that are dealers in that business,
and willing to be interessed in any the Lands there: Whither is gone this
year already, for us to vary from it, and therefore we have resolved to build
our Edifices upon it, and to frame the same after the platform already laid,
and from whence we take our denomination. So as we purpose to commit the
managing of our whole affairs there in general, unto a Governor, to be
assisted by the advice and counsel of so many of the Patentees as shall be
there resident, together with the Officers of State, that is to say; The
Treasurer for the managing of the treasure and revenues belonging to that
State. The Martial for matters of Arms, and affairs of wars, be it
defensive or offensive. The Admiral for maritine business civil or
criminal, and the forces belonging to the Sea. The master of the ordnance for
munition, artillery and other provisions for public store of Armies by Sea or
Land; as also such other persons of judgment and experience, as by the
President and Counsel established here, for the better governing of those
affairs shall be thought fit.

By this Head, and these Members, united together, the great affairs of the
whole State is to be managed, according to their several authorities, given
them from their Superiors, the President and Council established as aforesaid.

And for that all men by nature are best pleased to be their own caruers, and
do most willingly submit to those Ordinances, or Orders whereof themselves are
authors: it is therefore resolved, that the general laws whereby that State
is to be governed, shall be first framed and agreed upon by the general
assembly of the States of those parts, both Spiritual and Temporal.

For the better distinction whereof, and the more orderly proceeding, agreeable
(as is said) to the present State of this our Realm, two parts of the whole
Territory is to be divided between the Patentees, into several Counties, to
be by themselves or their friends planted, at their pleasure or best
commodity. The other third part is to be reserved for public uses, to be
belonging to the State, as their reuenew for defraying of public charge.

But as well this third part, as the two formerly spoken of, is to be divided
into Counties, Baronries, Hundreds, and the like, from all which the Deputies
for every County, and Baronry, are to be sent in the name and behalf of the
Subjects, under them to consult and agree upon the Laws so to be framed, as
also to reform any notable abuses committed in former proceedings.

Yet these are not to be assembled, but by order from the President and
Council here, who are to give life to the Laws so to be made, as those to
whom of right it best belongs, according to his Majesty's royal grant in that
behalf, as also that under God, and his Sacred Highness, they are the
principal Authors of that foundation. And thus much for the general form of
our Government.

In like manner are the Counties to be governed by the chief Head or Deputy
thereof with other Officers under him. As his Steward, Comptroller, Treasurer
of his reuenews; and so the Baronries by their Stewards, and other inferior
ministers, who are to have assigned them the power of high and low Justice
within themselves for determining of Controversies, with reservation of Appeal
in some cases to the supreme Courts.

And further, these Lords of Counties may of themselves subdiuide their said
County into Manors and Lordships, as to them shall seem best, giving to the
Lords thereof power of keeping of Courts, and L^^^, as is here used in
England, for the determining of petty matters, arising between the Lords, and
the Tenants, or any other.

And there is no less care to be taken for the trade and public commerce of
Merchants, whose government ought to be within themselves, in respect of the
several occasions arising between them, the tradesmen, and (...)
Mechanickes, with whom they have most to do: and who are generally the chief
inhabitants of great Cities, and Towns, in all parts; it is likewise
provided, that all the Cities in that Territory, and other inferior Towns
where Tradesmen are in any numbers, shall be incorporate and made bodies
politic, to govern their affairs and people as it shall be found most
behouefull for the public good of the same; according unto the greatness or
capacity of them, who shall be made likewise capable to send certain their
Deputies, or Burgesses to this public assembly, as members thereof, and who
shall have voices equal with any the rest.

BY this you see our maine drift is but to take care for the well ordering of
the business, seeking by all means to avoid (what we may) the intermedling
with any men's moneys, or disposing of any men's fortunes, save only our own;
leaving to every particular undertaker the employment of their adventures, and
the raising of their profits, out of their proper limits, and possessions, as
shall seem best to themselves, or their officers, or ministers, whom they
employ, and whom they may be bold to question, or displace, as to themselves
shall seem most fitting.

And hereby all men may know, that as it is not in our wills to delude and
deceive any, so we are careful not to give the least cause of suspicion of
any evil in that kind; so much the rather for that we daily see by
experience, the abuses committed in like cases by inferior ministers, to be a
notable cause to dehort the good dispositions of many otherwise well affected
to Plantations, for that they observe those that are so employed to grow rich,
and their adventures to come to nothing.

And we further desire that all men should be persuaded, we covet not to
engrosse any thing at all unto ourselves, but that we should be exceeding
glad to find more of our Nation, so free in disposition, as to partake with
us, as well in the profit, as in the future travel, and charge thereof;
without looking back to our expense, or labor already past, to the end that
all our hands being united together, the work may be so much the sooner
advanced, well knowing and freely confessing, that it is sufficient to give
content to a multitude, and that of all sorts. For such as are truly Pious,
shall find here the opportunity to put in practice the works of piety, both
in building of Churches, and raising of Colleges for the breeding of youth, or
maintenance of Divines and other learned men. If they be such as affect Glory,
and to continue their memory to future ages, they may have here the means to
raise Houses, Parishes, yea Towns, or Provinces, to their Names and Posterity.
Do they aim at wealth? here is the way for their industry to satiate their
appetites in that, if they be not insatiable. Do they long after pleasure?
here is as much to be had as may content any, not merely voluptuous, or only
prodigal. Do they aspire to be Commanders? here is the place where they may
have command of their own friends, or tenants, if they be of any worth, or
means extraordinary wherewith to transport any numbers. If otherwise of
experience and virtue, it is likely they may attain places of government for
the public State. So as you see there wants no occasions, or opportunity to
inuit, or give satisfaction to such as have patience to attend the time.

And indeed we shall be glad, that this, or any thing else may induce a free
and noble resolution, in any well affected person, to endeavor the advancement
of these ends, together with us, in that they shall find them agreeable to
honor, and honesty; and if there be any that can add ought unto our
endeavors, by their advice or otherwise, there is none that shall more readily
embrace the same then we; whose intents are only framed for the prosperity of
the business, as is already said, and as we hope will all those be, that shall
assent to join with us, both in the labor, profit, and honor, without respect
to the weakness of the motive, by which it has been heretofore moved, or
any thing save the work it self. For by it you shall find the Honor of our
God, our King, and Nation, will be advanced, without effusion of Christian
blood, or question of wrong to the present Inhabitants. For that they
themselves both desire it, and we inte^d not to take ought, but what they that
are there, are willing we should be seized of, both for the defense of them
against their Enemies, and their preservation in peace among themselves, and
propagation of the Christian Faith, which with wonderful alacrity many of them
seem to give care unto, and for whose speedy conversion we intend to be as
careful as of our own happiness; and as diligent to build them houses, and
to provide them Tutors for their breeding, and bringing up of their children,
of both sects, as to advance any other business whatsoever, for that we
acknowledge our selves specially bound thereunto. And this being done, to
refer the success, to the Author of Heaven and Earth, to whom be all Honor
and glory.

FINIS.

