Newnams Nightcrowe.

A Bird that breeds braules in many Families and Housholdes.

Wherein is remembered that kindly and provident regard which Fathers ought to
have toward their Sons.

Together with a disciphring of the injurious dealinges of some younger sort
of stepdames.

Vnicuique secundum opera cius.

Cor. 2. Vix reijcis florem qui dulcem prebet odorem.

LONDON. Printed by John Wolf. 1590.

The Books purpose.
For widows and elder brothers,
For children that have lost their mothers.
Or be injured by stepdames might.
And Sons that lost their births right.
With others needyng restitution.
These find in me some meet fruition.
To the right worshipful Master Thomas Owen Esquire, one of the Queens
Majesty's learned Seriants at the Law.
AT what time King Darius invaded Scithia, the people of the same did retire
and give back so much from the force and first brunt of the inuador that in a
manner they seemed to give over and relinquishe the defense of that part, which
was of best fertility, and were now entering into their desert of their land.
Darius sent to know what they meant and how far they purposed to fly, they
answered we have no Cities to fight for, but as soon as Darius shall
begin to meddle with the Towns, and Monumentes of our fathers and auncesters,
he shall know whether the Citizens can fight. It is now more then twenty
years space, since it has been my fortune to bear the assaults, damage,
injury, discomfortes, and unkindness of a stepdame, by her overmuch
prevailing, which oftentimes is found to be as puissant in vanquishing as the
strong army of Darius. All this I thought to have put up and given place unto
by silent patience, as a cross ordained for me, until at length she
proceeded so far in malignity, as I thought it intolerable: and that was by
an utter supplanting and disheriting of me in some mean or competent portion,
her driftes thus extending to the spoiling me of my birthright, which to
every man is the best Monument of his parent, I could not but be moved with
that prick or instinct of Nature, which shows it self in the least
creatures, of which it is said: Habet musca splenem and formicae sua bilis
inest. The Fly will resist and the Ant will turn again. Now for that some
purpose or end of knowledge and insight is to draw good out of evil, and to
make medicines of diseases, I thought it good with some labor bestowed to
convert the harm of my own calamity, to the instruction of some and benefit
of others, in no small number. And because the subject of the whole matter,
seems to shroud it self most under the nature, property, and manners of a
stepdam, which persuades as much by night as by day, she is vulgarly called
the Nightcrow, best worthy to be my child's Godmother and to have the
preheminency of the name. And although all sorts of foul Coruini generis) of
crows kind, were forbidden to the children of Israel, which argues some ill
property, unwholesome, or unsavory taste of the flesh of that kind, yet I hope
there is nothing in this intellectual or spiritual bird, that may offend or
dislike the taste of any good Christian or true Israelite. The Divines
howsoever it comes to pass make the Crow a figure of procrastination, and
deferring to do good. It may be of his cry or voice, and the continual
iterating of this word, cra cra, put to it one letter, it is cras, so is there
nothing in her mouth (if she could speak English) but to morrow, to morrow.
Therefore it pleases some of them (when they would counsel us to beware of
deferring repentance, or the performing of good deeds) to bid us beware with
the Israelites to eat Crows flesh: as though Crows by property or nature be
hinderers in all goodness, and no furtherers. They that by the like hap are
brought into the adverse condition of disherison, be not many, nor yet very
few, the most being of some honest valor, howsoever affection has wrought to
the verefying of that saying, Prou. 13. Some men are rich, though they have
nothing, and some men are poor, having great riches. This notwithstanding no
man is naturally willing to give place unto wrong. Appetere proprium bonum est
omnibus natural. To desire our own good is natural to all men, says
Aristotle. And therefore that wise Prince and loving Captain of the
Lacedaemonians: Agesilaus seeing a child taking a mouse by the tail, and
prettily to pull him out of his hole, the mouse turning again, bit the child
by the fingers, and so escaped. Which small and childish matter, he applied to
weighty and sad purpose: bidding indeed the best of his Captains to take
an example hereof, saying: If so little a beast will resist injury, what
should men of valor do if they be provoked. God of his infinite goodness give
grace unto all wrong doers, and such as have erred in this behalf, through ill
counsel, or other illusion, to remove from themselves, and their way to
eternity, that block of injurious misdoing, and in the mean time to send
likewise the grace and gift of Christian patience to the injured of this sort
till remedy be vouchsafed.

Thus not with the least of your well willers nor with the last of your
undeserving accomptance, I wish you long life with the accomplishment of true
happiness, presuming to dedicate to your acceptance and patronage, the homely
fruits of this my rusticke labor.

Your Worships dutifully, and dignitatis tuae cum salute studiosus. John
Newnham.

To the Reader.
ALthough (friendly Reader) I have read that the Emperor Tiberius, so little
condescended to any purpose or motion of tyranny in himself that he would
openly say: In a free City tongues should be free, yet in the body of this
simple treatise, wherein I seem in part to have some conflict with them that
be nymble and skillful at the weapon of tongues, I trust I have not ouer-lashed
my self to the misusing or offense of my own tongue, well I wot that folk
shall give an account for idle words, but those be not idle that are meant to
admonish, exhort, reprove, commend, or misprayse, so long as they be spoken
truly and soundly. If any words of this kind be more than the infirmity of
any woman or man would willingly hear of, let him wit, that which they dislike
or find not belonging to themselves it pertayneth to some others as an
admonition of the fault. I wot well that besides Nightcrowes, there be Noctuae
and Vespertiliones.

There be also Momi which be mimi, in English: I mean busy controullers, and
but small dooers themselves: as light and truth is delectable to all other
birds and creatures of sound eyesight, so unto these, plain truth without
starching and setting forth in order is either so offensive or seems so
boisterous in their tender eyes, and they can as ill away with it as that
mother in law which deserves to be called a Stepdame, can abide to take
delight in her husbands first chirdren. Neither comes this word Stepdame of
the speakers ill speech or terming, but in deed is drawn from the parties ill
doing: although perhaps the Grammarians will say, Nouerca is a compound word,
quasi noua furca, in english, a new frame of three pieces prepared and set up
for some purpose. By that word God forbid I should mean all mothers in laws
of whom I dare vow and affirm there be a great number so kindly to their
husbands children, that they may well be called mothers. The abuse of a few
sometime makes all of that suit or sort, to be blamed, propter paucas inuisa
sumus omnes mulieres says Terence: for a few Stepdames sake we are all called
Stepmothers. To be short, I would constantly beseech all mother in laws in
general, to have this opinion of my meaning that have adventured to meddle in
this kind of matter, chiefly in favor of the ouerborne, motherlesse and of
the poor innocents, whose Angels be before the throne of God, that as we are
sure one Crow pulls not out another eyes, so I hope this my Nightcrowe
shall spiritually or temporally do good unto many, even of them that rightly
deserve that name.

Vale.
The Table.
THat the virtue, thriuing and prosperity of children are for the most part
wrought by the fathers good examples and instructions. Chap. I. That the vice
and other infelicitie of children, mostly proceeds of the fathers ill
examples. Chap. II. That fathers ought not to provoke their children to wrath
or disobedience. Chap. III. That fathers ought to deal kindly and faithfully,
and not preiudicially or fraudulently toward their children. Chap. IIII. That
fathers or parents ought not to dispose their goods or lands after private
fancy. Chap. V.
The second part.
OF the ungentle dealing of some Stepmothers toward their husbands children.
Chap. vj. That stepmothers ought not to be private or false accusers of their
husbands children more than of others. Chap. vij. That Stepmothers ought not
to supplant or procure disheriting of their husbands eldest sons. Chap.
viij. That disheriting of the eldest son without very great lawful cause is
an act very wrongful and ungodly Chap. ix. That procurers and counsailors of
disherison and all wrong doing ought to make or procure restitution. Chap. x.
The first part of this treatise (surnamed the Night-crowe) persuades in
certain kindly points pertaining to a natural father, the regard whereof, may
work a meet preservative or prevention against a woman's enchanting or
perverting.
CHAP. I. That the virtue, thriuing, and prosperity of children are for the
most part wrought by the fathers good examples and instructions.
SOlon, that was reputed so wise and provident a lawe-maker for the Athenians,
being asked how a State or Commonwealth might best be kept upright, and
longest endure: mary (says he) if subjects obey their Magistrates, and the
Magistrates obey the laws: as if he would say, It is not enough if the
subjects obey, and the Magistrates neglect the observing of laws themselves,
but these must obey first, that the others may learn obedience, otherwise they
are like to reap such fruits as they sow by examples. As subjects and
inferiors are contained within bounds of order and duty by laws, so princes,
pastors, parents, and all superiors are subjected to other laws, for the most
part have a superior Judge, whereby is performed the earthly Hierarchy so
well pleasing unto God, and so much desired of good men, whiles they command
by their own laws, they stand obliged by no less duty of obedience to the
law of God, and of nature. And specially Parents, who are so deeply bound to
love and tender their children, that brute beasts and birds may reprove and
control many. The thing that is most requisite to be found in them, is
natural love augmented and confirmed by the same which Christ so carefully
commended to his children, to wit, charity. Charity makes one heart of many:
it is the way of man unto God, and the way of god to man: but he that
expresses himself in his actions to fail, in the duty of natural love, is
not worthy to be counted an obseruer of the bond of Charity.

This Charity or wonderful new love, Christ not only left unto his children
by form of an express commandment, but also taught and confirmed the same by
the example of himself, in the unspeakable mystery of Sacraments: folk are
taught better by example of doing then by words, and such examples are always
to be drawn from the superior to the inferior. They whom nature or order
has preferred in degree before others, will always be looked upon for their
examples, which therefore had need to be good. For that which is done by
example, the inferiors will think they may lawfully do the like. Good
examples do edify and uphold, ill examples do destroy and confound.
Humanity is taught by the law of Nature. If parents by their example should
teach the contrary, what do they else but endeavor to transfourme men into
beasts: beginning first to perform it in their own children. These will (say
they) be Christians, and of the faithful, and yet Saint James says, Fides
sine operibus mortua est: Faith without works is dead. They must show us
better examples to come from them toward their children, then cold
friendship perverting of order; and sowing seeds of dissension in their own
house. Good works generally tend toward the clothing of the souls
nakedness, but good works in performing the will of GOD in our own house,
may prove a preservative against the plague or poison of imputient minds, or
more rather remedy against the ruin of Souls, descended in our own osspring.
Piety or godliness, which is a virtue annexed unto Justice, besides the fourth
expressed Commandment, compels children to love and honor their Parents,
their kindred, and their country, but yet Parents must not think themselves
untouched, or unbound by this commandment, seeing by a secondarie means the
same wills and inuiteth Parents to honor, and especially to regard their
children. Which honoring or special regarding, is to be performed of each
party in heart, word, and deed. As for the love of people at large, it is to
be accounted as mutable as the fair weather, or as permanent as the calmes of
the Sea. But the natural and the kindly love of Parents toward their
children, is, or ought to be, as constant and ready, as we would wish to
find the lone and favor of GOD toward us. Neither can they follow a better
example giver then Christ himself, who has taught them to commend and
bequeath love unto their Children, for if there had been any thing more
expedient, he would have commended it unto his Apostles and Disciples before
this. Never were more needful the Parents examples of love and well doing,
then now, seeing children find them scarce to be had at the hands of others.
Pondus meum amor meus, says Saint Augustine, My weight is my love. And unto
them that lack weight herein, shall that be said, Discedite a me operarij
iniquitatis, Go from me ye workers of iniquity Luke the thirteenth. It is no
suspected or unsound counsel set down in Decretals by these words, Ante
omnia opus est vt patres non solum nihil peccando, verumetiam honest singula
peragendo manifestum res e filijs exhibeant exemplar, vt in little vitam se vt
in speculum intueantur. Before all things it is needful, that fathers should
show themselves unto their children as a manifest pattern or erample, not
only be not sinning, but also by doing al things honestly, that they may
look into their lives, and peruse themselves as in a glass.

Aristotle being asket in what sort we ought to show our selves to our friends,
marie says he, in that sort as we would wish that they should show
themselves to us. If this point pertains to friendship, much rather to
parentage, who find it a harder matter to enfourme their children well, then
it is to beget them. For according as they are trained up by their parents
words and examples, such will they prove to be, after the prouerbial verse.
Arbor naturam dat fructibus atque figuram. Fruits are wont to take their
shape and nature of the tree.

All things are derived from the worthier parts whether they be good or evil,
and the virtue of an honest man or good Father, is like to the savor of musk
which impartteth his goodness to others that buy not of it. Of this mind
appeared to be that virtuous Prince Jews of France, called the good King, who
least his eldest Son Charles the Dolphin should be unmindful of those
thing which he taught him by good example in his life time, at the time of his
death left these precepts in writing to be delivered unto him, of likelihood
as a Codicill or part of his will, which Christian like counsels are worthy
to be known and remembered especially by them that succeed in nobility,
authority, or generosity.

The aduertisementes were these.

1 First yield an account of thy sins diligently, using the help and sound
counsel of four wise and well learned men that will not be afraid to
rebuke and control thee, 2 Serve God devoutly in the Church. 3 Be conversant
with virtuous men and such as live in good order. 4 Ruffians and such as have
no fear of God, let them be far off from thee. 5 Be ready and willing to
hear good counsel be it secretly or openly. 6 Let not blasphemers of God
and despisers of holy things escape from thee unrebuked or unpunished. 7
Toward all Christians be thou a severe and an upright Judge not favoring one
part more then the other. 8 If thou must needs make war, be a protector of
Christ's Church and all innocents. 9 Be not the means of swearing and
forswering, but rather forbid it.
Lastly my Son I exhort and pray she, I leaving this world before thee,
that thou will have a godly, charitable, and dutiful regard toward me.

The precepts be such as it may be wished there were more practisers of the
like.

The wise and virtuous Prince seemed a careful and diligent follower of
ghostly counsel, and namely of this out of Ecclesiasticus. Who so informs
and teaches his Son, greeueth the enemy, and before his friends he may have
joy of him, though the Father die, yet is he as though he were not dead, for he
has left one behind him that is like him.

The bishop of Augusta in his book De via Regia, has this aduertisment unto
parents. When thy Son (says he) shall ask thee which be the ancient
ways, thou shall tell him of the ancient faith, and of the holy and approved
life and good works of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and others the
servant and freindes of God, who by the true and sincere faith, raised the
dead, cleansed the leaporous, and restored sight to the blind.

The like Christian and religious lessons ought to be taught as readily as any
worldly instructions.

That which a man sows that he shall reap.

Let the Father give good examples and he shall reap the fruit thereof, on
the life, manners, and prosperity of his children.

Let him be mild and loving, and he shall taste of the love of God.

Let himself not be stubborn against the will of God and laws, and he shall
find it recompensed in the duty and obedience of his children.

Let him forgive the offenses of reasonable sons, and he shall overcome their
frowardness and ill disposition if the Philosophers words be true, which
says, Filium beneuolentia patris meliorem facit, that is, The beneuolent and
fauouralbe dealing of the Father, makes the son better.

CHAP. II. That Fathers ought not to give ill examples.
AMongs the Lacedaemonians, if two brethren fell at strife between themselves,
the Magistrate awarded that the Father should be punished: for that either he
was the cause of it, or did not prevent it before: or remedy it after. For they
thought the young men were to be pardoned. And if they offended by the
intemperance of youth, their father was to be blamed, whose authority ought to
forsee and provide, that no strife or debate rise between his sons. And
therefore a Father ought to be very careful in nourishing and maintaining
natural love and concord in his family, and in any wise not to suffer any
spark of hatred to enter into their hearts, least it kindle a fire in their
breast: much less ought he to cast in coals of discord among the^ him self
by any unkind or injurious examples of dealing. For the state of a family if
it be in due order, is like to a frame of joining work or building, wherein
if some one piece be out of his place, it tends to a disordering of all the
rest, and one disorder following an other, all becomes out of joint, and
falls unto a confusion very dispraisable. Therefore it seems this saying of
the holy Ghost is not of light regarded. Vae dantibus malum exemplum: woe unto
them that give ill examples, the grieuousnesse whereof the holy Doctor Saint
Augustine rather augmenteth then diminishes, when he says that a man may
slay others by his examples.

Even as the Father begins so it is like the son will proceed, for as the
Philosopher says, Amat vnusquisque sequi vitam parentum: Every man loves to
do as his father did before him. And as Seueca says, There is no wicked act,
but the example of it has been followed. If the Father neglect the express
will of God, who would and ought to strike a stroke, as well in the ordering of
his family, as in the directing of his life, or if he swerve from the usage of
the wisest or best forte of parents preferring his own fancy or wilful
conceit before all other reason, the Son by his example will do the like.
If the Father by an example of injury or disorder, gives an entry to venim of
mind, and hatred of heart in his family, the Son of pronesse unto evil, and
to imitation of his Fathers steps will not be so ready to extinguish and
quench this kindled mischief, but rather add sticks thereto and augment it,
by observing a badde tradition from his ancestors, passing that injury over
to others, which he received himself: namely when by want of good example in
the parent, the regard and awe of law and good order is taken away, and a
gappe opened to the actions of infidelity and inhumanitie.

I say infidelity seeing the life of a Christian consists of two parts:
vidz. faith and good works, of his faith I will not judge: but let his good
works be the meetest trial which are commanded and required, to the glory of
God, to the profit of our neighbor, or to taming of the flesh, and brideling
of the fleshly appetites.

Here is no glory of God regarded, where his will takes no place: and as
little good to come to our neighbor, where he vouchsafes so much hurt to his
own children.

What should I say in this case? above all the fleshly will and appetite is
followed and preferred without forsight of the inconveniences to come thereby,
or any endeavor to avoid them.

And surely if either we were so good Christians as we pretend, or did carry
in us the mind of natural and kind parents,: or but the constant and
hearty affection of a true friend, we should be as ready to make have to
put out and extinguishe an injury, as we would be to put out fire, taking
hold in our neighbors house and ready to flame forth and consume it. For if
an injury be not redressed and taken away in the beginning, it grows and
increases to infinite rage of fury.

But what should I speak of these things, that be matters of Christian
charity, and works of faith: where unto men are not so readily inclined to
perform them, as to talk of them, bidding him blow the coal that is a
cold: every man posteth it over and thinks it pertayneth not to him,
because it belongs as much to others. And therefore in some places of
Christendom, these and the like offices of Christian charity, are appointed
unto sundry companies or fraternities of men.

Unto one sort is committed the care and regard of prisoners upon life and
death: that by their travail and charitable industry, the wretched and
infortunat creatures, may make a happy end and recompense their sorrows and
misfortune, with the blisfull estate of penitent and cleansed souls.

Unto others is committed the charge of reconciling open or privy enemies and
adversaries.

Some are appointed to be workers of reconcilement between men and their
unlawful wives, living a part without just cause of separation or divorce.

Others there he that are enioined to travail and persuade women of loose and
lewd life, to remember themselves and their souls health, and after their
going astray to return home unto the honesty of their parents and duty of
good Christians, and from thenceforth to live an honest and unsuspected life.

These and such like be weak and ruinous places often in the walls of some
states, that might be repaired, if charity were not so cold, and the works
of faith so much decayed in apparaunce, chiefly through ill examples given:
whereof the account will be somewhat heavy and grievous to discharge. Ask the
Lawiers, De iniuriis and damno dato. If any man open a Cesterne or makes a pit
and do not cover it, and in the mean space an Ox, Cow, or some other cattle
faleth therein, I think they will say he is bound to make satisfaction.

O but how much more if the souls of thy children fall by thy ill example. If
we look into the bequeathed examples of some Fathers, what a Chaoe and
disorder might there be noted, either wrought by their perverse dealing, or by
the malice and unhappiness of a woman perverting al. Strifes and iarres left
in steed of kindly accord: hatred and maliciousnes occupying the place of
brotherly love, wrangling and wresting one from another, in steed of helping
and comforting.

Socrates did bid young men to look in a glass, to the end that finding
themselves well formed and of good shape, they might beware to do any thing
that was unseemly for that natural grace, and if they were of ill shape, they
might endeavor to supply and recompense their bodily defect with some virtue
and quality of the mind. Even so would I wish that some parents should
look into the example of the best sort as into a glass, and it the find
themselves deformed and blemished by any unkind actions or naughty examples,
they may recompense it with beneuolent and Fatherly dealings.

CHAP. III. That Fathers ought not to provoke their children to wrath and
disobedience.
COtys King of Thrace a man inclined by nature to be angry and wrathful, and
therewithal a severe corrector of such as chanced to offend or commit a
fault in serving him: on a time, a stranger brought him for a present certain
fine vessels of earth glased, very curiously wrought, and delicate to
behold. He rewarded the bringer, but straight ways cast the vessels against
the wall. Others about him maruailing that he did so, marry quoth he, I do it,
because they shall not make me angry with them that shall happen to break
them. He knew his own disease, and therefore wisely prevented the hurt and
displeasure likely to happen, by avoiding the means and occasion. Now for as
much as wrath, is an immoderate perturbation, that hardens the affection and
makes the forces of a man violent, being sometimes the cause of manslaughter,
and sometimes of other calamity, yea some times the original and beginning of
treason, and if it fly not so high the best that comes of it is disquiet,
loss, or discredit: who would not by possible means avoid the provoking of
an affection so troublesome and so bad in an other man's house or with them with
whom he has nothing to do? much rather ought he to keep such a guest out of
his own house which is the greatest enemy a man can have: For it makes a man
that should seem reasonable and of decent behavior and doings, to show like a
tree set a fire which is like never after to bear good fruit, or otherwise he
may be likened to a bark or ship subjected to the rage of a cruel storm,
and thereby in great hazard of perishing. The Apostle S. Paul Hebr. 12.
knowing such an infirmity to bear sway in many persons, gave a ghestly
admonition to prevent it, saying: See that no man be destitute of the grace of
God, and that no root of bitterness spring up and trouble you, for thereby many
be defiled. But Valerius Marimus exceeds some what the modesty of this
sentence, and says, that wrath and hatred do stir up great floudes in the
hearts of men, for whom such disguising passions be most unseemly as may
appear by this verse of the Poet:

Candida pax homines trux decet iraferas: Sure it is that one man is nearest
kin unto an other, how may a parent be as a stranger or adversary to his own
son? No man hates his own flesh: Ephe. I mean such as be in the flesh or
live after the flesh: except you will speak of Martyrs and such as set little
of the flesh, because there is an other thing preferred with them. And yet
hatred of the flesh in them is rather to be understood of the vices, than of
their own flesh. Saint Paul knowing the vndiscretenesse of many parents and
the ill success and fruitelesse end of their bitter speeches and violent
dealing with their children, was not unmindful of the childrens cause for the
fathers instruction in his Epistle, Col. 3. Fathers says he, beware how ye
revile or rigorously deal with your children least ye put them into a
desperate mind, therefore we may say it is good to tender as much as you may
the preservation of kindly love and good will betwixt ye, even in your
childrens tender years, and whiles they be yet under your law and correction,
give no occasion of disloue or grief taking for unkind words or dealing.
Keep out of your house these fire brandes of wrath and anger, which prouooke
unto disobedience in words or deeds. But much rather let not you infirmity
or maliciousness, be expressed against them of more than ripe years: for
there an unkindness is conceived more deeply. Remember you offend not
against the eight commandment which says, Non loquaris contra proxim^^m tuum
falsum testimonium, Thou shall not speak false witness against thy neighbor.
If by your railing and bitter words ye prouooke your children to wrath and
from wrath to disobedience, some Doctors interpret extreme speeches and
prouocations to mortal falling out, so straightly and severely that they say
and write, Nihil interest verum ferro an verbo occidas, There is no difference
whether you slay with weapon or by word, and therefore seeing the amendment of
ill manners must come from your selves by your good example of tolleration or
forbearing, set the coldenesse and experienced judgment of your years, and
the mildness of that nature which pertayneth to Parents against their broyling
heat and rashness, Ex duobus contrariis fit optimum temperamentum. Of two
contraries (says Philosophy) is made a goodly temperature. And no doubt the
faults of children are s^^ner cured and reformed by gentle words and mild
persuasions, than by furious fits of anger and violence. It you see faults and
imperfections in your children, either they took them of you or else you have
as badde in your selves: Crates the Philosopher held it was impossible to
find any man that is not faulty in some points, comparing man generally to a
Pome granate when he is at best, which from thencefoorth has always some
rotten grains like unto men's faults and ill qualities, which be not cured by
wrath and evil words, but by counsel and friendly admonition. And herein a
father ought to show him self like a Physician, who does not use to handle
his cures with raging and railing, but rather bethinketh him what he may
minister best for their health, finding for the most part every intemperate
humor or cause best to be cured by his contrary.

CHAP. IV. That Fathers ought to deal kindly and faithfully and not
preiudicially or fraudulently toward their children.
A Certain friend admonished Agesilans the Lacedemonian King (as yet but newly
come to the dignity) that he would now remember his preeminent state, and lay
aside some part of his hard manner of living, and use some more majesty and
delicateness in his diet, lodging and apparel: he answered, nay not so, I
will be always one manner of man because fortune is so chaungeable. Such was
the constancy and faithful heart of this wise Prince toward his subjects,
that he could hardly be brought to any inward or outward alteration, though
the change of his estate, did in a manner forbid him to continue his former
course. But this is always found to be true: look where there is love, there
is also faith and trustiness. He was now become the universal Parent of his
Country, and therefore needs must he love, and deserving the name of a
loving Parent, how may he become unfaithful.

Truly there be many, in whom the law of nature and the love of GOD both take
so little hold, and works so small and slender effects of kindness or
christianity, that they may scarce shrowde or show themselves under the name
of true friends or friendship: such is their hollownesse of heart, dissembling
in words, and fraud in dealings. I will not say, that such be counterfeitors
of friendship, because that is a fault worse then the forging of false money.
For he that takes a little forged coin for good, his damage is not great:
but to take or have a fained friend in stead of one true, constant, and
faithful, the hurt must needs be great, and the grief more. Well may we
complain with the Poet in this verse:

Heu quam parua fides reperitur nunc apud ciues? Trusty faithfulness in many
parents decays, whose words, by the rule and example of good men, ought to
be as much worthy in credit and account, as the oaths of strangers. Such as
in their works and examples declare themselves inconstant in fatherly love,
and so double in their actions, are justly measured by this rule of Solomon
Proverbs the twelfe, A true mouth is ever constant, but a dissembling tongue is
soon changed. O how soon are many fathers altered from the natural love and
inward affection toward their children, if they fall once to be entertained
with the gleekes of gallant glosers, and to be wantonlie wrapped in love and
liking of new spowses of Bigamie. What will they not do to please their
appetites? Whom will they not hate to gain their dissembled favors? The
weight of a Kingdom could not alter or change Agesilaus from being one
manner of man unto his family, and such as were under him: but the weight of a
woman can counterpoise woonderfully with some of these, and weigh them quite
from the ground of nature and honest constancy. But no marvel, since it is of
old experience, that love makes great alteration and conquest, according unto
this plain Latin verse:

Caecat amor mentes, and interdumsapientes. Love blinds minds, ^ ad
sometimes makes wsse men to dote. Saint Bernarb writing unto his parents,
says, He can not come near unto wisdom that gives himself to sleep or
to dote: and they do sleep or dote, that do give themselves over to
sensuality: daily forgoing good counsel and gifts of grace which is the best
tresure they have. Samson sleeping in Dalidas lap lost his strength. May
those hushands or parents trow you be deemed rulers of themselves and their
forces, that with so small resistance yield them to the dominion and tyranny
of amorous folly, making shipwreck of their reason, and whatsoever virtue and
valor is in them besides? But of such lither and flerible folk it is likely
it will at length fare with them as it did with Amon the son of David, who
was so in love with Thamar his own sister, that he fained himself to be
sick, and to surfeit with love till he had defiled her, and from thenceforth he
never loved her so ardently, as now he began to hate and loath her. So, when
these men through the light of reason, and illumining of grace, shall perceive
in hows great a labyrinth of error and wrong persuasion of women's will and
wiliness they have wandered contrary to reason and sound advise, or as soon
as GOD shall touch their heart with grace and repentance of their carnal
folly and immoderate serving of the flesh, they will begin to remember
themselves in the duty of kind parents.

By the Council Gangrense it was decreede, that if any man (though it were by
occasion of giving over the world, and entering into religion) did neglect to
have a due care for his children, as well for the godly enforming of them, as
also touching that which pertained to them otherwise, anathema sit, Let him be
accursed. But we must think great difference between neglecting them through
a certain religious contemning of worldly things, and the casting of them
off, by reason of the appetite of new love. But yet there is a much more
difference to be understood between^ negligent regard, and careful respect
had toward children, or such as be under our charge. Which ill example before
recited and reproved, may well be counteruailed with this contrary.
Epaminondas a famous Duke or Captain of the Grecians, going forth to an
exploite of war, his wife desired him to look well unto himself. He
answered, This is an advise fit for other men, and not for me: for he that
takes on him a charge as I do, his part is to look well to the safety of
them that be under him, seeing many are more to be respected then one?

If we will not with this bishoplike Duke prefer the safety and better
worldly state of our children and family, before the regard and satisfying of
our carnal desire and wanton appetite, so unseasonable or so inconvenient, yet
at least let us respect the health of their souls, before the inco^stant and
vain love of any earthly person. Diogenes that was so poor in worldly
substance, and so rich in wisdom, and gifts of grace certifieth us, that God
loves them that be disobedient to their private lusts. And to say the truth,
so a man ought to be: if not for so high a cause, yet of this baser respect in
avoiding hurts and inconveniences sensibly perceived to ensue to himself, and
his first children. Which in deed were the part of a faithful friend
compared unto gold or silver. And what faith, I pray you, ought there to be
between parents and their children, where we must acknowledge a bond of nature
that binds both parts? The law rule is, In vain does any man require faith or
promise to be kept by him, to whom himself refuses to keep faith. But in
such a case the dishonestie will be the more, if the stronger show himself the
weaker, in breaking first. Wherefore, for sundry respects worldly and divine,
it is of all good men to be wished or advised, that Parents attempt not first
the breaking of this band chiefly to their own harm, but even as the sight of
a scarre in an other man's face gives them warning to beware of wounds lighting
on themselves, so they beholding or remembering other men's errors, and euil^es
in this behalf past, the same by Gods grace and assistance may cause them to
take the better heed, in avoiding the like mischiefs of their own or their
family to come.

CHAP. V. Of fathers or parents, who dispose their goods or lands after their
private will and fancy without due regard of nature, reason, and order.
THe gladsome and joyful temperature of the morning was long since half
forgotten: the height of the Sun is in declination: the heat of the day is
past: the evening draws on, every creature begins to go unto his rest.
Man that has passed the whole course of this world, which is, for the most
part, equally mirte with sorrow and joy, what has he labored or spent his
time for, if he find not rest at his ending? As for the things wherein he
delighted, he finds them all but vain, and after alittle while, are quite
vanished, save only his good deeds and his bad. These bide by him, and will
not lightly be separated from him. Penance, or repentance ought now to be most
in his purpose: his negligence therein will now appear.

Night comes on, and as the Apostle says unto the Galathians chap. 6. Me
oporter operari cum dies est, v^nit enim nox quando operari nemo potest. I must
work whiles it is day, for no man can work when night comes.

Be the day never so long,
at length it will ring to Even song.
But who is sure to make out a whole days work, and to enjoy the fruition of
man's common age? seeing it is said in Eccl. 9. Nescit homo finem suum, sed
sicut aues capiun^ur laeq^r^, and pisces ha^o. Man knows not his end, but is
ou^rtaken even as bir^es be with the snare, and fishes with the hook. Every
man is judged wise or foolish by the manner of his ending: for one day denies
and controlleth an other, but the last day gives indgement of all the rest A
man at his ending has two ways to look unto: Backewards to his sins,
offenses, and negligences past, and Forwards by setting a good order in his
family, and well disposing of things for peace, quietness, and other godly
effects to come. His life time, good health, and best remembrance, is fittest
for the one, and the eueningtide of his iourny in this world, is not too late
for the other. Pythagoras said, that Gold is tried by fire, A woman by Gold
(that is, whether she be good or not) and man by woman, viz. whether he be
constantly natural and well minded toward his children, and good to his own
soul. For he that neglects his children, as says the divine Poet Horace,
depriueth him self of immortality. By the want of children his shape,
phisnomy, name, and memorial perishes: fith in the renewing and upholding of
the work of nature, the same is freshly renewed and maintained. Wherein, I pray
you, is the effect of true friendship lasting after death, better and more
surely to be verefied, then between a kind parent deceased, and his children?
which by an Emblem may be resembled to a dry or dead tree garnished and
adorned with a green and well prospering Vine, and specially by such as
resemble the parent, not only in phisnomie (which is the best assured token of
true dealing) but also in steps of honesty and worldly towardnes.

King Alexander was of that humane and princely mind, that he would say: A man's
riches are no where so well laid up and safely kept, as in the hands of his
friends. Where should a parent then bestow them, but on his own soul, or
upon the life and releeuing of his children? Shall he now give ear to any
covetous or excessive request of a woman? Shall her deceitful tears make him
to swerve from the mind and purpose of a kind father, and the covenant of
nature it self? No not so. He must now lay aside fancy, and overcome his
own will. And there is no greater and more laudable victory, then for a man
to vanquish himself, by yielding unto the reason and authority of nature,
law, and the will of God.

For sure it is, that the love of a covetous woman would long agone have ended,
if goods had failed: and to say truth, for the most part, so does the love
of the man dominish, if not utterly end, when beaurie decays. Shall I
regard her tears? No, for they be of two sorts, the one of grief, the other
of deceit. For a little goodness she will look forsooth to have a great
reward, little remembering herself what evil she has done, and had never
any chastisement for it. As the holy Doctor says, he that helps the evil,
hurts the good: but we may say, he that enricheth a stepmother, helps a
stranger and hinders his own: yea perhaps fourdeth his wealth unto his
ennemie, and scarcity unto them of his own flesh and offspring. See here the
perverseness of many men in their like dealinges, by following fancy, and
obeying their own will, wherein it seems the wise Philosopher Plato was
nothing deceived when he said, He that is inclined to follow his will, is
near the wrath of GOD. For the brideling, restraining, or moderating of which
will God by his Ministers here in earth has let an order by civil, canon, and
national laws.

There be sundry persons that can not alienate their goods, nor make wills.
Likewise there be things of some nature or quality in the possessing and
property of them, that they may not be alienated or transiated unto the
commodity or property of an other, according unto the will, fancy and
favoring of him that last possessed them. Also there be some Countries and
Cities, which, either forbid wills to be made, or else by their Custom do
make and appoint wills for men, because they shall not follow their own
will. The prodigal person; the bon^man, the guilty of treason, nor the
approved heretic can not dispose any thing by their w^^^s.

By the construction of the Divines, who is not prodigal and a mis^ponder of
those gifts, which. GOD has bestowed upon him? Who is not a bondsman? Qui
facit peccatum seruus est peccati, John the eight Chapter. He that commits
sin is the servant or bondsman of sin, and to confirm that saying more
plantely take these words of Saint Peter 1.2. A quo quis superatus est eius
sernus est. Of whom soever any man is overcome, to him is he bound. The
unfaithful or misbeleeuing Christian, is hardly charged with treason committed
against the celestial Emperor. And therefore has Saint Augustine In li. de
ouibus. Vigilate hereties audite a pastore testamentum pacis: Venite adpacem:
irascimini Christianis Jmperatoribus quia testamenta vestra valere noluerunt in
domibus vestris: dolor est: admonitio est, non dum damnatio, dicit tibi Deus
noli frauds querere. Vis stare testamentum tuum? Stet in te meum. The things
before mentioned that may not be translated or bestowed after the will of the
possessors, are the ecclesiastical goods and fruits. For seeing all Churchly
authority is to e^^fie and to destroy, a clerk might not by ecclesiastical
constitutions, make his will otherwise then according to their order and
vocation. For he might not enrich his carnal brethren or kinsfolk, although
he might give them victum and vestitum, that is, food and apparel, by reason
that the ecclesiastical things were called and reputed oblationes: quia domino
offeruntur. And therefore said those laws non debent in aliis vsibus quam
ecclesiasticis vel christianorum fratrum indigentium conuerti: quia vota sunt
fidelium and precia peccatorum and patrimonia pauperum. The saying of Saint
Ambrose is somewhat fearful upon this point, As riches (says he) to some
men (through misbestowing of them) be an an occasion of damnation, so in good
men's hands (by their well bestowing) they be helps of virtue. The cause I
have thus digressed and mentioned of these matters, which seem not plainly
retaining to this point of santasticall or wilful willing and disposing of the
parents substance or goods, is partly to induce and prove that the freewill
and fancy of some sorts of men are restrained by the laws Ecclesiastical and
Imperial in all countries. But of all sorts of men at least prescribed and
bounded in some Countries.

Also by all laws and in all Countries, that is a rule of reason to be
regarded among Christian men. Who so has power to dispose goods, ought rather
to have right consideration toward the causes to be respected in them that
stand at his devotion then to his own power. Since it is the saying of a wise
man quanto liceat tanto libeat minus, As the goods of the church in time past
were thought not properly to pertain to lay persons, so the goods of any
parent cannot temporally be bestowed on any persons more properly, then upon
his own children according to order of their age, and as the wisest and best
sort of men are wont to do.

Now to touch somewhat the duty of good and natural children, it is to wit,
that this word filius or filia son or daughter comes of the word Philos in
Greek, which is love or lover. And that son or daughter which expresses not
love toward the parent, as well when he is departed this world, as whiles
he is present, I wotte not which is wors^e in him, either his ungodliness or
his ingratitude, but seeing ingratitude is ungodliness, it were good that
children know it well that they may the better anoid the blot thereof. It is a
vice which in some good commen wealths has been punished as readily as any
others if it were in the highest degree.

The first and lowest degree of unthankfulness is, not to requite a benefit.

The second to dispraise or disdain it in respect of the thing.

The thir^e to forget a benefit.

But the fourth degree is rendering evil for good.

The Storkes for the natural kindness received, will bear their parent on
their back when he is old, and feeds him if he be not able to stir
abroad for his lining. In hye Castile these patterns of kind parentage are
to be seen, breeding in the top almost of every Church, tower or steeple:
of likelyhoode favored and fostered there of purpose for that lesions sake,
which that bird can teach man.

And although the duty of children is to help and succor their parents if
they should need, yet by law and order they are appointed rather to receive
benefits of their Parents, than to give vpwardes. For well you wot that love,
benefits, and all other good things are wont to descend. Law will not that
the father be the sons heir, but wills rather that the father should
restore that to his posterity which himself received from his ancestors.

Wherefore since no gift or token of benevolence is more fitter for children to
bestow, or for the parents and benefactors to receive, than the benefit of
hearty and daily prayer, it shall not be much amiss for all dutiful children
to remember their debt in that point after the form of the Grammar case rule.

Nominatino. First to pray for your self that you may be so ghostly
strengthened that you fall ^ot into mortal sin by frailty, and that you may
have right knowledge of God by faith. Genitiuo. For your Progenitors as
Parents, brothers, sisters, and kinsfolk. Datiuo. For your benefactors.
Accusatiuo. For your enemies. Vocatiuo. For them that be in error or
infidelity, that they may come to the right way of their salvation. Ablatiuo.
For them that be absent.
Saint Paul unto Timoth. says, If any man have not a care for them of his
own family, he is an infidel. And therefore he says in an other place, Si
quid patitur vnum membrum compatiuntur omnia membra. If one member be in pain
all the rest be not without anguish or grief.

O good God, who is so hard hearted that will not have compassion or christian
regard on his parent, kinseman, or friend, if he thought him in the case of
straight imprisonment or if he wist he were in any miserable or dangerous
state where prayer or friendship might help or do him good? The state of a
man in misbeleefe, infidelity, or security in sinning without tokens of
repentance, and amendment is dangerous God wot, and not without need of
assistance by hearty and earnest prayer of faithful friends and natural
children.

For we must believe that God will punish sin, and all other impiety: else
why does he threaten sinners so sharply by that example in the 5. of Matthew.
Amen: dico vobis non exies inde donec solueris nouissimum quadrantem: that is,
Verily I say unto you, thou shall not depart thence until thou have paid the
uttermost farthing. I see not how you can partake with parents, brothers, or
kinsfolk in nature, and have no feeling of their sinefull life, erroneous
condition, or other their pitiful state in your compassion and commiseration.
But even as you deal toward them unto whom ye owe any charitable or natural
duty, so shall they serve you at whose ^euotion you shall happen to stand.
Then with the same measure ye meat unto others, it is to be doubted, will be
measured to you again, somewhat according to the words of Naomie to Ruth
saying: cap. 1. Faciat vobiscum Deus misericordiam suam sicut fecistis cum
mortuis.

The second part bewrays the malignitie of a Stepdame, the monstrous
transfourming of the Father, and the often calamity of the first children.
CHAP. VI. Of the ungentle dealing of some stepmothers toward their husbands
first children.
WHen a Father so little remembers or regards the bond of nature and
faithful dealing of a kind parent, that he forbeareth not to bring into his
family a Stepdame, he can not do a thing of better liking to his foes (if he
have any such that foresee it) and wish ill betiding unto him and his. For what
may bring unto a City or house more harm or inconvenience, than discord,
which divides a house and makes of one City two? Intestine division is ever
counted worse than the malignitie of outward foes, as war is accounted worse
than peace.

In discord no man prayseth the Lord, As witnesses Saint Ambrose. What
blessing then do they deprive us of, that take away peace and good agreement.
Well may some children complain with the Poet in this case, who says in his
pleasant meeter: Sunt tria gaudia, pax, sapientia, copia rerum,
Haec tria diluit, haec tria destruit ars mulierum.


This Stepmother by the pretense and name of marriage is called in Latin, Vxor,
quasi vnxor, a Wife, as it were an Annoynter, for that the new married Spowse
in old time at her first coming home was wont to annoint the poastes and
principal parts of the house in token that she came to heal and cure all
faults or to remove sorrow and to plant and increase gladness in the place.
But I frowe this our Stepdame at this day annoynteth not with the oil of
gladness, nor with the unction of the holy spirit, by whom so much sorrow is
many times brought in, and so many ungodly effects wrought and increased. Call
ye this annoynting? she annoynteth in deed: but unhappy be those posts and
parts of the house where she lays her unlucky hands, as Euripides says,
Stepdames seeldome with and wo^ke any good to their hu^bands children, and too
much experience teaches, they be their utter overthrow, and cause of
confusion. For what be their ordinary practices in manner as principles of then
partment policy? For sooth first and chiefly to bring their husbands
children out of conceit and favor, to frame the matter so, that they may be
counted disobedient and by that means to wipe from the^ all good will. They
think they must not suffer so much a let and block in their way to their
husbands wealth as the bulworke of love and concord. This is a great eye sore
and hardly tolerable with them. This they imagine they must assault and assay
to batter and beat down by the best engine they have: they can bend against it
Cannon shot of great displeasure, they are sufficiently furnished with powder
of a malicious and wicked spirit, nor want they any shot of quarrelous devises
to perce and shake this poor remnant of kindly good will with kindled strife
and contention. Of this kind they can sharp them new supplies from time to
time, specially if they have their husbands well tempered to their humor and
appetite, then may it be said of the poor enchanted men, as we find it in the
Psalm: Os habent, and non l^quuntur: aures, and non audiunt: oculos, and non
vident. They have mouths, and speak not: cares, and may not hear: eyes, and
will not see. They stand in dread and awe they wot who must be foothed in all
things or else will follow but cold kissing, she claims all the love and
goodwill to her self, and if she understood Latin she would choose this good
verse for her husband, to measure his love by it.

Est tibi plus catus quam Papae Pontificatus. She may bear no partaker of her
husbands honest love, where she rules as Queen. She is to be counted very
favorable if she procure them no hatred, or vouchsafe it not her self. These
Stepmothers be against their wills great teachers of Philosophy, but their luck
is ill in making sew good Philosophers. The cause is, for that they (for the
most part) wish and would that all their husbands children were rather fools
than witty, or well deserving: so well it would make for their part and
purpose. And because they be themselves parties of so good merise, one
Callimachus mentions in an Epigram, that a young fellow whose Stepdame was
lately deceased, would have placed over her Toome or Hearse (I wot not of what
mourning intent) a fresh and fair garlande: it happended so that by moving or
meddling with the Hearse or Toomestone, it fell on his legs, and did him such
hurt that he never recovered it after. By which example, Stepdames are to be
feared and taken heed of, even when they be dead. What should I say? there
is in Stepdames so much wiliness and boldness to attempt even the utter most
mea^es of exterminating and undoing of their husbands children, that in all
ages and degrees there have been son in laws brought to ruin and
destruction by them. I wot not whether I should impute it more to the husbands
effeminatenesse and folly, than to the woman's wily woorking and dexterity.
Juno though a goddess counted afterward, bearing the like love to her
husbands some Hercules, whiles he was yet but in his cradle, vouchsafed to
shift into him two venomous adders, in steed of two pretty birds, for the little
boy to play with: but by the mercy and providence of God, who defends
innocents which are sine macula ante thronum Dei, the poor child was sound
safe without hurt, clipping fast the two snakes in each hand one.

But this was not all she skath and sorrow she wrought him, for besides this,
when he came to man's state and perfection, those monstrous toils which were
called Hercules labors, were devised by her, and enjoined to him to perform
and accomplish. The Britain King Vortimer the son of Vortiger, was poisoned
by Rawen his Stepdame.

The Saxon King, Edward the son of Edgar, was killed on his horseback by
procurement of Elphreda his deceased Fathers wife, because she would have her
son Etheldred King. But might there be no more examples brought forth of the
like bad dealinges in former ages, then such as are only registered of Kings?
Or be there not in our present age many meaner mischievous dealings of as bad
testimony for this purpose? No doubt yes: but this is enough to enforce any
indifferent man to be of this opinion: that as an evil man may be compared
with many women that be counted good, so does a Stepdame little differ from
the just proportion of an evil woeman. And often times the hatred both of the
one and the other, is borne against them that be good even for truth or
goodness sake.

Truly enough it may be said after the sentence of some wise men, There is
no evil more grievous than a Stepmother. It was therefore ordained as a law
by Charondas a law giver among the Grecians, that Whosoever brought unto his
children a Stepmother, the same father should be without the favor and
reputation of bearing any office in the common wealth. Neither was his
judgment or opinion herein to be thought singular or private, which was
receiueb as an inviolable law to a wise Nation. And of the like mind was
Euripides the Philosopher a man counted of no less wisdom and fame, when he
said: Qui liberis suis Nouercam superinduxit, non honor dignus, sed infamis
sit, vipote dissentionis author that is to say, who so brings a Stepdame
upon his children, let him not be worthy of worship or reputation, but
rather counted infamous.

Phineus King of Arcadia, bringing a Stepdame unto his children, she wrought
so, that in short space she procured the eyes of some of them to be put out.
For the which act God was displeased with him, and deprived the King of his
own sight, and for a worse punishment, when soever he should go to his meat,
there did usually come certain cruel birds or spirits like Harepies, to
scratch the meat out of his hands and mouth, whereby he was so vexed and
pined in his diet, that he lived not long time after.

The word Stepdame is not of unkind calling, but of hard and injurious
dealing. For we can not truly call her a mother, who shows her self rather
a persecuter then a Nurse and comforter. It is a saying, or resolute Sentence
of him that ye call Master of the Sentences, Non sunt filij sanctorum qui
loca tenent sanctorum, sed qui imitantur opera sanctorum.

These be not the somes of holy men or successors of holy Bishops that occupy
their Seats and places, but such as follow their steps and doings. Likewise
we may say these be not mothers, because they be coupled with fathers, but such
are to be called mothers, as succeed them in motherly dealing and kindness.
But that is not agreeable unto the nature and property of a stepmother: who
for the most part is inclined rather under the shape and mild looks of a Dove,
to bear at length the stinging tail of a Scorpion.

Then what is the remedy? Even as there be many euilles done or borne with
under the name of Justice, so I wot not how we may resist or avoid these
sundry inconveniences hatched and shrouded under the name and solemnity of
marriage. But this is to be wished, that fathers in such case should somewhat
strive to master their own fleshly affections, that they do avoid such
mischiefs as he over dear bought, Ecclesiast says, A wise man has his eyes
in his head, and not in the ground, nor below the girdle, that is to say, he
has regard to soul health, and concord of his house, and other ghostly good
of his samilie if he will. Which otherwise does redounde the more unto his
blame and sinful defaulte. It is a saying of Saint Gregory: Non potest esse
pastoris excusatio, si lupus oues commedit and pastor nescit. It can not be a
sufficient excuse for a Pastor or Governor, when his flock is devoured by
the Woolfe to say he knew not of it. And when children are infected with
grudging malice, dissension, and disobedience, brought quite out of kindly
love and favor: and deprived of such comfort and benefit as otherwise might
come unto them, it is not a full excuse for the father to say: It was her
doing, and not mine. I found best ease or contentment, by suffering her for
to bear the sway, and for to have her own will. Or thus. It was my fortune,
and who may resist the ordinance of GOD? Forsooth a goodly excuse, by a gay
gloss, when he does blame GOD for his own fancy and folly, and imputes the
fault of his farewell to Fortune, which wrought no more in his matter then the
Cross in Cheap side, or the Pasquill at Rome. Well does he deserve the
reprehension of Chaweer in this piece of meeter following:

He that builds his house all of Sallowes,
And pricketh his blind horse over the fallowes,
And suffers his wife to go seek hallowes.
Is worthy etc.
But this saying seems too light for the greatness of some anens expectation.
Let them take this of more weight and gravity out of S. Mat. 18. Vae homini
illi per quem scandalum venit, expedit ei vt suspendatur mola a^aria in collo
eius, and de ^iergatur in profundum maris. Woe be unto that man by whom
offenses come, it were better that a millstone be hanged about his neck, and he
drowned in the bottom of the Sea. Lastly, to conclude on this point briefly
with these few words, from whence come these evil fruits and effects of a
Stepdame, but from the will and affection of him that might have avoided them,
or else had it in his power to resist, expel, or moderate them?

CHAP. VII. That Stepdames ought not to be privy or false accusers of their
husbands children.
THe most nimble and cunning dice plaiers, are not wont altogether to trust to
their lucky casting and good chances of the dice, whereby to make the best game
of the skill, but do find it often a principal help and furtherannce if they
can carry the gain and game away with lying, facing and perjury. As women by
nature are all counted weak: so some of them are borne malicious beyond
measure: especially if they come in place where they may effectually utter it:
Hereof it comes that stepdames prevail much in bringing their injurious
purpose to pass, by forging faults in their husbands children. by launching
out lies and by facing out of forgery. As backebiting, lying, and flattering,
are always found sworn companions together, so gay glosing, supplanting of
favor, and false accusing, are seldom separate from stepdames, that can wring
out hereof much commodity at their fingers ends.

They that travail woods and deserts have need to look to themselves and
beware of surprising of lions, bears, and tygres: But at home in Cities and
private country houses, some folk have as much need to take heed of privy
slanderous reports, false accusers and underminers, they that be of this
practice have not yet learned or well borne away this moral and divine
precept, Quod tibi non vis fieri alteri ne feceris. That which would not
have done to thee, do not to another, we ought to measure other men's profit
or hurt, force or infirmity, faults or well deseruings by our own. The
Canonist says, Mortalis est omnis illalatio falsi test imonij quae fit animo
notabiliter unjust no cendi ia bonis spiritualibus aut temporalibus, (that is)
All bearing of false witness, is sin unto death, if it be done of a mind
much to hurt another wrongfully in his temporal goods or spiritually.

What is the purpose or intent of a Stepdame, when by forging false accusations
and wrong interpretation or constructions of words privily: she brings
those ^^^dren to be abiected and cast off, that have not deserved i^^^ but
only because as a Stepdame she would step between and defraude them of
such goods or benefits as her greedy appetite will not suffer her to forgo?
is it deadly sin? Let it be so: she cares little for that, so she may
have her will and satisfy her covetousness and lusty desire.

But it is termed deadly, because it slaieth the Soul, yea, but she is so
wise and well armed, that she dreadeth not, and of so hard a conscience that
she feels no such wound. I suppose her armed in this action and property,
because Solomon says, Who so bears false witness against his neighbor he
or she, is a very spear a sword or a sharp arrowe. What is meant hereby,
other then that the deeds of such be pearcing and perilous, but that he
falls unto them which chances many times to the foolish and unadvised,
that hurt them selves with the same adge tool, wherewith they strike or prick
at others. The twenty six Chapter of the Proverbs notes the manner and usage
of the like folk, resembling or comparing them to some Virago or mischievous
manslear, that shoots deadly or poisoned arrows and darts out of a privy
place: for so deals a dissembler or privy biter with his neighbor. If you
will know how acceptable and well pleasing unto God these make-bates and false
accusers be, whether they be Stepmothers, suborned practicers, malignant
contriuers, or others, you may believe the sixth of the Proverbs in these
words: A dissembling tongue, a false witness that brings up lies and such a
one as sows d^^cord among brethren, these be such as the Lord hates.

And although God of his mercy, or further respect of revenge, does forbear
and defer the punishment of many iniquities, which are reserved to himself
and not severely executed by any Justice in this world, yet sometimes it
pleases him for man's warning and instruction, to give tokens of his divine
pleasure for such offenses that be wicked and unjust. I mean false accusing
and wrong surmising, you may read the reports of sundry writers, that do
witness a wonderful work of God wrought upon a woman of nobility, for a like
offense committed rather but of lightness and rawnes, then of purposed malice
to hurt any person therewith. And because particular men's words be often times
distrusted, I will direct you to a sensible testimony, whereof a multitude no
doubt till this day are alive to be eye witnesses. At the Monastery of Losdune
besides Delphe in Holland, is the Toome of the Lady Margeret Courtesse, so
miraculous to be remembered, whereupon is, or of late years was an Epitaph
written or engraven thus.

Here lies Margeret the daughter of Florentius Earl of Holland, and of
Maudeline his wife, who was the daughter of Henry duke of Brabant, which
Margeret beign of the age of forty two years An. 1276. on good Friday at nine
of the clock died, being in travail brought forth confused or myngled male
and female, one with another 364. children at one birth together, which as
soon as they had all received baptism of the Bishop, in the presence of a
great company of ge^tlemen and head officers of the country, all the males
being called by the name of John, and the females Joan, they every one of them
with their mother departed this life, their So^le ^o li^e eternal with God,
whose bodies lie buried here under this marble stone.

The occasion whereupon it pleased God to show his miraculous power upon this
Lady in this manner is with the rest reported to be, for that within certain
months before, a poor woman bearing in her arms two children of one burden,
and begging her devotion, she did disdainefully defame or rather falsely accuse
her of misliuing: saying that it was not possible or likely, that she should
have two children lawfully at one birth, whereupon it is said, the poor
woman praid God that the Lady might have as many children at a burden as there
be days in the year. Which accident did not much fail to verify the divine
promise uttered in the ninth of the Proverbs. The innocent dealing of the just,
shall lead or deliver them, but the unfaithfulness of the despisers shall be their
end or destruction.

The truth of the matter seems as open and evident as a werte in a man's face.
The persons be named, the place is noted, and none of these obscure.

CHAP. VIII. That Stepmothers ought not to supplant or procure disheriting of
their husbands eldest Sons.
DIonisius king of Cicill, when he saw his mother who was well stepped in years,
to have gotten her an other husband, and thereby to bring her sobriety and
former chaste behavior in question, gave forth this sentence upon that action
of her liking, saying: Truly my friends we may violate and break the laws of
our country and perhaps escape unpunished, but my mother would break the law
of nature and that is either impossible or inconvenient for her to do. But
king Dionisius was not in the case to complain of those evils and
inconveniences which are wont to succeed of second marriages, he stood not at
his mother devotion, neither might it much prejudice him by her marriage: only
he seemed to blame her for attempting to break the law of nature, which is the
firmest law, by abandoning her self to the flesh at those years, and by
entering into a purpose that is wont to alienate natural love, and to alter
motherly affection: changing them both perhaps for their co^traries. And to say
the troth, for ye most part children have not so much cause to dislike with
their own mothers second marying, as with their fathers: seeing by the dicease
of the Father they have that which pertains, or they might look for: but not
so when the mother departs first. For in that case there is a new world
toward, and a turning of al vpsice down, if the Father be not constant in
observing the law of nature, and provident in avoiding such evils and
hindrances, as by another marrying are like to ensue to his present children,
Mulieris emulatio totam turbat domum, says Plautus, the covetous and
contentious endeavor of a Stepmother, will make all his children sing woe and
weal away, she purposes to bestow her time and night work so well, that she
will raise up new plants and fruit that shall soon be ripe, but in the
mean time she will be so bold, as to crop the others and to keep them as much
as she can from any good increase, and over this at length perhaps utterly to
supplant and pluck them up quite by the roots. But soft you dame stay the
brilde a while, and let me look if all be well for your surer sitting. I wot
a woman's wisdom is for the most in her will, and her conscience in her cubbord.
I may grant your virtue and honesty to be much, but Ecclesiasticus says:
there is no wickedness to the wickedness of a woman. Are you married? I ask you
because we find some marriages godly and some no more then honest, some to be
wicked, and some scarcely good, some well approved, and some no more then
tolerable, some be Bigamy by marrying one woman, and some marie twice for one
wife, but all men most confess it is a badde matrimony, that is not better
then whoredom or fornication. Can you love your husband and hate his
children? Can you honor him or vow to seek his honesty by undoing them? Do
you perform the vow of your obedience, when by all means you can, you make him
to obey and follow your injurious will? Are you a Christian by profession, and
yet in works will show your self worse then a Turk of Thrace or
Constantinople, that will not persecute Christian infants, but nourish and
bring them up? are you received to be endewed by the law, and yet will wrestle
to abuance your part with the spoil and impouerishing of them whom rather you
are bound by honesty to defend? To get as much as you can to your share by
flattery and injury: this you say is your conscience, and this is your
counsel: truly it is but a sorry counsel, and second conscience meet for a
second marriage. For there is another marriage to be preserred before yours:
and yet I acknowledge yours to be lawful and tolerable. And that is the
first marriage of the two single persons, by the which is figured the union of
Christ with the Church his spouse, and therewithal signified the divine love,
comfort, and faithfulness toward the same. Which Church our Savior did
sanctify and cleanse by his holy Sacraments in such wise as he might have it
without spotte or wrinkle. And if so pure and immaculate a thing be figured or
signified by the first marriage, it must follow that the same marriage is
without spotte or reprehension, which is more then the second may well be
assured of, as may appear by these reasons, likelihoodes and allegations
following.

To the first marriage did appertain that Ecclesiastical blessing which in a
great part of Christiandome is used till this day, the same always being
denied to the second or third marriage. And here I constantly beseech as many
as would be counted professors or favorers of truth, abhorring to suppress or
deny it, that they will bear with me in setting down these few places of
testimony, being true: from whence soever they come.

It is well known that for the most part both in the Latin and Greek church,
til this day in most places they admit not the holiness of Ecclesiastical
function any that has married twice, whereby he is called Bigamus, and
therefore rejected.

By the Council of Neocesaria Can. 3. it was consulted upon and decreed
concerning those men who marry sundry times, and likewise of the women that
marry sundry times. tempus quidem penitentiae his constitutum manifestum est
sed conuersatio and fides eorum tempus abbreuiat. Also by the same Council
Can. 7. it was decreede, concluded, and established for an universal law, That
a priest ought not to be present at the feast or bridale of the second or
third marriage, specially seeing he is commanded to enjoin repentance to the
second marriage. Quis ergo erit presbyter qui propter conuiuium illis
consentiat nuptijs, that is, what priest then will for the feast or dinners
sake seem to consent unto that marriage? Says the rest of the Canon: Well, we
will admit this to be true, and that there is, or has bin such a preciseness
used, but percase not meant altogether, in derogation or disabling of the
second marriage, but rather to commend the first, and to advance the dignity
of ecclesiastical orders. S. Hierome in an epistle written to a Lady or
gentlewoman, whose name was Ageruthia has these words. Cum in semente terrae
bonae centesimum and sexagesimum and tricesimum fructum Euangelia doceant, and
centenarius pro virginitatis corana, primu^ gradum teneat sexagenarius pro
labor viduarum, in secundo sit numero, tricenarius federa nuptiarum, ipsa
digitorum coniunctione testetur Digamia in quo erit numero, imo extra numerum,
certe in bona terra non oritur, sed in vepribus and spinetis vulpium, quae
Herodiae impijssmae comparantur, vt in eo se putet esse laudabilem si scortis
melior sit: si publicanorum victimas superet si vni sit prostituta non
pluribus: that is, Whereas the Gospel teaches or mentions of a hundred
fold fruit, sixty fold, and thirty fold to come of the seed sown in good
ground, and that the hundred fold held the first and chief degree for the
crown of virginity, the sixty fold the second degree for the labor and
good work of widows, the thirty fold signifies a reward for the true
observing of matrimony made by joining hands. The state of Digamie or such as
marry twice, in what degree or number be they? In deed they are in none,
seeing it grows not in good ground, but in bushes and thorns, which are
compared to the wicked Herodias, that might think her self laudable in this
point, if she be somewhat better the^ they that be naught, if she serve one man's
turn, and not many. Diverse and sundry other proofs, reasons, and likelihoodes
might be brought, that would shake and quasle the very foundation of a
Stepdames over great reckoning and presumption, but this shall suffice for this
turn. That which may be gathered of the above mentioned places of testimony,
if it be well considered and weighed in the balance of a man's christen
conscience, I doubt not, but that any father, standing in this case (of such as
have flexible hearts, and be not overmuch hardened) will at the length have
both an outward and inward respect unto the quality, dignity, and preeminence
of the first marriage, and likewise the issue thereof: yea, and whatsoever he
thinks a while, there is such a remorce to be had herein, specialy if he have
injured the first, as will make his pulses work, and his heart to drop tears,
if that be enough. Which remorce and remembrance of himself may be drawn and
derived, even from example and experience in our first fathers the patriarchs
and faithful servants of God.

The Bishop of Wurmace, Doctor Bourchard, in his common places of the decrees,
and counselles Ecclesiastike, alleges this, as the words of Saint Hierome:
Ebron dicitur esse ciuitas trium virorum etc. Ebron is said to be the City
of the three men, because in the same were buried the three Patriarchs there,
in a double cave, with their three wives: to wit, Abraham and Sara, Isaac and
Rebecca, Jacob and Lea. They had other wives, of whom appears not the like
regard: but these were the first, to whose offspring the blessing was due, and
by whose fruitefulnes the heretage of the faithful, and the faith it self was
maintened and vpholden by propagation and spreading unto the posterity from
whom we claim.

Answerable to this Tobias said to his son, Cum acceperit deus animam meam etc.
When GOD shall receive my soul, thou shall bury my body, and honor thy mother
all the days of thy life: and when she has likewise accomplished her time,
thou shall bury her hard by me in one sepulcher. Saint Augustine hereuppon
has these words: In primo connubio coniuncti quia vna and eadem caro est, in
vno sepulohro sepeliantur. They that in the first marriage be joined together,
forasmuch as they be one and the same flesh, it is meet they be buried in one
grave or sepulcher. If the examples of the patriarks and the counsel of ye holy
doctors do persuade and induce to bring the deceased fathers to their first
spouses, or the first espoused to them in burialles, what should we gather
hereof, but perfection, validity, and divine allowing of the one: weakness,
clement tolleration, and scantie commending of the other.

With what conscience then may the woman of the second marriage iniure the
first, by a supplanting drift and indonour of her part? first rooting out all
kindly good will that should come toward the son from his father, and at
length stripping him of the blessing, birthright, and heretage due by the right
of laws, nature, and so great antiquity. Would she shrowde her wicked working
and wrong doing under the example of Rebecca defrauding Esau of the blessing
due unto the eldest son? No, she can not, for that the cases be not like.
Rebecca was the first wife, and Esaus own mother: and also it came of the will
and providence of God since revealed, who knew before what was needful to be
done for the help of his Church, the planting of his faith and the increase of
his glory. But as for the usual sort of Stepdames, I wot with what Spirit
they be endowed and directed, who can not so well challenge to them the
worthiness, mystical union, and right of the first marriage, though they be
called wives. The^ is she a wrong doer by ye: universal law of cities and
matrons, which says: locupletari no^; debet aliquis cu^ alterius iniuria vel
iactura: no man nor woman ought enrich themselves with the wrong or loss of
others.

But the divine law, whose sentence is most to be dreaded, gives a hard
construction, and a more scuere judgment against any Stepdame and her
accomplices in the like wrongful action, as appears in Ecclesi^ ^.34. Who so
depriueth his neighbor of his living, does as great sin as though he slew
him to death. I trow she will not deny her husbands son to be her neighbor
very near in this meaning. Wherefore, not to be over tedious in this point, as
ye have heard before, the sentence of the heavenly King against the injurious
woman, delivered by the trump of the holy Ghost, even so let the judgment of
the earthly Emperor Marcus Aurelius against the misaduised father be digested
as a pleasant reprehension, and profitable admonition, which is thus. He is a
fool that takes counsel of a woman, he more fool that asks it, but he most
fool that fulfilleth it.

CHAP. IX. That disheriting of the eldest son is an act very wrongful and
ungodly.
ONe of the Roman Emperors, though namelesse, because he was vicious, yet did
he ordain sundry laws that imported great justice and humanity: namely,
amongst the rest this one, That no Roman whatsoever should cast out of his
doors, any servant, slave, horse, or other beast, were it but a dog, for
old age, sickness, or any infirmity, grounding and confirming his law with
this reason: that men serve from their youth, to be succored when they come to
old age. Humanity and Justice are so universally commendable, and so
particularly needful in the life of man, that we may draw infinite examples of
the observing and due regard thereof, even from Paynims and infidels, which is
the loss to be marvelled at by this saying of Strabo: Moriales maxim Deos
imitantur quoniam benefici sunt. All people do follow the property and
goodness of GOD, because he is full of good doing. Whereof comes the proverb,
Homo homini deus: man is a god to (...) Yea justice is so natural and
erpedient in human dealings, that it is observed and religiously regarded
even toward enemies, and not without good cause, since as Saint Chrysostom
says, Iustitia est radix vitae: Rightful dealing is the root of man's life.
Which as it deserves commendation, and is of all mankind to be embraced, so
the contrary thereof, which is injury and wrong-doing is no less to be
eschewed. For according to the saying of S. August. lib. 2. Ciu. Dei Nihil
homini tam inimicum quam iniustitia. There is nothing so much an enemy to man,
as is Injustice and doing of wrong. Then is it very unmeet that one man
should use it toward an other. But how much more inconvenient for a Parent,
to show and perfor ne toward his own son. But perchance you will say,
that a Father has either such authority over his son, or such interest in
that which he possesses, and is counted his own, that in such behalf he
cannot do his son wrong, which is to be preeued to the contrary: and the
wrong to be so much the greater as there is between them proximi^ie and
neerenesse of friendship, constitute and appointed by the law of nature. And
therefore as that law decreeeth i^ all sorts of things that the first sown
should be first ripe, and the first set, first to flourish or wax green, so
the law of reason wills, that he that first comes should be first sped,
seeing by nature he is enjoined first to depart. And as nature in all her
works for the most part seems to make some one thing to be chief before all
ye rest, whereby the same is, and the rather continues, so reason in the order
of a family, which is an imitation of a state civil, or body polliticke,
persuades of experience and necessity, that there be one before the rest as
chief. Whereby may be conserved that beauty of Unity, and harmony of
concord, which the almighty in his creation so woonderfully and diuersely
teaches, and our Saniour him self so carefully and specially commended to his
flock: and hereof seems to come that preeminence or more special regard,
which the law of God in the old testament appointed to his people the
Israelites, to be observed toward the first begotten son, and likewise
somewhat concerning other dinnbe creatures which first were brought forth into
the world.

By the ancient law of the Jews, the eldest had dubble so much as the others
of the Fathers goods, and alone to the eldest pertayned the blessing of the
Father wherewith should seem always the heritage to go and succeed: as
appears by the will of God in Deuteronomy. 21. Thou shall not make the son of the
second wife heir, before him that is first borne, though his mother were
hated. For to him belongs the right of the first borne.

The Patriarchs and others the servants of God, although by divine revelation
and other notice of the will of God they were certified that they might marry
many or sundry wives at one time, yet did they exclude from their heritage and
prerogative of the blessing, all the children of those secondarie and after
marriages, this appears by Genesis 21. The Son of the bond woman shall not be
heir with my son Isaac. Yet he was the eldest, but was not the son of the
first marriage. Also an heir is the work and institution of nature, and
heritage is dew to the son by nature, therefore it is so dew that he must
needs have it: seeing those things which come by nature or be natural are
not mutable, or to be changed. Moreover this name heir, which in a manner
with all Nations is the eldest, he is the successor of the law National,
besides the laws natural and diuire. And that Father who makes an other
heir than is by these authorities appointed, can not but express himself
rebel in disobeying and contenming so great laws and authority beginning a
new law of his owns head contrary thereunto.

Then what is more unjust, than to do contrary to all laws, and therewith to
disobey the will of God, to pervert the dew order of descent, preferring ye
second marriage before the first, dispraysed Bigamy before the marriage best
approved and honored with the merit of the thirtiefold fruit, as S. Hierome
says: The younger before the elder, the later offpring before primogenitum, so
much tendered and respected?

Now as the greatest injury a Father can do to his son is to disherite him,
so is it the most reproachful blot or damage to suffer the infamy and
discredit of disherison. For if he be worthy to be disherited in his fathers
house, he may be thought not worthy to draw breath out of it: for that he
ought to be convinced faulty in those crimes and heinous offenses which be
either repugnant to the duty of a child, or not meet for ye profession of a
christian. Namely if he strike or offer violence to his Father. If he
oppresses him with some great wrong. If he seek his death or destruction by
poisoning or otherwise. If he lie with his fathers wife. If he will not suffer
his father to make his will. If he be not of the true and Catholic says, but
is convinced to be an Heretic, whereby his life and heritage is in hazard. Or
if he refuse to succor and deliver his father out of prison by his suertiship,
or if he follow the trade and company of such persons as in the law be
counted infames, as we say infamous, vile, and most dishonest, as Iuglers,
Sorcerers, Coniurers, Thieves, and Pirates. Or if the Father offering him meet
marriage under fine and twenty years, he refuses it, and delights to live
continually in whoredom, and filthy order of life, these be (I suppose) all
the causes that the Civil or Ecclesiastical laws do assign.

And yet do some Doctors of the Church make it a question, whether a son
ought to be disherited at all for any of these causes. But all do agree, that
seeing disherison is of all others most odious, and utterly contrary to the
office and duty of nature a man ought not to fall to disheriting, nor yet ad
preteritionem, which is an omitting or putting out of the will, except it be
for the greatest or worst deseruinges by these causes. In which case of
disheriting, there is noted this sentence or judgment of the holy Doctor S.
Aug. Quicunque vult exheredato filio heredem facere, Doctore^ Ecclesiasticu^
quaerat alteru^ qui causam suscipiat non Augustinu^, immo Deo propitio nemine^
inueniet: whosoever ever (says he) disheriting his son would make an other
heir, let him seek an other Doctor of the Church to meddle with the cause,
and not Augustine: but by the grace of God he shall find none. But the
judgment of whom, and of the most part of all other good and learned men,
that unkind practice of disheriting, seems both absurd and ungodly among
the people of Christ's flock: seeing we are all called to claim our own
birthright, and do desire to attain unto that inheritance of the kingdom of
heaven which is but one.

If one brother disherite an other contrary to the will of the father, may not
the father by common equity thereupon pretend cause of disheriting the
disheritor? We are all brothers, and the sons of one heavenly father. We are
all so frail, and given to offend, that we are not fit to disherite, but
rather should fear to be disherited.

Neither need we to bring forth any written examples aunswerable in this
place, since we have eye testimony in manner of common experience in many: who
have disherited, undermined, or defrauded others, and thereby have given an
example how other men should deal toward them or theirs, and so at length
have bought with the same measure they sold unto others.

A learned Doctor of this age, writing upon the matter of Testamentes or Wills
making, has these words worthy recital. Prudentia and bonorum virorum
consilia aliquando suadebunt liberos malos non omnino exheredes scribendos
esse: sed in eis honorandum esse naturam legittima portione a iure prescripta.
Illi vero parents non digni sunt aut parentum nomine, aut qui hac luce
fruantur qui parts suas a se proijcere and exponere audent. Wisdom and the
counsel of good men (says he) will at one time or other persuade that evil
children are not at all to be disherited, but that nature be honored in them,
by letting them have their lawefull portion appointed by the law. But those
Parents who cast off their children from them are not worthy the name of
Parents nor scarce to have the fruition of this life. If this judgment be
such according to laws ecclesiastical and divine toward sons lewdly
inclined, or of ill behavior: how impious and unjust does he think to be the
disheriting of such as be honestly given, or rather make testimony of some
virtue and valor. Ye have heard before, that by someout of Imperial law
asses and dogs were not to be cast out of the doors, and shall christen men
cast out their own sons, to the reproach and scorning of the world? Asses may
bear the weight and grief of such burdens, and dogs may away to digest such
bones: but with the most sort of men they are either taken as heavy at the
heart as mil-stones, or as venomous in the intrailes as poison: some have
yielded themselves unto desparation of mind, and therevppon have run mad.
Others have addicted themselves unto damnable trades, as of robbery, piracie,
coniuration, treason, and others, in hatred of that bad unkind mind of their
parents, have forsaken true Religion, and fallen into Mahometisme, or other
perverse and reprobate sense of doctrine. Others that have been of more
credit or power, have entered into most bloody facts of war and conspiracies,
whereof have ensued uncharitable broiles, and more then unchristian contentions:
all proceeding from the root of stomaching the like injury, or more rather
from the Justice of GOD, who would not leave so high an example of injustice
and wrong doing unpunished.

And although the act of Disherison is rare and monstrous among good men, yet
such as put it in practice, will think they may the rather do it, because
others have done it before them. Unto whom Seneca answers, saying: There is
no wickedness which a man may not find taught by example, if he be so ready to
follow it.

Some other fathers there be, who being carried away into partiality and wrong
judgment, by the persuasion of women (of whose parts and practice you have
sufficiently heard) will pretend, and lay unto their sons charge, the
accusation of ill Religion: Let such Parents take heed least bearing the name
of Christians, they be found persecuters of the same. It is a more then fault
to render evil for good, or to reward virtue with punishment. Therefore it is
not safety for any father of mean knowledge him self to condemn his son
to disherison in a difficult cause: so much he may be deceived and blinded by
the wrong persuasions of a woman, and by other fine flattery of supposed
friends.

But if it would please such a father as is inclined by any manner of means
to disherite his son, to look unto him self: and setting apart affection in
matters of controversy, to weigh his own evil with his own good, no doubt
he would confess and say with the Poet:

Peccantem damnare cave, nam labimur omnes. Condemn not him that offends,
for we al do offend He might see, that in his life he has done but little good
as he should do. No works of virtue, none of charity, none of true godliness,
little of kindness, none of chastity, little of truth, none of true faith,
but rather all to the contrary, laying aside mercy, and refusing to vouchsafe
and perform the effects of forgiveness unto his own son, so much is his
understanding perverted, and his heart hardened, which, I fear me, may boade
unto any father little good, since it is the saying of Saint Bernard: Nemo
vnquam cordis duri, bonum habuit, nisi forte commiserans Deus abstulit cor
lapideum and contulit carneum, that is, Never any man got any good by his
hard heart, unless peradventure when it pleases GOD of his infinite mercy to
take from him his stony heart, and give unto him a heart of flesh.

then well he see his own oversight, in omitting to give good examples of
natural love and affection to his children, and therwithal perceive what had
fruits he has reapt by his examples of vnkindees, hard dealing, and perverting
of order in his family. Then will be find what ghostly comfort a peaceable and
charitable mind have in avoiding ye dangerous flames of wrath and inward
disquietnes. Then it will appear how beneficial and happy it had been for
his children, and how godly and seemly for him self if he had followed sound
counsel, and the prompting of grace in disobeying those his lusts and wilful
liking, the serving and pleasing whereof, has heaped upon him those evils,
which he findedeth now so hardly to be remembered. And further that gay-shew of
a woman's love, which first was founded either upon the hope and opinion of his
wealth, or of purpose to defraude and deprive his first children of inward
affection or outward possibility, now will seem vading and vanishing like the
moon before her change. Now will turn to his remembrance those causes of
sorrow and grief which were given to his own children, by her malignity in
bringing t^e^ out of his favor into hatred and displeasure: then will remorse
of wrong doing, specially in supplanting and disheriting (if any be) compass him
on every side. On the right hand to see how he has continued and cast from
him the due regard and worthiness of the first marriage. On the left hand how
preposterously he has dealt against nature and order preferring the pleasing of
an injurious woman before al laws and dutiful respects. Behind him in calling
to mind, how he has left the pattern of an ill example for others, and a bad
testimony of conscience for himself. Before him the orderly dealing of all
wise, godly, and provident fathers evident to his reproof and reproach:
Beneath him the deapth of due sorrowing and repentance, together with the
ponderous w^ight of his sins augmented by her spinning. Above him the hope of
his merciful favor whom he has most offended, and the expectation for a
heavenly inheritance for himself who disobeyd the divine will, in more then
denying to an other his eartly portion.

CHAP. X. That procurors and counsailors of disherison, and all wrong doing,
ought to make or procure restitution,
That famous Duke Alcibiades coming to visit Pericles a man of equal fame, who
praid him not to trouble him at that time, because he was bethinking himself
how to give an account to the whole state of Athens, then quoth Alciabiades,
were it not rather better to devise how you may not give an account at all.
Although perchance Alcibiades meaning was naught and corrupt herein, yet his
words be true, for every man knows it is more safety to shun and avoid
the case of rendering accomps, then to be charged and entangled therewith. Man
that has past his time in this world, rather according to the appetite of the
flesh and direction of his malicious and injurious, will then after the
counsel of the spirit and motion of grace, well and happy it were for him,
if either his innocence were such, as a small reckoning before God would
serve, or his careful regard in making a due account and reconciliation with
God, were so truly performed here in this world, that he might find the
less difficulty and danger in the word to come. But when will he perform it
that differreth it from day to day, or rather from year to year? and when will
he go about it, that will not begin it till his ending day, or perhaps
thinks not of it at all. How perilous a matter such folk of their impiety
or negligence do vouchsafe to their own soul, this saying of Saint Augustine
in ser. de Jnnocen. might somewhat certify them. The sinner (says he) may
take this for a sure lesson, that at the time of his death he shall be unmindful
of him self, who when he lived was forgetful of God, and therefore Saint
Paul to the Galathians counsalleth us with these words: Dum tempus habemus
operemur bonu^. Whiles we have time let us work good, nay rather the most
part, have need to leave evil and fall to repentance. It is not enough to go
diligently to the Church, except the conscience be in his due estate, the
payment of naughty money does not discharge a man's debt, since the principal
thing pertaining to man or between God and man is conscience as for good
works they be but things accessory, if the conscience be wrapped in sin, or
thereby wounded to death, what soever a man does, we may doubt whether it be
acceptable. Respexit dominus ad Abel and ad munera eius. Ge. 4 The Lord had
respect to Abell and to his oblations. O good God, thou know the multitude
of offenses which proceed from the naughty inclination of our own body, even of
such men as be counted honest and good men in the world. Full little needs any
to augment the huge burden of their offenses, by outward wrong doing, or by
partaking in the like offenses of others. It has bin before sufficiently
showed and proved, that birthright is right: and such as God himself wills
not to be wronged. We are told by the ghostly advertisement of Eccl. 43. Who
so depriueth his neighbor of his living, does as great sin as though he slew
him to death. Then, no doubt, he that procures or counsels to take from
another that which is his, or else is the means whereby it is taken away, or not
restored, he, or they, not only sin deadly, but are also bound to make
restitution. Remember what our Savior says Mat. 5. Non exies inde donec reddes
nouissimum quadrantem, thou shall not depart thence until thou shall restore
the last farthing.

It is the common admonition of spiritual pastors, Non dimittitur peccatum,
nisi restituatur ablatum. The sin of wrong doing is not forgiven, unless
that be restored which was taken away. If he be bound in the law to make
restitution, that holds but a dove house to the known and evident damage of
his neighbors in their corn: how much rather be or they that take away a whole
ship lode by Sea, or a farm at land: but the wrong of birthright and
inheritance draws more deeply then a ship, and is of more importance to be
regarded in the matter of restitution then a farm.

S. Aug. lib. de Penitent. says thus, Ad agendam penitentiam non sufficit
mores melius conuertere, and a malefactis resedere, nisi de his quae facta sunt
satisfaciat domino per penitentiae dolorem. To the performing of repentance, it
is not enough for a man to change his manners, or to amend his life unless he
please God by a sufficient sorrowing of repentance. But it is not meant hereby,
that in performing due penance or repentance it is enough for a man to be
sorry. For the ancient Doctors do teach, that repentance consists of 3. parts,
contrition, confession, and satisfaction: and those doctors of latter ages, who
say it consists only of 2. parts, affirm the duty of restitution and
satisfaction to be one: but whether there be three parts or but two, you shall
find due repentance a hard matter to perform, if we may believe the holy
doctor S. Ambrose, who says thus, Plures inuem qui innocentiam seruauerunt
quam qui veram penitentiam agerunt. I have found more that have not hurt any
man, then which have performed due penance or repentance. Oh, but some of these
wrong doers, and ill cou^sellors, or coadiutors, will defend their injurious
deeds by scripture: they may as well defend lying, robbery, manslaughter,
fighting, and strife making, expesting, or casting out of the poor. For of
two contrarieties one will serve their turn.

To maintain lying. Abraham lied. Genesis

But the holy Ghost says in the Psalm. 5. Thou shall destroy all them that
speak lies.

Thou shall not steal. Thou shall spoil Egypt says an other place.

I came not to send peace but the sword Mat. 10.

My peace I give you peace I leave to you. Ioh. 14.

He that has a coat, let him sell it and buy him a sword. Luke. 22.

He that takes the sword shall perish with the sword. Mat.

There shall be no needy person nor beggar among you. Deuteronomy.

The poor ye shall have always with you, faith the Gospel.

And what wickedness may they not be comforted or nourished in by these
words, Nolo mortem peceatoris, I will not the death of a Sinner. Ezech. 18.

He that works iniquity shall dye in the same. Ezech. 3.

We think (says S. Paul) that man is justified by says without the works
of the law. Romans 3.

But the same spirit says, God shall reward every man according to his
doings. Romans 2.

But true it is that in the like doubtfulnesse or ambiguitie, we ought to
follow this rule, Non intentio verbis, sed verba deser^^ire debent intentioni,
that is, We must not west a man's meaning to the words, but the words should he
brought to agree with the sense or meaning. To return again to the matter of
timely restitution, and of deferring the same, S. Aug. has these words: Non
inueni in quinque millibus annis saluatum in fine suo nisi solum latronem. I
find not any where of any that was saved at the very ending of his life, but
only the these. Also some divine says: they who defer to perform the parts
of repentance until extreme infirmity come, be in the case of law De
ar^ori^us cedendis: where it is adjudged that the tree shall be his, in whose
ground it grew and was rooted: and not to be his in whose ground it fell. So it
is to be thought of l^^n who so long as he lived, stood by his unpenitencie in
the di^els soil, and at his death fell toward God into the ground of his
salvation by over late repentance* And many there be that can like well enough
of the beginning of repentance which is dew sorrowing of heart, and could
vouchsafe to proceed unto confession by mouth, but they can not away with this
restitution, least it should utterly beggar them or their children, or make
them to be the worse able to live in the world by it. But such are foolishly
cruel, or cruel fools to their own soul, who chust rather the state of
dammation, than to be g^ee^ed here with a little poverty. But let all ungodly
wrong dooers, and such as get goods or lands by hook and by crook, together
with their counselors and assistents, not utterly despise this historical
example least it may happen to be verefied in themselves.

Anthonius de Florentia a Doctor of some confinned credit and fame, reports
that there was a certain vsuror, who would not make restitution of the money
gained by interest: alleging if he should so do, his children might go beg,
or be sent to the Hospital. The father dies in the same state, his eldest
son succeeds, and likewise wist not restore, The younger brother demands
h^s part of those goods and restores unto the parties after the rate of his
protion: the rest that remains he gives to the poor, and enters into the
state and trade of solitary li^e. Shortly after the eldest brother dies,
whereupon was showed to the younger brother living in chaste contemplation this
vision following: He sees his father and his brother in torment, one cursing
the other, the father saying that the son was the cause of his damnation,
because it was for the love and enciching of him, that he did not make
restitution of the money gained by usury or interest. The sonns he cursed and
said, that his father was the cause of his danmation, because he left him
these ill gotten goods, the keeping whereof has wrought his perdition. The
example is full of terror specially to such as have ill gotten goods in their
hands, or else are entangled with the iniquity thereof, who in their life
time peradventure will not make restitution themselves, at the like peril, nor
yet at the extreme point send for or admit any good man of knowledge to
inform them, and consult with, least this advise might be to th^^^ worlds
disprosite. To be short, if procure ^s (...) counselors of disherison and
wrong dooers themselves, are not yet by grace prepared to receive and follow
these wholesome admonitions of divine Doctors, yet at least it were to be
wished they would take the best of Artib^^^es meaning before specified, which
was to devise how a man ^^ny not be charged at all for those things, which
otherwise he is to account for.

FINIS.
Ric. Par. in Nycticoracem Iohannis Newnam Carmen.
RVstica Nycticorax viuens vectensibus agris,
Per mare, per terras, nocte dieque volat,
Vt done extremas vrbis perting it ad oras:
Fortunaque meas incidit illa manus.
Hanc ego perspiciens, alitis cognoscere mores,
Quam primum rediens ad mea tecta volo.
Visa loquax nimium est: nec garrula vellet haberi,
Suntque haec arbitrij verba relata mei,
Missa columba Noe ramum semel ore reportat:
Nycticorax fructus attulitore duos.
Henr. Serae genesis in eandem Sentia non sera.
QVid simulas coniu^? magis est laudata colu^ba,
Corue places satis: at grata colu^ba magis.
In Zoilum.
CVr tumes iratus nulli nisi dira nocenti,
Omen Nycticorax Zoile triste canit.
YOu show what Fathers ought and how,
to use their goods and pelfc:
You give them rule that never were,
a Father yet your self.
You heap your stuff in had array,
no Method in your work:
Your building base I think it sure,
more cause to lie and lurk.
You fourde us of your chafe and straw,
you keep your corn in stackes:
Your labors like to that of Bees,
we feed upon your wax.
To all you seem to preach that are,
no Prophet in your dw^^e:
A shallow soil that so^^ds you not,
in credit deeper grown.
For promise made of solid proof, Performance is but poor:

Sa. L. Ar. Auctori carmen beneuolum.
MAgna cadunt multis, mediocria nulla cadenti,
Magna pa^ as Vectilectus in vrbe liber.
Munia multa mones, viuens, sine munere scriptor,
Qui satis est alijs, Vtilis esse potest.
Dat Deus omne bonu^^, sed non per cornuataurum,
Det tibi pro meritis munus amice Vale.
Aunsweres by the Auctor.
With wise and grave a beardlesse man,
full often some credit bears:
Let Fathers not disdain to hear,
a ladde with frosty hears.
Fair glistering shows be seldom gold,
your buildings be too fine:
In rude dispersed Abbay rooms,
a man might suppe and dine.
Although there were but left enough,
to bake your self a cake:
Prove when you will to thresh as much:
will make your heart to ache.
A shallow shifte so shaps him friends,
and speedes with shallow doomes:
That shallow hearts to shallow minds,
must yield the shallow rooms.
Vnlight: pas in and show your male: I opened you the door.

MAgnacadunt mulis, sessoribus atque caballi,
Magne peris vento vectus in Orb labor.
Dat Deus omne bonum sed ceruis cornua tantum:
Vulpinae caude sorsque fabella mihi est.
Englished.

Great fortune falls on backs of mules:
some hackneis on their freight.
Tho sailing toil on worlds globe,
some times does perish straight.
God gives all good and I shall have,
since Hearts no hoofes do want:
A flappe with Rainard fox his tail,
or else my lotte is scant.

