A DAY STAR FOR Darke-wandring Souls: Showing the Light, by a Christian
Controversy: OR Briefly and plainly setting forth the Mystery of our
SALVATION.

DIVIDED INTO Principles, Objections, and Answers.

BY RICHARD NICCOLLS, the elder, of the Inner Temple London, Gent. deceased.

PVBLISHED For the general benefit of all those who heartily, and with a true
path desire their own Salvation: by I.C.

LONDON: Printed for John Budge, and are to be sold at the great South-doore
of Paul's 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, and truly religious Lady, the Lady ANNE GLEMHAM, I.
C. wishes increase of all godliness and virtue, with the fruition of eternal
HAPPINESS.
Right Honorable:

AS every good Artist labors with much pains to rectify and bring into due
form and order, the Art which he himself professes; and seeks all
possible ways and means to attain to the perfection thereof; adding thereto
his own practice and experience, thereby to make it more facile and easy to
be attained unto by future Posterities; and unto them conueying it, as it were
a matter hereditarie, and which by succession they ought to enjoy. Even so
ought every true Christian with his best endeauours, industry and travail,
labor to find out the true Principles and Grounds of Christian Religion; and
therein through his own industry (directed by the Spirit of the Highest) daily
seek to attain to the perfection of that blessed Truth which is the sole
Directresse to eternal Happiness* and the profits of his Christian Labors to
participate to all succeeding Ages. And as none can profit in any Science,
without first knowing the Fundamental Reasons and Grounds thereof; so it is
impossible for any man to attain to the perfection of Christian Religion,
unless he be first instructed in the certain and infallible Grounds and
Principles of the same: with which this worthy and religious Author was well
furnished, as by this ensuing discourse, or Treatise, made for the private use
of himself and his Wife, who being a godly and religious Gentlewoman, imparted
the same to some few of her friends; amongst whom, my self (as unworthiest of
those few) had a written Copy, which (most Virtuous Lady) remaining in my
custody (and the Author being a Gentleman, under whom I had part of my
Education, and fearing lest this Orphant (turned naked into the World, without
a Protector and Patron) might by sinister and fatal occasion happen into the
hands of some professed (though private) enemies; and there be smothered by
those irremarkable persons mentioned in the Revelation to have received the
mark of the Beast) depriving the Author of his due and well deserved
commendations, and the World of so honest and religious a work, I could do no
less then cause it to be published, as well for the general good of the
well-affected and religious, as also for an Example and President unto all men
to employ their labors in godly exercise, for the benefit of their Christian
Brethren. And considering with my self where to bestow it, I was embold^ed by
the inducement of diverse reasons to select your Ladyship, as one most worthy to
be the sole Patroness and Protector of this godly Treatise, knowing your
Honorable Virtues and sincerity of Religion to be such as are of force enough
to make that commendable which only by your Honors name is graced, in respect
of which, and diverse other Honorable Courtesies, for which I am obliged to
your Ladyship, I most humbly present unto your favorable view and Honorable
protection, the zealous and truly religious labors of this godly Gentleman,
challenging nothing to my self but the imperfections in the harsh composure of
the style, which if your Honor vouchsafe to receive, it may be that although
in the perusing thereof your Ladyship shall not find any matter which you are
ignorant of, yet may it confirm that which otherwise your Honor may doubt in;
or at least make it more evident by delivering the Circumstances in more
particular terms.

And as in the Author it deserves a general and perpetual remembrance, so
does it argue in him a most godly and good mind, in laboring to find out
that which gave a comfortable end to all his Labors, for the which doubtless
he now possesses an incorruptible and immortal Crown of Glory in the World
which shall never end. To the which, after many, long, and happy years, with
much honor in this life, lived to the glory of God, and to the comfort and
relief of his poor and afflicted Members, the Lord bring your Honor, with
peace and quiet Conscience.

Your Honors solely devoted in all serviceable duty, and dutiful Affection,

I. C.

To the READER.
CHristian Reader, how intricate and difficult a matter it is to content the
various conceits of the general multitude, I doubt not but is well enough
known to thee: and how curious (seeming) Scholars are in perusing the labors
of every one, daily experience makes it manifest, who notwithstanding the
benefit which they might reap unto themselves by observation, if (without
affectation of their own invention) they would with mature Judgment, and
advised patience, diligently read the good and godly Works of Religious
Persons, do study with all diligence, to lay some scandalous imputation not
only on the Author, but the poor innocent Book, who would if it were
possible, laugh at their ignorance.

How then shall this poor Book dare to adventure it self among so many
enemies, but in hope of the kind censure of the Learned, godly, and zealous
Christians: In expectation of which, with their loving acceptance of the Fruits
of the Authors Labors, it dares oppose it self to the general view of the
world, without fearing any the Calumnies of carping Zoilists, or those which
bear the irremarkable mark of the Beast, mentioned in the Revelation of S.
John.

And so rests thine to use and peruse.

CERTAIN Grounds, or Principles of Christian Religion, briefly and plainly
setting forth the Mystery of our SALVATION.
The first PRINCIPLE.
EVery one of us, who by generation descend of Adam, of our selves, by Nature,
cannot so much as think any good thoughts much less do any good deed, but
all our thoughts, words, and works are only evil continually, Genesis 6. 5.
Romans 3. 9. John 15. 5.

Notes upon the first Principle.
THE first cause of this our corruption is, because that every one of us who
come of Adam, sinned in the same sin that Adam sinned: viz. In eating the
forbidden fruis, and are guilty thereof before God. Romans 5. 12. Heb. 7. 9. 10.
The reason hereof is, because that Adam (as our common Procurator or Factor,
Tam ad perdendum quam ad lucrandum) did bear the person of us all, being then
in his loins: Therefore look what he gained, Calvin. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Sect. 7.
he gained for himself and us; and look what he lost, he lost for himself
and us, then being in his loins. 1 Cor. 15. ^2. The second cause of this our
continually sinning is, because that every one of us who come of Adam, are by
Gods decree (manifested and pronounced Genesis 2. 17.
to Adam) fallen into this heavy punishment for our transgression in Adam,
viz. we are tainted with original sin. This original sin is a
corruption of the powers of the Soul; and that not in some, or in part, but of
all and wholly: and so by this original sin, first, we are deprived not of
some, but of all good inclination, and do want not some, but all goodness:
and secondly, thereby we are inclined and prone, not to some, but to all evil,
and not only inclined and prone, but also naturally fruitful, not of some,
but of all sins; as having the seeds of all sins bred within us: so that,
although sins do not break out in all men alike, neither is any man found
who puts all sins in practice. Yet take the most civil and best natured man
in the World, and by Nature the seeds of all sins are in him: but the
general restraining grace of God does many and diverse ways restrain all men
from coming into many sins, chiefly for the good and quietness of his Church,
and also for the maintaining and upholding the society of the world. Which
restrayning grace of God, if it should be withdrawn, then every man without
exception would break out into every sin, to the utter overthrow of all
Societies and Commonweals. The godliest and best men can best testify of
these inbred seeds of corruption, for they best know what a do they have with
their corrupt natures, and how difficult a thing it is to keep them within the
compass of obedience, Romans 3. 9. 10. 11. The third cause of this our
continual sinning does rise from the consequence of the two former causes,
viz. Every one of us Man or Woman, high or low, rich or poor, borne in the
visible Church, or without, as he comes of Adam, and is borne of his father
and mother, for our transgression and original sin from and in Adam, is
hated of God, and is Gods enemy, and the bondslaue of Satan; who until the
time of regeneration reigns and rules in the heart of every one of us, and
haleth every one of us forward to the height and perfection of wickedness, so
far as he is permitted by the powerful hand of God, who will suffer neither
wicked men, nor the Devil himself, to put in practice every wickedness they
could and would, if God should withdraw his restrayning hand, Ephesians. 2. 2. 2
Cor. 44. 2 Timothy 2. 26.

1 Objection.
It is against common reason (say the Pelagians) that all men should be made
guilty of one man's fault; and therefore (say they) Adam sinned to his own
proper hurt, and by his transgression hurted not his posterity. And in this
that Adams sin is passed to his posterity, that is come to pass by
imitation, and not by propagation.

Answer.
This Objection being believed, utterly overthrows our free Justification by
Christ's righteousness, performed by himself, and imputed unto us, as done by
our selves. For if Adams sin is passed over Romans 5. 17.
unto us, his posterity, by imitation only, then also does it follow that we
have no other profit by this righteousness of Christ performed by him for us,
then that he is set before us for an example to follow: for in what sort we
are made partakers of Adams transgression to our condemnation, in the same sort
we are made partakers of Christ's righteousness to our Justification. And so
again in what sort we are made partakers of Christ's righteousness to our
Justification: in the same sort we are made partakers of Adams transgression
to our condemnation. And therefore as we being in Christ as our head and root,
are justified by the communication of his righteousness (it being imputed to
us as done by our selves) because that in him and by him, by reason of our
union with him we have fulfilled the Law, and satisfied Gods justice. So we
being come of Adam as the root of all mankind, originally are guilty of his
transgression, because that in him and by him, by reason of our union with him
see have all sinned.

2 Objection.
The Soul is newly created, and comes immediately from God, who is perfectly
righteous, and so the Soul cannot be naturally and originally sinful as the
flesh, which descends from Adam. And it being a spirit, and a thing
immateriall can not be infected of the body being a thing material. Therefore
it stands not with Gods justice, that the soul, having no sin of her own,
should bear the sin of another, namely of Adam, which was committed so long
before: neither is it to be thought, that God who forgiueth us our own sins,
will impute the sins of another unto us.

Answer.
The cause of our hereditary corruption, Calvin. (...). lib. 1. cap. 1. Septo.
as well of our souls (which by God are into us infused pure, and by us from
him received pure) as of our flesh which descends from sinful Adam, is not
in the substance of the soul, or in the substance of the body, but in this
that unto the penalty of God, the Creators decree, by Adam wittingly and
vvilfully transgressed, Adam and all his posterity, both in their souls and
bodies, were and are to be subjected. For, why should any Pelagian think of
this, as hard and unreasonable, seeing it seems unto our selves just and
reasonable, that the Potter may dispose of his Pots, made by himself, to what
use he will; and seeing it seems just and reasonable to our selves to subject
to laws made by our selves, both the Parents and the Children unborn, and
their posterity long after succeeding.

3 Objection.
Against this first principle, the Papists do further object, That man has
free will, which whosoever denies (say they) is worthy to be beaten like a
Stocke-fish, until he confesses that they who beats him have free will
either to beat him or to cease from beating him: for if one do deny the fire
to be hot, the best way to persuade such a one, is to cast him into an hot Oven.

Answer.
The answer unto this objection is this: First that all reasonable creatures
have free will in moral and civil acts: and secondly, that all wicked men
have free will from coaction and violence: thirdly, that among all sins
wicked men make free choice to put some in practice. But this freedom is
wanting to Adams posterity, to wit, by nature, to think or do any thing
which is good before God, and acceptable in his sight, because that by Adams
transgression man's free will is brought into the bondage of sin.

4 Objection.
If man's free will by Adams transgression be in such bondage of sin that it
cannot make no choice of good, then does free will lose its own nature: for
where sin must needs be chosen, there can be no liberty; and consequently
all the liberty which man's free will has, is freely to give to the Devil,
and so man is by God punished for that which he cannot avoid.

Answer.
There be three kinds of liberties or freedoms: the first, is liberty from
compulsion: the second, is liberty from sin: the third, is liberty from
misery. The first kind of liberty was in Adam, and shall be for ever in
Adams posterity; but liberty from sin, and liberty from misery, cannot be
had in this life, but for as much as this bondage of sin, or necessity of
sinning, is come unto us by our own voluntary acts (for in Adam, by eating
the forbidden fruit, we all being in his loins voluntarily sinned) we are
all with the bondage of sin and misery justly punished in him for his and
our own disobedience.

5 Objection.
To feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to honor our Parents, to serve our
Masters faithfully, to obey our lawful Governors, to dye in defense of our
Country, and such like deeds done by Infidels, are good deeds, and no sins,
and therefore men, by Nature, before regeneration, have choice and liberty of
will to do some good deeds which are no sins.

Answer.
S. Augustine in his fourth Book cap. 3. against Julian the Pelagian,
answers that such acts done by Infidels are doubtless sins; not that in
their own nature they are sins, but because they are not of Faith: for,
whatsoever (...) not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23. For that, without faith it
is impossible to please God. Heb. 11. 6 Again, the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.
31. Whatsoever we do it must be done to no other end then to the glory of
God: and therefore the said acts done by Infidels cannot be said to be done to
his glory, because the said acts being done without faith, cannot possibly
please God, and therefore such acts, done by Infidels, are doubtless sins,
though in their own nature they be no sins, but Moral Virtues.

6 Objection.
If the premises be true, then may an Infidel as well rob his neighbor as
relieve him with food or ^aiment: and so of the rest.

Answer.
God does deeply grave Moral Virtues, or the works of the Law, in the hearts
of the Infidels, and thereby they are guided to do some Moral Virtues, and
restrained from doing many wickednesses: but they being without Faith, do
nothing to the right end. Also the Infidels for Moral Virtues (which bear but
a show of good works) are by God rewarded with the praise and favor of men,
and other temporal blessings, for which the Moral Virtues were done, as the
principal end of their action.

The second PRINCIPLE.
We of our selves, without CHRIST, can by Nature lo^ke for no grace or pardon
for our sins a^ Gods han^s, but hatred, wrath, and eternal condemnation for
the same. Ephesians. 2. 3.

Notes upon the second Principle.
When we offend or sin against GOD, (whose person is of infinite
worthiness) our offense by consequence must needs be infinite, and therefore
greater then by any means, we of our selves can satisfy with condign
compensation, because Men and Angels, and all Creatures are incapable of every
infinite action; they are finite both in strength and power, to do or suffer.
Wherefore seeing God of his Justice cannot pardon sin without condign
compensation, which man cannot possibly make; therefore man, of himself, can
look for no grace of salvation at Gods hand, who is perfectly just, true, and
faithful, and always the same, and like to himself, with whom there is no
variableness, or shadow of changing. All James 1. 17.
Virtues attributed to God are essential and eternal, and not variable, as
the Virtues in men, which may be increased or diminished: All his Curses and
Judgments against sin must be performed, as well as his merciful promises:
Heaven Mark 14. 31. 1 Pet. 1. 25.
and Earth shall pass, but no word of the Lord shall pass away unperformed.

The third PRINCIPLE.
THe Blood of Christ Jesus crucified (because of the worthiness of his person)
is the only meritorious cause, thing, and price, which can satisfy Gods
Justice for all men's sins, and so make them away to his favor and mercy,
Act. 20. 28. John 1. 7. Romans 3. 23. 24. 25. John 3. 14.

Notes upon the third Principle.
FIrst let us behold Christ crucified, as the Scriptures do describe him:
according to which, he had no part from top to toe free from pain and grief,
but hung on the Tree, having his flesh torn with whips, his checkes swollen
with buffets, his face defiled with spittle, his head stuck full with Thorns,
his eyes dejected for shame, his ears burning with taunts, his mouth sowred
with Vinegar, his hands and his feet wounded with Iron Spikes, his bones
unjointed, his sinews pricked and strayned, his whole body hanging by the
soreness of his hands and feet; and lastly, (though he were dead) his heart
pierced with a Spear, whence issued blood and water. And here further let us
advisedly obscrue in his Stripes, that Pilate having a purpose to save the life
of Christ, and not neglecting to satisfy the people, (who were incensed
against him) caused him extremely to be whipped, and to be showed to the
people in that plight, with these words; Behold the man, to let them see that
Christ had received very sufficient correction (no crime being proved against
him) and so to withdraw them from secking his death.

In crowning him with Thorns, let us advisedly note, that the Soldiers did
not only wreath him a thick Crown of Thorns, to stick his head full of
them, but after the putting it on, to fasten it, they did strike him on the
head with their Caves.

In his nayling to the Cross or crucifying, let us advisedly observe, that
besides the greatness and soreness of his wounds, which were worthy to be
marked, they so strayned his body (least he should stir hand or foot) that
all his bones might be numbered. The greatness of his Wounds David fore-sheweth
in these words, They Psalm. 22.
dug my hands and feet: noting how wide wounds they made, which were rather
dug then pierced. How tender and sensible the hands and feet are above
other parts of the body, and what pain and anguish the pricking, strayning,
and tearing of the Sinews, Ligaments, and ^oynts (which are very thick and
full of sense in those places) did breed and kindle in the whole body, Nature
can teach us without any further proof. Of the racking of his Joints Bernard
makes this collection out of David, I am De Pass^ Dom. cap. 7.
so strained (says David, in the person of Christ) that my body, naked, being
stret^hed like the head of a Timbrell or Drum, all my bones may be numbered, all
my bones are out of joint; or pulled one from th^ther.

In this horrible torment of Stripes, Thorns, Wounds, Sinews, and Joints, our
Savior hung on the Cross above three hours in Bern. de Pass^ Dom. cap. 41.
most perfect sense, with extreme pain, until the very instant that he
miraculously breathed out his Soul. He who shortneth and lightneth the force
of torments in his Saints, when they be grievous, in his own would do
neither: he spared not himself who knew how to spare his: he dyed not by
degrees as his Saints do; his Senses did not decay, no pangs of death took
hold upon him, but in perfect sense, Patience and Obedience both of body and
soul, he did voluntarily by his infinite power resign his Spirit (as he was
praying) into the hands of his Father, without trembling or struggling, or any
show of sense of his pains: who can sleep when he will, Aug. Tract 119 in
Joan.
as Christ dyed when he would? who can lay aside his Garment, as Christ laid
aside his Flesh? who can so leave his place as Christ left his John 10. 18.
life? The laying down of his life was no imposed punishment, nor forcible
invasion of death upon him, but a voluntary Sacrifice rendered unto God for our
sins: and his blood thus shed upon the Cross, is a full and perfect
satisfaction for our sins. We must not 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19.
be so childish, as to think that the blood of Christ, in sensible flesh, is a
perfect Sacrifice rendered to God for our sins, to satisfy Gods wrath,
excluding the union, operations, and passions of his soul whilst his body
suffered, and in the end dyed: but in the shedding of his blood we must
include all A blessed and most necessary note.
his suffering both of body and soul, which testify his patience and perfect
obedience, even to the shedding of his blood upon the Cross.

Secondly, let us see how the precious Blood and Death of CHRIST crucified, is
of infinite worthiness and merit; for that in regard it must work infinite
things for us, to wit, it must deliver us from eternal death in Hell, and
bring us to life everlasting in Heaven: in respect of either of which it must
needs be of infinite value, or else it profits not: For an infinite purchase
cannot be made without an infinite price, this infinite price cannot be found
in our own merits, whose thoughts, words, and deeds are continually evil.

Shall we then seek for it in the everlasting pains of Hell? they are
neither meritorious nor infinite: meritorious they be not; for to be eternally
separated from God can deserve no thanks with God: if any man fall away from
Heb. 10. 38.
God, God has no pleasure in him, says the Apostle. And he who suffers
Hels pains is hated, and no ways beloved: for Christ's sentence shall be,
Depart from me you Mat. ^5. 41.
cursed into everlasting fire. And as Hels pains be not meritorious, no more
are they infinite in weight, but in time only: for they must be everlastingly
suffered, before they can be infinite, and the Devils and men which shall
suffer them, cannot endure any infinite sense of pain, because they be finite
Creatures: God only is infinite: but the vengeance of sin continues for
ever, because no creat^re is able to bear an infinite weight of punishment.

Since then neither our own merits, nor the pains of Hell, have neither worth
nor weight sufficient in themselves to satisfy the anger, and procure the
favor of GOD, we must seek to Heaven, even to God himself, for the true
ransom of our sins, and redemption of our Souls, which we can find no
where, but in the person of Christ Jesus, who being true God, took our nature
unto himself, to become one with us, and communicates his spirit unto us, to
make us one with him, and by the infinite price of his blood bought us from the
power of hell, and brought us unto God: for, neither the Virtues of Christ's
humane soul, though they were many; nor the sufferings of his flesh, though
they were painful, are simply infinite, until we look unto his person
being the eternal Son of God. Then shall we find that God vouchsafed, with
his Acts 20. ^8.
own blood to purchase his Church: and that we were reconciled unto God, when
we were his enemies, by Romans 5. 10.
the death of his Son. Moreover, concerning the infinite merit of Christ's
death and passion; if between the Creator and the best of his Creatures there
be an infinite distance; then between the most glorious and blessed Throne of
God in Heaven, and the most base and cursed Cross of Christ upon Earth, must
needs be so infinite a distance that neither men nor

Angels can comprehend it: and by consequence the Obedience of Christ (who
being in the form of Phil. 2.
God, humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even to the death of
the Cross) was infinite, and did in far higher degree please God the Father,
then the Rebellion of Adam did displease him: for Adams disobedience was the
Sin of man, but Christ's Obedience was the virtue of God; which Obedience
being infinite, does more then counteruayle Adams Disobedience, and for that
cause the Justice of God is better satisfied with the Obedience of Christ, then
with the vengeance it might have executed on the sins of men: for God has no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, neither does he delight in man's
destruction, but with the Obedience of his Son he is well pleased, and
therein his Soul delights: This is my wel-beloued Son in whom I am well
pleased: Mat. 3. 17.
Lo my Chosen, my Soul takes Esaias 42. 1.
pleasure in him: in which words God does not only note the natural love
between himself and his Son, but he gives full approbation of his
Obedience, as being thereby, as with a condign compensation, fully satisfied
for the sins of man.

But here is to be noted that although the blood of Christ crucified be a
sufficient price to satisfy Gods justice for the sins of all the world, if
men could and would apply the same to themselves by Faith, yet it is estectuall
only to them who are united unto Christ, so that Christ is theirs, and they
are Christ's: for they only have power to apply his blood unto themselves by
Faith. For even as a sovereign Salve, so Christ's blood, has sufficient virtue
to heal all, and it is effectual for the healing of those only, unto whom it
is applied.

Seeing then there is no means to purchase our Redemption but by the infinite
price of Christ's precious blood: let us highly esteem of so precious a thing,
and with all diligence seek to make it ours, and to use it to the glory of
God, and not to our own licentiousness: for being bought with a price we are
not our own but his who has bought us, and therefore we are not to serve our
own lusts, but to glorify him both in our Souls and Bodies, which are not
ours, but his who bought us. This is the very good and end of our Redemption,
and it is the true liberty and happiness of the Saints and blessed Angels in
Heaven, willingly and chearefully to serve the Lord by whom they were brought
to that happiness.

The fourth PRINCIPLE.
THe M^rits of Christ crucified, and his whole Person, and all his G^aces and
Benefits, stored up in his Man hoode, are made ours, by being united unto him,
as Members of his Mystical Body, by Faith wrought in our hearts by the
operation of his Spirit dwelling in his Man-hoode, and from thence descending
unto us his Members.

Notes upon the fourth Principle.
THe mystical union, whereby Christ and his members (which are all true
believers and they only) are actually coupled together into one mystical body,
is not carnal, as a thing to be understood according to the common capacity
of men, and therefore we must not think that Christ and his members are
joined together by imagination. as the mind of man, and the thing whereof he
thinks: or by consent of heart, as one friend is joined with another, as
Jonathan (...).
and David: or by mingling together of substances, as when many ingrediences
are mingled together to make one medicine, or by corporal conjunction in
touching, as Sea and Land are both joined together to make one Globe, and the
part of a Building coupled together to make one Building: For although this
mystical union betwixt Christ and all them who truly believe in him, is a
most real, a most near, a most straight, and a most sure, and indissoluble
union, and conjunction. Yet is the same rather by experience felt in the heart
of the true believer, then conceived in his brain. (...) o^. 10. 16.
The Jews require Miracles, and the Grecians Arguments, which they may
comprehend with their wit and wisdom: But God gives Pro. 3. 32. and 34 James
4. 6. Luke 1. 52.
the grace of understanding his Mysteries to the simple and true of heart, and
regards not the Wisdom of the wise, nor the Understanding of Esaias 29. 14.
19.
the prudent, in which things the proud do glory. Therefore the true Believer,
when he finds this Union to be above his capacity yet because he is taught
it by the Scriptures, he believes it, as it were upon Gods bare word, and by
experience he feels, that by Faith wrought in his heart by the Holy Ghost,
Christ with all his Merits, Benefits, and Graces, is actually made his own,
and himself Christ's; according to the Covenant of Grace, made unto Abraham,
and often repeated by the Genesis 22. 16. 17. 18. Esaias 59. 21. 94. 10. Ezck. 37.
26. 27. 28.
Prophets. Ier. 32. 38. 39. 40. Ier. 31. 31. 32. Hos. 2. 19. 20.

Moreover, in the Scriptures we are taught three kinds of unions, the first,
is a Natural union, or conjunction in nature, when sundry things are
conjoined and coupled by one and the same nature, as the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, being three distinct subsistences, are all one, and conjoined
in one Godhead, and divine nature: but Christ, and the true believer are not
one as conjoined in nature; for then they twain should be one body and soul.
The second union, is a Personal Union, or an union in person, when things in
nature different are so conjoined together, that they make one person, as the
body and the soul make one man, and the Godhead of the son, and his manhood
make one Christ, but Christ and the true believer are not joined in person: for
Christ is one person, and Peter a second person, and Paul a third person; and
so many men as be true Christians or members of Christ, so many several
persons are they. The third kind of union taught in the Scriptures is in the
spirit: and this is the mystical union whereby Christ and his members are
spiritually joined together into one mystical body, by the operation of his
divine spirit, descending from him the head to us his members, applying Christ
unto us, and creating faith in our hearts: whereby, as by our only instrument
on our parts we apprehend and receive Christ, and are united unto him: and
this union whereby Christ and the true believer are thus actually joined
together, because it is wrought and made by the spirit, is called a Spiritual
union.

In this Union the things united are the whole person of the true believer,
to^rds, his Body and Soul, and the whole person of Christ, God, and Man: but
yet they be so united, that the true believer is first and immediately united
to the humane nature or manhood of Christ, and then by reason of the manhood
to the word it self or divine nature: For salvation and life and the John 6.
53. 56.
merits of Christ's obedience depend upon the fullness of the Godhead, which is
in Christ: but yet it is not communicated unto us, but in the flesh, and by the
flesh of Christ.

This mystical union may be in some sort conceived more plainly by the
consideration of the union of the natural man and his members, when we
consider how his soul sends forth from his head sense and motion to all his
other members of his natural body, and that although the soul cannot from the
head send sense and motion to the other members of his natural body without
the means of Arctures and Ligaments; whereby the members of the natural man
are tied together, that by that means sense and motion may be conveyed from
his head to the other members, and that yet the head and other members of the
natural body are not so fitly coneyed and said to be the natural man's
members, because they be tied, and as it were, souldred together by arctures
and ligaments of the body, as for that they receive life, sense, and motion
from his soul: then how much more may we conceive and say, That Christ, our
Head, and we our selves be one mystical body; even mystical Christ's: and
that we 1 Cor. 1^. 12.
be members of his mystical body by the communion and preparation of Christ's
spirit, which being by nature infinite, stands in no need of any carnal means
to make this spiritual union by communicating himself from Christ our Head,
unto us his members, although Christ and we his members be distinct persons,
and far distance each from other, as in the natural man the head and the
foot.

Hence it is, that Saint John says, Hereby we know that we dwell in him,
and he in us, because he has given unto us of his spirit. And hence it is,
that Saint Paul says, If any man has not the spirit of Christ, the same is
not his.

Would thou then know, that Christ is thine, and thou Christ's as a true
member of his mystical body? then laying aside all carnal conceits, have
recourse into thine own self, and try whether with the Apostle Saint Paul
thou feel thy self, both Body and Soul, to live of Gal. 2. 20.
Christ's spirit: for as thou know that the members of thine own natural
body are thine own members, because they receive life, sense, and motion from
thine own soul; so every true believer does know that he ^s a member of
Christ, because that by experience he feels that his own person, to wit, his
Soul and Body, has received and does live of the spirit of Christ: and
again, as certain thou do know, that thy members do not live of my soul,
nor my members of thy soul, and that whatsoever members live of thine own
soul, are the members of thine own body: and whatsoever members live of my
Soul are the members of my own body.

Even so do thou know, that nothing does, or can, live of the spirit of
Christ but Christ and the members of his body, and that whatsoever lives not
of Christ's spirit, is no member of his.

Hence the Apostle Saint Paul (as comprised in the mystical body of Christ,
and by experience feeling the spiritual life which he received from the
spirit of Christ) says: I am crucified with Christ, G^l. 2. 20.
but I live: yet not I any more, but Christ lives in me, and in that I now
live in the flesh, I live by Faith in the Son of God, who has loved me and
given himself for me.

This mystical union is in both the Sacraments acknowledged: for in the
Sacrament of Baptism all true believers who are partakers of the outward
Sacrament of Baptism, and thereby made and acknowledged to be members of
Christ's visible Body, to wit, his visible Church: are by one spirit, to wit, by
the only spirit of Christ, working faith in them, made members of his mystical
body the invisible Church: and in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as in
token or remembrance that we are made members of his visible Body, the
visible Church; whose Body was broken, and his Blood shed for us, we
communicate and participate our Bread and our Wine. So also by this outward
action we acknowledge the mystical union which we have with Christ, and
one with another by the participation and communion of his spirit, of which we
spiritually live.

But the question may be yet further asked; how a man may discern and know,
when himself, or any other is spiritually dead, and when spiritually living,
and endued with the spiritual life here spoken of.

To which it may be answered, that as we be natural men, although we eat
and drink, and perform all other actions and works of men, who are
naturally living in bodily health; yet until by our union with Christ, until
by our effectual calling, until by our Justification, and until by our
Sanctification, we be made new Creatures in Christ, we are dead in our
sins, because we be no more able to do any the works of new creatures
living unto God in Christ, that is to say, we are no more able to do any works
acceptable unto GOD, then the man naturally dead, is able to eat or drink, or
to do any other work or action of the man who is naturally living, because
the whole natural man, and every part of him, is wholly corrupted with sin,
and therefore dead in sin, for:

First, in his mind there is nothing 1 Cor. 2. 14. Romans 8. 5. Ephesians. 4. 18.
but blindness and ignorance, concerning heavenly matters.

Secondly, his conscience is defiled, being always either benumbed Ephesians. 4.
19. Tit. 4. Esaias 57. 20. Prou. 28. 1.
with sin, or else turmoyled with inward accusations and terrors.

Thirdly, his will wills and lusts after that only which is evil.

Fourthly, the affections of his Genesis 6. 5. Phil. 2. 13.
heart, as Love, Joy, Hope, Desire, etc. are stirred and moved to that only
which is evil, and never to that which is good.

Lastly, the members of his body Gal. 5. 24. Romans 7. 18. 19.
are Tools and Instruments of his mind for the execution of sin.

All which corruptions and deadness in sin are then only cured, and we
made spiritually living unto God, When in Christ we Romans 6. 19.
be made new creatures by our effectual union with Christ, by our effectual
calling, by our Justification and Sanctification, which four degrees of our
regeneration, howsoever they in nature go one before the other, yet too make
us new creatures in Christ, do so concur, that the true believer or
regenerate person, finding himself to have the one of them, may assure
himself he has them all* for,

First, the true believer may assure himself of this union with CHRIST, when
he finds that Christ of his love preventing him does begin the union by
communicating unto him his holy Spirit, dwelling in his man hood, through the
ministry of his holy Word, and by the cooperation of the same Spirit with
his word does beget in him a lively faith, by which the true believer on his
part, as by his only instru meant is actually united unto Christ, but this
union is not perceived by the regenerate person before he be called.

Secondly, therefore the true believer may assure himself, that he having a
lively faith, is effectually called to the knowledge of the things he
believes, for no man can effectually consent unto the thing contained in the
Word, much less by a lively faith believe the things herein contained, unless
he be first by the ministry of the Word, instructed and called to the
knowledge thereof, to wit, by having his understanding enlightened with the
knowledge of the truth and his will thereunto persuaded.

Thirdly, the true believer being by faith, as aforesaid, united unto Christ,
and called by the ministry of the Word to the knowledge of that which by a
lively faith he believes, he may assure himself of his Justification;
because that the faithful are justified before GOD, by the only imputation of
Christ's righteousness: for in what manner Christ was made a sinner for us, in
the same manner are we made righteous by him: but Christ was made a sinner for
us by imputation of our sins unto him, and therefore we are made righteous
before God by imputation of his righteousness unto us.

Again, as we are made sinners (that is) guilty of the first Adams
transgression; so are we made not guilty, and justified, by the obedience of
the second Adam: but we are made guilty of the first Adams transgression by
imputation, and therefore we are justified by the imputation of the obedience
of the second Adam. Now the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us, does
as upon the only cause and reason thereof depend upon our union with Christ,
made on our parts by faith only.

Fourthly, the true believer finding himself united unto Christ, and Called,
and lively Justified he may assure himself of his Sanctification: for a
lively faith is not of our selves, but it is of GOD. By it we are in diverse
Hphes. 2. 8.
respects both justified and sanctified: by it we are justified, not formally,
as by a meritorious virtue or part of righteousness inherent in us, but
relatiuely in respect of the Object it apprehends, to wit, as by it we apply
to our selves the righteousness inherent in Christ Jesus manhood: which of
his own mere mercy is imputed unto all who lay hold thereupon by faith: but
by it we are sanctified, as by a grace inherent in us, as are also the graces
of hope and charity, and other sanctifying graces, which being in the manhood
of CHRIST without measure, are by his spirit from thence infused unto us in
measure, to sanctify us, and make us fit for the Kingdom of Heaven: and to
speak both briefly and plainly of this matter, Faith is a chief part of our
Sanctification, being, as it were, the root both of other inward graces, and
outward obedience which concur to our Sanctification.

The fifth PRINCIPLE.
BY the outward Ministry of the Word is conuayd unto us Christ's divine spirit,
which also by the same Ministry of the Word begets in us Faith, whereby
we are actually united unto Christ, and made one with him.

Notes upon the fifth Principle.
THE Doctrine of the fifth Principle is taught and confirmed unto us by the
whole Book of the Ac^ of the Apostles: for through out that whole Book
examples are expressly and plainly showed unto us how the Holy Ghost, and Faith
are given to the hearers, by attentive and reverent hearing of the Word of GOD,
preached by his Ministers, as in the second Chapter, three thousand who gladly
heard the Gospel preached by Peter the Apostle, received the holy Ghost and
believed: and in the tenth Chapter, and in diverse other places it does appear,
that many of the Gentiles by hearing of the Apostles Paul and B^rnabas preach,
received the holy Ghost, and believed: the like appears in that Book to have
been done at the preaching of other Ministers of Gods Word, as of Philip and
Steven: and almost nothing else in effect is taught through the whole Book but
examples, how the holy Ghost and Faith are given unto the bearers, by attentive
and reverend hearing the word of God preached by his Ministers.

And these examples do manifestly confirm the truth of Christ's promise made
to his Apostles and their successors, that at their preaching of the Gospel
he would be present with them, by his Matthew. 28. 20.
holy spirit to work Faith inwardly in the hearts of their hearers. And hence
(for that saving Faith is wrought in the hearts of the hearers by the operation
of the holy Ghost accompanying the Word preached) Faith is called the gift of
Ephesians. 2. 8.
God, and the outward ministry of the Word wherewith the cooperation of the
spirit is joined, is by the Prophet Esoy called the Stern Phil. 1. 29.
of God: that is by the instrument whereby the Lord declares his might and
power to bring us to salvation, and by the Apostle Paul, it is accounted the
wisdom of God to bring men to salvation: for (says he) seeing the world by
wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God (that is, by the consideration of
the workmanship of the world, whereby God makes manifest his exceeding Power
and Wisdom) it pleased God by foolish preaching to save believers as if he
should say, although by the wisemen of the world, the preaching of the word of
God is no otherwise made reckoning of, then of a foolish thing: yet with God it
is the greatest and chiefest wisdom to bring men unto salvation, being heard
and received with due reverence.

Let us therefore from hence know and understand, and lay up in our hearts for
ever, that he or she who does not hear, or negligently hears, the word of
God preached by the lawful Minister, yea, and does not compass and effect the
hearing thereof without sparing cost or pains, neglect their own salvation,
and willingly remain in the cursed state of damnation, under the tyranny of
the Devil, because they John 17. 20.
neglect and despise the means offered unto them by God, by which they may be
made members of Christ, and of the household of God. For, mark well also the
prayer of Christ made a little before his Passion, how he prays, first, for
his Apostles, to be made one with him, and then for them who shall believe by
the preaching of them and their successors.

Hence let us conclude these notes with the saying of the Apostle Saint Paul,
that there is no salvation without Romans 10.
faith, and no faith but by hearing the Word of God preached.

The sixth PRINCIPLE.
AS Faith is wrought in us by the Ministry of the word of God, so it is
afterward by the same word during the whole course of our lives increased and
made stronger in us. Ephesians. 4. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 2.

Notes upon the sixth Principle.
EVery Christian, as he is a natural man, was borne of his Father and Mother,
and is flesh of their flesh, and after his birth he has his being and
subsisting in himself, and not in his Parents: but otherwise it is of every
Christian, as he is a Christian, and of the Son of Adam, is in Christ made a
new creature or regenerate man, and is become the Son of God, he has in
Christ, both the beginning of his new creation or regeneration, and also his
being a new creature or regenerate man, and his continuing a new Creature, to
wit, He has in Christ his beginning 1 Cor. 1. 30. Ephesians. 5. 30.
to be, and his being and continuing an holy member of his holy body, of his
flesh, and of his bones: But as a young child begotten after the flesh, after
it is borne stands in need of nourishment, thereby to be nourished and
increased; so he that is made a new creature, or borne anew in Christ, by the
seed of Gods word, must be fed with the same word that he may grow in
strength and spiritual increase, till Ephesians. 4. 13.
(as the Apostle says) he become to be a perfect man, and to the measure of
the age of the fullness of Christ, that is, until he be come to perfection it
self; whereunto because we shall never attain so long as we live in this
world, we must all our life long be fed with the Word of God: the want of
which food is a greater punishment then famine of victuals, as God testifies
by his Prophet, Amos 8. 11. Behold, the days come that I will send a Famine in
the Land, not a Famine of bread, nor a thirst of Water, but of hearing the Word
of God, to wit, either publicly read or preached: by both which we are
effectually fed.

But who must preach the same? such as are thereunto lawfully called: for as in
a Kingdom well ordered, there is no man which ought or may exercise any
public office, but by the appointment and commandment of the King, so none
ought or can be accounted a Preacher, Minister, or Pastor of the Church of God,
to preach his word, except according to Gods own ordinance he be lawfully
called, and by his lawful calling, have from God his Commission to preach his
Word: for only to the Apostles immediately, and extraordinarily sent by
Christ, and to their Successors lawfully called by Apostolical succession,
has Christ given Commission publicly to preach, with special Mat. 28. 29.
Luke 24. 49.
promise of his presence with them at their Preaching, by joining the
cooperation of his Spirit with their Preaching: Also Christ in his Prayer made
a little before he went into the Garden, John 17. 20.
prayed only for his Apostles, and them who shall believe by the Preaching of
the Apostles and their Successors.

The seventh PRINCIPLE.
FAith inwardly begotten, and lying bid in the heart of the true Belcener, or
Regenerate man, is by him made manifest unto others, by the exercise of good
works, appointed of God for him to walk in, Ephesians. 2. Mark 5. Romans 8. James
2. 14.

Notes upon the seventh Principle.
AMong good works appointed for us to walk in, are principally to be
remembered, the Act 1. 14. and 3. 4. and 10. 2. Mat. 7. 7. John 28 36. Ephesians. 3.
19. and 6. 18.
Exercise of Prayer, both public and private: the Marse 16. 16 John 6. 53. and
22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 24.
use of the Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper: Mat. 23. 2. Acts 17.
11. and 18. 26.
hearing the Word of God preached, with reading and conference: Prou 19.
relieuing the Poor: willing Heb. 13. 17. Romans 13. 1.
obedience to Laws both Ecclesiastical and Civil in our several vocations:
Pet. 2. 13. Romans (...). and 8.
strong striving against, and subduing of our own lusts and affections, by
temperancie, continency, humbleness, kindness, patience, and such like,
wherein vvec are admirably helped, if with fervent Prayer Psalm. 119. 9. 57
Psalm. 1. (...). Josh. 1. 8. Psalm. 14. 4.
we every one particularly join an earnest examination of our own thoughts,
words, and deeds, by the ten Commandments of God: the true expounders
hereof are the Prophets and Apostles: and also particularly apply every one to
himself, all the Articles of our Creed, which is an abridgement of all things
by us to be believed for our souls comfort, and defense against every
temptation and assault of the World, the Flesh, and the ^ell.

The reason of this seventh Principle does rise from the consequence of the
fourth Principle: for as in the natural man, the soul does communicate his
eff^cts to the body, with which it is coupled, and makes his residencie in the
body to be known by the outward works and actions of the natural man: Even
so does Christ (with whom we are one spirit) communicate the force and fruits
of his Spirit unto all them whom he has united unto himself, as himself
testfieth: For says he, I am the 1 Cor. 1. 20. 1^ 5. Romans 8. 10. 1 Cor. 4.
20. 1 Cor. 16. 17. John 1. 5. 8.
Viae, ye are the branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, brings
forth much fruit.

Moreover, seeing God does of right exp^ct at our hands to be glorified by us
in the fruits of holiness and righteousness, for the innumerable and
unspeakable mercies and benefits we receive of him; and seeing (to take away
from us all excuse of insufficiency and weakness, that we are not able of
our selves to perform the things he does expect at our hands) he has by our
union with Christ, according to his oath made unto Abraham, given us power to
serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lives;
no weakness can excuse our unwillingness, and intolerable unthankfulness,
if we neglect to glorify him in the fruits of holiness and righteousness,
according to the power and measure of Gods grace given unto us, in all
singleness and willingness of heart, being the proper end of all his gifts
Ephesians. 14.
and graces bestowed upon us.

For wherefore has God elected us? that we might be saved howsoever we should
live? No: but he has elected us that we should be holy and without blame
before him in love.

Why has CHRIST redeemed us from the hands of our spiritual Enemies? that
being free from them we might sin more freely? No: but that we being Luke
1. 74. ^5.
d^liuered from the hands of our spiritual Enemies, might worship him without
fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lives.

Wherefore has he freed us 1 Pet. 2. 24.
from the s^ruitude of sin? that we might have the more freedom to sin?
No: he has freed us from the servitude of sin, that we might be the
servants of righteousness.

Wherefore does he regenerate us by his Spirit, and create us a new? that we
should do nothing our selves? No: We are the workmanship Ephesians. 2. 11.
of God, created in Christ Jesus to good works, which God has prepared that
we should walk in them.

Why does he bestow temporal benefits upon us? that like pamperd Horses we
should kick against our Lord and Master? No: he crowns us with his manifold
blessings, to the end we should keep his Statutes and observe his Deuteronomy. 30.
9. 10.
Laws? Let him not therefore say or think, that he is a Christian or
regenerate man, who brings forth no good works to testify his faith: and on
the contrary side, who so brings forth the fruits of saving ^aith, may assure
himself, that he is a true Christian and a ^ull Branch of the Vine, Christ
Jesus, which cannot but bring forth fruit to the glory of God.

Many in the time of Saint John the Apostle, did with vain confidence sav
that they had fellowship with Christ, and yet they walked in darkness. But the
Apostle, the 1 Epist* 1. 6. w^teth plain^ly, that they did (...), and dealt not
tru^y: and in like sort many an outward professor of the Gospel in our days,
who is in the Church, but not of the Church, does boldly boast and say, that
he has as sted^st ^aith and Hope in God and his Mercies, as any man: and that
if in all the world there were but only two to be saved, that himself should
be one of them two, and that not of any merit of his own, but for Christ's
sake, and for his sake only: and yet by confe^nce with such, and by their
vain^ and wicked lives and conversation, they do b^ay themselves, that they
walk^ in darkn^sse, and have no true saving knowledge of Gods me^ in Christ,
and that all their goodly words of Faith and Hope are grounded upon fleshly
Presumption, and not upon Gods word inwardly taug^t them by the Spirit of God,
which teaches that the me^e and loving kindn^sse of God should lead them to
Repentance, Romans 2. 4 and to become n^w Creatures, 2 Co^. (...). 1^. and to
c^ucifie the ^lesh, with the aff^tions and lusts thereof, (...). 5. 24. and to
die to sin and live to righteousness, R^m. 6. 14. and to live after the
will of GOD. 1 Peter 4. 2. For clean contrarily their conversation and
spee^es, if you have conf^rence with them, sauoureth only of lewd ignorance
and the lusts of the flesh, and that they make Gods mercy in Christ, but a
cloak for their sins, that they may sinn^ the more franck^ly and securely,
and set all upon Christ's score: they taste nothing of the Union which every true
Christian has with Christ, nor of the effectual Ca^ng, Justification, and
Sanct^fication, which are inseparable to all and every one, who has true and
saving Faith.

The eight PRINCIPLE.
THe Works of the regenerate person, or true Bel^euer, doc not me rit or
deserve, or are worthy of grace in this life, or Glory in the world to come.
Romans 17. 10. Romans 8. 18.

Notes upon the eight Principle.
I^ we note the nature of the word Merit or Desert, we^ may easily find that
merit or desert may have place with men, but not with God: for in me^iting or
descruing a thing, we must be nothing in debt for it unto him, of whom we will
be said to deserve it. Secondly, that the things we bring to deserve by, be
not his but our own. Thirdly, that the things we bring to deserve by, be at
the least equal, or as much in value or worth as the thing we will be said to
deserve. But if any one of these conditions do fail, there can be no merit or
des^rt; much less then can the regenerate man by his works merit or deserve
at Gods hands grace in this life, or glory in the world to come, seeing in the
same are wanting all these conditions.

For first, whatsoever good works may be performed of the regenerate man, are
due to GOD by a double right: namely, by the right of Creation, and by the
right of regeneration. Hereupon Christ gives warning unto his Disciples, When
Luke 17. 1^.
ye have done all thin^s which are commanded you, for ye, We are
unprofitable Servants, we have done that which was our duty to doc.

Secondly, whatsoever good thing can be done of the regenerate man, is
certainly of God, who works in us both the will and the dec^: Phil. 2. 13.
And Saint Paul in another place says, What have thou that the have 1 Cor. 4.
7.
(...) rec^iued? and if thou have received it, why do thou boast as if thou
had not (...) it?

Thirdly, the Kingdom of heau^n is of ins^te value, and therefore cannot
possi^ly be purchased by the (...) and deserts of finite (...). And hence Saint
Paul says, I co^t that the afflictions of Romans 8. 18.
this present life are not w^rthy of the glory, which shall be reueal^ a unto
us. Moreover, admit that the regenerate man's car^iage and government be such
of his out^ard parts, and also of his desires, (...), and lusts, that they
br^ake not forth into committing of gross sins, nor that he give so much as
consent to his wicked lusts, but hate them and is against them, and brings
forth many good works; yet for so much as he is not so clean washed in the
La^ar of Regeneration, but that some part of his inbred corruption, though it
be not imputed unto him, yet remains in him, he can in Gods Justice deserve
nothing at Gods hands, but his wrath and condemnation: for, the reward of sin
is Rom 6. (...).
death; and He^ b^aketh the whole Law, wh^ by his inbre^ lusts break^th Iam. 2.
20.
the tenth Commandment, which Gal. 3. 10.
does not only forbid consent unto wicked lusts, (which is also formerly
forbidden by the other Commandments) but goes further, and forbids that
we be not so much as ^kled with any kind of Concupiscence or wicked lust,
although our will consent not, yea^ be against it.

Also, from this inbred corruption of the regenerate man springs not only
omission of some good which ought to be done, but also wants and defects of his
best deeds, and to speak all in a word, Imperfection of Chariti^. For Charity
(which is a virtue with which we love that which ought to bel^d; and so is the
ground of all virtues and good works) is in some more, in some less, but
perfect Charity, such as the Law of GOD requires, (which cannot be increased)
is found in none: no, not in the regenerate man, during his life. For he
cannot perfectly perform the Law of GOD, and love God with all his soul, with
all his heart, with all his mind, and his neighbor as himself. He must
needs confess with the Apostle Saint John, If we say we have no sins, 1
John 1. 8.
we deceive our selves, and the truth (...) not in us.

This imperfection of Charity wrought through the force and violence of inbred
corruption, is clearly set forth and described by S. Paul in his own person,
propounding himself a true pattern of a man regenerated, Romans 7. For in
the 15. and 19. verses he says, that this inbred corruption made him to omit
the good be would, and to do the evil he hated, and in the 18. verse, that to
will was present with him, but he found no means to perform that which was
good: and in the 23. verse that his inbred corruption ^ebelled against the law
of the mind, and led him captive or prisoner to the law of sin: and in the
25. verse, that it made him serve the law of sin: and in the 22. verse it
appears that he speaks of himself as a man regenerated who delights in
the Law of God concerning the inner man. Wherefore, howsoever we profit by
the work of regeneration by God wrought in us, yet does our charity and good
works, by reason of the force and violence of ou^ ^bred corruption, or
original sins, want somewhat of that they should be, and the wants and defects
of our good deeds we do, and the omission of the good deeds we ought to do,
are such, and so many, that we of necessine (though we be regenerated) must
always without presuming upon our merits and deserts, humbly for his mercy
(...) crave at Gods hands forgiveness of our trespasses, with this assurance,
that if we acknowledge our sins, God is faithful and just to John 1. 16.
forgive us all our sins, and to cleanse us from all our unrighteousness.

Objection.
It seems that there is little difference betwixt the true believer or
regenerate person, and the unbeliever.

Answer.
The difference betwixt them is very great; for sin does only dwell in the
regenerate person against his will, but it reigns not, nor is imputed to him,
because he is justified and cleansed from his sins by faith in CHRIST I^VS:
and in this sense in the Scriptures the regenerate man is sometime said to
sin, and sometime is said not to sin. The regenerate man sins, in regard
that sin dwells in him, though it reign not in him. And he sins not,
because sin is not imputed unto him, but he is notified and cleansed from his
sin by the blood of Christ Jesus. But in the unregenerate man sin reigns
with his will and consent: and his sins are imputed unto him, because he
want^th faith to justify him, and to clear him from his sins by the
rightcousnesse of Jesus Christ.

Also, the regenerate man may say with Saint Paul, I do not the (...) I would:
but the unregenerate man contrariwise says, I ^not so much evil as I would:
which howsoever Romans 7. 10.
he speaks it not in express words, yet he has it in his heart, as may
appear in covetous, ambitious, and contentious persons, and in Thecues,
Fornicators, Drunkards, and such like, whose lusts are never satisfied:
moreover, whereas the unregenerate man waxes every day worse and worse; the
regenerate man contrariwise makes proceedings in goodness. In which (though
they be small) it does appear that sin does not reign in him, but in some
measure is overcome by him, and in him is in some manner mortified.

The ninth PRINCIPLE.
THE true believer or regerate person may assure himself, that he shall never
be moved from the state of salvation, whereunto he is effectually called by
the ^nisterie of the Word, and that he shall have life everlasting, and
eternal glory in Heaven.

Notes upon the ninth Principle.
THE Gifts and Calling of Romans 11. 29.
God are without repentance, and with him there is no variablenosse or shadow
of change, as God does testify of himself, I Iam. 1. 16.
am the Lord, and I change not. We cannot attribute unto GOD Matthew. 13. 6.
any change of decree, counsel, or will, concerning election or reprobation,
without wicked blasphemy: for he that changes his decree, his counsel, or
his will, does it because he sees he might have been better advised, or
because he sees he could not have brought his purpose to pass, as he would,
both which do argue imperfection and weakness, which are abhorring and far
from the nature of God, who is most perfect, and infinite in his Wisdom,
Will, and Power, and in all his attributes. Whatsoever pleases the Psalm. 135.
6.
Lord that does he, both in Heaven and in Earth, and in all places: and he
says of himself, my Counsel shall stand, and my Will shall be done. Esa 46.
10.
Therefore it is doubtless true, that some whom God has elected to Salvation,
shall certainly be saved, and others whom God has reprobated shall certainly
be condemned. But how may a man assure himself that he is of the number of
them who are by God elected and chosen to salvation? The Papist says, because
predestination to salvation and reprobation is in God, and not in us, no man
can assure himself of his election to salvation, except that God do expressly
by some Angel outwardly, or spirit inwardly, say unto him that he is
predestined to life everlasting. After which sort Saint Paul and some few
other Saints had 1 Cor 2. 16.
their predestination revealed unto them: and to confirm their opinion, they
allege, that no man knows the secrets of God, but the spirit of GOD, as no
man knows the secrets of man but the spirit of man who is in him. Against
which the true believer says, that God is not to be tied to special
revelations only. For by other means also he does reveal unto every true
believer the certainty and sure knowledge of his election to salvation. For,
says the true believer, although that God does not by any special revelation
say unto me particularly and by name, thou art elect and predestined to life
everlasting: yet by the cooperation of his holy spirit, joined in my heart with
his word, I am by the general propositions of the Word instructed and assured,
that I am predestined and elected to life everlasting. As for example, the
Scripture teaches generally, that this is the will of God, that every man who
beleele^ueth in Christ should have everlasting Ioh. 6. 40.
life: from which general proposition by the inward persuasion of the holy
Ghost. I persuade my self by the certainty of mine election to salvation,
because by experience I find and know, that by the ministry of GODS Word is
wrought in me saving faith which always is grounded upon the certain
knowledge of Gods promises revealed in his Word, and not upon ignorant
presumption, and vain imaginations. Again, the Scripture generally teaches,
that as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, and
if Romans 8. 14. 17
Sons, Heirs also of eternal life. From which general proposition, I
persuade my self, that I am certainly an heir of eternal life. First,
because by the cooperation of the Spirit of God, with the doctrine of the Law.
I find my hard stony heart softened and my conscience pricked and wounded,
while I apply unto my self the curses of Gods Law, and his fearful
punishments prepared for the wicked. Secondly, because by the further
cooperation of the same spirit with the doctrine of the Gospel, I do not
only find CHRIST JESUS crucified, to be the only sufficient means to free
all men from Gods curses and punishments, but also I rely upon him only for
mine own salvation. Thirdly, because I do not only love Christ, (who loved
me first, and gave himself for me) and all true Christians and his doctrine,
and all his commandments, but also I loath sin, and my self for my sins,
I desire nothing so much as by all means to be delivered from sin, and wholly
to serve God in holiness and righteousness.

Now for so much as I do, and boldly may, by the Word of God, assure my self,
that these things cannot possibly proceed from my sinful and corrupt flesh,
nor from the Devil, but they are the proper and only work of the holy Ghost,
I being thus led by the spirit of God, may out of the said general proposition
assure my self that I am one of his sons, and therefore am heir of eternal
life. And in like manner from other general propositions of the Scripture
every true believer or regenerate person by the applying the same to himself,
may make himself sure, and certainly know, that he is by God elected to
salvation, and that how vveake soever his Faith be, and how often soever by
frailty he sins, yet (because Gods will and election is unchangeable) he
shall never be removed from the state of salvation, whereunto he is effectually
called, but shall have life everlasting and eternal glory in Heaven. The true
believer stands not in his own strength, but he is kept by the power of God
through faith unto 1 P^t. 14.
salvation. It is God which stablisheth 1 Cor. 1. 21. Col. 3. 3.
him in Christ, his life is hid with Christ in God.

Objection.
It is a proud and Heretical arrogancy and presumption (say the Papists) for
a miserable Sinner to assure himself that he shall be saved: and to confirm
their opinion, they allege these places of Scripture, and many others: Pass
the time of your dwelling here 1 Pet. (...). Pro. 28. 14. Romans 1^ (...). Phil.
(...). (...).
in fear. Blessed is the man who fears always. Be not high minded, but
fear. M^ke an end of your Salvation with fear and trembling.

Answer.
The true Believer does not ground the assurance of his salvation upon his own
works, or worthiness (for that ^ere indeed proud Arrogancy, and Heretical
Presumption) but he groundeth the assurance of his Salvation up on the
merciful and immutable Promise of GOD only, which is no Presumption, or
Arrogancy, but true Christian Humility, giving all glory to God. And the more
that the true Believer thus groundeth his assurance upon God only, renouncing
utterly all worthiness of his own, and fears his own weakness, the more
he is stirred up to pray unto God for his assistance: and by experience he
finds the assistance of Gods holy Spirit granted unto him: and the more that
he finds by experience Gods love and favor toward him, in giving unto him
the assistance of his holy Spirit, the more he loves God and fears to
offend so gracious and merciful a God; and more and more learnes to distrust
his own worthiness, and to cleave only to Gods power and assistance, and to
assure himself of his Love and Favor unto the end. Therefore David joined
these together; Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling, Psalm. 11. 2.
Noting thereby, that Gods Children fear, yea, even tremble in regard of their
own infirmities and corruptions, and yet at the same time they are filled with
joy, in respect of their full assurance of Gods love and favor, and of their
own Salvation.

Objection.
The true Believer cannot have certain knowledge and assurance of his
salvation, because his Faith is full of doubting, which Faith is opposed to
full assurance.

Answer.
The true Believer is to be considered in his two parts: the Flesh and the
Spirit; the part regenerate and the part v^regenerate, which continually fight
and strive one against the other. And as the parties themselves are opposite,
so are their qualities and fruits: for in the Spirit is Faith, Hope, Love,
Zeal, Joy in the Holy Ghost, and such other sanctifying graces* In the Flesh
is Doubting, Infidelitis, hatred of God, Presumption, Desperation, Coldness,
Dullness, yea, Deadness in Religion, Servile Fear, Horror, and such like
Corruptions, so as we may say with the Apostle, I know that in my flesh (that
is, in my vnregeneate part) dwells no goodness: and sometimes the one, and
sometimes the other has the vpper-hand, and yet always retain their own
nature and properties. So that it cannot be denied, but that the Faith of the
true Believer (which is an infused grace of the Spirit) is assaulted of
doubting: but this doubting being a fruit of unbelief, which is an inbred
corruption of the Flesh, cannot be a commendable virtue of Faith (as the
Papists do teach) neither is it of the nature of Faith, which in it self is
certain and assured and not doubting: neither is it any way incident unto
Faith, but it is a fruit of unbelief, which is opposed unto Faith, Romans 4. 20.
And consequently, though Faith be assaulted of doubting, yet in it own nature
it does remain certain and assured, and still lies sucking nourishment out
of Gods gracious Promises, and still retains its property of certain
persuasion, though in the conflict with doubting, it does not exercise it so
manifestly, and in such measure, as before and after the Conflict of
temptations: And no more is doubting (coming unto the true Believer from the
boisterous blasts of Infidelity, being a fruit of the Flesh) of the Nature of
faith, being a fruit of the Spirit, then the shaking of a tree (coming from a
tempest of wind by outward accident) is of the nature of the tree.

Laus Deo.
A devout Prayer, for all Christians, and all times.
O LORD, which have vouchsafed of thy unspeakable goodness, to make and
ordain me thy creature, to live in this transitory life, giving me a
reasonable Soul, by which I know thee, my Lord and my God. O most blessed
Lord, I wretched sinner confess my wicked and abominable sins, I humbly ask
of thee mercy and forgiveness for the same: grant me thy strength to stand sure
in faith, thy knowledge to work thy blessed will, thy power to resist all
errors and wicked imaginations: thy wisdom to know the truth, give me thy
help, I humbly beseech thee, that thy holy Spirit may guide me, and all the
thoughts and desires of my heart, for the thoughts of men are miserable, and
their deeds uncertain: comfort therefore my soul, let it walk in thy Laws
and ways, and work thy will; suffer no worldly persuasions to take place or
root in my heart, but by thy holy Spirit, so direct my ways and works, that
they may be acceptable in the sight. Suffer not my soul to perish, whom thou
have so dearly bought, but for thy mercies sake have mercy upon me, make me
poor in spirit, low in heart, content with my calling, and let my Soul rest
in thee, let me love thee as a Father, a Forgiuer, a Savior, and scare thee
as a Lord a Judge, a Revenger. O Father, put from me my sin and wickedness,
make me to walk in the way of thy Commandments; let me reverently fear thee
and stand in awe of thy judgments. Let me love thee as a Savior, honor thee
as a father, reverence thee as a Lord, and fear thee as a Judge. Grant me
grace to set thy fear before me, to stand in awe of thee, and of thy
Judgments, that I do nothing to provoke thy heavy displeasure against me,
that I may walk in thy fear and holy ordinances, and imbrance those virtues
that shall evidently declare my faithful love, true honor, unsained
repentance, and humble fear toward thee. Have mercy, pity and compassion
upon me most miserable sinner, for my offenses are horrible, great, and
grievous, but I appeal to thy mercies which is above thy works: O let me live
with thee eternally, and not dye though I have deserved it: make me a vessel
of thy grace and mercy, that I may praise thy name: let not my sins souer me
from thee, but let me magnify thy power and mercy. O gracious God, give me
true, hearty, earnest, and unsained Repentance, that I may from the very
bottom of my heart continually lament my manifold sins and transgressions,
my unthankfulness toward thee for all thy merciful benefits abundantly
bestowed upon me; Alas that ever I became so wicked and unkind a Creature, to
displease so good a Lord, so loving and merciful a Father: O forgive me for
thy most dear mercies sake; forgive me all my sins that ever I have
committed against thee, let me never more offend thee, but always gladly serve
thee in righteousness and holiness all the days of my life, govern and
guide my heart in thy true faith, fear, and love, that in all my thoughts,
words, and deeds, I may glorify thy holy Name: to whom be all glory, praise,
power, and dominion, now and evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

