A TRV^ RELATI^^ OF THE PRO^^^dings of the Bauarian and Spa^^^^ forces before
the City Heydelburgh, having very strongly besiedged it.

AS ALSO, The marching of the King of Bohemia and Count Mansfield, with their
forces into Allatia, belonging to Leopoldus the Emperors brother, and the Duke
of Brunswicke into Bauaria.

LIKEWISE, The news from most of the Provinces of Europe, that therein you may
behold, the afflicted estate of Christendom, with the Various Changes
whereunto man is subjected.

Printed the 11. of Iulii. Sua cuique mihi mea.

At LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourne, and Thomas Archer, and are to be sold
at the Royal Exchange, and Popeshead-Pallace. 1622.

The first letter from Constantinople, the 10. of June 1622.
WE understand from Tartaria that there is great mustering of men, and that
they intend to challenge the Throne of Othoman, having heard of the death of
Osman, the great Turk: for this it stands, all that vast Country from Russia
to the Indian and Atlantic Seas, is divided betwixt three chames of ancient
and noble race: The first is called Tartar Cham, a mighty Emperor, possessing
the Province Mangia besides diverse other great Countries: The second Tartar
Mechrit, under whom is desertum de lop; and many Nations to the Caspian Sea.
The third is Tartar Chrim, discending directly from the Family of Othoman, who
both by birth and contract may challenge the Imperial Crown of Turkey, if that
line shall fail, as is thought that he will do now, or otherwise revenge the
murder of the aforesaid Osman upon the Iannissaries.

Also the Letters from Venice make mention that some of the principal
offenders that laid their hands on the Emperor, are fled, and that the rest at
home are divided, some holding with Mustapha, and some with a younger brother of
Osman aforesaid. And that Mustapha desires not the Empire, longing only to
visit the Temple of Mecha, being ravished with the promises of Mahomet.

They write also, that the principal Musty, and some Doctors of the Law, have
foretold and presaged the determination, and final end of the Turkish
greatness, persuading the Visirs at the imitation of the Graecians, every one
to step in for a Kingdom, or more.

From Persia they certify us, that notwithstanding, through this dissension in
Turkey, they have gotten good opportunity to recover Tauris, and other places
left; the Sophy being much displeased with the insolent murder of the great
Turk (as one Prince may act another part) is only resolved to raise an army,
to be revenged on the Iannissaires, whereupon the Beglerbeg of Arabia has sent
him a present of diverse brave Horses.

From Alexandria we hear, that the plague is so great in Gran Cayro, that
about 80000. there have been buried within the space of four months, and
that the Jews are flocking in such numbers to the Sea Towns, whereby the
traffic is much augmented, and increased in the Straites.

From Algier they write, that the Pirate begin to erect a Common wealth among
themselves, and have written to the Hollanders, that if they will unite with
their forces together, they will make an notable attempt upon the dominions of
the King of Spain, and begin a possession there.

It is reported here that at Naples there has been an attempt made upon the
Viceroy by the Nobility and inhabitants, being perplexed with a dearth: but
they cry out upon nothing so much as liberty, and lie in wait to put some
thing in execution.

These that come from Rome, relate that the Pope has given a free indulgence
and pardon of sins to all them that will serve the Emperor in his wars,
whereupon many soldiers and great store of money are sent unto him.

The Signorie of Venice has sent lately diverse Galleys at Sea, besides some
Gulleons toward Candia, and fortified the Harbors in Histria and Dalmatia,
and upon the continent about Crema and Brescia, provides all the places of
importance with strong garrisons.

Letters of Millane make mention, that there has been an insurrection amongst
the Grisons, whereby diverse Spaniards and Imperialists have been slain, and
many places forsaken, not without great terror of the rest.

From Genoa it is certified, that some undertakers have taken sanctuary, or
Asylum, being denied a protection from Spain, although they say their debts
arise, for being engaged about the Catholic Kings affairs.

They write from Florence and Luca, that there is great complaint against the
English, seeing they deal not for so many silks as they were used to do; and
therefore they will endeavor to make cloth and cottens of their own, and not
trade with England, as in times past.

From Poland the News is, that the Jesuits are hateful to the Inhabitants,
whereupon the Lords of the Country have petitioned to the Majesty of Sigism^nd,
either to banish, or dismiss them, about which there is great discontent
occasioned: and here give me leave a little by way of transsition to wonder at
this generation, why they? over all the Orders of Religion should so far vary
from true Religion, as to delight in murder, combustion of Kingdoms,
ostentation of knowledge, rapture of visi^ns, and especially setting Princes at
division, yea breaking the band of amity between Prince and Subject, sure I
can yield you no r^ason for it? but this as it fares with Children, who
sucking of a froward nurses breast become accordingly froward and pettish in
their lives: so they having one Ignatius Loyalta a Soldier to their Father of
a fiery disposition, no doubt according to his name, do immitate him in the
fiery and bloody stepps of war and dissension: God grant that all Princes
may take heed of their policies. For in my Conscience they would pull down
the Papacy, if they could, and set up their own Superintendancy.

They also write, that from the City of Leopolis and the Country adjacent,
much Corn has been transported to Constantin^ple in this time of their
dearth through the Black Sea, whereby they have been wonderfully enriched, as
the Turks neighbourly are releived.

From Spain, there is news of the fear of the Mores, who have lately made an
attempt in Granado, and word is brought by a Brazill man into Portingall, that
the wild men about the River of Amazones, have rebelled against the
Portingals, and Spaniards, who govern the Country and rule there. Much like
that unfortunate mischief which has happened of late in Virginia* where we
hear almost 300. of the English Plantation were slain by the perfidiousnes of
the old Inhabitants.

The second, from Vienna the 22, day, This Cit^ie is much quieted since the
Emperors Marriage, for here are many Nobles and Ladies, who profess the
Gospel, and have their Congregations without the walls of the City, to the
number sometime of forty or fifty Coaches, all which live here undisturbed by
reason the Emperesse entertaines them graciously, and they attend the Court
with all humility when occasion serves; whereas before they stood upon their
guard, and their Servants rodd with pistols and petronels to the Church: And
(God be thanked) the Jesuits cannot divert him from his resolution, to keep
good quarter with his Subjects, although they have many times attempted the
same. Or other wise it may be, their great numbers keep all in awe, and that
the Emperor is loath to be troubled with wars abroad, and dissentions at
home.

From Odenburgh, is here news that the Emperor proposed to the Lords and
States, the Coronation of his Son, but that they absolutely denied it, as
having made choice of another.

It was also Reported, that the Cosackes having no Wars in Poland, threatened
to come down into Hungaria, which the Jesuits urged, and the Emperor
intertayned, but it is said, and thought, the Tartarians and Russians will
keep them back with their Incursions and Enterprises, which they intend to
make shortly.

In those parts are still made great musterings, to supply the Emperors
wars. This City, Prague it self, has guard and watch like a Town of
war, and they beat unto the Parado, as if the enemy lay before it. In
plain terms, they are jealous one of another, and the Heirs and Friends of
those whom the Emperor put to execution, long to be revenged. As for the
Jews, though they generally rejoice at those dissentions among Christians, and
slaughtering one another, yet do they particularly rather favor the
Protestants then the Catholics.

From Moravia, we understand that the Marquis of Iaggerendorf, remains
constant to the King of Bohemia, and has written to Count Mansfield for his
coming into Bavaria, alleging if he do attempt that, he shall be sure to
find many Friends for his passage into Bohemia, where, if the war began
again, no question, some great alteration will follow: for Bethlem Gabor is
now at leisure to take his part, and will questionless assist him, if he can
prosecute any course to come near him.

The fourth, from Cullen the first of July. The Baron of Anholt has threatened
the Country of the Landtgraue of Hessen, in behalf of the Imperialistes; he
intends to recover the places in W^stphalia, taken by the Duke Christian of
Brunswick, but the Inhabitants are all rather for Brunswick, then the Bishop of
Cullen, from whom they were taken.

From Franckfort we understand, that the Duke of Saxony has imposed a harsh
Commandment in his Towns, for the searching of Passengers, and although he
seems discontent at Bavaria's proceedings, yet does he govern Silesia for
the Emperor, or at least so much of it as the Catholics are willing to
submit unto him. But among other things, the Bishops are most fierce against
the Protestants, and will not suffer them to go unto their Churches.

From Poland we have News, that the inhabitants being become loath of the
Jesuits, the Nobility has requested the King, either to banish or dismiss
them, about which is great discontent occasioned.

They write from Noragrad in Russia, that the Jesuits had laid a plott with
certain Prussians, to rob and surprise the Abbey of Saint Nuclay in
Muscovia, adjoining almost to the Sea, which they did either out of envy, at
the flourishing of the Greek Church, then which there is nothing more hateful
to the Roman, or out of a common disposition, and wicked perverseness to raise
quarrels between Countries, and nourish enmity between Princes.

The last from Franckfort, the first of July. After the arrival of the Duke of
Brunswick at Mainhem, where he was stately well-commed; the King of Bohemia
seeing the Country was not able to sustain his Forces, called a Counsel of
War, and resolved to depart; leaving the Palatinate to the care and tuition
of the Lord Belfast, and General Vere; with whom he also left eight thousand
men more then they had, and so they divided themselves, that they presently
marched ten thousand horse, and twenty thousand Foot.

The King and Mansfeild ar now in Als^tia, prosecuting the War there against
the Emperors Brother Leopaldus, burning, spoiling, and taking the Country to
his obedience, the which will constrain Tilly soon to forsake the siege of
Heidelburge, and follow the King, and so by this means divert the War into
his Enemies Country: He has sent the Duke of Brunswick into Bavaria, to
furnish the Kings Army with provision, and then to march and join both
together, and so to go forward as toward Bohemia, as God shall give them
leave. They were no sooner gone, but Tilly advanced his Forces toward
Ladenburgh, and from thence to Heidelburgh. Whereupon Sir Garret Herbert
Commander there of the Castle, assembled the Burgers and Inhabitants to know
both their ability, and resolutions, whether they would endure the siege or
no, and how long they thought their provision would last: they answered
generally, that they would live and die with him, and so they prepared
themselves to endure the siege. And it was thought that Tilly did this rather
to divert them from their Journey into Alsatia, then to bestow so much time in
the siege of a Town which could profit him l^ttle in the obtaining more, then
the possession of the place, unless the Emperor were resolved contrary to his
own Embassy, to make it a continual war. Tilly going on with his siege,
took two of the inhabitants, and cut off their heads, which he pitched upon
poles, turning their faces toward the town to terrify the Burgers: but they
in requital cut off five soldier* heads, and served them so likewise.
Gonsales in the mean time being at Opp^nheim, was yet doubtful whether he
would set upon Mainheim or Frankendale, and so to get the Palatinate at once,
lest it be gotten again: but there is a God that holds the winds in his
hands, and will no doubt hold back that resolution, which must be the cause of
so much bloodshedding, if the wars should go forward in such a manner: but
what will be the issue, time will reveal.

The Landgraue of Hessen, mistrusting lately the forraging of his country by
the Imperials, writ to the Princes of the union concerning the same, who all
returned, that their cause was a common fear, and therefore they would live
and die together in maintaining the general cause of Religion, and particular
defending one another Country.

In the same Letter was likewise set down the resolution of diverse Imperial
Cities, viz. Auspurg, Norremburg, Wittenburg, Francfort, Strasburg, and some
other, for the maintaining of the confession of Auspurg, which was the
resolution of the Protestant Faith, bought out long since by great sums of
Money of Rodolphus and Matthias, former Emperors. Whereupon these Cities
fortified their walls, had their Burgers in Arms, for fear to be surprised.

We have heard from Hagenaw, that the Imperials had lately gone about to
surprise the said City, and had gotten forty men through a Vault within the
Walls, but were all presently shot to death, and the City preserved of that
dangerous enterprise.

In Hungaria the matters stand yet doubtful: the Hungarians have flatly denied
the Coronation of the Emperors son: the Clergy desires to have all the
Spiritual goods back again, with the arrerages, but the States and Laymen
will restore them but a part. They can neither agree upon many other points: so
that it is likely nothing will be concluded at the Diet.

Here was flying news, that the Emperor was taken prisoner, but it is not
true: but this is certain, Bethlem Gabor and the Lord Bridiani are very
strongly marched up in arms.

Those of Glatz and Klingenburgh stand yet bravely out, and have lately given a
great Overthrow unto the Imperiallists, and they grow daily stronger and
stronger. The old Count of Thorn is reported to be upon the way with 26000.
men, to rescue them.

From Denmark they write, that the King has sent diverse Presents to the
Queen of Bohemia at the Hage, and written sundry Letters of comfort and
consolation, assuring of his assistance as well of Men as Money: and that he
has requested the Haven Towns to arm diverse Soldiers to go into
Westphalia, to help and supply those garrisons which Brunswick left there.

The Hollanders lately come from Sweden report, that the Captain of Calmar
castle was called in question for his life, as b^ing betrayed by a counterfeit
letter, written by some secret malicious enemy, as though the same came from
Poland for the surrendering of the fort when time should serve: but his
innocence saved his life, and the matter was soon taken up.

From France it is written, that the king is resolved to go forward in his
enterprises against the Protestant towns. That the Jesuits are jealous of the
Prince of Conde, and he gets but the kings displeasure by his violent courses.
That the Protestants will rather make sallies and die in the field then in
their houses. That Mountalbo is so well provided of all kind of provision, that
they think the king will not easily b^siege it again. Those of Mompellier
prepare themselves likewise, if his Majesty would attempt any thing against
them.

That the Duke of Rohan increase^h his army daily, and hops upon a great
person in France. That the king is much discontented, and has a growing
disease upon him. That the Rochellers take daily prizes, and were resolved to
make a sally upon the Duke of Espernon, being strong and able to minister many
brave soldiers. That there is a prohibition for the landing of the English at
Callice, or on those Coasts. That diverse Apologies are written in the defense
of the Protestants, and that the Queen labors what she may to pacify the
troubles.

From B^u^sels they write, that if the Ambassadors do not suddenly agree upon
a peace, it is feared that the warre^ will increase both in the Palatinate, and
the Low Countries. My Lord of A^gile has almost filled his Regiment, and they
lo^ke for four or five thousand Brit^^i^^ more to come unto them within this
(...) i^ weeks.

From the Hag^ we hear, that the Prince of O^ang is marched up with a brave
army, with resolution to set down before Shertog^nb^s^h, and has sent for all
his Captains out of England to attend his seruice^ no question S^^eola will
follow him. We hear also, that there are public Fasts and set Prayers for
the affairs of the Palatinate.

They write also, that his subjects of Austria, Stiria, Curniola, and
Curinthia, have petitioned to his Maistie, that as they prove good and obedient
subjects unto him, it would please him to be a gracious Lord unto them, to give
them leave to live in the liberty of their conscience, and die in the
profession of the Gospel, that living and dying they may give God the praise
for his protection, who opens the hearts of kings, and his Majesty the
honor of their welfare, for being so beneficial unto them.

We do further understand, that there is coming to the King of Bohemia,
Count Mansfield, and the Duke of Brunswicke, for their further help in the
great enterprises they intend, ten thousand horse and foot of Switzers, and
ten thousand horse and foot of Bohemians: and that the old Earl of Thorn is
gone to relieve Glatz with twenty four thousand horse and foot, and that
Iagensdorpe is marching toward the King of Bohemia with thirty thousand horse
and foot, and that Bethlem Gabor will not be long absent from the King: God
(I hope) will raise up friends to help his true Church, notwithstanding the
Greatness of the Enemies.

FINIS.

