THE Three Sisters Tears.

SHED AT THE LATE SOLEMN Funerals of the Royal deceased HENRY, Prince of
WALES, etc.

R. N. Oxon.

Mors eque pulsat pauperum tabernas regnumque turres.
LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Richard Redmer, and are to be sold at his shop
near the West door of Paul's Church. 1613.

TO THE MOST Virtuous and Highly Honored Lady; the Lady HONOR HAY, Wife to
the Right Noble Gentleman, JAMES, Lord Hay, and Daughter and Heir to the Right
Honorable, the Lord Denny, Baron of Waltham.
HONOR Denies not grace to any Muse,
When any Muse attributes grace to HONOR;
Then had these Sisters tears, which here insues
Not dul'd my Muse and thrown these woes upon her,
(Most Noble Lady) at whose happy birth,
Men gave you HONOR, and the heavens such grace,
That you are thought their Angel upon earth,
My Muse had sung your praises in this place:
Yet since these three fair Ladies, for your worth,
As partner in their plaints for HENRY dead,
From all your tender Sex do choose your forth,
Vouchsafe to grace these Funeral tears they shed:
And for such grace may all the learned nine
All praises offer at your HONORS shrine.
Your Ladyships ever most humbly devoted Richard Niccols.

Authori Carmen Encomiasticon.
Receive my shower of tears into thy flood,
Thou saddest Penman of the saddest Muse;
And would my tears were tears or showers of blood,
Might tears of blood or bloody showers excuse
The bitter doom which Death and Fate decreed,
Against this Prince, who was a Prince indeed.
I say, not I, Heroyicke Henry's dead,
He Is but from Saint to Angels Court removed,
Where he shall ever live eternized;
And where he erst did live be ever loved
We fear and hope, Fear says that such another
Lives not to match with him, Hope says his Brother.
But give I way to him, who knows the way,
And comes prepared to make the world to weep,
Since I want power to think what I would say,
Or say what I would think: such and so deep
Impression in my heart this loss does give,
Who was to young to dye, to good to live.
Enough, enough; begin thy Sisters tears
Unto thy noble virtuous Patroness,
Who no small part in their sad sorrow bears
For this late loss: which grief cannot redress
Were never tears in more abundance shed
Were never more true mourners for the dead.
T.W.

FINIS*
THE THREE SISTERS Tears.
SAd second Sister of the Sacred NINE,
Whose sweetest Music is hart-breaking moan,
Be present at these Funeral tears of mine,
And if they fail supply them with thine own.
If thou can teach me wayling human woes
To touch a stony heart with tender pity,
Sit down with me, my MUSE do thou dispose
In sacred tunes to sing this doleful dittie.
Such doleful dittie never Muse did sing,
No, not when all you Muses mourning sat,
With sweet Thalia'bout your horse hoof spring,
For her Twins loss, which Jove himself begat.
Her loss was great; yet greater loss was theirs,
Whose plaints must be the subject of my Pen,
These three sad Sisters, who with woeful tears
Here wayle his loss, whose like has seldom been.
Begin then MUSE, and tell both when and where
We heard these Echoes of their mournful song,
Recount likewise, who these three Sisters were,
And what he was, to whom death did this wrong.
That time it was, when as the hateful Snake
In that great belt, which buckles heavens bright breast
Rouzing his starrie crest, his turn did take
To spit his poison down on man and beast.
When in this I Will, which Nature as her neast
Halcyon-like has built, for her dear sons,
Amidst the seas, I steered my course by East,
Where fruitful Thames the Prince of rivers runs.
At length that noble City I beheld,
Against whose broad breast the angry River raues;
Yet back repulst as being thereto compeld
He paies it tribute with his fish-full waves.
There did I hear (was never ear did hear
More diverse sounds) all which might yet content
The daintiest sense, to which I drew me near
To know from whence they were, and what they meant.
And lo, I did behold, from off the shoares
Many light friggots, put into the deep,
All trimly decked, which by the strength of Oars
Through the swift stream their way did westward keep.
Who in their course, like couples hand in hand,
(While their proud pennons did the welkin brave
And their shrill Music echoed on the strand)
Did seem to dance upon the bubbling wave.
And round about in many a gondelay,
Light-footed Nymphs and jolly Swains did row,
Devising mirth and dalliance on the way,
Not caring, how they sailed, or swift, or slow.
So many varying and so vain delights
Floating upon that flood, I then did see,
Such diverse shows and such fantastic sights,
That Thames the Idle-lake then seemed to be.
As on the River, so upon the Land,
What ever might delight the living sense,
Was powered forth by pleasures plenteous hand,
As if no other heaven had been from thence.
With diverse change of fashions and of face,
That stately towns proud streets did ebb and flow,
Proud ietting Mimmickes, nor of name nor place
In rich attire and gold were seen to go.
The lofty buildings burdened with the press
Of lovely Dames their windows opened wide,
And swollen with joy of their so graceful guess,
Did burst to show such ornaments of Pride.
This was that day for Antique deeds renowned,
Which the grave senate of that famous state
And people, year by year, with triumph crowned
To honor their elected Magistrate.
With dainty delicates the Tables flowed
In every place, and plenteous Art in scorn
Of niggard Nature, all her cunning showed,
And every dish did lauishly adorn.
VVanton excess, whose cup did over flow
With the Vines frantic juice, which she did spill
With prodigal exspence, went to and fro
And gave to every one to drink there fill.
T'whom quaffing deep, while they in heart rejoice
And sit upon soft seats of careless ease,
Minstrill security does with high voice
Sing this inchaunting song, which well did please.
Let not vain doubt disturb our strengthened state,
Nor fear awake our peace with wars alarm's,
Our powers at home can beat back foreign hate
And friends abroad for us will manage arms.
Enjoy we not the Son of such a King
So fair a branch, which now such fruit does bear,
That from such fruit, such hopes already spring,
That our great Fortunes shake the world with fear?
The heavens therefore us ever shall behold
With lovely look, we fear no adverse Fate,
By human powers we cannot be contrould,
Nay, Jove himself can hardly hurt our state.
O vain opinion of Soule-blinded men
To think that ought on earth may be secure,
What lives, must doubtless die; though doubtful when,
No mortal thing, alas, may long endure.
In that self hour, in which the infant birth
Of joy in human heart is but begun,
Unlooked for chance may change such joyful mirth
To doleful mourning, 'ere the glass be run.
For angry Heaven disdaining this vain puff
Of Giant-Pride in men did open the treasure
Of Jove's fierce wrath, and with stern storms did cuffe
The earth and seas in sign of their displeasure.
The King of Gods, as he but cast a look
On them below, made all the kingdom tremble
A strange amazement Prince and subject struck*
Their former hopes now sudden fears resemble.
A cloud of SORROVV covered all the Coast,
The Sun of COMFORT that had wont dispread
His gladsome beams, as he his light had lost,
In doleful darkness hid his glorious head.
Then droop't great Albion, and did hang the wing,
Which late above the clouds did vaunt to fly:
The Peacock plumes, which from her pride did spring
Did shed, their colors all did vade and dye.
The noble youth to warlike practice given,
The brood of Mars, which daily great did grow,
Whose hearts with hope did leap as high as heaven,
Wander dejected in black weeds of woe.
Disturbed in thought to think what cause could force
So sudden change of things, that seemed to stand
Immutable, by West I kept my course
Still up the River, by the Northern strand.
Until I came to that great house of FAME,
That sacred Temple built by KINGS of yore,
Th'admired workmanship of whose fair frame
Excels all others that have been before.
There Time has raised up Trophies all dispred,
With shining Gold, and monuments of Fame,
To many Kings and great Heroes dead,
And there for ever has engrau'd their Name.
Whose goodly building, as I stood to see,
And wondered at the Architects rare hand,
An unthought accident did hap to me,
As in the Temple I did gazing stand.
There did I see, which I shall ever rue,
There to have seen a doleful Hearse erected,
To which as to a Prince no reverence due,
Or right of Royalty was there neglected.
The royal Badges that were set about
Did seem to me to mourn upon that Hearse,
The Lordly Lion seemed not half so stout,
Nor the Unicorn, as he was wont, so fierce.
A dew of doleful tears was standing seen
Upon the lovely white Rose and the red,
The Thistle was not, as was wont so green,
The Flowre-deluce did seem to hang the head.
But woe is me, that, which was most in me
The cause of woe (O let it no be told)
Was three fair Ladies, whom I there did see,
Three fayrer Ladies, eye did near behold.
They daughters to a famous Monarch were;
Though now their royal robes were laid away,
In stead whereof they mourning stoales did wear,
And at their feet their Crowns and Scepters lay.
On the cold ground all careless they did sit
As loathing nice respects about that beer
And with their hands for such stern use unfit
(Alas the while) did rend their golden hair.
Their breasts they fiercely smot, where lived their woe
And their sad eyes dispairing of relief
They up did lift, whence streams of tears did flow,
As heaven accusing guilty of their grief.
Their grief was such, that even the marble stone
As moved therewith a weeping moisture bears,
Yea now to think upon their pitteous moan
My frailer eyes does drown these lines in tears.
And at that time I felt my greiued heart
So peirc't with pity of so sad a sight,
That drawing near I prayed them to impart,
What was the cause of their so rewfull plight.
Then up arose the fairest of the three
Who sighing deep, as if her heart would break,
After some pause, as soon as breath was free,
To let forth grief, these bleeding words did speak.
Angela. AH, what delight of speech can be to those,
who when they speak in vain do spend their breath*
Man, he may hear, but cannot help our woes,
For he is subject unto Tyrant DEATH;
To Tyrant Death, that has done this despite,
Ah then in living speech is no delight.
In vain my tongue, in vain thou do unfold
The helpless harms of our heart hidden grief*
In vain it is such Sorrows should be told,
Whereas no hope is left to find relief:
All is but vain, where nothing may avail,
Except this one thing left, to weep and wayle.
To weep and wayle his loss for evermore,
Upon whose life my hopes did whole rely.
O then into these eyes what power will pour
A flood of Tears, that never may be dry?
That I unto the dead his due may give,
And show how I him loved, when he did live.
I am the eldest borne of Daughters three
To Albion, chief of mighty Neptunes sons,
Who jealous lest his seed commixt should be
With other mortals, round about us runs,
And from the world, as being in doubt to lose us,
Has made his waves a silver wall t'inclose us.
Logris my Name was once so called before
By great King Locrine, Brutus eldest birth,
But since that mighty people took this shore,
The warlike SAXONS famous through the earth,
Hight Angela my Name has ever been,
Such was the name of their victorious Queen.
And since that time, that name of mine like Thunder
Has borne a dreadful sound, through seas and land,
The worlds great Idol, Rome, at whom with wonder
The Nations round about do gazing stand,
As sudden blow her neck of Pride had broken,
Has quak't, when she has heard my name but spoken.
But why do I, thus vainly vaunt my power,
And boast my greatness, now alas brought low,
Since cruel DEATH has cropped as fair a flower,
As in my garland ever yet did grow?
Was never Flower more hopeful grown then he,
Though he is dead and withered, as you see.
If Iron sides were given me from above,
That sighing would endure, and never break:
Yet could I not express my countries love
Unto this dead young PRINCE; nor could I speak
His praises due, had I a voice of Brass.
So virtuous Noble, and so wise he was.
Was (woe the while that now he is not so)
Son to the Fame-grac'd Monarch of this I WILL,
Who with his royal Brother, who does grow
To hopes, that do my present griefs beguile,
Betwixt them two alone did seem to share
The heritage of GRACE, and virtues rare.
But unto him, to him, that now is gone,
Heaven at his birth so gracious was and free,
That as it should have took delight alone
To give to him, what gifts could given be,
In that blessed hour of his fair birth it shed
All gifts of grace upon his royal head.
The Honey sweet he sucked from learned writs,
Was as heavens Nectar to delight his taste,
Himself the best above the best of wits
In learnings lore shot up and grew so fast,
That all, in him, admired these nobler parts,
Discourse and practice both in worthy arts.
Then help (ye sacred Sisters every one)
Leave your delightful songs and sportfull games,
About the pleasant springs of Hellicon
And sitting with us on the banckes of Thames,
Lament with us, for you have cause to moan,
Maecenas now is dead, is dead and gone.
The sectaries of your deuiner skill
By the dull world dispis'd he did advance,
And them with Princely power protected still
Against the malice of Proud Ignorance;
Then to him dead, who gave while he did live
Such grace to you, all graceful glory give.
On you disdained of golden vanity,
He dain'd to look, and knowing sapience
To be the Garland of Nobility,
Did daily seek your wisdoms influence,
But he is gone and few do now remain,
That do not you and all your Arts disdain.
Where are the worthies of those antique days,
Who wont, their Crowns and Scepters laid aside,
To girt their conquering brows with sacred Bays,
For which their names be now eternized.
They late did live in him, that now is dead,
And are with him again rapt up in lead.
For few do now the sacred Nine esteem,
That have the gift of Mydas golden touch,
Science divine, a fruitless thing they deem,
And count the learned base for being such.
O then let all that learned are lament
His loss, whose life was learnings ornament.
And you brave spirits of the warre-Gods train,
That love to bear the bold Bellonaes shield,
And with your swords eternity to gain,
Delight in battles and in bloody field,
Mourn you with us, your Mars has lost his light,
And in deaths clouds is now extinguished quite.
Who like himself, is like to look on you,
That with an open hand and mind so free,
Will give to men of Arms their praises due,
Which wont great Britains brazen walls to be?
Now in the Helm, the glory of the field,
Foul spiders still their mansion house may build.
If death had given him leave to lead you on,
And guide you through the crimson paths of war,
Against the sons of strumpet Babylon,
Or those Philistines, that her Champions are,
You with your swords were like to dig a Tomb,
Wherein to bury all the Pride of Rome.
Of Rome, that would and will be Monster-head
Of all the world: who was so holy given,
That she of late with hot devotion led,
Would with one blast have blown me up to heaven,
Such hot hell-fierd zeal let all times know,
Since time before the like could never show.
For this, had HENRY lived to lift his hand
To hunt from hence Romes Rats, that daily feed
Upon the fat and glory of my land
And in my wounded bosom daily breed,
I by his arm, like ever to be strong,
Upon the gates of Rome had grau'd this wrong.
For I did think (and who but so will think)
Had he but lived, that never in this land,
A fuller cup of glory I should drink,
Then that which I did hope from HENRY'S hand?
For twice four Henry's have been Lords of me,
All which could not show greater hopes then he.
Not Edwards battles, when such deeds were done,
That Cressies and Poiteres were drowned in blood,
Nor those of Henry, when such fame he woone,
That France did stoop, and at his mercy stood,
I did not think should be so great in fame,
As those which hope did promise in his name.
Him often, though young, upon a warlike steed,
Like Ioue-borne Perseus, mounted I have seen,
Whom with such goodly grace he has bestrid,
As Horse and man had but one body been,
Teaching him stand, stoop, stop, turn, leap and spring
Caper, curuet, pace, praunce, and trot the ring.
His riper judgment in such unripe years
And knowledge in the Theoricke of war,
Which as I fear when future ages hears
They hardly will believe: we may compare,
To the ancient Romans, whose grave wisdom gave
Rome all her Pride, and made the world her slave.
As bounteous Heaven with virtues and with arts
The Immortal part of man in him did grace,
So Nature in constructure of those parts,
Which death too cruel did too soon deface
The grace of all good feature gave to him
In every Muskle, member, joint and limb.
A manly sternenesse sat upon his brow;
Yet mixed with an aemiable grace,
The silken blossoms began to bud but now
Upon his downy chin; yet in his face
Was seen such judgment as in age appears,
How then could death destroy such hopeful years?
But why do I, like man, made out of dust
Seem against great heaven vain arguments to frame?
Nor highest Jove, nor Death, have been unjust
Taking from earth, what earth could never claim:
His soul from us for our foul sins complaints,
Is rapt to heaven to dwell among the Saints.
Ah wretched England, now I turn to thee
To sound heavens judgments in thy sottish ears,
And if still deaf thou Adder-like wilt be,
And not be moved with pity of these tears,
Yet on thy self some kind compassion take
Do not sleep dead in sin, at last awake.
Why do thou hug thy sinful self, as safe,
In the soft bosom of securefull sloth?
Dreadlesse of thine own danger, why do laugh
In face of heaven whose looks are full of wroth?
Why do thou seek to make thy evil good?
As vice in virtue should be understood.
Turn yet dear country, turn thee now at last,
Be moved with this late sudden blow from heaven,
And let these tears, still tell thee what is past,
Least careless found, a greater blow be given:
For though thy loss be now laid out on beer,
Forget him not, thou can not find his peer.
Except his royal Brother, who begins
Like hopeful bud to promise goodly fruit:
For whose dear life, repentant of thy sins,
Offer to heaven thy prayers and suppliant suite:
For now on Charles my hopes transferred be,
Since Henry, dead, I never more shall see.
Thus sad she sighed and down her self did throw,
Even down again upon the cold hard stone,
With whom her Sisters, as wood-Culuers do
Upon the bared branch made pitteous moan,
Until at length the second Sister rose
And in these words did utter forth her woes.

Albana. A Mournful subject should with mournful skill
Be painted forth, in letters fraught with tears;
then help, soon help me to some turtles quil,
Who for her dear loves loss griefs burden bears,
Which with sad Sorrows drops may ever flow,
That with true Passion thou may write my woe.
Never did Turtle mourn on branchlesse bow
Her dearest make dead dropping from the tree
With more lamenting grief, then I do now
Dear HENRY dead, dead HENRY dear to me.
For though thou have my Sisters tears before,
Yet I have cause to mourn as much, or more.
To Albion, Monarch of this Island all
Till death his life untimely did exspell,
When with Alcides on the coast of Gaul
Fighting beneath his conquering Club he fell
I, wretched I, the second Daughter am
And at the first hight Albana my name.
Of Noble Abanact, Brutes second Son
I was so named, who over me did reign
Till slain in battle by the barbarous Hume
His Brother Locrine did my cause maintain,
And on proud HVMBER did revenge his blood,
Who drowned, did leave his name unto that flood.
And since that time, though wrathful heavens have frowned
With many a bitter storm upon my coast,
Though in the depth of woe I have been drowned
For many sons, whom I have timelesse lost;
Yet never any grief did touch me more,
Then this for him, whom dead I do deplore.
How can the Nurse but wayle her infant lost
Took from the breast, whom she shall never see
And of his birth, who but my self can boast?
Who was so hopeful, when he went from me,
That never Mother had more hope of child,
Alas, that of such hopes I am beguild.
When time at first his birth to light did bring,
Those three fair twines, from whom to us is given
All good and virtue, that of grace does spring
To rock his royal Cradell came from heaven,
And by degrees their graces did bestow,
As he from leaf and bud to flower did grow.
His leaf was lovely as the spring of day,
His bud peept forth as does the bashful morn,
His flower began most goodly to display,
And much this Islands garden did adorn:
But death, that wild Boar entered in anon,
And now his lives leaf, bud, and flower are gone.
Not in that gardens plot, which we be-hight
Of York and Lancaster, did ever grow
Amongst so many Roses red and white
Any Rose-bud, that made a fairer show,
So fair it showed, earth was enui'd to bear it,
Now therefore heaven does in her bosom wear it.
Not all the Forest of great Albion
Did ever any Lordly Lion know,
More like then that of his to set upon
That Beast of Rome and all her Pride orethrow;
And therefore now a place to it is given
Above the Lion, that great star in heaven.
If he had lived beneath his royal Sire
Our Kingly shepherd, who with care does keep
The flock of Israel from raging Ire
Of ravening Wolves that would destroy the sheep
Then, then, should all our Britain borders be,
As once they were from Wolves secure and free.
But what so strong or steadfast is, whose state
Stands under heaven built upon earthly mould,
That can endure? firm is the doom of FATE
To Prince and Poor alike, to young and old,
Nor wisdom, honor, beauty, gold or strength,
To mortal life can add on day in length.
Who that has eyes, but sees the day begun
Peep forth from East like child from Mothers womb
And yet in West ere many hours be done,
Her life and light being lost she seeks her tomb,
He, that sees this unto himself may say,
Death is not far, my life is like the day.
For if ought mortal could have wrought such wonder,
As to have bought a little Lease of life,
Stern Fate should not so soon have cut in sunder
Our dear dead HENRY'S thread with cruel knife.
Yea, many lives (could lives prevail with death)
Would for his one have offered up their breath.
But that which grieves a tender Mother most,
And heaps huge Sorrows on her mournful breast
When she her dear beloved Son has lost,
Is now the cause of my minds most unrest,
I was not by to close dead HENRY'S eyes,
When envious Fates did make his life their prize.
I, that did bear him, was too far away,
To mourn his doleful Fate, when as he di'd,
Death, like a Thief, upon his life did pray,
And stole him hence; to me it was denied
Unto my Lord to speak my last Farewell,
And bid him sleep, where peace does ever dwell.
Ye Sisters three, that still in fatal hand
The Twist and Spindle of man's life do hold,
To whom the power is given to command,
The breath of this or that man, vncontroul'd,
Amongst so many lives, why did you choose
That life of his, and all the rest refuse?
Was it to make your dreaded power known
In him alone, to men in Fortunes grace?
Among whom (flesh proud by Nature,) few or none
Observe it in the men of meaner place?
If so, he being spared, why was not then
Your doom decreed against those wretched men?
Those wretched men, of all that live this day,
Who vainly think themselves then most secure
When soothing Sycophants to them do say
They shall not dye but evermore endure:
Of such may HENRY, gone, the eyes vnblinde,
And make them know, they must not stay behind.
But thus why with inevitable Fate
Do I dispute? why do I think in heart,
To preordaine the time of final date
And point whom death shall strike with deadly dart,
Since mortal men such secrets may not know,
And heaven keeps hid such things from earth below?
Yet, if that any wretch, whose cankered breast
Is deeply wounded with the deadly sting
Of monster Errors, foul seauen-headed beast
Shall dare to ask, why such a hopeful spring
In prime of all his youth was taken hence
And falsely think the cause was his offense;
Such barking Curres (if barking Curres there be
That dare in private our dead Lion bite)
Know that the chiefest cause why wretched we
Have lost in Israel our second light,
Is their false, wicked, close, commerce with those,
That are their God, their King and countries foes.
Although I not excuse these impious times
Which unto heaven for vengeance daily call;
For know (dear country) for thy odious crimes,
This heavy loss upon thy head did fall:
Not that brave Prince, though borne with sinful breath
With crying crimes did hasten his own death.
Then with thy sister England turn from sin,
That Heaven may turn her threatfull plagues from thee
And bless thy Sovereigns Charles, who does begin,
To bud apace, and in each grace to be
The Image of his Noble Brother dead,
For whom these tears his Albana does shed.
This said, the rest in silence she did drown,
And sighing from her breast a grievous groan,
As if it would have broke, she sat her down,
With whom her Sisters did lament and moan,
Until the third and youngest up did rise,
Who did express her Sorrows in this wise.

Cambera. IF ever heaven did shed a weeping shower,
Compassionating things on earth below,
If earth, or any thing therein have power
T'augment my grief or add unto my woe,
In my sad passions let them bear a part,
That these my tears may pierce the worlds hard heart.
The man, that wayles the loss of such a thing,
Which he has sought and yet could never see,
which was the life, from whence his hopes did spring,
And finds it dead, that man is like to me,
Of HENRY dead, the garland of my glory,
Near seen by me, must be my mournful story.
I am the youngest Sister of the three
Yet equal to the best of both in fame,
As in all antique stories men may see,
And Cambera is my true ancient name,
So called of Noble Camber, Brut's third Son,
When over me to reign he first begun.
And since that time, my state often times cast down
On lowly dust by hand of irefull FATE,
I never had more hope to calm her frown
And raise again the glory of my state:
But death that daily works this worlds decay
With Henry's life has blown my hopes away.
Twice thirty times and five the radiant Sun
His Inn has taken with the golden Ram
And every time his years just race has run
Since any Prince was titl'd by that name;
Who then more tears should to this Hearse afford
Then I for loss of my late living LORD?
The black Prince Edward, whose victorious Lance
Spaines bastard Henry did in battle quell
And made black days and bloody fields in France
When French King John beneath his valor fell
In Henry lived, for he again did raise
My plume forgot, which Edward crowned with praise.
As when in golden Summer we do see
A dainty Palm high mounted on the head
Of some green hill to dance for iollity
And shake her tender locks but new dispread,
So stood my Estrich plumes on Henry's crown
VVauing aloft like ensigns of renown.
Had I but seen, what fame so high resoundes,
Had Ludlow with his presence once been blessed,
Or had his foot steps touched my borders bounds,
I should not yield unto my thoughts unrest;
But with my Sisters seek to appease my ruth,
Who did enjoy the glory of his youth.
Then for this loss, against whom shall I complain?
To lessen grief, shall heaven appeached be?
Or death accused of wrong? that were profane,
Our Princes are their subjects, and as he,
So others shall, that are and ere have been;
Like vapors vade and never more be seen.
No, no my country thou the blame must have,
Thy sin above the clouds her head did show
And there the King of GODS did proudly brave,
Who for that cause did scourge thee with this woe,
Which ever bear in thought, least at the last,
Thou feel the smart of that thou think is past.
Lift up thine eyes, to heaven all praises give,
Seek with sad tears to appease IEHOVAHS wrath,
And that thy Royal DAVID long may live
To try thy cause against that man of Gath,
Bring down the length of days upon his head,
And bless the partner of his Royal Bed.
Bless hopeful CHARLES, that we may want no heir
Of his to wear this Kingdoms Diadem,
Great Heaven look lovely on that lovely pair,
Strike Envy dead, if it but point at them,
And let their Sun of JOY be never set:
Though HENRY dead we never may forget.
Thus having vtter'd forth her pittious moan,
She with her Sisters vanished away,
And left me there in Sorrow all alone,
At which amazed I durst no longer stay,
Else I did think upon that Royal HEARSE,
To have left behind this sad acrostike Verse.

An EPITAPH.
Here lies a Prince, that was the Prince of Youth,
Expert in Arts his age does seldom know,
Noble his Nature, and the shield of Truth,
Religions steadfast friend, and Errors foe;
In Virtues ways he kept as he begun,
Even in that path his Royal Sire had done.
Parted he is from us, and yet not gone,
Rapt up to heaven, his heavenly part there lives,
In earth his earth lies dead, for it is her own,
Name and Renown the World to him still gives.
Count this true Parradox, if truly read,
Ever Prince HENRY lives, and yet is dead.
FINIS.

