COPPIES OF LETTERS SENT FROM PERSONAGES Of Account unto diverse Personages of
Worth in London; Truly relating all such remarkable Occurrences as have happened
in the Palatinate from the 30th of May to the 11th of JUNE.

Amongst which, the Prise that Count Mansfeild has taken from the Bavarian.

As also the Mis-hap of the Duke of Brunswicke in his passage over the River of
MAIN.

Likewise a Relation of diverse strange and miraculous Accidents, falling out
thereabouts.

By Doctor Wells and others.

Printed this 22. of June 1622.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Cheap Side, at the gilt Cup in the Goldsmiths Row. 1622.

To the courteous Reader.
COurteous Reader;
These are to advertise thee that these Letters are Printed without the
privitie of those that sent them, but I suppose that they will not take it
offencively, that all such as are well-willers to the cause of the Palatinate,
should be made acquainted with the common occurrences which fall out there,
and I suppose they would the rather suffer it, if they knew or were made
acquainted with the false Rumors which often pass here for current, until
we hear the contrary by such Letters as these are: I have not prefixed any
long preamble to the ensuing Relation, neither is it stuffed with any
superfluous conjectures, but you have them printed in the same words and
phrase in which I received them.

Vale.
COPIES OF LETTERS Sent from personages of account unto diverse personages of
Worth in London, truly relating all such remarkable Occurrences as have
happened in the Palatinate from the 30th of May to the 11th of JUNE.
FRom Hannaw within these two days are come together all the Forces the
Emperor, Bavaria, and the Bishops can make within six German miles of us. The
King has his Forces together, the one half in Ments Lands, the King in
Darmstradts Lands. Brunswicke is not yet with the King, he is this day about a
mile from Freesburg in the Watterewe, four miles from us. The King has or
shall have from Franckford an 100000. Reeks Dollars. The Bavarian soldiers
fall daily to Mansfield, I hair seen it, and have heard it of his officers,
that they go twelve or sixteen in a day out of a Company. And two days ago
there was money going to pay for four Months, but Mansfeilds Soldiers took
it.

There were three Hathorn Trees by Darmstadt, which were spotted all over on
the leaves as with blood; they are in Franckford to be seen; when they are
washed they will go off, but come on again. For three weeks word came from
Valtaline, from the Grisons, that the folk had slain all Leopoldus Forces he
had left there, for he had also put the Valtalines to the sword for them of
their Religion, and that after such cruelty, as the like has not bin heard
of. This week News came, that in a town called Bunfen, there were but fifty
men left in habitants; and many women, who putting themselves into men's
apparel, slew at several times two thousand of the Papists their enemies: it
is accounted here a work and a wonder of God.

MAINHEM 2. of JUNE.
Mainhem the 2. of June, 1622. Old Style.
MY L. Chichester arived here on Thursday last, to my Lord Generals great
comfort, and the whole troops. Barron Tilley strengthened with his fresh
supplies, which were 5000. foot and 1000. horse, marched toward the Maine,
to hinder Count Mansfeild and Marquis Baden, from meeting with the Duke of
Brunswick. Now the passage aimed at on both sides was Ashenburge a Town of the
Bishop of Ments upon the Maine, where there is a Bridge. The Count Mansfeilds
Army came about Darmstat, one Thursday was sevennight, and there staid the
coming of the Marquis which was Sunday: to conclude it was Teusday before they
marched from their quarters, in the Lantgraues Country toward this
Ashenburge, when being by Dippergen a small Town, which ransommed it self at
15000. Lor. advertisement came of the Barron Tillies having possessed himself
of the passage, and that he marched directly toward them with a great power,
weied to be (by the conjecture) of the Barron Anhalts forces and most of
Gonsales with him 30000. and the horse fully armed from top to toe as they say.
Our Army then thought of a fair retrait, and applied to it by the same way
they advanced, and lay the same night in Arms: on Wednesday they retreated
toward Openheim bridge and lodged about Girah. On thursday (which was a very
great march) they came on this side Bensheim, The Enemy all this while
following without any thing done, on Friday morning our two Armies having so
disposed of themselves, marched by several passages to Loresh, least the
enemy should cut between them and Mainhem, but were no sooner risen, but the
Enemy appeared, and with a body of Cairassiers, charged the rereward of the
Marquis of Baden, where his Lieutenant General Colonel Golstein a man much
lamented for his courage and understanding was at the first shot slain. But
since that written news came from the Enemies Leaguer that he is living shot
in the head, but not mortally, and his horse put to the worse, but the press
of the enemy was kept up by the Rereward of Count Mansfields horse, the
Regiment of Colonel Megant, and were forced to a disorderly retreat. Note the
enemies foot never came up, which if they had, the whole must needs have
been engaged. Thus skirmishing continued in the rere somewhat sharply by
fits, till toward night: the danger on every side was by the Chiefes
vigilance prevented, and the estimate of men slain on both sides is between
3. or 4. hundred, but till a particular view be taken of the particular
companies by each Captain, the just number of those that are wanting cannot be
known. In this skirmish his Majesty showed himself (as before) most forward
and valorous to the encouragement of others.

The Landgraue of Darmstart and his younger son are invited hither, and lodged
with the King at the Citadell, the King of Bohemia came suddenly and
vnexspectedly upon the Landgraue of Darmstat, so that he came to meet the
King withal speeding demonstrations of affection and much complement, which
he would have spared if the king had not brought a force with him able to
fleece the Landgraue, the King notwithstanding did not trust him; but showed
him an intercepted letter of his, whereat he was silent, and most of the Cattle
in his country are driven into the Pallatinate to make supply of flesh there.

The Arch Duke Le^poldus at my since his retreat from Hagenaw has been in a
great consumption, what with muting and a great different between the Spanish
and Dutch soldiers, a^ also by the Switzers who are said to have killed a
great number of them.

The Count Leuensteine in a letter to my Lord, takes notice of a Castle
between Ca^iere and Zurich, taken from the Spaniard with three pieces of Canon
which the Citizens have now before Mainfelt.

We here nothing from above, but great preparations (if the armies on foot
suffice not) against the poor Palatinate. Whether our army will adventure once
more over the Neckar, or take some other course, leave.

A German Prince of the house of the Rhinegraues, and a Count of the house of
the Mansfields were taken, and some others meaner of Officers, on the Enemies
side was a Collonell slain in complete armor, by a bullet in his face when
he lifted up his helmet to take cold air. And many other Officers of horse,
we count it a great blessing of God that in a retreat of thirty miles, we lost
no baggage, nor more men the enemy.

From Mainheim, June 6. 1622.
You will happily in few days hear of a scoff sooner then of arms, or a
forbearer of hostility, which makes as much, we have the Marquess of Baden
and Count Mansfield here with us, with both their armies, which are shortly
else where to be bestowed or discharged of attending the good success of the
treaty. The Bauarians forces are in Darmstrats country in a readiness to
oppose what may be attempted by the duke of Brunswicke in his passage upward:
but it is conceited that the endeauours of the Lord Ambassador here, and those
at Brussels will put a bar between them, here is a speech that the Turk is
pouring down his forces upon Christendom, but having no ground for it other
then a common report, you shall take it accordingly. This day the king sent 2.
Gentlemen to Brussels as does also the Marquess of Baden, there to treat for
them: my Lord Ambassador sent his Secretary to Gonsalo Tilly, and so to
Brunswicke, who is near to Ashenburg. Most of the Marquess his forces are put
into Garrison at Hidelberg, Frankendale, and Mainheim: my Lord Ambassador has
received them for 3. weeks into the king our soueraigns pay; he pays so many
as makes the number up, with these my Lord General already has, in that space
of three weeks it is thought that they of Brussels will either conclude or
break off.

The Duke of Brunswicke has taken Hasteon; the river of Main, and made a
bridge over it, he has six Regiments of foot, and eighty Cornet of horse.

Count Mansfields horse went to meet the Duke of Brunswickes forces, and
afterward his foot.

From Mainheim the 11. of June.
In have I desire to present my love, and tell you that Barron Tilly and
Gonsalo are gone with all the forces they can make over the Main to see if they
can find out the Duke of Brunswicke, who lay entrenched at a place called
Hoest within a Dutch league of Frankford, where the Duke lay ready to encounter
him, there is great disadvantage in their forces, but we hope that it will be
made up by the advantage of the ground, it is apparent by the great preparation
of the camp that he hops to swallow up the Duke, but we hope it shall turn
to the augmentation of the Dukes honor, the duke has had many skirmishes with
them, wherein he has had the better of them We have, and you will hear of a
lamentable defeat of the Duke of Brunswicke by Francford to the loss and
scattering of the whole army, but God be thanked it is not true but what is the
truth is hard to say, the likeliest is, that in passing the Main toward a
bridge by Hoest below Franckford, Tilly who is now said to be 30000. at least,
with three supplies from above, from Bohemia, Bauaria, and the Bishops, and the
Duke had but two small pieces: and the Barron of Anhoults occasion has broke
the bridge with thirteen pieces of Canon, where the foot were most passed, and
put the horse to swim, and so took much of the baggage and some men therewith,
but God be praised the body of the Army ioynes this night with the kings, we
hope.

The Army has lain ever sine they came out of Darmstat here by Mainheim.

FINIS.

