CERTAIN SERMONS, PREACHED BY THAT Reverend and Judicious Divine Master THOMAS
NEVVHOVSE, late Preacher of Gods word in the City of Norwich.

AND NOW SET FORTH for the use and benefit of Gods people, by ROBERT GALLARD
Master of Arts, and Minister in the same City.

ECCLESIAST. 12.11. The words of the wise are as goads and nails fastened by
the Masters of the assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kingston, for Edmund Weauer and William Welby.
1614.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLI. MAster GEORGE COCK, Mayor of that famous and
well-gouerned City of Norwich, together with the Worshipful Company of
Sherifes and Aldermen his fellow brethren in the same City: R. G. wishes all
true prosperity.
RIght Worshipful, that speech of the Poet, viz. scribimus indocti doctique,
etc. was never so true as now in this our scribbling age, wherein so many are
possessed with a brainsicke humor of being seen in print. I touch not any of
those (the searcher of all hearts knows) whose writings are of good worth,
and useful to help forward the spiritual building; yea, James 2.17.
rather I much bless that God the father of lights, whose spirit has of late
so clearly shined in the works of diverse, for hereby the truth which before
(as an unknown treasure) lay hid is notably discovered, error confuted, virtue
much furthered in the hearts and lives of men. But of such only I speak, who
being big with conceit of their own conceits, must needs vent and set them a
broach, though never so froathie, and in truth being balanced in the scoale of
a judicious Reader, found altogether lighter then vanity it self. Their works
I may fitly resemble to the Spiders web, for though they seem to be spun with
some curiosity, yet in truth they be deuoide of all substance and soliditie:
or to the airie Meteors, for as they very suddenly vanish out of sight, so
these (being as it were of an airie nature) do even in the reading, quasi
abire in fumum. Alas, little is the gain a man gets by them: with such
superficial and slightie stuff our age so abounds, that many complain of a
sacietie, yea of a surfit, and therefore for my part I wish that men were more
modest this way, and would keep in their pens from blotting so much paper in
vain; most excellent is the rule of Euripides for this purpose, viz. (...) i.
either speak that which is better then silence, or else keep silent still.

The works which here I am bold, right Worshipful, to publish to the worlds
view, are not (as in reading you shall see) any vain or idle discourses
sauouring of an empty brain, but most heavenly and divine truths, breathed
forth by the breath of an holy and sanctified heart: they be a few of those
sweet blasts, that were sounded forth in your hearing, by that silver sounding
trumpit: I mean the learned lectures of that famous and most judicious divine
Master Thomas Newhouse, late Preacher of Gods word among you: who (as you know)
like a faithful servant of Christ, thought not his life too precious to lay
down in his Masters service, but willingly as it were sacrificed himself to
God in his ministry, and as the candle, spent himself to give you light.

When I seriously consider how complete this holy man of God was, how fitted
and furnished with divine gifts for his heavenly function, I cannot (and I
think no more can you) but much bewail) our grievous loss; can a man lament
the loss of his box full of precious and costly jewels, or a Merchant the
wrack of his ship fraught with earthen treasure, then surely may we much
more, the loss of this box, the wrack of this ship, so filled and fraught
with such spiritual and divine riches? What a mass of knowledge God stored up
in this his earthen vessel, your thursday Lecture in part bewrayed, wherein he
did usually vent so much divinity, as that his learned brethren seldom went
away (by their own confession) without insight into some special things they
never knew before: and for his excellent skill in Case-diuinitie, whereby he
was able to settle the wavering and doubting Conscience, I may truly say of him
as Isaiah does of himself, Isaiah 52.4.
The Lord gave him the tongue of the learned to speak a word in season to him
that was weary.

Again for that singular gift God gave him in unfolding and explaining most
mystical and infoulded truths, in unloosing most intricate and knottie
doubts (whereof there be many twixt us and that Romish Church, as also for
his marvelous dexterity in selecting, contriuing, but especially in acute and
solid judging, who ever almost did hear him, but will acknowledge his
excellency in all these things with admiration?

And yet moreover what a great measure of sanctifying grace, it pleased the
divine spirit (which blows where it lists) to beautify this his instrument
with, what rare and excellent virtues did appear and shine forth in the course
of his life, it is not (I appeal to them that knew him) an easy thing for me
to declare; I have much mused to see how assiduous he was in his painful
calling, how careful always to put men forward in the way of life, how
careless of the world, not seeking the gain thereof coueteouslie, nor the
glory thereof ambitiouslie, a virtue in these our times not commonly seen in
so great measure, in men of so great gifts and learning. I need not speak of
his meek, lowly, courteous and affable carriage even toward his inferiors;
how wise and gracious he was in his behavior, how grave, sober, amiable and
lovely in all his demeanor, all such can say that knew him, and I am sure that
none of you that knew and entirely loved him can easily forget, nor yet
remember, without some sigh or sign of sorrow for the loss of so sweet and
ingenuous a friend. Thus out of the abundance of my hearty affection toward
this man of God, I thought it meet according to that certain knowledge which
I, and many of you yourselues had of him, to record these things which tract of
time would have worn out and buried up in the grave of oblivion, and hope no
man is so enutous as to grudge the dead should have their due.

Bethinking my self (Right Worshipful) what course might be taken to recover
the public damage which the Church has sustained in the death of this
worthy man, I find no way better then the publishing of such manuscripts as
he left behind him, among which I commend these few (as first fruits) to your
Worships patronage. The reasons of my so doing be these, I know that his
ministry (as it was meet it should) was among many of you much set by, you
received him as an Angel of God, esteemed and heard him as an Interpreter one
of a thousand, you loved and reverenced him in his life, and in his death
lamented much (as cause you had) your public loss, yea and still I see how
fresh his blessed name remains among you, pleasant as an ointment powered out,
sweet as a bundle of myrrh which sends forth most fragrant smells; upon
these, and such like grounds I am led to think, that these his endeavors cannot
miss of your courteous acceptance and tuition, and therefore if I so far
presume as to shroud these orphan writings under your protecting wing, I hope
you will easily give leave to this my bold enterprise; wherein I have but
signified my duty to your selves, and my love unfeigned to him that is gone.

In these two treatises which in special wise I present unto your view, you
shall find (Right Worshipful) these two points very soundly and plainly
handled; the first is the most wise, and eternal decree of God, the second is
the freed, and also the unchangeable estate of Gods child, both of them
matters of great weight and moment, needful to be known in some sort of all,
and no way unworthy to be read and understood of the most worthy. I wish I
might have spoken somewhat of each of them: but least I should exceed the
bounds of an Epistle, I will (your patience permitting) only spend a few lines
in setting down how lawful and meet a thing it is to preach and publish the
doctrine of predestination.

As it was horrible presumption in the Bethshemites to peer into God's Ark, 1.
Sam. 6.19. So it has been, and still is esteemed by many: for a man to diue
though never so little into the doctrine of Gods decree, some holding it should
not be meddled with at all: others that it may be sparingly handled, but only
in schools before the learned: but by their leaves they are much deceived; for
though we may not curiously search into such things as be hidden and wrapped up
in the secret counsel of God, yet are we not forbidden to seek the knowledge
of those things which be revealed. The Lord says, Deuter. 29. Secret things
belong unto God, let us have nothing to do therewith: but further he says,
revealed things belong to us and to our children; surely those may we safely
meddle with, and endeavor to know; nay we are bound both to know and publish,
so be it we keep within the limits of wisdom and sobriety: for if God who
is wisdom it self, thinks it a meet thing to open this doctrine to his
Church, (as he does in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles) how can we
conceal it without guilt of sacrilegious folly? Shall we be so bold as to
seal up that which God has opened? God forbid. But how injurious they be to
the Church of God, who would have this doctrine smothered from the people, and
canuased only in schools of learning, will easily appear, if we do but
consider the great good it brings to the people of God, being perspicuously and
plainly taught. Our Savior Christ says, Luke 10. Rejoice in this, that your
names are written in heaven: which place importes, that the enrolling our names
in the book of life: i. election, is a matter of great joy. And in the 6. of
Ioh. 3. All those says Christ, that the father has given me; i. in election,
shall come unto me, and those that come to me I cast not away; i. they shall not
perish. So that a believer may hence assure himself, that being elected be
cannot perish. Were it not much then (by concealing this doctrine of
predestination) to deprive Gods people of this joy, of this comfortable
assurance?

Again, in this doctrine of Gods decree, soundly and plainly taught, a
believer shall find that his appointment to salvation is not grounded upon any
thing in himself, neither his will, nor faith, nor works, nor worthiness
foreseen, but only the good will and pleasure of God. As Ephesians. 1.5. Who has
predestined us according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of
the glory of his grace; now were it not sinful to hide from people this
heavenly doctrine, whereby they are taught to ascribe all the glory of their
salvation to the free favor and love of God in their election? Yes surely. Yet
moreover in our predestination to eternal life, we plainly see as in a
glass an Ocean sea of Gods love and favor toward us, in that God passing by
so many thousands as vessels of wrath set apart to perpetual shame, would
select and appoint us to the obtaining of eternal life by Jesus Christ. Now
how can it be (love being the loadstone of love) but that the lively sense, and
feeling of this love of God in our election, should enkindle in us a love to
him that has so entirely loved, us and therefore it cannot but be very
iniurtous to deprive people of the doctrine of election, which might be as the
bellows to blow up in them this little spark of heavenly love to God.

But peradventure some man may say,

No, know) laid one by an other are more perspicuous: and how can we feel the
sweetness of Gods love in our own election, till we see the terror of his hate
in the reiection of others? To this purpose August. tom. 4. li. 1. ad simp. q.
2. says, that God shows by the punishment of the one what he gives to the
other.

Yea but this is a matter full of terror. Polan. in epist. libell. de Predest.
Hereto I answer as a learned divine of our times does: so that their hearts
are too tender, their ears too nice which cannot brook this point. And if
this were a good reason, it is a terrifying doctrine: Ergo, God may not be
taught, then might we not preach of Gods judgments, doomes day, the torments
of hell; all which be matters full of terror. But to give more full
satisfaction in this point, the doctrine of reprobation is fearful: to whom?
either elect or reprobates, not to the elect, for God assures them that they
be not rejected: Ergo, to reprobates as Cain, Judas, and the like, Now must we
for their sakes abstain from teaching necessary truths? Isaiah 8.14.
Isaiah foretold long since that Christ himself should be as a stone for these
to stumble at, and as a rock of offense for them to fall upon, yet who will
say that; Ergo, Christ should not be preachea? nay Christ must be taught
though all the world should be offended thereat.

Yet moreover there be some (who being given to pick quarrels) stick not to
avouch that we in our doctrine of reprobation, (wherein we teach that God has
ordained some men to be damned) charge God with a merciless disposition, which
God forbid we should once imagine to be in him, who is indeed even mercy it
self; wherefore I pray you give leave in a word or two to wipe away this
slander.

First it must be remembered that we teach not that God does simply ordain
any man to hell fire, but thus we teach, that God has decreed and purposed to
glorify his name in the due and deserved damnation of some, for in man's
Reprobation, God has two actions: First, he decrees to pass by some without
showing his eternal mercy unto them, and only to declare his justice upon
them; which thing he may well do without control, for he is tied to none,
then further he decrees to inflict upon some (when by themselves they be fallen
into sin) their just and deserved damnation. So that God decrees a man to
hell, not simply and absolutely without all respect to sin, but with a
reference thereto. This point I take it, being well weighed, Gods justice in
reprobation is much cleared, and our doctrine freed from casting the guilt of
cruelty upon the most high.

Secondly, I wish it might be well considered how that in some cases among our
selves we give liberty one to another to do this or that as we will, and we
think the action so done, both just and lawful; then ought we not much more to
give to the most wise and righteous God, a liberty in his actions to do even as
he will without all impute of cruelty or injustice whatsoever?

Lastly, we do but require that in this case of reprobation, so much so
ueraignty may be given to God ever men (which is most equal) as a silly and
mortal man assumes to himself over the creatures: we allow to a man so much
power and liberty, as to kill a fly, or a worm at his will, to slay a sheep
or an Ox for his lawful use and pleasure, and all this without the least
tincture of cruelty, why then should we think much, to grant to God (the
absolute Lord of the spirits of all flesh, and sovereign King of the whole
world) a liberty to appoint some men to be passed by, and so to run on to
deserved death, upon his mere will and pleasure?

Thus having overmuch presumed on your patience, least I should seem injurious
in detaining you too long in this my rude and wearisome discourse I here
surcease, desiring that what I have here with a single heart offered unto your
worships, may find your most kind and courteous acceptance.

The God of all mercy and goodness who has enriched your City with manifold
blessings, and made it very famous for his Gospel and good government,
perpetuate these his undeserved favors among you, with the further enlargement
of your prosperity, and grant that as he has made you his vicegerents, and
has put his sword into your hands, so he would please to double his spirit of
wisdom, and courage upon you all, that when you have faithfully finished your
work for God, in a Zealous executing of judgment and justice here on earth,
you may be rewarded with the life of glory in the City of the most high. From
Norwich, Nouemb. 7. 1613.

Your Worships ever to command in the Lord, Robert Gallard.

TO THE GODLY READER, Increase of saving knowledge in heavenly things.
CHristian Reader, so censorious is this our age, as that nothing almost can
pass without a nip. This I have considered, and yet am thus bold (thou see)
to adventure my self, as now I do. I take it to be a want of Christian
courage to refuse to attempt matters of public good upon a mere fear of
being misiudged: for what thing so wisely done but some will tax? Is it not
the folly of most to measure things done by a false and crooked ^^^wand? what
through ignorance, curiosity, envy, and sinister affection, the common
misleading guides of man's judgment, (...) comes to pass that few things well
done are well judged, good often times goes under the name of evil, and folly
gets away wisdoms praise. Wherefore setting at naught the vain censorious
humor of these our times, I have yielded at length to the earnest entreaty,
and importunate suite of some godly wise friends, for the setting out of these
few Sermons, breaking through such discouragements as were cast in my way,
hoping to be justified in what I have done at least by wisdoms children.

The maine motive that drew me on to this business, was not (God is my
record) any outward by respect to my private self, but partly a desire to
continue the memory of a blessed man, but most of all the hope of winning some
glory to God in his churches good, (...) I profess my self to rejoice, as in
a thing most dear and precious unto me, and therefore if I see that in thus
doing I any whit advance it, I have this my desire, and also encouragement to
future employments in this kind, and in the mean while shall bless my God,
that has vouchsafed to put my weak hand to these beginnings.

Now for the matter set forth in this little volume, it needs not my word of
commendation, read and thou shall perceive it speaking sufficiently for it
self. The points of doctrine which here thou shall meet with, are very
needful for thee both to know and practice, I wish thee a gainer in each
respect, so shall thou be an happy man,

Some things there be (I acknowledge) especially in the Sermon of
Predestination (as Peter says of a few things in Paul's Epistles) hard to be
understood; Pet. 23.16.
whereat when thou read take heed thou do not stumble and fall: take not
occasion to fall out with the doctrine of Gods decree, as many have done, and
split the ships of their poor souls upon that rock which (...) others.

If ought then thou meetest with of an higher strain then thy shallow reach
can attain unto, wrangle not, strike not the author, for he intended thy good,
blame not the matter, for that is Gods, nor manner of conueiance, for that is
most perspicuous for so deep a mystery: but if thou can not wade on with
the Author, stand still and admire Gods wisdom as Paul does, saying, Romans
11.33.
O depth! or smite thy self, and blame that blind head of thine as being unfit
to meddle with such high and heavenly stuff, and to conceive such divine
truths as thou art bound to know.

Now furthermore, whereas (good Reader) that arch enemy of Gods truth, Satan,
has offered much wrong to this doctrine of Gods decree, in those manifold
cauils which he has hatched and broached from time to time by men of sin.
Vouchsafe I pray you the patient perusing of these few lines ensuing; wherein I
have a little endeavored to answer the absurd sophistical objections which
often times we hear breathed forth by black mouthed Atheists, for even such
kind of fools (I hold) should sometimes be answered, lest other happily
should be entangled and perish in their folly. Prou. 26.5.


First, for that most usual (...) common form of reasoning. se. If I be
predestinate to salvation, I am sure to be saved let me do what I will; If I
be appointed to damnation, I am sure to be damned though I live never so
godly; for Gods decree changes not, and therefore I will live as I list.

Answ. Howbeit most desperate and profane wretches (for such they be for the
most part) do take occasion from Gods decree to reason in this sort, yet we
must know that the occasion is taken before it be given, for the doctrine of
the unchangeable decree of God affords no such conclusion as beer is inferred.
I am appointed to life or death unchangeably, this is Gods truth: therefore it
matters not how I live. This is the devils conclusion, not inferred by force of
good reason (for in a Syllogisticall form of reasoning I am sure no such
conclusion can be drawn) but framed and forged by the devils art, and
entertained for the most part in the brains of most dissolute and devilish
men. But see we the absurdity of this consequence, I am necessarily ordained
to life or death: therefore I may live as I list. This is a reasoning from the
putting too of the surpeme cause to a removing of the instrumental, which are
not opposite but subordinate one to another, Arist. (...)
as Logicians do speak.

Again, this kind of reasoning, sc. I am appointed to eternal life,
therefore I may live as I list, using no means to attain it, is as if a man
should reason thus, sc. God has ordained me to live many years, therefore
what need I eat, or drink, or sleep, or use any means, the reason is the
same.

This one point must needs be remembered, that in Gods decree, the end, and the
means tending to that end must go hand in hand, in so much as, look what God
has appointed to come to pass by means, those means he has as necessarily
ordained to be used, as the end to be archieued: yea, so inseparably are the
means and the event knit together, as that if we may suppose a demad of the
means, a denial of the event will necessarily be inferred thereupon.

As for example. Act. 27. the Apostle says, verse. 24. that God had given him
the lives of all those that were in ye ship; there was Gods decree: yet in the
31. verse. the Apostle says, that unless the ship-men did stay in the ship,
they could not be safe; here is a denial of the decreed means, inferring a
denial of the decreed event. So then, I am ordained to eternal life; there is
Gods decree: if I should not repent not believe, (which is impossible, God
having decreed them likewise) surely I should not be saved. The immutability
therefore of Gods decreee, does no whit favor the neglect of means tending to
eternal life. Wherefore as Hezekiah after he knew Gods decree for fifteen
years to be added to his days, neglected not all means of life (for if he
had, he should have died) but applied physic to his wound, are, drank, and
used other means of life; so he that is ordained to eternal life, if he
would obtain, must use the means, in repentance, faith, and obedience, or
else he cannot look to be saved.

Quest. Yea but now suppose a man be appointed to damnation, may not that man
so appointed resolve with himself to live as he lift?

Answ. Though this be granted to be a true position, sc. that a man appointed
of God to wrath shall surely be damned, yet no such conclusion as this will
ensue, sc that that man may resolve to live as he list. For first, there is no
man living so acquainted with Gods decree (unless he has sinned against the
holy Ghost) as to know his own reiection: for how be it I finding by a lively
sense a feeling of the spirit of sanctification, my self in the estate of
saving grace, may hereupon assure my self that I am elected, yet I may not,
finding my self e contra, to be in the estate of vnregeneracie, thereupon
conclude that I am a reprobate; for even the elect are in the estate of sin
before they be called. Again, the Lord does not seal up to men their
reprobation, as he does their election. What mad and hideous folly the^ is
this for a man to resolve to live as a reprobate, before he knows whether he
be so or no? As if a man should condemn himself, and run post have to the
place of execution, and put the rope about his own neck, or use all means to
make away himself, before he know whether the sentence of life or death be
past upon in the Judges breast. One dram of good reason, much more of grace,
would teach a man rather to argue thus: I know not whether the sentence of
wrath be past in heaven against me or no; I will therefore resolve to employ my
self in all well doing, repenting of sin, believing in Christ, and yielding
obedience to Gods Commandments, which is the only way to eternal life: by
this means I shall make mine own election sure to my self, and so at length
come to eternal happiness. Thus we use to reason in the like case. I know
not whether it be my lot to live till the next year or no, I will eat,
drink, sleep, and use other means appointed of God as the way to life, that
so I may live if it be possible. Suppose we thus, that a Judge give out to a
company of malefactors before him in this sort. I have secretly with my self
past a decree upon you all, and that unchangeably, wherein some of you are
appointed to life, some to death; now they that be mon of life shall surely
come to me, and kneel down before me, and sue for pardon, the men of death
shall not do so; and this is the mark of difference: now look to your
selves. In this case shall not that man bewray his folly above all the rest,
that shall resolve and conclude with himself never to come and kneel before
the Judge, because the decree is vnchangeablie past upon him, either for life
or death, which he knows not? should be not rather in all reason run to
the Judge, and kneel before him, and sue for pardon, that so he might assure
himself that he is a man of life? Yes surely, even thus it fares in the case
in hand; for God in his most (...) council has made a decree (...) all men:
wherein some are appointed to life, some to death unchangeably: God has
further said in his word, that the men ordained to life shall (...) to him, and
believe which is the mark of their election, but the men of death shall not
do so: are not they then most seely and senseless fools that shall upon
hearesay of an immutable decree past, whether for, or against them they know
not, resolve with themselves, never to turn to God, and believe, whereby as by
most certain signs they might prove to themselves their own election? Nay is
not this a wilful secluding of a man's self from the favor of God, and a
voluntary branding of a man's self with the black mark of a reprobate before
it be known whether God has done so or no? Yes surely, for as the sons of
Eli did bewray their own reiection by their obstinate rebellion, for the text
says they did not hearken to the voice of God, 1. Sam. 2.25.
because the Lord would slay them (where their obstinate course in sin is made
a secret mark of their reprobation) even so that man that resolves with
himself to neglect God, and to run on in sin, upon this that God has writ
his destiny in heaven, does as much as possibly he can seal up to himself
his own reprobation; and if he thus both live and dye, must needs be damned.

Object. What then? If I going on in sin be damned, is not herein the
irresistable will and pleasure of God, which needs must stand, brought to pass?

Answ. Yea it is, and that most justly, only through thine own default, for
thy sin brings by damnation as the due deserved wages thereof: so just is God
as that he will inflict damnation upon none that be innocent and free from
sin; God never did, neither will damn any man but for sin. And therefore,
lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and blame thy self for thine own ruin; Hosea.
13.
thy destruction is of thy self O Israel, Hos. 13.

Object. Yea, but had not God ordained me before to this end, I should never by
sinning brought damnation on my self.

Answ. Thou most saucie and molipert man, how dare thou take the dirt and
mire of thine own sin, and cast it thus upon the face of the most holy God?
Thou sinnest, and by thy sin bring upon thy self most just damnation, and
must God be blamed for appointing thee to that thy deserved end? must this thy
base and misbegotten offspring of sin be fathered upon Gods most righteous
decrees?

The conclusion then is this: A reprobate sins, for his sin he perishes,
according to the necessary and vnchangeble decree of God; yet man sins of
himself willingly, and is therefore condemned of God most justly, and Gods most
wise and just decree no wit to be blamed.

I doubt not (good Reader) but that the reason of man is able to object yet
much more, (for I see how our proud and thwarting nature is impatient of
satisfaction in this point) but know, that as more might be objected, so more
might be answered, and withal remember that man's reason (through the fall) is
a corrupt thing, and hereupon will grow sometimes very wild and wanton, and
therefore she should now and then receive a check for passing so beyond her
bounds. I wish thee therefore when thou arguest in these and such like divine
points, to cast as it were a bridle upon thy reason, and keep her in from
passing the lists and limits of sobriety.

And because I find by experience how restless and lascivious a thing man's
reason is, especially in this point of Gods decree, as also now armed and
furnished with the devilish art of wrangling. I think meet rather here to
stint my speech, then to admit of any further discourse. As for such as will
not admit of that reasonable satisfaction, which I hope I have given, but will
adventure through the pride of their wits to chop Logic with their Maker, and
to call him to his reasons, who is bound to render his reasons to none, God is
(...)
I pray God to make them more sober-minded, and do wish them to consider with
all humility that saying of the Apostle, Romans 9.19. O man who art thou that
disputest with God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have
thou made me thus? has not the potter power over the clay of the same lump to
make one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor? This place well
pondred in the spirit of humility, would sufficiently serve to stop our
mouths that we should not have one word to speak, and to set our haughty
reason at a non plus, so as it should not have a thought to think against that
disposal which God has made of the souls of men in his decree, seeing he is
an absolute and a sovereign Lord of the spirits of all flesh, and therefore may
deal with men according to his will, imparting or withholding his mercy even
as he pleases, and that without check or control from any: for alas, what are
we but the creatures of God, the mere workmanship of his hands? far more in
his power then the clay in the potters, for the clay is Gods creature, not the
potters, and will have a being in spite of the potter: whereas we are
continually in Gods power and at his mere courtesy for our very being.

Thus gentle Reader, for the prevention of scandal, I thought meet to
endeavor the remouall of such stumbling blocks, as the doctrine of Gods
decree, or this treatise in particular through Satan's malice, might seem to
cast in thy way; If I have given thee satisfaction (which is hard to do in
such knottie doubts) I have my wish; if not, yet let our poor endeavor be
taken in good worth. I have been (I acknowledge) over longsome and tedious,
passing somewhat the limits of an Epistle: but the weight of the matter, and
difficulty of the argument, which can hardly be handled both briefly and
plainly, will be, I hope, my sufficient apology with men of understanding, and
therefore I spare to crave pardon herein.

As for those other Sermons about the unchangeable estate of Gods child,
Baptism, and the fear of God, I advise thee to cast thine eye most what on
them, as being more easy to conceive, and, as I take it, more fit for thine
use, and most behooffull for thy learning: yet lest I should seem too busy in
giving advice I leave thee to thine own discretion. Thou know how the Be
making her choice in a garden of flowers, there tarieth longest where she
finds most honey; so thou in reading this book make thy choice, and there
stay most where thou sindest that which is most sit for thine use.

Thus (courteous Reader) as one mindful and desirous of thy good, I have been
bold, according to my poor skill, to counsel thee for the best: I intend, God
knows, thy souls welfare in Christ Jesus, and would much rejoice in a
blessed enlargement of his grace in thine heart: yea surely, if any thing in
this book shall further the same, thrice happy shall I judge my self to be
in having an hand to procure thee thereunto.

And now I leave thee to the further viewing of what I have here laid before
thine eye, be not (I pray thee) left handed in receiving what I give thee with
the right. Peruse what here thou find to thy best advantage: If ought thou
gainest, give God the glory, and me thy good word for my good will.

That God that wet the fleece of Ged^^^ with his own dew, Judge. 6.38.
power down from heaven the dew of his blessing upon thy reading, and
replenish thine heart with such a plentiful measure of his grace, that living
here in righteousness and true holiness, may hereafter have thy part in that
glory and happiness, that shall be revealed at the coming of our Lord Jesus.
Norwich, November 14. 1613.

Thine in Christ Jesus Robert Gallard.

A SERMON, WHEREIN IS OPENED THE MANNER OF Gods decree concerning Election and
Reprobation.
1 Thessalonians. 5.9. For God has not appointed us unto wrath, but to the obtaining
of salvation by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ.


IN the three first verses of this Chapter the Apostle continues in the
argument of the last judgment, which he had propounded in the latter end of
the former: wherein he signifies unto the Thessalonians, that the time of the
second coming of Christ should be sudden and unknown unto all, especially
unto the wicked, whom it shall overtake unawares and unprovided. Which thing he
declares by the example of the thief, who upon the night, when men least
think of it, breaks up another man's house: and of the woman with child,
whose travel comes upon her unexpected. In the 4. and 5. verses he comfort
them against the terror of this sudden coming of the Lord, intimating unto
them that there was no cause why they should greatly stand in fear of it,
considering they were not in darkness and ignorance, but enlightened with the
knowledge of the truth, and therefore were not the children of the darkness
and of the night, but of the light and of the day: whereupon in the 6.7. and 8.
verses he disswadeth them from security, and persuades them unto vigilancie
and sobriety; And lest the enemy by his subtlety should at any time
circumuent them, he wills them always to be in a readiness, furnished,
prepared and apparelled with the spiritual armor of Christian soldiers, viz,
faith, love, and hope. This exhortation (that it might take the better place)
he enforces it by a reason taken from the end, whereunto the Thessalonians in
the decree and counsel of God were appointed, to wit, eternal happiness, the
which is propounded in a discreet axiom on this manner: God has not appointed
us unto wrath, etc.

The words in themselves contain a description of the decree of Gods election.
First from the Author, that is, God. Secondly from the object, that is, Paul
and the elect Thessalolonians. Thirdly from the nature, that is, an appointment
or ordaining of them to the obtaining of salvation. Fourthly, from the
principal means of execution, that is, the mediation of Jesus Christ. Lastly,
it is amplified by the contrary, that is, the decree of Reprobation, which is
also described to be the appointment of some unto wrath.

Touching the meaning of the words, they are very plain, I shall not need to
spend much time in the unfolding of them. For whereas the Apostle says that
God has not appointed, the meaning is, God in his eternal and unchangeable
counsel and decree has not appointed to manifest and declare his wrath (for
so by a metonimie of the subject (I take it) we are to expound the words) in
our just and deserved condemnation, but to make known the riches of his
mercies in our free and gracious salvation, and that by the means and for the
merit of Jesus Christ. This is the simple meaning of the words. Only one doubt
may be here made, how the Apostle came to the knowledge of this decree,
especially touching the Thessalonians: but the answer is ready; that he
speaks of them according to the judgment of charity, and not of certainty,
the reason hereof is plain, because diverse of the Thessalonians afterward fell
wholly away from the faith and religion of Christ they did profess: so that in
the end they ceased to be a Church.

Now then that we see in some part the order and meaning of the words, let us
in the next place come to the use of doctrine and edification which they do
naturally afford.

The first doctrine is general out of the whole text, to wit, that there is a
difference and disjunction of men in the decree and counsel of God, some
(...), some reprobate, some appointed to salvation, some unto wrath: this point
is clear and evident out of this text, though there were no other scripture to
confirm the same; where the Apostle sorts all men into two orders or ranks,
some whereof are appointed unto wrath, out of which number he exempts himself
and the elect Thessalonians; and some to the attaining of salvation, in which
number he rangeth himself with them. And lest any man should doubt of the
signification of the word (...), and of the sense of it in this place, let him
read John 15.16. and Acts 13.47. where the same word is used in the same
signification. But for the fuller and more sufficient confirmation of this
point, compare the 2. Tim. 2.19. with Matthew. 7.23. where it is affirmed of
some, The Lord knows who are his: which is the seal of their Election, and of
others our Savior Christ shall pronounce at the day of judgment, I never knew
you, that is, acknowledged you for mine. Romans 9.22. there are vessels of mercy
prepared unto glory, and vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. 2. Tim. 2.20.
there be vessels of honor, and vessels of dishonor. Examples also hereof
are propounded in Jacob and Esan, Romans 9.13. Jacob have I loved, that is,
purposed to love with an eternal love, but Esau have I hated, that is,
purposed to hate with an eternal hatred.

But against this clear and received exposition many exceptions are made.
First it is alleged that by Jacob and Esau we are not to understand their
particular persons, but their posterity, viz. two nations which descended from
them of the Israelites and Idumeans, for so the divine oracle answers
Rebecca. Genesis 25.33. Two nations are in thy womb, and the elder shall serve
the younger: which thing was never accomplished in the days of Jacob and Esau,
but rather of the twain Jacob was in fear and subjection to Esau, then
contrariwise. But the text will not tolerate this exposition, for it is absurd
to say that two nations were conceived at once, and did strive together in the
womb of Rebecca, unless we consider them as they were comprehended under
their heads, to wit, the persons of Jacob and Esau. And whereas it is replied
that Esau in person was never servant unto Jacob, the answer is easy, that
Jacobs preeminence and privileges were not so much in temporal as in
spiritual things, and therefore proportionally Esau was debased to the
condition of a servant in respect of his younger brother, not so much in his
outward estate, as in regard of the covenant made with his ancestors, from
which he was justly for his prophanenes and unthankfulness debarred. Again,
though it were granted that by Jacob and Esau two nations and not two persons
were understood, yet all comes to one head: for the receiving of the nation of
the Israelites into the covenant, and the excluding of the Edomites, both
descending of Jacob and Esau, seem as well to prove Gods eternal Election and
Reprobation, as the receiving and rejecting of particular men.

Secondly, others allege and say, that by love and hatred we are not to
understand the eternal decree of God in Election and Reprobation, but temporal
blessings, wherein Jacob was preferred before Esau, especially that to him and
his posterity was vouchsafed the right and possession of the land of Canaan,
which was denied to his elder brother. Answ. If this were the meaning of the
text, then the Apostle should be accused of unskillfulness, in alleging these
examples to prove the reiection of the Jews from the Covenant, and indeed they
should be altogether impertinent: for though it were granted there were a
difference between man and man in respect of earthly blessings, yet hereof it
follows not that there should be the same difference in things concerning
the kingdom of heaven. Again, the land of Canaan was not only an earthly
inheritance (we are not so carnally to conceive of it) but a pledge and figure
to our forefathers of a far better inheritance in heaven: and therefore the
excluding of Esau from the land of Canaan, was a sign that he was excluded
from the covenant of grace and the right of eternal life.

Lastly, it is objected that to admit this exposition makes Ismael and Esau
damned persons, which is a hard censure. Answ. It is the safest to lean secret
judgments touching particucular persons unto God: but whatsoever their state
is before God, the Apostle has fitly in their two persons both descending from
Abraham, and both circumcised, set forth examples of such as for all their
outward prerogatives are indeed barred from the covenant of life everlasting
before God. Again, the opposition made by Paul requires that the contrary to
that which is spoken of Is^^^ and Jacob, should be affirmed of Ismael and
Esau. Neither is there a word in Scriptures which argues in them any
disposition of men ordained to eternal life: Ismael is noted with the brand of
a mocker, and Esau of a profane person. And lest any man should think, that
this doctrine is destitute of the testimony of the Church and of men, I refer
them to Augustine in his book de ciuit. Dei, lib. 15. cap. 1. and to his
Enchirid. ad Lauren. cap. 100. and to Thom. part. 1. qu. 23. art. 1. I may not
waste the time in reciting the testimonies at large. And thus much of the
general doctrine, the use follows which is twofold, partly in confutation
of error, partly in instruction unto godliness.

Touching confutation it serves first of all to overthrow the error of some
Divines, that term themselves Lutherans, and Imitators of Castellio, who hold
and teach, and in their writings publish and maintain that God for his part
has cast lots of no man, but has willed and decreed to save all and every
particular man without exception of any, so be it they will believe. But this
confused and universal decree falls to the ground, if God has sorted and
distinguished men in his eternal counsel, as we have before demonstratiuely
proved out of Scriptures. But that the truth in this point may be more
evident, and error more manifestly detected, against this indistinct and
general decree many reasons may be alleged.

First, saving grace is not given to all, as faith, hope, love, repentance,
perseverance, which are the means of salvation, therefore all are not elected
to eternal life: the ground of this reason is infallible, to wit, whosoever
are ordained to the end are ordained to the means, which properly and directly
serve to the accomplishing of the same end: so much the word predestination in
Latin signifies, viz. the appointing of such an end, which is not but by set
and appointed means thereunto subordinate, as by certain steps and degrees,
achieved. And Paul, Romans 8.30. has so linked and knit these things together,
that it is impossible to sever the^, but it must needs be that whosoever are
predestinate, they are also called, justified, and shall be glorified. But it
will be replied, that sufficiency of saving grace is given to all, though it
be not effectual in all, and that through the default of the receivers. Answ.
This distinction in the matter of grace is frinolous and absurd, whatsoever
Bellarmine or any other can say to the contrary. The reason hereof is plain:
for yt grace be sufficient unto salvation five things are required. First, the
collating or donation of grace. Secondly, power and ability to receive the
grace given, which is done by another grace. Thirdly, the retaining or keeping
of ye grace received. Fourthly, the using of the grace received and kept.
Fifthly, the perseverance in it, or the constant keeping and using of the grace
given and received, whereof if any be wanting, it is not sufficient, if all be
there it must needs be effectual, unless we will say, that he that continues
to the end in faith and obedience shall not be saved, contrary to the express
text of scripture. Again, these are so coupled and combined together, that
whosoever has the first grace truly and indeed, he must needs have the
second, to wit, perseverance, otherwise he has not true saving grace, but a
shadow of it, the perseverance being a part of the truth of grace, 1. Ioh.
2.19. so as men living in the Church, are then known to be counterfeits and
hypocrites when they do not persevere. And if perseverance does not always
accompany true saving grace, what will be the difference and preferment of the
state of Redemption, before the state of Creation? Adam before the fall in his
innocence had indeed to can that he would, but he had not to will that he
could, but whosoever are in Christ, as all are that have received saving grace,
they have in some measure both posse and velle, so as it is impossible they
should either totally fall, or finally perish. Man's salvation being put into
his own hands, was lost because he was not confirmed with new grace in the
act of temptation, but being now committed to the custody of Christ it is safe
and sure, he having overcome Satan and all the powers of hell, by subtlety and
violence whereof it might have bin endangered.

To make this plain by a familiar comparison used by Loc. com. page 464.
Peter Martyr. Suppose there were a great weight of timber or stone to be
moved, if a man shall put to so much force as is sufficient, that is, so much
as may prevail against the greatness of the mole, motion must necessarily
follow: in like manner, God being to move the stony and wicked hearts of men,
if he shall of his mercy infuse but so much grace as is sufficient, that is,
so much as will counteruaile the hardness and prauitie of them, it cannot be
avoided but they must be moved and mollified, and that not by any violent
compulsion, but by a most effectual persuasion.

As for the distinction of sufficiency and efficacy, and the difference in An
example of the natural agent. The Sun has sufficiency to enlighten all
men, but not efficacy in the blind.
natural and voluntary agents, it is to be acknowledged, and has his place
in things wherein man by nature has power and freedom of will to do or not
to do: for example, to talk, to go, to sit, or to use any like position of
the body, a man may have the sufficiency, that is, (...), and yet not the
efficacy, that is, (...): and why? because he will not, and he has power to
stay the action of the Motive.
natural faculty; but in matters concerning the kingdom of God the case is
far otherwise: for whosoever has sufficient grace, by it his will is so
corrected and rectified, that he effectually wills his own salvation. And
for men to imagine that a man does repel true sufficient grace though in never
so small measure, it is to make man Verum est nos frustra velle nisi Deus
misereatur: at quis dixerit deum frustra misereri si nos nolimus.
stronger then God. Neither does the place, Acts 7.51. any whit at al patronage
this error, where Stephen vpbraideth the stiff-necked. Jews with this, that
they had always resisted the holy Ghost, for he speaks not of the inward
powerful work of the holy Ghost in the conscience; but of his outward voice
in the external ministry of the word, Nor that other place, Matthew. 23.37. I
would, but ye would not: for there our Savior Christ speaks not as he was
God equal with his Father, for then who could have resisted his will? but as
man, or rather as minister of Circumcision, as the Apostle terms him, Romans
15.8. whose office was to will and procure by all means the salvation of men,
that herein also he might be an example to the Ministers of the new Testament,
who were to succeed him, whose duty and care is also to will and to further
the salvation of all. But notwithstanding all this, it is thought by some both
Papists and Protestants Divines, that saving grace may be given to the
reprobate, and to credit and authorize this opinion, it is fathered upon
Augustine, and affirmed to be his judgment; and to this end two places are
alleged, one out of the 8. chapter de corrupt. and gratia: the other out of
the 13. chapter of the same book. Ans. Albeit as our late learned Reader
answered unto Duraeus: Malo tecum de possessione scripturaru^, quam patrum
contendere: yet somewhat I have thought good to say, both to deliver Augustine
from suspicion of this error, and also for the fuller manifestation of the
truth in this point. Concerning the first place: Mirandum, multumque mirandum,
etc. in effect thus much. It is greatly to be wondered at, that certain sons
of God, whom he has regenerated in Christ, and to whom he has given faith,
hope, love, etc. should notwithstanding fall away and in the end perish. Ans.
This needs not to trouble any man, that will but peruse the chapter following,
wherein Augustine does sufficiently expound his meaning. In the beginning of
the chapter he distinguishes of the sons of God: some are sons of God
unto God, or before God, that is, truly and indeed; and some are sons of God
unto men, or in man's judgment, that is, counterfeit sons, which, as he
says afterward, when they were sons, were no sons, that is, as himself
expounds, even then when they were sub nomine and professione filiorum Dei,
were no sons of God indeed. And look how they are called sons, so in the
same sense they are said to be regenerate, and to have faith, hope and love,
viz. in the judgment of men, and quoad praesentem iustitiam, as he also
notes. But Bellarmine finding no sure hold in this place, very cunningly
passes it over, lest by occasion of it a man being led to the 9. chapter
should see Augustins meaning more fully, and so be able to answer them both,
and therefore in his 3. Tome, 3. book, de Iustif. cap. 14. he alleges the
latter, wherein there seems to be more color and probability, then in the
former. The effect of it is this: Credendum, etc. We are to believe that
certain sons of perdition, which begin to live in the faith which works by
love, shall notwithstanding before they go out of this life wholly fall away
and perish. Answ. The meaning of Augustine is this, that reprobates living in
the Church may have certain beginnings and degrees unto justifying faith, as
knowledge of the Gospel and assent thereunto, yea and a confused persuasion
that many hereby are justified and shall be saved, and falsely also persuade
themselves of their own salvation, whereupon they joy and take pleasure in
their knowledge and profession, and are zealous for the Lord of Hoasts as Iehu
was, and do reverence the Ministers as Herod did John Baptist, and dislike
profane persons, and such as are contemners of the word, and disordered in
their lives, and yet for all that are not sound at the heart, the word of God
having no through rooting in them, but (like unto the stony ground wherein the
seed, for want of sufficient rooting, at the heat of the Sun is parched and
withered away) in the time of temptation they wholly fall away. And that
Augustine never meant that true saving faith could ever fail, and therefore
could never befall the reprobate, it is manifest out of his 106. Tract upon
John: where, upon the 17. chapt. verse 8. Et cognouerurt vere and crediderunt,
he has these words: Crediderunt (says he) subaudiendum vere, quomodo
credendum est: id est, inconcusse, firm, stabiliter, fortiter, non iam in
propria redituri, and Christum relicturi. Now then if by Augustins judgment
true faith wheresoever it be, is perpetual, then it follows that it cannot
be communicated unto the reprobate, for the^ also it should remain with them
for ever, and advance them to eternal life. But whatsoever Augustins judgment
was, he was but a man, no Prophet nor Apostle, and therefore not privileged
from error, touching whom, though ever to be reverenced in the Church, we may
say as himself said of Cyprian, when as the Donatists alleged his authority
against him: Whatsoever (says Augustine) Cyprian has said agreeable to
Scriptures, I receive it with his commendation, Quicquid non congruit, cum eius
pace, respuo. Let us therefore come to the Scriptures, one sentence whereof
ought to be of greater price and value with us, and with greater reverence and
admiration to be received of us, then ten thousand sentences of humane
writings, out of which the evidence of this point may most certainly be
concluded. Acts 13.48. So many as were ordained to eternal life believed.
Where the restraint is to be observed, the Apostle does not make faith common
to all, but to the elect only, excluding (as it is manifest to any indifferent
reader) all others which were not ordained to life. And lest any man might
doubt of the equality and reciprocation of the members, that is, faith and
election, let him read Tit. 1.1. where the Apostle speaks of a faith proper
to the elect, which the article plainly declares, put there for distinction
sake; noting that there is a faith indeed in reprobates, to wit, a temporary,
or historical faith, but not the faith of the elect, viz. saving and
justifying faith, the which whosoever has, has presently eternal life, Ioh.
3.36. not only in a blind and coniecturall hope, as the Papists say, but in a
certain and infallible persuasion grounded upon the word and promise of God,
and in such a hope as disappointeth not, neither makes ashamed, neither that
only but in present possession, if we regard the beginnings of it: for there
are three degrees of eternal life; the first is in this life, in faith and
regeneration; the second in the end of this life in the total abolishment of
sin, which is the accomplishment of mortification; the third is after this
life, at the resurrection in the fulness of glory, wherewith both soul and
body shall be replenished for ever: wherefore the first degree or entrance
into this life is made so soon as a man begins to believe. Further, in the
same chapter, verse. 18. he that believes (says our Savior Christ) is not
condemned, neither ever shall be, as it appears, Ioh. 5.24. but has already
passed from death unto life: and Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them
that by faith are ingrafted into Christ: and lest any should doubt of their
perseverance, he adds by way of description, that they are such as walk not
according to the flesh, but according to the spirit.

Further, that true faith is an infallible note of election, it is manifest, 2.
Tim. 2.21. whosoever purges himself from these he shall be a vessel unto
honor. Whence I reason thus: The syllogism at large may thus be framed: If
sanctification be a sure mark of election, the^ says is so, because
sanctification is an inseparable fruit of faith: But sanctification is a sure
mark of election: Therefore, etc.
Sanctification is a sure mark of election; now sanctification is a fruit of
faith, for that alone purifieth the heart, Acts 15. Ergo. And indeed Ioh.
14.16.17. our Savior Christ denies that the world, that is, reprobates, can
receive the spirit of regeneration, which is the comforter and leader into all
truth: and Paul, 2. Cor. 13.5. excepteth the reprobates from the number of such
as have Jesus Christ dwelling in their hearts by faith. By all which it is more
then manifest that true saving grace is never communicated to the reprobate.

Lastly, if this doctrine might stand, three notable absurdities in Divinity
would necessarily follow upon it. First, that reprobates in their persons and
actions shall sometimes please God, viz. when they have faith, and work from
faith; for faith is that, that makes both person and action acceptable to God:
but how can this stand with that of our Savior Christ? Matthew. 7.23. who shall
pronounce at the day of judgment of them that were otherwise adorned with most
rare and singular gifts and graces of God; I never knew you, at no time I
approved you either in your persons or works, I never acknowledged you for
mine: which he would not, neither could say, if ever they had been endued with
true faith, for at that time at the least he must needs have acknowledged them
to be his.

Secondly, the certainty of salvation falls flat to the ground, for the
which we contend so much with the Papists, for what other (...) or medium is
there, whereby to persuade the conscience of the certainty of election besides
faith; which if it be a common grace to the reprobate with the Elect, then no
certitudo fidei, for a man may believe the pardon of a sin, and yet for all
that be a reprobate.

Thirdly, the very reprobate ones shall be true members of Christ, and of the
Catholic Church, which is mere Popery, and the thing that Bellarmine and the
Papists labor to establish.

Secondly, the very word Election ouerturneth this device of an universal
decree, for in every choice there is a taking of some, and a refusal of other
some, and he that electeth cannot be said to take all but some only. Object. To
elect, is to love: but God loves all his creatures, and therefore chooses all.
Answ. To elect is not to love, but to destinate and appoint to an eternal
love. Again, God loves not all with an equal love, he is said to love all in
that he wills good unto all, but not the good of eternal life. Thus Thomas
answers, part. 1. qu. 23. art. 3.

Thirdly, we see by the event that all come not to eternal life, but some
only; how then can we imagine that the final estate of a man in salvation and
damnation should come to pass without the decree of God? Ioh. 17.2.11. our
Savior Christ gives eternal life to them alone that were given him of the
Father, that is, those that were elected: now if all had bin elected, why did
he not speak generally, that he gave eternal life to all, but restrains it
to those that were given him of the Father. But here exception will be made;
though Gods decree be universal, yet conceived with a condition, which when
men do not observe, no marvel though they miscarrie and come not to eternal
life. Answ. This conditional decree is a foolish dream of man's brain, and
carries with it many gross absurdities. First, the Scripture has not spoken
a word of it, but whenever it mentions the decree, it simply and
categorically propounds it, as Romans 9 and Ephe. 1.4. He has chosen us before
the foundation of the world. It will be replied, the Gospel is propounded with
condition, and that is nothing else but Gods predestination revealed. Ans.
Albeit I confess that the Gospel does in some part reveal the decree of God,
yet it follows not, that it is to be confounded with it; and that they are
things distinct one from an other may appear by these differences.

First, predestination being as it is commonly used in Scriptures, and in the
writings of Divines referred to the Elect, is that wherein God determines what
he will do touching us or in us, and hereupon the definition of Augustine is
commonly received. It is the preparation of the blessing of God, whereby they
are delivered, that are delivered: But the Gospel is that wherein he
determines by duty what we are to do unto him.

Secondly, in predestination he defines both the material and formal number
(as the Schoolmen speak) that is, who and how many they are that shall be
saved, which number can neither be augmented, diminished, or altered: whereupon
our Savior Christ, John 13.18. I know (says he) whom I have chosen. In the
Gospel he describes them by their qualities wherewith they are to be endued,
to wit, faith and repentance.

Thirdly, predestination is the decree it self: the Gospel an outward means
of execution, whereupon the Gospel may be conceived with condition, though the
decree be most simple and absolute, and therefore has the Gospel a condition
annexed both in respect of the godly, that they might be assured of their
election, observing the condition, as also of the wicked, that they neglecting
it might be the more inexcusable, specially they being not ignorant that the
Lord required it at their hands.

Again, many inconveniences do follow of this conditional decree: for first
if God has decreed the salvation of men with condition, then this condition
must depend either upon the will of the Creator, or the will of the creature;
if upon his own will, the tenor of the decree shall be this: God has decreed
or willed to save all men if he will, which is absurd to common reason: if upon
man's will, then the condition is either possible or impossible, if possible
either unto nature or unto grace: not unto nature, for that is Pelagianisme;
not unto grace, for thereof follows three notable absurdities. First, that
grace is communicated to all, and to every particular man. Secondly, that by
virtue of this grace every man has a flexible will like unto Adam, so as he
may will his salvation, or nill it. Thirdly (which follows of the former)
that he may resist and reject the saving grace of God, which in no wise is to
be admitted, as in part we have proved before.

Secondly, this conditional decree implies in it a contradiction, for the
condition must needs be either evil or good: no man will affirm that God
decrees any thing upon an evil condition, and if it be good, it is an effect
of predestination and a means of salvation, unto which a man is as well
predestinate, as unto the end: for example, we are predestinate, not if we do
believe, but that we may believe, and consequently be saved: now for a man to
be predestinate, if he do believe, is to be predestinate to the end, and not
to the means, that is, to be predestinate, and not to be predestinate: for
that word signifies to be predestinate unto an end, which we come unto by set
and appointed means.

Thirdly, it fastneth upon God sundry indignities; as first that it subuerteth
the order of nature, suspending most impiously and indignely the will of the
Creator, which is the first and supreme cause of al upon the will of the
creature, against a common rule received in Schools, Actus primae causae
ordinat actum secundae: which is nothing else but to make man the Lord and
Emperor, and God to be his underling. Secondly, it ascribes unto God either
impendence or want of knowledge, as that he is ignorant of the events of
things, or else impotencie and want of power, that he is not able to effect,
what he has willed and decreed; no other reason can be devised of the
conditional decree: for we see among men that they are constrained to annexe
conditions to their decrees, either because they know not how things will
befall out, and so might be deceived, or else do want power to effect that
which they would: but if they might have their choice they would decree al
things absolutely; far be it therefore from us to charge God with that, whereof
we would disburthen our selves.

Fourthly, it makes the decree of predestination to be uncertain; for to
decree a thing conditionally, is to decree uncertainly, considering that the
conditional proposition does affirm or determine nothing certainly, nay it is
as though God had decreed nothing at all concerning man, especially when as the
thing determined is in the power of man's will, and in respect of God, the
decree may come to pass, or not come to pass.

Lastly, if God have decreed to save all, if they do believe, by like
proportion of reason he may be said to have decreed to refuse and condemn
all, so be it they do not believe: for by as good reason, and upon as good
ground, we may hold an universal reprobation upon the condition of
incredulity, as an universal election upon condition of faith.

Secondly, it serves to refute another error of the same persons, who hold
that the difference between man and man is not made in the counsel of God,
but wholly consists in the will of man; for by their doctrine, Gods mercy is
extended unto all, not only in the decree, but even in the execution of it, so
that as God from all eternity has appointed to save all, if they do believe,
so in time he gives them grace and power to believe, if they will; for so
they define their universal grace, an habitude or power to believe, if they
will. But of these men I demand then whence comes the acting and confirming of
this general power, that some do indeed believe, and some do not, some
persevere in faith, some do not? If it shall be answered, that it proceeds
from another special grace of God, (which were the safest) then I ask, why
does God give this special grace to act and confirm faith in some, and not in
others? no reason can be rendered but his will: so then by this reason the will
of God shall put the difference between man and man, and not man's will. If it
shall be said, that it comes of the will of man, it smells strongly of
Pelagianisme: for howsoever they would cloak all under the name of grace, and
seem to attribute nothing unto nature, but all unto grace; yet they cannot
escape so, for all men descending of Adam having equal grace, how comes it to
pass, that his general power is acted in some, and not in othersome? Answer
is made, because some will believe, some will not, some will persevere, some
will not: what is this else but to attribute the whole salvation of man to his
own will, and to the power of nature, considering that salvation follows not
necessarily of grace, which is common to all, but of the acting and
confirmation of it, which is wholly ascribed to the will of man without any
special grace?

The use of instruction is this, that seeing God has thus sorted and
distinguished men in his decree, and no cause thereof is known unto us, we
ought with fear and astonishment to submit our selves unto the good will and
pleasure of God, and to reverence that mystery which our reason cannot
comprehend, following the modesty of David, Psalm. 36. where considering of the
unsearchable judgments of God cries out, that his judgments are a great
deep, which cannot be sounded by the slender and shallow reason of man; and
of Paul, Romans 11.33. where having discoursed at large of the reiection of the
Jew, and the election of the Gentile, breaks out into the admiration of the
unsearchable and inconceivable judgments of God. Augustine also had well
taken out this lesson, who considering of this great and high mystery, and the
strangenes of it, why God draws some, and not othersome? why he gives
perseverance to some, and not to others? why he chooses some, and refuses
others? he does not reason the matter, but admireth and says, O Altitudo! And
this sobriety of judgment have all Gods children practiced in all ages,
neither may we carpe and cavil at that which for the depth and profoundnes of
it we are never able to conceive. Thus much shall suffice to have spoken of
the general doctrine, and of the use thereof: now let us descend to a more
particular handling and examining of the text.

And to speak of the words as they lie in the text; whereas the Apostle says,
God has not appointed us, etc. it is manifest that there is a number of men in
the decree of God appointed to wrath, or there is a decree of Reprobation; the
which that we may the better understand may be thus described. Reprobation is
the decree of God, by which upon his own will he has purposed to refuse
certain men for the manifestation of his justice. For the clearing of this
description these four points offer themselves to be considered. First, the
object or matter of this decree. Secondly, the order of it. Thirdly, the
impulsive cause. Fourthly, the end.

Touching the first. The thing decreed is the reiection of certain men;
neither may this seem strange or hard to any, for God is a most absolute and
sovereign Lord, and may do with his own what he will, and therefore may open
the gates of heaven, and admit into his kingdom whom he will, and therefore
may bar the gates and shut out whom he will, and who can control him, or
justly reprehend him? Is any man's eye evil because he is good? or does God use
partiality, or acceptance of any man's person? Nothing less: for unto the one
(as Augustine says Tom. 2. epist. 105.
) he gives indebitam gratiam, and to the other debitam poenam. The Scripture
also is pregnant in this point. Proverbs 16.4. God has made all things for
himself, yea the wicked man to the day of evil. Romans 9.22. There are vessels
of wrath fitted or framed to destruction: in this place some are appointed unto
wrath. Jude verse 4. there is mention of certain false teachers, that were of
old ordained unto condemnation, neither are they ordained to the end alone, but
to the means also. 1. Pet. 2.8. Christ is a stone to stumble at, and a rock of
offense to certain men, which stumbled at the word, being disobedient, unto
the which thing they were ever ordained. Why should we then be squemish or
afraid to speak with the Scripture, that God has rejected some men, and
purposed to glorify his name in their deserved condemnation.

The order of this decree follows: wherein we are to consider, first of all
that God for his part, as he does conceive all things at once, and not
successively one thing after another, but past, present, and to come, at once,
with one eternal and immutable act of understanding; so he does decree all
things at once, and not successively: the reason is plain, because all things
are present unto him; wherefore we are not greatly to contend about the order,
there being no difference of it in God, in whom there is neither prius nor
posterius. Yet for the helping of our weakness in this high mystery, we may
distinguish the counsel of God in this point, into two acts or degrees, the
which that we do not in any wise misconceiue, this ground must be laid: That
whatsoever God has decreed, he has done it most wisely: now wisdom
requires that a man should think first of the end, and then of the means,
and therefore determine first touching the end, and then after touching the
means: now the end which God propounds unto himself in the decree of
Reprobation, is partly the manifestation of his wrath expressed in this text,
and partly of his power and justice, Romans 9.22. The first act therefore of this
decree may not (as I take it) be unfitly thus conceived. It is the decree of
God wherein he has purposed to pass by some men, that in them he might
manifest his wrath and justice. This act is called by schoolmen the privative
or negative reprobation, because God in it denies to give grace, and by some
later Divines the decree of preterition. And it has not any cause out of God
in the creature.

The second act is the ordaining of the creature unto just punishment, which is
termed in Schools the positive or affirmative reprobation. Again, this act in
regard of the object has a double consideration, the one is simple, as it
respects this or that particular man, as Pharaoh, Saul, Judas, comparatiue,
as it respects this man and not that, as Pharach, and not Moses; Saul, and
not David; Judas, and not Peter.

The impulsive cause of the privative, or negative reprobation, is no other
then the will of God, as it may appear, Romans 9.22. What if God would, etc.
and in the same chapter, verse 18. no other reason is rendered, (why God
hardneth the hearts of men, that is, having offered the^ means of mollifying
their hearts, and having put into their minds good motions, does suffer them
notwithstanding to abuse them to their greater hardening, and hereupon in his
just judgment does deliver them up to Satan and their own concupiscences as
unto torme^tors, that they become more obdurate and obstinate in sin, and so
work their own woe, and in fine make up the measure of their own damnation)
save only the will of God, whom he will he hardens: neither is there any
other reason rendered of the hatred of Esau, then of the love of Jacob. Likewise
our Savior Christ, Matthew. 11.25.26. yields no reason of the revelation of
the Gospel to some, and the hyding from others, save the good pleasure of God;
Even so O Father because it pleased thee.

But this seems hard unto many to ascribe unto God (whom the scriptures every
where describe to be full of bounty, and mercy, and slow to wrath) such a
decree and that upon his own will: let us therefore consider their reasons.

First, they hold it to be a matter of cruelty and rigor for God thus to
purpose the reprobation of man. Answer. Shall it be no cruelty in man (who
is but a petty Lord, or rather a Tenant at will, having all his interest and
title unto the creatures by grant and concession from God) to kill an ox or a
sheep for his use, to hunt or to kill the Hare or the Partridge for his
pleasure? and shall God (who is a most absolute and sovereign Lord over all
creatures) be accused and arraigned of cruelty and severe dealing, if upon his
will he do refuse and forsake his creature for his glory?

Further it is objected; That he that ordains to the end which is damnation,
ordaines to the means which is sin; but he ordaines to the end. Ergo. and
so by this doctrine God shall be made the author of sin. Answ. The supreme
end which God propounds unto himself in this decree is not the destruction
of man, but the declaration of his justice: the appointed means to this end is
not sin on Gods part, which is evil in it self; but the just and voluntary
permission of sin, which is good: sin therefore in it self is no effect of
the decree of God, but an Antecedent thereunto, yea even a procuring and
meritorious cause of actual reprobation, that is, damnation.

Lastly it is replied, that if God upon his will has decreed to condemn any,
he shall be contrary to himself: for in his word he has revealed, that he
wills not the death of a sinner, Ezech. 33.11. but that all men should be
saved, etc. 1. Tim. 2.4. Answ. A sinner must be considered either as he is man,
or as he is a sinner, as Ad Simplic. lib. 1. qu. 2.
Augustine answers, God is not delighted with the death of a sinner as he is
a man, but as he is a sinner, neither that simply as it is the ruin and
overthrow of the creature, Aug. de Corrup. and great. cap. 14.
or the putting of him forth unto punishment, but as it is an illustration of
the glory of God and execution of his justice. Touching the latter place it
makes nothing for the purpose, being rightly interpreted. For where it is
said, God would have all men saved, the word ( Particula omnis non semper
collectiue, sed saepe distributive vt hic sumitur. Vid. Arist. Polit. lib. 2.
cap. 1.
All) must not be taken universally, but indefinitly, according to the ancient
exposition of Augustine, not all and every one, but of all some; not singula
generum, but genera sing^^^orum. And this meaning agrees very fitly unto the
text: for the Apostle having in the first verse exhorted that prayers and
supplications should be made for all men, lest he should be mistaken, (as
though his meaning were, that all men, even reprobates detected, and sinners
against the holy Chost, should be prayed for,) he expounds himself in the next
verse: for Kings, and for all that are in authority, that is, for all states,
degrees, callings, and conditions of men. Now in the fourth verse he urges his
exhortation by a reason, wherein the universal note must be equally extended
as before; the reason stands thus: Those whom God would have saved ought to
be prayed for; but of all sorts and conditions of men God would have some to be
saved. Ergo. The proposition is concealed, the assumption is laid down in the
fourth verse, the conclusion is the exhortation in the first verse: and that it
cannot be taken generally, the context does plainly declare in that all come
not to the knowledge of the truth, that is, of the Gospel, neither possibly
can do, seeing to many it has pleased God in all ages to deny all means of
revelation. Again, all men that are saved, God would have them saved; as if a
man should speak of the gates of a city, all men enter in by these gates,
that is, all that do enter: for it were absurd to say that all men living
enter into that city: Epist. 107. ad ritalem. and Ench. 103. and cap. 8. de
oredest, sanct.
so Augustine also expounds.

Again, both the word of God, and Augustine in his book Lib. 15. cap. 1.
de ciuit. Dei, distinguishes mankind into two companies or societies, of
both which universal propositions are given out: as for example, of the elect,
that they shall be all taught of God: of the reprobate, that every man seeks
his own; so it is said here God would have all men to be saved, that is, the
elect: for so the proposition is to be restrained unto the matter subject,
there being also an universality of the elect.

Lastly, the place may be understood fitly not of all men descending from
Adam, but of al men in the last age of the world, that is, of Jews, and
Gentiles; for in the three forms ages, there was always a difference between
man and man, people and people: in the first age some were the sons of God,
some the sons of men: in the second age some the children of the promise,
some of the flesh: in the third age some were Jews, some Gentiles: but in the
fourth age, at the ascension of Christ, this difference has been taken away,
and the promise of grace and mercy, at least in regard of the propounding of
it, made common to all people. And that this is the meaning of the place, Paul,
who is the best interpreter of himself, plainly shows; Act. 17.30. the times
of ignorance, etc. but now he admonishes all men every where to repent. Romans
16.25.26. The mystery was kept hid from the beginning of the world, but now is
opened and published among all nations. So Coloss 1.26.27.

Secondly, the will of God in scriptures is used two ways: first, it
signifies the decree, and is called by Schoolmen voluntas beneplaciti.
Secondly, the revealed will, and so is called voluntas signi: by the latter he
wills that all men should be saved, (...) the offers grace and the means of
salvation to all, not by the former according to the distinction used by some
Divines; he wills the salvation of all, quoad preceptionem and approbationem,
sed non quoad gratiam and efficaciam. But here it will be replied, that then
there shall be two wills in God one contrary to another. Answ. To will and to
nill the same thing does not bring in a contrariety, unless one and the same
respect be observed in both. Now God in some respects wills the salvation of
men, that is, offers the means principally that they might be the more
inexcusable, and in other respects, and for other just and necessary causes
known to himself nilleth their salvation, that is, wills not to make the
means effectual unto them. What is more usual with men then to will and nill
the same thing? but yet without contrariety. For example: A man wills the
death of his father so far forth as it may put an end to his misery, and be
a means to bring him to rest and happiness; and he nilleth it in another
respect so far forth as he is thereby deprived of necessary help and
comfort.

The use of this doctrine follows: how much less contemned it: many also
living out of the bosom of the Church have not so much as heard of the
Gospel. Besides, Paul, Gal. 5.20. numbreth up many other causes of damnation
besides infidelity, viz. all the works of the flesh, which make men as
subject to the wrath of God, and everlasting condemnation, as the other: and in
the Lords prayer we are taught to ask, not the pardon of one sin only as
of infidelity, but plurallie of many trespasses. Yea, though there were no
contempt of the Gospel, nor any positive infidelity, the original corruption
of man's nature were sufficient to condemn all men. Lastly, the admitation
wherinto Paul breaks, Romans 9.20. O man what art thou, that take part to
dispute against God! does plainly show that the decree of God in rejecting
some men has an unsearchable cause, and does not depend of any foreseen
contempt of grace, for so there might easily be rendered a reason of the decree
of God.

Secondly, if God has appointed to reject and pass over some men, it is the
duty of every one to labor to be assured that he is exempted out of the
number of that company. 2. Tim. 2.21. Whosoever purges himself from these,
that is, errors in judgment, and uncleanness in life, may assure himself that
he is a vessel of honor sanctified unto the Lord, and prepared to every good
work. And contrariwise to be in the number of the elect, obeying the counsel
of Peter, 2. Ephesians. chap. 1. verse. 10. in using al diligence to make sure his
election by the practice of a holy life. The Disciples of our Savior Christ
so soon as they heard this voice uttered, Matthew. 26.
One of you shall betray me, presently began to equire among themselves, and to
demand of Christ whether it it were they or no? carrying a holy suspicion of
their traitorous hearts: so likewise hearing this voice daily sounding in the
Church, that there is a number of men in the counsel of God rejected, which
shall perish everlastingly; we are to examine our estates, and to make question
whether it be we or not? rather then curiously to search the reason of that
which we cannot conceive. And if we shall find his mercy to be extended
toward us in preparing us unto glory, let us acknowledge it with thankful
hearts, make special account of it, and magnify the riches of his grace unto
us.

The last point follows, that is, the end of this decree, which is the
manifestation of the glory of his power and justice, Romans 9.22. This also
confuteth another error of the Lutherans, that imagining God made all of
mercy, hold and teach that the end of all his counsels and decrees is to
communicate his goodness and mercy in eternal happiness to all his
creatures. But they are greatly deceived, for the nature of God is to be as
just, as merciful, and therefore his decree must be answerable, for it may not
in any wise contrary his nature.

Again, God is as good in his justice, and the execution thereof, as in his
mercy. Though therefore the Lord, being goodness it self, intend the
communication of it unto all his creatures, yet not in like sort, but after a
diverse manner, unto some in mercy, unto others in justice.

FINIS.
A SERMON, WHICH SHOWS HOW THE CHILD OF God is neither subject to the
dominion of sin, nor total defection from grace.
1. JOHN 3.9. Whosoever is borne of God, sins not: for his seed rentaineth
in him, neither can he sin, because he is borne of God.


IT is the purpose and intent of the Apostle in this whole Epistle, to confirm
the faithful to who^ he writ in the doctrine of the Gospel and the practice
thereof, specially in the maine and principal point of Christian and brotherly
love, to the end they might be well furnished with spiritual joy, and assured
of their fellowship and communion with God: whereupon he propounds unto them
these two points of faith and love, handling the^ confusedly, and by course
passing from the one to the other. Further, he amplifieth both these by their
contraries, dissuading them both from seducers and Idols, and also from the
love of the world, and the hatred of their brethren: having therefore made
entrance in the two former chapters into this doctrine, now he proceeds in
the same argument, exhorting the faithful in this third chapter to the study
of holiness in general, and more specially to the love of their brethren. And
in the first verse he sets down the dignity and excellency of the
children of God, noting it to be a matter of singular preferment, and
preeminence for a man to be called the son of God: which sentence he further
amplifieth by a Prolepsis, wherein he meets with the perverse judgment both
of the world, and also of the faithful servants and children of God. As for the
judgment of the world he insinuates that it is to be contemned, because it
arises of the ignorance of God, in the end of the first verse. As for the
faithful (lest they should be too much daunted and discouraged, through the
manifold afflictions and crosses whereunto they are subject in this life) he
opposes unto their present miserable estate the future glory and felicity,
which certainly abides them after this life, which felicity he defines to
consist in a similitude with God, and in a perfect seeing of him face to face,
that is, in immediate fellowship and conjunction with God: verse 2. Now from
the hope of this glory and happiness he exhorts unto the study of
holiness, urging the same by the example of God himself, verse. 3. which
exhortation he illustrateth by the contrary, dehorting from sin, which is
flat opposite unto holiness, and that by diverse arguments. First, from the
nature of it, which is an anomie or transgression of the law, verse. 4.
Secondly, from the end of Christ his first coming into the world, which was to
take away sin, and to dissolve the works of the devil, verse. 5. and the
latter end of the 8. Thirdly, from their communion and fellowship with Christ,
in whom there was no sin, verse. 6. Fourthly, from the author of sin, who is
the devil, whose society is by all means to be avoided, verse. 8. Fifthly,
from the efficient cause of holiness, that is, regeneration, verse. 9. wherein
are laid down these two points.

First, the description of the state and condition of a man regenerate by two
arguments: the first whereof is taken from his nature, which is to be borne of
God, which is as natural unto him, as it is natural unto a man to be borne
of his natural parents: the second is taken from the denied effect he sins
not.

Secondly, a reason, for his seed, etc. In the latter end of the verse there is
an inuerse repetition of the former branch, with an amplification from the
cause. And this is the coherence and disposition of these words: now let us
come to a more particular examination of them; and first search the sense and
proper meaning of them, and after descend to the doctrines and uses which they
shall afford.

He that is borne of God that is, birth. The principal efficient is the holy
Ghost, insinuating himself into the hearts of the elect, and effectually
applying the form and virtue of the death and resurrection of Christ, thereby
abolishing the corruption of nature, and creating an inherent quality of
righteousness and holiness in the whole man, Romans 8.9.10. The isntrumental
cause is the word of God, that is, the immortal seed of regeneration, as the
Apostle terms it, 1. Pet. 1.21. The material cause is the efficacy or
effect of that righteousness which is inherent in the humane nature of Christ,
from which as from a root and fountain is propagated and derived all that
holiness which is to be found in the faithful. 1. Cor. 1.30. Christ is made
unto us from God righteousness, holiness, not only by imputation unto
justification, but by infusion unto sanctification. The formal cause is the
renouation of the decaled image of God in the whole man, Ephe. 4.23.24. The
final cause is the worship of God in the duties of the first and second table,
Ephesians. 2.10. by all which we may see in part what regeneration is.

Now come we to the second argument of the description, which is the effect
denied, he sins not: the meaning is not that the regenerate man is this
life is whole pure and free from sin, for that is clean contrary to the
tenor of the whole Bible, and to common and manifest experience in the Church
of God, and were heresy for a man once to conceive. Eccl. 7.22. Prou. 20.9. 1.
Ioh. 1.8. and the most holy men of God that ever have lived in the Church, have
not only been subject unto sin, but when the occasions of temptation have
been greater, have fallen dangerously and grievously, as we have examples in
Noah, Lot, Aaron, David, Peter. The proper meaning therefore and sense of these
words is this: he sins not, that is, he does not laboriously, painfully, and
diligently employ and busy himself in the practice of sin, he sins not
with study, with deliberation, with constant purpose, with full consent of
will, with delight, with endeavor, with continuance: to conclude, he makes not
a trade and occupation of sinning: for so much is comprehended in the phrase,
he sins not, or he does not practice sin.

For the further clearing of this point, to commit sin contains in it these
three things: first, to give full and free consent unto sin. Secondly, to
give up the members of the body to the practice of sin. Thirdly, to keep a
course and continuance in sin. Thus the man regenerate sins not: first, he
does not fully consent unto sin, as it may appear in Paul, Romans 7.16. where
he says, that if he did the evil, he would not, he consented to the law
that it was good: if then he did at all consent unto the law, he did not
wholly consent unto sin, but more plainly, verse. 22. For I delight in the law
of God, etc. Secondly, he does not give up his members to the practice of
sin: he is so far from that, that he bridles and suppresses the corruption
of nature in the heart, before it break forth into action: Gal 5.24. They
that are Christ's, that is, by faith united unto him, they have received the
spirit of Christ, whereby they crucify them with the affections and lusts. 1.
Job. 5.18. He that is borne of God, keeps himself, that is, preserves
himself from sin, so much as possibly he can. And this ye Apostle
insinuates, Romans 6.19. As you have given up your members, etc. signifying that
as by the force and strength of natural corruption, they did before
regeneration prostitute the members of their bodies unto uncleanness and sin;
so now by the virtue of Gods grace after their conversion, they should
sanctify all their parts unto the practice of righteousness. Thirdly, he
keeps not a course in sin, but either presently, or not long after his
fall, rises again and recouereth himself by repentance, as we have examples
in David and Peter.

The law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, has freed me, not
from sin, but e iure peccati; which thing also may be further confirmed by
these two reasons. First, where Christ has taken the hold, there Satan is
repelled and cast forth: now Christ has taken the possession of every man's
heart that is regenerate and borne again, and therefore no place for Satan;
for it is not possible that Christ by faith and grace, and Satan by corruption
and sin, should at once lodge and dwell together in one and the same heart: if
Christ keep the hold, Satan is excluded, if the strong man be in possession,
all things are in peace, there is no room for Christ. Secondly, the
perpetual combat between the flesh and the spirit, whereof the Apostle
speaks, Galath. 5.17. so that we cannot do what we would, neither that good
by reason of sin, nor that evil by reason of grace; which could in no wise
be, if so be that sin reigned, for in the reign of sin there is no
resistance.

Let not sin reign: Ergo, the Romans who were justified and sanctified, and
all regenerate men, are subject to the reign of sin.

To this I answer, (...)
that the exhortation does not imply any such thing, only it shows the peril
and danger they might fall into by reason of sin, that hereby they might lose
many of the graces of God, and deprive themselves of all spiritual
consolation, and if it were possible wholly fall from grace, so as sin might
again bear rule in them. So also other exhortations in Scripture, as this,
He that stands, let him take heed lest he fall, 1. Cor. 10.12
do not insinuate that a man in the state of grace may fall wholly, but in
part, or they bewray his weakness considered in himself whereby he may
wholly fall, or they are spurs to our dull sides, and rods to our slow backs,
to stir us up to vigilancie and care, lest we fall; nay rather they implie
we shall not fall, for they are instruments to preserve from falling, God
making good that which he commands in the hearts of the faithful.

David during the time of his impenitencie.

First, it is not probable, David for ye space of a whole year, without check
or controlement, specially he being a man according to Gods own heart, and
endued with most singular and excellent graces of God.

Secondly, David, for without doubt he resisted at the first assault, though
peradventure the resistance was more obscure and insensible, by reason of the
vehemency and impetuousnes of the affections, by the tumult and disorder
whereof the spirit of God speaking in the conscience was not heard or attended
unto, yet a resistance there was, because there was grace, which in the first
temptation could not be idle: But if we take reigning sin for a prevailing
sin, it cannot be denied but that corruption for the time prevailed against
grace.

Yea, Paul confesses of himself that he was carnal and sold under sin, and
therefore it may seem that sin had dominion in him.

The answer is easy. and sold with money, and secondly the hired servant,
which being at liberty, for some gain brings himself into voluntary
bondage: now Paul compares himself unto the slave, who though he were very
desirous to escape his masters hands, yet was constrained in great misery to
serve him: so he by reason of the relics of original sin, was otherwhiles
forced to serve sin in some part: but he does not say that he was like to the
hired servant, who in hope of some profit, pleasure or preferment, did sell
himself to work wickedness, as Ahab.

Secondly, Paul, Romans 7.22.23. and by these signs, first before he sin he
does not intend it, or desire it, but he purposes and wills the contrary
good. Secondly, in the action he resists less or more, though peradventure
the resistance be not so evident, by reason of the violence of the affections.
Thirdly, after the action he is sorry and repents seriously.

An example hereof we have in Peter, who before his fall was resolute rather to
have died, then denied his Master; in the action there was some slender
resistance, as may be perceived by the answer he made to the damsel in his
first assault, saying, I know not the man, coldly and remisly, and after being
admonished partly by the voice of the Cock, and partly and principally by
the look of our Savior Christ, he went out and wept bitterly. All was
contrary in Judas, who came with a resolute mind to betray his Master; for
the devil having a long time tempted him hereunto, at the last enters into
him, that is, causes him to resolve to commit the treachery, and in the
temptation he resisted not, being altogether destitute of grace, and after he
repented not in a godly manner unto salvation, but in a desperate grief went
and dispatched himself.

The use of this doctrine is this: it as by a rule we are directed to try and
examine our own estate; for if we be regenerate and borne again of God, we
have not our conversation in sin, we do as much as possible we can to
abstain from sin; for if we take our pleasure, and lead our lives in sin,
a plain argument it is that we are not borne of God, but remain as yet the
sons of the old Adam. If we that live in the schools of the Prophets should
examine our selves by this rule, I fear me that the grace of regeneration
would be very rare, or not at all found among us: for the sins which we do,
not of infirmity and weakness only commit, but even of custom and obstinacy,
and which reign amongst us, do plainly prove and convince unto our selves,
that we are destitute of the grace of regeneration. And first of all the
security, which rules amongst us, whereby we are frozen in our dregs, void of
sense, remorse, and conscience of sin, and of all fear of the wrath of God,
as also of all feeling of the want of Christ, and of that spiritual hunger
after him, and his righteousness, does evidently demonstrate this. Again,
the contempt of religion, and the worship of God, which appears in our
assemblies, argues no less, as well in the Preacher as in the hearer: for many
a man coming into this place to preach the word, does not (as it is plain by
his practice) propound unto himself the glory of God, the edificatio^ of Gods
Church, that is, the winning, saving and co^uerting of men's souls, which is
the principal drift and maine scope of all the Scriptures, and of all our
preaching and hearing; but he intends to preach his wit, memory, learning,
reading, skill in Arts and tongues, vain and foolish eloquence. As for the
hearers, some come of custom to hear the word, for form and fashion, either
to retain their credit, or to prevent the danger of law: some with preiudicate
minds to carpe and to cavil, and to take exception against the speaker,
either for the matter or manner of delivery: some to have their cares tickled
with an empty and idle sound: some for this sinister purpose, some for that;
but few come with due preparation, with reverent and religious minds to have
their consciences edified, their hearts disclosed, the secrets of their
thoughts revealed, that they might be humbled, and converted unto God: in both
which the worship of God is abused and profaned.

Thirdly, the gross and palpable hypocrisy which is to be found amongst us,
whereby we can be content all of us to make profession of religion and
Christianity, but when it comes to the practice, there we fail: nay if any
man shall give himself seriously and constantly to the practice of religion,
he shall be scorned, mocked and reviled with most odious and ignominious, yea
with most hellish and heretical names. Further, this one thing bewraieth our
hypocrisy to al men, that whereas we prosesse love unto God and to our
brethren, we put in practice neither of both: for if we loved God, we would
desire to have communion and fellowship with him, and consequently the mean;
whereby this fellowship is begun and preserved, which are, meditation in the
word, invocation, repentance, and other exercises of religion; which because
they are generally neglected, plainly argue our want of the love of God: And
in stead of loving our brethren, in societies there is to be found hatred,
malice, rancour, pride, and lifting up of our selves against our brethren,
contempt, disdain, and such like; al which make manifest the hypocrisy of our
hearts.

Lastly (to omit the abuse of the name of God by blasphemous oaths, and the
profanation of the Lords Sabbaths) the pride and excess as well in apparel as
in diet, does plainly euince this point, specially in these times wherein the
Lord has called us to moderation and frugalitie: all which, with many more
sins that reign among us, do argue the want and the absence of the grace of
regeneration.

But to leave this point and to come to the reason, because in it is is
contained special matter of instruction: for his seed remains, etc. By
seed in this place (to omit all other expositions) we are to understand the
word of God, the immortal seed of regeneration as Peter calls it, which as
it is in it self immortal and incorruptible, so it is immortal and
incorruptible in the hearts of the Receivers.

The doctrine that naturally arises hence is this, that the child of God
begotten again by the word and spirit of God, and endued with saving and
effectual grace, so continues and abides for ever: which point because it is
difficult and controuersall, I will stand the longer upon it.

The question then is this, whether saving grace may be wholly lost, or not? For
the better resolution whereof, we must hold and remember this distinction, that
the word grace in Scripture, as also in the writings of Divines is used two
ways. First, it is put for the love, favor and mercy of God, which is the
fountain and original of all grace, called by the Apostle, 2. Timoth. 1.9.
the grace which was given us through Christ Jesus before the world was, and
this is eternal and immutable, as the Lord himself, from which it is not
possible that a man should ever totallie or finally fall; according to that of
our Savior Christ, John 13.1. and that of the Prophet Esaias 54.9.10.
Nevertheless a man may loose the signs and tokens of this grace wholly for a
time; as it is manifest, Esaias 54.7.8. Psalm. 89.30.31.32.33. And herein the
Lord deals with his children, as the natural Father with his child, who when
he offends and transgresses his commandment, he is angry with him, he
looks upon him with a stern and severe countenance, he threatnes him to
disinherit him, and turns all the tokens of his love and favor, into the
signs of anger and displeasure, yet he retains this purpose firm and
constant to make him his heir: even so does the Father of spirits deal with
his children, when they are rebellious and disobedient unto him, he scourges
them, he afflicts them and lets them feel his displeasure, yea, he puts them
often in sear of depriving them of the heavenly inheritance, yet his purpose
of putting them in full possession and giving them the fruition hereof, never
alters, Psalm. 89.33.34. Secondly, it is put for the effects of this grace,
which are of two sorts; some are of absolute necessity unto salvation, without
the which salvation and life eternal cannot be achieved, as Election,
effectual vocation, justification, regeneration, and the graces thereof, hope,
love, the fear of God; and these can never be wholly lost, as afterward we
shall prove: some again are necessary, but not of absolute necessity, which
may be lost, as the inward cleanness of the heart, the alacrity of spirit
arising of a good conscience, great boldness in protessing and confessing the
name of Christ, invincible courage in bearing and sustaining most grievous
crosses, free and cheerful calling upon the name of God, and an excellent
sense and taste of the goodness and mercy of God all which or the most of them
were lost in David after his grievous fall, as some have observed out of the
51. Psalm. To speak more plainly and distinctly, spiritual joy, the sense
and comfort of grace arising of the apprehension of the love and favor of God;
the degree and measure of grace may be wholly lost for a time. Apoc. 2.4. the
Church of Ephesus is reproved because she had left her first love, which yerst
she had professed and practiced; but no one grace of absolute necessity unto
salvation can ever be wholly lost. This may appear both by express testimonies
of scripture, as also by the evidence of reason deduced thence. Among many
scriptures I will make choice of those that are most pregnant for the purpose.

Matthew 16.18. The gates of hell though they may assail the Church, and join
their forces against it, yet shall they never prevail, because it is built
upon the sure foundation and rock of our Savior Christ himself, confessed by
Peter.

John 3.36. He that believes in the son of God, has presently eternal
life. If it be said he has it in hope only, not in deed; the answer is
that the hope of Gods children makes not ashamed, Romans 5. it does not
disappoint a man of the thing hoped for, for why it is not a blind hope, a
vain hope, a popish coniecturall hope, but a certain and an infallible
expectation of immortality and of the glory of God; whereupon David Psalm.
31.1. says, that he had cast his hope upon God, and therefore should not be
confounded.

John 10.28.29. No man shall take my sheep out of my hands. Exception: So long
indeed as they continue the sheep of Christ, none can take them from him.
Answer: They always so continue, as may appear by the words following, they
are the gift of the father, unto the son, and all which come unto Christ are
not cast forth. Ioh. 6.37. and in the words following, the Father is greater
then all: if then Satan, sin, the flesh, should but for a time snatch them out
of his hands, they should at least for a time be stronger then he.

Romans 8.35.36.37.38.39. 1. John 2.19. By all which places it is more then
manifest that those that are once in the state of grace cannot wholly fall away.

But to descend to a more particular proof and confirmation of this point:
First, Election cannot be lost, for that is firm and unchangeable. Romans 9.11.
Paul takes it for granted that the purpose of God according to Election, might
remain firm and sure, 2. Tim. 2.19. the foundation, that is, the Election of
God which is the foundation of the salvation of the Elect, abides firm and
sure.

Secondly, the effectual calling of God is never made frustrate, but abides
always: for it is without repentance, Romans 11.19.

Excep. God for his part repents not of any gift given unto man; but man,
after he has received grace from God, does unthankfully and contemptuously
reject it.

Answ. It is not possible that any man should resist the powerful operation of
the spirit of God in the conscience; As for that of Stephen, Act. 7.51. (where
he vpbraides the Jews that they had always resi^^ed the holy Ghost) it is to
be understood of the spirit speaking in the outward ministry of the word, not
inwardly and effectually working in the conscience.

Thirdly, justification standing in the remission of sins, and acceptance of
a man unto life, for the only obedience of Christ imputed, cannot be made
void or frustrate: for the Lord does most perfectly pardon sin: Esaias 44.22.
Micha. 7.19. Iere. 31.34. Psalm 103.12.

Fourthly and lastly, Regeneration cannot be lost: for why? the Author of it,
that is, the spirit of God, abides ever, 1. Ioh. 2.27. who is called the
anointing and the oil of gladness, Psalm 45.7. and the graces of it, as
hope: for else how could it be the anchor and hold of the soul? Heb. 6.19
Love abides ever, 1. Cor. 13.8. a seed whereof remained in Peter in his
denial, and the fear of God never utterly quaileth, Iere. 32.40.

This also is manifest in experience: for when the child of God yields to
any grievous temptation, he sins not as one desperate and void of all hope
to be recovered, nor of hatred against God, not in a secure contempt of God as
the Epicure; but still retains in his heart some remainders of these graces,
which being afterward revived and quickened, he raises up himself and
returns unto God. Grace in time of some grievous temptation is driven into
some narrow corner of the heart, even as they that are in a Sconce or Castle
besieged, fly into some straight corner, or some inward and secret place, yet
after they come forth. As then this point is clear by Scriptures, so likewise
reason will avouch and demonstrate the same.

The first reason is taken from the intercession of Christ, who prayed not
only for Peter, Luke 22.32. but for all the elect that should either then
presently, or hereafter believe, Ioh. 17.20. who was always heard of his
Father, Ioh. 11.42. Unless therefore we will say that Christ his prayer is
ineffectual, we must needs conclude that the believer cannot wholly be
ouercarried of sin. And unto this prayers of the faithful, who asking in
faith to be strengthened in temptation, that they might not wholly be foiled,
have a promise to be heard. Unless therefore we will say that God does
falsify his promise, we must necessarily affirm that the faithful never fall
totally from grace.

The second is taken from the mystical union, which is so firm and
indissoluble that nothing can break the same, Hos. 2.19. nay even death it
self does not dissolve this bond: for when the body is rotten in the grave and
turned into dust and ashes, then notwithstanding it remains a part of that
person which is really and truly (though spiritually) united unto Christ, which
is a matter of no small comfort to the children of God: and if it could be
broken it could never be restored, because faith is but once given, Jude 3.
And if it could be restored, and a new insition into Christ made, then
Baptism, which is the sign and seal hereof, must be iterated and repeated
for the confirmation thereof.

The third reason is this: If grace may be wholly lost, then no man can be
assured of his salvation, neither can have peace with God, nor pray in faith
without doubting: but the faithful man is certain of his salvation, otherwise
he has not faith, because certainty is of the nature of faith; Certitude est
de natura fidei.
and has peace with God, Romans 5.1; and prays in faith without wavering, Iam.
1.6. Ergo.

The fourth reason is this: The son abides in the house for ever, that is, in
the Catholic Church, Ioh. 8.35. but all the faithful are sons by adoption,
Ioh. 1.12. and not only sons, but heirs, and fellow-heires with Christ,
Romans 8.17. and therefore are never wholly cast out of the favor of God, though
they fall dangerously. Now that we see this point to be so clear and evident,
let us answer unto some of those objections that are usually alleged to the
contrary, that we may be more confirmed in the present truth.

That election may be lost, Moses prayer, Exodus 32.32. where Moses prays to
be blotted out of the book of life.

To omit all other answers: first, and therefore affirms nothing certainly.
Secondly, it is not simple but comparatiue, rather then the whole body of the
people should perish, and the glory of God be impeached he prays in an
earnest affection to his brethren, and in a fervent zeal to Gods glory, that
he might (if it were possible) be raced out of the book of life. As for the
place in Psalm 69.28. where David prays that his enemies might be dashed out
of the book of life, he means reprobate hypocrites, who though in their
judgment, and in the judgment of the Church, were falsely reputed to be in
the number of the Elect, yet their names were never written in heaven, and
therefore David prays that the Lord would detect and make manifest their
hypocrisy. But it will be replied, that the Churches of Ephesus, Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Thessalonians. 1.4. 1. Pet. 1.1.
Thessalonica, and the jews are called Elect by the Apostles, who afterward
notwithstanding made total defection and apostacy from God. Answ. There be
two kinds of judgments to be given of men; the judgment of certainty,
whereby an infallible determination is given of any man's particular estate: and
this belongs to God properly and principally, and to man so far forth only
as the Lord shall reveal the estate of one man to another: there is also the
judgment of charity, whereby those that live in the Church and have given up
their names unto God in Baptism, and profess the religion of Christ, are
commonly reputed to be in the number of the Elect: and according to this
latter judgment did the Apostles speak of the Churches. Again, whole
Churches are called Elect by a Synechdoche by reason of the better and more
excellent part, which are in the^ Elect: as the heap of corn, wherein there
is a greater quantity of chafe is so called, by reason of the more principal
part. As for the conditional decree it is a mere forgerie of man's brain,
having no footing in the word of God: for to decree a thing conditionally is to
decree nothing at all, Conditionalis propositio nihil ponit in esse.
because the conditional proposition affirms nothing; and besides that it
does most indignely suspend the will of God the supreme and sovereign cause of
all things, ordering and ruling all secondary oauses, and ouer-ruled by none
upon the will of the creature: it does most impiously ascribe unto God either
imprudence or impotencie: for therefore do men purpose and decree things
conditionally, either because they know not what will be the event, or else
are not able to effect that which they would: but God that has al knowledge
locked up in his breast, and all power in his hand, has no need that he
should conceive any things of his decree with condition.

Against effectual vocation it is alleged out of the Romans 11.22.

It is a Fallacian we call in schools, Ignorantia Elenchi, for the Apostle
speaks not there of particular men, but of the whole body of the Jews and the
Gentiles, and he opposes the Gentiles unto the Jews, giving the Jews hope
that if they shall not remain in incredulity and disobedience, but be
converted unto God, both they and their posterity should again be received
into the bosom of the Church, and into the fellowship of the people of God:
and threatens the Gentiles on the other side, (among whom there were many,
that had the faith of Christ more in outward profession and appearance, then in
the truth and power of godliness) that if so be at any time they should
depart from the doctrine of the Gospel, they should be rejected, and the Jews
received in their room and stead.

Against justification, that is,

Out of a parable no collection of doctrine may be made befides the scope: and
irreconcilable hatred toward those that have injured them. So our Savior
Christ expounds it in the last verse: wherefore the only thing that we can
gather hence is this, That if we shall not remit our brethren their
trespasses, we shall incur the anger and displeasure of God; and that it is
a plain argument, that we are not released of our sins before God,
considering that our pardoning of our brethren their offenses and injuries they
have done to us, is an effect of our absolution and discharge before God.
Against Regeneration.
and 2. Pet. 2.20. some that had truly escaped them that were in error and
filthiness of the world, were again entangled therewith.

sacramento tenus, or he speaks according to the judgment of charity. In
the second place he speaks of false teachers and hypocrites, as it is plain
by the context, and he does not attribute unto them the grace of Regeneration,
but the knowledge of the doctrine of the Gospel, and an outward reformation of
manners; for these had truly escaped out of their old errors, and in stead
thereof embraced the truth, and truly renounced their gross and notorious
sins, and did make a profession of external holiness: yet afterward were
entangled with their former heresies and filthiness of the world.

Further, Examples.
as Adam and David. Adam sinned with full consent of will or not, because he
(as Euah) was seduced by the subtlety and iugling craftines of that old
serpent, 2. Cor. 11.3. But be that granted, there is a great difference
between Adam in the state of innocence, and the regenerate in the state of
grace: for though Adam had greater grace, yea sufficient grace to have stood if
he had would, yet he had not the grace of continuance; but the regenerate have
the grace of confirmation, and perseverance, and herein the state of
regeneration is priusledged before the state of creation.

David it is alleged out of the 51. Psalm, that he prayed after his fall,
that the Lord would create in him a new heart, now creation is of a thing that
is not neither actually nor potentially, Ergo, he was wholly for the time
deprived of grace.

David speaks of himself not as howas indeed before God, but as he was in
his own sense, oppressed with the burden of his sins, and apprehending in
conscience the anger and displeasure of God for the same; whereupon as one
forlorn and destitute of all grace he desires the Lord to frame and create in
his heart the graces of his spirit.

Except. Where there is no repentance, there is no remission of sins, where
there is no remission, there is no faith, where there is no faith, there is no
grace, and therefore David during the time of his impenitencie had no grace.

Answ. Where there is no repentance neither habitual nor actual, there is no
grace. Again, though there be no actual remission of sins, but where there is
both actual faith and actual repentance, yet the antecedent remission is
still ratified, and the future pardon is purposed to be bestowed so soon as a
man shall actually believe and repent, Lastly, there may be habitual grace,
where there is no actual remission of some present particular sin or sins
for a time.

Not content with these, From reason.
no man can be a member of Christ and of an harlot at once, because the
Apostle opposes them, 1. Cor. 6.16. and therefore he that is joined and made
one flesh with an harlot is cut off from Christ.

A man is a member of Christ two ways: first, heat, life, or sense from the
rest of the members, or from the head, yet for all this it remains still
united and coupled to the body, and may again be recovered by plasters and
Physic: so after a grievous fall the child of God feels no inward peace and
comfort, but is smitten in conscience with the trembling of a spiritual palsy
for his offense: and yet indeed still remains before God a member of Christ in
respect of his conjunction with him, and shall be restored to his former estate
after serious repentance.



Though it cannot stand so firmly, peccatum vastans conscientiam, the sin
that wastes the conscience, and this is not incident unto the man regenerate:
secondly, improperlie, which is done though of knowledge, yet of infirmity by
reason of fear, constraint, hastiness, precipitation of the mind and such
like sudden passions in the tegenerate, or with some wilfulness of
presumption: yet because there is never any full and absolute consent, it
cannot be called sin against the conscience properly. Wherefore to conclude
this whole matter, we grant that the man regenerate and endued with saving
grace, may fall into sin dangerously and grieuouslie, so as hereby his faith
shall be weakened, his heart hardened, the spirit of God made sad in him, the
peace of the conscience troubled, the proceedings of Gods grace in the heart
interrupted, the comfort and joy of the spirit removed, and the heart filled
with amazedness, astonishment, perplexity and fear, all the grates of God
lessened, the best things in man obscured and blemished, the course of Gods
mercies stopped, and the whole man laid open to all the plagues and judgments
of God, and made unprofitable to every good work: yea, he may so fall that he
shall have need of a new reconciliation with God, a new remisssion of his late
offense, a new confirmation of faith, a new inkindling of the spirit, and a new
restoring of the inner man: but that he can wholly lose grace, that is not
possible; that, that faith which purifieth the heart and works by love; that,
that love which proceeds from a pure heart, a good conscience and faith
unfeigned; that, that hope which makes not ashamed, and is the anchor hold of
the soul firm and steadfast; that, that fear which is the headspring of
wisdom, and causes a man to decline from evil, and is in the heart a well of
life to make a man escape the snares of death, can be wholly lost, neither
scriptures, reason nor probalitie shall be ever able to euince.

in any temptation: so on the other side it gives us a caveat to take heed we
do not abuse it to security and the liberty of the flesh, for considering
the state of a christian man is so tickle and inconstant in this life, that he
is subject ever and anon to fall into sin, yea wholly to fall away, if it were
not that by the promise of God, and the effectual intercession of Christ, he
were as by certain underprops supported and sustained; requisite and
necessary it is that we listen unto the exhortation of the Apostle, and with
fear and trembling to work our salvation, and if any man think he stands,
let him take heed least he fall.

FINIS.
TWO SERMONS, PREACHED BY THAT Reverend and Judicious Divine Master THOMAS
NEVVHOVSE, late Preacher of Gods word in the City of Norwich.

AND NOW SET FORTH for the use and benefit of Gods people, by ROBERT GALLARD
Master of Arts, and Minister in the same City.

ECCLESIAST. 12.11. The words of the wise are as goads and nails fastened by
the Masters of the assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Edmund Weauer and William Welby.
1614.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND truly religious Gentleman, Master THOMAS CORBET
Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in the County of Norffolke:
And to the Worshipful Gentlewoman Mistress ANNE CORBET his most loving, wise,
and virtuous wife: R G. wishes true happiness in this life, and a blessed
hope of the life to come.
RIght Worshipful, those exquisite and most curious works, which Aholiab and
Bezaleel wrought in the Temple, were to be seen long after their times, and
remained as testimonies of their skill to them that did survive: And we see also
in common experience, that earthly buildings, when the workmen be dead, often
times stand still as monuments of their art, and means of much good to them
that live after. In like manner it were to be wished that the works of the
skillful builders up of Gods house (when they themselves be gone) might still
continue as memorials of their skill in spiritual Architecture, and as
instruments of much good to succeeding generations.

Among diverse works of worthy workmen, who have of late very artificially and
cunningly wrought about the temple of Christ, I am sure that some of the
Manuscripts of that judicious Divine Master Thomas Newhouse, may well for their
art be valued with the best in their kind, and cannot doubtless but be very
precious in your eyes, who loved their author so well, and very profitable to
many others, by who^ they be so much desired. For this cause (having some of
them by me) lest I should seem injurious either to their author, in
suppressing that which might make so much to his praise, or to the public
good, in keeping back those things are much desired as useful to Gods people,
I thought it a meet thing to publish these few to the making up of this little
volume.

Among the manifold true hearted and entirely affecting friends this godly man
had, I doubt not but that I might single out diverse, of whose kindness I might
presume for defense of his works, and may justly fear for passing them by, to
be challenged as a man unmindful of their love; but the time is coming
wherein I hope to meet with good opportunity of giving them satisfaction in
this kind. In the mean while, I think it my duty to remember your Worships
with these; which if I had neglected to do, I see not but that I should in
some measure have been blemished with the tincture of unthankfulness. I
therefore do offer these Sermons to your view, and also to your protection,
hoping that you shall find them worthy of both. If you respect their author,
they be his something; if me the publisher, alas they be my nothing: yet sure
such is your ingenuitie, as that I doubt not but that you will receive them as
pledges of love, both his and mine.

Indeed I acknowledge the particular respects whereby it has pleased your
Worships to engage me unto you, do far exceed all that poor recompense,
which the slender dedication of these few sheets of paper can possibly make;
neither would I that the same should be taken as any way equalizing your
desert, but only I desire herein to give you partly a sign of my dutiful and
most unfeigned affection toward you, and partly also a memorial of the Author,
your departed friend, who is now in bless; not doubting but that your Worships
will please to give a kind acceptance to this my poor offer, not weighing the
worth of the thing it self, but rather (as you are wont) the mind and good
will of him that gives.

Now for these two Sermons, in them the Author does chiefly treat of these two
things: Baptism, and the fear of God: the first, a sign of our insition into
Christ, and a blessed seal of the covenant of grace. The second is called in
Scripture, the Reverence of Jehovah, the fountain or wel-spring of true and
heavenly wisdom.

As touching Baptism me thinks when we seriously consider with our selves
what weighty things were done therein, and mutually past twixt God and us, we
cannot but see it to be utterly a fault, so easily to cast aside all thoughts
about it, and to make it such a stranger to our meditations as usually we do.
For mine own part I know not whether any one thing be more worthy of a
Christians consideration then is his baptism, for by it as by a conduit it
pleased God to convey unto us the best of his favors. For example, whereas by
nature (as scripture speaks) we were aliants from God, and sons of wrath,
Ephesians. 2.3.12.
when we were baptized in the name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, we
were brought into an holy fellowship with the blessed Trinity, and were
admitted into the family of Christ, ever after to remain as adopted sons in
the house of the most high God; A most blessed condition.

Again, Ephesians. 2.1.
whereas by nature we were all dead and rotten in sin, and altogether deuoid
of the life of grace, in baptism we received quicknance from the spirit of
life the holy Ghost. And whereas our poor souls were beggarly clad with
natures cloth, which is (God wot) naught else but a torn and rotten ragge of
old Adam, in baptism we laid aside that old, and put on a new and most costly
coat, even the rich robe of Christ his righteousness, whereby the whole Church
(the spouse of Christ) does stand as a glorious object in the sight of God for
evermore. Lastly, whereas by nature we were most filthy and loathsome in Gods
eye, no leper or lazer so loathsome to us as we to God: for as the child newborn lies tumbling in blood, so we in sin, in baptism we were washed by the
clean water of the spirit of God, and thereby freed from the spots and guilt
of sin, 2. King. 5.
as Naaman was from his leprosy in the river Jordan.

Thus by our baptism, of strangers to God we became even Gods associats; of
limbs of the devil, members of Christ; of beggars brats poorly clad, Kings
sons richly attired in the righteousness of God; of polluted and unclean,
pure and amiable: (...) thus were we blessed when we were baptized with water
and with the holy Ghost.

Now further see we what great things did pass from us to God in our
baptism; surely as God therein became a God unto us, so we became a people to
him, we renounced the world, and proclaimed a defiance to sin and Satan, we
dedicated our selves, souls and bodies to the service and worship of the most
high; and as David vowed to keep Gods commandments, so did we by a solemn
vow in the sight of men and Angels, bind our selves to believe in God, and to
become as it were Gods apprentises, or rather the loyal subjects, and faithful
soldiers of our Lord Jesus to fight under his colors, and maintain his
quarrel against all adversary power of our salvation and his glory. And thus
we see that in our baptism the Lord did great things for us, and we promised
great things to God again; how requisite a thing is it therefore, nay how
necessary that we should now and then admit of thoughts about our baptism,
that so we might have a sense and feeling of the comfort of those blessings of
God which there we received, and also be quickened up to the careful
performance of what we have so solemnly promised. For this very cause I wish
that this little treatise concerning this argument, might be as a Remembrancer
to put us in mind of these things which are of such weight, and so nearly do
concern us.

As touching that other Sermon, in it we may see very exactly and iudiciously
handled that rare and singular virtue so often spoken of in the Scriptures, and
called by this name, The fear of God, a most excellent gift of the spirit, as
useful almost as any other to help forward a Christian life, and no less
gainful in bringing in Gods blessings.

As for a Christian life, as we know it is chiefly spent in two things, that
is, abstaining from evil, and endeavoring that which is good; or as Isaiah
speaks, in ceasing to do evil, Isaiah 1.16.17.
and learning to do well. Now both these be streams flowing from one and the
same sountaine, viz. Prou. 3.7.
the fear of Jehovah. Solomon says, The fear of the Lord is to hate evil,
Prou. 8.13. there is Gods fear the cause of surceasing from evil. He further
says, Pron. 14.2. He that walks in righteousness fears the Lord: where
the wise man reasons from the effect to the cause, and shows that Gods fear
is it that causes a man to walk righteously, that is, to do well: and indeed
there was never any man that feared God, but endeavored in the course of his
life to please God in well-doing. So then as we see man that rides, in ordering
his horse does use a bridle and a spur, a bridle to restrain him if he be
too free, a spur to prick him on forward if he be dull; so in ordering our
lives, the fear of God is as a bridle to curb us from rushing into sin, and
as a spur to prick us on forward, and quicken our slow and lazy natures to
that which is good and pleasing to God.

Yet moreover as this is a virtue of great use in directing us to heaven, so I
may truly call it, as the Apostle does call godliness, great gain, for it
brings in with it the abundance of Gods blessings, in so much as whosoever will
attempt to trade therewith, shall find her revenues to be very great: and
that which Solomon says of Wisdom, Prou. 3.14. will be verified of her, viz.
that her mercha^dise is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof is better then gold. What good is there almost that a good man can set
his heart a wishing or desiring, but may be obtained (if God think meet) so
be it he will be a fearer of God, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it Psalm.
34. that nothing shall be wanting to them that fear him; would we live long
and enjoy many days on earth, which is the foundation of all earthly comforts:
the wise man says, Prou. 10.27.
that the fear of the Lord increases the days. Would we feign be rich, and
had in high esteem and repute among men? Prou. 22.4. The reward of the fear
of the Lord is riches, and glory. Are we desirous to know the holy Scriptures
aright, and to be acquainted with the deep secrets and hidden councels of the
most high God? The Prophet David says; Psalm. 25.14.
The secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him. Do we long after
Gods favor, and that his loving countenance may shine upon us, without which
nothing in this world is worth the having? The Prophet says, the loving
countenance of the Lord indureth for ever on them that fear him. Would we be
truly happy and blessed of God both in our selves and in our Children we leave
behind us? Questionles, our only way for this purpose is to fear the Lord,
Blessed says the Prophet, Psalm. 112.1.2. is the man that fears the Lord,
his seed shall be mighty upon earth, and the generation of the righteous
shall be blessed. And most excellent is that sentence, Psalm. 25. His soul
shall dwell at ease, his children shall inherit the land. Lo thus and many
other ways shall that man be blessed that fears the Lord.

Thus I thought good (Right Worshipful) to touch the titles of these two
Sermons in these sewe words, wherein you may see the worth and weight of the
subject matter they are about, and so be led to a further perusing of them to
your souls good.

Now the God of heaven who has already seasoned your hearts with his fear,
and set you apart as sanctified vessels to bear his glorious name, hold on
your hearts in a wise and zealous profession of his truth, and grant that you
may see your service to God abundantly rewarded, even with the best of his
favors, upon your selves, and upon your most hopeful posterity for ever.
From Norwich, Nouemb. 15. 1613.

Your Worships true affected in all Christian love and duty, Robert Gallard.

A SERMON, SHOWING THE FRVIT AND BENEFIT we have by our Baptism.
GALATH. 3.27. For all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.


HItherto the Apostle has proved by the scope and end of the legal
administration, that the law is abrogate by the coming of Christ: the
ceremonial law wholly, and the Moral in some part, viz. in respect of
justification. Now in the 26. verse he proves the same by opposition of their
present, with their former estate, as if he should say, All ye are now the
sons of God, you are therefore no more servants, as you were under the law:
and that they are the sons of God he shows it by this, that they were
ingrafted into Christ by faith the proper instrument of this insition. Now in
this verse he confirms this their incorporation by the testimony of
baptism, whereby the truth of this is signed and sealed unto them.

For the words themselves, that we may with fruit be conversant in the
handling of them, first let us search the true and proper meaning of them and
then come to the use.

To be baptized into Christ, is to be baptized in or into ye name of Christ,
that we might be made partakers of all the benefits of Christ which concern
salvation. Thus Saint Peter expounds it, Acts 2.38. where he gives this
advice unto the Jews, which were touched in conscience for their sin in
crucifying of Christ, Repent and be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus for
the remission of sins. Now to be baptized into the name of Christ, is to have
the name of Christ named upon us, and for us to be acknowledged to be his
members; and by baptisine, as by a solemn right and ceremony instituted of
God, to be inuesled and installed into the family of Christ, viz. his Church,
and to be endued with all the privileges thereof. This appears by a like
phrase used Genesis 48.16. where Jacob at his death blessing Joseph's children
has these words: Let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers
Abraham and Isaac: that is, let them be all taken and reputed as my children.
Now because this speech used by the Apostle is a sacrame^tal phrase, wherein
that is attributed to the sign which is proper to the thing signified.

These words are further to be explained on this manner: All ye that are
baptized into Christ, that is, all ye that are ingrafted and set into the body
of Christ, and have received the sacrament of Baptism as a seal and
confirmation of this your insition and incorporatio^, have put on Christ, even
as men do use to put on a garment. The original of this Metaphore I take it
to be this: Those that were to be baptized in the Primitive Church, being men
of years, were wont to put off their clothes going into the water, and when
they came out of the water either to put on new clothes, or the old garments
as new, themselves being become new men: whereupon the Apostle speaking of
regeneration, alludeth to this custom in two places, Ephesians. 4.22.24. Coloss.
3.9.10. Further, Christ is here compared to a garment in two respects: first in
respect of necessity; secondly of ornament. For the first, the garment has
this necessary use to cover the nakedness from the eyes of men, and to
protect and preserve a man from the injuries of the air and the weather, viz.
from the extremity of heat and cold. In like sort Christ is a covering to
hide our nakedness from the sight of God, and a shelter to shroud and defend us
from the heat and tempest of the wrath and anger of God: and thus is Christ
put on in justification. For the second; as the garment does adorn and
beautify a man's person, and does not a little commend him and make him
acceptable in the presence of men: even so Christ being put on in faith, does
adorn and enrich our souls with divine and spiritual graces, making us to
appear precious and beautiful in the sight of God; and thus is Christ put on
in sanctification: so then the meaning is that those that by baptism are
ingrafted into Christ, are justified and sanctified. And thus much shall
suffice to have spoken of the meaning of the words; now come we to the use: the
which is manifold.

First, if baptism be a sacrament of our incorporation into Christ, our duty
is to labor by all means in truth and indeed to be set into Christ and to be
made members of his body, that so we may answer our profession made in
baptism. Great is the carelesnes of the world in this point: all men that live
and are borne in the Church, have this benefit vouchsafed them in the beginning
of their days, to be brought into the Church by baptism, and to be
acknowledged as true members thereof, but few there are that labor for the
inward baptism, represented and sealed by the outward, to wit, to become the
lively members of that mystical body, whereof Christ is the head. I will
therefore use some reasons as motives, to induce and persuade us to become
members of Christ: the first whereof is this.

God of his infinite mercy and love in Jesus Christ has vouchsafed us this
honor in the beginning of our days, (when we were no members of Christ
actually, but children of wrath and heirs of damnation) to call us by his own
name, setting (as it were) the stamp and seal of baptism upon us, thereby as
by a badge and cognizance not only acknowledging us for his, but
distinguishing us from the pagan, infidel and profane company of men in the
world, thereby also solemnly admitting us into ye Church, and endowing us with
all the privileges thereof: if we will not therefore be wilful contemners
and despisers of so great grace, and on our parts, as much as in us lies, make
frustrate the holy ordinance of God, and prejudice that good which he meant and
offered unto us in baptism, let us labor to be set and ingrafted into Christ.

Secondly, as it is no small privilege for a man to be acknowledged for a
member of this Church, and of Christ before he be; so is it a far greater
prerogative truly to be implanted into him. Why so? because by this means
thou have fellowship and communion with Christ, not only as he is man, but as
he is God, and the second person in Trinity, and by reason of him, with the
Father and the holy Ghost: Now what a preferment and pre-eminence is this for a
man, being but dust and ashes, yea a worm creeping and groueling upon the
earth, to have communion with the most great and glorious God, who is King and
Lord of heaven and earth?

Thirdly, this incorporation is the ground and foundation of all those benefits
we have in Christ: for hence it is that whole Christ is made ours, both in
justification and sanctification: 1. Cor. 1.30. He of God is made unto us
wisdom, etc.

Fourthly, hence it is that we have title and interest unto eternal life, and
are heirs and fellow-heires with Christ of his kingdom, and shall as Kings
reign with him in glory for ever after this life.

Lastly, the very consideration of our miserable estate by nature ought to
prick us forward, and even to constrain us hereunto, which is this: The image
of God is defaced and almost raced out in us, and we are vile and deformed
creatures in the sight of God, more loathsome and odious unto him, then the
dog or toade is or can be to us; in our minds full of ignorance and error,
in our wills of contumacie and rebellion, in our affections of disorder, being
always prone to evil, and never to that which is good; in our consciences of
guiltines, and in our memories of forgetfulness, in our words and deeds of
manifold offenses, in the whole man we are fearfully thrall and in bondage to
sin and Satan, and unto these corruptions and sins the punishment is
answerable: for in our minds we are subject to frenzies and madness in our
consciences to horrors and strange fears, in our bodies to aches, innumerable
diseases and infirmities, in our goods to losses, and in our names to ignominy
and contempt, in the end of this life to death, and in the life to come to the
second death, which is a separation of the whole man from the presence of God:
If then this be the state of every man till he be in Christ, how does it stand
us upon to labor in this point above al things, that we may be true members of
Christ? And that we may be incorporate into the body of Christ, three things
must be practiced.

First, we must acknowledge our selves to be no members of Christ, but limbs
of the Devil, vassals and bondslaues of Satan, firebrands of hell, and members
of the kingdom of darkness, alienates and strangers from the Covenant and
Church of God. In the third of Matthew none were baptized of John, but such as
confessed their sins.

We must in the next place be humbled, that is, be heartily grieved and
displeased with our selves for our sins, purposing and resolving by Gods
grace never to return to the practice of them, but hence forward to live in
newness of life: For this cause John's baptism, Mark. 1.4. is called the
baptism of repentance, because of the parties baptized (being men of years)
was required a testification of their repentance, and their baptism was a
solemn profession thereof.

Thirdly, we must with humble and contrite hearts come unto Christ; first,
beginning to consider of the promises of the Gospel; then to hunger and thirst
after them; and last of all, by faith to embrace and lay hold of them, Matthew.
11.28. But how may we come to Christ? only by faith: for so, believing and
coming unto Christ are put one for another, Ioh. 6.35. For faith is the foot
which carries and brings us unto Christ, and being come to him, it is the
hand whereby we receive Christ, and the bond wherewee are coupled unto him, and
made one with him.



live till they come to the years of discretion: as for the former they are
ingrafted into Christ, not by any faith, (which they have not, neither indeed
can have by reason of their age) but by a secret and unspeakable working of the
holy Ghost, uniting and coupling them unto Christ, and applying unto them the
perfect obedience of Christ for their justification from original sin, and
inwardly renewing them in the inward man, and repairing the image of God in
them in holiness and righteousness: for the latter whereof there is the
greater question; Baptism has this present use in them, it is a symball, and
(as it were) a door of their solemn entrance and admissio^ into the Church of
God, and for the time to come it is a seal and pledge unto them of their
certain incorporation into the body of Christ. Thus much of the first use.

Secondly, if by baptism we are ingrafted into Christ, then let us walk as it
becomes the members of Christ. 2. Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, let him
be a new creature, that is, renewed in his mind, in his thoughts, in his
purposes, in his desires, in his affections, in his speeches, in his actions
and whole conversation; let none of these savor of the flesh, but of the
spirit: and why so? because All old things (says the Apostle) are past, and
all things are become new: So likewise Galath. 5.25. If we live in the spirit,
that is, if being coupled unto Christ, we be quickened by his spirit in the
inward man, then let us walk in the spirit, that is, let us bring forth the
fruits, and do the works of the spirit, and not of the flesh. If a man were
called out of the country to live in the city, and made one of the
corporation, his name being registered in the Roles, and he enfranchised and
entitled to all the privileges of a free Citizen, he would shake off all his
rude and rusticall behauiours, and carry himself and converse ciuilly as a
Citizen: so likewise we being called out of this world, that is, the corrupt
stock of mankind, and set into Christ the true vine, our duty is to cast off
all our worldly and carnal behauiours, and to carry and demean our selves
honestly, as it becomes the members of Christ, being now made (as it were)
free Citizens of the kingdom of heaven.

Thirdly, if by baptism we are ingrafted into Christ, let us endeavor and use
al good means daily to grow up more and more with him in this spiritual
conjunction. The members of the natural body at the first are but small and
slender, but still they grow in strength and receive daily increase, till they
come to their just quantity: even so it is in the mystical body of Christ,
though at the first we be but babes in Christ, yet by the continual use of the
Word and Sacraments, and by prayer, meditation, etc. we must look to receive
continual increase, growing from grace to grace till we come to be tall and
strong men in Christ Jesus. The sience or graffe that is set into a stock and
does not prosper and grow greater, neither bearing leaf, nor bringing forth
fruit, we judge it to be a dead and a rotten branch, and that worthily, and
that it lives not by the sap and juice of the root; semblably, when as by
baptism we are set into Christ, and make no progress or proceedings in
knowledge, in faith, in love, in zeal, in godliness, in obedience, it is an
argument we are but dead branches, and are but only outwardly in appearance
before men ingrafted into Christ, and not truly indeed before God.

Fourthly, here al parents are taught their duty, as the common care of all is
(which is commendable) by baptism to bring their children into the Church, so
when they come to years (which is commonly neglected of al) to instruct them
touching the matter and use of baptism, a maine and principal point whereof
is their infition into Christ, laboring to bring them to the sight and sense
of their sins, to repentance unfeigned for the same, and consequently by the
use of the Word and Sacraments to true fellowship and communion with Christ.

Fifthly, here is a matter of great comfort unto all that are fallen, or by
infirmity, or otherwise have made relapse in some or more grievous sins: for
when a man fallen shall consider that baptism is a sign and seal of our
perpetual insition, and indissoluble union with Christ, in which is granted a
general pardon of all sins past, present and to come, never to be repealed,
because the Covenant remains ever in force unto them that repent and observe
the condition. Esaias 54.10. The covenant of my peace shall not fail: he takes
heart and comfort himself in hope of favor and mercy, if he return unto
God by repentance. For baptism is like unto a ship, out of which if a man
shall be fallen into the Sea, and shall but catch hold of a board to bring him
to the ship, the Pylot will be ready to receive him: so if a man shall after
his fall (having caught the board of repentance) return unto baptism, the
Lord will be ready to receive him to mercy, and it will be of force to save
him.

Lastly, if baptism be the sacrament of our incorporation, then we ought to
honor it, to reverence and regard it as the holy ordinance of God, and by all
means to testify the same. And here a common abuse comes to be taxed and
reproved, when men depart forth of the congregation in the time of
administration, thereby manifesting their contempt of the holy Sacrament,
whereas by their presence and decent behavior they ought to testify their
reverence unto the ordinance of God, and their joy for the adding of a member
unto the Church.

Have put on Christ. Christ is put on three ways. First in his merit: secondly
in his efficacy, and thirdly in his example. For the first, Christ is put on
in his merit, when as by faith his righteousness and meritorious obedience is
applied unto justification and salvation: this is signed and sealed by the
action of the Minister besprinkling the body of the party baptized with
water, thereby representing the blood of Christ, which being sprinkled upon the
soul by the hand of faith, purges and cleanses it from all sin, 1. Ioh.
1.7. Our duty therefore which we learn from hence is this; that we are to
labor above all things to be purged and washed in our consciences from sin,
that our hearts being purified by faith, we might stand blameless and without
fault before God. Acts 22.16. Ananias is brought in giving this counsel unto
Paul; Arise (says he) and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, etc.

Secondly, Christ is put on in his efficacy, when as by the virtue and power
of his death a man kills and crucifieth the corruption of his nature, and by
the power of his resurrection he reuiueth and is raised out of the grave of his
sin, to holiness and newnes of life: this is also signed and sealed in our
baptism, and for that cause we are said, Romans 6.3. to be baptized into the
death of Christ, because baptism is the seal and sacrament of our
mortification: neither of that only but of our vivification also, as may
appear Romans 6.4. for we must be like fashioned unto Christ, not only in the
similitude of his death, that as he died for our sins, so we by the virtue of
the same death should die unto sin, but also in the similitude of his
resurrection, that as he rose again for our justification, so we by the
virtue of the same should rise out of sin unto righteousness and holiness
of life. Our duty is therefore to labor for spiritual regeneration, for so
baptism is termed by the Apostle, Titus 3.5. the lauer of the new birth, and
renewing of the holy Ghost. Hereunto Paul exhorts, Ephesians. 4.22.24. and Phil.
3.9.10. alluding unto baptism.

Thirdly, Christ is put on in his example, when he is made a pattern of all
moral duties wherein he has gone before us for imitation. Our duty is here
to deny our selves, to take up our cross and follow Christ in his patience,
in his meeknes, in his humility, in his love, in his obedience: And unto this
putting on of Christ the Apostle exhorts, Colloss. 3.12.13.14. Now unto this
putting on of Christ in that manner, which I have said, diverse and sundry
reasons and inducements may be brought: the first is this.

Christ is here compared to a garment, which argues that our nakedness and
filthiness is apparent in the sight of God, before it be covered therewith,
and we also exposed to all the plagues and judgments of God: If we would
therefore have assurance of our justification before God, and our acceptance
of him unto favor and mercy, and our freedom and deliverance from the wrath
and anger of God, let us labor to put on Christ.

Secondly, in the knitting of these two together, our insition into Christ with
our putting on of Christ: we see that all that are truly ingrasted into Christ,
they are justified, sanctified, and walk in obedience unto God. If therefore
we would have any testimony or argument to persuade us, that we are in
Christ, we must necessarily put on Christ, for here these twain are
inseparably coupled to gether by the Apostle.

Thirdly, if we shall not thus put on Christ we are not in him, and
consequently baptism is unto us a nullitie and becomes of none effect: for
it is but as a seal set to a blanke, Romans 2.35.
the Apostle says Circumcision verily prafiteth, etc. But if thou be a
transgressour of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision; so baptism
loses his grace in them that are not regenerate.

Lastly, the consideration of our vow and promise so solemnly made in baptism
touching the renouncing of the Devil, the world, the flesh, and the embracing
and following of Christ and his truth ought to move us hereunto, unless we
will become truce breakers with God, and contemners of the covenant, unto which
we are entitled in the beginning of our days. Neither may we please our
selves in an outward profession that we have given up our names unto God in
baptism, and are acknowledged to be his, and live in the Church, coming to
hear Sermons, and to receive the Sacraments at times appointed, but we must
proceed further to answer in truth and in deed unto our profession made in
baptism: for it is not the washing of the filth of the flesh by the material
element of water that does commend us unto God, but the stipulation of a good
conscience sanctified and purged by the blood of Christ.

FINIS.
A SERMON, WHEREIN IS DEclared the nature of the fear of God.
PROVE. 1.7. The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom.


TO omit the coherence of these words with the former, because it makes not
much for the further understanding or opening of this place, the words in
themselves contain a brief or sum of all that doctrine, and the ground of
all those exhortations which are propounded in the 9. first Chapters of this
book: which is this, that the reverence of Jehovah is the chief wisdom, and
the gate or entrance to all wisdom, according to which whosoever does order
and frame his life, may be justly called a wise man. In the words is contained
a description of the fear of God by a double argument. The first is taken from
the subject, to wit, Jehovah, for about his Majesty is this fear conversant.
The second taken from the nature of it, to wit, it is the principal wisdom,
or the very fountain and headspring of all true wisdom.

For the better understanding of the words, we must remember that there is a
threefold fear mentioned in Scripture. The first is a natural fear, which
is occupied about some imminent evil and danger, which may either destroy, or
grieve and annoy the creature; so our Savior Christ feared death. The second
is a distrustful fear, every where discommended in Scripture and disallowed,
as 1. Ioh. 4. perfect love casts out this fear of incredulity. The third is
a fear proceeding from faith as a fruit of it, in which sense we are to
speak of it in this place, being that which here is commended unto us: this is
called the feate of Iehonah.

But here it will be demanded how God can be the object of fear, considering
that fear is occupied about some future evil, and that not far off, but
imminent and near at hand; and no small evil, but so great as that a man is
not able by his power either to resist, or to sustain and overcome it. Now God
is goodness it self, yea the chiefest good to be desired and earnestly
sought after of all, and therefore to be feared of none. Answera. The proper
and direct object of fear is some evil, yet indirectly, and in the second
place it respects the party or person from whence the evil comes; as hope
first of all respects the good thing hoped for and next, the person of whom
this good thing is to be received so the most direct and proper object of this
fear is the displeasure of God, which is the only evil to be feared and
avoided of all men; and more indirectly and in the second place it is referred
to God himself, and called the fear of Jehovah.

This fear proceeding from faith is said to be the chiefest wisdom, both
because from hence us from a pure fountain proceeds all true wisdom: and
herein also consists the greatest part of spiritual and divine wisdom to
reverence the true God.

Touching this fear, that we may with fruit consider and entreare of it,
four things are to be learned: first what it is; secondly, by what marks and
notes it is known and discerned: thirdly, by what means it is obtained and
kept: fourthly, by what arguments we are to be induced to seek after it and
practice it. For the first, to begin with the acception and use of the word,
which in Scripture is manifold. First, it is put for God himself: Genes.
31.53. Iaakob swear by the fear of his father Izhak. Secondly, for his word
and doctrine, Psalm. 19.9. The fear of the Lord is clear, etc. Thirdly,
generally for the whole worship of God, Psalm. 34.9. Jonah. 1.9. Fourthly, it
is put for a special part of Gods worship, and signifies this chaste and
filial fear, that fear whereby the wife fears the husband, and the child
the father; which may be thus described. It is a peculiar gift of the holy
Ghost in the regenerate, whereby a man, being resolved particularly and
effectually of Gods presence, stands in awe to displease him, and endeavors
to please him in all things.

First it is a gift, Esaias 11.2. Secondly, it is a peculiar gift to distinguish
it from the common gifts of the Spirit, as Prophecy, which is a gift to
interpret and expound Scripture; illumination; a gift to practice a particular
calling; a gift to bridle and moderate the affections; and temporary faith:
all which, with many others, be in reprobates, and such as are destitute of
the fear of God.

Thirdly, in the regenerate: and that is added for two causes: first, because
unregenerate and wicked men that live in their sins do want this holy fear,
Romans 3.18. Psalm. 36.1. Secondly, to distinguish it from that fear which is in
them. Now the difference consists in these 3. things:

First, the fear of the godly proceeds from faith and love of God, for he
believes every word of God: The commanding word, and therefore fears to
transgress even because of the authority of the commandment: The promising
word, and therefore fears lest through unthankfulness and disobedience he
should deprive himself of the use and fruit of the promise: and the
threatening word, and therefore fears lest he should incur the danger of
Gods wrath, and curse denounced against the breakers of his law. Again,
because he loves God, therefore he fears to offend him, and by sin to
divide and separate himself from him. Contrariwise, the fear of the wicked
proceeds from distrust, for he only setting before him the consideration of
the curse, the judgments of God due unto him, hell, death, and damnation,
utterly despaireth of mercy, and his conscience, by the assistance of the holy
Ghost, applying the curse, is overwhelmed with excessive fear, and plunged
into the gulf of desperation and destruction. Again, it proceeds of corrupt
selfeloue, whereby he loves his own welfare, his present and future good
estate, his own pleasures and lusts, and abhors every thing that may cross
him in them. Lastly, of the hatred of God; for this is his damnable disposition
that he wishes there were no God, the law were no law, sin were not sin,
that he might still live in the practice of his lusts without check or
controlement.

They differe in the object: malum culpae, and the offense of Gods Majesty
principally, holding that to be the greatest evil: and less principally and
in the second place, about the malum paena, and Gods wrath: for this is the
ingenuus disposition of the child of God, that though there were no hell or
punishment for evil doers, yet would he shun and avoid sin for it self,
because God abhors it. The fear of the wicked is occupied about malu^
paenae alone, therefore it is indeed a servile and slavish fear, and if there
were no punishment for sin he would never fear, and the more he is punished
the more he rebelleth.

In the effect: Job: the latter causes a man to fly from God, and to run
away from him, and to fret and fume against him; and in one word, the one has
hope of comfort with it, the other has none. The difference further may be
illustrated by this comparison: The fear of the godly is like the fear of the
chaste Matrone, who fears her husband being present lest he should depart
from her, lest he should diminish his affectionate love toward her, and by any
offense on her part have his mind alienated from her: Contrariwise, the fear
of the wicked is like to that of the stru^pet and adulterous wife, who fears
her husband absent, lest he should return, and present, lest he should know
and be made privy to her wicked and unchaste practices.

Whereby a man being resolved particularly, etc. This resolution is the ground
of the fear of God: now it necessarily presupposes an apprehension or
conceiving of God in the mind; which how it may be, (seeing God is infinite and
incomprehensible, and therefore cannot be compassed within the narrow and
staight bounds of humane reason and capacity) it may be demanded.

Answ. God is not conceived of us as he is in his own nature, neither yet by
negation, or analogy, but as be has revealed himself in his word and
creatures. God has revealed himself in his word to be holy, wise, good, just,
merciful, infinite, omnipotent: therefore the mind of man conceiueth him to be
holy, etc. God has revealed himself in his creatures to be great, mighty,
terrible, a God full of power, glory, and Majesty: therefore the mind of man
conceiueth him to be so. This apprehension breeds a resolution of Gods
presence in the mind; but unless it be further settled in the heart and
conscience it is unprofitable: and therefore I add it must be particular: not
only that whereby a man is persuaded generally that God sees and knows all
things, and is present at all men's actions, but also effectually, such as
strikes the heart with an holy reverence in regard of Gods Majesty. Whereof
there be two effects: first an awe, David exhorts Saul's Courtiers, Psalm. 4.4.
An example whereof we have in Joseph, who being solicited unto folly by
Potiphars wife, was hereby restrained, Genes. 19.9. Secondly, in regard of
punishment or chastisement, either present, whereunto Peter exhorts, 1. Pet.
5.6. Examples whereof we have in Ely, 1. Sam. 3.18. and in David, 2. Sam.
16.10. Psalm. 39.9. and in Job, Job 1.21. Or future, when a man fears to sin
because of Gods threatenings, which even the child of God ought to dread: for
the natural child fears not only the offense of the father, but even the rod
also and whip. But is not this a servile fear? Nothing less: this fear is
good, and a part of that filial fear whereby we worship God in this life, as
appears by these reasons. First, it is the gift of God, Esaias 11.2. Ierem.
32.40. Secondly, it is commended unto us in Scripture; both by precept, Leuit.
19.14. which is a moral precept, and Matthew. 10.28. and by practice; in the
example of Iehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 20.3. of Josias, 2. King. 21.13. in the
Prophet Habakkuk. Hab. 3.16. in David, Psalm. 119.120. in Job, Job. 31.23. and
in Christ: who though he naturally feared death, yet had a further fear by
reason of the horrible wrath of God to be sustained for the sin of man: and
therefore the Apostle says, Hebr. 5.7. that he was heard in that which he
feared. Thirdly, it is a means to escape the wrath of God, as ye may see, Hab.
3.16. Fourthly, it becomes not us to be secure when God shows himself to
be terrible and fearful in his works or judgments. And if God be to be
feared, why not his wrath? and if he would have us to fear the sword of the
Magistrate, why not his own? considering that the sword of the Magistrate is
his own sword. And why does God threaten so many plagues even to his children,
but to this end that they might fear them? And if it displease God that we are
senseless, and not grieved and moved when he does afflict us, Ierem. 5.3.
does it not also displease him that we do not fear when he threatens? Yea
what father or person in authority above other is there among men, that does
not love to have his threats feared of his children and inferiors? Fifthly,
this fear is very many ways profitable and necessary: for first it expels
the contempt of God and the security of the flesh, even in the regenerate, and
makes them tractable and pliable, and prompt to do the will of God: and hence
it is that the Lord does often exercise his children with legal terrors and
fears, that they might be the more humbled, and so made the more willing to
obey. An example of this we have in Paul, who by reason of those fears in his
first conversion, wherewith he was strangely smitten and astonished, was greatly
cast down, and became far more prompt to obey God. And this is confirmed by
the contrary: for what is the cause why Atheists, Epicures, and profane
wretches, do sin without all shame and regard of common honesty? but that
they have cast out of their hearts all fear of God, and al consideration of
his judgments, that they might more freely without all check wallow in the
mire of their carnal pleasures, and bathe and refresh themselves in their vile
and beastly sins.

Abraham, Genes. 17.1. and examples hereof we have in Enoch, Genes. 3. and
Noah, Genes. 6. who both of them received this testimony that they walked with
God: that is, as in his presence. For when a man considers that God sees his
heart, and knows all his thoughts, then he labors to avoid dissembling,
and to be upright. The use of this serves to condemn the practice of most
men: for who almost is persuaded of Gods presence? God sees us, but we do not
epsy him: who stands in awe of him, but upon every occasion yields unto
sin? who is patient? who studieth to please and glorify God? howsoever many
profess the same outwardly.

Now that we may not deceive our selves in this matter, there be certain
marks whereby this true fear of God may be discerned: which be these.

First, Danid, Psalm. 16.8 whereof follow many notable effects.

First, if a man be in company he will observe and use the opportunities of
doing and receiving good: if he speak, he will speak wisely, and guide his
words with discretion, or else be silent: yea he will observe the occasions and
seasons of speaking and keeping silence, and his outward carriage will be
grave, moderate, decent, sober; not only inoffensiue, but profitable to
edification. If he be to do any part of Gods worship either private or
public, he will do it with reverence, with care to glorify God, to profit
others and himself: if he be about any work of his calling, he will do it
faithfully, sincerely, and diligently: if about any moral duty of love unto
men, he will perform it willingly, and cheerfully, and in an holy manner.

To make conscience of all sin, Joseph did: for otherwise not every
abstaining from sin is by and by a sign of the true fear of God. But to this
three things be required: first, a godly jealousy and suspicion over a man's
self, lest by sin he should fall from God: and good reason, because of that
domestical and inbred enemy of deceit, which is deeply fixed in every man's
heart by nature, Iere. 17.9 Secondly, a continual care and watchfulnes over
the heart and life, and over all the members of the body, and the senses, that
they be no instruments either to occasion or begin, or to execute sin,
commended unto us, Prou. 4.23. Thirdly, a (...) only to foresee the occasions
(...), and deceits of the spi^^^^all enemy, and carefully to prevent them; but
to furnish a man with spiritual armor out of the word of God against all
assayes. Again, a man must make conscience not only of outward public
sins, whereof the world cries shame: but of secret sins which he might
commit without the knowledge of any; yea, of the inward and secret conceits of
the heart, as Joseph, who might have done the evil to which he was solicited
secretly, so that no man should have known it, but even then the fear of God
withheld him. So also Prou. 8.13. Job 31.23. Again, there is this conscience
of moral obedience: for these two be always coupled together: Eccles. 12.13.
Pro. 14.2. Psalm. 112.1. Acts 10.35.

Habakkuk 3.16. said, that when he heard Gods threatenings, he feared, and his
belly trembled, and rottenness entered into his bones, and he was wonderfully
dismayed and terrified. And to be silent and wonder at the remembrance of the
judgments of God, as did Aaron, who held his peace when his two sons were
destroyed by fire from the Lord, Leu. 10.3. and to be provoked by them to
repentance, which is the right use of al his judgments, they being real
sermons, which use our Savior teaches us, Luke 13.3.

To fear God more then men:

Humility:

Desire of knowledge: these two 6.

Having showed both what this holy fear is, and which be the marks and
signs thereof, it follows now that we speak of the third general things
propounded, namely, the means of obtaining this grace, and of bringing our
hearts unto a true fear of God: which be these.

First, meditation and serious consideration of God, and that, first of his
authority, rule, and absolute dominion over all things, which ought to strike
a reverence into all; even as Princes, Magistrates, and Superiors, are feared
for their authority. Secondly, of the glory, majesty, and sublimitie of God,
who is above al creatures: nay, in whose presence the Angels are not pure, Esaias
6.2. and the Sun is darkness, and at whose beck all creatures are subject as
his host and army, to execute his will. Thirdly, the baseness of man, both in
respect of his weakness, (who is not able to stand before God and to behold his
presence, no more then the brittle glass to hold strong liquour: and therefore
the Apostle says that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven,
and that this corruptible must put on incorruption before it can enter into
glory) and as also in regard of sin, the conscience and guilt whereof makes a
man afraid, and ashamed to come near to God, as may appear in Adam, Genes. 3.
who after his fall, being ashamed of Gods presence, sewed fig tree leaves
together and made aprons to cover his nakedness, and if it were possible to
hide it from God. And Moses Exodus 3.6. and Peter, Luke 5.8. Fourthly, of the
omnipotency of God, who is able even with the breath of his nosthrils to
consume and bring to naught all that rebel against him. Fifthly, of his
justice, judgments, and mercy. Lastly of his omnipresence, and of his
omniscience.

Secondly; earnest prayer for this grace especially: for that is the conduit
pipe to convey this and all other graces into the hearts of Gods children.
David prayed for this grace particularly, Psalm. 86.11. and God gave it him; for
he testifies of himself that his flesh trembled for fear of Gods judgments.
God has also promised to bestow it upon his children, Jeremy 32.40.

Thirdly, the denial of our selves, especially of our fleshly wisdom. Prou.
3.7. Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the Lord, and depart from evil.

Come we now to the fourth point, which is the motives whereby we may be
persuaded to seek after this heavenly grace: and they be these.

First the commandment of God: which we have in many places of Scripture, and
among others in these: Eccles. 12.13. Psalm. 34.9. Secondly, the examples of
holy men that have herein gone before us, as of Abraham, Genesis 22.12. of Jacob,
and Izhak. Genes. 31.42. and 53. of Joseph, Genes. 39.9. of David, 1. Chron. 13
12. of Job, 1.1. of Simeon, Luke 2.25. of Cornelius, Acts 10.2.

Thirdly, the large promises which God has made to this grace, of good things
both spiritual and temporal. First spiritual blessings, and they are many:
as first illumination and understanding of the scriptures, Psalm. 25.14. Then
obedience, and grace to live well, Psalm. 25.12. The love and favor of God,
Psalm. 103.17. life eternal, Prou. 22.4. Prou. 19.23. and happiness, Psalm.
112.1. Prou. 28.14. Secondly, for temporal good things: God has promised to
them that fear him prosperity, Psalm. 34.9.10. Psalm. 112.3. Glory and honor,
Proverbs 22.4. A good condition of life, together with the continuance of the
same, and immunitie from evil, Prou. 19.23. long life on earth and length of
days, Prou. 10.27. The blessing of children and posterity, Psalm. 112.2.
Psalm 25.13. Protection from dangers, Psalm. 33.18.19. All which good promises
have bin fulfilled in Abraham, David, and their posterity. And if at any time
these temporal promises are not performed unto us, yet is not God false of his
word, because these promises and the like must always be understood with the
exception of the cross. Yea in one word, God has promised to them which have
this grace, all good things both temporal and spiritual; as Psalm. 25.13. His
soul shall dwell at ease; that is, be replenished with all blessings.

Fourthly, let us remember the exceeding great profits and commodities which
attend upon this fear of God: It teaches a man to observe the golden rule of
mediocrity in every estate of life, Eccles. 7.20.21. It restrains and
hinders us from sin, Prou. 14.2.16. Job. 1.1. It gives true and invincible
fortitude in the midst of the greatest dangers, Psalm. 112.7. Exodus 18.21. Men
of courage, and fearing God, these two are joined together. An example whereof
we have in Elisha, 2. King. 6.16. and in Hezekiah, 2. Chron. 32.7. and in the
Martyrs, who have despised the threatenings of Tyrants, and have remained
undaunted in the midst of the flames: whereupon David grounded his courage,
Psalm. 27.2. Psalm. 46.1.2.3. It is the way to true wisdom, Prou. 1.7. Now all
men desire to be esteemed wise.

Fifthly, let us call to mind the threatenings which God has denounced against
them which fear him not, Deuteronomy. 28.58.59. and against security, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20.

Lastly, let us consider how dangerous the estate of a secure man is, which
chiefly appears in these three things: first, a secure man deuoid of the
fear of God, goes down suddenly to hell, before he be aware, or can think of
his misery, as Nabal died liked a stone, and as they in the days of Noe,
Matthew. 24. and Luke 27. even whilst they were eating and drinking and making
merry, were overwhelmed in the flood; so shall it be with the secure man.
Secondly, he that fears not God is very far from true repentance; for not
knowing his disease and wretched estate, he never dreasnes of a remedy.
Thirdly, the longer he lives, the more he increases his judgment: as it is
evident, Roman. 2.5.

FINIS.
WHo shrugg'st vnshelt'red, in the open, wide,
Cold, staruing desert of man's woeful state,
Amid'st fell monsters, set on every side:
As head strong Lusts, huge Pride and ougly Hate;
Toade-tonged Slanders, greedy Couetise,
Diu'lish Profaneness, tyrannizing Fear,
Wide-mouthed despairing and that Cocatrice
Which deadly poys'neth all that comes near.
Who near the brinke of that vnbottom'd pit
Of mazing horror, on the bleaker shore,
All naked and shudd'ring, do forsaken sit,
Haled by hell Porter to that dismal door.
Who art bedrinkled with the drops that fall
Of wrath and anger, from the offended God,
Threatening more tempests and worse storms that shall
O'rewhelme thee grooueling, with their furious load.
Have hither: hide thee under this new roof,
Newhowse has framed for thy sure behoof.
No stud is here, nor spar of any wood
Of Spoongy Sallow, or the Sappie shell,
Of crumbling shrublings, but what is firm and good:
As Oak of Bashan and the Cedar Dele,
And seasoned heart of Shittim, and such stuff
Which God's wide forest, sacred Lebanon,
The holy Bible has and yields enough,
To build safe refuge for each outcast one,
Who void of harbor strayes and wanders wide.
For want of homestead, or a place to abide.
Gods sure Election as foundation stands.
Gods Fear as strongest pillar bears up all
The lasting building. Baptism is the band
That joints each rafter to his principal.
Baptism the badge which beautifies the same.
With glorious var^^sh while This has reference to a sermon of his touching
the doctrine of Justification, printed Anno 1612.
Christ's righteousness,
A roof immortal, shelters all the frame
From dint of storms and thunders eagerness.
Here Is Gods Election. Here Is Gods Fear. Here is
Baptism the joy of Christians. Here is plain
Christ's perfect Goodness, covering our amiss;
Which who once gets shall never loose again.
Who then art wandering and would find a stay:
Who art vncou'red and would hide thy shame:
Who have no refuge for a stormy day:
Who see thy death but can not shun the same:
Haste hither: hide thee under this new reofe,
Newhowse has framed for thy sure behoof.
Fowlke Robarts.

REader: if weighty truth, with judgment sound,
In method most distinct, and order clear,
From heavenly heart which did with grace abound,
In style so plain as to be wished were,
If so great worth as is but rarely found,
May give content, or please, all this is here:
If other things thou seek, seek else where.
Live little book, and long in price remain:
Proserue alive thine Authors memory:
Be to his friends in stead of picture plain,
Where, not his face, but they his soul may see:
And reading, freshly call to mind again,
What grace, what speech, what spirit, once had he,
Too good (if God saw good) so soon to dye.
Dan. Heylet.


