PLEASVRES VISION: WITH DESERTS COMPLAINT, AND A SHORT DIALOGVE of a Woman's
Properties, between an old Man and a Young.

BY ARTHVR NEWMAN of the Middle Temple Gent:

LONDON, Printed by G. E. for Thomas Bailey, and are to be sold at his Shop in
the Middle-row in Holbourne near Staple Inn. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND truly Worthy, Sir George Newman Knight.
I Have adventured this mean work to your learned Censure, only with a
longing desire to make my love to you legible: and I was the more encouraged,
in that I knew you would read with Patience; for I assure my self you will
forget no Virtue. Yet since I expect for but a bewraying witness of mine idle
hours, so great a privilege as your grave Patronage, I must acknowledge my
self guilty of inexcusable presumption, that so the confession of my fault may
plead for some favor, although not altogether for pardon. I can say little for
my self but this, that if I have here done amiss, I promise all my endeavors
for amendment hereafter. In the mean time I wish I had done better, and more
for your sake, then mine own. For I honor your worth, and account it a
happiness to preserve your Love.

Unfeignedly yours, ARTHVR NEVVMAN.

AD AMICVM suum omni laud et obseruantia dignissimum AR: NEWMAN.
NOui tenerum, noui iuneuilibus annis
cum vox iucundi plena leporis erat,
Et dixs de te mihi semper, Apolline cert^
dignus eris: nec men's haec mihi vana fuit,
Ecce Caballino sitis est nunc font lenata:
pocula Castali^s nunc saturantur aquis,
Digna trophaea feres, cingent tua tempera la^^i
^t patria est meritis grata futura tuis.
PE: LOWER. PLEASVRES VISION.
When, in the Confines of the silent Night
Refreshing Sleep seisd on each wearied wight
And did, with gentle Slumbers, and soft Ease,
The raging Motions of sad Care appease;
Hushed were the moanes of haples wights oppressed:
And harmel^s thoughts were ^ill'd in pleasant Rest:
Now, bad, unquiet, and pernicious mind.
Surceasd to plot their dangerous Designs:
Now, st^ll'd was Strife, and troublesome Debate,
And pining Envy, now forgot to hate:
And darkness reigned, that harmeles Sleep might be
Hid from the Troubles which the Light does see:
And, in the Bed whereon my self was laid,
There, d^ou c Slumbers, for th^^ Lodging staid:
But me of Rest, deluding Marpheus ^eau^d;
And, in a Dream my Senses so deceau'd
That, as awak't, I saw, or seemed to see:
A perfect Man, or Gallant, one was he:
But by the strangenes of his outward show
He seemed the last, and he was doubtless so.
Light was his carriage, and his Gate affected,
Oay his attire, and manly Shape neglected:
For like a nice Dame that does Pride affect,
He with vnmanlike Curiousness was dect:
In Nations of disguises he was clad,
And every Limb a several fashion had:
And ever on himself he fondly gas'd,
As, with the strangeness of himself amas'd:
And on himself enamoured was he,
As commonly Fantastiques use to be.
His vnpremeditated words, like wind
Were light, and blustering, and bewraid his mind:
Unconstant, and still wandering were his looks,
And, in his face, as in lascivious books
Whole Stories you of lightness might have read;
For there, it wantonly inhabited,
Yet he, of Natures best gifts, plenty had:
And pity 'twas they were bestowed so bad,
For those save Eyes which lewdnes so proclaimed,
Nature at first for ornament ordained:
For she had done her part, and set him forth,
With lively Shape, and outward signs of worth,
And Hope at first said, this fair seeming Inn
Had no ill guests that harbored within.
His lightness was not Natures fault, o no,
It was his mind that those parts sniut'd so:
Then Nature, since thy bounty wronged has been,
In such again let it no more be seen.
His youthful years did flowrish in their prime;
And lusty health, cheered up his looks: and Time
On his untamed will did seem to attend,
As though to him a Servant, and a friend.
Swift Time, that it might be by him well used,
Often showed, that where it idly was abused,
There it must vanish, and pe're come again,
But often be called, and cride for back, in vain:
And Fortune looking on him, smoothed her Brow,
And played the Prodigal that he might know
She has no bounds to limit her great power,
But where she smiles, she cloies; yet if she lower,
Then, acts a Misery beyond belief:
And as the fills with joy, so kills with grief.
Then Beauties decked with Nature, and with Art,
Did all their sweets to his desires impart,
They freely opened to complete his pleasure,
Their all-alluring, and commanding treasure.
Some had such tempting looks, and Angell-features,
That, but I saw their frailty, heavenly Creatures
I them had deemed: they power had to allure
(Without great providence) holy, and pure.
And sure there is no man (as I believe)
That can behold such err but he must grieve.
Others there were, and of an other kind
Which also fancied his lustful mind.
Some meanly fair, some foul, others their feature
With Art did help, in spite, and scorn of Nature.
With those he wantoned for variety;
(For all, insatiable Lust must try.)
Thus slept he in this Dream of false delight,
Still acting shameful deeds, of shameless Night;
And wasting Plenty, as with Spoil compounded
In lauishing, and all Excess abounded:
Banquets were Surfeits, and were nere without
Healths of abused Wine still quaft about.
He in the spoil of honest thrift did slow;
And none (alas) said, this should not be so
His Ears were slopt when was blamed by Fame,
And some to add more fuel to his slame
Falsely protested, pity 'twas that he
Might not some King, or mighty Monarch be:
And to such height his bounty did advance,
"That he to his own music seemed to dance.
None there distinguished Liberality
From all-consuming Prodigality:
For pledges of their love, they smooth words pawned,
And just like dirty dogs upon him fawned,
That leave no love sign but offen sieve Mire.
Others there were, to humor his desire,
That still with newfound Sports his fancy fed,
And him from pleasure unto pleasure led,
They had the Art, and only tricks to stray
With all devises tending to decay.
And, what he liked, or loathed, none gainsaid,
But good, or bad, his will was still obaid,
Base servile minds even over humor'd him,
Whilst he in Seas of fleeting joys did swim.
The uncontrolled life he did commend,
And dearest deemed his numor-feeding friend:
And still, Vice-punishing Authority,
He, (outlaw-like) would slight; and brauing try
Desperate Exploits; to show he naught did fear,
Nor yet his humor could, or would forbear.
And such as he was, were his company,
That ready always were for Villainy.
No care, or grief did harbor near his heart,
No cross did from his Iollity him part.
No want of Pleasure, Liberty, or Fase
Did his contentments any way displease;
For, all delights which might each Sense content,
By Vanity her self to him were lent.
But ah, extremes can never endure, and Meat
That is most sweet with sowrest Sauce we eat:
For, in a moment all this vanished,
And he himself stood strangely altered:
For, where as once he seemed a blooming Spring,
O're-filld with plenty of each pleasing thing:
Now feeble Age, and now disdained want,
Seemed in his looks their dwelling seats to plant.
His Eyes waxt hollow, looks lean, cold his heates,
And cate had folded up his brows in pleates,
He rent his hair, his face he bathed in tears,
For precious Time misspent in youthful years:
And, as chief Cause of his misery,
On pleasures past exclaimed bitterly:
For calling them to mind, he ten times more
Did execiate his Fortune, then before.
Many past by, and laughed his woes to scorn:
And some did patty, seeing him for forlorn.
Yet, former friends, but like his shadow were
That followed him in Sunshine every where;
But, when a Storm of Trouble comes on,
They soon fall off; and like to shades are gone:
Yea, each thing else, that he esteemed dear,
But to augment his anguish did appear.
And, all the flattering Hopes he erst possessed,
Forsook him quite, and he was quite distressed.
These alterations seemed to me so strange,
That I inquired the Cause of all this change.
Whereat his heavy Eyes on me he bent,
Through streams of Tears, made thick with languishment,
And, bid me lend his words attentive ear,
That in my heart I might them better bear.
I silent was; when, lo, this ruthful Man,
With Sighs, and Sobs his speeches thus began.
In prime of lusty head, when youthful Spleen,
Had never the wiles and guiles of Pleasure seen.
Not dreampt, how precious is swift winged Time,
Which, as it flees, our Fortunes fall, and climb:
Nor yet, by oath charms once taking heed,
But wild delights did wandering Senses feed:
Then, my vain will untamed, vntutored,
Left Reasons Rule, and roau'd as fancy led:
Like to a lost Sheep, from his Shepherd straid,
Running to wrack without his Keepers aid.
I never my own affections did control,
For they commanded all within my Soul:
Not I regarded future good, or ill,
Nor had of Pleasure till my fall, my fill.
I did amiss; and now with grief may say,
Only for that, I threw my self away:
Yet blinded, no familiar dangers knew,
That waited on me; nor till I did rue,
Percen^'d that woe on pleasure did attend,
Which contraries, (too often) in one do end.
O! so my thoughts with pleasures spells were charmed,
That they ore came me against their force unarmed:
For which, naught but Repentance yields relief,
And yet (alas) that adds but grief to grief:
Yet grief for gracelesnesse does much relieve,
Because we ought for gracelesnesse to grieve.
Friends I obai'd not, therefore they me leave,
Pleasure I followed, that did me deceive:
Fortune, and Time once gently on me smiled,
I then mistaking both, my self beguild,
I Time misspent, and Fortune did neglect,
Therefore with cause they do me now reject.
I made the means, (for my good only) lent,
By lauishing, of woe the Instrument.
And then brave Prodigal Vice styled my name,
Now therefore, Ruin, and the Map of shame:
And wherein I my self thought most secure,
I Am therein for mine Error most unsure.
If man himself can promise ought; it is this,
That what he aims at most, he most shall miss,
For worldly certainty is but althought,
And so it vanishes, and turns to naught.
O! of all Creatures breathing vital Air,
Man, of his wavering fate may most despair:
For, there is no danger, misery, nor Care,
But therein destined is to him a share.
And his best earthly bliss no longer lasts,
Then Vapors do, in whirling windy blasts:
If rich, or poor, a Beggar, or a King,
His Rose has pricks, his honey has a Sting:
His comick-mirth is mixed with tragic woes,
And Ebbs ensue when most he ouerfloes:
He like the Moon may not at full remain,
But (like her) changing still, must wax, and waine;
He, only he, is naught but fortunes sport,
The spoil of Time, and place where Cares resort,
The plant that 'midst great heat, and moisture grow'th,
Now green, now parcht, now at a stay, 'twixt both.
The very wheel which Fortune turns still
Is Man; for him she turns which way she will:
He seems of Change a Character, or Map;
Or what is still most subject to mishap.
Or like a Ship, whose Pilot wanting skill,
(Though far from Rocks) in doubt, and danger still:
For here and there the Fortunes of Man kind,
Are blown, and tossed like Ships in storming wind:
What Is past and present is the most that can
By all allowed Art be known by Man:
But, what ensuing Fate may or will be,
Till past prevention he can never see;
Nor yet know when, or where good hap, or ill
May raise, or cast him to the Dale, or Hill
He can but guess at most, and who does so,
He nothing truly, but by guess shall know.
For what of him the Destinies decree,
Because he is Man, unknown must ever be,
Then let not him presume that is fortunate,
Since still uncertain is his doubtful state.
Since Pleasures Sirens are, that Ruin sing;
Since Fortunes great do great misfortunes bring;
Since there is no Earthly welfare or delight,
That with the Morn does rise, but sets er'e Night.
And why through dangers, restles cares, and pain,
Should man attempt frail honors to obtain?
When got, his puft-vp thoughts so vainly range,
That, what they are, and o! how soon they change,
He cannot think* for with a thought they vary,
So, hopes to hold those haps which cannot tarry.
And who sees not, that to none other end
Fortune does often to Man her f^uours lend,
But, on poor him her Tyranny to try,
And laugh to see him for her live, and dye.
For, when in greatest height of best delight,
In thought secure, in honors shining bright;
When rockt, and lul'd in Pleasures charming lap,
Scorning to think that ought can breed mishap,
Fortune, to show her euer-changing power,
Turns in a Moment, all his sweet to sower,
And from those destined Ills, o how shall he
Poor se^uile bondsman manumised be?
To whom shall he appeal? or who has power?
Is It angry Heaven? Fates? Stars? or some thing lower?
Yea, it is himself; for he was framed by Jove,
To be all other Creatu^es far above,
Next to his euer-great all seeing Maker,
Of wisdom, and safe providence partaker.
But he as subject to his straying will,
En bracing that for good, which tried is ill,
And weighing not how frail a thing is man,
Not yet for eseeing what Chance hourly can,
Forgets himself, and without mean, or measure,
Wakes to wast I me, yet dreams on naught but pleasure,
And, with his faults so partially does beat,
That until ruined, cannot Ruin fear.
He dreads no fire until he feel it burn,
Till whipped with his own Rods does never turn,
Then his misdeeds, and then his Time misspent,
With too late penitence he does lament.
Thus vnaduiled Neghgence does bring
Him to be Sorrones helples underling.
Thus to himself he proves a traitorous foe,
And Vipe: like is Mother of his woe:
For, in his breast hes many a thought, and deed,
That coming forth, do his destruction breed;
And man, as fearing he should scanted be
Of his forbid destes, so eagerly
Does all then mottall baits ingurgitate,
When therewith should never be satiate.
(...) being once to tun amiss inclined,
H^^ tau^^s he fees not, self will makes him blind,
And leads him headlong unto cursed ends,
E^e he can think what danger him attends:
And now, youth's heedlesse and unbridled rage,
And even some of green and tender Age.
Vn^cemingly can vaunt how they will drink,
Quaffe, and carouse; and those themselves do link
With men debauth'd, vile, lauith, and profane,
Which work their own, and their Associates bane:
Which, like diseases, do Society
Corrupt with their infectious Company:
Which daily on the utter Ruin feed
Of rash youth, which have neither head nor heed:
And those things which for Comforts we should use,
Lake wretches, they unthankfully abuse,
For shame, for pity, for your selves forbear,
And ^^^ingsters sly their haunts; the Plague is there.
Then harms, are by Examples still revealed,
To ^^e we see permits them not concealed:
That we may notice take, and safely shun,
The dangers which so many have undone.
But now our Corn is over grown with weed,
And men even strive who may in vice exceed.
The truest badge of a true Gallants will,
Is to be dating in attempting Ill.
They must not seem their Vaniues to hide,
But mount the Pitch where most they may be spide:
I or they are grown to such a monstrous height,
In all they even glory to delight.
They with brave outward shows much baseness hide,
And fly aloft with wings of towering pride:
They tage; and quench with blood hot Angers fires,
And cool with Sin their heat of lewd desires,
Or lewd ^^^es, begot of Fancies foul,
That tune health, and wealth, and wit, and Soul.
Ins^^^ou^ to themselves, Sins very lees,
And po^soned sweetes, stolen from forbidden Trees,
The fearful acts of black and shameless Night,
Honey for Drones, for D^uells the delight,
And we (too true) do by Experience see,
That great and small by them still ruined be.
It is not powe, or golden Vanity,
Still blinding I une, or maskt Hypocrisy,
Or making Justice from her limns stray
Can s^l^e these crimes, or wash then spots away
'Twere Sin to think so for the end it tues,
When the rewards of Vice are miseries,
For come (and none how soon know) must the time,
When known and pun^^^ shall be every Caime.
And those sweet Sins which did the Sense delight,
Shall then their Fosterers with woe, requite.
The fruit that we by Pleasures past shall gain,
Will be soon s^e^^^ng joys, for lasting pain:
O^ all that we shall gain, will be but this,
And remembrance, that we did amiss,
For tell you ^ail^m^s, chaim'd with vanity,
And haples wretches with the memory
To^^^d of woe, and vengeance-crying ins;
What have you got? the cheating Devil wins,
And staling down but counte^se^ted pleasure,
You to gain that, do lose the pricelesse treasure
Of all your grace, your liberty, and bl^^le,
And he gets by your wo^ll folly this.
O^ (...) unto your selves, for your own sake,
For just account you for your selue ^^st make.
Recall your thoughts, each fond desire s^^ey,
And their frail motions ever disobey:
M^pend not Time, and spoil not stower of youth,
Believe not Pleasure, though her words seeme^ ^th.
Due^^ your Steps into none other Tract.
But such as Ve tue treds in show and act.
That way is safe, and never leads amiss,
But crowns your Iournies end with endless bliss.
There are no Traps, there none will you betray,
No Wolves on haimeles I ambes there dare to prey.
Your Guidresse here, whilst you with her do go,
Warrants your safety against your greatest Foe:
And no device can make her false to those,
Which confidence in her defense repose.
What she does game, whilst you with her do live,
The profit freely she to you will give:
She will your Cause against all the world maintain
And never shame you: but you friends shall gain
Of all good Men; and such as run astray
Sha l curse the Time, they followed not your way
And of your goodness, to Posterity,
When dead, you leave shall happy memory.
Next do not Parents wary Counsel slight,
Nor make not of true friends aduisings light:
Faults which you see not, nor of them be told
By your Companions, they with grief behold,
And often what dear expetience them has bought,
You may both hear, and learn, and shun for naught.
And then, least like a muddy poole that stands still,
Filth self your body, and corrupt your will,
In some good action ever busied be,
So never corrupting Idleness shall see
A banefull Opportunity, to draw
Your weakness to infringe the sacred Law
Of heavenly Virtue, whom the Gods must right,
Maugre all-horrid Hell's infernal might.
And be of Company most circumspect,
That you may good in brace, and bad reject:
That with good liquor, your new Vessels may
At first be filled, that still a taste may stay,
Lest that the Bud in coming forth be blasted,
And so the fruit be all untimely wasted.
Then your minds forces muster, Sin to foil,
Proclaim Defiance, Peace with it is spoil:
If you want aid, and dare not break the Truce,
Virtue will help to ruin Times abuse:
And Vice, flee, when Virtue does appear,
Like Thieues, that punishment of Justice fear.
O, think on this, and know that if you fight
With Vice, by Virtue, till you kill it quite,
Celestial Bliss your Victory shall crown,
And treacherous Vice, with Ruin shall come down.
For Time will all destroy that Time mispend,
Then weigh your follies, and in time amend.
A Sigh here stopped the passage of his breath,
Whilst in his looks appeared meagre death:
And as an outward Sign of inward woe,
He smote his Breast, while Tears did ouerfloe,
Then seemed his looks, and lift-vp hands to say,
Take heed by me, so vanished he away.
Whereat such passion did assail my heart,
That I from Sleep, amazed, up did start.
But what this Dream pre^ag'd I could not guess,
Or if I could, I cannot well express:
For vari^us thoughts, had Arguments so many,
That I ^nf^unded, understood not any.
Till, after, viewing Londons stately Streets,
Wherein the Stream of Vanity still fleets;
And swiftly runs away, as having been
Never there at all; that more may still be seen.
Then, what I sleeping did but seem to see,
There, there, I waking found too true to be.
FINIS.
DESERTS COMPLAINT.
LAte, wandting by a Valley side,
Where weeping Streams did sadly glide,
Since Soll^^ bright Rays could not appear,
The place, or ought therein to cheer,
I saw clad in a mourning Weed
A Man whose griefs, my grief did breed.
For Desa t desert there (alas)
Upon his Brow engraven was,
And coldly on cold Earth he lay
Like some fra^'d picture of Decay.
Or like an ancient Monument,
Which was erected, to prevent
Th'obliuion of some noble fact:
Which, some dead Worthy once did act;
And being ruined, would enforce
All the spectators with remorce
To breath forth helples sighs; and then
To r^ile on Time, and check those men
That let Decay to disinherit
True Worth of what it had by Merit.
Thus did he lie, and like a Swan
Dying, to ease his h^^t began
In sad laments to sing his woe,
And thus he sighing on did go.
Where shall I run? where shall I fly?
Where shall my plaints find remedy?
Where are mine ancient friends? and where
My followers that held me dear?
Where may my now-lost honors be?
Where is the Time that favored me?
And where and how, and what am I
That in this wretched State here lie?
Of former ^oyes am I not reft?
And of the careless World quite left?
Are not my followers distressed,
Di^dain'd, dispis'd, poor, and oppressed?
Are not my chiefest friends all dead?
Are not many honors from me fled?
And is not strangely Time disguised?
O yes, for by it ^^me despised.
I am an outcast, and dejected,
And see with grief my Rites neglected:
And many do usurp my place
Which me, themselves, and it deface,
And unto such, I plainly see,
The world does give what is due to me,
If men despise, and slight me so,
I cannot think where I may go.
And what to do, I know not, I,
Unless, I cease to be; and dye.
I am not frantic, for I know
By sad Experience of my woe,
My hapless words are too too true.
Which they I fear too soon will rue,
If to the Country I retire,
There dull and earthly minds require
Houses, and Acres, by which now
Desert is measured, therefore how
Can I, whom Fate has seemed t'ordaine,
This Reputations want to plain,
And all frail outward but to slight,
Of them crave favor, much less right?
Of my Complaints, and wrongs appease,
Since dull-besotting Error these
Does so much blind, that they scarce see
The odds between the Droane and Be?
And yet, if good on Earth do dwell
It Is in a simple rustickes Cell.
But let me wander in the City,
O! both to her, and gentle pity,
I am a stranger, and find none
To entertain me; but alone
I through her babbling streets do pass,
That cry, What lack ye? when (alas)
Though I what she has lack, and she
Be poor in what abounds in me,
And each might other gladly pleasure,
For each does want the others treasure:
Yet she, (as it is the use) affecting
Only her self; and me respecting
But like unto commodities
Not vendable; am of no price.
Thus her wise Ignorance does slight me:
And never, I fear, will learn to right me.
And when the stately Court I view,
Whose glitting, and whose sun-like hew
Dazles the Eyes of every Wight
That wants a Princelike Eagles sight;
There I lie clouded, and this brightness
May not reflex on me it is lightness.
I am obscure, and was not taught
To sooth, or by him to be laughed,
That sees me strive to gain esteem,
And not to be what I would seem.
I cannot brauing look, and be
One, into whom could men but see,
They might all baseness there behold,
Yet those, then Impudence more bold,
Can look, and vildely will assume
To them great matters; and presume,
When all their Fortunes do depend
On others, and with others end.
Yet sometimes in the Court I live,
But want, and therefore none will give.
From hence, if to the Camp I go,
There Is nothing now for me to do.
For iusly Peace, although it please,
And in the end must War appease,
Yet so it iniures Arms and me,
That to my face, and grief I see
The Campe's a Market place, or Fair,
Where all to buy and sell, repair.
Desert gets nothing, not a friend
That might, as it is the fashion, send
A letter of Commends to any,
That without me, prefers many.
Thus all my friends, I fear will fly me,
Since, now they get so little by me.
Yet since the Camp, Court, Country, City,
Will not my case, I theirs do pity.
O! I so poor, and mean am deemed,
With few I live, of few esteemed:
I had a Time, but now (alas)
I can but boast that once I was.
O! once I was, now to my grief,
I cannot be, I want relief.
Yet once I ioyd a States-mans Seat,
And such men only I, made great.
And o how bright shined then their Fame,
Which, well agreed with place and name:
For then without Desert not any
Could rise; though now I fear too many.
When Fathers by my help had won,
Honor, and Fame: yet if the Son,
Did only house, and name inherit,
And by Desert did nothing merit,
Those illegitmate were deemed,
And for their greatness less esteemed.
It Was not, (o happy then) as now
When a vild i'easant for the Plow,
And naught else fit, yoakes thee Desert,
And servile makes which free borne were.
For his blind earthy mind can see
No happiness more, then to be
Blessed, (as he thinks) with precious gold,
For which he finds is bought and sold
All honors, titles, all Earths blisses,
Which are the period of his wishes.
But for the high Contents of mind,
Their Heaven, his grosenesse cannot find:
Yet this is he whom most men hold
The wisest m^n; a man worth gold.
This must Authority possess,
That others faults he may redress,
But knows not how: and why should he
Blind in his own, another see?
Alas he does vsurp his place,
And all the Rues thereof deface:
But, since by me, men should obtain it,
If they without me might not gain it,
Then reason would force some to prove me,
And proving, all would better love me.
Besides, preferments would attend
On me that I might be the end,
Whereat Men's wronged thoughts might aim;
And so a world of faults reclaim.
For I never undertook that thing
That failed a blessed reward to bring;
Though now to ill, by Times blind Error
The good is turned for all Times terror.
Ah, once without me none aspired,
For I in greatness was required;
Which as it sti^^ed me to gain,
So down on it the Heavens did rain
Showers of honor, that still green,
I ^a^rant, and growing it was seen:
And then all such as me neglected
Could never ri e but were defected.
But then I was so loved, that he
Was happy, which could follow me.
Sometimes my Studies were divine,
Wherein deep knowledge made me shine.
I was a Shepherd, and did keep
Free from the Fox and Wolf my Sheep:
But now my Flock is lured from me,
And Droanes suck honey from the Be.
Parnassus Mount I did frequent,
And with the sacred Muses spent
Labor, and Time: they kind, and free
From their own selves did give to me.
But they their blessed gifts, so deuin'd,
That only they inricht the mind.
And poor my Body was; and when
I sought relief for it of men,
My wants were laughed at, made a scorn,
And I, in my distress forlorn.
And still I saw, and wept to see
How Fortune always ran from me,
Who, with much Care and Labor, sought her,
Whilst those that for her looked not, caught her.
O it is decreed, for such is Fate,
And such a Scholars injured state.
I tedious Trauells did endure,
To make my understanding sure,
And others woes have seen and known,
That I might better shun mine own:
Yea, foreign Tongues and manners gained,
And dear Experience I obtained;
Yet, homespun Clownes before me far,
By Times abuse preferred are.
When I return from bloody wars,
With feebled Limbs, with wounds, and scarres,
Which, for but Truth, and Honors sake,
My prime of years did undertake.
Yet if with odious want distressed,
So slighted, and so vnredrest,
It thousands would enforce to swear,
Desert must out of fashion wear:
And out of fashion, who will respect it?
All will for fashions sake neglect it:
This Age is blind, it cannot see
The sweet Content ^^e^ hid in me.
It thinks not how my Servants have,
Which followed me, now dead in Grave,
Still living honors, and loved Fame,
That both Posterity and name
Crowns with Observance and regard,
Such is Deserts allowed Reward.
But Tune and Error now contend,
My Dues and Rights from me to rend:
Preferment now from me is fled,
Which me as Husband once did wed,
And would not lend a glance to any
But only Me* yet now to many
So common, like base Strumpets grown
That all for Coin make them the^^ own.
And still-sought Opportunity,
My once prevailing friend, o why
Do thou of help and favor reaue me,
And me in my distress thus leave me?
I never did thee neglect, or ever
Did thee from my Achiuements sever:
But begged thy happy aid. But sure
Corruption now does thee allure.
Thus am I wronged, disgraced, defamed,
And yet the world is not ashamed
To see how most unjustly I
The aim am made of injury.
Yet I never shamed, or wronged this Land,
But for her honors firm do stand:
I never did seek to wast her store,
But was the mean to make it more.
I never was false, fond, or unjust,
I never with selfe-consuming Lust,
Was to my Country blot, or stain,
Nor Fame on me had cause to plain.
No mifchiefe I did act, or plot,
And States abuser I am not:
No Innocent I ere accused,
And no injustice ever used.
I never with bribes was hired, or bought,
Not I Authority e're brought
Desertlesly to least disgrace,
By wronging her most sacred place.
Nor am I plague of State, or power,
And yet my Stars on me do lower.
I no blaspheming Roarer was,
No Bruers beast, good-fellow-Asse.
No bragadochio-brauing-Mate,
No Swasher, no Repent-too-late:
No grief of Reason, Ape of pride,
No shadow, but a substance tried.
O! I was never ought that is vile,
Nor any ever did beguile.
I was plaine-dealing, and did fly
All causes of indignity:
I was not pitch that still defiles
The toucher, I was free from guiles.
My followers yet could never say,
I lead them wrong, or to decay.
Yet at the lowest Ebb am I
Of Want, and scorned misery.
O! it is my Fate, I may not thrive,
Or bring home honey to the hiue.
And why? I am not eminent,
Nor Princes Palaces frequent:
Nor am I complementall matter,
But hate to temporise and flatter.
I am not like the Apes of Time,
That often for a downfall climb;
I rest content, and strive t'auoid
Ambition, that is still imploid
In her own ruin; and does gain
Nothing but trouble for her pain.
For shadows I do never strive,
But am alas too good to thrive.
I cosen none, nor have deceits,
Nor can I fish with golden baits:
With golden baits, that too too much
Ensnare all those, that them but touch.
And right, or wrong are sought for, when
They draw like Loadstones Iron-men,
They do corrupt, and always where
Man goes, he finds Corruption there:
For were not so; and if exiled
Were favor, that alas does shield
Desertlesse Vpstarts; only raised
That greatness might not still be praised;
Then well-deseruers well regarded
Would be; the ill, as ill rewarded.
And men in naught, but doing well
Would strive each other to excel,
And in mine ancient honors I
Should be installed, and mount on high,
I Time ob'curely should not spend,
But whom I serve should me attend,
And Ignorance should never bring
Desert to be her Under ing:
Her underling that stan^eth low,
Lake obscure Shrubs; yet when winds blow
Are ^afe, whilst every stormy gale
Shakes lofty Cedars till they fall.
Then Worldlings come, and love, and try,
My bliss: I give se^urity
To all my Creditors; that never
Desert shall fail, till Time disseuer
Justice, and ^an: and Wisdom power
Wants; while the Heavens for it lower.
And thou Occasion g aunt thus much,
I may no more thy baldness touch;
O let me come before, that I
May but thy lucky fore-locke spy,
And I Will catch at it fast; if not
(As now) let me be still forgot.
And come you mental Virtues all
Save me, lest you your selves do fall*
You are defended, you revive
Only, by keeping me alive.
And ALBION to thee I cry,
Save me for thy necessity.
And Greatness do thou favor me,
Then I again my friends shall see.
Thou m^k'st, or marr'st, then grace me so,
That I for thee may greater grow:
But if thou slightst me, and deny
To do me right; know I must dye,
That all the Land may mourn for me,
That, seruilizd, first made it free.
Thus said, and being not imploid
In ought, that might dead Sleep avoid
Forthwith a Drousie slumber sei'd
His senses, and his moanes appeased,
And, as of Man's society
The slighted outcast he did lie.
When, loc, a Virgin did arise
From Earth; whom never mortal Eyes
Beheld; or was by memory
Recorded, to be noted by:
Thought knew her not, she could be found
No where, till now, but under ground.
OBLIVION was her dismal name,
Whom all the World may justly blame:
For, soon she laid (o dire mishap!)
Desert upon her fable lap.
There she (alas) in silent sleep
Him from the blinded world does keep.
Put stay, awake, awake Desert!
We cannot say thou only were.
We dare not think so, and much less,
Believe we are in such distress:
Except we with conceit would all
Despair, and hopeless with thee fall.
But aged Heavens in their care
To us and thee more gracious are:
For thou art not of all friends rest,
Nor may thou of thy friends be left.
He that the Scepter of this land
Does sway, and naught but right command,
Has place, and being for thee; where
He thee and thine expects; and there
Thy followers are only placed:
And only by him for thee graced.
And though some shameless do intrude,
Which never were with thee indude;
Know that the glorious Sun displaies
On all things his reviving Rays:
And to each Creature which does live,
He the best nourishment does give,
He shines upon the sweetest flowers,
Which flourish in the choicest bowers:
Yet he alas, can shine no where,
But lurking weeds will start up there.
Thou then Desert art not forlorn,
Though weeds sometimes o'regrowne the Corn.
FINIS.
A DIALOGVE of a woman's Properties, between an old man and a young.
Old Man. IF gray Experience may deserve belief,
I Will tell what Women are; (although with grief.)
They and their beauties are so vain and frail,
That with their dearest friends they most do fail.
And their quaint Tricks do so our Judgments blind,
Their guiles we never see, yet ever find.

Young Man. Must you so hardly against fair women speak,
Because (alas) then gentle sex is weak,
^eele not then frath^es burden they, unless
We (...) ph^^d with their unhappiness?
And though they have some poor shifts, men have many:
And too much would deceive them without any.

Old Man. Woman to show, what she would be, at first
Made by her frailty, all the world accursed.
And that by her (sure us by Fate concluded)
Man shall be ever, as at first, deluded.
Then would all seeming Heaven, d^d but allot
That only man might be, and woman not.

Young Man. For what she did, grieve more, then blame. Alas,
His fatal subtilty, by which she was
Unhappily beguiled was such, that she
By it, if man by her, soon guil'd might be.
Yet Heaven this privilege does women give,
The world without them stands not, nor men live.

Old Man. Yea, woman still remains our fatal curse,
And will all Vanities for ever nurse:
She rebel is to reason; yet in wiles
So witty, that she wisest men beguiles,
For she is such a strange bewitching thing
Man must her honey have, though with it a sting.

Young Man. To be our helps they are, and we do find,
Beauty has made them lovely, Nature kind;
And Virtue being female cannot choose
But sa^red guift^ in her own Sex infuse:
And their faults cannot be so much their own,
As tempting man's, if all were rightly known.

Old Man. To gain their own wills, pleas^ngly they flatter,
To gather loose love, they light looks can scatter:
O* they to ruin sweetly can allure,
And are as lustful, as in love unsure.
To where may n^w Penelope be found,
That chaste was tempted: she is under ground.

Young Man. She was; and being gone, we still have new
Which are, dispight all false seducements, true.
And know this pretty family of Love
Are in affection as the turtle Dove.
Never alone, but with us, and about us,
And out of question dye they would without us.

Old Man. They sport, and toy, dissemble, crave, and feign:
Then frown, then rage, then hate, and then disdain.
And can seem kind, where most unkind they prove;
Yet seld or never know whom best they love:
For though they chance with their own choice to wed,
Yet, Venus must have Mars in Vulcans Bed.

Young Man. ^^^ld they we e ^^inty, or remorcelesse, then
They ne^^^ would vnder^^e the wrongs of men.
N^^ le^ th^^^ (...) be in^^^ed by those,
In whom th^^ con^idence, and tru^^ repose.
But they (...), and are so kind
(...) ^^sily th^^e yielding souls do blind.

Old Man. (...) they ^^inded are, and never will ^ee
(...) lo^^^n^sse be:
(...) ^eason ^ind
(...) them (...) rotten find,
And yet (...) enchanting features,
Th^^ (...) them. O b^witching creature.

Young Man. How we, since they the weaker Vessels are,
To tirannize no forged slanders spare.
And yet (so charitable is their love)
They cannot from us their affections move.
Then leave, if not for shame, for pity, thus
To wrong them, if they err, it is for us.

Old Man. Although they seem us only to affect,
It Is their content, not ours, that they respect:
They for their own ends cunningly can f ine,
And though they hau't by natu e, yet they will strain.
Sure if on Faith by wiles gained might be bliss,
Straight that I were a woman I would wish.

Young Man. Alas from subtilty so far they are
That me^ (...) easily) do them ensnare:
And i^ the^ wi^^ have; we too often see,
They but ^hei^ gentle ^elues to cosen be.
But they would all be spotless, did men leave
Their pitying hearts with fal^ehood to deceive.

Old Man. They are so fond, that being flattered, will
C^^^ent to t^ei^ own Infamy and ill,
And ^^rets vn^dui^edly reuea^e,
And not so much as then ow^^ thoughts conceal.
Yet they though ^^^ttings ^oe beguile them still,
Their flatterers make ^ooles, and ever will.

Young Man. When men fair speeches use, but to deceive,
Wise women them of their intents bereave:
And those which naught suspect, they do ensnare,
And such still wronged for well-belieuing are.
Yet men so shameless be, that for the same
Whereof themselves are cause; they women blame.

Old Man. Women, when as they list, denialls have;
Yea often when to betray themselves they crave.
For where is the Phoe^i^, or the sable Swan,
Mirror of women, wonder unto Man,
But change of pasture greedy is to try,
And of stolen Sin, craves still Variety.

Young Man. Since thou are withered, and thy blood is cold,
And have no privilege to love, being old,
Thy doting weakness enuies those that may,
Allowed by youth, with lovely Venus play.
But do not hinder them of licensed Time,
Since it is but short, and natural the Crime.

Old Man. How counterfeit delights do blind the Sense
Of such as da^e with Folly to dispense!
Ah I do know, which would I never had
Women are all, (I fear to say how) bad.
What justly men deserve that them believe;
The very thought thereof does make me grieve.

Young Man. Speak on; and if their tempted faults be known
To be less man's provoking then their own;
I^le yield: and even blame them cause I see
They so full of delight, and beauty be.
And all advantage of their weakness take;
But then my self hard hearted I must make.

Old Man. Like Crocodiles they move destroying pity;
They tune like Sirens a sweet banefull ditty:
And are forgetfully of some commended,
Only with their loose frailty to be friended.
And their lascivious sex have careful been
But in this only, to commit vnscene.

Young Man. Since thou art wither^d, and thy blood is cold,
And have no privilege to love, being old,
Thy doting weakness enuies those that may,
Allowed by youth, with lovely Venus play.
But do not hinder them of licensed Time,
Since it is but short, and natural the Crime.

Old Man. How counterfeit delights do blind the Sense
Of such as dare with Folly to dispense!
Ah I do know, which would I never had
Women are all, (I fear to say how) bad.
What justly men deserve that them believe;
The very thought thereof does make me grieve.

Young Man. Speak on; and if their tempted faults be known
To be less man's provoking then their own;
I Will yield: and even blame them cause I see
They so full of delight, and beauty be.
And all advantage of their weakness take;
But then my self hard hearted I must make.

Old Man. Like Crocodiles they move destroying pity:
They tune like Sirens a sweet banefull ditty:
And are forgetfully of some commended,
Only with their loose frailty to be friended.
And there lascivious sex have careful been
But in this only, to commit unseen.

Young Man. If that some one of them do tread awry;
Must all be naught? o judge it Charity.
But since mankind is subject to be tempted,
Then from this Cross they cannot be exempted.
Yet oftentimes, (such abstinence they have)
They can refuse, what in their hearts they crave.

Old Man. Thou art a woman sure disguised; if not,
Nature that thou should est be one did allot:
And then some Hagge, that once, one man might be
That spoke of women well, has thus changed thee.
Else when for such known mischiefs I them blame,
Thou never would speak, but hold thy peace for shame

Young Man. All know (insufferable Man) they are
For beauty and delight beyond compare.
For conference so full of pleasing wit,
For use so necessary, and so fit,
That man without them, can by no means be,
Nor ever will, if he be ruled by me.

Old Man. Nay sure these necessary harms were framed
That man, as too too heedlesse might be blamed.
His weakness cannot greatest weakness fly,
In her strong-drawing frail society.
Then happy they, that know what women are,
But happier, which to know them never care.

Young Man. Old Father, I Will no more with thee contend,
But must confess, as we, so they offend.
Many of them are good, and many ill,
Yet all in this err, all must have their will.
But for your part, do you the strife here end,
And for my pray I Will pray they may amend.

FINIS.
TO MY WORthy, and ingenious Friend, Mr. Arthur Newman, on his fore-sayd Book.
NEWMAN, to praise thee to thy face, were not
Friendship, but flattery. TO avoid which Blot,
My tardy Verse is placed at the end
Of all thy Book: (as if I did commend
Thee dead, or absent.) Yet, if this my Verse
Had come Before, not Ouer-tane the Press,
I had hung (such is thy provoking wort^)
My Bays up, with the rest, to set thee ^^rth.
For, this I prophecy: Thine early Fame
Shall (oldly) prove as New, as (now) thy Name.
Ad Eundem.
QVisque Nouo, Veteri nullus blanditur amico,
Te (mihi qui Nouus es nomine, front simul)
Miror, et inuideo. Tibi non (hoc) blandior ipse:
Cum sic inuidia Carmina digna tua.
G. Parre, in Art: Mag. Ox:
