A COPY of the agreement MADE BETWEEN HVRIAN BASSA, Governor of Tunis and
Argier, for the great Turk.

AND THE LORDS the general States of the united Netherland Provinces.

Faithfully Translated out of the Spanish and Dutch Copy.

MDCXXII.

A COPY OF THE AGREEMENT MADE Between Hurian Bassha Governor of Turis and
Argier, for the great Turk. And the Lords the general States of the united
Netherland Provinces.
Jn the name of the Almighty God. TO the puissant Lords, Protectors of the
Christian faith, The States general of the united Netherland Provinces, we
wish and desire salvation and prosperity, with this our Letter we also send
you na assurance of peace and friendly salutation.
Not long since we received a Letter by your Committie JOHN MAVRICO, delivered
unto us: whereby you desire and require of us, the confirmation of the peace,
and friendship, which we formerly offered and promised unto you.

But hitherto there is no man come from the State, neither yet have we heard
any news thereof. Our Ships of War put forth to Sea, and have met with
diverse of your Ships, which have emboldned themselves to fight with our Ships,
and would neither refrain them, nor strike their sails as it was agreed upon.

But now having seen your Letter, we thought it good to commit the Netherland
Christians, whom we have here made Slaves, into the hands of your Counsel,
whom we will suffer to return peaceably into their own Country, when your
Ships of War, and one from you with Letters shall come hither, to agree
thereon: in such manner, that all shall be well. And we from henceforth
promise, In the name of God, and our great Prophet, To hold and observe true
friendship and peace: so that if your Merchants will come and Traffic with
their Merchandise, they may freely come: and if your Ships of War will join
themselves with us, to set upon the Spaniards; they may securely come: for from
this time forth, your friendship, is our friendship, and your Enemy our Enemy:
In such manner, that as your Committies are in Turkey, so shall your Committie
here also, be and remain under the protection and defense of our great Lord,
so that his Commission does not in any manner tend unto the contrary by him
promised. We have commanded our Ships, that are gone out to Sea, and those
also that are yet to put to Sea, that meeting with your Ships at Sea, they
shall do them no hurt, neither in their Ships, sails, nor Anchors, nor once
to meddle with them: In such sort, that in the Straights, that shall be
observed which we have propounded: which is, that when any of our Ships come
thither, they shall peaceably lie by them, and shoot off their Ordnance, in
sign of friendship, and from this time forwards, our peace shall be peace, our
word, our word, and our security, our security. And therefore, we wish you to
write, and send us your Letter, by your Ships of War; which doing, we will
do as you desire. Dated in Argier the last of Mossarraua, in the 1031. year.
Under written and Sealed.

Hurian Bassa.


