APPROOVED MEDIcines and Cordial Receiptes, with the natures, qualities, and
operations of sundry Simples.

Uery Commodious and expedient for all that are studious of such knowledge.

IMPRINTED AT London in Fleetestreete by Thomas Marshe. 1580.

TO THE Worshipful, the Master, wardens, and general Assistantes of the
Fraternitye of Chyrurgians in London.
SENECA that noble Christian Ethnic (for so does ERASMUS for his singularitye
of profound wisdom and judgment term ^im) wills us in bestowing of any
gift ^o be careful, that it be both such, as (...)s fit for the estate of
the Gyuer, and also meet for the Condition of the Recei(...)er. Else, in steed
of expected thanks, ^isgrace may grow: and what the Gyer means of goodwill,
may (perhaps) (...) the Receiver (either lymping in judge (...)ent, or freezing
in delight) be little (...)guarded, and less cou^tenanced. For my (...)rt I
have (as I think) not much swerued (...)erein, from the sound advise of the
aforenamed Philosopher, in maki^g you Patro^s of this little work, and that for
two special respects: the one, for that, it treats of such matter, as is
peculierly appendant to your worthy faculty, whereby you are in profession best
able thereof to judge: the other, because it was penned and gathered by one,
whose name is to me unknown, who nevertheless seems hereby to be a
hearty embracer and well. VViller of your excellent Art and function: and
therefore in that respect, are you the meetest, and in my opinion the fittest
to defend his labors, and to become Guardia^s to this his poor mangled and
forsaken Orphane. The faults which (in deed) through negligence or ignorance of
them that had the charge and oversight of the Prynting thereof, are unhappily
chanced, I am to request you being shilfull, either gently to amend, or
friendly a while to tolerate, till either letter opportunity serve to refourme
them, or that the auther and compiler (if he be living) may himself peruse and
recognyze the same. The holy Ghost bless you and your Labors in that your so
noble an office and profession, having so excellent a Subject to work upon,
as Man is, the perfectest and excelle^test of all Creatures, and for whom al
others were made and created.

From Butley in Chesshyre, the 19. of October. 1580. Your vnfaygned well willer
Thomas Newton.

To the friendly Reader.
Here haste thou Gentle Reader a brief and compendious collectio^ of many
good and approved medicines with the operation, and virtue of many simples. It
was not meant at the first to have the same published, which is the cause that
the Book now is not wholly without his blemishes, and some imperfections. But
thy courteous and friendly accep^aunce at this time may cause the same to be
hereafter better skowred over and polished for thy further commodity.

Farevvell.
THE TABLE OF this Book.
A
ACacia. Fol. 65 Add(...) 89 Agaricke. 20 Agnus casius. 41 Agalochus. 27
Alica. 20 Alkak^ngi 66 Almond 10 Alisaunders 38 Aloe 27 Allumme 80 Amber 1
Ambergryce 27 Ambrose 38 Amy 39 Anacardium 48 Anagallis 22 Anemone 19 Angelica
50 Anyse 34 Antimonie 75 Arabian thorn 61 Aristolochia 25 Artichoke 36 Ashes
51. 81. Aspalathus 15 Asphaltum 25 Assa foetida. 33
B
BAy tree. Folio. 45 Basil 23 Baulme 12 Balaustium, see Pomgranade flovvers.
B^^ley 61 Bean 2 Bearbreeche. 30 Bearefoote 45 Bear barley 59 B^ellium 39
Beech 54 Bellragges 43 Ben^emin 33 Beete 71 Betony 43 Berberis 65 Be^erscodde
89 Bitumen, ^ee Asphaltu^. Bitter fitche 15 Bole Armoniacke 81 Borage 52
Bloudstone 83 Blyte 71 Branne 13 Bread 14 Bryar 58. 59 Bryne 30 Brionie 46
Britannica 64 Brymstone 79 Brasle 76 Brazen stone 84 Broth of a cock 88
Buglosse 21 Bulb^s or Scalions. 48 Bu^bast 19 Bushsage 58 Bushsage mushru^.
Ibid.
C
CAlamus aromaticus. 28 Camomill 1^ Capers 38 Cantharides 89 Calamint 42
Camphyre 68 Caravvayes 37 Caret 24 Cassia fistula 1 Cassia Lignea 39 Castorium,
look, Beauers codde. Cataputia. 50 Celandine 40 Centorie 42 Cedre tree 51
Cerusse 75 Cetrake 26 Cicorie 70 Cichpease 20 Cinnamon 35 Cinoper 79 Citrull 72
Cheric 71 Chestnut 54 Christ's thorn 65 Cleauers 20 Clone 43 Codde tree 62
Colevvort 14 Colophonia 23 Coloquintida 37 Coltes foot 32 Comfrey 2 Coral 55
Coriander 15 Correcheruile 47 Costmarie 43 Cotton, see, Bumbast. Coppevvebbe 89
Copper 76 Copperesse 77. 81 Cresses 49 Crovvfoote 52 Cubebes 37 Cuckovv pint.
16 Cucumber 72 Comyne 37 Curryers berries 65 Cuttle bone 95 Cyperus, see,
English Galingale. Cypress tree 16
D
DAffadill 31 Damsons 69 Darnell 40 Dates 19 Date tree 59 Dill 44 Ditan^e 42
Docke 57 Doder 15 Doggestones 52 Doggeberye, or Eglantine 60 Doronicum 46 Donge
87 Doves blood 85 Dregs of oil 22 Dragons 15 Dvvale 65. 66
E
EArth 81 Earthvvormes 89 Echion 14 Egg 87 Eglantine, see, Doggeberry Egle
stone 84 Egrimonie 20 Elder 36 El'campane 49 (...) 55 Emeraulde 85 Endine 70
English Galengale 26 Epythyme 34 Euphorbe 47
F
FEnell 44 Fenigreeke 25 Fern 17 Fetherfevv 33 Figvvort 40 Fig tree 28
Filbert 24 Flovver deluce 33 Foales foot 34 Fox lunges 89 Fumetory 19
G
GAlangale 45 Galbanus 43 Gall 78 Gardein Smallage 37 Garlic 48 Gentian 34
Germander 2^ Gladen 35 Glevve 62 Goats blood 86 Gold 80 Gold Soder 79 Gourd 73
Grape 7 Graynes 19. 42 Greenevvort 54 Groundsell 64 Ground pyne 26 Grummell 19
Guiacum 22 Gum Ammoniacke. 35 Gum Dragagant. 62 Gum Arabic ibid. Gynger
46 Gytt 44
H
Hearts horn 88 Hearts Pizill ibid. Hearts tongue 67 Havvthorne 55 Hebenu^,
See, Guiacum. Hemp 28 Hemlocke 68 Henbane 67 Hippe 60 Hollyhocke 12 Hoppe 64
Horehound 27 Horsetayle 62 Houseleeke 74 Hunny 27 Hysope 35
I
IAsperstone 83 Ieatte 84 Jewish stone 84 Iesymyne 25 Incense 26 Iuye 15
Iuorle 88 Juniper 37 In^uba 71
K
KItkeyes 53 Knottegrasse 74
L
LAbdanum 15 Lark 90 Laserpitium, see, Beniemyne- Laurel 46 Lazule stone 84
Lead 78 Leaven 13 Leeke 50 Lettice. 37 Lignum Aloes, see Agalochus. Lyneseede
12 Lyntespurge 51 Lillye 30 Liquirice 71 Liuervvort 58 Lote tree 59 Lou^ge 38
Loadestone 83 Lupine 19 Lycium 2 Lie 80 Lyme ibidem Lysimachia 64 Lytharge 71
M
MAce 1 Mader 17 Maioram gentle 39 Maioram 17 Maydenhaire ibide^. Malobathron
16 Mallovv 71 Mandrake 67 Manna 16 Marchasite, Iooke. Brazen stone. Marovv 87
Medicines 91. 92. 93 94. 95. Medlers 56 Mehlote 12 Mercury 19 Melon 72 Mill 55
Mynte 39. 47 Mysseltoe 25 Myrobalane 36. 56 Molen 47 Moss 54 Mulbery 61 Mummie
32 Musk 29 Muskle shell 89 Mushroome (...) Mustard 52 Milk 86 Myrrh 32
Myrtle tree 53
N
NArde ^7 Nauevve 31 Neperyall 42 Neesevvort 45 Nettle 21 Nightshade 65 Nu^^e
of India 53 Nutte migge 24
O
OAde 16 Oats 60 Oak 54 Olyueberie 3 Onyon 48 Organie 41 Orpiment 76 Olmund 17
Oils 4 Oyster shell 90
P
PAlma Christi, look, Tykeseede. Panax 41 Panicke 55 Paper herb 55 Parietarie
63 Parselye 38 Paste 62 Patience 57 Peache 73 Pear tree 58 Pease 59 Pellitorie
of Spain 50 Penyroyall 41 Penyvvoit ^3 Peonie 18 Pepper 5^ Perilvvort 2
Pervincle 40 Phu, See, Valerian. Pipe edge tree, See, Berberies Pisticke nutte
17 Pitche 31 Plane tree 70 Plaster of Paris 76 Plantayne 65 Poli^ll 24
Polipodie 34 Polygonaton 20 Pome cytron 3 Pomegranade 60 Pomegranade flovvers,
61. 65. Pomegranade rind, ibi. Pompone, look, Melo^. Populer tree ^3 Poppy
68, 69 Powder of a post 16 Priuet 57 Prunes 69 Pumyso 84 Purselane 74 Pyne tree
18
Q
QVicksiluer 77 Quince 61 Quitche 59
R
RAdish 40 Raison 8 Rampion 31 Rhaponticke 42 Rheubarbe 28 Revve 39 Reed 60
Rocket 32 Rose 57 Rose of Jerusalem, 36 Rosemary 44 Runner 87 Ryce 11
S
SAffron 25 Sage 22 Salt 82 Salt peeter ibide^. Sarcocoll 12 Saint Iohas vvort
35 Saty^^on 52 Sauerie 42 Sauyn 34 Saphyre 85 Scammonie 40 Saunders 68 Sebesten
2 Seahollie ibidem Seavvillovve ibidem Seen ^7 Seruis 57 Sesamum 10 Setvvall 25
Sicomore 30 Silk 13 Singreene, look, house leeke. Soldanella 14 Soap 51
Sovvbread 34 Sovvfenell 37 Sorell 57 Sheep greasy vvoolle 88 Sheepeskinne
ibidem Sovvthistell 64 Sothernevvood 43 Snakes skin 89 Snayle 90 Sperage 2
Spikenard 17 Spinache 70 Spelt 59 Sponge 12 Spurge 49 Spodium 78 Squilla 31
Squinant 12 Starch 13 Stauefagre 36 Stechados 10 Storax 16 Storkes bill 21
Sugar 11
T
TAllovv 86 Tamarix 13 Tamarindes 68 Tatre 32 Tartar 83 Tasill 56 Terra
sigi^lata 81 Thlaspi, or Tryacle mustard 49 Thapsia ibidem Tu^bith 44
Turmentill 11 Turneppe 30 Turpentine 23 Tykeseede 31 Time 37 Tutye 77
V
VErdegresse 76 Verinyce 66 Vernyce 17 Veruayne 47 Vine 63 Vineygre 61 Violet
70 Virgin wax 22 Vomit Nutte 24
W
VVAllnut 24 Wallgelofers 31 Wallsage 68 Wallvvort 36 Water lilly 67 Water
germander 44 Wax 1 Wertvvort 64 Wheat ^3 White Lead, see Cerusse Wine 8 Wine
lees 83 Wild Saffron 27 Wild oats 11 Wild smallage 38 Wild mynte 39 Wild
rocket 48 Wild Vine 46, 63 Wild Sage, or Tasey. 64 Wielding 60 Wild Buglosse
64 Winter chery, see Alkakengi. Winter cresses 48 Wychwynde 20 Willovve 62
Woodbynde 2^ Wormevvoode 1^
Y
YEllovve Bottle, or Mayvveede 23 Yellow carret or Wild carret 35 Iron 79
Z
Zizipha, see, Iuiuba.
FINIS.
Medicines of Medicines of temperate heat.
Cera. Wax.
WAX, is maturatiue, resolu^^ue, Remedy to ye bloody flux.
and mollificatiue. The material substance of Plasters, and Oynte^e^ts. It is
taken in Gale. sim. Acti. li. Paul. li. Diosco. li.
wa^dly in brothes against the ^lousy flux, which is with vlcerations of ^e
Bowels. Wax well washed is more ^mperate than Wax unwashed: for by ^e
washing the sharpness, and acrimonie (...) it is taken away.

Cassia fistula, Black Cassia. Lax. 7

THis is a certain fruit, or ^odde brought Serapi. Simple A^icen. 20 Canonico
Mesue de simplo.
from Egypt, the pulpe of it is Laxa^^ue, (...)rgeth cholier, and tempereth
the blood: (...)e Tree thereof now grows in Italy.

Macer, Macis, Mace. Flux.

MACIS is the husk of the Nutmeg, Di^. li. 10. Gal. si. 0. Act^. li. 10. Pau.
li. 70.
it is contor^atiue unto the Stomach, ^o stays the flux of the body.

Adiantum, Politrithon, Maiden hair.
THis bear^^ is of the kind of our maiden Stone. Dio ii. 40 Gal. si. 70 Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
bayre: subtle in substance ins^ssiue of gresle vumours in the breast, and
(...). I^ breaks the Stone, and stays the flux of the Body.

Trichomanes, Capillus veneris. true Maiden hair.
THis is our true Maiden hair, and of the same virtue that Adiantum before
Dio-li 40.
spoken of is.

Succinum, Ambra, Amber.
AMber is thought to distill from the Populer Stop Blood Flux. Dio. li. 10
Auicen. 20 Canonico
^^ee iuto the Ficud of Euridan^ and there to were hard. Beaten to poud and
drunk, it stays the Flux of the (...) macke and belly, and stops blood.

Symphiton Petrenum, unsavory Marioram.
THis Herb is inscissyue and also bynding. Purge^ Breaste. Flux Wounds Gal.
li. 80. Acti, li. 10 Pau. li. 70. Dio, li, 40.
Is purges the Breaste, healpeth coughing of blood, stops all manner of
Fluxes, and heals wounds.

Symphiton magnum, Consolida mayor. Comfory the greater.
COmfory is of the same virtue that Symphiton Flux. Gal. si. 80. Pau. li. 70.
Dio. li. 40
Petrenum is: but something hotter in virtue.

Asparagus, Sperage.
BOth the Seed, and Root of this herb Purges the Liver Dio. li. 20. Gal.
si. 60. Acti. li. 10 Pau. li 70.
are abstersyue, apertiue, and do open both the Liver, and Kidneys.

Faba. The Bean.
THe substance of the Bean is abster sive, Bloody Flux purges Gout,
swelling.
the Rynde is bindinge and also abstersive: therefore the whole Bean decocted,
and boiled in water and Uineger is given for the flux of the Belly without
blood, and against vomites. If it be eaten it is Gal. si. 60. and aliment. 10.
Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70. Dio. li. 20.
windy, and bard to be digested. It purges breast and loongs, it eases the
gout made in a Pla^ster with swynes grease: and also is good against
inflammations and swellings.

Lotus Pratensis. A kind of threeleaued grass. Handachocha. Eyes.
Perellworte.
THis herb is abstersive, mixed with Dio-li 40. Gal. si. 60. Acu. li. 10 Pau.
li. 70.
Honny it purges and cleanses the ties of gross humors.

Lycium, The Lycian liquor. Ulcers.

THe true Lycium is the juice of the root^ Fiuxe.
of a certain (...) Cappadocia, and In Dio. li. 10. Gal. si. 70. Acti. l. ^0
Pau. li. 70.
dia. It is resolutiue, auster sieve, restrictiue or (...) heateth Ulcers, and
ma(...) ous Soars: ^t stateth all manner of flux^ (...) of men and women. In
steed of the the Chyrurgrans (...) use the Juice of Caprifolie, (...) (...)
casted Woodbynde.

Mexa, Sebesten, Nuttes of Graecia.
THis fruit is Laratiue, good against the Lar. Worms Auicenna Canenico Serapi
de Simplici. Laxe. Dio. li. 20. Galen de alime^t. 10. and Sim. 60. Acti li. 10
Pau. li 70.
cough: it does mitigate and swage the burning of the dryne, and kills the
worms that be in the belly.

The substance of this fruit stays and byndeth the belly, the lyc^ur
wherein it is decocted or boiled does lare the belly, or is soluble: it
gendreth evil humors and melancolious.

Eringum: Seaholme.
THis herb grows by the Seasydes, Colic and stone.
and is good against the Collicke, and breaks tue Stone: provoke ye bryne,
and Dio li. 30. Gal. si. 80. Acti. li. 10. Pau. li. 70.
the monthly course in women. The roots condite be uses to provoke lust and
conrage, but of no authority, ne yet to any great effect in that behalf.

Halimus, Sea Willowe, or Prickwillowe. Increase of Milk and seed.

THis plant grows by the Sea sides it is salt in taste, and samewhat bynding:
Gal simp. Paul. li. Diosco. li.
^t engendereth milk and Seed^^ the tender buds be eaten, and for the same use
reserved. It grows much in Cycill.

Malum Citrinum: Malum medicum: The Pome Citron, or Citrine.
THe Rynde of the Pome Citrone is Sweet Breath. Poison. Gale. de aliment and
Simplici. Acti. li. Paul. li. Diosco. li.
temperate in heat, but ^ry in the second degree. It comfort the Sinmacke,
and makes the Breath sweet. The middle substance which contey^^th ye seed is
sharpt in taste, cold and dry in the third degree. The substance next v^t^
that toward the Rind is gross, and engenders Fleagme, cold in virtue: the
Seed is hoate and dry, and resolutiue in the second degree. The leaves of the
tree be dry, and resolutiue. The whole fruit drunk with Wine is comminded
against poison, and corrects the corrupt Appetites in Women with Child.
Orenges, and Lymons be much of the same kynoe, and of like virtue.

Oliua, The Olyue Berry.
THis Olyue Berry being ripe, is tempeperate Binding. Gale. sim Acti. li. Paul.
li. Diosco. li.
in heat: being unripe is tarte and cold in the first degree. But the Leaves
and teuder croppes of the Olyue tree be bindinge, and cold.

Olyuae Conditae, the Olyue berries kept in Bryne.
THe Olyue herries that be preserved in Appetite. B(...) G(...) de alime^t. 60
Dio. li. 10. Acti. li. 70
bryne comfort the stomach, and pro ^oke an Appetite. The brine wherein they
be kept preserves the Qu^mes from rhewmes and superfluous moystures, and if
they be washed with it, and fastneth also the teeth.

Oleum, Oil.
Oil of the ripe Olyue is temperate in Dio. li 60. Gal. si. 10. Acti. li. Pau.
li. 70
heat, soluble and cesolutiue: but Oil of the baripe Olyue declyneth to
coldness, byndeth and comfort. Oil the older it is the more it exceeds in
heal. All Oil is good against Doyson often drunk, and often vomited. Oil
washed, is more gentle of taste, and of less mordacity, or sharpness then
that which is not washed. Oil is the material substance where with all
Paysters, and Oyntmeates be made and tempered.

All other Oils be referred for their virtues unto the Temperature and virtue
of the substance whereof they be made. As for cremple it is more largely
declared in these Oils after described.

Oleum Rosarum, Oil of Roses.
Oil of Ros^s is confortatiue of parts Burning.
Diosco. li. Acti. li. 10 Gal. si. 10. Mesue de Oleis.
that be resolved, resolutiue, repercussiue, and does refrigerate such parts
as be inflamed.

Oleum Chamomelinum, Oil of Chamomill.
Oil of Camomill is resolutiue, and eases pains.

Oleum Violaceum, Oil of Violettes.
Oil of Uiolettes extinguisheth Infla^ Dio. li. 10. Acti. li. 10 Gal. simp.
Mesue de Oleis.
mations, and hoate swellings.

Oleum Cidoniorum, Oil of Quinces.
Oil of Quinces is co^fortatiue of parts Rewmes Floxe Diosco. li. Gale.
metho. 10. Acti. li. 11 Mesue de Oleis. 10.
that be relaxed. byndinge and stayinge all rhewmes and fluxes.

Oleum Amygdalarum dulcium, Oil of sweet Almondes.
Oil of sweet Almonds ^solueth hardness, Mollificatiue. Galen. li. Simpli.
60. Mesue de Oleis.
and does smoothe and lenigate ye asperite and roughness of the wind pipe: it
is good also for the Breast and loonges.

Oleum Amygdaelarum amararum, Oil of bitter Almondes.
Oil of bilter Almondes is a^^stersiue, The ^ares. Dio. li. 10. Acti. li. 10
Gal. si. 60. Mesue de Oleis.
and aperti^^. It disselurth wyndes and soundes in the Ears, and kills the
worms also that oftentimes be in the same.

Oleum Lilliorum, Oil of Lyllies.
Oil of Lillies is mollitiue of hard swel Cold Breaste. Acti. li. 10. Mesue
de Oleis. Auicen Cano. 10.
lines, caseth pains, is good against colds Diseases of all parts, and
specially of the Breast.

Oleum A^eth^, Oil of Dill.
Oil of Dill resolves, and eases Act^. li. 10 M^s^e de Oleis 50 Aui^enna
Canonico
pains.

Oleum Laurinum, Oil of Bays.
Oil of Baye^ is good against all cold Cold bu mou^s. Dio. l^. 10. Acti. li.
10 Me^^e de Oleis.
Dis^ases, as Collick^s and pa^^es in the S^^ewes, and Joyntes that come of
cold humors.

Oleum Rutaceum, Oil of Rewe.
Oil of Rewe is good against Infla^ nations. Jufla^mations. Gale. metho* 120
Mesue de Oleis.
and wind, and all diseas^s that come of cold.

Oleum Spicatum, Oil of Spike.
Oil of Spike is good against all cold ^assions and diseases: and specially
of Cold in the Stomach. Gale. metho. 70. Mesue de Oleis.
the stomach and parts that do nourish: and with all it is comfortable.

Oleum Mastich^num, Oil of Masticke.
Oil of Masticke is confortatiue of the stomach and Liver, and of all parts
Confortattue.
that be needful to be comforted and warmed. Dio li. 10. Gale^ metho. 70
Mesue de Oleis. 10 Acti. li.


Oleum Abs^thij, Oil of Wormewoode.
Oil of Worm wood r^solueth cold, Gale^ metho. 1^0 A^^cen Cano. 50
and gr^sse bum^urs, and it is confortatiue of the member or part that is
diseased.

Oleum Mel(...), Oil of Millelote
Oil of Millelote resolves swelliages Bruses. Mesue de Oleis.
and bruse^, and eases the pains.

Oleum benedictu^, vel de Lateribus,
THis Oil resolves, and does mitigate Mesue de Oleis.
pains, and is good against all cold passions.

Oleum Costium, Oil of Costus,
THis Oil is apertiue and comfortatiue Mesue de Oleis. Auicen Cano. 50.
of the Sinews: good also against all cold diseases of the Liver and stomach.

Oleum Euphorbij, Oil of Euphorbium. Palu^es and Crampes Mesue de Oleis.
Auicen Cano. 50

THis Oil is special against all cold ^iseases of the Synewes and Joyntes:
as Palu^es, Crampes, and such other.

Oleum Castoreum, Oil of Beauer.
THis resolves cold nassions, and is special Gale. metho. 120 Auicen Cano. 50
good for coll^^kes.

Oleum Uulpium, Oil of a Fox.
THis Oil of a Fox is good against all Back. Mesue de Oleis. Gal. si. 110
Acti li 20 Pau. li. 20
cold diseases and aches: as cold, gouts, aches in the Back, and Palsies.

Oleum de Scorpionibus, Oil of Scorpions.
THis Oil breaks the Stone in the Stone. Mesue de Oleis.
Ry^nies, if the Back be anointed therewith: cast in with a syringe it breaks
the Stone in the Bladder.

Oleum Nenupharis. Oil of the water Lyllie.
THis Oil is good against heates, and (...) hoate Swellings, and
Infla^mations. Inflammations. Mesue de Oleis.


Oleum Papaueris, Oil of Popy.
THis Oil refrigerateth strongly, and Sleep. Mesue de Oleis.
^aseth the pains that come of heates, and provoke Sleep.

Oleum Mirtinum, Oil of Mirtes.
THis Oil does refrigerate and comfort Heart. Mesue de Oleis.
the Stomach, the Heart, and all other parts that be resolved and weakened
by excess of heat.

Una, the Grape.
OF Grapes there be diverse Gale. de a liment. 20
kinds, some be sweet in taste, some^e ta^te, some be sharp, Acti. li. 10
and some be of a mean quality or taste betwixt these, neither notab^e
sweet, n^yt^er sharp, neither Pau. li. 70 Dio. li. 50.
sower, which be called Uinosae in Latin, that is to say, having the taste
of Wine, and this kind is temperate between ^oate and cold. The kind of them
that be sweet is hoate, and increases thirstinesse. The sharp and sower be
cold, the sweet also be sol^ble, and specially while they b^t f^ll of
moys^nesse. The sharp and sower do not only lack that property, but also
are neither conco^ted in the stomach, Galen de a^^me^t. 20 Diosco. li. Acti.
li 10 Pau. li. 10
neither well distributed into the body, ^e yet do well nourish^. The ryp(...)
Grape does most nourishe next to the figg(...) of all fruits, and engenders
none evil humors if it be thoroughly ripe. Howbeit of(...) the Grape comes no
Juice and stable nourishment, as does of Flesh. The Grape (...) it be green
and in his moyst^^s, does in* flate the Stomach, and is soluble: if the Grape
be long retained within the body, it does annoy and hurt, which fault does not
happen to the Fig: for although the Fig be not down ward in short time
avoided, yet if it be well disgested in the stomach it gives good
nourishment: which property and virtue the Grape lacks, for in case they be
over long retained in the belly, they neither be disgested nor altere(...) in
the stomach, neither distributed to the Liver and veins, nor increase other
th(...) crude humors which cannot be altered i(...) to good blood. The Grape
has in it four(...) substaunces, the one is the stone, which (...) cold, dry,
and ^inding: the other three be the utter skin, the substance adjoining an^
contained within the same, and the Liquor. The ston^ and ^kyn do descend
through the body in manner (...)o. The other parts be retained and do nourishe.

Una Passa, The great Rayson.
THe Rayson is of like comparison to ye Grape, as the ory Fig Galen de
alime^t. ^0 Gal. si. 60 Acti. li. ^0 Pa^. li. 70
unto the green. The Rayson is maturatiue, bynding, or stiptike, and
resolu^^ue. The sweeter the Ra(...) ye hoatter, the ^arter the colder, the
(...)r Rayson does strengthen and comfort the stomach, and bind the be^^y:
the sweet rayson is in the mean, for it neither resolves the stomach,
neither laxeth the bel^y, neither yet byndeth g^ra^ly. The sweet sweet ra^son
is a(...)ur, and does temper and vanquishe frea(...)gs or bytinges of the of
the stomach. The best raison is yt which is most fatty and un(...)ous, and
^ath a (...) skyn. The raison does not so laxe the ^elly, neither is so
abstersive as the ^ry Fig: Howbeit, it is better to the stomach. The raison
eaten is good for ye wind pipe, good against ye Cough, good for the Kydnies
and B^ou^.

Uinum, Wine.
Wine is hoate in the second degree G^l. (...). 80 (...). li. 10 P(...). li. 70
Howbeit, if is (...) very (...), it is hoate in the third degree: But must or
new wine is hoate i^ the first: they be like in dries, as they Gal. ^li. 30
D^o. li. 50
be in heat. Of all Wynes Red and gross wine is most meetest and conu^ment to
(...) crease and eagender blood. Next to that Galen de bonis Succis
is wine that is black in color, sweet, and gross. Thirdly read or black
wine with grassinesse of substan^r and ta(...)es in taste, D^o. li. 50
Wy^^ wine and gross substance with tartnes in taste are re^^rued in the 4.
place. Whyt^ wine and thynne in Substance nourishes least of all. Sweet wine
is better concot* ted in the Stom^cke than ye tarte or green wine, and better
di(...)ed into the body, and also is more soluble. Although gros(...) Galen de
(...)ate Tue^da, 50
wynes be meetest for the (...) of blood, yet it is to be noted that (...)y
gross wine is ^ardly concorted and altered in the Stomach, and slowly
distributed, unless the Stomach be good and st^onge, the gross(...) wynes
also be not commended for making* and provoking of bryne: and besides that some
of them do stop the Liver, the splen, Dio-li. 50. Gale^ metho. 70
and kyd(...)s, so that by the use of the^, ^o^e men fall into Drop^es, some
into the stone: and specially old men. The most (...) somest wine for them
that be in recovery from sickness (so that they have no Fever) is wine read
in color, thynne in substance, and somewhat tarte in taste. Wine among all
other things does moist, and soonest increase natural heat: and therefore
wine that is hoate of nature, and subtle in substaunte, yellowe in co^^er,
old in age, of good odoure, and smelling is most special to revive and
restore such persons as fall into Hipocra, de vlceri.
soundinges or sayntings, for it is soonest distributed into all parts of the
body, not with standing such yellowe and strong wines do oftentimes trouble
the head. Waterish and thyn Wine does little or nothing nourishe, but does
only provoke the bryne. Wine is meet for the cold natures of complexions:
wine condite with honny is Hipocra. de vlceri.
good for those that fear the stone universally. As Wine is good for old men,
so it is evil for chi^oren: sweet wynes ^e good for them that need to be
restored, so they be subject to no (...)becillity or weakness of the Liver,
^pleue, or Rydnies. To them that have gross humors in their Uaynes subt^^l
wynes are meet and good: to them that ^aien de (...)e ^uenda. 50. and 10.
have cold humors in their veins hoate wynes and old ve meet: but to them
that be not of this condition or state, Wynes that be pleasant and well
smellinge be m^eter, so that they do not trouble and un(...) quiet the head
Flee from gross and evil smelling Hipocra. ^^^een.
wines, and such as be of great tartenesse* and or unpleasant taste. Also
absteyne from wine that is to old, or to new, special from all wynes till
they be fined. Wine in the utter parts of the body be good (...) wash and
mu^dify v^cers or saares Wine also be confected with diverse substaunces as
with Honny, ^ater, U^^eger, Tym^ G^len d^ ^^tate Tu^n. 5^.
Squ^^t^s, Roses, Wormewoode, Raison^ and many other things, which Wynes
confected and made, are to be esteemed a(...) tet the nature of such
substaunces when with they vee confected. Wine thyone su^stance. and yellow^ in
colo^^, heateth (...) parts of (...) body, provoke vryne, and po(...)geth
^he blood. Wine does ripe and matu^ (...) (...)rs so ^uch as any thing els^
prouo^eth (...) e^tes, a^^ ^ryne, and ^isp^^ to quietness and sleep. As wine
is thought to vee unmeet for children, so it is partly for young men which
are hoate and dry, and yet being in their grouth. For such natures it shall
dispose to I^e and volupeuousnes of body, and hastynes: and also shall trouble,
and unquiet the mind and reason, if it be not taken moderately.

Amygdala dulcis, Amarae. Amondes sweet, bitter.
THe sweet Almonde is temperate, but Purge ye Drea^^a Liver Spl^ne. (...).
(...). 60 (...) l^. 20. Act. l^. ^0 Pau. Pau. li. 70. D^^. (...). ^0
the better is suotill, and a^ster sieve, and ^^oat^ in the second degree: it
purges the ^reast and Luonges of gross humors: o^ene^^ op^^ations of the
Lyuet. Spleen, and Ryo^es, the sweet Almonde has ye same ^reper^les, but much
weaker than the viter, and belyo^s that, the sweet nourishes ^e body, but the
the nourishing that it ge^ets is little.

Sesanij, and Sesanum, Oily seed.
THe seed of this herb does mollify, but Gal. si. 80. alime^t. 20 Acti. li.
10 Pau. li. 70. Dio. li. 20.
by reason that it is some what oily and unctious, it fills the stomach
anon if it be eaten, it ouerturneth, and troubles the same: it causes the
Breath to stincke if (...) stick or remain between the Teethe the Oil of it
also does mollsie, and so does the decoction of the herb it self.

Stechas, Stichados.
THis herb is apertiue, abfter sieve, co(...) Come in the Stomach. Dio li. 30
Gal. si. 30 Act. li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
fortatiue of all the inward parts and ou(...) ward pa^es of the body, which
are refrigrate: and specially good for the Breast if be decoc^ed or boiled, and
so received.

MEDICINES hot and dry in the first degree.
Absinthium, Seriphiu^, Ponticum, Santon(...) the kinds of Wormwood.
OUr common Wormewoode is of the Dio. li. 30. Gal. si. 60. Acti li. 20 Pau. li.
70.
of Ponticum: it is hot in the first degree, and dry in the third: it is
resolutine, abstersive, and comfortatine: it purges collericke humors from
the stomach and from the veins by vryne: opens the Liver, and kills
Worms. The kinds of Wormwood called Seriphium, and Santonicum, be hot in
the second degree, more bitterer and not so comfortatiue, they kill Worms
more strongly.

Chamomelum, Chamomill.
CAmomill is of subtle substance, it resolves Sorrow Dio. li. 30. Gal. si.
60. Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
swellings: opens the poares of the Body, and does mitigate and cease pains
and dolours.

Aegilops, Wild barrayne Otes.
THis Herb is some part like to our Dio. li. 30 Gal. si. 60 alime^t. 10
Acti. li. 10 Pau. li 70.
wild Otes: it does resolve hard swellings, and heals the Fistula in the
corner of the Eyes.

Oriza, Ryce.
RIce is of little nourishing, bynding, and Dio. li. 20. Gal. si. 80. and ali.
10. Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
hard to be digested.

Pentaphillon, Quinque foliu^, Tormentilba, Tormentill,
TOrmentill is dry in the third degree* and Tothach. Liver. Gal. si. 80. Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70. Dio. li. 40
of subtle substance: the decoction os it cease the Aothache, and bealeth
v^cerations of the Mouth: it is also good for the Loonges, and Liver.

Sacharum, Succharum, vulgo Sugar.
Sugar is lenitfue, abstersive, mundifica* Cold stomach.
type, apertiue, good for the stomach tha(...) is not hoate and collerike, for
in the hoate col^erike stomach it is soon turned to cho^ ler: ^t is good also
specially for the Breast Dio. li. 20. Gal. si. 70.
and Loonges. Of the Sugar which is (...) pressed out of certain Canes, or
Reeds speaks no old Au^thor, for the Sugar they speak of was brought out
of India, Arabia, and was a certaiue substance, which was congealed upon the
Canes, or Reeds of that Country, and esteemed to be a kind of Honny, and was
of like complexion and virtue.

Althea, Ib^scus, Holihocke.
THe Root and Seed of Holihocke, do Stone. Dio. li. 30 Acti li. 10 Pau. li.
70
mollify, resolve, and mature or ripe: the Seed also breaks the stone.

Sarcocola, Sarcocoll.
THis is the Gum of a Tree in Persia: Wou^des. Dio li. 30 Gal. si. 80. Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70
it dries, and sic catrizeth wounds.

Spongia, the Spounge.
THe Spounge laid to a Wound with Stone. Dio. (...). 80. Gal. si. 50. Pau.
li. 70
water or wine bealeth it, and with honny heals old Ulcers and Soars: the
stones fonnde in the Spounge be abstersive, and break the stone in the
Kydnies.

Mel^lotus, Melilote.
MEllilote is resolutiue, maturatiue of swelling. Dio. li. 30. Gal. si. 80.
Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
Imposthumations and swellings, and is confortatiue of the members. The
Mellilote that we now use, seems not by his description to be true
mellilote, howebest the virtue of it is not much unlike.

Schynanthas, squinantum, vulgo Squynante.
SQuynante is of subtle parts or substance, it provoke the vryne, and the
Liver. Dio. li. 10 Gal. si. 80. Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
monthly course in Women: it is good against hoate swellings of the Liver and
Stomach.

Semen lini, Lynseede.
THis resolves and mollisieth the instam marions and swellings, taken and
mixed swelling. Dio. li. 30 Gal. si. 70 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
with Honny, Oil, and Water and make thereof in plaster: if it be taken
(...) wards it gendreth wind, and is hard t^ be disgested, and evil for the
stomach.

Melissa, Apiastrum, Baulme.
THis bearbe is resolutiue and abstersive, Liver. Spleen. Dio. li. 30. Gal. si.
70. Acti. li. 10. Pau. li. 70
it munvifieth the Liver, the Spleen, ye Breast, and the Loonges.

Seta, Sericum, Silk.
Silk is Cordial, and good for the heart. Mesue de electuarijs Auicenna
Cano. 20 Serapi de Simpli.


Populus Alba The white Populer tree.
THis is abstersive. The Juice of the leaves milk warm put into the Ears,
Diosco. Gal. simp. Acti. li. Paul. lib.
eases the pains of them.

Tamarix, Tamariscus.
THis tree is inscissiue, and abstersive. The Dio. li. 10. Gal si. ^0 Acti. li.
10 Pau. li. 70
Root of it, the tender croppes, the leaves decocted or boiled in vyneger, or
wine, bealyeth the Spleen, that is endored or bard. Also boiled in wine and
drunk, they have ye same operation. Cups made of ye root of the same thee
are thought very wholesome for splenetike persons to drink in.

Triticum, Wheat.
Wheat is a nourishment not to (...) Galen de alime^t. 10 Dio. li. 20
eaten alone without flesh, fish, or other food: for it is of it self very
Uiscous, and opilatiue, which fault and lack in it is corrected, and
redressed Paul li. 70 Acti. li. 10. Gal. si. 80.
by the mixture of Leaven with it. Put to the outward parts as medicine, it
is hoate in the first degree, temperate in moisture and dryth. Wheat chawed
in the mouth is good against the biting of a mad Dog. The flower of it
decocted and boiled with water, does mature and ripe.

Furfur, Branne.
BRanne is of the least nourishment of any part of the Wheat, it is
abstersive, Leaper. Dio. li. 20
and mundificatyue: boiled in Uyneger it healpeth the Leaper.

Fermentum, Leaven.
Leaven is resolutiue, and attractiue from Gal. si. 80 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
the deep parts of the body.

Amilon, Amidam, Uulgo, Sterche.
STerch is colder and drier than the wheat, Rewmes Galen do alime^t. 10 Dio.
li. 20. Pau. li. 70
and nourishes less: it does Lenigate and smoothe parts that ^e exasperated
and made roughe, as the wind Pipe or Throat: it is good also against sharp
distillations, and rhewmes into the Eyes.

Panis, Bread.
BRead is a nourishment most wholesome: Galen de alime^t. 10 Acti. li. 10 Pau.
li. 70.
that which is made of ripe red wheat well kneded, well baked, and well
leauened, is as a medicine: it is resolutiue, by reason of the leaven.

Panis Furfuracnis, Course or brown Bread.
THe Bread that has much branne is of Galen de alime^t. 10 Pau. li. 10.
less nourishing then that which is of flower, but more soluble, for it is
laxatiue, and scoureth, by reason of the husky substance remains in it.

Brassica, Caulis domestica. The Coleworte.
THe Coleworte is abstersive, resolutiue Ulcers. Worms Gal. simp. Acti. Paul.
Dioscori.
of hot infla^mations and swellings, and heals ulcers and soars, the
decoction of it laxeth the body, the substance of the Herb byndeth. The
Seed kills woormes.

Brassica Sylue^^ris. The wild Coleworte.
THis grows by the Sea sides, and is Gal. si. 70. Acti. li. 10. Paul li. 70
Dio. li. 20.
of the same virtue that the Gardeyn Colewortes is, but stronger and of more
efficacy.

Brassica marina, vulgo Soldonella.
THis grows also by the Sea sides, it Laxe. Gal. si. 70. Acti. li. 10 Pa^.
li. 70 Dio. li. 20
is salt and bitter in taste, and laxeth the belly.

Echium. A kind of buglosse.
THis herb drunk with wine does no only heal them that be bitten with ve
stinginge. Dio. li. 40 Pau. li. 40
nemous serpents, but also drunk before does preserve such from hurt as hap
to be ^it of the same.

Orobus, Erui, Bitter Fitches.
THis corn is abstersive, inscissiue, apertiue Dio. li. 10. Galen de alime^t.
10 Simpli. 10 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
of op^lacious: it is dry in the second degree, provoke vryne: if it be taken
excessiuely, it makes to piss blood, because it attereth and raseth in
passage.

Coriandrum, Coliander.
COliander seed is abstersive, resolutiue Worms Gal si. 70. Dio. li. 30. Pau.
li. 70 Acti. li. 10
with a certain bynding: it increases seed or nature. The seed also taken
in a small quantity with must kills worms: received in a great quantity
brings to madness.

Aspalathos. The wood Rhodium.
THis tree decoct and gargarised heals Ulcers. Dio. li. 10. Gal. si. 60 Acti.
li. Pau. li. 10
corrupt ulcers in the mouth, it grows in Creta, an Island.

Cuscuta, Dodder.
THis Herb grows with flax, it is Spleen. Serapi. Simple
abstersive, confortatiue, and apertiue of the opilations of the Liver, Spleen,
and Kydnies, and purges Melancholy. Auicen. Cano. 20.


Hedera, Iuye.
THe grieve leaves of ye Juy boiled with Wou^des. Dioscori. Gal. simp. Paul.
wine heal great wounds, and malicious Soars that come of burninge. The
leaves boiled in vyneger profit the sp^eue: the flower is more vehement, and
heals brenuings: the Juice purges the head, and heals old ulcers of the
ears: the gu^me Stone.
of it kills Lise, and takes away hair: it is so hoate yt it burns, and
if it be drunk it healpeth them that have the stone.

Ladanum. Ladan
THis is a certain liquor that in ye spring Falling of ye hair Dio. li. 10
Gal. si. 70 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
of the year falls upon a p^ante call^^ Cischus: it is moistiue, resolutiue,
maturatiue, and comfortatiue: it stays the falling of the hair.

Dracunculus, Dragons.
IT is abstersive, mundificatiue of op^^a Spleen. Eyes. Dio. li. 20 Gal. si. 60
Acti. li. 10 Pau. li 70.
tions of the Liver, and Spleen, and t(...) Loouges: it healpeth old ulcers
and snarethe fruit is of more strength then the leaves, or root. The Juice of
the same clean seth the Eyes.

Aron, wake Robin, or Cuckowe pintell.
DRagons is of y same virtue that wake Dio. li. (...). Gal. si. 60 Acti. li. 10
Pau. li. 70.
Robin is, but not so strong.

Tereniabin, Manna.
THis is a certain dew that falls upon Auicen Cano. 20, Mesue de Simpli.
Serapi and Simpli. Galen de aliment.
the leaves and trees in the East parts: also in Calabi ^a and certain per^es
of Italy, and other hoate countries: it is abstersive, purges Choiler, and is
good for the Breast, and Loonges. Of this Galen seems to make mention in his
book de Alimentis under the name of Aer^meli, and Drosomeli.

St^rax calamita, Storax vulgo.
THis is a ^umine of a tree in Syria, it Cough. Dio. li. 10 Gal. si. 8. Acti.
li. (...) Pau. li. (...).
is mo(...)tiue, maturatiue, good for the Cough and catarris, and for the
Br^aste: it moves the mouethiy co(...) in Mome^.

St^rax liquida, Stacte.
THis is the fatty and oy(...) part of ye Mirre Dio. li. Acti. li.
when it is expressed The virtue of ^^^s like to the virtue of Mirre.

Isatis, Glaston. Woade.
VVOade, is resolutiue of all manner swelling. Dio. li. ^0 Gal. si. 60 Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70
swellings: it strauncheth the blood, it is good for persons that be
splenetik, and also heals green wounds.

Caries Lignorum. The powder of an old post.
IT mundifieth, and heals moist ulcers Ulcers. D^o. li. 10 Gal. si. 80 Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
and Soars.

Folium, Malobathron. A rare spicie leaf.
THis leaf grows in India it is abster Uryne. Dio. li. 10 Gal. si. 70 Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70
syue, and comfort the stomach, an^ Liver: and provoke dryne.

Cupressus. The Cypress tree.
THe fruiet and tender croppe of ye braun Stau^che Blood Dio. li. 10 Gal. si.
70 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
ches heal green wounds: staunc(...) blood: consume superfluous moystures
dry and comfort the member or part, wh(...) is with such moystures oppressed
and w(...) kened.

Filix, Femina, The Brakes, or Fern.
THe roots of Fern dry, and heal moist Dio. li. 1^ Gal. si. 70 Acti. li. 10
Pau. li. 70.
ulcers and soars.

Filix, Osmonde.
THe root kills Worms, and diminishes Spleen. Dio. li. 40. Gal. si. 80.
Pau. li. 70
the increase of the Spleen.

Nardus, Spicanardus. Spikenarde.
SPikenarde is hoate and biting in taste, and Rewmes Dio. li. 10 Gal. si. 80
Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
dry in the second degree: it strengthens and comfort ye stomach, eaten
inwardly and also outwardly in Plasters, it provoke dryne, and cures the
gnawing or frea^ing of the stomach: it dries the rhewmes of the belly, of the
bowels, or Guts, and of the head, and breast. The kinds called ^ndica, and
Siriaca be chief.

Nardus Celtica.
THis is of the same virtue and power ye Dio. li. 10 Gal. si. 80.
Nardus Indica and Siriaca is, but more weaker in all things, only except
that it Acti. li. 10. Pau. li. 70
provoke vryne more strongly.

Nardus montania.
THis is of the same kind and virtue yt Dio. li. Gal. simp. Paul. lib.
theother two before are, but not of like strength and efficacy.

Sandarocha, vernix, Vernice.
THis is a certain gum, the fumigation Rewmes Auicen Cano. 20. Serapi.
Simpli.
of it dries Catarres and the wmes.

Sena, Colutea, Seen.
Seen is thought to be described of Theophrastes, Auicen. Cano. 20. Serapi.
Simpli. Theop. 30 de historia Plantarsi.
under the name of Colutea: it purges choler.

P^stacia, fistici vulgo, Pistickes.
THis fruit is good for the stomach, apertiue of opstations of the liver, and
good Liver Loonges. Dio. li. 10 Gal. si. 80 Pau. li. 70 Acti. li. 70
for the breast and loonges.

Rubea tinctorum, Rubea maiorum, Madder.
MAdder is abstersive, mundificatiue of Liver. Dio. li. 30. Gal. si. 80. Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
the liver and spleen: purges their op^lations: provoke vryne, and the
monthly course in women.

Paeonia, Pionie.
BOth kinds of Piony be abstersive, and Liver. Dio. li. 30. Gal. li. 60. Acti.
li. 10. Pau. li 70.
comfortatiue, mundifie opilations of the ^yuer and kydnies, provoke vryne and
the ^onethly course in women: it is written ^f old experience, that the root
hanged a^out the neck of Children, cures them of ^he falling Sickness.

Phu, Valleriana, The wild Valeriane.
THe wild Ualeriane is good and comfortab stomach and liver. Dio. li. 10 Gal.
li. 80 Acti. li. 10 Paul li. 70
c for the Stomach, and Liver: (...)rouoketh vryne, and the monthly course
(...) women: i^ is of like virtue to the Spike(...)arde, but somewhat weaker:
neuerthe(...)sse it provoke vryne strongly.

Pini Cortex. The Ryne or Bark of the Pyne tree.
IT does so dry and bind that it heals excoriation Br^ning. Dio. li. 10 Gal.
si 80 Pau. li. 10 Acti. li. 10
that comes by burning of fire.

Pini folia. The leaves of the Pyne tree.
THese Leaves heal wounds. Wofides. Dio. li. 10. Gal. li. 80 Acti. li. 10


Pini fructus, Nuclei pini. The Kernel of the Pyne tree.
THe fruit of the Pyne tree is good for the Breast and Loonges: and healpeth
Cough. Dio. li. 10 Gal. li. 80 Acti. li. 10 Paul li. 70
the coughe.

Fuligo Ex pini cortice, ex fructu, ex folijs. The fume of the pyne Bark,
fruit, leaves.
THe soote gendred and made of these parts Falling of ye ha^re Gal. li. 80.
Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
of the Pyne tree be good for fallinge or shedding of hair in the Brows, for
running Eyes, and Ulcerations in the same.

Cardamomum Arabum. Graynes.
THis spice has two kinds: it both comfort Serapi de Simpli. Auicen Cano.
20.
the stomach, and conduces to disgestion: of this Cardamomum the Greek
Authors speak nothing.

Bombex, Gossipium, Cotton, Bumbast.
THis is a certain kind of Cotton growing Cough. Se^de or Nature. Serapi.
Simpli. Auicen. Cano. 20.
upon trees, the seed is good for the Breast, and the cough: it increases
Seed or Nature in Man.

Millium folis, Lithospermon. Grumwell.
THis is subtle of substance: it breaks Stone. Dio. li. 70. Gal. li. ^0.
Acti. li. 10. Pau. li 70.
the stone, and provoke vryne.

Palmula, Dactylus. The Date.
THe Dates be comfortatiue of the Stomach, Dio. li. 10 Galen li.
and Liver, both inwardly received, and outwardly in plasters: but they Pau.
li. 70
engender ache and Rhewmes: they make great obstructions, and leaprosie, eaten
in great quantity.

Mercurialis, Mercury.
THis herb does not only laske the belly, Laxe. Gal. li. 70. Acti. li. 10
Pau. li. 70 Dio. li. 40.
but also in plasters it is resolutiue.

Capnos, Fumus terrae, Fumaria. Fumitory.
ALbeit this Herb is hoate in the first Dio. li 40 Gal. si. 70 Acti. li. 10
Pau. li. 70.
degree, yet is it dry in the third: it opens the opilations of the liver,
comfort the mouth of the stomach, and laxeth the belly, and purges choler
by the vryne.

Anemone, Herba venti. Purge ye Head. Fleagme. Dio. li. 10. Gal. si. 60. Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70

THis herb is attractiue, apertiue, and purges the Nose, and the Head: if
the root be chawed and mastichated in ye mouth, it purges fleagme.

Lupinus, Lupyne. Worms Dio. li. 20. Galen de alime^t. 10 and simp. 60 Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70.

THe Lupine is abstersive, and resolutiue, it mundifieth the opilations of the
live(...) and spleen, and kills worms.

Choudros, Alicia.
THis is a kind of corn: it is maturatiue, Dio. li. 20. Galen de alime^t. 10
and simp. 80 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
and does nourishe: it stays the belly, and is good for the stomach.

Eupatorium; Agrimonium, Egrymony.
THis Herb is apertiue, and abstersive Dio. li. 40 Gal. si* 90 Acti. li. 10
Pau. li. 70.
of opilations of the Liver, and comfort the same. The herb that now is
called Eupatorium growing by the water sides is judged of experience to be of
the same virtue, but not me^cioned of old Aucthors, as far as it is known.

Agaricus, Agaricke.
AGarike is inscissiue, abstersive of the opilations Worms Dio li. 30 Gal. si.
60 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70 Mesue de Simpli
of the Liver and Kydnies: it purges gross fleagme and choler: and kills
the Worms: also it purges from the breast gross and viciouse humors.

Cicer, Chich peason.
THis kind of pulse is windye, soluble, Stone. Gal. si. 60. and (...). 10.
Acti. li. 10. Pau. li. 70 Dio. li. 20.
provoke vryne, and gendreth seed, and Milk. The decoction of it breaks
the stone.

Smilax hortensis, Gardein withwinde.
THe fruit of this Plant provoke vryne, Dreams Dio. li. 30* Serapi.
Simpli. Auicenna Cano. 20
and the monthly course in Women: it is eaten and boiled with the Cod(...) as
our common bearbes be: and it causes troublesome Dreams.

Poligonaton, Secacull. Scalacoeli.
THis herb is stiptike or binding in taste with sharpnes, and a certain
vitternes. Cleanse the Face. Gal. (...) (...). Paul. lib. Dio. li. Se^^pi S^m^li
Auicen Cane. Mesue ^e Comidis.
The root heals wounds: the herb i(...) self is used to mundifie and
cleanse the fac(...) from syots. The Arabitanes seem by the description of it
to call it Secacull, and to attribute to the root of it power and virtue(...)
to provoke lust or courage.

Philanthropos, Aparine* Cleauers.
THis is abstersive and of subtle substance: stinginge. Gal. si. 60 Acti. li.
10 Pau. li. 70. Dio. li. 40.
the Juice of (...) drunk with Wine, is good agayuste the bytinge of venomous
Worms.

Circium. vulgo Buglossum magnu^, A kind of Buglosle.
THis is thought by the description of it Dio. li. 40
to be our Buglosse: it eases pains that come of great repletion of the
veins in every part.

Periclimenon, Caprifollium, Matrissilua* Woodbynde.
THe fruit and leaves of Woodbynde be Soar(...) in the mouth. Dio-li 40. Gal.
si. 80.
inscissiue, so that it provoke to piss blood, if it be much used: and also
it is good for the spleen: it is commonly used of experience to beale vleers
and soars in ye mouth, and parts of like temperature.

Geranion, Gruinalis, Storkes bill.
THe first kind of Gruinalis is good for inflammations Dio. li. 30. Pau. li.
70*
in Women: the second kind is of no use, neither profitable in physic.

MEDICINES hot and dry in the second degree.
URTICA, The Nettell.
THe Leaf and Seed of the Nettle resolves swellings: purges Purge ye
Breaste. Biting. Gal. si. 60 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70. Dio-li. 40.
the Breast and Loongs of grosie humors. The Seed drunk with sweet Wine,
moves lust and courage. The Leaves made in Plaster with Salt, heal the
bitinges of the mad Dog, and also Ulcers, and Soars: they provoke the Uryne,
and the monthly course in Women.

Amurca, The Dregs of Oil.
THis heals wounds and ulcers Tothach. Dropsy. Gal. si 60. Acti. li. 20 Dio.
li. 70. Pau. li, 10.
in bodies that are of dry Complexion: for in tender bodies it does rather
exasperatt the wound, liquify and consume the flesh: with vyneger, or Wine it
is good against the ache of the Teethe. Also spread upon Leather and put to the
Body, it represseth watery swellings in such bodies as have the Dropsy.

Propolis, Virgin Wax.
VIrgin Wax is a certain gummy Pricking of thorn. Cough. Gal. simp. Acti. li.
Pau. li. Dio. li.
substance, whereby the honny Combs in the Hyue, and ye Wax of the same be
joined and fastened together: it is attractyue, in so much that it draws out
of the body stubells or thorns that are fastened in the same: the fume of it
healpeth old and long Coughes.

Hebenus, Guaicum, Lignum vitae.
HEbenus is thought to be the tree the now is called Guaicum or Lignum v(...)
it is abstersive and of subtle substance, therefore it mu^difieth and
cleanses ye Ey^^ and dries the wmes and ulcers in the sam^ At this time it is
used of experience onl^ and of no aucthority to extenuate the bod^ and dry
ulcers and the wmes of all parte^ as in ye sickness called the french
Pack(...) Goutes, Melancholy passions, and man other diseases.

Saluia, Sage.
THe leaves and croppes of sage prouo^ bryne: it is good for wounds. and
staun(...) ^heth blood in them: it mundifieth also U(...) cers and soars:
besides that it is hoate, (...) is also bynding temperately.

Anagallis, Pimpernell.
PImpernell is aftersiue, and attractiue the Juice purges the head, as well ga^
garised, as instilled into the Nose: also (...) heals wounds and corrupt
ulcers and soars both kinds of Pimpernel be of one virtue(...)

Ocimum, Basilicum, Basile.
BAsile eaten gendreth superfluous Humors and moystures: wherefore taken
^wardes it is not wholesome: but used to ^e utter parts it is resolutiue, and
matuatiue. After Dioscorides it laxeth the bell(...), dissolueth wind,
provoke dryne, en(...)reaseth Milk, purges the Eyes and the (...)eade. It
is esteemed good against melanholy passions.

Buphthalmos, Cotula. Yealowe Bottell.
THis hearhe is more hoatter, and more resolutiue than Camomill: so that it
resolves and consumes hard swellings, mixte with Oil and Wax.

Terebinthus, The Turpentyne tree.
THe Bark, Leaves, and fruit of this tree be strictiue and byndinge: but the
fruit dried moves the vryne, and healpeth splenetike persons.

Resina Terebinthina, Turpentyne.
TUrpentine is abstersive, attractiue, mollificatiue, and resolutiue: it is
good for the breast: it provoke vryne: laxeth the belly, and heals scabbes.

Resina Pini. The Rosin of the Pyneaple tree.
THis resolves, and mollifieth: and is more of efficacy than turpentyne, in
that behalf.

Colophonia, or pix Greca, A kind of blacker Rosin.
THis is resolutiue, and mollificatiue.

Balsamum Liquor, the licour, Fructus. the fruit, Lignum. the wood. of Baulme.
ALl parts of ye Baulme tree, the wood, ye fruit, and liquour also, be subtle,
abstersive, of great efficacy against all could diseases no sickness: they
provoke vryne: are good or ulcers and soars that be filthy and corrupt:
(...)he liquour is of greatest virtue next unto (...): the Fruit or seed
least of all. The ly(...)uour is called Opobalsamum: the Fruicte
Carpobalsamum: the wood Xilobalsamum.

Nux muscata, The Nutmegge.
THe Nutmegge is comfortatiue of the stomach, liver, and the spleen: it
stay(...)th vomittes, and sweeteth the Breathe.

Nux Iuglans. The Wallnut.
THe utter Rynde or husk of the fruit of the Wallnut is very tarte in taste,
and byndinge, the Juice of it is good for the mouth, and throats that be
inflamed: the Kernel is vnc^^ous and evil for the Stomach, the Dyle of it is
resolutiue.

Nux vomica, The vomitting Nutte
THis Fruit moves to vomittes, an(...) laxeth the Belly.

Nux Auellana. The Filbeard, or hasell Nutte.
THe Filbeard and hasell Nutte be some(...)what colder than the Wallnut, and
more bynding: in other qualities like, but that (...) hasell Nut makes the
head to ache, and a(...) so is not good for the stomach.

Polinum. Poliell mountain.
THis herb is abstersive, and aperti^^ of oppilations of all the inward
parts(...) it provoke urine, and the monthly cours^ in women: also it
heals malicious ulcer(...) and soars.

Pascinaca, Baucia vulgo The Carret tame and wild.
THe G^rde in carret is the weaker, the the wild carret is the stronger in all
qualities: the whole herb provoke vryne, and the monthly course in women,
but specially ye root and seed: the root provoke lust and courage.

Viscum, Misseltoe.
THe Misseltoe is subtle, attractiue, and resolutiue: mixed with Incense it
healpeth malicious ulcers. That which grows upon ye Dake is preferred before
other.

Aristolochia vtraque, rotunda, longa, Astrology.
BOth kinds of this herb, and specially the roots, be abstersive,
resolutiue, and good for the Breast and Loonges: they be comfortable also for
the Synewes, and dry up ulcers.

Zeodaria, Setwall.
THis Root is comfortatiue of the Stomach that is cold: it co^sumeth wind,
and resists poison: and is very wholesome in time of the plague.

Crocus, Saffron.
SAffron is maturatiue, and comfortatyue after Auicen it is a Cordial: ^ow ve
it (...) it be used in excess, it is not without da^nger: after Dioscorides it
moves lust and courage.

Fenegrecum, Fenegreeke.
FEnegreeke is resolutiue, and mollitiue of swellings, and some thing
abstersive: if it be taken inward, it troubles the Stomach.

Ieseminum, Iesemyne.
IEsemyne resolves cold swellings: eases pains and grief that comes of
cold Fleagme.

Aspalathus, Bitumen.
THis heals green wounds, and is good for all passions: and for all wounds
and soars that needs to be dried with mean^ ^eate.

Libanus, Thus. Incense.
^Ncense is dry in the first degree, and has acertayne bynding or
strictiuenesse. The ^arke of the tree is dry in ye second degree: ^oth do
healpe the spitting of blood: com(...)rt the stomach, and stay the bloody
flux: (...)ey hyale also wounds, ulcers, and soars.

Manna Thuris. Powder of Frankincense.
THis is the subtle powder of Incense, and is of like virtue, but in some
part of (...)ore efficacy.

Fuligo Thuris. The Soote of Frankincense.
^He soote of all things does dry and partaketh the nature of the thing
burned. ^he soote of Incense is used for Inflama(...)ons, rhewmes, and ulcers
of the eyes. The (...)ote of Turpentine, and Myr^^ be of like (...)tue to the
soote of fra^kincense. The soote (...) Storax is stronger tha^ is ye soote of
Asphal(...)s: strongest of al is the soote of the Ceder (...).

Chamepitys, Aniga: Ground pine.
THis Herb called Commonly Chamepitys is abstersive, and apertiue of
opilations of the Liver: it provoke ^ryne, and the monthly course in women.
This hear^ being green heals green wounds, corrupt ulcers and soars, and
resolves har^nes in the breasts of women.

Chamedrys. Tyxago. Germander.
THis herb opens opilations of the (...)uer and spleen, provoke ^ryne,
and (...) monthly course in women.

Cyperus, Iuncus Anglosus. English Galengale.
THe Root of this herb is incissiue, breaks the stone, provoke ^ryne,
the monthly course in women: it heal(...) moist ulcers and soars.

Scolopendria, Asplenon. Ceterake.
THis Herb is inscissiue: it breaks the stone, and resolves the hardness
of the ^plen^.

Colchichon, Hermodactylus. wild Saffron.
THe Root of this herb is ^axatiue: it is given to them that have the gout,
and ^aynes in their Joyntes: but it hurts the stomach.

Mell, Honny.
HOnny is abstersive, and mundificatiue: when it is boiled and scommed it does
mu^difie ye less: it is sanatiue and consolatiue of ulcers and soars: it is
good nourishment for old men and them that be of cold complexions: in young
persons and ^oa^e natures it increases choler.

Ambra, Ambergreace.
THis is confortatiue of the Brain, and of all the Senses: it comfort also
ye heart, and is good for cold complexions.

Agalloction, Lignum Aloes.
THis Tree consumes superfluous moystures of the stomach, and comfort the^
same, and the Liver also: and makes the mouth to smell sweet.

Marinbium, Prassin, Horehounde.
HOrebounde is abstersive, and apertyue of the Liver and spleen: it mundifieth
the Loonges, and moou^th the monthly course in women.

Aloe. Aloes.
ALoes is abstersive, and ^axatiue of the belly, and purges choler: it is
less a^stersiue when it is washed: it is most comfortatiue to the Stomach of
al Medicines ^axatiue: it mundifieth and heals ulcers, and soars that be
hard to close, and specially in the Foundament, and secret Members: it dries
and heals also Wounds.

Cincus, Carthamus, Bastard Saffron.
^He seed of this herb ^axeth the ^elly, and purges fleagmo: howbeit it
^ut^^th the stomach.

Cucumer Agrestis, wild Cucumbers.
THis herb is abstersive, mollificatyue, resolutiue, and strongly moves the
monthly course in women: the Juice of the fruit called Elaterum purges
cholier and ^^eagme.

Calamus odoratus, vel Aromaticus. A soote Reed.
THis root grows in India, and is of a subtle substance, as all other
things that ^e Aromaticall and of pleasant savor: it provoke ^ryne, and
the monthly course in Women, as well taken inwardly as outwardly in
fomentations: it is good and comble in plasters both to ye liver and stomach.

Rhabarbaru^, Reubarbarum, Rubarbe.
Rubarbe is abstersive, and purges Choler gently, and without danger: it is
a special remedy against all choleric diseases: it opens the obstructions
of the ^yuer, and provoke ^ryne, as experience does daily show: the old
Au^thors both Greeks, and Arabikes wryre the same of Rubarbe, howbeit their
descriptions seem not to agree in all poynctes with out Rubarbe now used.

Canabis, Hemp.
Hemp seed co^sumeth and dries so much, that if it be eaten in great
quantity, it dries seed of Generation: it is hard to be disgested, and makes
ye head ache.

Canabis Agrestis, wild Hemp.
THe Root of wild Hemp, does resolve hard swellings.

Ficus Arbor, The Fig tree.
THe liquor of the Fig tree, and the Juice of the leaves be a^stersiue,
^lcerative, and apertiue of the veins, and consume war^s. The Juice of the
wild Fig tree is stronger than of ye Fig of the Gardein.

Ficus, and Carica, The green Fig, and the dry.
Figs are nourishing among all fruits, and commended to be best:
notwtstanding yt they enge^der evil humors, they have ye commodity of they do
soon pass down through the belly, and are shortly distributed into ye whole
body, they be abstersive, and purge gravel from ye Kidneys: the nourishment
that they give is not firm and stable to body, as the nourishment of bread
and flesh, they be windy, but by reason of their short tariance in the Belly
the wind hurts not much. The ripe Fig is of much more praise than the
fig that is not ripe, the dry fig is colder than the green, so that he
comes to the second degree, and is subtle, and inscissiue: of the great use
of them comes not very good blood: one discommodity of them is, that they
cause the body to be full of Lyce: if the stomach be full of evil humors
they do much hurt, for shortly they be corrupted. Although the dry Fig be
subtle and inscissiue, yet it hurts the Liver and spleen that is enflamed,
and so does the green fig also: therefore when the Liver or spleen is
abstructed or has opilations, figs be eaten before other meats with Time,
Peniroiall, Sauery, Calamint, Pepper, or Ginger, and such like: who so eats
ye green or dry figs after gross meats, does incur damage. The dry fig
is a medicine to the outward parts, and does mature and ripe hard swellings,
and the same in short space does resolve, and the decoction of them also: but
when ye will more mature or ripe than resolve, wheaten flower is to be mixed
with them. And when you will more resolve than mature, ye flower of Barley bread
mixed with them is of ye mean operation between ryping and resolving. The
fatter the fig is, the more it does mature or ripe. The sharper and heatter,
the more it does resolve. The green Fygge, by reason of the superfluous
moystures, is weaker than the dry Fygge, but both do laxe the belly. Fygges
decocted to the thickness and substance of bonny are of the same virtue that
Honny is, the fig decocted with Isope purge the Breast, and is good against
long and cold coughes, and diseases of the Loonges.

Moscus, Musk.
Musk is pleasaunce in savor, it comfort both the brain, and the heart.

Acanthus, Branca vrsina vulgo. Bears Breeche.
THe leaves be resolutiue, the root is inscissiue and of subtle substance,
and provoke vryne.

Arcion, Personatia, Lappa vulgo.
the Burre.

THis is resolutiue and dry with a certain bynding, wherefore it is good
against old ulcers and soars.

Sycomorus, The Sycomore.
THe fruit of this tree is of little nourishment, and evil for the stomach:
the licour and Juice of the tree is mollitiue and resolutiue of swellings, and
heals wounds: it consumes also the hardness of the spleen.

Muria, Brine.
THis is a kind of bryne, which is abstersive, and is used against corrupt
ulcers of the bowels, ministered in glysters.

Mariscus, A kind of Bulrushes.
THis herb is abstersive, and attractiue^ the root moves vomittes, and
heals great wounds of the synewes, and cords.

Lilium, the Lilly*
THe flouer of the Lilly is abstersive, mollitiue, and sanatiue. The Oil of ye
said Lilly is resolutiue, and mollitiue. The leaf abstersive, and sanatyue.
The root abstersive, resolutiue, and consolidatiue.

Seseli massiliense, Siler montanum. Siler mountain.
THe root and seed of this herb provoke vryne, and the monthly course in
women: it is of such subtilty that it heals the falling sickness, and the
shortness and difficulty of wind or breathing.

Rapum The Turnep.
THe seed of the Turnep is very wholesome, and moves Just and courage: the
root is hard to be disgested, windy, and increases seed or nature. eaten in
excess, it breeds crude and gross humors.

Rapum Agreste, Rampions.
THe seed of Rampions is abstersive, and mixed with the flower of the Lupyne,
or Wheat, or Tare does cleanse the Face and the rest of the body: the root is
commonly used in sallettes, more of use than of sufficient Aucthority.

Bounias Napum, the Rape, or nanese.
THe root boiled, does inflate and nourishe less than the Turnep: the seed
is is good against all venym and poison, for if it be drunk it makes the
venym to take none efficacy.

Lewcoyon, keiri, The wall Geloflouers.
OF these Geloflowers be three kinds: yellowe, white, and blewe: the yellow is
of more virtue, they be abstersive, resolutyue, and subtle: they provoke the
monthly course in women, and resolve swellings.

Asphodelus, Albucum, Daffadill.
THis herb is abstersive, resolutyue, and provoke the monthly course in
Women. The ashes of this herb are hoarter and dryer than ye bearbe it self.
And therefore it heals a Disease in the head called Alopecia.

Scilla, Squilla, Squilles.
THe squill is inscissiue of gross humors, and specially in the Breast: it is
better boiled, or roasted, than raw.

Cici, Ricinus, Kerua, palma Christi, Tyke Seed.
THe seed and leaves of this herb be abstersive, and resolutiue. The Oil
of the Seed called Oleum Cicinum, or Oleum de Kerua, is more hoatter and more
subtle tha^ the oil Olyue, and therefore more resolves: the seed purges
choler and fleagme downewarde, and provoke also to vomit.

Pix Sicca, Pitche.
PItche is abstersive, maturatyue, and resolutiue: it is more dry than hoate,
and heals wounds.

Pix liquida, Tar.
THis is also abstersive, maturatiue, and resolutiue of hard swellings: it is
more ^oate than dry, and is also subtle: good for them that be short breathed,
and do void corrupt and matterishe humors out of the (...)reaste.

Mirra, Mirre.
THis is the Gum of a tree that grows in Arabia: it is abstersive, and
exicratiue: it heals wounds in the head, and ^illeth worms: provoke the
monthly ^ourse in women: is good for the Breast, and ^gaynst the cough.

Mumia, Mumy.
MUmia is not much different from Bitumen Indaicum: For in Syria they
En(...)aulme the corses of dead persons with Bitu(...)en Indaicu^, which
Enbaulming with por(...)ions of the dead Bodies is brought from (...)ence, and
is called Mumia: it is used against (...)uses, as well of the inward parts, as
of (...) outward.

Eruca, Rocket.
ROcket is so hot that it is not commo^^ eaten, without it be mingled with
L(...)tice leaves: it is thought to increase na^u(...) or seed, and provoke
just: it makes ye (...) to ache, if it be eaten alone: the seed prou(...)keth
vryne: the wild Rocket is strong(...) than the Rocket of the Gardein.

Huscus, Bruscus,
Butchers broom.

THe leaves and fruit be drunk to prouo(...) urine, and the monthly course
in woe(...) and to break the stone. The root decoc(...) is of the same virtue.

Tussilago, Farfara, Ungula caballina.
Coltes foot.

THe fume of the leaves and root of fol(...) foot dried and taken by the
mouth, heal(...)eth the coughe, and straightnes of wind: th(...) leaves green
and made in plasters beal(...) hoate inflammations, and swellings that (...)
hard to mature and ripe.

Artemisia, Motherworte.
BOth kinds of mother worte be of subtle substance: they break the stone in
the (...)ydnies, used both in fomentations to the Belly, and taken by ye mouth,
they provoke ^he monthly course in Women.

MEDICINES hot and dry in the third degree.
IRIS. The Flower deluce.
THe flower deluce is subtle, abstersive, maturatiue, and purges gross
humors that be in the breast: provoke ye monthly course in women: mundifieth
filthy and unclean soars with water and honny: it laxeth the belly, and
purges gross and choleric humors, and also humors thath be waterishe.

Meoum, Mewe.
THe root of this hear be is dry in the second degree: it provoke urine, and
the monthly course in women: it is windy, and therefore taken in excess, it
causes ye head to Ache.

Laserpitium, Assa, Assa faetida vulgo.
THis tree grows in Syria, and Armenia, The lyquor or gu^me of this tree
which is thought to be our Beniemin: it is attractiue, abstersive, and
consumes superfluous flesh: it is good for the breaste and liver, and
provoke the monthly course in women: the gum is sweet of odoure.
Assaf(...)d^ which is described of the Arabikes, is displeasaunte in smell, and
not mentioned of ye Greeks.

Parthenium, Amaracus, Matricaria,
Fetherfewe.

FEtherfewe purges Fleagme, and Melancholy: and is good for the shortness of
wind, and against the stone: and is used in Baynes and fomentations against
hard swellings, and in Posthumations in the secret parts of Women
Dioscorides calls it Parthenium, Galen Amaracus, Serapion Matricaria.

Anisum, Anise.
ANise seed is resolutyue: it provoke vryne, and consumes wind in ye
belly: and provoke lust and courage: and increases Milk.

Asarum, Assarabacca, Foales foot.
THe roots of Assarabacca be abstersive, and resolutiue: they provoke vryne,
and the monthly course in women: healpe the spleen which is hard and endured:
are good against Dropsies and Sciatikaes: the leaves provoke to vomit.

Sauina, Sauen.
SAuen is subtle, resolutyue, and abstersive: it provoke the monthly course
in in women, and vehement'y moves vryne, and (...)ifleth corrupted bicers and
loares.

Epithinnum, Moss growing about Time.
EPithinuum purges fleagme and melancholy: it healpeth such persons as be
Melancholious, and windy: the quantity of it at the most is four drammes.

Polypodium. Fern of the Oak.
POlypodie purges fleagme, and Melancholy.

Panis porcinus, Malum terrae,
Sowebread.

THis herb is abstersive, attractyue, inscissiue, and resolutiue: it opens
ye veins that be in the fundame^t called hemeroydes, and provoke the
monthly course in women.

Gentiana, Gentian.
GEntian is abstersive, apertiue of the op^lations of the inward parts, with
much efficacy: it is also a remedy against ye stinging or biting of venomous
beasts, if it be drunk with Wine, Pepper, or Rewe.

Dancus, wild Carret.
THere be three kinds of this herb, the chief is Dancus Creticus: the Seed
of every of them provoke vryne, and the monthly course in women.

Cinamomum, Cinnamon.
Cinnamon is of subtle substance, and comfortatiue of the stomach, and
consumes superfluous humors in the same, and keeps it from putrefaction:
provoke vryne, and the monthly course in women: it is thought that we have
not true Cynamon: for that we have is called Cassia Lignea.

Hipericon, Herba perforata. Saint John's worte.
Saint John's worte is subtle, provoke vryne, and the monthly course in
women: this Herb being green is sanatiue of wounds and burninges: dried it
heals moist ulcers and soars.

Ascyron, and Androsaemon. Tutsan.
BOth these herbs be of the kind of Hi* pericon, and in some things of like
virtue: drunken they be very good for the Sciatica, and purge Choler.

Acorus, Hoate Gladen.
BY diverse learned men's judgment the root called Galengale is the true
Acorus: it is subtle and resolutiue, provoke vryne, and healpeth the spleen
that is indurate, and hard: in Baynes it is good for certain secret diseases
in women.

Hyssopus, Isope.
^Sope is subtle, and apertiue: good for old Coughes, and does extenuate
gross humors in the breast, and provoke ye monthly course in women.

Ammoniacum, Gum Armoniake.
TH^s gum does mollify, and resolve hard swellings, and in special the
hardness of ye spleen: also hard and stony matters of substances in ye Joints,
and other parts.

Carduus, Scolimos. The Prickled Artichoake.
THis herb boiled in wine, provoke stinking vryne abundantly: and thereof
it healpeth the strong savor or evil smelling under the Arms, and in all
the body.

Chanelaea Alba, a kind of Spurge.
THis herb is received inward, and the root thereof kills the worms: and
healpeth them that have Dropsies.

Chamelaea Nigra, A less kind of Spurge.
THis herb is not to be taken inwards: it is abstersive, and cures letters,
scabs, and morfewes.

Staphisagria, Stauesagre.
S^auesagre is abstersive, attractiue, and vlceratiue: it heals scabbes, and
purges ye head: if it be chawed or holden in (...) mo^th, it draws fleagme
by the same.

Glans vnguentaria, Granum, Ben.
Mirobalane.

THis fruit grows in Ethyopia, and Egypt: it is inscissiue, abstersive, and
bynding: it purges ye Skyn from tetters, morphewes, scabbes, and such like
passions, provoke vomits, laxeth the belly, and purges opilations of the
Liver and spleen.

Sambucus, Elder.
ELder is resolutiue, and consolidatiue of ulcers and soars: the leaves purge
choler and Fleagme.

Ebulus, Wallworte.
VVAllworte is of the same virtue that Elder is.

Amomnium, The rose of Hierechus,
THis herb is subtle, resolutiue, and provoke vryne: and in special
resolves the spleen indurated: and it provoke the monthly course in women.

Iuniperus, Juniper.
THe Juniper is hot and dry in the third degree: howbeit the fruit of the
same (...) but dry only in the first degree: it provoke vryne, it is good
for the stomach, and (...)reast: it healpeth the cough, and co^sumeth
(...)inde.

Thymus, Time.
^Ime is inscissiue, and mundificatiue of the inward parts: it provoke
vryne, and the monthly course in women: cleanses the breast and loonges,
purges Fleag(...)metike humors downewardes.

Colocinthis, Coloquintida.
COloquintida purges strongely Crude fleagme, and undigested humors.

Tencedanum, Sow fenell.
THis herb is resolutiue, subtle, and inscissiue: good against cold diseases
of the synewes, the breast, and loonges: healpeth the hardness of the spleen,
and the ^^ote heals malicious ulcers.

Cyn^mum, Common.
COmyne is inscissiue: provoke vryne* consumes infla^mations, and wind.

Carpesion, Cububi,
Cububbes, or Goordes.

CUbubbes be abstersive, and mundificatiue of opilations of the inward parte^
provoke vryne, and break the stone in the Kydnies.

Caros, Carum,
Carowayes.

CArowayes ^ee inscissiue, and subtle: goo(...) against the stone, provoke
urine, co^sum(...) infla^mations and wind

A^ium Satinum, Gardeine Smaledge.
THis herb is inscissiue, and subtle: (...) provoke vryne, and the monthly
cour(...) in women: it dissolueth inflammations (...) wind, and specially the
seed of it.

Eleofelinon. Apium Palustre,
wild or water Smaledge.

THis is thought by some men to be wild smaledge, it is of the same virtue
that the other is.

Stachys, Ambrose.
THis Herb is abstersive, inscissiue: it provoke vryne, and the monthly
course in women.

Olusatrinum, Hipposolimon,
Alexanders.

THis root is eaten both raw and sodde: the Leaves and Buddes in like manner
with meat: it provoke vryne, and the monthly course in women: and has the
other properties of Parseley.

Ortoselmon, Straight Parsley.
THe kind of Parsley that grows upon hills and Cony places, provoke urine,
and the monthly course in Women, as Parsley does.

Petroselinon, Parsley*
THe kind of Parsley that is properly c(...) led Petroselinon, grows in the
bills (...) Macedony: it provoke vryne, and the monthly course in women
largely: it consumes wind, and inflations both of the St^macke, and gutte
called Colon, taken wi^^ drink: it eases pains of the Breast, the Kydnies,
and Bladder.

Smyrinum, Black Lonage.
THis herb grows in a hill of Syci(...) called Mons Amanus: it is commonl^
eaten both the leaf and stalk: it prouoket^ vryne, and the monthly course in
Women(...) it heals malicious ulcers and soars.

Capparis, Capers.
THe rynde of the Root of Capers is a^stersiue, mu^dificatiue, inscissiue, and
resolutiue with a certain bynding and astringe^cy, and therefore is good for
the spleen tha^ is indurate: it provoke urine, and the monthly course in
women, heals malitiou^ ulcers and soars: the fruit is of like virtue, but
not of such efficacy.

Bdellinum, Dellium.
THis gum is of a tree that grows in the country of India, and in Arabia:
it (...) mollitiue, and resolutyue of hard and en(...)ured swellings it
breaks the stone: ^^ouoketh vryne, and the monthly course (...) women.

Sampsuchus, Maiorana,
Marierome gentell.

MArierome is subtle, and resolutiue: it provoke urine, and the monthly
course (...) women.

Ami, Ammeos, Amy.
AMmeos is abstersive, resolutiue, and subtle: it provoke vryne, and the
monthly course in women.

Menta, the Mynte.
THe Mynte is abstersive, and bynding: it kills worms, and stops the
spittinge of blood, comfort the stomach, stays ^omiting, provoke lust
and Conrage.

Mentastrum, the wild Mynte*
THe wild mynte is much of ye same virtue, but not so perfect and good to be
(...)sed in health.

Serpillum, Running Time.
RUnning Time is resolutiue, and provoke vryne, and the monthly course (...)
women: decocted with vynegre, and mixe^ with oil of Roses, it eases the
pains (...) the head.

Ruta, Rewe.
REwe is resolutiue, and inscissiue of gross^ humors: it provoke vryne, and
the monthly course in women: dissolueth inflations and wind: extinguisheth
and debateth lust and courage.

Cassia Lignea, Cynamon.
THis is judged to be our Cynamon tha^ we do use: it is inscissiue, and
resolutiue of gross humors of all parts of the body, and comfort the same:
it provoke monthly course in women which be stayed by excess and
grossness of super^^uous humors.

Scamonium, Scamony.
^Camony laxeth the Belly, and purges choler and Fleagme.

Sagapenum, Gu^me serapyne.
THis Gum is of an herb growing in Media: it is subtle, and abstersive: it
^^ndifieth and cleanses the sight that is ^^rkened: it is good against the
Palsy, and (...) cold diseases as come of cold and gross ^^mors.

Silybion, The common Eryngium, or Seaholme.
THe Juice of the root of this herb, with water and honey moves to vomit:
while ^e herb is young and tender, it is eaten ^yth salt and oil.

Lolium, Darnell.
DArnell is abstersive of ye outward parts of the body, from letters, ring
worms, and such like: also good for ^rabbes and vl^^rations: taken inwardes,
says Galende (...)limentis, it makes the head to ache and be as (...) man were
drunk for the space: besides ye (...) increases evil humors

Chelidonium maius, Celondyne.
CElondyne is abstersive: the Juice of the herb cleanses and mu^difieth the
sighte^ which is obscured and darkened by gross h^mors: the root healpeth the
Jaundice, an^ opilations of the Liver.

Chelidonium minus, Figwort.
THis herb is hoatter and sharper tha^ Celondyne, in so much that it does
exulterate the skyn in short space, and purges* head by the nose: it is
counted hoate in the fourth degree.

Raphanus, Radix, Radishe.
RAdishe is resolutiue, and the wild R^dishe is of more strength than the
Ga(...) deyn radishe: it is windy, and not good (...) the stomach: the seed
is of greater effic^cy than the herb: it provoke to vomi^ and also vryne:
the root is commonly ea(...) for Sauce, more than for nourishing.

Panax Heraclium, and Opoponax. Panax, and the Juice.

THe Juice of this herb is called Opoponax, it is resolutiue, and mollitiue,
good against all cold dyleases: the (...)e of the root is abstersive, and
heals malicious ulcers, and ^oares. The Juice and Seed provoke the
monthly course in women: the Juice of it most commonly is called Opoponax.

Panax ascl^pium, The second kind of Panax
THis kind of Panax is not so hot as the kind called Heracl(...): the whole
herb. the flower and seed mixed with hunny, heals ulcers and soars.

Panax chironium, The third kind of Panax.
THis kind of Panax is of ye same virtue and strength, that Panax asclepium
last before spoken, is.

Agnus Castus, Uitex, Chaste tree.
THis tree is subtle, with a certain binding: the seed or fruit of it is
eaten: howbeit, it causes the headache, the said leaves and fruit do
consume wind, does decay lust and courage, both taken inwards and laid
outwardes under the body: it opens opilations of the liver and spleen.

Origanum Organe.
ALl kinds of this herb be subtle, and inscissiue, and provoke the
monthly course in women: and with hunny it healpeth the the coughe: drunk
with wine it resists the biting of venomous beasts.

Tragagorinum, wild Marierome.
THis herb is of the same virtue tha^ Origanum is, and moreover:: t is good
for the stomach that refuses and abhors meat.

Pulegium, Penieroyall.
THis herb is subtle, it purges gro(...) humors and vicious of the breast
and loongs(...) moves the monthly course in Women healpeth the bytinge of
venomous beasts drunk with wine.

Dictamnus, Dittany.
THis herb grows in Creete, and is of the same virtue that Pulegium before
spoken is: but of more efficacy and strength.

Pseudodictamnus, Bastard Dittany.
THis is of the same virtue that Dictamnus is, but of less strength and
efficacy.

Calaminta, Nepeta,
The Calaminte, Neperiall.

BOth the Calamint and Neperiall be subtle, inscissiue, and penetratyue: they
provoke sweats, and dry ye whole body: they provoke the monthly course in
women, purge the breast, and the opilations of the Liver: healpe the Jaundice.

Thymbra, Satureia, Sauery.
SAuery provoke vryne, and the monthly course in women: it purges the
breast of gross humors, and is of the same virtue that time is, but not of
like strength.

Cent aurum maius, Rapontike.
This Herb provoke the mon ethly course in women: it does heal a ud
incoryate wounds: strengthens and comfort the Member also that is wounded:
it healpeth the spitting of blood. Some men judge the toote of this herb to
be yt which we call Ra Pon^^cum.

Centaurum minus, Centory.
THe root of Centory is of no strength ne virtue: the leaves and Flowers be
abstersive, and exiccatiue: they heal great wou^des, soars, and ulcers: purge
opilations of the iyuer, healpe the spleen endured, provoke the monthly course
in women.

Cardamomum Graecorum, Cardumenum, Greekishe Graynes.
THis seed is brought from India, and Armenia: it is good against all cold
diseases of ye sinews, it kills worms, with vryne it heals scabbes. This
Cardamomu^ is called of the Arabikes Cardamenum, and is a thing much different
from that they call Cardamomum, which is hoate and dry in the first degree.

Abrotanum. Sothernewoode.
THere be two kinds of it, both be resolutiue, and inscissiue, in so much
that the Flowers boiled in oil and anointed on the body, take away the cold
and shyuering in fevers: they move the monthly course in women, and kill
worms.

Costus. Cost mary.
THis herb is abstersive, and attractiue: good accaynst the Palsy and cold
shiuerings in fevers, kills worms, provoke vryne and the monthly course
in weome^, mooneth to lust and courage drunk and taken with wine and hunny.

Gariophillon, The Cloue.
Cloves be comfortatyue of the stomach and liver: do stay vomitting and cause
the body to smell sweet.

Galbanum, Galban.
THis gum is brought out of Syria, it is resolutiue and mollitiue: the smell
of it reuiueth and stirs them that have ye falling evil: and women that be
in the passion called the mother.

Coccus, Granum tinctoru^, Charms,
Grain to dye withal.

Grain is astringent and binding: it heals great wounds, and pearsing of the
sinews, anointed with vinegar and hunny.

Betonica, Betony
BEtony is inscissiue, and abstersive: it breaks the stone, purges the
Breast, the Loonges, and the Liver, provoke vryne, and the monthly course in
Women, healpeth them that have the fallinge sickness: made in playsters, it
healpeth the biting of venomous beasts.

Ston, Berula,
Bilders, or Belragges.

BIlders is resolutiue, provoke vryne. and the monthly course in women, and
breaks also the stone.

Feniculum, Fenell.
ALlthough Fenell be hot in the third degree, it is dry in the first, and
therefore (...)increases Milk: it is good for the eyes, (...)ouoketh vryne,
and the monthly course (...) women.

Feniculum Agreste, wild Fenell.
THis fenell is of the same virtue and power that the Gardein fenell is, only
except that it is much drier, and therefore it rather (...)cayeth milk, than
increases it.

Anethum, Dill.
^Ill is resolutiue, and maturatiue: it cease pains, and provoke vryne:
burned (...) bealeth moist ulcers and soars, and speci^lly such as be in the
secret parts: decorted and boiled in oil, it resolves, matureth, and
(...)ypeth crude swellings, cease pains, and (...)rouoketh sleep.

Ros marinus, Libanotis,
Rosemary.

ROsemary is abstersive, mollificative, inscissiue, and resolutiue: ye
decoction of it helps the Jaundice: moves vryne, and provoke the monthly
course in women.

Nigella, Melanthium, Herb Git.
NIgella is abstersive, and inscissiue, and subtle: the smell of it healpeth
Catarres, and cold rhe^mes of the beade: it kills worms, and healpeth the
shortents of wind: provoke vryne, and the monthly course in women.

Turbith, Turpetum, Turbit.
THis root is laxatiue, and purges fleagme that is gross, from the extreme
parts: howbeit if it be not corrected with Ginger and things Aromaticall,
which he comfortatiue of the Stomach, it purges paynefully, and troubles the
stomach.

Scordium, T^ixago palustris. water Germander.
THis herb purges and mundifieth the inward parts: it provoke vryne, and
the monthly course in Women, drunk it auayseth against all cold diseases.
Being green it heals great wounds: being dried it heals ulcers and
soars. Decocted in wine it healpeth against the biting of venomous serpents.

Galanga, Galengale.
THis root is good for the stomach, and consumes cold humors in the same:
it healpeth digestion: and increases se^^e of generation. These properties be
not found in the root we call commonly Galengale, the which should have
these propertyes. Wherefore it is thought that we lack the true Galengale, and
that which we do now call Galengale to be the Root of Acorus after this
description, as it is spoken of before in the Chapter of Acorus.

Helleborus Niger, veratrum Nigrum,
Bearefoate.

THis herb is thought to be a common herb growinge here in England called
setterworte, or long worte: it is abstersive, purges melancholy down ward,
mu^difieth the outward parts from scabbes, ringwormes, tetters, and such like
infirmities of the Skyn.

Helleborus Albus, Ueratrum Albu^,
White Neese woorte.

HElleborus albus, is much of the same virtue, and purges gross humors by
vomit, and downewardes also.

Laurus, the Bay tree.
THe Leaves and Berries of the Bay tree be resolueiue: but the Berry is of more
efficacy and strength: the rynde of the root does break the stone, and is
good for the Liver, good for shortness of wind and rhewmes that fall to the
breast.

Laurus Alexandrina. The Bay of Alexandria.
THis herb provoke vryue, and the mouethly course in women.

Laureola, Laurel.
^Aurell is of the some virtue ye Laurus Alexandrina is, and besides that
moves (...) vomit, and purges fleagme downwards,

Chamaedaphnis, Peruincle.
CHamaedaphnis is of the same power ye Laurus Alexandrina is.

Doronicum, Cummyne of Ethyope.
THis is a certain Root Aromaticall, good for the stomach and the heart: good
against pains and griefs that come of gross ^yndes, and inflations.

Uitis Alba, Brionie.
THe Root and Fruit of Brionie is abstersive, and resolutiue: it cleanses
the Skin from scabbes, and Leaprosies, it provoke vryne, and helps the
Spleen that is endured: the tender croppes of it are ea^en in the spring of the
year in Sallets, and ^ee good for the stomach.

Uitis Nigra, Downie vine.
This kind of vine is of the same vert(...) ye Brionia before spoken is in all
things, but yt it is somewhat weaker in operation.

Uitis Siluestris. wild vine.
THis Uyne is different (...) nature much from Labrusca, for it is hoate and
dry(...) if it be decocted or boil(...) in wine, or condite with (...)ter of ye
Sea, it purget^ waterish humors, and is given to them th(...) have the Dropsy:
the fruit purges t(...) skyn from sun burning, and other disco^^ loring:
the tender croppes of it be reseru(...) in salt and bryne, and eaten.

Zinziber, Ginger.
GInger does not heat so soon(...) Peper, by reason yt his substan(...) is
grosser: it is good for the col(...) stomach, healpeth concoction(...) loses
the belly: it purges the eyes, and is almost of the same virtue that Pepper
is: it provoke lust and courage after Auicen.

Uerbascum. Tapsus Barbatus.
Molen.

ALl kinds of Molen be abstersive and dry, and good for passions that be
rhewmatike.

Uerbenica, Veruayne.
BOth kinds of Ueruayne be so dryinge and byndinge, that they heal wounds,
and stay blood.

Sisimbrion vtrnnque. water Myntes, and red Myntes.
THere be two kinds of Sisimbrion, the one is a kind of wild Myntes, the
other is our water Cressis, which is hoate and provoke vryne.

Sandix, Corn Cheruell.
THis Herb provoke vryne, and open(...) opilations of the inward parts.

MEDICINES hot and dry in the fourth degree.
Ruta agrestis, Harmell, wild Rewe.
THis Herb is subtle, inscissi(...) and resolutiue of gross humor(...) it
provoke vryne, and the m^nethly course in women.

Euphorbium, Euphorbe.
THis Gum is brought from Lybia: is very subtle, and is good against cold
diseases, as Palsies, and such like.

Cepa, The Onion.
THe Onion is abstersive, and apertyue of the veins that be in the fundament
called Emeroides: if they be eaten they inge^der inflations and wind, and
increase evil humors: if they be boiled, they be of less hurt.

Bulbus Cibarius, The best Hyacinth.
THis Herb eaten engenders evil humors, and wind: how be it, it moves
appetite: purges the Breaste, provoke lust and courage.

Bulbus vomitorius. The vomitinge Hyacinth.
THis kind of Bulbus is hoater than ye kind before spoken of, called Bulbus
^ibarius, and provoke vomit.

Anacardium. Heart berries.
THis fruit grows in Cycill, and Apulia: it sharpneth the sight, and
restores the memory.

Erysimon, Irio,
wild Rocket winter Cresses.

VVIlde Rocket purges the breast, an^ the loonges of gross humors: if (...)
be steeped in water and then corified it (...) of more efficacy.

Allium, Garlic.
Garlic is inscissiue of gro(...) humors, apertiue of opilatio(...) it
consumes wind, and kyleth worms, how be it (...) much use of it engenders
e(...) humors, and hurts them that be of ho(...) Complexions: and hurts
the eye sigh^

Nastur^ium, Cresses.
CRresses be inscissiue, and good against the Sciatica, and all disseases: for
they be in manner as hot as mustard seed: they help the shortness of the
wind that comes of gross humors: the herb dried is of like strength as ye
seed is, but green it is wea^^er: it kills worms, and provoke lust and
courage.

Elenium, Enula Campana. Elecampane.
THis herb purges the breast of gross humors: moves vryne, and the
monthly course in women: it is good for the Scitica, and all cold diseases,
for it is rubificatyue, and exulceratiue.

Thapsia, Thapfene.
THis herb is resolutiue, and attractiue from the deep parts of the body^it
purges the breast and loongs of gross humors: and is good against all cold
diseases, as ^ciatica, the ache of the head that commet^ of cold humors, for
it is exulceratyue.

Thalspi, Triacle mustard.
THis hea^be is subtle, breaks swelling and Impostumations within the body
provoke the monthly course in women in glisters it healpeth the Sciatica: it
purges choler vpwardes, and down wards.

Arabis, Nasturtium Orientale, Cresses of India.
THe seed of this herb is used in Cappadocia with meat in stead of Peppe^*

Tithymall^ genera, Herbae! lactariae genera. Characias, Myrtites, Paralius,
Hetrosc^pius, Cyparissus, Dendroides, Platiphy^los, The kinds of Spurge.
There be vij kinds of Cithymall: (...) be avster sieve, inscissiue, and of
like verta^ The lyquor of them is strongest, next is the (...)eede, then the
leaves, of less strength is ye (...)oote: boiled in vyneger it does healpe the
(...)oothache: and so does the lyquor. The lyquor also takes away hair: ^ut
because it is exulceratiue, it must be mixed with Oil, ye ^yquor also takes
away Warts, and tetters: and purges choler and Fleagme downewardes: but with
^unny and water it pro^oketh vomit.

Porrum, The Leeke.
THe Leeke is subtle and inscissiue: it provoke vryne, and the monthly
course in women. If it be much used for nourishing it increases evil humors:
provoke lust and Courage.

Ampel^ Prason, wild Leeke.
THis wild leeke that grows in vynebardes, is evil for the stomach,
inscissiue, and apertyue of opilations: it proud^oketh vryne, and the monthly
course in women.

Struthion, Condisi, Angelica.
THe root of this hea^he is a^ster sieve, and inscissiue: it moves vryne, and
is goo^ for the breaste, and provoke sweating.

Chamelaea. Theophrastus Rosemary.
CHamelaea is abstersive, and mundificati^^ with hunny of unclean and filthy
soars it purges also choler and fleagme.

Lathyris, Cataputia vulg^: Spurge.
SPurge is inscissiue, and abstersive: the seed of it purges choler and
fleagme, and provoke to vomit.

Pirethrum, Pellitory of Spain.
THe root of this herb is hot, dry, a(...) burning: chawed and masticated,
it dra^eth fleagme largely from the head: decoted or boiled in vinegar it
healpeth ye toothache that comes of cold humors: made into an Ointment with
Oil, it provoke sweat, and eases the coldenesse that comes with long
Feauers: healpeth also all ^olde dyseases, as Palsies, and such like.

Piper, Longum, The three kinds of Pepper. Album, Nigrum,
ALl kinds of Pepper be good for ye cold stomach, and help co^c^^tion: are
good against all cold Passions of all the inward and outward parts: the root
of the Pepper is abstersive, and Attrac^yue.

Sapo, Soap,
SOye is abstersive, attractyue, and vlceratyue.

Cedru^, and Cedrea. The Gum of the Ceder tree.
THe Gum of the Cedar tree, is putrificatiue, and adustiue: it healpeth and
eases the payues of the Teeth, and if the Tooth be hollow it breaks the
same: it kills all vermyne or worms within the body: the Oil and v^ciiouse
part of this Gum is more temperate than the Dragges and gross part of it
is, for the gross part does exalcerate, the other does ory and heal. The tree
is but hoate in the third degree.

Cinis, Ashes.
THe substance of Ashes contains in it two parts, the one is subtle and
fiery, which when the Ashes be steeped in water remains in the Lee: the other
is the earthly part which discendeth to the bottom. All Ashes be not of one
virtue: for some be stiptike and bynding, some burning as the Ashes of the
Fygge tree, and of the Tithymall.

Lepidium, Bastard Dittany.
THis Herb is of the same virtue tha^ Cresses are, and also does vlcerate,
an^ therefore it is good for the sciatica.

Pi^ynsa, Esula vulgo. Lintspourge.
THis hear^e is of the same virtue that ye kinds of Cithymalles are, and it
lax^th the Belly.

Sinapium, Mustarde.
MUstarde is Attractyue: it provoke sneesinge, and purges the head: it is
good against all cold passions of the belly.

Batrachium, Rannuculus, Apium risus, Crowefoote.
ALI kinds of Crowfoote be so hot, that they exulcerate, and excoriate: they
be ^bstersine, and resolutyue: the root dried provoke sueesing.

MEDICINES hot and moiste in the first degree.
Borago, Buglossa Graecorum, Borage.
BUrrage leaves in Wine incrase ^yrth: d^cocted in Hunny, and Water healpe the
roughness and asperity of the Chroate.

Satyrion, Testiculus vulpis vulg^. Lady Traces.
THis Herb is sweet, and has a supersluous moystnesse in it, wherefore
(...) provoke lust, and courage: the root is (...) the same virtue.

Satyrion Rubeum, Another kind with red flowers.
OF this kind of Satyrion speaks Dioscorides, and Pliny: it has the
prop(...)ty to provoke lust and courage, more stronger than the other before
spoken of.

Orchis, Testiculus Ca^is. Dogstones.
This Herb has two Roots, the bigger is hoate and moist, and full of
h^midite, which provoke lust and courag^ more stronger than the other before
spoken of.

Orchis Serapia^. Three stoned Orchis.
THis Herb is dryer than Testiculus Canis before spoken of: and therefore
does not a like provoke lust and courage: it is resolutiue, and mundificatiue
of filthy ulcers and soars. And the more effectually if it ^ee dried.

MEDICINES hot and moiste in the second degree.
Beheu^, Album, Herb Tunicle. Rubrum,
THere be two kinds of this root the one is red, the other is white: they be
brought from Armenia: they do Engender or increase Seed or Nature: they do
comfort the heart, and healpe trembling of the same. Serapion judges them to
be hot and moist, and Auicen hot and dry.

Lingua auis, Kitkeies.
THis is judged after the description of Serapion to be the A she keys: they
increase nature or seed, and provoke lust, and comfort the heart.

Nux Indica, The Nut of India.
THis fruit is of subtle nature and little nourishing, and heavy to the
stomach: it increases lust and Courage: the Oil of it is good for the
Emeroides, and kills little worms in the fundament.

MEDICINES Cold and Dry in the first degree.
Mirtus, and Mirtidanum, The Myrtle tree.
THis tree, and every part of it is strictiue, and bynding: it stays all
fluxes both inwardly taken and outwardly, of blood, as of other humors:
Mirtidanum is a certain substance that grows upon ye Myrtle tree, it is
drier and more byndinge or strictiue than the Myrtle tree.

Muscus, Usnea, Moss.
THis is the Moss that grows upon the Ceder tree, the Pyne tree, the white
Popler tree, and the Oak tree: but that which grows upon the Ceder tree is
of most efficacy, for it is strictiue, and with all resolutiue, and mollityue.

Aster Atticus, Herba Iuginalis, Grineworte.
THis herb is bynding, and resolutyue: it is specially good against swellings
in the Share or Gryne.

Quercus, The Oak tree.
ALl parts of the Oak tree be stryctiue and byndinge, but the Inner Bark and
Cup of the Acorne more than the other parts: it healpeth the spitting of
blood, and the flut in women, and old rhewmes of the stomach: the Leaves
green heal green wounds. The Acorne is of great nourishing, but it is hard
to be disgested, and enge^dreth gross humors: the Cup of the Acorn is very
bynding and strictiue.

Glans Castanea, The Chestnut.
THe Chestnut is of the same virtue that the Acorne is, but of better
nourishment: both kinds do increase the headache.

Fagus, and Ilex. The Beeche, and the Ilex tree.
THese trees be of the same virtue yt the Oak tree is. The rynde of the Root
of the tree called Ilex, boiled in Water and mixed with an herb called Cimola
colors the hair black.

Spina Alba, Bedeguards, Hawthorne.
THe Root of this herb is Strictiue, and bynding. Wherefore it healpeth
weak Stomachs: it staieth also spitting of blood, and the increase of
swellings: the decoction of it healpeth the toothathe: the Seed is subtle,
and hoate, and therefore drunk it healpeth the crampes, and the by^ing of
venomous serpents.

Coralium, Rubrum, All kinds of Coral. Album, N^grum,
ALl the kinds of Coral be abstersive, and bynding: good against the bloody
flux, and spitting of blood: the red Coral is of most efficacy.

Papyrus, Herb Paper.
PApyrus grows in the Water of Nyle, ten Cubits high: of this, Antiquity
made their Paper: the use in Physic of it was to keep Fistulas open: the
Ashes of it with vyneger or wine heals green ulcers and soars.

Milium, Milium Romanum vulgo. Millet.
THis kind of corn is of little nourishing: it stays the flux of the belly,
and provoke vryne: tor^ified and put into bags or Playsters, it eases
torsions and pains of gross humors and wind.

Panicum, Panike.
THis Corn is of the same virtue yt Milium is, but of less nourishing: it
stays rhewmes falling into the stomach: made in playsters, it does dry and
cool the outward parts.

Oxisthoemus, A kind of Bullrushe.
THis is a certain Junke or Rushe which grows in waterish places. The seeds
of all kinds of it fried and drunk with wine stop the flux of the Belly,
and the red Fiuxe in women. How be it they make th(...) the Head to Ache, and
procure overmuch sleep.

Ulmus, The Elm tree.
THe leaves of the Elm tree be binding, and abstersive, so that they heal a
green wound. The Rynde is so abstersive, that it heals and purges with
vyneger the rough and Leaprouse Skin, and heals also wounds. The Root is
of the same virtue in so much that it is used to join and fasten bones that
are broken, Dioscorides says, that the gross rynde of it with minte, purges
Fleagme.

Dipsacus, Labrum veneris, Tasill.
THe Tasill is dry in the second degree: it is also abstersive, the root
boiled with wine, heals the fistula in the Fundame^t, and choppes or ryuings
in the same part.

Mirobalani. Citrini, Indi, Kebuli, Eniblici, Bellirici. The kinds of
Mirobalans.
THese five kinds of Mirobalans be testringent, and something tarte.
Wherefore they all comfort the stomach. The Citryue purge choler. The Indi
purge Melancholy, and Choler adust. Rebuli purg(...) Melancholy. Enib^^ci
purge fleagme, an(...) refresh the Wit. Bellitici purge fleagm(...) also, and
refreshe the Wit and Brain Co^dite they be more delycate, and of no less
virtue.

MEDICINES Cold and Dry in the first degree.
MESPILVS, Medlers.
THis Fruit is tarte and bynding, and g(...) for the Stomach, and stop the
Fl(...) of the Belly.

Epimelis. Another kind of Medlers.
THis kind of Medler is stiptike and bynding: hard to be digested and good
for the stomach: it eugendreth also the head^che.

Rosa, Rosa Damascena. The Rose.
THe Rose is stiptike, and somewhat resolutyue, and specially good against al
hot inflammations, and swellings, in their beginning, and their augmente or
increase. The yellowe Flower of it is more bynding, and more dryer. The
Arabikes do ascribe to the Juice of the Rose, power and virtue to laxe the
Belly. The Damask rose is esteemed to be the more perfect and better smell.

Sorba, The seruis
SEruises be bynding, and good for ye flure of the Belly, and be not much to
be eaten, but rather as a medecyne than a nourishment.

Ligustrum, Alcanna. Pryuet.
PRyuet is bynding, and resolutyue: good for burning of the fire, and hoate
(...)smations and swellings: it heals vlcerations of the Mouth that often
hap i(...) Children.

Lapathum satinum, Rumex, Patience.
THe root of this breaks the stone, and moves the monthly course in
women(...) the hoate herb is resolutiue. The seed i(...) bynding, and stays
all manner of fluxes.

Oxilapathum, Acetosa vulgo. Sorrel.
Sorrel is resolutyue, and repercussyue (...) the seed is tarte and binding,
so that i(...) heals the Flux of the belly more than th(...) seed of
Patience: the Root breaks th(...) stone: heals the Jaundice, and provoke
the monthly course in women.

Hippolapathum, Lapathumpalustre, The water Docke.
THe water docke, is of the same virtue (...) Patience and Sorrel be, but
mor(...) weaker.

Lapathum Agresto The common Docke.
THe Docke root boiled in vyneger or wine, and also the decoction of it warm
holden in the mouth, fasteneth the teeth, and ^aseth the pains of the same.
The root heals the Jaundice, and moves the monthly course in women.

Tribulus, Terrestris, Aquaticus. The land, and water Briar.
BOth kinds of this are repercussiue, and good against hoate inflammations and
swellinge in the beginning, but the kind that is ^alled cerrestris, is more
bynding: and the seed of it breaks the stone.

Lychen, Epatica. Lyuerworte.
LYuerworte besides that it is cold and dry, it is also abstersine: it
avails and is good against hoate swellings: heals Ryngwormes, and tetters,
and stopeth blood.

Pirus, The Pear tree.
THe Leaves and tender Branches be stiptike and bynding, the fruit with
^ar^nes or stipticknesse has (...) certain waterishe sweetness, s^ that it
is of a compounde nature: it is good for the stomach, and stopeth the belly:
debareth the thyrlle: beaten to a Plaster (...) does ory and refrigerate
temperately, in s(...) much that it heals wounds. The wyld^ Pear is of the
same virtue.

Cisthos, Bushsage.
THis plant is Stiptike and byndinge the leaves heal wounds, and the floure^
be of more efficacy, in so much that drunk(...) with wine they cure the bloody
Flux, an^ heal putrified ulcers and soars.

Hypocisthos, The Bushsagemushrum:
THis grows at the root of the plant called Cisthos, and of it is taken and
gathered a certain liquor of the same name, which liquor is more stiptike and
byndinge than Cisthos: it stays all Fluxes and rhewmatike Dispositions into
all parts, and strengthens the part that is with overmuch moystnesse
resolved: it is mixed with Playsters for the Liver and Stomach, for it
comfort the said parts.

Pisum, The Pease.
THe Pease does nourishe, and is of like substance to the Bean, but that i^ is
not so wyndy, neither so abstersive: and therefore it remains longer in the
belly than the Bean.

Palma, The Date tree.
THe Date tree is cold, stiptike, and bynding in all his parts: the fruit is
stiptike, and of temperate heat, comfortatyue to the utter parts in
playsters: and to the inner parts received with other medicines if it be eaten
alone it engenders gross and vicious humors: procures the opilations both of
the Liver and spleen: and makes the Head to ache.

Grameum. The grass called quytche.
THe root of this grass heals green wounds: and the decoction of it
breaks the stone.

Lotus Arbor. The Lote tree.
THis tree is stiptike or bynding, the decoction of the shaving of this tree
stays the flux of the belly, the bloody flux, the flux in women: and
fasteneth the hair that falls.

Trages, Spelta vulgo, Spelt.
THis kind of Corn is hard to be conco(...) ted and altered, it makethe the
belly soluble.

Zea, Beerebarly.
THis kind of corn nourishes less tha(...) wheat, and more than Barley.

Rubus, The Bryer.
THe leaves and huds o^ this bryer are stiptike or binding, they heal
^lceration(...) in the mouth, and also wounds. The fruit being type is not so
tarte and stiptike, for it is some what sweet, and therefore it is eaten:
howbeit before that it is ripe, it is tarte and stiptike, and so are the
flowers: both stop all kinds of fluxes: and the root breaks the stone.

Sentis, Cinosbatus, Rosa Canina. Hounds brier, or the hippe.
THe fruit and Canes be stiptike or bynding: the ^y^he of the fruit is to be
feared, for it hurts the Wind pype if it be eaten.

Auena, Oats.
THe Ote after Galen is no nourishing for men, but for beasts: as a medicine
it is of the same virtue that Barley is: for in plasters it dries, and
resolves with a certain bynding, whereby it stays the flux of the belly:
after Dioscorides it healpeth the cough.

Arbutus, The Wilding, or Crab tree.
THis tree and the fruit of it be stiptike or bynding: the fruit is evil for
the Stomach, and the head.

Arundo, Carna vulgo. A Reed.
THere be diverse kinds of Canes or Reeds, only the kind called Phargnutes
or Uallaris is used in physic, where of the root is attractyue, and
abstersive, and the green leaves heal hot inflammations, and swellings. The
Ashes of the Rynd(...) be stiptike and ^oate in the third degree, and ^eale
the disease of the Head called Alopecia.

Malum Punic(...), Malum Granatum. The Pomegranate.
ALl kinds of the Pomegranate be good for the Stomach, although they be
o(...) little nourishment: but the sweet is to b(...) for borne in Fevers:
they that be sharp i(...) taste be good for the whole Stomach: the mean
betwixt the sweet and the sharp, which is of the taste of (...)ine is of a
mean virtue and nature betwixt them both: the Juice that is expressed out of
the graynes, and specially of that kind which is sharp, mixed with hunny,
consumes superfluous flesh in the nost^ils. The grain dryes and beaten to
powder, stays and dries rhewmes failing into the stomach and belly.

Citimus and Malicorium, The flower dried of the Pomegranate.
BOth the Flower and Rind of the Pomegranate be bynding, and of more efficacy
than the graynes. The Flowers do glutinate and heal wounds.

Spina rociarrabica, Spina Aegyptia^a. The Arabian thorn.
THis kind of Thorn or Thistle stopeth the Flux in women: and heals ulcers
and Soars.

Ordeum, Barley.
BArley is resolutyue, and abstersive, and of less nourishing than wheat, but
more soluble: the P^isane made of Barley, is moist and abstersive.

Morus, The Mulbery.
THe Mulbery being ripe, is laxatiue: being not ripe, retayneth and stopeth:
the Juice of the ripe is good against vlcerations of the mouth: the rynde of
the root kills the worms: the fruit is lightly corrupted in the stomach if
it be taken after meat, or if the stomach be not clean,

Malum Cotoneum, The Quince.
THe Quince is byndinge, and comfort both the stomach and Liver: it stopeth
the Flux of the belly, and all other Fluxes.

Acetum, Vyneger.
VYneger is cold in the first degree, but dry in the third: it is penetratiue
and inscissiue: it has mixed a certain hoate substance with the cold: it
represseth hoate inflammations and swellings: and mixed with other convenient
medicines, heals ulcers, and soars.

Xyloracta, Ceratia, Cod tree, or Horn cod tree.
THis Fruicte is tarte with a certain sweetness: whiles the fruit is green
it laxe the Belly, when it is dried, it byndeth: the humors yt come of it be
evil.

Salix, The Willowe or Sallowe.
THe Willowe leaves dry and be astringent, and heal green wounds: the Flower
and rynde be of the same virtue and power: but the rynde is of more efficacy:
the Ashes of ye rind steeped in sharp vyneger, consumes warts and Corns.

Hippuris, Equisetum, Horse tail.
THis herb is stiptike or byndiog, with bitterness: therefore it dries
strongly without sharpness or bytings, and heals great wounds and sinews
that be cut: it is good against ye coughing of blood. and all Fluxes.

Colla, Glutinum ^aurinum, Common Glue.
THis is much like to the paynters Syse, but that it is made of ye heads of
bulls: if it be dissolved in vyneger it takes away ring worms, and
Leaprosies of the Skin: anointed with water upon any part that is burned, the
part shall not bladder: mixwith Hunny and vyneger it is good to heal wounds.

Colla, Glutinum ex Polline. Paste.
THis is our Paste, which is made of the finest Flower an^ Water boiled
together: it is emplastike or clea(...) to the parts that it is put unto, and
also maturatyue.

Ich^hiocalla, Glutinum piscium. Mouth Glewe.
THis is made of the Bellies of certain great and clammy fishes: it is good
for playsters that be used to the head: it takes away the toughness of the
Skyn, and makes it fair and smoothe.

Tragachantha, Dragagantum vulgo. Gum Dragagant.
THis g^mme is of very gummy and cleauinge substance: mixed with medicines that
be hoate and biting, it tempereth the Actimony and sharpness of them: it is
good for the Coughe, and asperity of the wind Pype: it is also good against
vlcerations,

Gummi Arabicum. Gum Arbike.
Gum Arabike is much of ye same virtue, that gum Tragagante is: tempereth
the sharpness and acrimony of hot medicines, and does smoothe parts that be
asperate.

Uitis vinifera, The vine tree.
THe Ieaues be stiptike or byuding: the Juice of them helps the bloody flux,
and spitting of blood, and are good for the stomach that does not retain
meat, and also helps the corrupt Appetites and desires of strange and
diverse things, that do happen to women with child. The gu^me of the vine
tree is hoate, inscissiue, and a(...)ersiue, and drunk with Wine breaks the
stone: anointed, it mu^difieth the skyn from ring worms, ^etters, and such
like.

Oenanthe, Labrusca. The flower of the wild vine.
THe wild Uyne differs in nothing from the Gardein vine, but only in
Cultures: the leaves and branches be of like virtue that the gardein vine is.
The Flower of this vine, called Denanthe, is cold and dry in the second
degree: it is stiptike or bynding, confortatiue of the stomach: good against
inflammations and hot swellings in wounds, and against fistulae; in the eyes,
in the beginning of them: and also against vlcerations in the mouth, and the
secret parts, mixed with Hunny, Saffro^, Myrre, and oil of Roses,

Helxine, Parietaria, Herba vitri. Perietary of the wall.
PErietary of the wall is abstersive and binding, with a certain cold
moistnes: and after Galen is good against hot sweilings, both in their
beginning, and increase. The late practicioners suppose it to be hot and dry,
and use it to resolve wind, and in sackes, or bags to provoke vryne.

Lagopus, Pes Leporis. Harefoote.
THis herb dries thewmes of the belly, and stomach strongly.

Ambrosia, wild Sage.
THis herb is stiptike or byndinge, and repercussiue.

Centunclus, Wertworte, or codweede.
THis herb is stiptike and bynding: and therefore taken with some tarte and
binding wine, healpeth the bloody Flux.

Lupulus, Lupulus Salictarius, The Hoppe.
THe Hoppe, after the Arabikes declineth to coldness: decocted it
extinguisheth ye hoate inflammations: purges choler, and mundifieth the
blood: it is good against hoate inflammations of the stomach, and Liver.

Britannica, Astrology.
THis herb is not certainly known: i^ is stiptike or bynding, and heals
wounds.

Lysimachia, Herb Willowe.
THis herb is stiptike, and heals wounds stopeth blood and the bloody Flux:
spitting of blood, and the Flux in women.

Anchusa, wild Buglosse.
THe root of this herb is stiptike, an^ somewhat abstersyue, wherefore it i^
good for them that be splenetike, and tha^ have diseases in the Rydneyes.

Sonchos, Rostrunum Porcinum. Sowthistell.
ALl kinds of Sowthistell do cool, wit^ a certain bynding, eaten and used
in pla^sters to the stomach.

Senetio, Groundsell.
GRoundsell, besides that it cools, do meanly resolve: kills worms, an
helps them that have an hoate liver.

MEDICINES Cold and Dry in the second degree.
OXYCANTHA, Berberis vulgo. The Barbery, or Piperedge tree.
THe fruit of this tree is stiptike, betwixt moist and dry. Although it be
cold in the second degree, it is not to be taken inwards but to the utter
parts: it does mollify and is repercussiue: and is good against choleric
swellings with oil of Roses or vyneger: it helps the ache of the Joyntes of
hoate humors.

Balaustium. The flower of the wild Pomgranate.
THis is very stiptike or bynding: dried to Powder it heals excoriations, and
vlcerations, and spitting of blood: and is good against the bloody Flux, and
all other Fluxes.

Plantage, Planteyne.
PLanteyne is astringent, and byndinge: good against putrified and malicious
ulcers and soars: against the bloody Flux, and all other Fluxes: the root and
the seed be of the same virtue, and the seed is more subtle. The Leaves,
Root, and Fruit (...) good against o^ilations of the Liver and Kydneis, and
specially the Seed, for it is some what abstersive.

Rhus, Simiake, Curriers berries.
This seed is very stiptike and byndinge in taste, stays the bloody Flux,
and all (...) Fluxes.

Rhamnus, Christ's throne.
THis a certain kind of thorn why(...) heals cholerike inflammations, and
swellings, and vlcerations called herpes which run from place to place.

Solam, Satinum, Solatrum v^lg^. Night shade, or Dawle.
THe Gardein Nightshade is sometym taken with meaces: in Playsters it is good
against hoa^ and cholerike swellings: and against ulcers that spread from
place to place called herpes.

Halicacabus, Uesicaria, Alkakenge, or winter Cherry.
ALkakenge is of the same virtue, and strength that Nightshade is: the fruit
of it provoke vryne.

Solanum Somniferum, Sleepy Dawle.
THis kind grows by the sea side: the weight of a dram of the rynde of it
(...)unke in wine provoke sleep: the seed of it provoke vryne greatly,
and therefore ^ij. berries of the fruit are given against (...)opsies, more
than xij. given, make a man mad. Some think this to be the bearve ^ee call
Dawle, but the description seems not to agree.

Solanum furiosum, Mad Dawle.
THis kind is not to be taken in wards, for it makes a man mad, but in
plai^ers it heals ulcers.

Ribes, Gasell.
THis fruit does refrigerate, and comfort the hot stomach: asswageth thirst:
stopeth ^omits, and the Flux of the belly.

Acacia, The fruit of the Egyptian thorn.
THis Tree grows in Egypt: the tree, the Leaves, and the Juice (...)
st^ptike and byndinge in taste: the Juice is the part most used in ph^ sick:
if it be washed it is cold in the second degree, unwashed in the first: the
Juice (...) good for eyes that be inflamed, and against hoate Choleric
inflammations: it healt^ vlcerations in the mouth, and stopeth a(...) manner of
Fluxes: because we lack the (...) cacia, we use in steed of the Juice of it,
th(...) Juice of Slowes or Bulleis.

Omphacium, Agresta vulgo, Verinice.
THis is the Juice of the wild grape, it cold in the second degree and, dry
in th(...) third, vynding and stiptike: it is good (...) excorfations of the
mouth mixed with bun(...) or'Must: mixed with Upneger, it is good against
cold ulcers and soars, that do ^^te and run from place to place.

Nypmhaea, Nenuphar, The water Lilly.
BOth root and seed of the water Lilly do dry, and stay the rhewmes of the
stomach, and nature or seed that voydeth unwillingly in dreams or other
ways: and also velpe the bloody Flux. That kind which bath the white root
is more stronger: in so much that it stays the Flux in women: both kinds be
abstersive, but the kind which has the black root, is more abstersive.

Phillitis, Lingua Ceruina. Hearts tongue.
THis is thought to be out ^arts tongue: the leaves he druuke in Wine against
the biting of serpents: against the bloody Flux, and other Fluxes.

MEDICINES Cold and Dry in the third degree.
Herba Apollinaris, Iusquiamus vulgo, Henbane.
THe kynee of ^enbane that has the white flower and the white seed is used in
Physic, to cease vehement pains and dystillations of the head, and the eyes:
given in a convenient quantity it provoke sleep, the other kinds are not to
be used, for they be stupefactiue and perilous.

Mandragora, The Mandrake.
THe fruit of the Ma^drake has in it a certain superfluous moystnesse,
whereby it provoke sleep: the rynde of the root is stronger, and also
dries.

Caphura, Camphora, Camphire.
CAmphyre resists hot swellings: and is good against pains of the head that
come of Choleric humors, and abateth lust and courage.

Sandali lutei, Albi, Rubri. The three kinds of Saunders.
SAunders is good for the stomach, head, and liver that be hot: all kinds be
cordialles, but the yellowe is of more virtue.

Cicuta, Hemlocke.
THis Herb taken inwards is perilous: bowbeit with other medicines it is mixed
in playsters to the utter parts, and so used it extinguisheth and debateth
milk: and also does stay the increase of the breasts in virgins and maidens.

Tamarindi, Tamaryndes.
TAmarindes are thought to be a kind of wild Dates that grow in India: they
repress choler, and purge the same, and extinguishe thirstynes.

Sideritis, Wall Sage.
ALl kinds of Sideritis be stiptike and bynding, they heal wounds, stop
blond, the bloody Flux, and the Flux in women.

MEDICINES Cold and dry in the fourth degree.
PAP AVER, Popy. These be the kinds of Popy. Satinum, Erraticum, Siluestre,
Corniculatum, sieve Ceralites, Spumeum, sieve Heracleum.
THe seed of ye guard in Popy provoke sleep meanly, and is good against
the cough, and distillations.

Pa^auer Erraticum, Redcorne Rose.
THis kind of Popy is so strong that no man can use it without danger.

Papauer Siluestre, wild Popy.
THe seed of this kind is medicinal, and specially if it grow in Thebes: the
juice of it is called Opium, and taken in excess it does refrigerate so much,
that it stupifieth, and makes the body without sense or freling: but taken in
a convenient quantity, it does cease pains, and provoke sleep: stays and
engrosseth rhewmes and distillations, the deco^^ion of the leaves, and crops or
heads of all these kynds be employed for a fomentation to the head. The Juice
of this Poppy is called Opium.

Papauer Corniculatum, Yellowe Poppy.
THis kind is inscissiue, and abstersive: the root decocted helps diseases
of the Liver: the leaves and flowers do mundifie filthy, and unclean ulcers
and soars: it is hot in the fourth degree.

Papauer Spumeum, White, or froathy Poppy.
THE Seed of this kind purges Fleagme.

MEDICINES Cold and moist in the first degree.
PRVNA, Prunes, or Damsons.
Damask Prunes be the best: prunes of Spain be next: green Prunes be more
soluble than dried Prunes: the Prune of Spain is more soluble than the Damask
prune: the leaves and Buds of the Prune tree have sensible tartnes, and binding
in taste. Wherefore the decoction of them are good to gargarise for
inflammations of the Junla, and inward parts of the mouth: the wild Prune
byndeth and stays the belly: the gum of ye Prune tree drunk with wine
breaks the stone.

Spinachia, Spinache.
SPinache is abstersive, and lenitiue of the belly: it extinguisheth choler,
and is good for the breast and loonges that be distempered with heat.

Uiola, the Violet.
THe leaves of the violet both alone, and with barley meal, be good against
heat swellings and inflammations: also they be good made in playsters, for the
heat of the stomach, and the Eyes, after Mesue: the Uyolet does laxe and
purge choler: it extinguisheth thrystinesse, is good in hot Fevers, and
against ye cough, and other passions of ye breast, that come with heat: the
flower is used both in syrupes and conserues, and it is of more efficacy than
the herb.

Platanus, The Plane tree:
THe leaves of ye Plane tree, being green and made in playsters, beale
inflammations, and hot swellings in their beginning: the bark and the fruit
are dryer than the leaves: the bark boiled in vyneger, eases the pains of
the Teethe: the fruit mixed with Swynes grease, heals ulcers that come of
brenning.

Scariola, Intubus, Cychorea satiua, Scarill, or gardein Endyue, Cychory of the
gardein.
THe gardein Endyue and Sychory be cold, and moist: the wild be cold, and
dry. The gardein Endyue and Sychory differ not much from the nature of Lettice,
but they be not so pleasant: they be good for ye hot stomach, and the hot
liver, and against all hot inflammations.

Cerasus, The Cherry tree.
OF Cherries, some be sweet, and they be solutiue and not good for the
Stomach: some be tarte in taste, and they be bynding and good for the
stomach: some be sharp in taste, and good for the stomach that is
Fleagmatike and full of superfluous humors. The gum of the Cherry tree is
good for the roughness or asperity of the wind pype, and drunk with wine,
breaks the stone.

Atriplex, Arrege.
ARrege is soluble, good against hoate inflammations and swellings: the seed
purges and mundifieth optiations of the liver, and therefore cures the
Jaundice.

Glycbyriza, Liquirice.
LIquirice extinguisheth thristinesse, le^ifieth and tempereth the roughness
and asperity of the wind pype, and does the sa(...) in the Bladder which is
excoriated.

Beta, The Beete.
THe root is abstersive, resolutiue. and purges the head: it is soluble: but
not good for the stomach.

Malua, The Mallowe.
THe Mallowe is resolutyue, mollitiue, and laxeth the belly: howbeit, it is not
commended for the stomach.

Iuiube, Zizipha, The fruit Iuiubeis.
THis fruit is of little nourishment: hard to digest, and evil for the
stomach.

Blitium, Bleete.
THis herb is commonly eaten: it laxeth the belly, and is of no other use.

MEDICINES Cold and moist in the second degree.
PEPON, The Millian.
THIS Fruit is abstersive, and soluble: it provoke bryne, and the sede of it
more specially: So that it breaks the stone: not wythstanding ye fruit
ingendreth evil humors, and chiefly if it be not well disgested.

Melopepon, The sweet Millian.
THis seems to be of the same kind that the Pepon is, and of less power:
both do provoke urine, and laxe the belly: how be it this is of better
nourishing.

Cucumis, The Cucumber.
THe Cucumber is abstersive, inscissiue, (...) provoke vryne, but not so much
as the Pepon does: it is soon corrupted in ye Stomach as ye Pepon is: if the
seed and Root be dried, they be dry in the first degree, an^ therefore more
abstersive: the seed wyt^ milk is good against the vlcerations o^ the bladder.

Citrullus, Cucumis, Citrimus, The Citrull.
THe Citrull is colder than the Cucumber, and engenders crude and vittou^
humors in the veins, if it be not correcte^ with Ameos.

Lens Palustris, Duckes meat.
THis herb is good against inflamat^ens, and hoate Gowtes, and is repe^
cussyue.

Melon magnus, Melon Saracenicus. The great Millian.
THese seem to be the great Melons that be brought from the new fou^o
lands: they be good for the stomach, and against hot and burning teuers.

Cucurbita, The Gourde.
THe Gourde in Playsters, is good against all hoate inflammations. The Juice of
it with oil of Roses, help(...)th inflammations or pains of the Ears: being
raw or crude, it is evil for the Stomach, and hard to be disgested: but
boiled and decocted, it is not so evil, how be it, it nourishes but little.

Lactuca, Lettuce.
LEttuce is good for the hoate stomach: good against all hoate affectes and
dyseases: it takes away thrystines, and moves to sleep, the seed drunk
retayneth and stays the seed or nature of Men or Women, yt unwillingly
auoydeth either sleeping or waking: of all heat bes it ingendreth the best
humors: yet beware the excess o^ it: the wild Lettuce, which is our wyld^
Endyue, seems to be cold and dry, and is abstetsiue, by reason of that it
is bitter* and of the same virtue that the gardein lettuce is, but of less
efficacy.

Malus Persica, The Peache.
THe leaves of the Peache made in plaster to the Navel, kills worms: the
fruit is good for the stomach: taken before other meats they do not only
l^xe belly, and shortly descend themselves, (...) also give occasion to the
rest shortly to follow. As the ripe laxeth, so the unripe bi^deth.

Contyledon, Umbilicus veneris. Penyworte.
PEnyworte is cold and moist, with a certi^ bynding, and bitterness mixed:
whereby is repercussiue, abstersive, and resolutyue: it is good against hot
and chollerike swellings, and is also good for the heat of the stomach in
playsters.

MEDICINES Cold and moist in the third degree.
PORTVLACA, Purslane.
PUrslane is somewhat tance in taste, and therefore is repercussiue of hot
inflammations or swellings: it extinguisheth intemperate and excessive heat of
the stomach, and chiefly in Fevers hectickes: it helps the teeth that be
edged with eating of sower Fruit: it is also good for the bloody Flux: the
coughing of blood, and specially the Juice of it.

Sedinum, Semperuiuum. Houselike, or Singreene.
BOth kinds be somewhat bynding and astringent: good against all hot and
choleric inflammations and swellings in all parts of the body.

Poligonon, Herba sanguinalis, Centinodium vulgo. Knotgrasse.
KNotgrasse is byndinge: good against all hot diseases of the stomach: good
for ulcers, and soars, and green wounds it stays the bloody Flux, and the
cours^ in women.

Fungi, Musheromes.
THe Musheromes do breed moist an^ Fleagmatike humors: all kinds are t^ be
feared: the best are thought to be thos^ that grow in sweet and temperate
Meadows and pastures: all other be dangerous and poison: beware of those that
grow near to the Dens of Serpents, vnt^ Trees that bear dangerous
fruits, unto the rust of Iton, or where any corruption or putrefaction is.

MEDICINES Of Metalles.
STIBIVM, Antimonie.
ANTIMOny is cold and dry in the second degree, found in the Mines of Silver:
if it be burned it sauoreth like Brimstone: that is most chief that is
bryghtest: Besides the virtue and power of during, which is common to all
metalles, it is astringent (...) bynding: Wherefore it is mixed with m^^l(...)
for the eyes: it does refrigerate, and prohibit the increase of superfluous
fl^she: it ^^opeth the Flux of blood that comes from the raynes, and
paniculs that cover ye brain: that part that is burned shall not blister, if
it be anointed with Antimony, and with freashe grease: and in case it be
blistered, and have gathered a skurfe, yet if it be anointed with Antimony,
Wax, and Cerusse, it will shortly be cicatrized, and briefly, it is of the
virtue that lead burned is.

Cerussa, White lead.
WHite lead is cold and dry in the ijdegree: taken inwards it is poison it is
made of Lead dissolved in vyneger: it is cold and dry cleaving or abstrictiue
of the poares: it represseth superfluous flesh, and mixed with oyntmentes and
playsters that be lenityue, i(...) does cicatrize: if it be burned it is
called Sandix, of the old Authors commonly Minium or read Lead, and is of
more subtle substance than Cerusse is: howvei^ there is a kind of Minium
that is natural^ and not made by Act.

Gipsum, Plaster of Paris.
GIpsum is cold, dry, and bynding: with the white of Eggs, and Myll dust it
^asicheth blood: when it is burned it is not so cleaning or stoping of the
poares of the ^ody: but it is dryer, and of more subtility of substance, and
repercussyue, specially with water and vyneger.

Auripigmentum. Orpment.
YEllowe Orpment is hot and dry in the third degree, and does putrify the
member both burned and unburned, but the burned is of more subtle substance:
it is ^sed to take away hair: if it remain long to the part it does burn
the Skin, ^^d is not to be taken inwardes. That which now commonly is
called Realgar is of the kind of Auripigmentum, and found with it in the same
Mine, but it is not so perfect. Also Arsenike which is white, is Judged to be
of like kind and virtue.

Sandaracha, Auripigmentum rubrum, Red Orpment.
THis is of the same power, and virtue that the other Auripmentum is.

Erugo Aeris, Uiride Aeris, Verdegresse.
VErdegresse is hot and dry in the fourth degree: it resolves, and co^sumeth
dead flesh: mixed with Oil and wax, it does only mundify, and that without
any great sharpness or taste.

Aes vstum, Copper, or Brass burned.
COpper or brass burned is very hot, and sharp: howebeit, it has mixed a
certain bynding or stiptikenesse: if it be washed it is special to cicatrize
soars and ulcers in tender flesh: unwashed also it does ye same in hard
flesh.

Flos Aeris, The skumme of Brass.
THis is subtiller than is vstum or Squama Aeris: it is a^stersiue, and used to
consume and mundifie, specially in a certain disease of the eye Lyddes which
is called Sycosis.

Squama Aeris and ferri, The battering of Brass, or Iron, when it is beaten
with the Hammer.
THe batteringes both of brass and Iron do dry strongly: but they differ in
that the battring of Brass is more subtle: the battring of Iron is bynding,
and therefore it is meetest to heal corrupt ulcers and soars, more than the
battring of Brass: but the battering of Brass does more consume and waste the
flesh: both kinds be sharp and biting.

Atramentum sutorium, Calcanthos, Uitriolum vulgo. Copperesse.
COpperesse is hoate and dry in ye fourth degree, and with all has a certain
binding and strictiuenesse, by reason of yt heat: it is a Corrosiue, and
consumes flesh: by reason of the byndinge it both compact and strengthen the
substance of the part where unto it is put: the weight of a dram of it taken
inwardes, kills the worms after Dioscorides.

Chalcitis. Unslaked Copperesse.
THis is very hot and sharp, and also astringent: it does burn the flesh,
and gathers over it a skurse: it is used in medicines for the eyes: if it be
burned it is of less sharpnes, and in substance more subtle.

Argentum viuum, Quick silver.
OF this there is both natural, and artificial: it is temperate in heat and
cold, and abstersive without sharpness or biting: it is good for vlcerations
in the eyes, and for all moist soars and ulcers that be in tender bodies, as
Women and Children: for hard and dry bodies, it is of like efficacy.

Pompholix, Tutia vulgo, Tutty.
TUtty is cold in the first degree, and dry in the second: washed it does dry
without pain or smarte, and therefore it is vsen against cankers and like
malicious soars: it is good for rhewmatike eyes, and for all blisters and
vlcerations in them, and also for soars, and ulcers in the fundament and
secret members.

Spodium, Burnt Iuory.
SPodium, after the description of ye greek Authors, is of the substance of
metals, and is good for ulcers, and is much of the same virtue that Pompholix
is: but Spodium that Auicen describes, is made of ye roots of Canes or Reeds
burned: it is comfortatiue of the heart, as be writes, and sliptike: but
Spodium that we now use, is burned Juory, and taken to be of the same virtue:
for Juory of it self unburned is strictyue and byndiuge.

Lythargiros, Spuma Argenti, Lytharge of Silver.
LYtharge is cold and dry made of diverse Substaunces, for there is of it of
the color of Gold, and of the color of silver: it is temperate in heat and
cold restrictive and abstersive: it dries and heals, and is a meant betwixt
all other medicines of that Nature.

Plumbum, Lead.
Lead is cold and moist, and specially i^ it be washed: it is good against
^oat inflammations, and ulcers of the fundament, and secret members: heaten as a
thin Plate it is good for the hoate bark, and for them that shed seed or
nature in dreams.

Plumbum vstum, Burned lead.
BUrned lead washed, is cold: unwashed, it bath a certain heat and
sharpness mixed, and remaining in it: it is good against malitions soars and
ulcers: if it be washed it increases flesh, and does heal.

Plumbago, Lead Oar.
OF this there is natural, and artificial: the natural is found in a certain
vain, containing in it silver and lead: the artifi(...) is made in the fyning
of Gold and silver: it is something cold: it increases flesh, and does
heal ulcers and soars.

Scorio Metallorum, Recrementum, The dregs, or dross of Metalles.
THe dregs of metalls do dry, but the dregs of Iron most, which when they
be powdered finely, and mixed with vyneger, do heal mattering ears. The
dregs of lead are of the same virtue, that burned lead is. The dregs of
silver are mixed with playsters that do dry.

Ferrum, Iron.
IRon is cold and dry: fiered and extincte in water, it leaves a certain
drying in it, which if it be drunk, healpeth them that be splenetike: if it be
extincte in wine, it is good for fluxes, and all weakness that co^eth by
choler to the Stomach.

Sulphur, Brimstone.
BRimstone untried is best: it is hot (...) third degree: it is attractiue,
and subtle: so that it is good against the stingig of venomous beasts: wych
turpentyne (...) heals Scabbes, Leaprosies of the Skin, ^etters, Ringwormes:
it is good for the roughe, voth taken inwardes with a rer(...) Egg, and also
the fumigation of it: also i^ is good for the shortness of wind, and for them
that wych coughtug void the matter and corruption from the lounges.

Cinnaberis, Cinopar.
CInopar is hot and sharp, with a certain astringency, and bynding: it
helps blood, and aswageth burnings and blisters, mixed with wax.

Chrisocolla, Borax, The Soder of Gold.
OF this there is both Natural, and Artificial: both kinds consume the
flesh* it is a medicine both alone, and also with other like things, for
malicious ulcers, and soars.

Aurum, Gold.
Gold is temperate of complexion, and among all medicines of metalls, is most
commended to cauterize with, for the cauterizacion of it is soonest healed: the
substance of it reduced to powder, comfort the heart, and puts away
mela^choly fantasies: this is the judgment of the Arebikes only: but the
great Authors make no mention thereof.

Alumen, Alume.
OF Alume there be three kind, in especial Alumen Liquidum, which is our
Alume Plume, or Iching powder. The iij. is Alumen Rotundum, not well known in
this our time: all kinds be bynding, and of gross substance: the subtillest
is Aiulumen Plumeum, ye second Alumen Rotundum, grossest of all is Alumen
Liquidum: all kinds be hot and dry in the third degree, bynding, and
abstersive, cleanse ye sight, co^lume superfluous flesh in ye Eye liddes: all
kinds be burned, and do stay putrified ulcers: stop blood, dry the gu^mes
that be moist: with Hunny and vyneger stay and fasteu ye teeth that be loose,
and are good against vlcerations.

Calx, Lyme
Vnsleaked Lyme, is hoate and dry in the third degree, and does burn so
strongly, that it does make a skurfe. Lyme that is fleaked does also gather a
skurfe: but by little, and after a day or two: it burns less tha^ the other:
if it be washed it puts away his heat into the water, which is called
Li(...) and the oftener it is washed, the less it does smarte or byte, for so
it dries gently without any pains or smarting.

Lixinium, Lie.
THe strength of Lie is after the nature and power of the Ashes whereof it is
made: for some is sharper than other some it is corrosiue, and ^oth putrify
and burn.

Cinis Sarmentorum vitis, The Ashes of the vine.
THe Ashes of the vine, is causticke: and with Oil and grease it is good
against the brousing of sinowes, and the fractures of the Joyntes: it consumes
superfluous flesh she, and is good against the biting or stinging of venomous
Serpents, and mad Dogs.

Terra, Earth.
ALl Earth does dry, and if it be pure without any strange qualties, it dries
ge^t(...)y: if there be in it any fiery or sharp quality, washinge takes it
away: earth burned is of more subtilty than earth unburned, and sharper: if the
sharpnes be put away with washing, it does dry with more efficacy soars and
ulcers that be hard.

Sigillum Lemnium, Terra Sigillata.
TErra sigillata is cold, and dry: dissolved in vyneger it heals corrupt,
and malicious soars: dissolved in wine it heals wounds: (...)peth the
spitting of blood is good against poison: infuled in (...) with the Juice of
plantayne, it heaieth v^cerations of the Bowels or guts: (...) have little
or none of this, but such as (...) counterfayte.

Bolus Armenus, Bolearmoniake.
BOlearmoniake is cold in the first, a(...) dry in the second degree: it
dries m(...) so that it is good for vicerations of ye mou(...) all rhewmes of
the stomach and breast: sp(...)ing of blood, and also the vlcerations of
Loonges: and against all soars and v(...)rations that need drying: it is also
sp(...)all for the Pestilence.

Mys^, Sorry, Chalcitis, Kinds of vnsleaked Copperesse.
THese three M^neralls be found in o(...) Mine in the Isle of Cyprus, in
th(...) veins: the lowest is Sorry, the second Chalcitis, the highest is Mysy,
and they judged to be of one virtue, but that Mysy more subtle than the other
two: Sorry is the grosest of ye three: Chalcitis of a mean nature betwixt both:
when they be burned, they be made more subtle, and less binding: they be so
hoate and sharp, that they consume the flesh, and be causticke: they be used
in me^ycines for the Eyes: the one of them does alter and change in process
of (...) to the other, as Sorry into Chalcitis, and Chalcitis into Mysy. Mysy is
of the color of gold, Chalcitis is of brass, and Sorry is black.

Sal Ammoniacus, Sal Gemonae. Saltes of diverse kinds.
THere is salt dug but of the earth, and also salt that is made of the
salt water: all kinds of salt be abstersive, and stiptike or bynding, but some
more, some less, after the diversity of the Grounds and Earth where they be
made. Salt is hoate and dry in the second degree, it does consume all
indystures, and condensate, and gather together the substance that does
remeyne, whereby the bodies be preserved from putrifactio^. Sal Armoniake among
all salts that be mineralles is chiefest, and does consume superfluous humors
in the eyeliddes, whereby the hayres in them do prosper and increase: all
salt does repress and extenuate superfluous flesh, and is used in Glysters
and in bags or sackes to cease paints. and consume cold swellings, as in
Dropsies: with oil and vyneger also cures the Itch of the body: and is also
good in playsters against ye stinging or biting of venomous Beasts (...) and
does preserve from the gout. Salt burned is more subtle, and resolutiue, and
of iess^ bynding or restrictyuenesse, than salt unburned. Sal gemmae is of ye
nature of salt and moreover purges Fleagme, and Ch(...)ler: and helps
medicines laxtiue in th(...) operations.

Nitrum, and Aphronitrum, Salt Niter, or Saltpeter.
BOth Nitrum, and Aphronitrum have t^ power and virtue of Salt: they be a(...)
stersiue, and mundificatiue. Aphronitru^ is more subtle, and resolutyue.
Nitru^ burned does dry, and resolve: taken into the body it is inscissiue and
extenuatyue of gross humors, much more tha^salt. Aphronitrum is not taken
inwardely, without great necessity, for that it is evil for the stomach:
howbeit, it is good against ye poison of Musheromes, and so is Nitrum, both
burned, and unburned.

Fex vini, Wine leyes, Tartarum vulgo. Tartar.
Wine Ieyes does dry, and resolve: it is bynding and restrictiue, according to
the nature of ye wine whereof it is: It does resolve swellings, and dries
Milk put to the breast: burned it is causticke: with Rosen it takes away
Leaprosies, and makes the bayre yellowe: washed it is abstersive, and is used
with medycines for the Eyes: it is also used of certain Physicians to be
taken inwardes, to laxe the belly: the leyes of vyneger is more bynding.

Lapis Haematites, The Blood stone.
THe blood stone does dry, and is stipticke. and restrictiue: it heals the
roughnes and asperity of the Eye liddes, if they be inflamed, mixed with the
white of Eggs: without inflammations mixed inflammations, mixed with water:
drunk, it helps the coughing of blood. It heals also ulcers, and soars:
and the powder represseth superfluous and proud flesh.

Magnes, The Loadstone.
THis stone draws Iron to it, and is o(...) the virtue and power, that the
blood(...) stone is.

Iaspis viridis, The green Jasper.
THe green Jasper, both borne at the st(...) macke and in the ringeworme,
comfort the mouth of ye stomach: also knit to th(...) Thyghe of a Woman in
labor of Child(...) does Accelerate the birth.

Lapis Iudaicus, The Iewishe stone.
THis stone ground to powder, and drunk with Water, breaks the stone in the
Kidneis: and after Dioscorides, the stone in the bladder.

Pyrites, Marchasita, The Copper, or Brasenstone.
THis stone is resolutiue of swellings of gross matter, and blood gathered
and congealed within the flesh: there are of this diverse kinds: for Aetius
says this stone is like to silver: Dioscorides like to Cop^er, or Brass,
which burned is used to cleanse the sight, yt is offended by any gross humors.

Gagates, That is thought to be our Get stone.
THis stone is black, and cast into ye fire, sauoreth like to Aspaltum: it is
resolutyue, and consumes old swellings in the knees: the fume of it reuoketh
women out of their passions called the mother, and the felling sickness: it is
written that there is great store of this kind in England.

Pumex, the Pumishe stone.
THe Pumishe stone is abstersive, and scoureth the Teethe: vurned and washed it
does incarnate hollow and deep ulcers.

Lapides in spongi^s, The stones found in Sponges.
THe Stones that he found in Sponges be abstersive, and break the Stone in
the Kydneies.

Lapis Aetites, Lapis Aquilae, The Egles stone.
THis stone bound to ye Arm of her that is with Child, does stay all untimely
byrthes: in the time of the birth and labor bound to the Leage, it brings
forth the child without pain.

Lapis Cyaneus, Lapis Lazuli vulgo, The blewe Lazule stone.
THis stone is sharp, abstersive, and resolutiue, more than Cinaberss is: and
is also stipticke or byndinge: it consumes flesh and is causticke or burning.

Lapis Armenius, The Armenian stone.
THis stone is of the same virtue yt Cbrisocolla is, and increases hayres in
the Eye lidnes: taken inwardes, it laxeth the belly, and purges melancholy.

Saphirus, The Sapphire.
THe Sapphire beaten to powder and drunk with milk, bealeth all inward
vlcerations, and in like case with milk anointed to the utter parts. The
powder of it laid upon cuts and choppes of the tongue, bealeth ye same: also
drunk it healpeth them that be bitte with Scorpions.

Smaragdus, The Emeraulde.
THe Emeraulde burned, and beaten to Powder, helps the dimnesse of ye sight.
Anointed with water, and with gum Arabicke, it belpeth the Leaper: and drunk
with water, it brings forth the same Disease again. Borne upon ye body, it
stays blood from what part soever it comes.

(...) Saphirus, Smaragdus, Hyacinthus, Rubinus, Granata, Sardius, Margaritae.
The Sapphire, The Garnet The Emerauld, the Sardine, the Iacint, the Ruby,
Pearls.
THese precious stones of the Arabikes, and of late practicioners in physic,
are esteemed and used for things of great price and virtue, to comfort the
bearte. The Greek Authors make no mention of them for ye purpose.

MEDICINES Of the parts of Beasts.
(...) Sanguis Columbarum, Palumharum, and Turturum. Blood of all kinds of
Doves.
THe blood of the Dooue, ye stockdooue, or Woodquist, and Cortle, is good
against blood sheding in the eye, that comes of a stroke: and also good in
wounds of the beade where the Skull is perished: with inflammations of the
Brain.

Sanguis Hirci. The blood of a Goat.
THe blood of the Goat breaks ye stone: and drunk with hunuy, is given
against the Dropsy.

Adens and seuum. Grease, and tallowe of Beasts.
BOth grease and sewet, be moist and hoate, and do mollify and resolve: but
some more, some less, after the temperature of the beast: for Swynes grease
is moystest of all, near unto the temperature of Oil: Goats sewet is dryest,
and does shortly co^geale and wax gross, and therefore it is refused in
Glysters, to cease pains and freatinges in the lower Gut: Goose grease is
hoater and more subtle: the grease of the Cock and Hen is of a mean betwixt
swynes grease, and Goose grease. The Lions grease is hoatest, and most subtle.
Bulls sewet is ye mean betwixt Swynes grease, and Lions grease.

Lac, Milk.
Molke contains in it three substau^ces. The Curde, the Butter, and the Whay.
Milk of it self is a good nourishment, the whay is abstersive, and laxeth the
belly: the curde is gross and cleaving, or stoping of poares: and therefore it
tempereth ye sharpness of other medycines. Butter is maturatyue, and
resolutiue of swellings: Milk with Peable stones or Iron fyered, and ertincte
in the same, is good for the bloody Flure, and sharp rhewmes in the Belly:
Milk is also good against rhewmes of the Eyes, vlcerations of the Loonges, and
of all inward parts. The Asses milk is thynnest: the Cow milk grossest:
the goats milk of a mean substance: most temperate milk is woman's milk:
next to that goats milk, then follows Asses milk, sheep milk, and cow
milk. Milk that has most of whay and less of curde, is to all persons of
less peril, as the milk that has most curde and less whay is most
dangerous for them yt have opilations of the liver, or spleen. Milk is not
good for them yt have weak heads and wyndy stomachs. Much use of milk does
perish ye teeth, and specially that milk which has most curdes: therefore
after milk, ye teeth ought to be washed with hunny and water.

Ouum, the Egg.
THe Hen Egg, and the Phesaunt Egg be best for the nourishinge of the body:
the Egg of mean temperature or rearenesse is preserved: the Egg that is so
(...), that it may be supped, is of less nourishing and does lenify or smoothe
ye aspetity and roughnes of ye windepipe: taken inwards with binding medicines
it is good against ye bloody Flux, and other fluxes of the belly. Eggs yt be
boiled, be of hard disgestion, and much more they yt be roasted in Ashes, but
fried be worst of all: the white of ye new laid egg is cold and of all
medicines most gentlest, and of less bynding: and therefore good for
vicerations in the secret parts, yt should be dried without smarte or bycing:
the Yolke is of the same virtue.

Medulla, Marowe.
Marow is a nourishment which does move the stomach to voin^: but if it be well
dilgested, it does nourish as a medicine: it does al so moilify. The marow of
ye Heart is cheife^^: next is ye marow of you^ge bullocks: for yt of the goat
and Bull be sharp and dry.

Coagulum, The Runnet.
THe Runnet is hot and dry, sharp and resolutiue, the Runnet of the Har does
cure (as it is written) the fa^ing sickness, and the Fluxes in women: and it
dissoiueth Milk that is curded in them.

Fell, The Gall.
THe Gallis the hoatest humor of the body, tor it is hot and dry in the rou^th
degree: and if it there is much diversity, according to the diversities of the
(...): the weakest is the gal: of Swyne, which is good for ulcerations of the
Ears: sharper than that be the Galls of the Sheep, of the Goat, of the
Bore, and Bull. The Gailes of birds be sharper and dryer than the Galls of
fourefooted Beaues, and among them the Galle of the Cock, and (...) be
chief: the Galls of ^aukes be so sharp, that they do exulcerate: Galies be
used in diverse medicines, and specta^^y tor eyes.

Stercus, all manner of Dounge.
THe Dounge of all beasts is hot and dry, and resolutyue: Goats dounge in
playfter, is good for hard swellings: Dx. (...) in playsters, is good for
dropsies: Pigeons dounge is good for long dileases, as Sc^as^caes, Megtimes,
Headache, aches in the the Back, the Fe(...), the Joyntes, and universally in
all passions, where need is of grease Attraction to the utter parts, for it is
attactyue.

Corium Ouis, The sheep Skyn.
THe skynnes of sheep newely slain, and put to the body that is beaten and
bruised, helps, the same briefly within one day and a night, more than any
other thing, for it does ripe and resolve.

Oesipus, Succida Lana, The sheep greasy Woolle.
THe fatness of the woolle of the sheep is good against all brousing, and
vy^^nge on any part howsoever it come, and is much of like nature with Burter.
Woolle without fattinesse is a thing necessary often times to teteyne oil,
and oyntmentes to any parts, Woolle burned is sharp and drying, and consumes
flesh in moist ulcers and soars.

Ius Gallorum, The broth of an old Cock.
THe broth of the old cock with Salt, applied to the utter most of the
flesh, laxeth the belly: the broth of the Hen tempereth the sharpness of
blood.

Cornu Cerns, and Capri.
THe borne of the Heart, and of the goat burued skoureth the teeth, and dries
ye moist gummes if they be washed with it: it helps the bloody flux, the
spitting of blood, and the weakness of the stomach: and it is good also for the
Jaundice, and dries rhewmes of the Eyes.

Genitale Cerui, The Pyzill of the Heart:
THe Pyzill of the Heart beaten to powder, and drunk with wine, is good for the
biting or stinging of Adders.

Ebur, Iuory.
THe shauinge of Juory, helps Whitflowes, or hoate swellings under the
Nail, for it is a stringent: it is used for the Jaundice by the common people.

Pulmo vulpis, The Loonges of the Fox.
THe Loonges of the Fox oryed, and made in powder, and drunk, helps them yt
have shortness of mind.

Castorium, The Beauers cod.
CAstorium is heat and dry in the second degree, and subtle of substance:
good against al. cold passions that come to the live was by repletion: drunk
it provoke the monthly course in women.

Scincus, The Loins of the Scinkes.
THe parts of this beast, that be near to to the Kydneis, drunk with wine,
are thought good to proueke lust, and courage.

Senectus serpentis, The slought or skyn of a Snake or Serpent.
THe skyn of the Serpent boiled in byneger, (as it is written) helps the
toothache.

Caro viperae, The flesh of the Adder.
THe flesh of the Adder is hoate and dry, and purges the whole body by ye
Skyn from the Leapry, and such other passions: wherefore it is mix o with
triacle.

Tela Aranearum, the Copwebbe.
THe Copwebbe s^^yetd bl^ud, and preserured for wound from Inflammation.

CAntharides, Green flies beyond Sea.
CAntharides be heat and dry in the third degree, and do ^i^ster the skyn: and
mixed with other conueniente medicines do take away skabbed, and sk^^uy
Nails: they provoke vryne, but taken in too great quantity, do excoriate the
Bladder.

Lumbrici terrestes, Earthwormes.
THese worms made into a plaster, help the sinowes that be bruised, and but:
besides yt, if they be drunk with sweet wine. they provoke vryne.

Conchula Indica, Blattae Bizantiae vulgo, The Indian Muskleshell.
THis kind of shell burned, and taken for a fume, reuiueth women that have the
passion called the mother: and them that have the falling disease.

Ostreorum testae Oyster shelles.
THe shelles of Oysters burned, and dried, be abstersive: washed they increase
flesh, and do replenishe hollow ulcers, and soates, without smarte or dyting.

Sepiae Testa, O^ Sepiae, The Cuttle bone.
THe Cuttle boue is cold, and dry, and abstersive: burned, it takes away
scabbes and spots from the skyn: (...)burned, it cleanses the teeth, and
mundifieth skarres in ye ^yes, and takes away roughnes growing in the Eye
li^des.

Ala^da, Galerita, The Lark.
THis Bryde roasted and eaten, helps the cyollicke.

Cochlea Terrestris, Limaces vulgo, The Snayle.
THe whole Snayle, with ye shells burned, and mixed with pepper, and Galls,
stop the bloody Flute: they must be beaten to powder with the shelles, and
made in a plaster to the belly: they help ye dropsy, and swellings in the
Joyntes of them that have the Gaw^e.

MEDICINES Approved, and Tried.
For the Chollicke, stone, and Strangury, an excellent perfect medicyne.
TAke five, or stre leaves o ye Heart called La^re^ and stamp and strain the
in Ale, or if they be (...) beat them to Powder, (...) put them in Ale, and
l(...) the Pacient drink it first the morning and all that day keep him
warm in to^ chamber: for after the receipt thereof the Pacient shall be
prouoken to d. or ^j. store s(...) or more. This ^^a^ (...) Laurel, is growing
in Gardeyns, and (...) like to M(...)den, (...) has Leaves like to the (...)
called (...) sell which grows out of (...) (...) and bears a Berry ^yke toe
bygi^^sse (...) of Werttes, and is commonly grieved to Bullockes for medicines.

THe next day, make a powder of these thinns following, Filipendula, and
Sarifrage, of each an ounce: Coriander seed, Gromell seen, Alexander seed,
of each half an ounce: Juie Berries, ye seed of Brom, of every an ounce:
the B^othe of Elder flowers, and the Berries of smothe Holme, of every an
ounce: Annise Seen, Fenell Seed, of every an ounce: a quarter of an ounce of
an Or^ Gall: The Rome of ready berring, half an ounce: The Roundes of a
Thorne^ fish, which is a round nut, which you shall find within the dryckes
which stand upon the Fyshes back, half an ounce: Polinonium, which is a
Fern growing one of an Oak, dried in powder, half an ounce: beat all these
in powder, and mire them together, and by the space of four, or five Days
followinge, take every Day fasting a Spoonefull of the said Powder in Ale,
and drink thereof, and eat, nor drink in four, or v. hours after.

For a child or man that is burned, or scalded with fire, or water.
TAke an Hen Egg, and roste it until it be very hard: and then take out ye
yolke, and bruise it with fresh buter, and anoynte your grief there with.

For a Copperesle Face, to wash it.
TAke green and white Copueresse put a quantity in a sancer of water, and
warm it over the Coals, and as hoate as you can suffer it, anoynte ye pim^les
of your Face therewith, or such parts as are red and and this use till they be
whole.

For an akinge Head.
TAke a Rose cake, and wet him with Uyneger, and put thereunto the powder o^ a
Nutmegge, and the powder of Cloves, and bind them to the temples.

For bleeding at the nose, a singular Medicine.
TAke a Lynaen clothe, and wette it in vynyger, and wrap it about the pri(...)
members of the pacient, and he shall ^^ase bleading: que probatum est per
Ioannen Lynsell, clericum Magestri Anthony Brown in Essex.

For the tertian Agewe.
TAke nine leaves of white stock Geloflouts, and five or six crops of
rosemary, and stamp them together, and take the Juice thereof, and drink it
in Ale luke warm, a little before your fit.

For an Agewe.
TAke a toste of bread, and spread it over with Triacle, and let the Pacient
care it before the fit comes, three times several, at three days. per
Guill^elmu^ Le^^hell, Oxon. Armigerum. etc.

For a Bruise.
TAke Brook lime, Smaledge and Brouse wor^r, and fry them in Sheep sewer,
then strain it through a lynnen clothe, and it wild an O^le, and put
thereunto the powder of Spermaceti, and anoynte the grief therewith.

For to destroy fleagme, and to avoid it.
TAke Pa^s^^y roots, Fenell roots, Peritorie, and Isope, se^th them with good
Ale, and Lycoris, with a quantity of cl(...) H(...), and use to drink it first
and last etc. Mistress Castelyne.

For the Chyne coughe.
Take a mouse and flea him, and dry him to pou der in an Oven, and drink him
in ale: the same is also good for them (...) cannot hold their water. Probatu^
per magistru^ lerueies.

To break the stone.
TAke the she will of a Snaile, and dry it leasurely, and beat it to powder, and
drink it with white wine, and note ye Snayles be very good for a consumption,
if they be first laid a day in bra^, and then st^wed.

For the Plague.
TAke an Onion, and make a hole in him, and take out the inner core: then take
water of Dragon, Triatle, and Pepper, and bruise them a l^tle, and put them into
the Onion, and roste the Onion in the Imbers, and afterward bruise the Onion,
and stranne him with Malm^s^y, and ^^ue it unto ye Pacient to drink: and if it
be taken before the heart be infected, it is a present remedy. Per doctor em
Uardenorte.

For the Canker in the Mouth both White and Red, the Red will break out, and
the White will not: and for scare Legs, and soar Lips, or any other Soars.

TAke ij. handfulles of the leaves of woodbynde, and one handful of Sage,
shred them fine, and brate the^ very small in a mortar: then take ij.
spoonefulles of Hunny, and a piece of Roche alume of the quantity of half an
egg: then take a quarte of fair runninning water, and s^ethe all these
together, until it be thick: then take it, and strain it in a fair cloth,
and put the liquor into a fair earthen pot, and cover it close: the^ anoynte
the Gu^mes th^rewyth, within on the soar side, or else your whole mouth: and
if it he a white Canker, then anoint the v^ter side: and then wet a clothe in
the Liquor, and lay it thereunto on the out side of ye soar: and use this iij.
times in a day, and when you are dressed, then lay your face to a warm
chafingdishe of coals, and the water will tun out of your mouth in great
quantity. And if the Canker be in the nose, or in any place where it cannot be
touched, then spout in this lyquor with a Quill, and this this will beale you
within short space. And this liquor will be kept well xxi. days in his virtue,
and no more. The good wife Baldwin of Wimbledon besides Fulham.

For a Mole in a woman's body, otherwise called a wheston, or a moon Calfe.
TAke water Cressies, and eat them with Potage sodden with Mutton, morning and
eveninge, and use none other Potage: then take Oil of Roses, and every
eueninge anoynte your body, breast, and belly there with. Per Ioannem Bell.

For the Pyles.
TAke Diaculum, and Oil of Spike, a little, melt them in a Sawcer, and spread it
on a lynnen clothe, and lay it very warm to the Pyles, and within two days
fanabitur: and it must be new dressed daily. Per Ioannem Bell.

For a Corn in your Toe.
TAke a Knyfe, and pare the Corn hard to the Quick, and then take the inner
part of a Fig, and a quantity of Uerdegrease, and mire them together, and lay
it to the Corn, and bind it fast with a linen cloth, and this will eat out
the root. Per Ioannem Bell.

A Plaster for worms in a childs belly.
TAke a handful of fether few, and another of Rewe, one of wormwood, and
another of ^^set lyekes, and the leaven of Brown bread, and a vynte of white
wine vinegar, and boil them all in the vyneger, until it be thick, and like
a s^l^e: and the^ put it into a double clothe, and bind it to the Navel as
hot as it may be suffered, and let it remain (...)j ^^wers Per Ioannen Bell.

To purge a soar from dead flesh.
TAke Sorrel, and roast it in the Embers (...) within ^ro(...) or white Paper.
and make a (...) thereof, and lay it as hoate (...)in three dressinges
sanabitur Per (...) Bell

For the Chollicke, and stone.
TAke Black berries. ^awe^. and Arorns, and dry them upon tyles, then take the
(...) of them severally, of each a sponefull, and (...) it ^^^e, and give it
to the Pacient in Malmosey

For the Gowte.
TAke S^^e dried half a day, or 1 whole day, and lay it to the soar, and it
will ^ase your pain in one night. Per Sergeant Waters.

Another for the same.
TAke Aquanitae, and wash and rub the soar therewith: and then take a
linen clothe, and wet it in. Aquanitae, and lay it to the soar, and it will
heal you within one hour or two at the most. Per Robert. Westo.

For the Plague.
TAke Mit(...)um a dra^me, and gene it hetimes to the Pacient with dragon
water, white wine, or with any other liquor.

For the gowt, or any ache.
TAke a Quarter of a pound of R(...) and asm(...) of ^itch, and a ^uantity of
Frankins^^ce a^ m(...) as a (...)e, and ^smuch of (...)e: then take D^ere
s^wet* or s(...) (...) and (...) al^o ^ether in a ^^t, (...) t^en (...) it in
clean ^^ter and was^^ it as (...) (...) (...) ^^me, and then s^^^d it v^^^ a
(...) of L^^t^er, and la^ it to t^^ soar, and let it remain there until it
fa^l of.

For a green wound, wherein is no dead flesh.
TAke (...), w^ic^ (...)mith (...) (...)only vs^, (...) it i^ ^ik^ A(...) and
(...) ye ^ou^^^ t^er^of v^^n the s^^^^* t^^n s^r^d t^^(...) v^^^ a ly(...)
cloth^, and la^ it to the s(...), and let it rem(...) (...)s* a^^ chau^^e it
once a day with ^ewe powder, and it will heal your wound without any other
thing. Per David Denewe of Brainford.

For the plague, a present remedy.
TAke five spoonefulles of Dragon water, (...). spoonefulles of strong ^y^^ger
half a spoonefull of (...)ac^e of I^ne, a qua(...) of a spoon^full of Bole
a^moniak^ in (...) powder, and the quanti^y of a piece of Bry^^sto^e beaten
into fine powder, as^uch and some what more of the ^oote of S^twa^^e of Venyce
be^ten in powder: and drink this when you ^^e g(...)d wy^^ (...)fec^^on an^
^ot ^ls, and take no other meat nor ^rynke in twelve hours af^^^, vu^^s it
(...) a(...)e of the same. Per (...)stris Kn^ght de Andouer.

For your defense from the plague, a special preservative.
TAke five spoonefulles of vyneger, three spoonefulles of r^nning Water, half
a spoonefull of (...)a^l^* and as much of Bol^ ^^^on^ake as a (...) Not made in
fine powder, and drink this last to bed, and first in the morninge. Per
predictam mistress Knight.

To make a salve for a tente.
TAke the Yolke of an Eggt, Hun^y as much as a Walnut, T^^pentyne as much: beat
these, and use it to the soar with lynte.

To kill the Ringworme.
TAke an ounce of ver degrece, d. ounces of vyneger, and grynd them in a
morcer, and ado three ounces of Hu^^y, and sees them all v^on the fire t^^l
they be as thick as Hu^^y.

At London in fleetstreete by Thomas Marshe. 1580.


