GREAT BRITAINS General Joys. LONDONS Glorious Triumphs. Dedicated to the
Immortal memory of the joyful Marriage of the two famous and illustrious
Princes, FREDERICK and ELIZABETH. Celebrated the 14. of February, being S.
Valentines day. With the Instalment of the said potent Prince Frederick at
Windsore, the 7. of February aforesaid.

Imprinted at London for Henry Robertes, and are to be sold by T.P. 1613.

TO THE MOST LEARNED AND COMPLETE Gentleman William Redman of great Shelsord in
the County of Cambridge Esquire.
I Not respect the pride of common praise,
Nor the disdain of Fools, abusing kind;
Rude Ignorance her thoughts could never raise
To judge of Wisdom, or to know the Mind:
My heart in this, shall ever be precise,
To wish the love of few, so they be wise:
Thus to the wight, whose thoughts are still divine,
In whom a worthy honored heart does reign:
Where Wisdom in her best attire does shine,
And all the virtues, void of all disdain:
To such am I transferd, my Muse does vow
To honor such a wight; and such are you.
By the true honorer of your learning and virtue, A.N.

Great Britains general Joys. Londons glorious Triumphs
YOU sacred Spirits, that haunt Pernassus spring,
And pierce the skies, raising from lowest dust,
(With scaring thoughts, mounted on Pegas wing)
Even whom you list, and whom you list down thrust:
You whom the Muses all do jointly greet,
My weakling Muse does many wishes make:
(You that drink Nectar and Ambrosia sweet,)
That some of you, her task would undertake,
And show the profits, praise, and dignity,
Of this Diuine-bred Nuptial unity:
For if true Glory, or stabilitie,
In bodies Politic, or Natural,
Has ere been gaynd, it came from unity;
The foundresse and true gouernesse of all:
For as in bodies Natural we see,
Where differing Elements are ever found,
They yet in equal mixture do agree,
Making each several Complexion sound,
When with a mutual reference to either,
The hot does clear the cold, the moist the dry:
But when there is a iarring strife together
Which shall be great, which bear Supremacy;
The little world of Man is quite undone;
Nor can the Mind (being King thereof) endure,
Where such insulting humors overrun,
To live within a Kingdom so vnsute.
Even thus in Bodies politic it stands,
Where contrary conditions yet agree,
Where Sovereign power with Equity commands,
And powers subordinate obedient be:
But if that spirits turbulent be found,
To stir up factious strifes within the State;
As many such do in each Land abound,
Mayntayning discord with inueterate hate.
Let them know this, they work in what them lies,
To mar the Music of this sweet Consent:
And as malignant Opposites, devise
Against the Sovereign state and regiment.
They err in blindness much, that will not see
What excellent occurrents may befall,
By this Conjunctions heavenly harmony
Confirmed on earth by powers Celestial.
For set aside the profits that may rise
To The Palsgraues Land and this, by their comerce,
(As that whereon a Commonwealth relyes)
It shall be here more fitting to rehearse,
The fame, and glorious state, and dignity,
That in this Sea-wald I Will will ever spring,
By this Divine Conjunction, which will be
Common to both the Subject, as the King.
For if before the Palsgraues force did stand
Strong, both when Spain, and Rome was bent thereto;
If then it chekt them, having but one hand?
Now joined with ours, what power has it to do?
With Flowers therefore each man strewes the way,
For though this Land were often blessed of yore,
Yet Hymen makes this his chief Holy Day,
For that it never was true proved before:
Now the air is sweeter far then the sweet Balm,
The Earth begins with Verdure to be dight;
The Satyrs now do dance about the Palm;
All things give perfect sign of their delight:
Now do the Birds record new harmony,
Now Trees, and every thing that Nature breeds,
Do whistle their consenting melody,
And clad it self with fresh and pleasant weeds:
And why? Eliza, flower of second Troy,
Enioyes her Frederick; both have mutual joy.
Oh Hymen, father of all Nuptial tites,
Begun on earth, and registered in Heaven,
Grant these conjoined Princes, fair delights,
And free them from false hearts, and thoughts uneven*
The Princely enioyers of this Union,
That in the sacred band of love are twynd,
Are both from Kings, and lignes Imperial sprung,
And by their match, great Kingdoms are combinde:
By it great Britain, and the Palsgraues Land,
Shall check the Popish pride with fierce Alarm,
And make it in much trepidation stand,
When both their Colors shall join arm in arm:
And (thus conjoined) shall tryumphant fly,
Both in one line of Love and Dignity.
ELIZABETH, to whom God gives,
Fulness of Peace, in which she lives:
Fulness of God, her name so importes,
How well her Name, and Nature sorts?
ELIZAES eyes are blessed Stars,
Inducing Peace, traducing Wars;
ELIZAES hand is Crystal bright,
Her words are Balm, her looks are light:
ELIZAES Breast is that same hill,
Where Virtue dwells, and sacred skill:
Oh blessed be each day and hour,
Where this ELIZA builds her Bower.
Thou great Pince Palatine, and Prime elector,
That did for our Prince lately with us grieve:
And whilom woodst with woe, now heavens protector
To hard beginninges, joyful ends does give.
Thy welcome first, was a sad Funeral,
Which now is transformd to a joyful Nuptial.
Thou found'st us glad at thy arrival here,
And had had entertainment to thy state,
Had not Heavens hand turned all to mournful cheer,
And to our joys, given so untimely date.
Yet are they now revived for griefs are gone,
Our hopes are happy in thy Conjunction.
Oh Nuptial unity, produ'ct from Heaven,
To propagate thy blessings in this Land;
Why should disioyned hearts, with thoughts uneven,
Refuse the grace of thine algiuing hand?
That adst to profit, pleasure, friends, and fame,
Maintainst Religion in her sacred seat,
Give Britains I Will a neuer-dying name,
And such a Style as ever will be great:
Great in the glory of her present state,
Great in the settled hopes of times to come,
Great in preventing of all foreign lu^e,
Great in preserving of her peace at home*
Great in this match, great in her wealth and fame:
In all things great, as is Great Britains name.
By Unity, perfectious things are gaynds
Defects are bred by Dissipation;
By Concord was the Roman state maintaind,
By Discord brought to desolation.
Witness the outstretcht rule and Royalties
That time through their disjunction has decayed;
Now changed to poor weak states, and seigniories,
Which once united, all the world obayd:
So France, and Spain, and other parts can tell,
The brain sick battle of disseuered bands,
Whose sad memorials yet can witness well,
The horrid Acts of dis-vnited hands.
In former times, on us strange Nations
(As Danes, and Saxons, hearing our dissension)
Often plagued this Land with strong invasions,
Still working on the wrack of our Contention:
Whose lofty pride, and high insulting power,
Did many hundred years usurping stand,
When Seven divided Kingdoms did devour
The fame, the state, and riches of the Land.
But how shall ever Time forget to tell,
The Tragic actions of that bloody War,
That in this Kingdom many years befell
Betwixt the Houses Torke and Lancaster?
Where Englands honor against it self was armed*
Saint George against Saint George, did lift his hand:
Nature by Nature, was unkindly harmed*
Blood did against Blood, in opposition stand.
And if the sacred hand of Unity,
Had left untuned the stringes of their debate,
Mischief, with vnpreuented Misery,
Had wrought the utter ruin of the State:
But God, and good foresight, prevent such ill,
That no eclipse of Glory may befall*
But that this Unity may flourish still,
To be the power-full safeguard of us all:
That so the Imperial Ensigns of this Land,
And the Prince Palatines admired fame,
In high Maiesticke glory long may stand,
To dignifie their glorious Countries name.
And that the Nobles of each Land, may join,
As Well in foreign, as Domesticke state,
By peace and war, to make their Glories shine,
Extended farther then the power of fate:
Wishing that they, whom Honor thus combines,
May mutually partake in peace and wars:
And as an offspring from the glorious lines,
Of royal Princes, Kings, and Emperors,
Still in one Center of Coniuction rest;
That both their Glories so may long time stand,
And with their several far spreading Crests,
Make known their Fames to many a foreign Land.
So shall the Princely heads of this fair frame,
With peaceful Scepters both their Countries sway:
So shall they keep Religion, Rule, and Name,
That they have still mayntayned to this day:
That God, that is the God of Union,
First founder of all undivided things,
May guide the state of this Conjunction,
And make it happy in a line of Kings,
Which from their Princely stock may grace both clim^^^*
And evermore continue Sovereignty,
In all high Honor, till the end of times,
And the beginning of eternity.
Deo Trino, et vni Glori^^
Hymen's Holiday, or the Marriage day of the two famous Princes, being S.
Valentines day.
DEscend you sacred Daughters of King Jove,
Apollo's lovely Darlings, leave your Mount,
And those delightsome sweet Castalian Springs,
That warble with their silver winding waves,
Making soft Music in their gentle glide.
Clio, thou s^gest of the sisters Nine,
Conduct thy lusty company to Court,
Great Britains Court, on earth an earthly Heaven:
There take survey of fair Elizabeth,
And in her praise, tune your heroicke Songs:
Write, write you Chronicles of Time and Fame,
That kepee remembrance golden Register;
And recommende to Times eternity
Her honors height, and wonders of her Age:
Wonders of her, that reasons reach transcend,
Such wonders as have set the world at gaze:
Elizabeth, whose worth, all English hearts
Admire at home, and so do foreign parts.
Clio, proclaim with golden Trumpe, and Pen,
This happy VVedding-day, this Nuptiall-^ay,
Ore Europs bounds take wing, and make thy flight
Through ^elting Air, from w^e^'s the rising Sun
Gallops the Zodiac, in his hery VVayne,
Even to the brinke where Thetis in her Bower,
Receaues the weary Bridegroom of the Sea,
Beyond Graund CAYRE by N^lus sly my banks,
Over the wild and sandy Affricke Playnes,
Along the frozen Shore of ^anais,
Whose Icye crust Apollo can not thaw:
Even there, and round about this earthly Ball,
Proclayme the days of Britains happiness,
The days of Peace and Victory proclaim,
And let this gla^some Nuptial day be first,
This Wedding day (beginning of much bliss)
Set down this day in Characters of Gold,
And mark it with a Stone as white as milk:
This cheerful Wedding day wear Eglantine,
And wreaths of Roses red and white put on
In honor of this day, you lovely Nymphs:
And Paaus sing, your sweet melodious songs,
Along the chaulky Clifts of Albion;
Lead all Great Brittaynes Shepherds in a dance,
Ore Hill and Dale, and Downs, and Daisey plottes:
And be this day Great Brittaynes Holy Day,
That thus unites the royal hearts and hands
Of these two Princes, in Loves holy bands;
Be multiplide the number of their years,
Their years, that may prolong our golden days,
Wherein we still in safety may abide,
And they may reign and rule in Honors height:
So may they long, and ever may they so,
Untouched of traytrous hand, and tretcherous foe.
This Nuptial day being celebrated thus,
Is to Great Britain, Hymen's Holiday:
The day of joy, the day of iollitie,
That young and old, and all do celebrate:
Muses and Graces, Gods and Goddesses,
Adorn, adore, and celebrate this day:
The meanest with the mightiest may in this,
Express his love, for loyalty alike,
Blazons affections force in Lord and Lowne,
In honor of this Wedding day behold,
How young and old, and high and low rejoice.
England has put a face of gladness on;
And Court and Country caroll both their praise,
And in their honor, tune a thousand Lays.
Behold, in honor of this happy day,
What Poems and triumphals London singes:
What holy Hymns and sacrifice of thanks,
Englands Metropolis as Incense s^ndes;
And in the sound of Cymbals, Trumps, and Shalmes,
In honor of Eliza and great Fredericks name,
(To whom his life he owes, and offers up)
With songs of joy for this long lookt-for day;
This Nuptial day, wherein we all enjoy
Such perfect comfort throughout Brutes new Troy.
With us in simpathy of sweet accord,
All English Subjects join, and hearts and hands,
Of praises and of hearty prayers send
Thanksgiving for the blessings and the grace,
The gracious blessings on this day powered down*
This blessed day, wherein these blessed Princes,
(The peoples peace, their Countries happy fate)
Are both conioynd in Matrimonial state.
And in this general plaudite and applause,
And celebration of this joyful day,
Wherein pale Envy, justly vanquished,
Gives way unto the virtues of these Princes,
And wounded with remembrance of their names,
Has taken wing, and made amain from hence,
To murmr that he durst not here disgorge,
And breath his discontentments over Sea,
Among those graceless fugitives, that thirst
For nothing more, then dangerous change of times,
And alteration of a settled State.
That rabble of unnatural Englishmen,
Whose base revolt (infamous through the world)
Makes them foul Architectes of vilde practices
That end in their dishonor and their death,
Those bloody stratagems and traiterous traynes,
That shall be cruelly laid unto their lives,
(Precious in sight of Heaven, and dear to us)
By these base Truth-falne run-awayes.
We pray that Jacobs God may still preserve
These Princes, even twixt bridge and waters brinke,
And save their sacred persons in the fall,
From Pharaos Rod, and from the Sword of Saul:
For this great Triumph that true Subjects make
Is likt of all, but Enemies of the Truth,
Enemies to them that serve the living Lord,
And put in him their trust and confidence:
And this they well have shown in gorgeous Shows,
And in all other fit accuttrements,
Prepared to do their duty and deuoyre,
Wherein they did so well demean them selves:
So well, so willingly to please these Princes,
That (breathles) yet they would have been content
In this days honor, years of days to have spent.
Prince Frederick created Knight of the Gater, and instald at Windsor the 7 day
of February 1612.
ABout the time when vesper, in the west,
Began set the evening watch, and silent night
Sent sleep and slumber to possess the world,
Under the starry Canapy of Heaven,
I laid me down, laden with many cares,
Fast by the stream where Tame and Isis meet,
Even at that time, all in a fragrant Meade:
In sight of that fair Castle that or'elookes
The forest one way, and the fertile val,
Watered with that renowned River Thames
Old Windsor Castle did I take my rest.
When Cynthia, companion of the night,
Piercing mine eie-lids, as I lay along,
Awakt me through: Therewith me thought I saw,
A royal glimmering light, streaming aloft,
A Titan mounted on the Lions back,
Had clothed himself in fiery pointed beams
To chase the night and entertain the Moon.
Yet scarce had Phaebe gone her journey through,
Sleeping, or waking, as alone I lay,
Mine eyes, and ears, and senses all were served,
With every object perfect in his kind,
And lo, (a wonder to my senses all)
I might discern a troop of Horsemen ride,
Armed Cape de Pe, with shield and shiuering lance,
As in a plash, or calm transparent brook,
We see the glistering fishes skowre along,
A number numberles, appointed well
For tournament, as if the God of war
Had held a iusts in honor of his love.
Therewith I heard the clarions and the shalmes,
The Shakbuts, and a number instruments
Of several kinds: but lowdest of them all,
A Trumpe more shrill, then Tritons is at sea,
The same renown, precurser of the train,
Did sound (for who ringes louder the^ renown)
He mounted was upon a flying horse,
And clothed in Phawcons feathers to the ground
By his Escutchion you might easly guess,
He was the Hearhauld of eternity.
I looked to see an end of that I saw,
And still me thought the train did multiply,
And yiedling clouds gave way and men at arms
Succeed as fast at one another heels,
As in the Vast Mediterranean sea,
The rolling waves do one beget another,
Weary of looking up, I laid me down
Willing to rest, as sleepy souls are wont,
When of a sudden such a noise I heard
Of shot of Ord'nance pealing in mine ears,
As twenty thousand Tire had played at sea:
Or Aetna split, had belcht her bowels forth,
Or heaven and earth thundering in arms amain,
Had bent their great Artillery for war.
And weary Atlas had let fall his load,
Enough to wake Endimion from his trance.
Yet was the Welkin clear, nor smoke, nor dust
Annoyde mine eyes, I gazed and as I looked,
Me thought this host of Aerie armed men
Girt Windsor Castle round: anon I saw
Under a Canapy of Crimson bisse,
Spangled with gold, and set with silver bells,
That sweetly chym'd and lul'd me half a sleep,
A goodly King in robes most richly dight,
The upper like a Roman Palliament,
In deed a Chapperon, for such it was:
And looking nearer, lo, upon his leg
An ancient badge of honor I espide,
A Garter brightly glistering in mine eye,
A worthy ornament. Then I called to mind
What Princely Edward of that name the third,
King Edward for his great atchiuement famed
What he began: The order of Saint George,
That at this day is honored through the world
The order of the Garter now it is called.
Famous through all the world for honor and antiquity
Graced by a King, and favored of his peers,
Famed by his followers worthy kings and queens
That to his day are sovereigns of the same.
Some say the manner how this grew at first,
Was thus. The King disposed on a time
To revel after he had shaken France,
And decked his Lions with their flower de-luce,
Disposed to revel: some say otherwise
Found on the ground by fortune as he went,
A ladies Garter: and the Queen I trow,
Lost in a dance and took it up himself.
Which was, a silken ribban weau'd of blewe,
His Lords and standers by, seeing the King
Stoop for this Garter, smiled: as who would say,
Our office that had been, or some what else.
King Edward wistly looking on them all,
With princely hands, having that Garter raised,
From harmles heart where honor was engrau'd
Bespake in Frence (he could the language well)
Honi soit qui mal Y pense) quoth he)
Wherewith upon aduisement, though the cause
Were small, his pleasure and his purpose was,
T'aduance that Garter, and to institute
A noble order sacred to Saint George,
And Knights to make them, who^ he would have termed,
Knights of the Garter: this beginning had
This honorable order of our time,
But truer far that from the holy land,
This holy order ca^e, whe^as a garter high aduan'st
and served for an ensign, and was crowned with victory
Hereon I thought when I beheld the King,
I was instructed in the circumstance,
And found it was King Edward that did march
In robes, like those he ware when with his Lords
He held Saint Georges royal feast on earth,
His eldest son surnamed the black Prince,
Though black of hue, y^ surname yet in France
He wan: for terror to the Frenchmens hearts,
His countenance was, his sword an iron scourge,
He on a cole-blacke Corser mounted was,
And in his hand a battle-axe he held,
His Beuer up, his corslet was of steel,
Varnisht as black as iet: his bases black,
And black from head to foot, yea horse and hoof
As black as night: but in a twincke me thought
He changed at once his habit and his steed,
And had a Garter as his father had,
But rich and costly, with imbrodery
Of Pearl, and Gould I could on it discern.
The Poesy whereof I spoke of yore,
And well I wot since this King Edward days,
Our Kings and Queens about their royal arms,
Have in a garter borne this Poesy,
Still as I lay, I gazed, and gest at once,
What was this train, and whether it did bend.
At last I found King Edward was the man,
Accompanide with Kings and Conquerours:
That from the spacious Aerie house of fame
Set forward royal to sollemnize
Th'installement of some new created Knights,
For lo, I saw in rich accuttrements,
Like to King Edwards, and the prince of Wales,
Full four and twenty Knights, nor more nor les
In roabes with pretio^us colors of S. George,
And they had Garters all, buckled with gould.
Me thought this semblance could not but import
They Should be noble men of golden minds,
And great account, favored of Prince and Peers
Whose names should in that register be writ,
Consecrate to Saint Georges chosen Knights.
Herewith the golden book began open fair,
And easily I might read their names that next
Went to the King, of whom and of whose worths
Needs not to make particular relation.
This book co^taines their names and several coats,
And keeps them written in his golden leaves,
As they have had installement and creation
By gracious favor, in each Kings succession,
Within the Carracters of this same book
I saw a name rejoiced me to see,
Henry late prince of Wales, I read it plain
And glad I was that in that Register
That name I found: for now (me thought) I said
Here virtue does out live th'arrest of death.
For dead is Henry, virtuous and Renowned
For honor, courage and viuacity,
And yet his names alive in fame's records,
That held this Garter dear, and ware it well.
The train of all thiese hardy Knights enstal'd
Cast in a ring about old Windsor Castle,
Under the glorious spreading wings of fame,
I saw Great Britains King, richly attyrde,
Leading with him a sort of goodly Knights,
With Garters and with colors of Saint George
Iacobus Rex on a compartiment
Of Gold, in Bisse was writ and hung a skue
Upon his head, under an imperial crown:
He was the Sovereign of the Knights he led,
His face me thought I knew: as if the same,
The same great King, that we do here enjoy,
Had climbed the clouds, and been in person there
To whom the earth, the Sea, and Elements
Auspicious are. A many that I knew,
Knig^^^d in my remembrance I beheld,
And all their names were in that book inrol'd,
And yet I might perceive some so set down
That (howsoever it hapt I cannot tell)
The carle oblivion, stolen from Laethes lake
Or envy stepped from out the deep Auerne;
Had rac'd, or blemished, or obscured at least:
Yet all the Kings since that King Edwards days,
Were with their Knights and companies in yt train.
At last me thought, King Edward thus bespake,
Hayle windsor, where I sometime took delight,
To havvke and hunt, and back the provvdest horse
And where in Princely pleasure I reposed,
(After my vvarres) in my return from France
Yea twenty times hail Windsor (q. the King)
Where I have stal'd so many hardy Knights,
And Tournaments and royal Iusts performed,
Behold in honor of mine ancient throne
In honor of great Britain, and Saint George,
To whom this order of the Garter first
I sacred held: in honor of my Knights
Before this day created, and instal'd,
But specially in honor of this Knight,
That at this day this honor has received
Under King James, great Britains Sovereign
With princely trains, I from the house of fame
Do resalute thee here, and gratulate
To this new Knight, created by a King,
Peereles for vvisdome and for majesty,
The honor of the Garter: long may he
Wear it as note of true Nobility,
And virtues ornament, Young Frederick
Thou high and mighty Prince, and Prime Elector,
Mounted on fortunes, wheel by virtues aim,
Become thy badge as it becomes thee,
That Europ's eyes thy worthynes may see,
And what this day pure honor has put on
So full of princely hope, in honor wear,
Answer the worthiest of thine Auncestry,
In deeds (to fame and virtue consecrate)
Brought up in liberal sciences and arms,
Patron of Chiualry and of the Muses,
Brandish thy sword in right, and spend thy days
In common wealth affairs, it shall become
Thy forwardnes to follow virtues cause,
And great designs of Princely consequence,
Prince Palatine, Shape thou thy noble course,
As virtue (loadstarre of renown) directs.
That as thy royal Ancestors have done,
Thine earthly race in honor thou may run,
And as in leaves and characters of gould,
Thy Princely name is writ in this Record,
So live (as with a many more) thou may
Survive and triumph in eternity,
Out of obliuious reach, or Enuies shot,
And that thy name immortally may shine,
In thiese Records, not earthly but Divine.
Then the shrill Trumpet of renown did sound,
And by and by the train retired (as swift,
As Stars do use to shoot) from whence they came
The gaudy Morn awakt, and every thing
Arose from rest, and little birds began sing,
Where with I rowz'd and have set down my dream
The matter (for the time) being a fit theme.
FINIS.

