A TRVE REPORT OF THE LATE APPREHENSION AND IMPRISONNEMENT OF JOHN NICOLS
Minister, at Roan, and his confession and answers made in the time of his
durance there.

Whereunto is added the satisfaction of certain, that of fear or frailty
have latly fallen in England.

PRINTED AT RHEMES By John Fogny. 1583.

THE PREFACE.
Good Christian reader, the children, and specially the Priests of Gods Church,
have been manifoldly assailed by their adversaries in our country these later
years: first by the vvriting and preaching of the Sect-maisters, which made no
great impression: Secondly by authority of the Civil Magistrate, which was
more forceible, but yet prevailed no further then to the loss of some richmens
transitory goods, and a fevv poor men's temporal lives, neither the one nor the
other perished to the owners but both laid up with Christ and bestovved upon
him to the hundredth fould advantage in the next, and to the great increase of
the Catholic party in this life.

Lastly by practice and policy of certain crafty co^scie^celes men, by
falsehood and forgerie, altering in the sight of the simple the causes of their
death and punishment, and making their lives and actions odious to the world.
Whereby they disadua^taged in deed the Catholic part much more then by any
plain violence or pretended justice whatsoever. Besides the common
persuasions of Protestants but most false (though grounded upon the experime^t
of their own disloyaultie in the days of Q. Mary) that al Catholics be
ennemies to the state: was it not a great temptation to such as know not the
deep subtlety of Satan, to see that certain good fellows were found to
preach, print, and aduouch to the faces of the poor desolate persons, yea and
to swear that they had purposed and practiced the Queens death? particularly
recording the time, place, and circumstances: and naming such and such of the
Counsel, that were with all to be massacred, and all this, either so
coulorably and confidently, or so plausibly and oportunely for the practice,
that public justice passed upon them as malefactors, and therevvith many
pretty pa^phlets put forth and spread for the tempering of men's speeches and
conceits of such strange procedings. In this case truly a poor and unadvised
man might have been either for some time abused, or have found good cause to say
with the prophet, Pene moti sunt pedes mei: my feet were almost moved.

But he that said, nothing is hidd, which shall not be revealed, would not
have this error long to prevail, but has to his own glory, the honor of his
saints and great advantage of the Catholic cause in our country and the
whole Church, many ways discovered that treachery: as short gaudies almost
has the ennimie of such traffic, as Judas had of the betraying and sale of
Christ, who disclosed his own treason, yielded up his money again, and
hanged him self, before his Master (whom he sold) was executed. God give
the adversaries better grace and an other kind of repentance then that proditor
had: to salvation and not to perdition. But truly his name be therefore
everlastingly glorified, our merciful lord, has merueilously revealed to the
shame of heresy, these sinful inventions of the Churches ennemies.

The conscience and certain knowledge of so many good men, that knevv those
holy confessors innocence, the wisdoms of others that savv the practiz,
color, and collusion, the note of their answers and full satisfaction given
at the bar, their uniform and sincere protestations of their innocence at
their death, the very qualities of such persons as were the first brochers and
instruments of their accusation and condemnation, al these things and diverse
treatises set forth of the matter, have ope^ned and made clear the case to the
whole world: whereby god of his old mercies has turned all these
difficulties and apparent distresses to the singular benefit of his truth.

And lo here more, to see his svvet providence and disposition of these things,
John Nichols him self, the first author of the shamfull fiction, and that first
set down the particularities for which the men of god were condemned and
executed, falling of late into the hands of the justice at Roan, has
confessed all the collusion and forgerie. Which was thought meet to be
published Verbatim, even as him self vvrote and gave forth to the Officers and
others: the Original partly remaining in the court roules, partly to be shevved
of his own hand vvriting.

In setting it down, no one title is altered, nor the very incongruities of
his speech amended. And though he was in prison when he did it, yet he did
nothing of fear or compulsion, being assured that he could not for such
matters as he had committed in England, nor for religion, be any long time in
durance in France: but al came of deep remors of mind and conscience for the
death of the innocents, which he knevv came by his false accusation,
vvherevvith he was inwardly so vexed in England, though he continued as he
does yet in his perverse pretended religion, that he both confessed his foul
dealing to one of the condemned persons and to some in office and authority
there: and also in fine left the Realm therefore specially, and partly, as he
says him self, because the Bishops who were commanded and had promised him
every one of them a yearly pension for recompense of that his service, would
not keep touch with him. but shaked him of with a Tu videris, like as the
jews did their copesma^ sudas. Where upon he obtained a piece of money of an
other, his principal patron, who thought it pity or at least no policy to
cast the poor miser of, in that sort, and passed over into the low country
without taking his leave, and went forvvard into Germany, provvling as his
manner has long ben with Epistles for his living, and not finding
co^tentement so, he purposed into Turkey, and thithevvard he went on, till by
the persuasion of his companion one M. Laurence Caddey sometime student of the
English College in Rome, he was turned back from that desperate course into
France: by whose godly endeavors for both their saluations, notice was given
of the said Nichols in Rhemes and Paris, and after was apprehended in Roan,
where he vvrote and spoke the letters and other things follovving, and
thereupon was dimissed very shortly.

And being afterward among some contreymen of his own religion, to whom he
resorted for payment of his fees, he was demanded before them, by some that
were Catholics whether he would now being at liberty, avouch all the things
confessed in the time of his restraint: he ansvvered that all were most
certain, and that he would stand to all that he had uttered. A protestant yet
he would be still, though in prison he shovved him self vvilling to confer
and to yield to reason, and might at the same time have easily ben invited to
Rhemes, if he had not fallen into the Protestants hands, at his releasing. At
his first arriual in Roan, the vain man told some of his companions that he
had talked and disputed with Doctor Allen, and that he proffered him a hundred
pound English a year to be of his religion. The fellows lif and fortune,
though he be not old, has been exceeding various, if all were recorded since he
first was Minister, where his misery began: but nothing need to be spoken,
of the causes of his first coming over sea, of his follovving the Camp, of his
vvandring in Flanders, France, and Italy, and such like: only I thought it
necessary for an introduction to the rest, to set down his formal Abiuration
Verbatim, as it is recorded in the Court of Inquisition at Rome: faithfully
translated into English. Into which office of holy Justice against Heretics,
he went to accuse him self of his own accord, and in the end the matter
passed as follovveth.

A TRVE REPORT OF THE LATE APPREHENSION AND IMPRISONMENT OF JOHN NICOLS
Minister, at Roan, and his confession and answers made in the time of his
dura^ce there.
Whereunto is added the satisfaction of certain, that of fear or frailty
have lately fallen in England.
The true copy of the Abiurations that John Nicols (latly relapsed from the
Church by Apostasy) made at Rome in the year of our lord 1579. which
Abiurations, in his English reuolte latly published in print, are by him termed
two Sermons that he preached before the Popes holiness. faithfully translated
into English out of the auctentik Latin copy, newly sent from Rome where
the Original is extant of record.

NOS Frater Thomas Zobbius ordinis praedicatoru^, Sacrae Theologia Magister,
and Commissarius generalis, sanctae and vniuersalis Inquisitionis Romanae. Cum
tu Ioannes Nicolaus, filius alterius I^annis Nicolai de loco Vvalliae,
Dioecesis Landauiensis in Regno Angliae, aetatis tuae annorum viginti quatuor,
velcirca, sponte coram nobis comparueris in hoc sancto Officio, atque confessus
fueris, etc.

We B. Thomas Zobbius of the order of the Preachers Doctor of divinity and
Commissarie general of the ^oly universal Inquisition of Rome. For as much as
thou John Nicols the son of an other John Nicols of the province of Wales in
the Diocese of Landaff within the Realm of England of the age of twenty and
four years or there abouts, have voluntarily appeared before us in this holy
Office, and have confessed that after the Sacraments of Baptism and
Confirmation in thy childhod by thee rightly received after the manner of the
CATHOLIC CHVRCH, thou have ben trained and brought up in pernicious schism,
and sundry wicked heresies until thou came to the age of twenty and one
years, and the same did believe, namely these, to vvite: Pilgrimages to
holy places, offering of Candles and such like, to be mere superstitious.
Beads not to be used. The Images of Saints neither to be had nor vvorshiped.
That Saints ought not to be prayed unto: nor that they have any care or
knowledge of the necessities of mortal men, nor can pray for them. That
prayers ought to be made in the vulgar tongue which the common people understand.
That lamps, ashes, which are put upon the faithful on Ashwednesday, and al
other ornaments and vestements of the Church, and finally all ceremonies
Ecclesiastical whatsoever ought to be taken away. That it is lawful for
Priests to marry, and for all persons to eat flesh at all times. The Bishop
of Rome not to be head and cheef of the universal Church. That there is no
Purgatory after this life. That man has not free will. That he is justified
by faith only. The most blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, to
be only a sign of our lords passion, but not the body of our Savior JESUS
CHRIST. That no Mass ought to be used in the Church, nor that the Apostles did
celebrate any. That there are only two Sacraments, that is to say: Baptism
and the Lords supper.

Finally that thou have preached unto the people in many places the foresaid
heresies, by the space of one half year, and that after the rites and manners
of Heretics thou have taken the order of Deacon and Priesthood, and did
obtain and get one benefice by Simonie, and an other by free gift, and the
fruicts thereof did enjoy by the space of three years. And forasmuch as
thou have said, that thou art right sorry and penitent for those thy former
errors, and that by the mercy of God thou art called to that faith which our
holy CATHOLIC and APOSTOLIC mother the CHVRCH of ROME does believe and
teach, and that thou mindest firmly to hold it, and to stand therein to the
death, and have humbly desired that thou may be admitted into the lap of
the holy Church, and to be absolved from the censures Ecclesiastical which
thou have incurred for those causes, and to be dispensed with for such
irregularities as thou have thereby brought thy self in danger of, and to have
remitted to thee such fruicts as thou have taken of the said benefices.

The decree of the most honorable and most Reverend L. Cardinals Inquisitors
general, in the public assembly of the holy Inquisition, by the counsel of
the Doctors in divinity, and law, enacted the sixth of this present month of
May, being seen: whereby the dispatche of this cause standing in question,
between thee and the right worshipful and Reverend Doctor Sig. Anselme
Canutus, Doctor of both laws Canon and Civil, Procuror fiscal of this most
holy Office, is committed to us: we are come to pronounce this vndervvritten
sentence.

The name of Christ and of that most glorious virgin his mother being first
inuocated, we sitting in the seat of the judgment, and having only God
before our eyes, by this our definitive sentence, which we have in this writing
made, say, pronounce, judge, decree, and declare thee, the foresaid John Nicols
to have been a Schismatic and Heretic, and to have incurred all the pains and
punishments that are by the holy Cannons and Constitutions whatsoever general
or special provided and made against Schismatics and Heretics. Yet for so much
as thou have voluntarily presented thy self before us, protesting that thou art
sorry from thy heart, and have vvithall humility desired to be admitted into the
lap of the holy ROMAN CHVRCH, which is not wont to be shut up against such
as return thereunto: we do benignely and mercifully receive thee, according
as thou requirest, so that thou do detest, accurse, and abjure from thy heart
all schism and heresies, especially those above recited, and all errors that
are contrary and dissonant to the said holy CATHOLIC CHVRCH, in such sort and
manner as we command thee by this our definitive sentence, to accurse, detest,
and ab^^re them.

And yet to the intent, that Justice be not utterly separated from Mercy, seeing
that the one is linked and knit with the other, and to the end the mercy of
God by mean of Justice may be more plentiful and large toward thee, we
enioine thee for wholesome penance, that thou do two several times visit the
seven Churchs of this city, and that all thy life time, thou say daily five
times, Pater noster, and five times, the Aue Maria, and for the space of five
years, thou say once a week, the Seven penitential Psalms together with
the Litanies and Prayers following: and once in the month, the office of the
dead, called the Dirige. And that four times in the year of the said five
years, thou fast, and every month confess thy sins to a law full priest,
such as is allowed by his ordinary, and by his counsel and consent, to receive
the B. SACRAMENT of the altar once every month, and in the feasts of the
Nativity of our Lord, of Easter, Pentecost, and the Assumption of the
gloriouse and perpetual virgin Mary the mother of God.

And so we do hereby Say, Judge, Enioine, Decree, and Declare. Sending thee
to the feet of our most holy Lord the POPES HOLINESS for the forgiveness of thy
fructs taken, and absolution from the spot of Simony, and for the inhabling
thee to holy orders, and other things which are prohibited to Schismatics and
Heretics.

THOMAS ZOBBIVS COMMISSARIE GENERAL.
The above written sentence, was given, avvarded, and iudicially pronounced
by this vvriting, by the aforenamed our reverend father Thomas de Zobbiis of
the order of the preachers, Doctor of divinity, Commissioner general of the
Office of the holy Roman and universal Inquisition, sitting in the Judgment
seat at Rome, in the Palace of the said holy office in the Vatican of S.
Peter: and was read and published by me the Notarie, at the commandment of
the said reverend father the Commissarie, in the year of the Nativity of our
Savior 1579. in the seventh indiction, the viij. day of the month of May, in
the time of the Bishopric and See of our sovereign and most holy Father in
Christ Gregory by Gods providence the thirteenth of that name, the said John
Nichols being present, and with thanks giving, accepting the foresaid
sentence: who vvilling to obey the same, and all the contents thereof,
kneeling upon his knees before the said reverend Father Commissarie general of
the holy office, corporally touching with his hands the holy scriptures, did
Abjure, Accurse and Detest, al those errors and schism, and the heresies
which he held and believed in manner and form as in the Abiuration hereafter
follovving, subscribed with his own hand may appear: made at Rome in the
palace of the said holy office, then and there being present as vvitnesses,
Benedictus de Solanis, Peruzin, and Petrus Bilaqua of the Dioces of Firmiano.

I John Nichols, the son of an other John Nichols, of the province of Wales,
of the Dioces of Landaf, in the Realm of England, of the age of twenty and
four years, or there about, kneeling on my knees before the re^erend Father
Thomas Zobbius of the order of the Preachers, Doctor of Divinity, and
Commissioner general of the office of the holy and universal Inquisition of
Rome: touching personally the holy Gospels, do swear, that I believe and vvil
to my death believe, that faith which the holy CATHOLIC and APOSTOLIC ROMAN
CHVRCH does believe and teach.

But for so much as after the Sacraments of Baptism and Confirmation rightly
and Catholikely by me received and taken in my childhood, I was brought up and
trained in pernicious schism, and sundry most impious heresies, till I came to
the age of twenty and one years, and them did believe, namely and specially:
That Pilgrimages to holy places, Offering up of candles, and such like, were
mere superstitious. That praying upon beads ought not to be used: That the
images of Saints ought neither to be worshipped nor had: That the Saints in
heaven ought not to be prayed unto, nor that they have any regard, care, or
knowledge of the necessities of mortal men, nor can pray for them. That prayers
ought to be made in the vulgar tongue, which the common people do understand.
That Candles, Ashes, which are used to be put on the faithful upon Ashwenesday,
all ornaments and stuf of the Church, and finally, all Ceremonies
ecclesiastical whatsoever ought quite to be taken away. That it is lawful for
Priests to marry, and for all persons daily to eat flesh. That the Bishop of
Rome is not the head of the universal Church of Christ. That there is no
Purgatory, after this life. That man has no freevvil, and is justified by
only faith. That the most blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
is only a sign of the death and passion of our Lord, but not his very body.
That no Mass ought to be used in the Church or was celebrated by the Apostles.
That there are only two Sacraments, to wite: Baptism, and the Lords supper.
And these heresies have I preached by the space of half a year, and after the
rite and manner of heretics, have received the order of Deaconship and
Priesthood, and obtained one Ecclesiastical benefice by Simonie, and an other
of gift, and received the fruicts thereof. And for these causes was adiuged by
this holy office a Schismatic and Heretic.

I therefore do from my heart, Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, all schism and
heresies, namely those above specified. And swear that never hereafter will I
believe heresies or keep company with heretics, or read their books. And do
further swear that I will denounce and declare unto this holy court, and to the
inquisitors and ordinaries, of the places in the which I shall become, al and
singular persons whom I shall know either to be professed heretics, or
suspected of heresy. And swear also, that I will observe and perform all the
points of the penance enjoined me: and in case I do not. I subject my self to
all the pains and punishements due by the law, to such offenders, so help me
God, and these most holy Gospels.

I the foresaid John Nicols have Sworn, Abiured, and Promised as before: and
in faith thereof this schedull written with an other hand, I have subscribed
with mine own: At Rome in the Palace of the said holy office, the viij. day
of the month of May, Anno 1579.

Which Abiuration being made, the foresaid Reverend Father Commissarie
general, did absolve the said John Nicols there present and most humbly upon
his knees erauing the same, and him discharged from the Excommunications,
Censures, and Penalties by him incurred by reason and cause of the premises,
and him restored to the communion of the faithful, to the participation of the
Sacraments, and to the unity and lap of our said holy mother the CATHOLIC
CHVRCH. And has enjoined him for healthful penance as is expressed in the
above written sentence, recorded and authentiked as is before said, in the
presence of the aforenamed witnesses.

This copy was taken out of the first and proper Original, with which
(vponco^fere^ce made) it agrees etc. In faith and witness whereof I have
subscribed and sealed it with the seal of the said holy Office in such cases
used. At Rome in the Palace of the said holy Office the thirteenth of the said
month of Maij 1579. So it is, Signed by me Flaminius Adrianus Notary of the
holy Roman and general Inquisition in faith and testimony of the premises.

LAVRENCE CADDEY of whom we made mention before, lately passing the seas with
John Nicols, and his fellow in journey into Germany, daily conceiving more and
more sorrow of the misery he was fallen into by his frailty and coacted
forsaking of the unity of the CATHOLIC CHVRCH, retired into France in January
last An. 1583. and his said Companion with him: and approaching near Rhemes,
whither he came for his comfort of conscience, being in a village near the
suburbs of the City, he made his way by this letter written to the President
of the College, as follows.

ALthough I might comme to the City of Rhemes, because I never offended the
same, or any inhabitant thereof: yet in respect of you my dear country men. I
neither will come thither or unto you, although as I shall be saved at the day
of judgment, I love you, and have loved you as the apple of mine eye. And
although the desire I have to speak with you be unspeakable, the matter for
the which I would speak with you is the greatest that ever I had with any
since I was borne, or can have whiles I live in this miserable world, and as I
hope more profitable both for soul and body then any thing whatsoever in this
world Besides it apperteineth to both the Seminaries, that of Rome, and this of
Rhemes, concerning weight matters in respect of them both. Moreover it
concerns the abominable lies of John Nicols, which hereby may be redressed.
To conclude, if your Seminaries have been injured by the sclaunders of any,
hereby they may be I trust cleared again: and I trust that in respect of some,
it may be said that the same Scorpion that stinged being crushed on the same,
will sonest heal the wound she made.

Therefore M. Doctor Allen, I request you for the love you bear to Christ
crucified, his blessed mother, and all the Saints of heaven, and as you tender
the life of a soul almost dead in sin desiring by your means to be
quickened, and as you couit to heal the sores wherewith, your Seminaries have been wounded, send in all have without any delay a Priest well learned, virtuous,
and mortified, and of a good nature, and to him largely the cause of my arriual
here, I will lay open, so that by him you may be fully certified thereof. the
which I would have to be either M. Gregory Marten, or Doctor Barnard the need
of body brings me not hither, but of Soul, and causes alleged. I am at Tessi
half a league from you in a tavern: hither therefore send as I request with
this messenger in all have that can be, and if the said Priest lodged here al
night it were best,

Your humble Orator. laden with sin, vvishing and coming hither to be
healed, whose name you shall know.
Post scriptum. I have a letter from the said Nicols to your worship, who is on
this side the sea which I will deliver to the Priest sent.

It was endorced thus.

Venerabili viro D. Doctori Alano Anglorum Seminarij Rhemensis dignissimo
prsidi, hae statim tradantur litera.

A Monsieur le Docteur Allen Anglois. Jesus Maria. Si non sit in Ciuitate D.
Alanus, tradantur Doctori Bernardo, aut D. Gregorio Martino.



THe President being not then at home, but newly gone to Paris, this letter
was received and read by the other to whom in his absence it was directed,
and by whom his godly desire was also in part accomplished: but for more full
satisfaction of his conscience, he was advised to go forvvard to Paris, where
he might deal with D. Allen him self: and so he resolved to do, having
appointed also before to meet John Nicols again there, who departed from him
(as he said) at Challon, ten leagues from Rhemes, where Nicols (for a Brauado)
wrote this letter follovving to the said Doctor: which letter, at once with
Laurence Caddeyes, he received by a special and speedy messager, before
Laurence him self arrived

DOctor Alane, multi te ferunt librum quendam edidisse sub nomine Apologiae
diuulgatum vtriusque Seminarij Romae Rhemisque Romani Pontificis impensis
extructi. In eo libro tuo nimis in me ferociter irruisti and maledictis
lacessiuisti, si tu aliqua salutis meae cupiditate flagrasses illa conuitia
atque maledicta quibus abundasti silentio pretermisisses. Satis in meum
vituperium dixisse arbitratus es, cum dixeras me his deciuisse a religione
vestra, quid hoc ad propositum, nunquid Apostoli (qui omnibus virtutis
ornamentis exculti fuerant) semper Christum agnouerunt? minime gentium sed
Christum aliquando negauerunt vt sacra scripturarum loca testantur.

Quid si ego vestram religionem (si vera esset religio) decies abnegassem, and
postea eam amplexus fuissem quandiu vixissem, nunquid post miseram hanc vitam
me reprobum sentiretis? profecto haud sic, si very Christianiessetis. vestram
religionem multis erroribus implicatam denegasse laetor, maxim si fides vestra
Romana ab Apostolorum sententia mintme dissentiret, ab illa nullis terrortbus
atque suppliciis adduci vllo modo potuissem: sed quia traditionibus humanis
innititur, illam non probo.

Alane mi, Consule tibi dum tempus est, Resipisce, Renuncia erroribus quibus
irretiris, Reuertere in patriam, Prosternas teipsum ad pedes pientissimae
Reginae nostrae, explices perfidiam tuam, deplora te talem fuisse qualem terra
vt ferret indignus fuisti. Romae quid didici? hypocrisim, mendacium,
arrogatiam, breuiter, omnia mala. in Seminario regnat libido, superbia,
inuidia, ira, maledicentia, vt breui comprehendam, illud collegium est sentina
omnium malorum. Perhorresco literis mandare quae oculis meis vidi, non
crederes, quia nimis faues illis. Raptim scripsi. Rescribe si vis, aut si
elatus animus patietur. scriptum Nancy.

Per me Ioannem Nicolaum Anglum.

DOctor Allen, many report that you have published a book under the title of
an Apology of both the Seminaries of Rome and Rhemes, erected at the Popes
charges. In that book you have pushed at me very furiously and provoked me
with many reproaches. If you had had any care of my souls health, you would
have passed over those reproaches and detractions with silence: but you thought
to disgrace me excedingly in reporting that I had twice forsaken your
religion. what is that to the purpose? why? did the Apostles (which were
adorned with all ornaments of virtue) alvvaies confess Chrisi? nothing less.
For sometimes they did deny him as holy writ testifies.

What if I had denied your Religion ten times (if it were a true religion)
and afterward had embraced it again as long as I lived, would you
notvvithstanding have taken me for a reprobate after my death? if you were
true Christians, I think you would not. I am full glad that I have denied your
Religion, which is mixed with many errors. If your Roman faith dissented
not from the doctrine of the Apostles, I should never have been drawn from it,
with terrors or torments whatsoever: but because it is underpropped with men's
traditions, I cannot like or allow of it.

O M. Allen, provide for your self while you have time. Amend, and for sake
your errors wherewith you are entangled. Return home to your country. Cast
your self down at the feet of our merciful Queen. Confess your
disloyaultie, and lament that you have been such a one, as the earth is
unworthy to bear. what learned I at Rome? hypocrisy, lying, pride, and to be
short all that euel is. In that Seminary there, reigns lust, pride, envy
wrath, detraction, and to say al at a word, that College is the sink of
sin. I do tremble to write the things, that I have seen with mine eyes:
neither would you believe them, because you favor them to much. I have
written in have, write again if you vvil, or if your proud stomach will
suffer you. Written at Nancy.

By me John Nicols Englishman.

ABout three days after the receipt of the above written letters, came
Laurence Caddey and found D. Allen and all other Catholics very ready, as duty
required, to give him the comfort and succor they could to his great
contentement: as also upon intelligence that John Nichols was in the town,
many means were sought to bring him to conference and speech of the learned
for his recovery: but missing of that, there was thought no other remedy to
save his soul, and to reclame him from the damnable state that he lived and
was like to die in: but by his apprehension and imprisonning, which, by reason
of his speedy departure from Paris, could not be done there: but it was
atchiued at Roan, where upon his restraint, he wrote with his own hand at
several times the letters and others things in Latin, to D. Allen.

DOctor Alane, tua meam petulantiam vicit charitas, ad te (temeritate ductus
magis quam prudentia fretus) acriter scripsi, tu ira non commotus omnia bona
mihi optasti, pollicitus es cum fueram tibi inimicus ea quae non speraueram a
te concedi, tua elementia me superauit supra modu^. Parisiis Rhemos venissem si
mea culpata^ta non fuisset quantum explicare verbis nequeo. Pudore impeditus,
Rhemos petere nolim. Tua patientia mea mayor fuit malitia, tua verba ex
charitate fraterna producta ostenderunt quo spiritu suffultus eras. Laurentius
Caddeus, qui meas tibi dedit literas, iuramento facto predicta confirmauit, qua
charitate audita in quae prorupi verba testetur.

Si illam Domine D. Alane animae meae curam te habere verum sit, vt tuam
reuerentiam non pigeret peregrinationis multorum locorum modo saluares eam, des
tunc operam vt saluetur. and mea anima salua tua opera, saluabitur anima tua
iuxta verbum diuinum. Si anima and corpore peribo tua incuria atque
negligentia, redditurus es rationem huiusmodi mortis meae in die iudicij. Sum
detentus in carceribus, and non indigne. Sustentor lautius hucusque quam
deberem, appello ad tuam reuerentiam, and non ad Papae Nuntium. Si promittes
tuis literis, quod mea culpa quoquo modo commissa contra quoscu^que ignoscetur
mihi, and quod nemo ob mea delicta perpetrata, me e medio tollere conabitur,
Rhemos veniam, and ponam vitam meam in manibus tuis: si hoc mihi negabis,
sanguis meus a te requiretur, and eris causa perditionis animae meae. Non curo
propter vitam corporis mei. singulis diebus contentus sum mori, si semel animam
meam and virtute and religione verbo diuino innixam, suffultam sentirem, oh
nemo mortalium me laetior esset.

Dicunt multi me nullam religionem habere, and vere dicunt secundum opera mea,
flagitiis enim multis coopertus sum. hoc ego dico et in suggestu sepe dixi.
Quodcu^que scriptum est in veteriatque nouo testame^to firmiter credo si me ad
ignem, autad patibulum lictores iam traherent, aliud non crederem, instar
vmbrae est vita mea, a carcere Rothomagensi clamo ad te vir magne, and vir
plene charitatis vt mihi succurras dum hac vitae vsura fruor. Si conquaereris
de scriptis meis, quod falsum est retractabo, causam indicabo cur sic
scripseram, totam mentem meam iuxta veritatis limits satis abunde explicabo.
D. Alane, etsi grauiter offenderam, tamen curam tibi committo animae meae.

Nescio quid de me consultum est, si Papa and Cardinales, and omnes alij qui
autoritate praecedunt alios, consultius aestimant esse vt vindictam sumant
iniuriae illatam illis immerito, fiat voluntas Domini, sciunt vbi me inueniant:
exequantur quod in mentem venit, sed aliter de illorum charitate spero. In his
angustiis quibus constitutus sum D Alane, praesto mihi sis, and consilio and
labor and aliis omnibus charitatis operibus: and accumulabis tibi magnum
thesaurum in caelis, and me tibi in aeuum deuinces.

Non sum obstinatus, cupio saluus esse, saluum me reddat Deus anima a corpore
dissoluta. Scripsi. been vale, oraque pro me peccatore maximo. Dum viuo, spero
Read bonum D Alane pro malo, and eris discipulus Christi: sic fecit Christus,
sic docuit.

Per me Ioannem Nicolaum Anglum, tui amantissimum.
POst scriptum. Spiritus pugnat contra carnem, caro contra spiritum ad tempus
spiritus diluuio peccatorum submersus carni succubuit, sed spero quod spiritus
emergetur, and carnis vires mulalidabit Deus sit mihi propitius. Capituitas est
medium per quod viam ad coelum inueniam D. Alane, partim quia Christum
agnoscis, and partim quia conterraneus meus es, consule mihi dum tempus est.
Lego vestros libros, non taedet me legere, aliquam mihi legendo consolationem
comparaui. Legam, and sermonem babere cum Catholicis Romany inficias non ibo.
Scripsi, and expecto responsionem voluntatis tuae propensae, vt spero in meam
salutem. 18. Feb. 1583.

Per me peccatorem grauissimum, Ioannem Nicolaum indignum hac vita quam dego.



DOctor Allen, Your charity has overcome my impudency. I wrote unto you very
sharply, being led thereto rather through rashenes, then guided by wisdom.
you for your own part being nothing atal moved therevvith to anger, wished al
good unto me promising to me your enmmie such benefits as I could not have
looked for at your hands. your clemency therefore has wonderfully vanquished
me. I would have come from Paris to Rhemes, if my offense had not ben so
heinous, as cannot be by words expressed. The cause why I came not to Rhemes,
was, because I was ashamed of my self. Your Patience is greater then my
malice. Your words proceeding from brotherly charity, do declare with what
spirit you are endewed. Laurence Caddey who delivered my former letter unto
you, has affirmed the fore said things to be true and that with an other he
also can witness into what speeches I burst forth when I understood this your
charity.

If it be true (M.D. Allen) that you have so great care of my soul, that your
Reverence would not stick to travail to what place soever, to save it: do
you your endeavor then to save it. For if my soul be saved by your means, you
shall save your own soul also, as holy writ says: but if I do perish body
and soul by your carelessnes and negligence you are to render account thereof
at the day of Judgment. I am emprisoned, and that worthily: and am fedd
hitherto more delicatly then I have deserved. I do appeal to your worship and
not to the Popes Nunce. And if you will promis me by your letters that the
faults which I have by any means whatsoever committed against any man, shall be
forgiven me, and that no man shall pursue me to death for the crimes that I have
committed, I will come to Rhemes, and yield my self into your hands: if you deny
me this, my blood shall be required at your hands, and you shall be the cause of
the loss of my soul. I esteem not this transitory life, I am content to
dye, and that every day. Oh if I felt once my soul to be endewed with virtue
and religion stayed upon Gods holy word, no man would be more glad then I
should be.

Many report that I have no religion in me, and they say truly in respect of
my works, for I am overwhelmed with many abominable vices. I say thus much
and have often said it out of the pulpit. That I do firmly believe whatsoever
is written in the old and new Testament. If the Sergants were drawing me to
the fire or gallows, I would not believe any other thing. My life is like a
shadow, I cry to you (worshipful Sir and full of charity) out of the prison
of Roan, to assist me whiles yet I live. If you complain of my books, I will
retract that which is false, I will show the cause why I wrote so. I will
open my mind abundantly so far as the limits of truth will permit. M.D. Allen
albeit I have grievously offended, that notwithstanding I commit the care of my
soul unto you.

I know not what the Pope, Cardinals, and others in authority ar determined
to do with me: if they think it best to take vengeance on me for the injuries
which I have unjustly done unto them, the lords will be done: they know
where to find me, let them put their designs in execution hardly: but for all
that I hope better of their charity. Being brought into these distresses, I
beseech you D. Allen to assist me with counsel and al other works of charity,
and you shall thereby heap to your self a treasure in heaven, and shall bind
me to be yours forever. I am not obstinate. God grant I may be sauued after
this life. I have written. Fare you well, and pray for me a grievous sinner: for
as long as I live, I will hope. M.D. Allen, render good for evil, and by so
doing you shall be Christ his disciple. For so Christ did, so he taught,

By me, John Nichols Englisman, your lover.

POst scriptum. The spirit does fight against the flesh, and the flesh against
the spirit: and for a time the spirit being over whelmed with the flood of
sins, does yield unto the flesh, but I hope that the spirit will get the
victory, and weaken the force of the flesh. God be merciful unto me.
Imprisonment is a means by which I may find the way to heaven. M. D. Allen
help me with your advice whiles time is: partly, because you are a Christian
man: partly also, because you are my country man. I read your books and am
not weary of reading, I have gained great comfort and consolation by reading
them. I will read still and will refuse no conference with any Roman Catholic.
I have written, and now expecte your favorable answer, as I hope, to my
salvation. 18. Feb. 1583.

By me most grievous sinner, John Nicols, unworthy to live.

DOctor Alane, contra Papam, Cardinales and Episcopos quaecunque scripsi,
scripsi ambitionis causa: and quae audiueram in Italia de moribus Papae,
Cardinalium, Episcoporum aliorumque inter agrestes and inopes homines, literis
in Anglia mandaui: nullum librum aedidissem (Deus est mihi testis) nisi Praeses
Castri Londinensis me ad scribendum prouocasset. Partim tunc temporis
grandipromissione delusus, partim appetens interituram gloriam, a me public
scripta sunt ea, praesertim de moribus Papae, Cardinalium, Episcoporum,
totiusque ecclesiastici ordinis quae fama acceperam a viris non fide dignis,
liberate mihi eo tempore concessa paulo post resipui and me nequiter
scripsisse Domino Lucae Kirbeo^am vita defuncto, cum in carceribus detentus
fuerat, confessus sum.

Multa scripsi, multa feci, quae scribere aut facere negaui prorsus, antequam
Praeses Turris Londinensis saepe minatus sit, Grauissimum torquaris tormentum,
quam acerbam poenam pati meafragilis caro abhorruit. Illius igitur inuentionem
atque voluntatem executus sum, quod imperabat scripsi, feci, sic locutus sum,
non ex malitia, sed ex impulsu, non ex praua voluntate, sed ex satanica
suggestione.

Multa scripsi falso, quae scripsisse poenituit me antequam ex Anglia tanquam
profugus ob enormia peccata mea quae conscientiae meae magnam inquietem diu and
noctu iniecerunt, discesseram, Nun quam in Anglia steti coram Iudice, aut alio
quouis magistratu ta^quam testis co^tra quemuis Catholicum Romanum, quando in
iudicium vocati sunt, ex proposito abfui Londino.

Papa, Cardinales, Episcopi, and alij Catholici Romani in me multa contulerunt
beneficia, quae ingratitudine recompensaui, sed causa ostenditur, metus
grauissimi supplicij, magnifica promissa me a Deo auocauerunt. si vos viri
dignissimi, in eodem periculo versaremini, nescio quid faceretis.

Nihil aliud audire potui in carceribus quam has minas, Fac sic, aut satellites
te ducent torqueri: maluissem si dixisset suspendi. Non bona res est, corpus
isto cruciatu longius fieri per duos fere pedes quam natura concedit. Narratum
est mihi modus torquendi, cum audiueram, timor and horror istiusmodi supplicij
me omnino vicit in meaexaminatione. Quorum voluit ille Praeses aut sernus
illius nomina scribi, scripsi. Georgius Peccam, aeques auratus in Catalogo fuit
Papistarum, Iudex Southcotus, and alij multi mihi ignoti and ad nomen and ad
personam (antequam ad castra Londini veneram) in meo Catologo, suggestu
praedictorum locum occupauerunt inter caeteros Romanae religioni addictos.

Si captus non fuissem cunctis Papistis indicassem interroga^tibus me causam
scribendi talia mendacia in mea examinatione. Ego fui scriptor, sed Deus scit,
alios fuisse autores. Si mea fragilit as me non excusabit, appello ad
misericordiam vestram qua munitos esse dicitis: ostendite tunc illam, and pro
amore Dei liberate me, and non vrgeatis me sicut caeteri, loqui and scribere
contr a conscientiam meam: and postea cernetis sine impulsu, quod libere
fatebor veritatem.

D. Alane grauiter te offendi, sed tamen dico, quod recumbo in tuam clementiam.
De religione nihil dico quod scriptura docet (nullum excipio librum neque
veteris neque noui) firmiter credo: nihil aliud credam, facite mecum quod
vultis, comburite, suspendite, interficite, decapitate, ego idem sum: si
veritatem no^ habeo, Christus est veritas, ostendat mihi veritatem, and aper^at
oculos meos.

D. Alane, Odovvenus Hoptonus Praeses Castri Londinensis minis iussit vt
examinationem iuxta voluntatem illius scriberem. Quando nomina Papistarum
patefeci (quorum quam plurima nomina nunquam ante audiueram) eos fautores
Papae, Reginae Scotorum, acerrimos inimicos Regiae Maiestatis, virorum a
conciliis, and omnium illorum qui defensores sunt religionis quae public in
Anglia docetur asserere non vererer. Et omnes illi de quibus mentio facta est,
nobiles and generosi fuerunt. Hoc si a te factum erit Regina promouebit te,
inuenies me promptissim um fore ad te iuuandum. Cuncti proceres te magno
prosequuntur amore, and nihil indigebis. Mittam tecum seruum Oxonium, ibi
sustentaberis, centum Marcas singulis annis dabo operam vt adipiscaris and sine
dubio pingue sacerdotium tibi dabitur. Si hoc non praestabis grauissima poena
mulct aberis, consule tibi igitur Et hanc ob causam, partim metu ductus, partim
adulatione victus, hoc in me quadrauit adagium: Quid ipse aiebat, confirmaui:
promissum illius iuramento perstrictum fuit. Haec quae exaraui adeo vera sunt
vt nihil verius.

Videte homines, qua mecum Tragedia vsus est ille Praeses. Quamprimum veneram
in conspectum D. Odovveni Hopton, ductus cum satellite, confessus sum me illius
religionis fuisse, and tamen hypocrisi maxima me vti voluit, paratus eram in
die Dominico istius hebdomadae qua captus eram in ecclesiam venire mea sponte,
and tamen iussit vt apparerem reluctari, and seruus illius iussus fuit trahere
me ad ecclesiam quasi inuitus fuissem: ex his paucis colligite plura.

De bulla affix a parietibus Rhemis, hoc no^ audeo consirmare, sed ita fama
volauit inter alummos Papae in Collegio Anglicano Romae sito, vtrum ista
excommunicationis bulla contrae nostram ^eginam Elizabetham renouata fuit, and
ex integro impressa Romae prorsus ignoro, sed ignoscite mihi quae tali modo
temere and falso scripsi and feci.

Quae literis mandantur, me libera sponte sine compulsione vlla, vt
conscientiam meam liberam redderem in praesentia Gulielmi Johnson and Georgij
Robinson mand at a sunt in carcere Rothomagensi in die Sabbati. 19. Februarij.
An. 1583.

Ioannes Nicolaus.

DOctor Allen what things soever I have written against the Pope, Cardinals and
Bishops, I wrote them through ambition: and such things as I printed in
England, touching the manners of the Pope, Cardinals and Bishops, I had heard
them in Italy of peisantes and poor men. I had never published any book (God
is my witness) if the Lieutenant of the Tower of London had not provoked me to
write: for I was partly deluded at that time with great promises, partly also
pricked forward with desire of vain glory. Such things have been written by
me pubickly, chiefly touching the manners of the Pope. Cardinals, Bishops, and
of the whole Clergy, which I had by report of men of no credit. But as soon as I had obtained my liberty, incontinent I amended my former fault, and
confessed to M. Luck Kirby now executed, but then a prisoner, that I had
written very lewdly.

I wrote many things, I did many things, the which I utterly denied either to
write or to do, before that the Lieutenant of the Tovver threatened me, and
that often, to rack and torment me, which grievous punishments my frail flesh
did abhor. And therefore I did but execut his will and invention. Whatsoever
he commanded, that I wrote, that I did, so I spoke, not of malice, but by
constraint, not of evil will, but of deuellish suggestion I vvrote many
things falsely, and it repented me that ever I vvrote them before I departed out
of England as a runnegate for my enormeous sins, which vexed and disquieted
my conscience day and night excedingly.

I never appeered before any Judge or other officer in England as a witness
against any one Roman Catholic: in so much that when they were araigned, I
absented my self from London of purpose. The Pope, the Cardinals, the Bishops,
and other Catholic Romans, have bestovved many benefits upon me, and I have
requited them with ingratitude, but I have showed the cause: fear of grievous
punishment and magnificall promises withdrew me cleene from God. If you
(vvorthie men) had been in the like danger, I know not what you would have
do^ne. I could hear nothing else vvhiles I was in prison, but these threats:
Do so or else the Officers shall carry-thee to be racked: I had lever he had said
to be hanged. It is an euel thing to have my body by these tortures to be
made two foot longer, then ever God made it. They recompted unto me the manner
and order of racking, which when I heard, the fear and horror of this kind
of punishment did quite overcome me in mine examination.

I vvrote down into my book the names of such as the Lieutenant or his
servant would have me write. Sir George Peckam knight was in the rovvle of
the Papists. Judge Suthcot, and many other (whose names and persons were
unknown to me before I came to the tovver) occupied a rome in my rovvle among
the rest that were addicted to the Roman religion, and that by the suggestion
of the forenamed. If I had not ben apprehended, I would have answered all
Papists that would have asked me for what cause I vvrote so many lies in my
examination: That I was the writer in deed, but (God knovveth) other men
were the Authors.

If my frailty will not excuse me, I appeal to your mercy: where with you
say, you are fenced: show it then, and for the love of God set me at liberty,
and afterward you shall see, that I will confess the truth freely without
all constraint. I have grievously offended you D. Allen, yet I say thus much,
I do commit my self wholly to your clemeneie. I say nothing of my religion,
whatsoever the scripture does teach (I except no book of the old or new
Testament) I do firmly believe, I believe no other thing. Do with me what
you list, burn me, ha^g me, kill me, behead me: I am the same man, if I have
not the truth, Christ is the truth, let him show me the truth and open mine
eyes.

D. Allen, Sir Own Hopton the Lieutenant of the Tovver commanded me with
threats, to write mine examination according to his will and pleasure, and
willed me (when I published the names of the Papists, many of whose names I
never heard of before) not to be afraid to affirm them to be fautors of the
Pope, of the Queen of Scots, to be mortal ennimies to the Queens Majesty, to
her Counselors, and to al those which were defendors of the religion which is
now publicly taught in England. And they were al noble men or gentlemen,
that were there mentioned.

If thou vvilt do this (quoth he) the Queen will promote thee, and thou shall
find me most ready to help the: all the nobility will love thee excedingly,
and thou shall want nothing: I will send my man with thee to Oxford, and thou
shall be maintained there: I will find the means that thou shall have one
hundred Marks yearly: and without all doubt, thou shall have a fat benefice.
If thou vvilt not do this, thou shall be tormented and that grievously:
therefore take good advice what to do. And for this cause, partly led with
fear, and partly overcome with flattery, the old proverb was verified in me:
whatsoever he did say, the same I did sooth: al his said promises were bound
with an oath.

These things that I have written are so true, as nothing can be more true.
See (o men) how tragically the Lieutenant of the Tovver dealt with me. As Soon
as ever I came in Sir Own Hopton sight, being brought by an officer, I
confessed my self to be of his religion, yet for all that he would needs have
me play the hypocrite I was reddy to go to church on mine own accord the
next sondaie after I was apprehended, yet notvvithstanding he commanded me to
seem to resist, and his man was willed to dravv me to the church, as though
I went against my will: of these sevv you may gather many things.

Concerning the Bull which was fastened upon the walls at Rhemes, I dare not
affirm it, but there went such a report among the Popes scholars in the
English College at Rome: whether this Bull of excommunication against our
Queen Elizabeth was renewed and printed again at Rome, I am utterly
ignorant: but forgive me that have after such sort written and done, both
rashly and falsely.

Such things as I have written at this present, I have written them of mine
own free will without any constraint to unburden my conscience, in the
presence of William Johnson and George Robinson, in the prison of Roan, on
Saterdaie being the 19. of February in the year of our Lord 1583.

John Nichols.

MAKING SVTE FOR A VVARRANT TO ATTACH THE SAID JOHN NICOLS, demand was made
whether any thing could be laid to his charge saving matters of religion: it
was ansvvered yea: and thereupon these articles and accusations following were
drawn out against him, upon which the prisoner being examined he ansvvered
to every one severally, as is here set down first in Latin, afterward in
English.

1 ACcusamus Ioannem Nicolaum, primum quod famosos libello fecerit, and praelo
mandauerit contra Principes and publicas person as atque collrgia, qui famosi
libelli etiam in ditionibus suae Maiestatis Christianissimae in multorummanus
venerunt and famam multorum leserunt.

Respondeo vt sequitur. Ego Ioa^nes Nicolaus, protestans in religione, 20.
Februarij anno Domini 1583. neque metu, neque fauore cuiusquam hominis, aliquid
a me respondebitur. Quantum ad hunc primum articulum, fateor me ture recteque
accusatum esse.

2 In his libris, turpissimorum criminum mendaciter and calumniose insimulat
nominatim certos Cardinales, obiiciens eis stuprum and scelera pessima, ex mera
contra sacrum ordinem malitia.

Ad secundum sic respondeo. Fateor me sic scripsisse, sed fama atque relatione
hominum prauorum, vt opinor.

3 Sanctissimum Dominum nostrum Papam seditiose and maledi^e in iisdem scriptis
incusat iniustitiae furti, rapinae, and omnis iniquitatis, particulatim
nominans quasdam rapinas quas eum fecisse fingit.

Respondeo, me sic scripsisse, sed magis ambitionis and malitiae causa, quam
veritatis, nifi vt acceperam illum fecisse aliquid quod a me literis mandatum
sit a viris illius conatibus minime fauentibus, quod nunc non omnino a me
approbatur.

4 In suis libris praedictis iniquissime, and (quod postea confessus est)
falcissime accusauit, proditionis and laesae Maiestatis homines sanctissimos,
and innocentissimos, per quod ipsius and aliorum suorum complicum falcissimum
testimonium, plurimi, id est 12 religiosissimi viri aut plures fuerunt
crudelissima morte sublati. Eumque interrogari cupimus, an aliorum inductione
vel sua sola malitia, eos falso accusauerit, and qui eum induxerunt ad hoc.

Ad quartum sic respondeo. Me semper negasse aliquod testimonium in ducturum
contra quemcunque hominem qui ob religionem passus est: sed in libris meis
insinuaui, quod multi in Collegio Anglicano Romae si^o, optauerunt mortem
Reginae, and multorum aliorum vt scribitur isto libro: and in illo articulo
addidi plus quam veritas concessit. Et quantum ad nomina illustrissimorum
virorum, vt nomen Domini Leicestriae, vt nomen Domini Burleighi, Reginae
conquaestoris, Domini Francisci Vvalzingham etc. quos viros neque accusatos,
neque minatos ab aliquo in isto Collegio audiui, sed hoe ambitionis and lucri
causa finxi.

5 Accusauit mendaciter and malitiose Anglorum Collegium (suae Maiestatis
fauore Rhemis residens) quod Bullam Pij V. contra Reginam Angliae datam, Rhemis
publicauerit, and valuis and postibus illius vrbis affixerit, ex quo
iniquissimo mendacio, and calumnia, illius collegij alumni, magnam postea
incurrerunt Reginae suae indignationem.

Ad quintum articulum sic respondeo. Quod iuniores students retulerunt mihi
quod Bulla anaihematis per Pium V. facta contra Reginam nostra^ Elizabetham,
renouata fuit per Gregorium Papam XIII. and retulerunt mihi quod illa Bullae
Pij V. publicata fuit ^hemis and valuis and postibus illius vrbis affixa. Hoc
leui illorum relatione scripsi: sed hac dear, non melius sciui, quam infans
vnius diei, quia Rhemis tunc temporis non fui.

6 Nuper etiam in Galliis existens scripsit ante 10. dies, apertas literas ad
quendam grauem virum, in quibus famam and honorem Collegij Anglorum multiplici
mendacio, conuitio, calumnia, and detractione grauissima, laesit: dicens
praedictum Collegium docere and committere omnia mala, and quod viderit oculis
suis continuo in Collegio fieri quae nimis sunt dictu turpia and horrenda, vt
ita falcissima calumnia and patres societatis Jesus, qui illud Collegium Romae
regunt, and ipsorum discipulos collegij alumnos infamia notari.

Quantum ad sextum, hoc respo^deo. Istiusmodi literas scripsi, sed superbia,
and animus cupiens in Anglia promoueri, ad scribendum me duxit. Et quantum ad
Collegium Rhemense, hoc dico: quod plus ex malitia, quam ex veritate dixi. and
sic alterum Collegium quod est Romae falso a me accusatum est. Et de Doctore
Alano, in conscientialoquor, nihil aliud scio aut audiui quam innocentiam, sua
religione excepta.

7 Praeterista, periurij crimen ipsum incurrisse, probabimus. non solum ex eo,
quod post publicam, solemnem and voluntariam haereseon abiurationem Romae ante
quadriennium factam, relapsus sit in abiuratas haereses: sed ex eo quod
interposito tureiurando promiserit (cum Collegij Romani alumnus esset) se
suscepturum sacros ordines, and in Angliam profecturu ad propagandum fidem
Catholicam, quandocunque a superioribus id esset sibi mandatum. Quod promissum
iureiurando confirmatum, iam ipse eum ing enti scandalo irritum fecit.

Ad septimum articulum respondeo. Illum articulum esse verum, and incurri
periurium, quia Romae vixi vt hypocrita, nunquam existens in religione
Cathelicae Romana, praesertim cord.

8 Porro, obiicimus illi, quod Pontificem dolo male fraudauerit, quando sub
pretextu aduersae valetudinis, and quod aerem Romanum far non potuerit,
petiit a sua Sanctitate veniam eundi ad Collegium Rhemense, vt ibi studia
prosequeretur, and sacerdotium susciperet, in eum finem postulans and accipiens
a sua Sanctitate 50. aureos, cum ille accepta per fraudem hac pecunia recte
profectus est in Angliam.

Ad octauum articulum respondeo, me defraudasse Papam 25. aureor um, quos mihi
dedit in via viatici vt Rhemos peruenirem, sed Rhemos non veni, recta in
Angliam profectus sum.

Ob omnes praedictos articulos sic a me Ioanne Nicolao concessos dolor magnus
me tenet, and sub pedibus cuiusque quem sic malitiose and grauiter offendi, me
ipsum prosterno and subiicio. Deus scit, animo euadendi fortunatus
promotionibus, quam desiderio veritatem loquendi ductus. Deus sit mihi
misericors, and propitius, and ignoscat mihi pariter cum illis quos sic temere
and impieo ffendi. Peto vt omnes illi qui per me offensi sunt, pro amore
Christi, tantae iniuriae immerito illis illatae, obliuiscantur. partim hanc
tetigi culpam Satanae suggestu, and partim quod multilaudauerunt ea quae sic
impudenter scripseram.

Per me Ioannem Nicolaum Anglum.

1 We do accuse John Nicols, first, for that he made infamous libels, and set
them down in print, against Princes, publicks persons, and Colleges: which
infamous libels came to the hands of many in his most Christian Majesty's
Dominions, and have blemished the good name of many a man.

I John Nicols Protestant, the xx. of February An. Domini 1583. do answer as
follows: That I mean to do nothing for fear nor favor as touching the first
article, I confess that it is a truth that I am accused of.

2 In these books he does accuse falsely and slanderously many Cardinals by
name, of most filthy crimes, obiecting unto them vvhoredonne, and most wicked
acts, and that of mere malice against the sacred function.

As touching the second, I confess that I wrote so, but upon the report of
lewd persons.

3 In the same vvritings, he does accuse sediciously and reprochfully the
Popes holiness of injustice, theste, roberye, and al iniquity, naming certain
roberies particularly, which he has fained him to commit.

To the third article I agree, that I have written so, but of ambition and
malice: but even as I have received (by report that the Pope did somevvhat as
is written of him by me) of men that sauored not his proceedings: which things
afterward upon better aduiseme^t, I did not, nor do allow.

4 In his foresaid books he has accused most holy and innocent men, most
unjustly and (as him self confessed afterward) most falsely, of treason and
conspiracy against their princes person: so that through his, and his
companions false witness: many, that is to say, xij. most religious men or
more, were put to most cruel death. And we desire you to enquire of him,
whether he falsely accused them of his own malice, or induced thereunto by
others, and what they were that thereunto induced him?

To the fourth thus I answer: that I alvvaies denied to bring forth any
evidence against any one person that suffered in England for religion: but I
insinuated in my book that diverse in the College at Rome, wished the death of
the Queen and diverse others as is specified in that book. and in that article
I added more then truth is. And as concerning the names of honorable
personages, as my Lord of Leycester, my Lord Burleigh, Sir Frauncys Vvalzingham
etc. which men I never heard accused or threatened, by any of the College, but
were for ambition and preserment sake forged.

5 He has falsely and maliciously accused the English College (now by his
majesty's favor reside^t in Rhemes) that they did publish in Rhemes the Bull
that Pius V. set forth against the Queen of England: and that they did fasten
it upon the gates and walls of that city: by occasion of which wicked lie and
slander, the students of that College, did incure the high indignation of
their Queen.

As touching the fifth article, this I say: that by light report of the
younger students, I reported in my book that the Bull of Pius V. was renewed by
the Pope Gregory the thirteenth, and was fixed upon the posts at Rhemes,
which thing I knew as well as the infant of one days age.

6 And now of late being here in France, he vvrote not ten days since, open
letters to a certain grave man: in which letters he did with many a lie,
reproach, slander, and grievous detraction, empaire the good fame and honor of
the English College: saying that the foresaid College does teach and commit al
euels, and that he has seen with his eyes that to be do^ne continually in
that college, which are horrible things, and to filthy to be spoken, so that
by this most false slander, he does defame, both the fathers of the society
of Jesus, which gouuerne that College at Rome, as also their scholars the
students of that college.

As touching the sixth article, this I answer, that I wrote such a letter,
but of pride, and a mind to be preferred in England. And as touching the
College of Rhemes, this I say, that I spoke more of malice then of truth: and
so in likewise the College of Rome was falsely accused by me. And as
concerning M. Doctor Allen, I say in conscience, that I know or have heard by
the man nothing else but innocence, his religion excepted.

7 Besides these we will prove him to be a perjured person, not only for
that he is in relapse, and fallen again into those heresies, which he abiured
publicly, solemnly, and voluntarily at Rome 4. years since: but for that he
promised upon his oath (when he was a student in the English College at Rome)
that he would take holy orders, and go into England, and there to teach the
Catholic faith whensoever he should be sent by his superiors. which promis
(confirmed with an oath) he has broken, not without great scandal.

The seventh article is true: and I have incurred perjury, for that at Rome I
lived as an hypocrite, being never in heart of the Roman religion.

8 Moreover we object to him, that he abused the Pope with craft and deceit,
when under pretense of sickness, and that he could not away with the aier of
Rome, he desired leave of his holiness to come to the College at Rhemes, there
to follow his study, and to be made priest, and to that end requesting and
receiving of his holiness 50. crowns of gold, but as soon as he had gotten the
money thus fraudently, he went straight into England.

As concerning the eight article it is granted, I defrauded the Pope of 25.
crowns given unto me in way of Viaticum to bing me to Rhemes.

For all these articles being thus granted by me John Nicols, I am right sorry,
and submit me self under the feet of any such as I have maliciously and
grievously offended. God knovveth I spoke these things with a desire to be
promoted, rather then with a mind to utter the truth. God be merciful unto me
and pardon me, and al those whom I have thus offended vvilfully I cry mercy:
and beseech them for Christ his sake to forget such injuries so impudently
committed against them, partly by Satan's prompting, partly by the countenance
of others in commending such stuf.

By me John Nicols Englishman.

M. Stubs gave me the matter of my book in the Tovver, entitled: The
recantion of John Nicols, etc. M. Wilkinson did write in the margent the
notes: and also added to that which I vvrote, and corrected the faults by me
escaped.

Moreover I told my Lord Treseurer about alhallowtide last past Anno Domini
1582. these words that follow: If it may pleas your honor, I am right sorry
that I have such books put forth, that contain more falsehood then truth. My
lord ansvvered, that the Papist found out that I lied.

When I confessed to M. Kirkby in the tovver that it repented me in vvriting
such books as were contrary to the truth, M. Lucas Kirkby reported these my
words to M. Reignolds of Oxford, who made report thereof to Sir Frauncys
Vvalzingham who being certified of this thing vvrote or sent to M. Lieutenant
of the Tovver of London, that I should be sent for, and examined face to face
before M. Kirkby to know whether it was so or not as Sir Frauncis was
certified. When I came to the Tovver, M. Kirkby used these words to me when
he saw me. Speak the truth (quoth he) and shame the Devil. So I will (quoth I)
doubt not thereof: M. Kirkby was examined apart, and I ansvvered truly, if I
had been permitted by M. Lieutenant so to do. For when I said so, I told M.
Kirkby that I vvrote those books for ambition, say not so (quoth M.
Lieutenant) write (quoth he to his Secretary) after this manner: That he was
sorry that he wrote his books so rudely as he did.

When M Reignolds in the presence of Doctor Humfrey told me that he would
prove to my face before M. Doctor Humfrey (M. Kirkby being called before them)
that I had uttered such words, as that I was sorry that my books were
published conteinning more untruth then verity, and that I said I would forge
no more against the Papists neither in print nor pulpit. Which thing when M.
Lieutenant heard, he had him hold his peace. and talk no more thereof.

By me John Nicols.

THE SATISFACTION. OF LAVRENCE CADDEY, TOUCHING his frailties, and fall from
the Catholic Church, at his return into England.
IF there be any Catholics in England or out of England, that heard of my
speech or recantation at Paul's cross, which was in the year of our Lord 1581.
These are to certify them that it was directly against my conscience, and
that I was never of that Religion that then I pretended, as God shall save me
at the general day of Judgment.

For I will show plainly and manifestly that of my inward defection from our
Mother the Catholic Church there were never any effectual causes, whereby it
may most clearly appear that inwardly I was never since my first
reconciliation to the Catholic Church an heretic. For either I inwardly
separated my self from the Catholic Church, because I thought some points of
the Churches doctrine to be false, or for the euel life of the Catholics.

For the first, although I never studied divinity, but as much as some
Cathecumini do, and the younger scholars that are yet in the course of
Philosophy, or other profane sciences, yet I am not (I thank God) so dull of
wit, but I can Judge somewhat of Religion and of the difference between the
Catholics and the Protestants, by the sermons of learned men which I have here
to fore frequented, by the conversation I had with learned Fathers, which
daily did expound the harder points of Religion, and often did dissolve diverse
folish and childish Sophismes of heretics.

Whereby I know, and truly ever since my first conversion did know, that
every point of the Catholic religion is conformable to the word of God,
although the heretics do falsely say that they are grounded upon the bare
traditions of men: and to me it is evident that there is no article of the
Catholic faith now called in doubt, which may not be proved by diverse places
of the scriptures, or by most clear sequel inuincebly deduced and gathered of
the same.

And where the adversaries say, that either the Catholics do recite places out
of the scriptures, which are not authe^tical, or else if they do allege places
out of the true scriptures that they expound them falsely according to their
own fancies, I was never since my first reconcilement so simple or necligent
of my salvation, as not to see, that to be an usual stale evasion of al old
heretics.

For this I know, that Luther that provvde Lucifers Primogenitus, or what
other singular sectarie soever, being but one man, although he had been most
holy in the sight of men, as in deed he was most unholy and wicked both
before God and man, ought not to judge scriptures to be authentical or not
authentical by his own private, unconstant and variable spirit, and refuse the
Judgment of the Church and General Council which determines such things by
the spirit of truth, promised by Christ's express word, and so clearly
testified in scriptures, to abide with the same to the end of the world.

And in truth, it was a note sure enough for me to confirm my self in my
forefathers faith and to condemn in my conscience the contrary sect of the
Protestants, that I heard by men of full credit (howsoever The English sectaries
vvrith and vvrangled in the matter of late to save their honesties) that one
heretic, as Luther, by his spirit denies some books that our Caluinists
accept to be Gods word by the judgment of their spirit. and I savv it plainly
by mine own late experience of them, that they receive and condemn, admit or
repel, even as they think good for the vantage of the cause, and as may best
serve for the defense of their deuellish doctrine. Wherein truly (I say for the
reverend respect and honotable dealing with the divine book of Gods word) not
withstanding the adversaries pretending al reverence toward the scriptures,
and tedious vaunting, talking, and tossing of them, the Catholics yet do so
far pass them in Religious keeping, preserving, interpreting, translating,
alleging, and al other use of holy writ, as the true owner and occuper of any
thing, passes the thief and usurper. I believe it, and have had experience of
it in both sides, and therefore I speak it.

For the second, that is, th'exposition of scriptures, I knew it was the
property of al heretics to abuse, wrest and wring them, to whatsoever them
selves list, and particularly to the private sense of every sect master, each
one for his own erroneous doctrine and the condemnation of his fellows. I
have heard with mine own ears, and seen with mine own eyes: that the
scriptures sound al for Luther and against the Sacramentaries in Germany: and
in England and some other places, all the Bible is at Caluins and Bezas beck,
and sounds whatsoever they say, against not only the Catholics or
Lutheranes, but against their own book of common prayer, acts and
injunctions published by authority: the Puritanes there having reconced above
an hundredth and sortie errors in The English service against the scriptures, and
which I noted in the time of my being in England especially in London and
Cambridge, as well the writers, Preachers, Readers and Disputers, as most other
scholars and prentises be puritanes, condemning by Gods word that same service
and administration which them selves daily resort unto.

For which who soever shall read the writings of M. Vvhittakers, or the
disputes of Fulke, Charke, Walker, and such other Ministers lately had in the
Tower, they shall find my words and observation true, and shall see many points
of puritanisme decided by them by coulor of scriptures, against their own
authorized service, and all those things set out by authority.

I need not stand to tell you now the Lutheranes expound this notorious text,
Hoc est corpus meum, so far otherwise then the Zuinglians and Caluinists,
that they have proved these, by Gods express word heretics: and these, them
for the reciproke, plain carnal men and Idolaters: both the one and the other
vvrithing the sacred words to their own erroneous and damnable sect against
the proper nature and plain sense, which the letter, the circumstance, the
conference of places, the ancient fathers, Councels, and the whole Church
expressly sets down. With this I have marked that the Sectaries of our
country and al other places, being singular, vainglorious, lovers of them
selves, and cherisers of their own fantasies, seek for nothing but
novelties, and in th'exposition of scriptures to find out that which never
neither fool nor wiseman found out before them, and all this with a ridiculous
boast of every man's several spirit, gift and knowledge, which to me and
others that see their lives and learning, and partly know their intention, is a
strange case.

How soever it be, their exposition so new, so improbable, so inconstant, so
various, so far differing from the comme^taries of all the fathers, passing al
these men in all grace and knowledge, from the general Councels, that not by
particular fancy of a few, but by uniform consent of the most learned in the
world, have by Gods word (truly through the assistance of the holy Ghost
understood) defined these things to our hands: this consideration I say of
their ungodly behavior toward the holy scriptures, the glorious Doctors, and
the universal Church of al ages and nations, of which by my late being among
them, I have informed my self better then ever I could have do^ne by reading of
books or here say, has fortified my faith against them, I trust in God, during
life. But because I profess not in this brief satisfaction to dispute of the
matter, or arrogate to my self any profound knowledge in these things, I for
this point say no more but this, that if I had been partly bent to heresy when
I went into England, as I was not (I speak it as before God) the more I had been co^uersant with the Protestants, yea with the learnedsts amongst the^, the
sooner should I have been reclaimed from that heresy.

For in other things though I may bouldly say they have the gifts of the mind
as plentifully as any nation, yet in divinity and specially in these
controversies, they are so bewitched, that through the common malady of
heresy, which by Gods just judgment of sin and for saking the obedience of
his Church, is ever joined with pitiful darkness of understanding, especially
in such as brag most of the light, that when they bring but Sophismes to prove
their religion, they both think and bouldly aduouch, that they are
demo^strations. But here they will exclaim after their manner and say they
bring places of scripture, and will charge me that I call the scriptures
Sophismes. No God forbid, for that were blasphemy, but I call the false and
childish exposition, or the place (either by false translation or exposition
wrested) a Sophisme, the which may sone be espied of him that has any
judgment or common sense, especially if God has lightened his understanding
by the doctrine of the Catholic Church.

Besides, if I had favored heresies, this would have revoked me, to see some of
those that on this side the scas were both counted and know to be void of all
good gifts and qualities of the mind, not capable of any science, yet at their
return home, to be admitted to be public preachers, and their words, being
nothing but known forgeries and blasphemous lies, to be compted ^s Oracles and
conclusions deduced out of th'expresse word of the Lord, as they speak in our
country.

One says very vvisely of Aristotle, that he used hard and difficult terms in
Philosophy to drive away from the reading of his books those that were
simple and unlearned, lest says he, Omnia harpiarum more immundo contactu
conspurcarent: that is to say: lest they should diminish and abase the reverend
majesty of philosophy by their foolish and doting expositions. How soever it
is in that faculty of Philosophy, sure it is, that the written word of God
is full of profound mysteries, and yet is confidently, bouldly and malepertly
expounded now in England, as well privately at every table and tavern, as in
the pulpits and common assemblies of simple and unlearned artificers, so that
the lay people, prentises especially and young scholars, as soon as they can bid
Caesar good morrow in Greek, or read The English Testament, yea the women dare
presume to dispute with the Clergy of the cheifest points of Religion, and
bouldly condemn the cheifest clercks in the world.

Is not this I pray you a great abasing of th'excelle^cie of the word of God?
surely if I had favored heresies: this would have been a sufficient motive to
have revoked me. I could bring many more strong reasons to this purpose, but
because I am a young nouice in learning, and because I think this which I have
brought will suffice to prove that there was no cause of my inward defection
in respect of my particular knowledge, I vvil here end this first point.

For the second, that I had no cause to separate my self from the Catholic
church for the euel life of the Catholics, and to come to be a Protestant for
their holiness, I vvil show it manifestly, and yet no great proof vvil be looked
for at my hands therein. First, suppose the Catholics lived very euel, and as
ill as their adversaries (purposely to deceive the people) feign them to do, if
I think the Religion to be good, their euel life should never cause me to for
sake it, if a man should measure truth and faith by the elle of virtue and
innocence in the professors and followers of any sort, in man's frailty and
misery of this life, God should have no people nor part in this world al being
subject to sin and danger in this mortal state. But surely if we should docide
the matter by the difference of life, behavior, and conversation of both
sides, I were worse then an ass to determine for the Protestants against the
Catholics, amongst whom the first Professors were Saints, and the cheef
leaders and teachers afterward most holy, and al these followers though
frail and sinful men, yet finding remedy by the medicinable Sacraments,
penance and discipline of the Church, for their daily offenses.

Where contrary wise the very first authors of this Protestancy, Luther,
Calvin, Beza and the like, or as them selves call them, the restorers and
reformers of Religion, were not only vulgarly naught, but of notorious
infamous wicked life: as their Ministers be in all cou^treies, and their zealous
followers not good in any place, specially in England, where they have
notoriously betrayed their false faith, by their foul fruicts. Yea and where
it is known that their doctrine it self, has so altered to the worse al
kind of States: and that their pulpits are nothing else but a school of sin,
licentiousnes, lust and liberty, that al wisemen wonder at it, and good men
lament the case.

Who knows not that virtue, devotion, and godly life it self is bourthenous
and hateful to the Protestants, so far surely that they seek as I have seen
not only to abolish, deface; and destroy, the books now or of old written
for defense and proof of the Catholic faith, which they may do upon some
pretense of errors contained in the same, but they burn up al godly treatises
and books of contemplation, meditation, and instruction of Christian life and
manners, containing no dispute of religion at al, as long since they used a
devout treatise, of the life and Immitation of Christ: and now of late they
openly burned a number of the books of prayer and meditation of prayer made by
Jews of Granado together with the new Testament. Assure your selves that they
cannot abide such books of al others, knowing that devout prayer only,
penance and amendment of life, will easily bring men from their pretended
Religion, in which no such devotions are found. Neither, if you mark well,
shall you ever find that the learned of the Protestants writ or treat of any
such argument, al their doings are in pugnis verborum, in strife, emulation,
contention, contradiction, destruction. They stand upon quick dispatch, and
attribute al to Christ his passion, without either much meditation of it, or
conforming them selves unto it. Finally they have turned the grace of Christ
into carnal lust and license.

To see these things which in England are so open and evident, not so much
profound learning is requisite, as due consideration, and some experience of
other places, which if our Gentlemen, students and others, either of the ynnes
of Court or universities, or of what other place or calling soever might have:
as diverse by traveling over the seas to either of the Seminaries or other
Catholic schools have happily proved, they should see what difference of
life, manners, education, and behavior there is betwixt the one and the other.

This one thing I dare be bold to say, for the Seminary of Rome, where I most
lived in mine absence from my country which therefore I knew best, and which
the wicked calumniators have most sought to slander, the youths and students
al, there, be as virtuous as any be in Christendom. And let both Oxford and
Cambrige, give me one such for hollynes of life and conversation (so long as
they be there under the Protestants regiment) as there be a number in the said
Seminary, and I promis you I will say in S. Peter's in Rome, all that I said at
Paul's cross in London.

Not vvithstanding (as I said) al euel life makes not nor proves one to be an
heretic, for I am an offender as other men, and perhaps the cheef of many
sinners, but I have found remedy, mercy and salvation, in the Church, in
which only the holy Passion of Christ the cause of al remission, is
profitable, and out of the same, nothing but damnation though man's life seem
never so just and holy. For this his blessed passions sake I trust he will
nether now remember the sins of my youth nor this my exterior revolt from his
holy Church, which I profess as before to have been of frailty against mine
own conscience and knowledge. God that knows al things, knows that I did it
not for any liking I had of the Protestants either life or religion, knowing
both to be stark naught, only the Devil by false and subtle persuasions was
the cause of my outward defection. First I had a seruent desire to see my
parents and friends, and because I was afraid, they neither durst nor would
receive me for sear of the statuts. I thought it good to play the hypocrite
(if that may be called hypocrisy, to put on the habit and resemblance of
wickedness) with the Bishop of London, that is, to feign my self to be an
heretic, that thereby I might procure his license, and so go to my friends
both without their danger and mine own. The Bishop being a wily Fox straight
ways commanded me to signify so much in public audience, and then he would
grant me my request, then began the tragedy of my vvo and misery.

I began to excuse my self of fearefulnes, and to weep before him that taught
the Bishops sons, and befote John Dias the Bishops chaplen. Then I thought
with my self, that if I should withstand the Bishop, a thousand worldly
inconveniences should have ensued thereof, because I had said before, I was as
he was in religion, these and other such like causes of my miserable outward
defection did the Devil put into my head: who although he had thought to have
thrown me down for ever at that time, yet I hope to give him and al his the
overthrow, and never here after while I live to yield to such like temptations,
for the performaunce whereof, I beseech the blessed virgin Marie, and all the
holy company of heaven, and al good Catholics to pray for me. I could name
some vvitnesses of the great passions and in ward strife I had with my self
upon the first consideration of my pretended reuoult, but that I dare not name
them for putting the godly men in danger: this only I vvil ade therein, that
all the world may see I never was theirs in heart since my first reconcileme^t to
the Catholic Church.

First when I was in prison in the Gatehorrse, I went every day to the door of
a Catholic which lay in the next rome to the chamber I lay in, and weeping
bitterly, shevved him that I should do against my conscience, from which he
merueilous charitably and comfortably dehorted me, with great reasons and
encouragement to be constant in confession of my faith: but the Devil, his
Ministers, and mine infirmity prevailed, and I did that which was required at
my hands. After I had done that which ever since has been a nail in my
conscience, in diverse places I was conversant with the Catholics, and never
uttered or hurt any, nor would have done for all the good in the world, the
persons and places I could name but for their endangering.

When I was at Cambrige, I counseled diverse to go over sea, and persuaded
them so, that I had brought them over with me in deed, if it had not ben for
fear of their Tutors-Many youths there be (God be thanked for it) well bent
to virtue and the Catholic Religion, I beseech God bring them thence. Besides,
when my chamber fellows especially, one Sir Hutton, Doctor Hutton his
nephew, would speak against F. Campion, I have defended him so far, that he
called me often Papist, and defendor of Traitors, and threatened he would
complain of me to the Master and the Seniors. I have spoken the same, and
how he was falsely accused, etc. in mine own country to one, being both
well learned and very catholickly bent as we vvalked by the Seas side.

But some vvil object I kept company with Io^^ Nichols, a fervent heretic: to
which Objection I answer, confessing that I kept him company to much, for if
I had follovved him in all points, he would have brought both him self and me
to everlasting destruction: for I am sure, that never woman brought out such a
horrible and ougley monster in manners as he is. But if ye consider the end
wherefore I was conversant with him, I hope ye will not think me to be
much blame vvorthie.

First I went about to know his lying spirit and his detestable manners,
which I am sure I know (although to mine own discredit) as well as any: but
especially I went about to get him out of England, from being the cause of
shedding of Innocent blood, the which I thank God I have obtained, and have
procured his apprehension, not for hatred or hurt of his person, as God does
know, but for desire of saving his soul, and detections of his foul
slau^ders against the Church of God and her children. I was never (I thank
God, most humbly) of his malicious humor, if I had been, I might have vomited my
poison against the Catholics, I might have gone to the privy counsel, and
have enstauled my self as many do, I might have received good conditions of
living being offered, I might have staide at Cambrige at the cost of my parents
which are able to keep me in the schools of learning: many commodious ways
for vvorldly preferment I might have follovved, if I had inwardly liked of
that foul heresy, nether had I any need to go into a strange country,
where I knevv, I should live poorly.

To be short, vvhiles I was in England this last time, I was never quiet in
conscience, because whatsoever I did, I did it against the same. Other reasons
I could yield, but because I will be short, these shall suffice: one thing does
comfort me no little, that many have fallen as grosely as I have done, and
afterward have become most firm and constant. It remains only, that for
this public sin and scandal, and al other offenses, I crave pardon of God,
of the holy Church, of Christ his Vicar here upon earth Gregory the XIII. of
that name, head of the said holy Church, and al other that I gave scandal to
thereby. And I request al good Catholics to take me as their brother in Christ
Jesus. And I beseech al good Christians for Jesus Christ his sake to pray for
me, that I never become an heretic, but that I may live and die in the
Catholic and Apostolic Church, which is the Church of Rome, and that after
this life I may enjoy the kingdom of heaven: to the which God bring us for
Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be al
honor, power, and glory, both now and for ever world without end.

Laus Deo ac deiparae virgini Mariae. By me Laurence Caddey.

THE COPY OF A LETTER written by the said Laurence Caddey, to his Patron and
friend.
I Think my self happy most worthy Patron that your Fatherly affection toward
me is not decreased, but wonderfully and more then I could look for,
augmented. I now see that first of al you have a great love to my soul,
secondarily to your Country and to me your poor countryman, a great thing
it is to bestow upon me my habit, but what greater then to give your word,
and besides a testimonial most necessary in these perilous times, but you
can do no other seeing that the quallities of the true Church be in you
eminentissimo quodam modo, the which most abundantly does bestow not only
interna Charismata, upon those that penite^tly do run unto her for soccour:
but also al exterior graces necessary for them, you therefore be no stepfather
nor she no stepmother, but most loving and charitable nourishers both of the
inward and outward man, of your penitent and contrite children. As for the
declaration of my faith it was abruptly in three hours done by me, beside
none at Paris either helped me or saw it as yet, therefore it must needs be
childishe. I pray you let it come to light both for the honor of the Church and
my credit also, and for the discharging of my conscience, besides I made a
solemn oath, that there is nothing but that it is true, every good Christian
will think so, and I would you could learn his name that was in prison
near me in the Gatehovvse, and ask him, etc. as for the resolution of entering
into religion, I have chosen, meaning thereby to work (by Gods grace) my
salvation: I do it not for need, for first I might and may be (but I will
not) a Carthusian, although I never offered my self. besides going with a good
Religious Father to Says in Normandy, there in an Abbey of Saint Martin, I
was requested of most of the Brethren (as this Father can testify) to enter
into their order, but I neither offered my self there or to any other order but
this: Nor mind to be of any but this of the Carmes, which I trust I have made
choice of by Gods suggestion, not conde^ning any other order, al doublesse
being of God, neither yet enter I into religion for need or for desperation,
for I know that if the number of my sins were more then the little sands of
the sea, if I unfeignedly repent, by Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction as
much as I can, that God will be merciful unto me: to be short, I will neither
in any calling despair or presume. for if in any thing, in this it is truly
said, In medio consistit virtus. Briefly I will either attempt it with zeal,
devotion, and full desire of working my salvation and the service of God, or
else Manum de tabula, that is, I will leave of betime, and not take the habit
and afterward, Valedicere habitui and conuentui.

As for the rest in your letter, if I study not to put them in execution to
th'vttermost of my power, surely my heart is more hardened then ever Pharoes
heart was, seeing that one not much inferior to Moses, does both by word of
mouth and by writing speak unto me so lovingly and effectually. Thus leuing of
to trouble you, I request al your prayers for me, and as my bound duty is, I
will whiles I live be your beads man. At Paris.

Your daily Orator, Laurence Caddey.

THE CONFESSION OF RICHARD BAINES PRIEST AND LATE STVdent of the College of
Rhemes, made after he was removed out of the common gaile to his chamber.
AS my misery and wickedness was great which I will now set down to the
publishing of my ingratitude to God, the Church, and my superiors, so was Gods
justice, mercy and providence marvelous toward me to salvation as I verily
hope. Of al which to the glory of Christ, and satisfaction of the holy Church
and all her children whom I have offended or scandalized, and to mine own
worthy confusion temporal, I intend to make this my public confession, that
all that stand, may by my example beware of a fall, and such as be fallen may
thereby make have to arise again.

The very ground of my fall and of all the wickedness either committed or
intended, was my pride which drove me to a lothsomenes to live in order and
obedience, to conceits of mine own worthiness and manifold discontentement of
the schollarlike condition wherein I lived, to an immoderat desire of more
ease, wealth, and (which I specially also respected) of more delicacie of diet
and carnal delits then this place of banishment was like to yield unto me,
though (vvo unto me that could not see so fare before) the stude^ts state in
the Seminary, where I was in very honest count and calling is in all points
so good and happy, that most wise men wonder at Gods so merciful and
plentiful provision for the competent maintenance of so many in such a blessed
trade of life and education.

Besides this, though I was not only a student in divinity, but also a
priest (though many ways I showed and made my self most unworthy of that
high degree) prete^ding in deed in the sight of my superiors the study of holy
scriptures as dewly required: yet in truth I most delited in profane writers
and the vvorst sort of them, such as either wrote against the truth or had least
taste of religion, whereby the holy vvriters of my Christian profession and
priesthood, began daily to wax more and more tedious and loathsome unto me, in
so much that in the doing of such public exercises as by my course of study or
my superiors appointment I often made, I had a delit rather to fill my mouth and
the auditors ears with dainty, delicat, nice and radiculous terms and
phrases, then with wholsome sound and sacred doctrine.

Whereby at leinght I had such a liking of my self, that through novelties of
words joined with pretty proverbs, terms and mocking taunts, whereunto by
natural inclination and by my said profane usage I was much given, I found
means to insinuat my self to the familiarity of some of the younger sort that
me thought might easily be carried into coffeehouse and to mislike of rule
and discipline and of subjection to their masters and governors: for which
purpose I used ordinarily some pretty skoffes against every of the elders of our
house. Undermining by art also, but in pretense of great playnnes and holy
simplicity certain very honest men, whom I thought knevv somewhat of my
superiors secrecy, the knowledge whereof (our lord God forgive me) I purposed
to abuse as occasion afterward should be given, to the annoyance and great hurt
as well of the Catholic cause as of the Seminaries, our President and other
principal persons, to whom by the law of God, nature, and by singular benefits
done to me I owe all duty.

With this I began by little and little to the scandal and ruin of diverse of the
youth and other my fellows, if God had not preserved them by his singular
grace as well by my example of licentious life, as by wicked words, to show my
mislike of fasting and praying, calling for flesh pies or pasties in my chamber
on fry days at night, and omitting the divine service prescribed to men of my
calling, often jesting and skoffing thereat before some of my companions in
whose secrecy and love toward me I had some affia^ce. And then proceeding
farther and farther in wickedness I began to mock at the lesser points of
religion, which is the high way to Heresy, Infidelity and Athisme. as to my
great danger I have experience in mine own case, so lamentable. desiring al
Christian people to take head by my example. Protesting to all the world, that
it is not reason, nor scriptures, nor the spirit of God, which are so much
pretended by protestants, that leads any man to that damnable sect, by which
one country is perished, but it is voluptuousnes, sensuality, pride, ambition
singularity delight and love of man's self, that drives down persons laden
with sin to this heresy of the Protestants, and that the next door, yea the
next steape of this staire is atheism and no belief at al. A fevv words
vvil serve a wise man.

Well when I had thus entangled my self, and for some days proved that such as
I had uttered my euel heretical speeches unto kept al things close, I bouldly
adue^tured upon their familiarity and secrecy to utter diverse horrible
blasphemies in plain terms against the principal points of religion,
specially to one person of mine own calling who afterward (as I must needs
confess to the shame of th'ennemy) godly and trewly for both our good and
saluations uttered the whole matter unto our superior which was Gods great
mercy to me, for otherwise I had doubtless perished for ever more.

For a month space or there abouts I dealt with my said fellovv bouldly not
only by arguments and often communication to draw him to heresy, but also
uttered to him my intention to go into England, there to preach heresy: and
to annoye the common cause of Christ's Church, and specially this Seminary, the
President and superiors thereof, as much as I could possibly: discoursing with
him and declaring that there was no remedy, but the counsel must needs seek
the dissolution of the Seminary, or else sustain their state to be ruyned in
time by it.

Thereupon I uttered sundry means unto him, how first the president him self
might be made away, and if that missed, how the whole company might easily be
poisoned or otherwise dispersed further more offering my hand to gage, that
the president should not be a live that day two years that I spoke it, one of
the years being now gone and yet he alive: as I desire God he may be many. This
was often my deuilish communication, and whether I should not have given this
ouerture to the counsel when I came into England for dispatch of him and the
said Seminary my derest nurce, my self know not (to say he lest) how far
the devil would have driven me, who now holy occupied my heart in hope of
advancement in England by these practices. For which purpose I had also
fraudulently discovered certain points of secrecy and set them down in
vvriting with intent to give the note of the same to the counsel, wherein I
rather detected my own malice then any other thing, for the matters were of
no importance in deed.

In brief this I must needs acknovvledge that I would have done any of these
impious injuries rather then have fallen from the preferment I hoped and gaped
after so inordinatly, our Lord of his infinite mercies for give me that
detestable treason against him and his Church: and the abominable perjury
dissimulation and fiction, when for a whole months space after I had
discovered my mind to my fellovv, yet I said Mass daily, sought for leave and
viaticum of M. President to go home to increase by preaching and al endeavors
the Catholic cause, and took an oath upon the Evangelists that I believed al
points of the Catholic faith, and had no other purpose of going into England
but for the advancement of the same. And I desire good M. President and the
whole house even for the blessed death and wounds of our Savior for whose
sake they sustain all this contradiction of me and other sinners, to pardon and
healp me by their prayers to true repentance and remission.

And that good Priest my dear loving fellovv, whom I would have had partaker
of my wicked and damnable reuoult I cry him mercy even upon my knees, and
thank him (though to the carnal worldly man it might be compted an injury that
he discovered al my counsel unto his superiors and mine. for else I had been
with out doubt damned for ever more.

But all this came of the sweet mercies and dispositions of our Lord God and
Savior who ouertooke and over raught me happily in the very course of my
malice and damnable designements, and has by his unspeakable wisdom, caused
not only my imprisonment, and other my bodily afflictions which he procured
for me at the very same time that I had thought to have been in my ruff and
iolitie amongst his ennemies, but turned my very sins and wickedness to the
good of his honor and my salvation: at the same time both delivering his true
and innocent servant of the Seminary and others whom my malice might have
annoyed, and me also, in most gracious and miraculous sort, his name be blessed
therefore for ever more.

And it is his goodness that has delivered me from the accomplishment of my
wicked desires as powrably and miraculously al most as he did Saul persecuting
the Christians, but with much more mercy then him, for that he found grace
because he did it of ignorance in incredulity: where I did al against my
own skill and conscience: never doubting but the Catholic Roman religion
was the only true, Christian, ancient and Apostolic faith, and worship of
God: though I fained my self for the atchiuing of my detestable designeme^t to
doubt thereof and to have some reasonable motives against the same, and sought
by all means possible to have informed my conscience against that truth which
otherwise I in heart believed.

Now therefore for the poor amends that lies in me to make unto Gods Church.
I protest before the blessed Trinity, and all the glorious company in heaven
and by this public vvriting which I voluntarily make and subscribe with mine
own hand: That I believe in all points the holy, Catholic, Apostolic and
Roman Church, submitting my self to her and the chief governor thereof our
Lord and Master Gregory the xiij. Christ's supreme Minister in earth: and do
Detest, Accurse, Anathematize and Condemn from the botome of my heart, al
Heresies, Schisms and Sects, and specially the heresies of Luther, Calvin,
and al others unto which I might seem by my outvvard wicked behavior and
dissimulation to have been inclined unto: Desiring God and our holy mother the
Church, no otherwise to have mercy on me to salvation, then so long and so
far as I keep, profess and mantaine, to my power the said faith of our
holy forefathers, taught and set forth by the Sea Apostolic.

Given in my chamber at Rhemes the xiij. of May 1583. in the presence of M.
Thomas Bailly Priest, M. Humphrey Ely Doctor of the Laws. and M. Seth Foster
Priest. I acknovvledge this to be mine own act, Richard Baines Priest.

THE SATISFACTION OF EDWARD OSBERNE PRIEST, TOUCHING his frailties, and fall
from the Catholic Church, at his being in England.
IT is almighty Gods great wisdom and mercy, that he has besides his other
just judgments either te^porall or eternal upon sinners, joined also for
most part some great affliction and torment of mind for a continual inward
check and chasticement of their offenses even in them selves, and in this
life. which caused a great Clearke to say, Thou haste commanded good Lord,
and so it is, that every inordinate appetite should be a punishment to it self.

But no sin breadeth this internal vexatio^ so much, as that which is
committed against a man's own skill and conscience, specially the voluntary
forsaking of that faith, truth, and religion which God by his spirit in the
Holy Church, and sacred word, has made him partaker of. I speak not of his
case that impugneth of malice the known truth, as many arch-heretikes have
done, and wickedly do, for that is a sin against the holy Ghost, and such
often carries about with them such hellike torments of conscience and
desperation, that they may be thought to begin their damnation even in this
life* but I mean of others only, who by frailty of the flesh, fear of
worldly distresses, doubt of temporal torments, and disgraces, or sum other
humane infirmity, be often driven to yield in sum points to the threats,
perswations, or allurements, either of worldly friends, or gostely enemies:
even these also, for that they have denied Christ before men, preferred the
body before the soul, hazarded heaven and their salvation, for the brief,
uncertain, and miserable state of this transitory world, carry about with
them in their breast, far worse torments, then any are in the Tower, for the
avoiding of which, many times men make that unhappy choice, we see them do.

Of this misery (vvoe to me and my sins therefore) I have made to much
experience: but I trust to my everlasting salvation, as my merciful Lord God
has now used the matter toward me. Who after I had denied him, forsaken him,
foresworne him, wickedly subscribed to certain blasphemous articles, and made a
private abrenu^ciation of the pereles power and sovereign auctorite of Christ's
Lieutenant upon earth, a flat denial of the Catholic faith, a plain
abiuration of my Priesthod, yea and by the subtle craft of the Churches
deadly enemies, was induced, or rather driven, to accuse most traitorously and
unjustly certain his holy, honorable, and renoumed confessors, and to bear
unhappy witness against them: after all this, yet looked upon me from heaven
with those eyes of grace, by which he converted Paul, restored Peter,
pardoned Marie Magdalen, and others not only his frail friends, but many his
plain persecutors, and by skourging my conscience with contrnuall remorse,
and dovvleful consideration of my soul fall, and damnable condition, has a
leingth brought bitter tears out of my stony heart, and called me again out
of that Sodom of our lost country: and put me into the holy society, and
communion of his body mystical, which is his Church Catholic, the only true
mother of all the faithful, the house of God, the pillar and establishment of
al truth. In which only is al comfort, al grace, al benediction, and out of
which, as I now know by mine own experience, and by the certain view of other
men's cases, with whom I have of late in England conuersed, there is nothing but
error, blindness, doubt, or plain desperation.

His name be blessed for evermore, that has so povvrably and mercifully
delivered me his poor unworthy servant out of these and like miseres, and from
the snares of such, as do nothing but seek how by terror, or machiuillian
practice and policy, to drive men not to be of their religion (for such as be
the common dealers in these cases, God vvot have none) but to seem to be of
that sect which they would be counted of. Surely I can not for the honor of
our country, and the dew respect I have to office, and authority (though to
say truth, they be not of any high function that work us these woes
commonly) discover their foul uncharitable, and unchristian abuse of my
frailty, in procuring my fall from God, and revolt from the true Catholic
Church. which other wise to the shame of that irreligious heresy, and mine
own confusion in this world, that I might find more mercy for the next, I
would willingly lay open to the Christian reader.

This only which is the least of thousands of their sinful, and crafty
collusions, I may not omit, to warn you, that they give out, as often as any
man of fear, pusillanimitie, or any other worldly respect, yeldeth to their
desires, that it is Gods own hand, and miraculous vvorcke, proceeding of the
inuinceible force of their spirit, gospel, and doctrine, against which, no
learning, nor other obstinacy of man may resist. So surely they behaved them
selves in my case, when they knew it best them selves in their conscience to
be otherwise, being the crafty procurers of my fall, and that they had not in
my inward opinion or judgment (which was never I take God to witness
altered) though in outvvarde show overthrown me.

Now my dearly beloved brethren and who soever else shall hap to read
this my pitiful complainte of my late distresses and tragical acts, I do
protest unto you before God, and al his saints, and holy Angels, that my
yelding to their damnable desires came not of any motion of the holy Ghost, by
any probabilite of argument, or authority either of holy scripture, doctor, or
any other reasonable motive, or for that I had any doubt whether the Catholic
Roman religion were the true, and only saving faith and worship of God or
no, for though I be never so simple, yet being in common sense, and taking
trial of both, in such places, as I have lived in, it is not possible that I,
or any man should in deed, and heart, prefer the protestants pretensed
religion, to the Catholic faith, but to tell the plain truth, and shame the
Devil, and my self to, so far as I follovved his perverse suggestions, al
came of mine own concupiscence, evil desire, and delicaces, which vvarred
against me in my members, as The Apostle says, and so did over rule in my
spirit, captiuated, and caused me to yield to flesh and blood, making me to
fear to suffer any pains, or abandon my pleasures for my Lord and masters
sake, who had suffered so much, sheade so many tears, so great abundance of
innocent and precious blood for me.

The adversaries threated me with Phalaris bull (so to call their torments) or
as in truth, them selves termed it unto me, Sir Own Hoptons schole, with
dungeons and death also, except I would admit an ungodly oath, to answer
truly to their captious and cursed interrogatories, confess such things, as
the fear and reverence of God prohibited me, accuse my self, and appeache the
chosen servants of God.

Our Lord God gave me many goodly motions at the very time of that combat, to
resist their terrors, and temptations, as he did also his manifold graces, and
good inspiration, to contemn their sweet promises of good benefices and other
livings, if I would conform my self unto them: but (a less) through my great
sin and frailty, the adversaries for the time prevailed, and specially my
carnal friends, who, by I cannot tell what secret sweet poison of fleshly
love, and pretense of natural kindness, do more deeply vvound and enchaunte
their dearest friends, then other men can do their deadly enemies.

These lo are the arguments, and not any color of scriptures, any learning of
the heretics, or any other probability in the world, that can move any man
to be of their religion: the same reasons will as easily make one a Turk (I
do speak it before God) as a protestant. For though those, that be from their
childehod brought up in their Universities, or other their Schools, and
Churches: without a special miraculous grace of God, can not lightly be of any
other religion, because they can not ordinarely believe except they hear, or
read some catholic true teachers or vvriters, whose writings therefore the
protestants hide from them with all diligence: yet none that ever has been a
broad in the world, and seen the other, or that has the good luck to look
to the faith of our forefathers in our country, or any other Christian
country, can be in heart a protestante.

And would God all the youth of both universities, especially my dear Brethren
(whom God has blessed with wit, learning, and good nature) saw what love,
sincerity, sweet and plain dealing, is used in the Seminary of Rhemes
(where I now by God his grace am) and how easily upon a fevv days conference
and hearing, with out al Rackes, Fears, Forces, Torments, vvorldly
allurementes, or presermentes, by the only force of truth, and evidence of holy
scriptures, and such other plentiful proofs, as the Church of God, and al
Catholic schools have, for all the articles in controversy, besides the great
difference betwixt the life, order and manners, seen here in Churches and
schools, and the wild behavior of our masters and Scholars in England. Or at
least, it were to be vvisshed, that our fellow students in both the
Seminaries, or other Catholics, might have the like fredo^ to come to those
universities, as theirs do hither, and there to try, with out threats of
imprisonment and death, or terrifyinge, by calling men traitors, rebels, and I
can not tell what, to see then, whether their spirit or word (whereof they
so childisly vaunte them selves) could convert any of this education in the
holy Church, to their improbable sect.

At the beginning I know, when their vvares were fresh, and their novelties
joined to the promises and doctrine of lust and licentiousnes, they found some
scholars, and may yet find some, to follovv their concupiscences, but none
trevvly (I think) either young, or old, that can be persuaded by their
arguments.

They make much a do, when they gain the exterior assent of infirm persons,
which in deed, are (thanks be to God) very fevve in comparison of the great
number of those, that gloriously and constantly contemn their terrors and
persuasions, through whose forcible prayers, and merits, I verily think, God
has given me now at this time, and in manner all the rest of their feeble
brethren, grace and mercy, that the enemies there may have confusion by us,
where they looked for glory, the vveake that fell, or were scandalized by us,
may rise and repent with us, and those that stand may be warned by our
frailty, and by the admonition of the holy Apostle, to take head they fall not.

For mine own part (God knows) since I knevv what religion meant, I was
never (and least of al, of late, when they caused me to subscribe to them) of
their meaning. I subscribed (our Lord God forgive me) to that, which one
William Heart parler-preacher to my uncle Sir Robert Lane devised, and which
I neither knew of before, vvrote my self, nor believed my self.

The very truth is, one Richard Lewis a minister, Person of the Parish where
I was bred up, and where I then abode, a famous preacher in deed, but (as I
am able to justify) a most infamous liver, brought me to that unlucky
bargain, as he was before the procurer of my first relenting, which he may
remember, by this token, that his energumicall spirit could not abide the sign
of Christ's Passion, portred in a glass vvindow, in my Fathers Parler, which
was the Cross and wounds of our Redemer, with this sentence written about
the same, Pittey his passion, that caused our redemption, this goodly speech he
scraped out: and let the rest alone which his diuisishnes, no Christian (I
suppose) will allow, nor I, though fallen before, could like in him, but once
fell into hot dispute with him about the same, whose foolish defense (which
was, for that Christ is omnipotent, and a glorious God) I can not now stand
to report.

Surely the very acquaintance with such men's actions, and words which they
often let fall in familiar communication, among such as they deal with all
secretly, would make a man abhor them: one example may be of Fox, the auctor
of the volume of Crackes and many lies (I would say, Acts and monuments) to
whom when I had of late in conference, alleged a place of S. Peter, 2. Pet.
c. 1.11. for proof that our good works were cause of our justification, and
salvation, the fellovv answered flatly: such words I do not remember, but if
S. Peter say, that we are justified or saved Per praesidia bonoru^ operum (for
so he is wont to interlace his English speeches, with latten words) I would
say that he lied, because Iame sure that Paul has the contrary. whereby, and
by diverse like things, I well perceue those good fellows measure all religo^
by their own mere fancy, caring in truth, nether for Peter, nor Paul, nor
Christ, further then their can vvrith they words to their lust. I am
sommething beholden to this man not vvithstanding, for that, at our very first
acquaintance of al, he made me partaker of a certain secret, which he said he
had not reveled to any man else, vz. That he was called by God him self to make
his new latten book of justification. Again, at the same time very
impertinently to our talk, he told me, that he had sent an angel to alderman
Martin to change into single pense, for to imploye them in almees: verily I
laughed in my sleue to hear this vain hypocrite talk: thought I with my
self, Hypocrita cupit videri iustus. These wicked ministers of Satan were
they, that by their craft, pollices, and promises, procured my subversion, and
subscription of the said articles, and other unjust actions.

All which articles, which were seven, I now by this public testimony do
revoke, and recant of mine own free will, as before in heart, so now openly
before all the world, protesting, that I will by the grace of God, live, and
die, in the communion, and felloship of the Catholic and Apostolic Church of
Rome, and during life will obey in all spiritual causes, our holy Father
Gregory the XIII. and his successors in th'Apostolike seat Christ's vicars in
earth, the reuolte from whom, has been the cause of al these errors, sects,
and divisions, and that we can not live in rest and peace of conscience in
our unhappy days, and country, as our auncetors in times past did, but be
thus spoiled, and massacred, for no felony, trespass, or treason, but for
holding that faith, which al our happy forefathers, and our selves were
baptized in, and out of which, I know there is no salvation in the next
world, nor grace in this. Beseching Christ our merciful Savior, to pardon me
that I denied him, and his truth, for fear of man and mortal pains.

As I also humbly (for his sake) desire al Catholics, whom I have unjustly
offended in this my fieblenes to forgive, and pray for me, that I never fall to
the like tentation again: namely those glorious confessors, whom I love as
mine own soul, and honor as the chosen vessels of God, who were injured by
my vndew dealing. For I confess, and acknowledge in my conscience, that I
should have suffered any torments in the world, rather then have uttered any
their godly religious acts, to their dommage, whether it were true, or
false: and that I should not, nor ought by Gods word, have disclosed any such
thing, though I had taken an oath to do it, and to answer to al
interrogatories concerning the same: being assured that al such oaths, be
unlawful, and ought not to be taken, nor be kept, if of frailty they chance
to be taken. Because no man can bind him self, neither by oath, vow, or any
other obligation to God or man, to accuse, or be wraye any innocent to the
persecutor: no such oaths (I say) bind, being one sin to take them, and an
other, and that greater, to keep them.

But the thing a less is now past, and can not be amended in it self, but
only may be forgiven, as I verily hope, it is both at God and man's hand, by
this my sincere confessing, humble craving pardon, and poor public
satisfaction, till the which was done, I could never find rest in my
vvounded conscience, nor durst approach to the holy Altar, to offer the
deutiful gifts of my priesthod: made much unworthy of that high function,
through my said grievous offense, and scandal. Which being now (as I hope) in
our Lords mercy, and their great charity, remitted, I shall daily with great
comfort do, during life, these sovereign duties of religion for them, as also
(as I am most bound in deutie) for my dear Mother and al her Christian
offpringe, my dearly beloved Brethren and Sisters according to the flesh,
desiring God, to reliue their zele with true understanding, humbly beseeching
my loving Brother, and Sister, who bound them selves in a certain sum of money
for my good behavior (so they call the conformity to their English procedings)
not to impute my departure to any unnatural carlesnesse of the losses, and
dangers that may fall unto them by forfaiting their band, by my retire over
sea: for God knovveth, it is the special worldly thing, that greueth me: but
rather to account it a supply of my patrimony (which would have surmonted
it much in valewe) and a case of such mere necessity, both of my soul and
body, as no interest of temporal goods whatsoever, may counteruaile it: and
of their singular brotherly and sisterly affection (if any extremity should be
used toward them in the matter) as I trust verily their innocence well
known to the Counsel, and their great earnestnes, and diligence to gain me
to that religion (which they of error and ill education think to be true)
shall procure them al courtesy, and favor therein, not to account the loss
of monye, which one day, either in this, or the next world, may be redered by
God, or man again, for the health and salvation of their own flesh and blood:
or at least, if they think this not the way to salvation, yet for quieting of
his conscience, against which what soever a man does, must needs be sin,
and damnable.

Thus I end desiring them, and al Catholics, my loving brethren in Christ, to
pray and thank God with me, for all his mercies, that he has done to my
soul, as it shall laud and bless his holy name for ever more. Given at Rhemes
this 19. of May, being the Ascension of our Lord JESUS, to whom be al thanks
and eternal glory, for ever and ever. Amen. 1573.

By me a poor sinner, your Brother in Christ, Edward Osberne Priest.

THE SATISFACTION OF M. JAMES BOSGRAVE THE GODLY CONFESSOR of Christ,
concerning his going to the Church of the Protestants at his first coming into
England.
To al Christians and all that profess the Catholic faith, to al such as are
chained, Imprisoned, or otherwise afflicted for the faith and religion of
Jesus Christ, peace and salvation.
BLessed be the God and Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, the father of mercies
and God of al comfort, who comfort us in all tribulation. I am merueilous
heavy and sorrow full at the heart, for that I understand that there is a certain
sinister opinion sprung and spread abroad every where of me, as though I had
renied that faith and religion which had her beginning of our Lord Jesus
Christ, was received of the Apostles, and Doctors, and has been perfited and
sealed, not only with the blood and death of the worthy Martyrs, but
principally with the blood and death of Christ our Lord.

Would to God that I had either never ben borne, or else that I had been buried
immediately after my death. If I (borne of Catholic parents, nourished and
brought up under Catholic scholmaisters, trained up in learning in those
countries where the Catholic religion does greatly prosper and flourish) now
at the length after my return into my country to mine own and my parents
comfort: should depart from that Church which S. Paul calls the pillar and
ground of truth, should deny Christ our Lord, and break my faith plight in
baptism, and whereas al men did expect, that I should have borne grapes, to
bring forth weeds.

My dear and well-beloved brethren, to whom I write these few, whose glory
and salvation I seek, and whom I bear in my bowels. I forsake my part of
heaven, and vvish never to see the good of God in the land of the living, and
would that my name were blotted out of the book of life, if I ever either did
or attempted, or as much as thought any such thing, let me also be accursed and
a Maranatha, if I would either crucify Christ our Lord again, or make void
and frustrate the blood that the holy Apostles, and vvorthie martyrs have shed:
who al were slain for that religion and faith which Christ our Lord has
communicated and revealed unto us gratis: of the which (religion and faith) I
my self am partaker and for the which I am ready to suffer death.

O wretch that I am, and of al men the vnhapiest, what hope of salvation could
I have, how durst I lift up mine eyes to heaven, with what face might I call
Christ our Lord, Father, if I should forsake his spouse, the Church our Mother?
I know (most loving brethren) that there is no more salvation to be looked for
out of the Church, in the which I believe my self to be with you: then there
was out of the Arch of Noe, which bare the type and figure of the Catholic and
Apostolic Church. Do not ye therefore give over light credit to every flying
tale, for I know that the end shall prove al these rumors that have been spread
of me, to be false and feigned.

For I hope brethren (and this is my desire) that I shall be bound with the same
chain, and for the same faith, that you are, and I trust to be partaker both
of your tribulations and your rewards. God forbid that I should glory (to use
the speech of the vessel of election, and of the Doctor of the Gentiles, with
out al arrogancy and pride) saving in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. I
beseech you therefore (as yet not being bound, but peradventure to be bound in
our Lord) that you remain, and walk vvorthily in the vocation religion and
faith to which you are called: and that you be ready to shed your blood for
the same.

You have heard, that I was become a Protestant, I call God and his Angels to
witness (brethren) that this has been mine election and that full often (if I
ly, then I pray God, I never speak more) that I had rather be a Turk or a
Jew, then a Protestant, that is, to be enrouled among those that have renied
the faith of Christ. There be many I know which have heard me (albeit with
murmuring and indignation) utter these words. For it were better for me in
deed, never to have known the way of truth, then after the knowledge thereof
to start back from it. If therefore (my friends) the fame of my return into my
country be come unto your ears, if peradventure these naughty reports of me
be commonly talked of amongst you: if you do over expect any thing of me that
pertains to the duty of a brother, friend or kinsman of yours, and that
which the name of a Christian man does require, which is borne, brought up,
and by the space of many years as it were confirmed in the Catholic Church
and faith, persuade your selves for certain, that I will (by Gods assistance)
satisfy your expectation.

You have heard peradventure, that I would go to the Church. God almighty (in
whose sight I am, and speak, and who is the searcher of the heart and reins
of men) does know, that I never went to the Protestants church with the mind
to pray, or to allow and profess their sect, neither by co^straint or free
accord, to seem by any means to approve by consent and liking this religion,
which they term, reformed: but I went sometimes and that but seldoome, when
I thought it good, only for to see their rites, and then manner of preaching
and doing, and to make mine English tongue more prompt and ready. Nor do you not
think, that, that which is lavvfull to some one for certain causes, is
convenient to al men, for I would not counsel other men to go to the
protestants church, yea I have diswaded men from it above a thousand times: and
have showed them, that it was in no case lawful: because, that he that loves
danger, shall fall into it: neither would I have gone to their conue^ticles
for any thing, if I had know that I should have given occasion of scandal.

You have heard (and do marvel at it) that I am at liberty, and therefore you
suspect that I am returned to my vomit. Dearly beloved, I am of al liars the
va^nest, if I do not envy you your chains, your prison, your banishment, your
guard, your loss of goods, your tribulation for Christ: and persuade not your
selves I pray you, that I do rejoice in this my fortune and liberty, but
rather that it is sorrovvful and loath some unto me, that I am not worthy to
suffer contumely for the name of Jesus. Therefore I attribut my liberty to the
clemency of God almighty, to the courtosie of the Q. Majesty's honorable and
wise Counselors, I impute it to mine own mishap, and to my great sins: but
that which is differred is not altogether taken away. If I used doutfull
words before the Q. Majesty's counsel, for the which they set me at liberty, I
have interpreted them more plainly by my letters, which I have now sent to
the Q. most honorable and sage Counselors. But put the case I yielded unto
them: why brethren, ought I to attribute more to my self, then to most blessed
Peter, most holy Marcellinus, most stout Thomas of Canterbury, of the which,
the two former were Popes, and al after the denial of Christ, obtained pardon,
and shed their blood for the Catholic faith. Be you not therefore seduced,
with the wicked example of one man, but stand stoutly and dwell in this
church, in which we have been borne and bred: the which Christ our Lord has
built and brought forth upon the foundation of the Apostles and their
Successors: whose ruins do begin now after a sort to be repaired and restored.

But to draw to an end, I beseech you brethren by by the bowels of the mercy
of Jesus Christ, by that charity wherewith he so loved us that he vouchsaued
to be hanged on a tree for us, by his cross, his wounds, by the nails and
spear (which are the badges of our Savior) that you, be not frighted nor
moved with false reports, the end will prove al: and persuade your selves, that
as I am partaker of one country with you, so am I partaker of one Church, one
faith, one religion, one doctrine, with you. I thought good to write this
letter, to witness thereby unto you, that I am of the same religion, in which I
was borne again by baptism and for the which I am most ready to dye with
you. I desire you also to pray unto Christ Jesus crucified for me, to give me
grace to direct al my thoughts, words and works, to the glory of his most holy
name, to mine own salvation and to the profit and commodity of my country.
Let us also pray continually and with a common accord, that Christ our Lord
would preserve the Queens Majesty, and her sage Counselors, and illuminate
them with al truth, that al their beginnings and proceedings te^de to the
glory of almighty God. Christ Jesus embrace us al in the bowels of his mercies,
confirm us and make us al in one agreement in the Church which he has founded
with his most precious death.

Fare ye well.
AN ADMONITION TO THE READER.
THere are no more of regard, as far as we yet hear, that have relented all this long and perilous time of practice and persecution, saving M. Aufild, and
M. Govwe, the former in England, through extreme fear of torments yelding
only to go to their church once, and that with many qualifications: the
other in France, upon other frailty, specially for desire to return home and
enjoy the commodities temporal that God had given him in his country: who
both straight upon their fall (being in regard of humane frailty not great)
wept bitterly, have done penance accordingly, written their letter to our
Presidet in Rhemes of th^^^ readiness to do any satisfaction for the scandal
and offense committed, and so be reconciled to Gods Church again, and have
done since that, and do, al they can possibly for th'aduauncement of the
Catholic faith. Whose like public acknovvledge of their offense should here
have been set forth, but that the same could not be so speedely sent hither as
the dispatch of these other was compted necessary.

Only in all this (gentil reader) I desire the to mark for thy co^solatio^,
the mercies of God: how in this long combat with so forcible and povvrable
ennemies according to the flesh, who vva^t no means vvorldly, either to force
by fear of death and torments, or to tempt by pleasure proffit and
preferments, or to entangle by art and policy, he has given us his poor
servant and souldiars, not only to fight, stand, hold out, and have assured
hope of victory over the adversaries, but to have it with so small a loss, by
the death of so fevv, with the fall or wounding of so fevv, so easily
recovered again to far more advantage of the cause, as our Lord has of his
grace used the matter, then if they had never had experience of their own
infirmity, and of the necessity of his holy aid, by whom only we are
vpholden in this spiritual fight for our faith, and defense of his dear Spouse
our Mother the Church, which by no power of man or Devil can be overthrown.

Fare well gentil reader, and make thy profit to salvation, of these examples
of our frailty, whereby thou see Gods streinght to be perfited in our
infirmity, and our weakness to be sustained by the force (...) his grace, to
him be al honor and glory. Amen* The first of June 1583.


