THE MIRROR OF HONOR: Wherein every professor of arms, from the General,
Chieftaines and high Commanders, to the private officer and inferior soldier,
may see the necessity of the fear and service of God, and the use of all
divine virtues, both in commanding and obeying, practicing and proceeding in
the most honorable affairs of war.

A treatise most necessary, comfortable and expedient for all English
subjects, whereby their duties to God, their Prince and country, their
assurance and safety, is lively set forth as in a glass before them.

Exodus 14.14. The Lord shall fight for you, therefore hold you your peace.

The Contents of the book are in the next page.

Printed at London by the Widow Orwin for Thomas Man. 1597.

The Contents of this Book.
1 A brief motive to the consideration of the necessity of this work, and of
the different effects of peace and war. 2 How necessary the fear and true
service of God, and the use of all divine virtues are in every chief governor
in arms, and wherein true honor consists. 3 That all men should be ready to
defend their Prince and Country, and how inferior officers in arms, the
common and private soldiers should behave themselves, as touching their
obedience to God, their Prince and superior Commanders. 4 That Prayer is
necessary among men of arms, as a principal and chief mean both to defend
themselves, and to annoy the enemy, and that after victory they ought to
praise God. 5 A most necessary motive to stir up all men that continue at
home, to serve the living God, and to seek to win his favor as well in
regard of the safety and good success of their brethren, soldiers abroad,
as of their own at home.
TO THE RIGHT HOnorable my singular good Lord and Master, Robert Earl of Essex
and Ewe, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourcher and Louaine, of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel, and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter.
ALbeit (right Honorable) the endeavors of best deseruers, and of men qualified
with highest gifts of all kinds of virtues, be subject to deprauing censures,
I, the meanest of many other, am moved by the love I bear to my country, in
all reverence and zeal, according to my portion of knowledge (since the better
able afford it not) to adventure some thing to the encouragement of men
trained and to be trained to the field in Military service: not as teaching
them the art of war, but inciting them to obedience to God, their Prince and
Commanders, to virtuous and divine exercises, to the practice of profitable,
and of praise worthy actions, and to the avoiding of things offensive,
hurtful and fruitles. For if none should speak because they have captious
hearers: if none should write because they have deprauing readers; what would
become of the use of the tongue or practice of the pen? If none should
undertake but what they were assured should please all men, there would follow
speedy ruin of all virtuous endeavors in whatsoever kind. For none is so
absolute by art or nature, but that some being mere naturals without art or
virtue, will struggle to glorify their own nothing, by deprauing the something
of others. No good endeavor (intended to Gods glory) can be so simple and
fruitles, but it will yield some profit to the well disposed: and no work is
so excellent but is altogether fruitles to the evil affected. Best things have
least grace among the worst, and the prophanest works best welcome to profane
men. But such as savor of divine reason will embrace the good fruits even of
poorest knowledge, and will reject the most absolute work of a carnal
conceit. And if I had not hope grounded upon mine own, as also upon public
experience of your honorable clemency, to accept of virtuous endeavors at the
hands of the meanest, I could not (at this time) afford scope unto my
sorrowing thoughts, daunted, dulled, and dismayed at the dismal issue of
former hope, to expose unto a general gaze, this silly Mirror, which under
your Honorable protection, I know may safely pass through the pikes with
profit to many, prejudicial to none, but behoofull to all. And it craves at
my hands no safer shelter from the malice of the worst, nor better warrant to
pass current among the best, than your Lordships allowance, which in
discretion I cannot deny it, though I cannot assure it. Yet I am urged to
adventure my self for it, and it for me, unto your Honorable consideration.
And while I wait in hope, I do and will ever rest a dutiful petitioner to
the God of hoasts, to furnish your Honor with all happiness, and happy issue of
all your Honorable enterprises.

Your Honors humble servant, John Norden.

To the Reader.
NOthing is so rashly, rudely, or unadvisedly undertaken, but that reason or
discretion seems to direct the same: and most of all Military attempts are
to be enterprised with high devotion, because they tend to peace the most
precious end of war. For there seems as great difference between peace and
war, as between a sober and a mad man: the one plausible, sweet and
profitable to many, the other terrible and troublesome to all, and truly
profi^able to none. It is a pernicious evil, as of it self, but by
circumstances it is both lawful and expedient, not that it opens the way to
heaven by slaughter and blood, as Scipio of Affricke boasted, but that it is
the way to redeem most wished peace. When the cause is just no man may
question whether the war be lawful. It is then just when it seeks to
defend and preserve the public quiet and Christian religion, and it is then
lawful, when it is done by the authority of the Prince, and rightly undertaken
when it is in the fear of God, and truly executed when it is with upright
minds. As touching the justice and lawfulnes of the cause present, it suffices
us to know it is to preserve our state, the superior Magistrate commands it,
and we are to obey it in a treble duty, to God, our Sovereign and
commonweal, to the end we may possess our own in quiet under the protection
of equity and justice, which both are established by peace, and peace
maintained by suppressing war. Our present war is a defense against hostile
offense, which (as every man sees) threatens unto us the dreadful devouring
sword, or such wretched servitude as was never showed unto the Jews in Egypt
or Babylon. For the experienced tyrannies of our adversaries have many ways
and in diverse places, displaied their bloody inclination to be more than
heathenish: and therefore our estate (aimed at by their cruel desires) is
neither to faint or flatter it self, but in the name of the God of hoasts to
go forth with our armies, and with courage only in Christ to witness our
Christian fortitude: not as some great Martialists have done, that have sought
and gotten fame by blood, as Herod, Hannibal, Caesar, Attila, and infinite
others, who have left behind them nothing whereof truly to glory, only the
stink of their ambition, and slaughter of men remains. And our present
enemies testify their apt imitation of these tyrants in all their victories,
wherein they regard nothing more then the number of towns burned, and of men,
women and children murdered. And he priseth his reputation dearest, that has
inhumanely bereaved most of life, and most tyrannously behaved himself in the
wars, without fear of God, or clemency toward man: showing thereby how
far they degenerate in affection from true Christians, that embrace
compassion and mercy as the badges of true religion, which teaches that we
ought to conform our minds to a godly proceeding in the affairs of war,
without rigor, tyranny and superstitious lenity. And to this end ought all
men called to the profession of arms to be furnished with divine virtues, that
all their proceedings may savor of godliness and godly boldness. And for as much
as (by reason of our usurped liberty to sin more in this profession then is
fit in any) we are deprived as of our own natures, of the true knowledge of
that good course which in these dangers of war is to be taken. And therefore
all military men ought to have continual counsel and consultation with the
God of armies, disclayming their own wisdoms, judgments and valor, and to
follow what is commanded in, or agrees with his word. The Commonwealth of
Israel was held happy for that it might ask, and receive counsel and
direction in all their proceedings of God by Vrim and Thummim. But much more
blessed are we in that the divine light shines unto us in Christ, whereby the
true meaning of the spirit is expounded in the word of truth, whereunto all
men are invited freely to refer themselves, and therein to search diligently
what duty is required of them in their several functions: for therein has
God declared his mind and will concerning all things wherewith man has to
deal in this life. From thence must every degree be furnished with warrant and
direction how to proceed in their professions: therein is the Prince taught
how to rule rightly, the subjects how to obey loyally: therein are Commanders
in the wars directed how to dispose of their charge wisely, and the inferior
soldiers may therein learn how to frame both their affections and all their
proceedings godly. And for that the office of a soldier is a calling of higher
reckoning and of greater moment then it is commonly reputed by the general and
rude multitude, yea, then it is considered to be, of the most that undertake to
carry arms in the field, and of some that bear office in the wars: it is
requisite that all should understand what burden they bear, that they may
also learn to discharge the same, so as they may be worthy to be called what
they desire to be. For as the life is to the body, so is virtue to the mind,
and the divine spirit to the soul: the body without life is but a dunghill,
the mind without virtue is but a sink or gulf of filthy cogitations, and
the soul without the heavenly comforter is but a forlorn captive under the
Prince of darkness. Ignorance of the will of God is a dark cloud that
shadoweth all divine qualities, and that smoothereth every sacred grace and
special favor received at the hands of the highest, whereby a soldier
becomes oftentimes proud of vanity, and covetous and greedy of vicious and
hurtful in stead of virtuous and profitable things: whereby he becomes
conquered of his own carnal affections, making himself thereby unfit to
undertake that honorable action which only is proper to the virtuous, and to
such as fear God. Such as are armed with divine habiliments within, as well as
girded with military furniture without. For who so considers that he
fights for the Lords cause, for his Princes state, his countries good, and
his own honor, cannot but think himself bound to cast off all impediments
that may hinder his prosperity, or blemish his reputation therein. For there
is no assurance in things displeasing the King of Kings, in things unsavory
to the spirit of God, who being on our side gives us victory: but if we
defraude him of the reverence and honor due unto him from our selves at home,
and from our men of war^e abroad, we have no assurance that he is with us and
for us. And therefore when we go forth with our Armies (says Moses) we must
then keep us from all wickedness: for that the Lord himself walks in the
midst of our campe^ to deliver us, and to give the enemy into our hands, if
we be holy: but to destroy us if we be profane, faithles and wicked. And it
h^th been ever a noted subtlety of a wicked enemy prompted by Satan, to lay
traps and snares to cause Christians to sin. Search (says Achior) if there
be any wickedness among them, Judith. 5.
then shall we surely destroy them, otherwise we shall never prevail against
them, for their God will defend them. And it seems that our adversaries have
no greater encouragement, then to see the fruits of our gross corruptions,
affirming that we fear not God, because we transgress his will so boldly:
and above all they take notice of the uncivil behavior and licentious lives
of our men in the wars, grounding greater hope to prevail, by reason of our
sins, then by their own forces. Experience has long told us that there
has been defect of virtuous exercises among men of military profession, who
seeking to be renowned, begin not at the fear of God, but yielding their
minds captive to sin, come conquered into the field: and therefore their
enterprises often fail of victory. But howsoever some deem the contrary, it
does higly dignifie men of arms, to fear and serve the living God, and to be
at one with him, before they presume to march to the battle, or undertake to
bear arms in the field. And all such as are called to that high and worthy
calling ought to be changed in their minds, casting off all the former lusts of
the flesh, to shape their affections after a more holy order: for the nearer
they resemble the great conqueror, by participation of his divine virtues, so
much the more powerful shall they become, and be partakers also of his glory
by conquering by him, as were Gideon, Barac, Sampson, Iepthath, David, Samuel,
and many other that in and by him overcame kingdoms, and obtained many
admirable victories against their enemies. It is an honorable thing in
Commanders to be able to exhort by word to godliness of life, but more honorable
when their exhortation is joined with the example of a virtuous life: for the
one proceeds from the tongue, which may dissemble before the world, the other
from the heart, which is known to God. And he that is truly sound within,
cannot but appear unto others to be so: for he will bring forth the fruits
of approbation, among which it is not the least to have care of the choice of
his soldiers, as of the most virtuous, as much as lies in him, after the
example of Cyrus, who said unto his soldiers: My friends, I have chosen you,
not because I have had experience heretofore of your manhood, but because I
have known you ready to do those things which are honest, and to eschew all
dishonestie. In his choice he seemed to agree with the opinion of valiant
Agamemnon a Grecian Captain, who affirmed to Achilles, that one man beloved of
God, is in stead of many men in an army. On the contrary the Scripture
affirms, Iousha 7.1.2
that the wickedness of one man indangereth the state of a whole army, as
Achan did the army of Israel. The Emperor Traian said, to accept of war, to
collect soldiers, to put them in order, and to give battle, belonged to man:
but to give victory was the work of God only. Whereby it follows, that as
victory is the end of waging battle, and battle disposed by best discretion
of chief Commanders: so there is not a more precious thing in the execution of
this business, then to do all in his fear, honor and reverence, that gives
that which is striued for. They that covet to vanquish, and not to be
vanquished, must rely wholly on him that disposes of victory, and to use
soldiers, munition and policy as his means: for if they be blessed by him,
they are holy, otherwise they may be as well instruments of their own, and of
the confusion of such as trust in them as of their safety. To the end
therefore that our enterprises may succeed to our comfort, it behooves all men
of arms, of what quality or degree soever he be, not to think is a blemish
to his reputation to be seen virtuous, religious and godly, but to testify
the same in the view of all men, by continual exercise of prayer and praise to
the God of hoasts, that he may still bless those means, direct their
counsels, and dispose of their proceedings happily: so shall they triumph in
victory as well with few as with many, with the godliest, and not with the
greatest number of men. And to the end that all military men may be put in
mind of this heavenly consideration, I have presumed under your favors, to
speak a little unto you in a plain manner, not that I would be seen to
presume to teach such as are already furnished with divine knowledge, and are
armed with faith and religion: but to whet them on to the daily practice
thereof, and to stir up such as are more ignorant, to a desire to become also
virtuous and obedient to God, and in him to their Prince and Commanders, that
as they seek honor, they may so attain it, as may make them in deed truly
honorable.

Yours in christian good will, John Norden.

THE MIRROR OF Honor.
A motive to the consideration of the necessity of this work, in regard of
the time, and of the different effects of peace and war.
THERE is nothing in this world more pleasing to flesh and blood then peace,
nor more beneficial to a common wealth. For where no trouble is, The sweet
effects of peace.
there is a quiet state fit for every honest Artist to practice his skill, to
the furnishing of the state with Sciences necessary and profitable. In peace
are Laws at liberty to be duly executed, and Justice may flourish without
restraint: Ve^tue may then show her effects, and Religion be practiced,
without terror or torture. Then may the Church execute necessary Discipline and
manage all things to Gods glory and the comfort and commodity of all his
members. This has England tried true, almost forty years under Queen
Elizabeth, who from God has brought us the blessing of this wished peace,
Englandes peace near 40. years.
together with the rich Jewel of the freedom of Religion, whose fruits (if
they flourish not as they ought amongst us) the fault is ours. And that God
that has afforded us these precious blessings, finding us negligent and cold
in our professions, threatens to rouse us out of our secure dreams by the
drum of his surie, to awaken us out of our slumber by the noise of war, God
threatens to ^ouze us out of our dream by war.

A new song, a woeful song.


nay by the blows of war, we hear the sound, we see the swords, the Cannon
plays in our ears, the armours glitter in our eyes, here is the beginning of
war. After the sweet song of Peace peace, now is the dreadful dumpe of
War war. And what is War, a May Game? Noe, it is the woeful messenger of
confusion, without the mercy of our offended God, which is to be obtained by
faith and repentance. We all know that peace is plausible, a joyful and wished
thing, and yet we seem full of it, or at least of the fruits of it, which is
plenty and ease, fullness and forgetfulness of God and our selves. But if we
had seen war as we have tasted peace, we should esteem the better of peace
and provide against the fear of war, in meeting the God of hoastes to
appease him, 1. Sam. 25.23.
as Abigail did David. But England (God be praised) has been made acquainted
with war by report from our neighbor territories, and the most of us are
ignorant whether it be sweet or sour by experience: and therefore think not
that it brings the miseries which Fraun^e, Many of us are ignorant of the
effects of war.

The fruits of war.


Flaunders, Holland, Zeland, Brabant, and sundry other most pleasant Lands and
Provinces, have long time endured: wherein Justice has been suppressed, and
injury, violence, will, and the swords surie prevailed. These infernal
firebrarnds inkindle war, whence proceed the outrage of bloody furies,
wherein spoils are held lawful prize, riots maintained as rightful laws,
innocents murdered, maidens, wives and most grave matrons violently abused,
and forcibly deflowred, churches destroyed, religion confounded, houses
consumed with fire, all virtue and honest duty abandoned, vice exalted and
embraced, the service of God contemned, Gods children murdered, every degree,
sex and quality grieved and oppressed, all trades and traffic hindered, the
best men trodden down, and all this (with many other miseries) by a crewe of
most merciless and wicked men. War a salve for secure kingdoms.
Here are in part the fruits of furious war. And yet it is the salve that
our most loving God applies to the infections of such Kingdoms and Countries,
as abuse his most sweet bl^ssing of peace. We are not ignorant of this, though
we have yet but given aim (as it were) to foreign broils, not considering,
or at least not reforming the euilles that long peace has bread at home. For
which our forgetfulness and neglect of duetifull diligence to reform us, the
same God, that found out this remedy for the sins, or judgment for the
transgressions of other Nations, has threatened the same to us, for that we
repent not at his many other most gentle admonitions. It seemerh he has
decreed somewhat against us, for the common report is, that there will be
wa^res, and that England must prepare for wars, Gods forewarning of war^e a
great favor
and surely this gentle forewarning of God (among many others) is to be held a
precious favor, for that he gives us time to consult with him, what is to be
done, in so weighty a pretended business. And there is no doubt but our
Sovereign is not slack, not only to consult with her chosen and grave
Senators, but with high Jehovah the God of Armies and hoastes her glorious
guide and our approved most strong and loving defender, to whom also like true
Ninevites we must all fly, from the one degree of men to the other. And since
it is the business of war, Generals, captains and soldiers must take
counsel of God.

2. Sam. 5.19. Josh. 8.18. 1. Sam. 7.8.

The Ministers must pray and exh^rt to prayer.


the generals chiefetains and captains, inferior officers and private
soldiers, must martch forth and begin the action, continue it and perform
it in his fear. And as victorious David did, they must ask counsel of him,
and he will teach them and instruct them as he did Joshua at the conquest of
Aye. And hereunto must our faithful Ministers become true Samuels to cry unto
God for the good success of them that go forth to fight. And moreover they
must not cease, but with all industry and diligence, teach and exhort to
faith, obedience and prayer all that tarry at home, that the Lords wrath may
be appeased: and that he will take part with us going forth with, and blessing
our armies that we may expect our salvation only to proceed from him: least
that trusting in our own merit, strength, wisdom or policy, we should be
foiled of his and our enemies. And to the end that our men appointed to the
wars, should be in some measure whetted on with godly affections to undertake
a matter of so high moment, What moved the auctor to undertake the work.
being on the behalf of the Lord of lords, our Queen and countries weal
and preservation: I am imboldened in duty and stirred up in love, simply as
it is to set before them, this silly Mirror.

How necessary the fear and true service of God, and the use of all divine
virtues is in every chief governor in arms, and wherein chief honor
consists.
AN host of men, or an army of soldiers, as of themselves, is a multitude
confused and unordered, many dispersed members, An Army of men is a confused
multitude without order.
of an vncompact body. But wisdom, art and experience, having found the
mean, to dispose them into a body, by the right reducing of every member into
his convenient place: the wisdom of God must needs be confessed to have the
chief rule and to bear greatest sway in the work, which so much the more
resembles this politic body to the divine Image, by how much it bends the
chief end thereof to the glory of the highest and most superior Gou^rnour,
How an Army may resemble the divine Image.

Every head of an Army must be conformed to the head Christ.


by seeking the good of the universal body of his Church, which in regard of
all divine duty, order, and the right rule of christian religion, is said to
be divine and heavenly: whose head, as it is that chief Sovereign Christ
Jesus the Son of the eternal Deity, full of grace and peace, so must the
head and general of this body of a christian army, be conformed to
righteousness and holiness, that all the infe^iour members may (like unto the
me^mbers of the heavenly body) embrace that truth and follow that rule of
righteousness, which their head receives by the power of the divine comforter
and director, from his superior head Christ. So shall there be seen that
sweet consort and heavenly harmony in their warfare, which shall gain the
love, favor and affection of the heavenly company, The Angels of God shall go
forth with the godly.

Exodus 14.19. and 32 34. 2. King. 19.35 Romans 9.7, 2 Pet. 1.3.4. An excellent
resolution.

An uncertain ground of good success.


even of the Angels, and they shall go before them as heavenly guides, yea
and as a warlike host to destroy their enemies. The fear of God and his
service, faith and true religion, have only the promise of Gods presence, of
his defense, protection and conduction. And that resolution only is excellent,
which is grounded upon that right reason which is confirmed by the word of
truth: and all other hope which proceeds from the power of flesh and blood
merely, from the strength of man's arm, as Goliahs and Senacheribs and others:
has the assurance semblable to that ground, that is weak, and of no
certainty. And therefore whatsoever this last hope shall warrant, is but like
unto the wind which blows where and when God permits. So God by his might
throws down the mighty strength of the proud, who boast themselves of their
multitudes and stand upon their policies* and preserves the weak in their
own conceits, beyond the expectation of carnal hope: whereof the examples ^n
divine histories are infinite. Yet such is the necessity of the order and
comely disposition of matters of war, We must ask counsel of God, how to
order ^ur troops rightly. Deuteronomy. 31.22. Josh 1.1.2.
that we must seek at the hands of the high Lord of hoasts and armies, how to
dispose our troops, and how to lead them forth in his fear and according to
his will: who challenges a share therein, if we will proceed aright, for so
he had in the proceeding of Joshua whom he directed and encouraged being the
General of the huge Army of Is^ael, to whom he principally gave counsel and
charge that he should be studious in the Laws and word of the Highest:
willing that the Book ther^of should not depart from his hands, I^sh. 1.5.6.
The book of God must be in the hand^s of a General, and the practice in his
heart. Iu^g. 2.25. Josh. 6.2.

The General ought to fear God.

Order and government.


but practice and proceed according to all equity and justice, and in so
doing he should be strong and courageous, for no man should be able to
withstand him all the days of his life, and that the Lord would not fail or
forsake him. This divine and absolute assurance of Gods favor and readiness
to help in the time of need, has been in all former Generals and Captains
fearing God, and they have prevailed, as appears by Joshua against Jericho,
Gideon against the Madianites, and many others. And therefore, it is required,
that great regard be had of the choice of the General, that he be religious,
fearing God, that he so order the matters appertaining to his charge, as
beseems christian policy. Government of it self presupposes order, for
without order, no man can govern his little house, much less an Army of men.
And government is a right disposition of those things whereof a man takes
charge, to bring them to a good end. And therefore many things are requisite
in a General, as well for the right ordering of the army, (namely of the body
whereof he is the head) as also for example, that the inferior officers may
follow him as a light, leading them the right way. For that is the nature of
the honest imitation of the virtuous, to become more virtuous by a virtuous
guide: The ^ffectes of Imitation and Emulatio^
as it is the property of wicked emulation in the contrary affected. And
therefore in a General, Prudence, which includes in it self, that wisdom
which is the right reason of things, is the most precious and most honorable
ornament. For as Zenophon says. Without prudence there is no use of virtue.
Prudence.
What then avails magnanimity and fortitude, Magnanimity vain with out
pru^ence. Effects of prudence.
and other virtues, if Prudence fail? for then magnanimity is but desperate
rashness, and fortitude a careless running on to his own ruin: nothing is
sure, but all uncertain, without that Prudence, which is the mistress of all
virtues, which teaches how to provide for things to come, how to order and
dispose of things present, The office of a General.

The approba^i^n of a Gener^ll.


and how to make use of things past. The end of the office of a General,
generally taken, is to do good for his country in the highest degree, and
therefore the right administration of all necessary directions, and discipline
to them that are under his charge, is of no small importance, for that upon his
carefulnes and high wisdom, depends much the good and happy issue and
success of victory, although indeed the disposition of victory, is in the
Lord. It is a token of Gods favor, and that he allows of the choice of
that General, that fears him and walks rightly before his people. If
otherwise, he is surely advanced to that high place, to hurl down such to
confusion, that trust in his wisdom, be he never so politic or warlike: and
his honor is but usurped and shall be taken from him again with ignominy.
Religion is that golden rule, Religion.
that godly guide, that by right reason leads an Army rightly: and the
irreligious, neglecting true duty to the powers divine, howsoever forward or
fortunate they may seem, in stumbling upon fortune sometime, and in triumphing
in victory, yet at the length their tragical ends discover unto the wise,
that there is no true hope nor blessed issue unto the end, and in the end
without the fear of God. And this has appeared in many, who have bin full
with vain conceit of worthiness by reason of some fortunate effects which after
have bin foiled and their glory stained: ^ King. 1.4. 2. King. 19 37 Exodus 14.23.
as Jeroboam that pulled destruction on himself and the city, and as mighty
Seuacherib was killed by his sons, and Pharaoh with his host, for policy
admirable, and for multitude infinite, in his glorious conceived hope of
victory over Gods children, being of himself victorious and mighty, The
sin of the people may be the des^ru^^ion of the go^l^ G^nerall.
is a spectacle of dishonor to this day, with infinite others. But (by the
way) it may fall out that though the General be religious, faithful and
fearing God, the sins of the people may procure the confusion both of their
Governor and themselves, and sometime the sin of one man, may cause many to
be punished, as Achans, for whose sake all Israel was afflicted and greatly
discomfited at the siege of Aie: Josh. 7 1.2.
wherein he alone perished not, but many for him. How much more shall many
suffer for the sins of many? The men of Gibeah were slain, not only the
committers of the wickedness, but such also as wincked at it. Judge. 19 24. and
20.13.14.
How careful then ought a General to be of his Captains, the Captains of
their soldiers, least that they being negligent in looking into the manners or
punishing the vice of such as are under their charge, knowing this, that he
that commits sin is worthy to be punished, not only for examples sake,
but for the Law, and Justice, The execution of Justice and punishment of sin a
pleasing sacrifice to God.

Romans 1.31. A General ought to pray for his people. Number. 14.19.


in whose true execution God is pleased: and least also the Co^maunder be
snared by sin, and so not only favor sinners, but even commit the same, and
so fill up the measure of Gods vengeance, which waits on all them that are
thus disobedient. If I should say that it were the part of a General to pray
for his people and for their sins, I might say but as Moses did, who being
moved in zeal of the peoples safety, desired God to pardon their sins,
knowing that sin had the threats of judgment: and how glorious an effect
had his request? to whom the high God gave answer, saying, I have heard thee
for them, and have forgiven them? God forbid it should be thought a derogation
of the reputation of the greatest Commander to be seen forward in the like
affection for his people: for by that means he may also win such as are
under his charge to feel their infirmities, and draw them to such humiliation,
1 Samuel 12.19.20.

The benefit that the people have of the General fearing God.

Deuteronomy. 1.30.


as that they may both pray themselves, and serve the Lord in fear, and also
crave the assistance of their godly Superiors therein. This is the benefi^e
that rises of the true fear and service of God in the General, who will show
himself as courageous as Moses, not merely standing upon his policy or
multitude, but upon the Lord to bless his proceedings, and to encourage his
people that they faint not: and then may he justly assure them that they need
not to fear or be afraid of the enemy, for the Lord of hoastes goes before
them and will fight for them. He is the General of generalles, God the
General of generals.
the high Captain of all Christian Companies, the powerful Defender of all
faithful Armies and hoastes, his power has bin seen in miraculous manner to
the destruction of the mighty enemies of his children. And yet his absolute
force and power ha^h not been seen, as it is in himself, for if he should at
full discover his force before us mortal men, God has never showed his power
as it is.
it would so far dismay the strongest of us, as we should confess our selves
less then nothing unto him. And therefore is his power called infinite as
having no end, Gods power cannot be limited.
nor limit, whereby it may be staid or restrained, neither is there any mean
in the same, in man's capacity and judgment, though we can say that the death
and destruction of one man is more admirable then another, and one miracle does
exceed another in admiration, Number 21.28. All Gods miracles are alike.

Dan. 4.29,


as to make Balams Ass to speak like a man was straung to us, and to make
Nabuchadnezzer to become a beast being a mighty Monarche of the world after
his many conquests, was no more strange. The killing of Goliath by David was no
more admirable, (if we consider, by whom the thing was done) then the killing
of a worm by a man, 1. Sam. ^7.51.
for the Lord of hoastes is the hand that effects great things by weak
means: as by Gideon with 300. men he overthrew the whole host of the
Mydianites. God does weighty things by weak means.
So that we may not reckon what God can do, for there can be no estimation or
limitation of his power, neither in regard of his mercy, wherein he saved
Daniel among the lions, and the 3. children in the fire, Dan. ^ 16.
and confounding their accuser: s neither of his judgment and vengeance
wherein he destroyed the whole world with water, Genesis 7. in toto. Genesis 19 24.
and Sodom with fire. And therefore we may conclude, that if he will he can
do what he pleases, and there is no exception of persons, places, strength,
policies, riches or multitude of men with him But whosoever fearing him truly
do commit themselves and commend themselves unto his favor, throwing
themselves down and all their natural wisdom and power at his feet in
humble prayer and singleness of heart in a lively faith, ^hey are stron^est
that com^it their pow^^^ to God, ^ste^ming the^ ^^^hing
may assure themselves that both he can and will do more mighty things for
them then has bin hitherto seen of men. And if we of England have not
forgotten his many miracles done even for us, to make his power to be truly
known and his name rightly reverenced of us, we cannot but with praise
acknowledge that he has done mighty things for us, God has done great
things for England.
whereof we have rejoiced: and the same he will confirm unto us, with new
mercies toward us, in his judgments toward our adversaries, if he be taken
as our chief Conductor: and if our leaders, captains and soldiers embrace him
with their whole hearts. Our leaders must fear God.

Josh. 1.5* 6. The fruits of the book of God.


And there is no way to assure us hereof, unless our chiefetaines be seen
favorers of his word and followers of his will. And therefore as he willed
Joshua, so he wills the^ all to seek wisdom of him, and not to suffer the
book of his divine precepts to depart from before their eyes, for it records
his power, his providence, his mercy, his love toward the true of heart, and
lays open his justice and judgments, against such as are wicked and
dissemble with him. This book should be in their hands, and his truth in
their hearts even in the midst among their enemies. So shall it be as a
sanctuary unto them to defend them from the destroyer, and as a sign that the
devouring angel shall spare them in the day of destruction. It is as Manna to
feed them from heaven, and as a two edged sword to cut down their enemies
before their faces. It is better then Socrates great virtue, it is the wisdom
of the spirit of God, which guides and lifts up the heart aright, induing it
with that happy and most fruitful knowledge, that not only concerns the
true direction of an army, but of the very Majesty and power of heavenly
Jehouah, and their obedience to him their high and powerful General. There is
nothing so precious as the fear and true service of God in the wars, The
fear and true service of God, the most precious thing in the war. Exodus
17.11.
as appeared by Moses prayer at the battle of the Israelites with the
Amalekites, for as long as Moses prayed instantly, Israel prevailed: but when
he fainted; their adversaries had the better. What other thing is war, the^ a
contention for victory? and what is the honor of war, but conquest? and
whence is victory but of God? and as God is of Majesty, most high far above
all gods, that is, As God is of highest Majesty, so must highest Commanders
be directed by him.
far above all the princes of the earth; so it beseems the greatest, that
have charge in the wars, to acknowledge him their supreme Commander: and as
they expect honor, duty and reverence from the inferior and lowest of the
Army, and think it both unlawful and punishable, if any resist their
command and authorized power: so they must think that their obedience is to
be yielded unto God. And as the private soldier or captain presumes to
enterprise nothing without the special direction of the General, so the
General ought to be a continual petitioner unto the high of highest
commanders, that he will teach him that wisdom, and give him that direction
which may answer his own will, and redowne to his own honor and glory, and
to the preservation of his children, over whom mortal man has charge. The
true use of ^eligion.
For it is the true use of religion thereby to become heavenly wise, and being
truly instructed in that sacred school of divine virtues, he becomes
obedient, not by constraint, but in love, whose fruits appear always to be
faith and assurance in the heavenly powers, which cannot be but it will always
show it self by working all things, and undertaking all things, not after
carnal, but after a spiritual consultation and consideration of the end of
every enterprise. Though God answer us not by mouth, his spirit speaks
within us.
And although we may not look for revelations, and apparent declarations of
Gods purposes, as from his mouth, we must not therefore remain careless to
ask counsel of the Lord by pray^r, who although he answer not yea or no, go,
or go not, fight, or stand still, as in former ages of our faithful fathers
he did: yet he by his spirit assures us according to our faith, and
therefore to refer the issue unto him, and assuredly if we repose absolute
affiance in his power and providence, no doubt but he will effect it as we
pray. If we cleanse our selves from evil, and wash our hands in innocence, it
shall (I say) effect and succeed well by his promise, which he never brake,
neither will violate for ever: God never breaks promise.

1. Ioh. 5.14, 15. 1. John 3.19. The hypocrite is unfit to pray. Deuteronomy. 10.12.


whatsoever we ask according to his will we shall receive, provided, if our
hearts condemn us not. The hypocrite is unfit to become a petitioner unto the
Lord, because he is already discovered to be a leaper within, not clean in
conscience, through faith in the blood of Christ. God asks nothing at our
hands for all his favors, but fear, obedience and love, and even these have
the promise to be heard. These have the promise of victory, What has the
promise of vict^rie.
therefore must not only the General, but all Captains and soldiers embrace
these, and gird them as a most victorious sword about the loins of their
hearts, and so march on in faith and full assurance of good success.

Polybius General and Lieutenant to Scipio of Afric though he were a mere
politician, says, that the Romans had no greater means to extend the borders
of their Empire, The Romans got the possessi^n of glory of the world by
religion.
and the glory of their famous acts over all the earth, then religion. And
shall Christian armies that pretend to go forth in the name of the same God
that gave them success, be either careless or cold of this principal and
great virtue, that has still prevailed, and has the promise to prevail for
ever? The Heathen have had special regard to serve their idol gods before
they proceeded to battle, The zeal of the heathen.
having but the shadow of hope (to encourage them) of the better success. But
since there are so many examples in the book of God, of the issue and happy
success of victory in the religious serving of the true and unvanquishable
God, by whom we have the substance of a lively hope, even his promise: what
General, what Captain or Commander will not be careful truly to imitate the
godly in this behalf? If Infidels and Idolaters shall go before us in their
care of their blind religion, in serving creatures vnhelpful, and Saints, whose
bodies are dust, as the relics of James, which are highly reverenced and
devoutly sought unto by blind zealous pilgrims at Compostella in Spain, and
infinite other like. Yea the Turks, how do they haunt the temple of Mecha,
James of Compostella.
to visit the shrine of that incarnate devil Mahomet? And as the Romanists
have a whole legion of Saints, Mahomet.
so have the T^rkes as many Passaes, The Turks Passaes.
whom they esteem as most religious departed this life, and call upon them for
their sundry occasions: as Aschick Passa, one that can further love: Sehrich
Passa, Barthschin Passa, Aliuan Passa, and so many other as their griefs and
maladies of the body, passions of the mind, the pleasures of peace, The Turks
and Papists have many inferior gods.
or troubles of war seem to require. For every of their occasions are
supplied by the multitude of their petite gods, as of the Papists by their
Saints: and yet they both seem to hold a superior inferior majesty, as the
Turks their Mahomet, and the Papists their Pope: yet both under ye high God,
who is above the Passaes and Saints in their own co^ceits. But what are these
men but mad, through blind zeal? what are these gods, but saints and
reprobates? England professes and holds of one only God.
It is the glory of the English nation, to produce, in their life, manners and
profession, that religion which holds one only lively, powerful and
alsufficient God, the creator of all, the preserver of all, the confounder of
all, not only of men, but of all the counterfeit gods of these nations, even as
he will. God forbid therefore that we that have the name of true Christians,
should faulter in the true execution of that sincere religion which we
profess, namely, in our trust and confidence in the living God, to whose honor
and immortal praise we must bend whatsoever we take in hand. And for that
the state of wars imports matter of the greatest moment of any other thing
appertaining to this life, War imports matter of greatest moment.
it must be so considered, practiced and performed, as may hold best assurance
of good success therein: and as we rely upon one God alsufficient, we must
maintain one law inviolable, and that the most righteous and best; we must
have one King and Monarch Christ, unto who^ the celestial father has given
the seat of his father David, that he may rule and have dominion from one sea
unto another, and that he may execute justice and judgment in all the earth.
This great and invincible General ordains the true ministers of justice
under him in every place, Christ ordains ministers to execute justice in
earth.
to defend his Church, which imbraceth that religion which is only good, and is
compact of good men: and these ministers are to draw the sword, not only
against the evil members of that holy society, but against every enemy that
rises against it. Wherein the word of our saving Christ, the Bishop of our
souls, ought to stand fast and immovable in the hearts and souls of them
that undertake to lead forth the armies of Christians, for weak and feeble is
the help and force of best weapons, yea of the cannon and curious and furious
ingines, unless both at home and abroad all men regard duty and Religion, and
strive who shall be most godly, virtuous, and forward to preserve the peace,
health, and salvation of their Prince and Country. True glory never gotten
without religion.
True glory is never gotten in the wars without Religion and virtue.
Agamemnon the General of the Grecians before Troy, said that a man beloved of
God was in the place of many men in a camp: What then is a religious General?
who fearing God, will (for so he ought) seek out like Captains: and they
again will endeavor to find out and choose like Soldiers. And when an army
is thus furnished, it will come to pass in deed, that ten shall chase an
hundred, and one hundred shall put a thousand to flight. Since then that the
necessity of the fear and service of God is such, as there is no hope of good
success of an army without it; it behooves a General, who in that behalf
is Gods agent, to provide sufficient godly, sincere, and paineful Ministers, or
men apt to teach the fear of the Lord unto his people, The General ought to
have a care to provide Ministers to teach the people.
that not only the General himself, but every Captain, private officer and
Soldier, may be exercised in knowledge, and practice of the word in prayer and
thanksgiving to God. Good men have bin in time past greatly honored in war,
and much sought for by the greatest commanders, even among the heathen, The
heathen have honored good men in the wars.
who would undertake nothing before they had prayed unto their gods, and
offered sacrifices after the manner of their time: and when they had done some
exployte, and gotten victory, they were diligent to give the praise to their
gods. And shall we that profess Christ, Judge. 11.34. 1. Sam. 18.6.7.
and undertake to defend his cause, go on without prayer, and receive victory
without praise? It is too general that our Generals for the most part have
sought more for a multitude of men then for godly and religious men, An
oversight in generals.
and a swaggering Ruffian is yet often preferred in wars, before a modest
discreet man fearing God, and of resolute valor. But such as thus fill up the
number without regard of honest duty appearing in them; have many men, yet few
men. A man without virtue is no man.
For a man without true virtue is a man but in shape, and called a man because
he usurps the place of a man. I speak not only this of every base fellow
that has the title of a Soldier, corrupt in manners: but of such as are able
by their fury, to strike a terror and fear in a whole army of enemies, as
Senacherib, Benhadad, Hazael, Hannibal, Herod, C. Caesar, Silla, Attila,
Totila, Tamberlane, and infinite such, who by their victories seemed, and some
of them are esteemed at this day very virtuous, because of their success in
arms, as their destruction of many Kingdoms, Countries and Cities, their
confusion of common wealths, their murdering of many men. But if we consider
what their furies have left behind them, The ignorance of wicked Generals, is
greater then their honor.
it will appear that the stincke of their vices and cruelties is greater, to
their eternal ignominy, tha^ their victories have gained honor. The greatest
conquerours that histories record, come short of true honor nor without God.
And therefore the people of God have ever practiced godliness, and exercised
true virtue at all times, but in the perils of battle and dangers of wars
especially. And that made the Israelites so unvanquishable: The Israelites
never overcome, but when they fly from God in their manners.
they were never overcome, but when they forgitting God, fell to wickedness and
idolatry, then they became always a pray unto the enemies, and upon their
repentance, they obtained their honor and reputation again. When Holophernes
was devising what course to take to overcome Israel, he was persuaded if he
could intise them to sin, as Balaam also counseled Balacke K. of Moab, they
might be overcome. And therefore says Achior, if there be any wickedness in
them, we shall overcome them. But if they stand in the true fear of their
God, we shall never prevail against them: for their God will defend them.
Wickedness odious in an army.
Here we see how odious wickedness in an army is before God, and how precious
his fear is, that for the one he defends, and for the other he destroys
them. Sultan of Memphis gave the Christians a notable scoff when he said that
the Saracens got not Siria and other provinces from them by their own power,
but because the Christians had forsaken their duty to God, Sin the cause of
overthrow.
and became disobedient unto his word, and therefore God gave them no
prosperity in their wars, but let them fall into their enemies hands. The
Saracens prospered, increased in wealth, and enlarged their possessions, and
the Christians decayed and lost their territories, because God was angry with
their sins. There is no army to be feared in deed, Wicked Christians
overcome of wicked infidels.
but of the Christians: but as long as they by their sins provoke God, so
long they be not only not of force to overcome, but subject to be overcome of
Infidels. And therefore it is a thing worthy to be spoken, and often to be
said unto our Generals: Serve the Lord in fear, and fall down before him in
all reverence, Learning for leaders.
that he may be unto them a guide in their proceedings, that they causing sin
to be banished from their own tents, the faults of inferior followers may be
found out: for there is nothing that can expel darkness but light, and
nothing can discover sin, Chief governors are as the head of a spring.
but the truth, and sincere obedience to the laws and precepts of the
highest. And if the superior governors be clear and clean, being the spring
of the fountain, the fountain will yield pure water to the river: but if the
fountain be defiled, it is impossible that the brook should be clean. And
surely if the opprobrious words of this Sultan might sometime sound in the
ears of Leaders, it might perchance so grate their hearts, and pierce their
thoughts, that they may feel the necessity of godliness, and so cleanse
themselves and their people from sin: for unless it begin above, and that
the Commanders be seen religious and righteous, the inferior sort will hang
on their manners, and think it neither piety nor policy to cast off that
which their Leaders embrace. Faith and obedience a two edged sword.
And therefore let the two edged sword of faith and obedience cut off the head
of sin in the head, that it may dye in the members: and let the sound sleep
wherein our Martial men lie snorting (for the most part of them) in vanity,
be awakened, least that mischief which has seized upon the most, devour all,
and so our state which has been long glorious, in standing defencible by God,
against a mighty adversary, become foiled to our disgrace. Let all be
provoked to the study of virtue, of that virtue, which is accounted among the
godly, to be the Lady of fame, namely, Christian obedience, Religion the
Lady of fame.
whereby our slander, which consists in our vicious lives, may be taken
away, whilst our ungodly and furious enemies take counsel against us, and lay
plots to devour us, The ground of our enemies hope to prevail.

A pernicious conceit.


having no other ground but that we have forsaken our God, and God us: and
therefore they say in the way of reproach, where is their God? They are most
grossly affected surely, and their minds very pernicious, that seem by their
own manners, and by the tolleration of the wickedness of others under them,
to hold that there is no necessity of virtue, or the fear of God among
soldiers: and that temperance, sobriety, meeknes, love, peace, and such like
arguments of christian modesty, and fruits of religion, should be entertained
of me^ of arms, as though through these most blessed things manly minds
should seem dastardly or cowardly, without which divine virtues, none may
indeed be held either virtuous or valorous, nay not men but beasts. For these
things are the fruits of faith, whereof Paul shows the effect, Faith has
chiefest dominion in war. Hebr. 11.
to be the chief guide, and to have highest dominion in war. Read and
consider his 11. chapter to the Hebrews: Every virtue that is begotten without
faith, Virtue witho^t faith is as a bastard.
is bastardly: for faith is the gift of God, which he never gives without
those companions to follow it, which make a complete virtuous man. And
therefore he that fathereth his virtues otherwise then on God, the author and
father of all goodness, and good men, usurps his honor: for the very heathen
have acknowledged, Plato.
that no man can be honorable without divine inspiration and inw^rd motion.
And Plato that famous man among the Greeks, None can be tru^y virtuous but
from ^od.
shows by the words of Socrates, that all the virtue and gravity of man is
so much to be esteemed, as he has the knowledge of God: and contrariwise his
vice and wickedness may be measured by his ignorance of God. And therefore is
the Prince induced to conceive well of him, What makes the Prince to think
fit in him that she appoints General.
whom she purposes to make General of an army, by the apparent tokens of his
wisdom and experience, and especially of his religion and fear of God:
whereby she is moved to refer unto his disposition (as it were) her power and
authority regal, for matters requisite in the business of war. And it
behooves that precise choice be made, for that his charge may import the
preservation of millions of men, What in^reaseth the hope of the Prince.
yea of the state of his whole country. And therefore the more his resolution
appears to be grounded upon the fear of the Highest, so much the more hope
has his Sovereign of prosperous expedition. And so much the more virtuous and
valorous will his followers appear, by how much they see their General
truly religious. And his care (as before is said) must be to furnish his
companies with the most virtuous; and as Agamemnon dispensed with a rich
dastard and cowardly worldling for going to war: so and much more should
religious Generals and Captains refuse and reject wicked persons, Generals
must refuse wicked persons to g^e to war.
in as much as in them and their knowledge lies. For if a coward and
faint-hearted man be supposed prejudicial and not to profit, but to do hurt in
war; what may a wicked man? through whose impiety and ungodly example many
are corrupted, and for whose cause not only wars, but every virtuous action
succeeds the worse. And therefore is the religious man to be reverenced, The
religious never faint hearted in a good cause.
for that in a good cause he is never fainthearted: though it may be that the
imbecillitie of the flesh sometime may make him stagger, but he gathers his
powers, as it were unto him, and resolves like David, resting assured, that
his own weakness shall be no impediment unto him as long as he feels the
power of the divine aid to compass him about. And howsoever the wicked may
seem sometime to prevail by their hardiness and desperate boldness, there
is no certainty in their success, The issue of the enterpri^es of the wicked
suspicious.
but always a suspicion of the issue. For there is no true hope without faith,
and faith has no ground but Gods promise, which is only made unto the godly,
that bring forth such virtues, God^ promise the ground of faith.
as are approved by the word of God, and executed accordingly. Such as are
laden with evils, have no hope at all; but only an ambitious desire to
prevail, as Goliath had, whose trust was in himself: The wicked have a desire
and no hope.
but prevailing David held himself by God, who had promised victory to faith:
and therefore, in that his lively expectation he waited for the grace, presence
and power of God, wherein he prevailed. In vain does he hope that fears not
God, and in vain he fights that fights without Gods assistance: The
conquest of the wicked not honorable.
for whether he overcome or be overcome, neither is honorable, for that the
blessing follows only the promise which is made to the believers, whose
consciences being pure and clean, they are accepted with God: And their
counsels and enterprises have reason for their guide, and pass not the limits
of right and equity. And the hope which is grounded upon this sound foundation
is the greatest riches and chiefestie well that a General can possess: The
greatest riches and best jewel of a General.
for it causes him to shake off the clogs of cowardice and of a covetous
desire, which hinder much the good success of war. For from the latter
proceed many mischiefs, as strifes, quarrels, emulation, hatred, and murders,
and all forgetfulness of God, who then besotteth human wisdom by the cares
of spoils, delay and slavish fear. But hope is an enemy unto this greedy
desire of gain, and argues greatest magnanimity, Greatest magnanimity.
in setting more store by an ounce of honor, then by millions of gold. For
hope precedeth honor, and true honor has ever enough. Alexander the great
General of the Grecians, is hereof a notable president, The praise of
Alexanders hope.
who to succor his followers, and to enable his friends, gave all that he had.
And being demanded what he would keep for himself, answered, Hope. Thus
should noble minds trust in their virtues, whence can not but spring new supply
daily of necessary furniture, The noble mind.
to maintain honorable reputation, especially to him that fears God, and
executes his charge religiously. Such a one may assure himself above
Alexander, that his hope shall have enough. The noble mind thinks nothing
more dishonorable, The noble ignobled.
then to be blemished with the servile love of the bace pelf of this world,
although many pretending honor and nobility in the world, do even sell
their reputation for mucke and the worlds miseries, who have the name, but not
the effect of nobility, which is to be qualified with these honorable parts,
True nobility.
namely with patience, bounty, courtesy, clemency: to be liberal in
rewarding deseruers: to be kind in entertainment of the virtuous: easy to
be spoken with, to be constant, magnanimous, ready and quick in execution of
virtuous enterprises: to be forward in his countries quarrel, to be resolute
to perform whatsoever true duty requires: So shall he not only become more
honorable, but admired and beloved, not only of his followers, but of all men,
even of his enemies: and God especially will bless his endeavors, and frame
all his actions and enterprises, so, as the success shall be glorious and
wished. And forasmuch as a General stands in place, not only of a Leader
and director, The office of a General twofold.
for the performance of military affairs: but of a Magistrate to execute
justice by authority, derived from his Sovereign, wherein he must not only
regard his allegiance due unto her, but especially his duty to God: Plato
affirms, Plato his opinion of the necessity of justice.

Justice twofold.


that no commonwealth, city, or body politic can be well ruled, ordered,
or preserved in happy estate, without divine or humane justice. Whereby it
appears that justice is twofold, divine, whereby we are joined to God by
devotion and religious service: humane, whereby we are linckt and knit unto
men by mercy, love, and mutual desire to help one the other. The ground then
of justice is the honor and true service which we owe to God, The ground of
justice.
whereby we are induced to yield unto man what equity and love require,
according to Gods divine institution, to love him above all, and our neighbors
as our selves. And this is the sum of all justice. It is the most manifest
testimony, that a General and chief commander can show unto man outwardly,
The truest testimony that a General fea^eth God.
that he fears God, and imbraceth his truth inwardly, when he executes
iustic^ Whereof every man, be he high or low, yea the basest, equal with the
greatest, is to be partaker. For justice is nothing else among men, but an
equal distribution to all, The definition of justice.
as they deserve good or evil. And for that cause it is most earnestly
commanded, by the spirit of God, to all Magistrates and governors, Iere.
21.12. and 22.3.
and who soever violateth the same, cannot avoid the curse of God: which will
light not only upon their own heads, but be to the confusion of them that are
committed to their charge. And therefore a heavy judgment of God hangs over
them, whose governors regard not justice, Justice a refuge for the good.
which ought to be as a sanctuary and city of refuge, to protect the
innocent. It should be as a hand to hold them up, a sword to defend them, and
as a Moses to deliver them, a buckler to withstand the rigor, cruelty and
oppression of the wicked, and as an executioner to punish them. For there is no
other safe way or mean to preserve an army from tumult, The way to keep an
army from mutinies.
sedition, and dangerous mutinies, then to reward the well doer, and to punish
the offender. It requires of every man, much more of a General, to be seen
an indifferent and just moderator between man and man, having no respect of
men in regard either of friendship, kindred, wealth, poverty, or dignity. But
if a good General make choice of good Captains, Captains of private officers
and soldiers fearing God, possessed with the same zeal to virtue and
religion, there will seldom happen partiality in judgment. But for as much
as among such a huge multitude of men, it cannot be but there will be many
disobedient, stiffenecked, idle, wicked and contagious persons: Justice must
have her effect in cutting off the worst, that the rest may grow up and become
more profitable. Agesilaus King of Lacedemon, used to say, that he esteemed
justice as chief of all the virtues, Valor of no value without justice.
and that valor was of no value, if it were not joined therewith. To use
justice is the mean to make many just, which (if all were just) would have no
use in judgment, but all in reward. Oh, what anhappie regiment would that be,
where were no use of the sword? A happy regiment.
And howsoever impossible it may seem to be to attain unto that perfection
in an army, yet every christian society ought, from the head to the lowest
member, bend their endeavors to come near thereunto: to which there is nothing
more auailable, The good examples of governors much auailable.
then the good examples of superior governors. But because it is a thing
rooted in nature, and all men generally are subject to some vanity, all men
seem to take shelter under that thin covert, A cold covert for sin.
and for all their evils plead natural imbecillitie, whereby more sins are
committed, then if according to a divine constancy, they would resolve to
conform themselves to the best natures, namely, to the sanctified affections
of the most godly, whose corruptions howsoever they may seem to draw them to
things forbidden, yet it appears that it is as it were against their
consents, Exercise and custom the best mean to subdue sin.
doing that they would not do. So that exercise and custom to virtue, is an
especial mean to conquer carnal desires, which to do at all times for all
men, yea for any at al, is hard and merely impossible, but that some spark of
original frailty will euaporate, and show from whence we are: yet for the
avoiding of slander, and the just reproves due for common weakness or
wickedness, it behooves every chief Commander especially to consider duly how
he walks: The Leader must take heed to his walkings.
considering the eyes of all are fixed on his treadings, which seem to
privilege the licentiall minded to follow his Leaders evils. And though diverse
men are diversely affected, and among a multitude the most are worst, happy is
that governor that gives rather occasion to the good to become better, The
greatest mean to advance a Leader.
and to the evil to become good also. And this among all other deseruings,
yields greatest advancement unto his honorable reputation. For honor is in
nothing more gained, then by noble virtues. And nothing more blemisheth the
noble person, then gross imperfections: for that is true honor that proceeds
of wisdom and good government. True honor.
And he is only to be reckoned excellent, that by the high spirit of inward
grace is able to know himself: and then to subdue what he knows in himself
offensive to God, or prejudicial to his right rule and government, not leading
his affections by the line of carnal reason, twisted by the golden wheel of
flatterers, but as divine prudence, the lively leader to right judgment, shall
induce him. Cicero by a certain divine illumination, Cicero his opinion of the
prudent.
says, that none can be prudent, but he must needs be good. Such then as have
corrupt and wicked conditions, are destitute both of this wisdom and piety,
and deceive themselves, Men of great spirits may deceive them^elues.
in conceiving that as long as they can perform some act, well liked of great
men, and be perchance noted to be of valor, because they will undertake
desperate things, that they therefore are prudent, and have in them that which
becomes men deserving honorable reputation. For every virtuous and truly
praise worthy action, flows from that valor which is grounded upon that
wisdom which both teaches the way to true honor, and discovers the
infirmity of such as walk in vain glory: Such as measure their deseruings
by the plausible voices of such as speak for advantage or fear, having no
true taste of that most honorable fear and duty to God, without which there
can be no true valor in the heart. And therefore every man that longs for
honor (as all men for the most part, What he must do that deserves honor.
without flattery, do) must foster religion and the religious which procures
honor. In regard whereof, the most honorable person so little respects
honor, as he priseth his uttermost travails yea his life little worth to
maintain the same. Truest glory.
The truest glory is gotten by measuring all things by consc^ence, not doing
any thing for oste^tation and vanity. No man needs to boast himself of a
virtuous action: The greatest honor is to have done an honorable thing.
for the greatest glory that a man (most valiant) can expect in this life, is
to have done an honorable thing: for it is the act that glorifieth the agent,
by whom again God must be glorified by whom he did it: for the glory of the
assistance of the divine worker, is more glorious to him by whom it is wrought,
then the greatest honor that man can give. When a man gets most glory.
And the man that performs laudable services, gains most praise and fame,
when he himself least assumeth it. Yet it may stand sometime with modesty in
a military man to grace himself, When a man may praise himself.
with commendation of his own heroical desires, to the better encouragement
of others to follow him in an adventure perilous: as Nestor, who to animate
Patroclus and other knights, to undertake the combat against Hector man to
man, thought it no arrogancy to praise his own valor. It is an apt mean,
and sometime expedient, to draw men forward, and it causes cowards sometime to
become hardy, when a commander shall join execution, to his encouragement and
exhortation, and when his person shall be pressed to perform what he speaks of
himself: A General should not adventure his person upon a light occasion.
although it is not to be held a general necessity that the chief governor
or leader should adventure his person upon a mean occasion, or where the
service may be done by others, only by his direction. But it beseems not
every man, how worthy soever, to be seen forward to glorify his own
ability, by reason of things already done, nor to argue assurance by former
experience, to perform a thing to come, being dangerous and uncertain:
unless his assurance be so soundly grounded upon faith in the power of the
almighty, as David's was, who made it an argument to be able to fight with
Goliath, because God had given him power to prevail against a Bear and a Lion.
1. Sam 17.^4.
And therefore if valor covet by urging emulation, to make testimony of it
self, let reason go before which promises success, and then no doubt but
honor will follow: which of it own nature and accord, Honor attends virtue.
attends virtue at the heels, and never suffers true Fortitude, (which is
grounded upon equity and justice) to die without honor. For such is the power
of virtuous acts, that though they bring the mortal ca^kas with hazard to
the field and lay it in the dust, yet the memory of the excellent deeds is
challenged, and the virtuous that live do afford the same to posterities, with
etern^ll commemoration of deserved honor. And therefore it befitteth a soldier
to be so jealous of his reputation, How a soldier should be jealous of his
reputation.
that he rashly undertake not an unjust action, and valiantly to execute what
is just and honest. And it behooves a Commander to be so watchful over his
affections, as nothing break forth to stayne his reputation by unseemly
desires. For there are many dangers, Honor passes through many dangers. Pride.
through which true honor is forced to pass ere it come to the end of the
race of absolute renown. And among the rest Prid^ is the most perilous, the
cause of the first corruption of man's nature, a pleasing deceit, whereby best
actions may be defiled, and highest reputation blemished, and that by assuming
more of it self to it self, then reason or desert will yield, from other men
And there is nothing so powerful to prostitute the heroical mind to all
vanity, as an over good conceit of a man's own worthiness. This is deeply to be
considered, even of military men that seem to challenge it as a peculiar badge
of their profession, wherein they stand upon their honor (as they seem) to
encounter in arms the proudest in conceit. But since there is nothing more
grievous unto them the^ to be overcome, and the proud have no promise of
victory, because God exalts the meek, and throws down the proud: as
appears by poor Mordecay and insole^t Haman. Iam. 4.6. Hest. 7.9. The lowly
exalted and the proud cast down.
It is as a goodly tree that brings forth bitter and banefull fruits, which
may be well compared to the apples of Asphaltidis, fair to the eye, and yet
filthy and corrupt within. And therefore though it be very pleasing to flesh
and blood, it is hateful to the divine nature: for that it has not, nor
affoordeth any society in love, which is only meek and temperate in every
action. But pride is an infernal poison, which being once entertained in the
heart, Pride an infernal poison.
procures such an elevation and swelling in the thought, as it seems to
admit no equality in earth, nay it sometime heaueth it self above the divine
Majesty, as appears by that ramping devil of Rome, who trampleth all power
and subjection under his feet. It makes a base peasant sometime to lift up
his thoughts above his betters, like poor Diogenes, Diogenes contendeth with
Alexander.
who being proud and scornful, for that he seemed to be of highest
magnanimity, in subduing his affections, thought it no fault to contend with
Alexander. A tolerable pride.
And indeed pride is most commendable (if pride be to be praised) when men be
proud of suppressing evils in themselves. But that pride that comes of a
vain conceit of a man's singular virtues, or gifts outward or inward above
other men's, breaks oftentimes forth into cursed envy, Envy comes of
pride.
the invisible root that brings forth many apparent and execrable evils. It
showed her poisoned inclination first against innocent Abel, and it has no
part of her venom diminished to this day: Genesis 4 8.
but still draws men to execute her effects in most detestable actions, Envy
enemy especially to the virtuous.
especially against the more virtuous, that by true desert gain most glory:
as Saul who sought David's destruction, for no other cause but that his
worthiness was seen, to purchase honor by his virtues among the people, in the
service of the King, 1. Sam. 18.7.
and for defense of his country: for which cause Saul moved by envy, sought
means to murder him: but he not only prevailed not, 1. Sam 31.4.
but came to a shameful end: and God weakened his posterity, and
strengthened David and his house, only because David feared God, 2. Sam. 3.1.
and sought not the like effects of envy, to recompense evil for evil. It
ever brings greatest detriment unto the envious, Envy hurts it self most.
and hurts not the envied: but is rather a mean to bring them to more
comfort. What gained Labans sons by their envy toward Jacobs prosperity?
Genesis 31.1. G^n 37.4. En^ie a gross wic^^dnesse. Dan. 6.4.
the bl^ssing came upon Jacob, and the hurt upon them that envied him. The like
came to Joseph envied by his brethren. It is a gross wickedness to be
envious: for it feeds only upon the damnable desire of doing injury to the
best, who in all love ought to be cherished and fostered, comforted and
encouraged in virtue. En^ie followe^h honor like a ^ulture to devour it.

The valiant are far from en^ie.


And yet this evil follows honor, as a vulture to devour it: it lurketh in
the tents of most valiant soldiers: but the valiant are far from envy, yea
so far as they covet the company, and seek the society of the most praise
worthy, embracing the virtuous with the arms of perfect love. All noble and
religious Commanders, Captains and inferior men of true worth, hate this
malign fury, that macerateth it self at the prosperity, and triumpeth at
the harms of other men. Envy a tragedy of ^iuellish practices.
They see the effects, and consider the issue of it to be nothing else but a
tragedy of devilish practices, whereby men run into their own ruin by
revenge, as the Egyptians envying Israel, did. Revenge is a branch springing
from the former root, Exodus 1.12. Revenge.
which taken as it is in it own nature, is a desire to requite an evil
received, by returning an evil again, which has some color to work
injury, for injury. Envy iniust.
But such is the injustice of envy, that it boyleth with the furious heat of
malice against innocent virtue, which carries no shape or resemblance, neither
of valor, which consists in maintaining a just quarrel, nor of revenge, as
it is truly revenge: for that it seeks to iniure such as iniure not. He is a
simple man that enuieth and cannot pretend matter to bear color of lawful
revenge. Envy will find ma^ter to bear ^olour of lawful revenge.
But far be it from a Commander, because it blinds Justice, and peruerteth
Judgment. And howsoever it be grown among men to be held a part of highest
generositie, to offer this measure for every wrong, and to challenge and accept
the challenge, for life and death, for trifeling abuses: and though he seem
cowardly, that refuses to answer every desperate outrage of the furious:
Consult with reason before ^e^enge.
Let all men consult with reason, whether upon such frivolous occasions, true
valor ought to launch out into such seas of repentance, as they are tossed in,
that in such vainglorious attempts speed best. Experience has trial enough,
that patience is better then desperate fury, which is also approved true by
that which is taught by the divine teacher, who condemns murder, Leuit. 24
1^. Psalm. 9.9.16. Matthew. 5.10. God defends innocents from iniust injury.
and forbids to offer injury one to another for any private grudge:
offering himself to be the defender of the innocents, to whose bosoms he
returns rather a reward, then suffering the wicked to prevail. And therefore
it is better to receive then to do evil. And if any professor of arms seem
to take exception at this, in regard that re^usall of a challenge may argue in
him pusillanimitie: let him think that the effects of true magnanimity and
valor, is to bear and to endure, with all modesty and patience, the wrongs
of private injuries, True valor.
and to refer the consideration of the offense unto the censure of the
superior commander: who has power to convince and to execute the offender, as
the cause requires in justice. And howsoever men (deceiving themselves) deem
that their chief praise consists in shedding of blood for private causes;
let them know that their true fortitude is not therein seen, Wherein true
fortitude is seen and not seen.
nor seen but in a resolute execution of it in the face of the public and
professed enemy of Gods truth, and his countries quiet, wherein as far as
he shows his resolution to dye with honor, so much the nearer he comes to
that mark which virtue aymeth at: and wherein it shows it self absolute and
perfect, for the virtue that comes nearest the divine nature, and is most
difficill, and least familiar with men, is it that makes men truly valiant,
and gains them the honor which is due to the most worthy persons, who have
ever striued to conquer their revenging desires, wherein that mighty Alexander
showed himself divinely instructed, when he said, The noble heart of Alexander
in subduing his desire of revenge.
that a man wronged had need of a more noble heart to forgive his enemy, then
to be revenged on him. Sage Pittacus having within his power one that had
abused him, overcame this furious passion of revenge, and suffered him to
depart unhurt, saying, that pardon was better then revenge, Pittacus his
opinion in pardoning wrong^.
^he one being proper to the spirit of man, the other to a cruel beast. He
that is able thus to master this violent affection, shall procure unto himself
the name of being most ho^orable and gracious: for that it agrees with the
divine spirit. Where (on the contrary) if he yield to such an untamed passion,
he shall only receive praise of the wicked, and the prudent shall record his
rashness, to his eternal ignominy. So that the best revenge and most honorable
victory, which a man can have against his enemy, The best victory over an
enemy.
is to surpass him in patience, in bounty, and in good turns, wherein
rests true magnanimity: whereby the wise will hold him a greater and more
happy conqueror, then if he had deprived his enemy of life in the field. But
when a man's reputation is touched by slander or disgrace, there seems such
an honest quarrel, A pretended honest quarrel.
as may not (in credit) be quallified, without the combat, or denial: for so
dear does a soldier seem to prise his honor, that if it be impaired by any
of his companions, he stands upon his reputation to maintain it with the
force of his own sword. But alas, this is but a mask to cover a dishonorable
affection, which were it duly reformed by the glass of divine duty, Matthew,
5 44.
that commands to love our enemies, he would rather swallow up a simple
disgrace, among few (which indureth not) then in a vain conceit to maintain
his glory by his own will, to run into the disgrace due to the reprobate
for ever. He that reuengeth, usurps a law unto himself.
Let no man be deceived with vain regard of the preservation, or increase of
his honor, by usurping a law unto himsefe, to shed the blood of him, whom the
law in every government (yea of arms) has power to punish: and which (in
stead of the first offender, being revenged by the offended) inflicteth the
law justly upon him, that might justly have craved the law against the other.
Vengeance is the Lords, therefore should all men leave it to him, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
or to the judgment seat of his scepter bearer in earth. But he is the most
honorable conqueror that freely forgiueth, ouercomming evil with goodness:
Romans 12.21.
which he cannot do but with the weapons of that heavenly prudence, wherewith
also he must encounter two other dangerous impediments to honorable reputation,
Ambition and Tyranny.

Emulation and flatte^ie.


Ambition and Tyranny, which daily offer themselves to charge the most
heroical spirit, by the instigation of emulation and flattery, two
inseparable companions of honor, shrouded both under one veil of dissimulate
zeal of amity, whose fruits yet import envy and disgrace. And he may be
called prudent in deed that can walk so warily, that he be not foiled in
honor by the subtle wilines of one of these, of which the most dangerous is
flattery, which being shaken off, the residue cannot with ease subdue the
affections of the prudent. If flattery were plainly laid forth before our
eyes in it right shape (howsoever it appear being covered and cloaked like
love) it would be seen a pestilent deuourer of virtuous thoughts: The nature
and effects of flattery.
for it is a spiritual poison, an invisible murderer, a pleasing voice,
whereby aspiring hearts are unawares wounded, and enchaunted: it beguileth the
mind with vain conceit of things that neither are, nor will be. It promises
life, but practices death, and works upon the highest and greatest, changing
it self into what behavior, manners, guize and quality, be it vice or virtue,
that the object imbraceth: it gives a dissimulate echo to every sound: it
boweth and bends, it stands stout and becomes mute, according to the
president of the object. Insomuch, as were it possible, the flatterer could
transform his shape into the shape of him whom he flattereth, yea he would
seem content to dismember himself for imitations sake: as it is reported,
that Alexander the great and Alphonsus King of Aragon, having each of them a
wry neck, the one by nature, the other by custom, their flatterers to seem
the more applicable to their affections, dissembled these their imperfections,
carrying their necks also awry, testifiyng their affections to be as crooked.
Every observing noble Man, Men of power, place, and authority that behold
their followers, may discover such disguised foxes: and it is the part of
discretion to discard them, as not profitable, but pernicious members, of whom
yet some (being endued with perfect Prudence) can make use, They that are
truly wise may make use of flatterers.
by carrying themselves so much the more warily, by how much they perceive
themselves invaded by them. And therefore a thing seriously to be considered
of all men, but of military guides, governors and leaders espeacially, who
aiming their virtues to the mark of honor, are yet through original
weakness and the subtlety of the malign spirit, carried to and fro to
attain thereunto, by right or wrong. And the greatest spur to prick them on
in the contrary and forbidden course, A d^ungerous prick to the noble minded.
is to hearken and give consent to the deceyuing persuasions of such as follow
them, of a mere desire to be advanced by them, and not in regard of that
affection which love (grounded upon the virtuous inclination of him whom they
follow) ought to inkindle in them. The nature of man is most apt to conceive a
good opinion of himself, and to affect them best that can most sweetly sing
him asleep in this conceit. Such a one has both the passive and active parts
of flatte^ie, Flattery has both an active and a passive part.

2. Sam. 15.7 8.9.

Flattery the spur to ambition.

2. Sam. 18.14


for he flattereth himself, and content^ himself to be flattered, as Absolon
that stole the hearts of the people from his father by flattery, wherein he
flattered himself to be more worthy of the Kingdom: and was whetted on to this
reprochful ambition by suffering himself to be carried away by dissembling
Achitophell, whose end as it was wonderful, so is his ambitious practice to be
avoided. The man that is deceived with this counterfeit kin^nesse and love,
which he seems to have (and has not,) from other men, bemisteth his
affections more and more, Flattery bemisteth the affections of the flattered.

The effect of perfect duty.


by ^herishing those means that covet to justify all his actions, so that he
cannot perfectly see the true meaning of honest duty and faithful reverence,
which he that unfeignedly loves, coueteth to show, in discovering plainly what
all men judge, and how the wise conceive of his manners, behavior and
proceedings, and which in all things delivers what it thinks of all things,
propounded to his censure, what is sit to be done or omitted, of him, to
whom it owes this duty, were it to Caesar himself. But pl^yne and simple
truth has not that grace, Truth and plain dealing not graced. Pro. 12.2.
nor receives that entertainment of the most, and most noble, that it
deserves, where it ought to be h^lde more dear then all Machiauels
politickes. But the good man is favored of the Lord. And he that can best
dissemble is wise in the world: who can carry all virtues in his tongue, and
all vice and deceit in his heart, The dissembler prospers.
he lives, he loves, he prevails and prospers, and he is fit to be
favored, and in this he thinks nothing more sententious then what he
speaks, nor more praiseworthy then what he does But the wise man's opinion is
that there is more hope of a fool then of him. And the greatest deseruer in
his own conceit gayneth but ignominy, without the approbation of the prudent.
And therefore says Job, Let all men fear God, for he regards none that
stand wise in their own conceit. Job. 37.24. Romans 15.1.
We ought not to please our selves says Paul, which imports that none should
flatter himself, or be puffed up the more for the flattery of other men:
although it be the main trodden way to that forbidden apple of ambition, which
once tasted, peruerte^h the affections, and seals up the conscience, that it
yields neither judgment nor equity, but measures all things by will and
injury. Alexander in that humor put to death Calisthenes, Parmenion and
Philotus, The pernition^ act of Alexander.

Ric. 3.


to satisfy the desires of his flatterers, showing himself more ba^barous
then prudent. The practices of Ric. 3. in cu^ting away the twigges that seemed
to hinder his passage to Ambition, is not so ancient, but it rests to this
day and will be ever rememb^ed to his notable ignominy; a spectacle of the
same nature ouerruleth all that give place either to flatter themselves, or to
b^e carried from duty by the flattery of other men. And therefore men in
office and great place, Men of high place must be c^^c^mspect.
had n^ede to carry ever sail between ( Sylla and Cha^ybdis) flattering and
flatterers: least by the one they administer, or by the other they take
occasion to deceive or be deceived, that they accept not nor give fair and
pleasant show of love, (which may be dissembled) without the true approbation
of the one, by substantial judgment and trial of their inward dispositions,
which speak them fairest: and of their own true meaning and inward desires in
speaking fair to other men: for by the one they may be miscarried, and by the
other they may misleade men that depend simply upon the bare terms uttered,
Simple men stand upon the words and not upon the inward meaning.
and not upon the hidden intentions of their superiors. For what can be more
perilous to conscience, then to dissemble with it self, since it knows and
can discover that to be a lie, which it cannot justify to be spoken as it is
meant, nor meant as it is spoken? A man gives himself the lie if he speak
what he means not.

Psalm. 41.9.


And if a professed valourist give himself the lie, why should he not stand
more upon revenge against himself, then if a stranger gave him the lie? upon
whom he makes it a matter of conscience to hazard his credit and blood to be
revenged? Oh ridiculous vanity that men should dissemble with their own
hear^es, and not think it offensive to their souls, since their consciences
write up against themselves, against Judgment, every falsehood of the tongue
which is the fruit of flattery David says, My familiar friend, whom I
trusted, which did eat of my bread, even be has combined against me. Our
t^ngue our familiar friend
And what is more familiar with us then our own tongues? (though David meant
his dissembling friends) which can utter nothing but it is manifested first
unto the conscience, which would that all truth should proceed forth at the
door of the lips, who ought to be as the careful porters of our thoughts,
to let pass nothing but that which should pass by the consent of the
undefiled conscience. It much behooves such as stand upon their reputation,
and would indeed maintain true honor, to avoid flattery in themselves, both
active and passive, whereof the first kind is known unto themselves only, and
as touching the second, they must make trial of men. So shall they find the
flatterer to flitte away or do the thing commanded coldly, There must be
trial of men.
and without that true devotion, which true duty and friendly love indeed
requires. For whosoever pretends love and honest duty to his superior,
must in deed truly transform himself, The nature of a true friend.
into his nature whom he seems to love, and be unto him as another himself,
faithful and secret in causes honest, without suspicion of any contrary fruit
the^ loyalty to his Sovereign or true duty to God, The main pillars of true
friendship,
which maine virtues are the cords of gayning and retayning the faith and
absolute amity of the surest in friendship, and all other respects of love,
Counterfeit love.
besides the former, are but a combination and co^federacie of like with like,
and both to be shunned of the prudent. If a great person afford semblance of
love or liking to his inferior, The higher affecting the inferior, what is
required therein.
it follows that either it is in regard of some special quality approved or
hoped for in the party, or of the free disposition of his honorable mind,
which above all things ought to tie the party to an honest desire to become
able to answer his noble affection by some effects of duty and duetiful
endeavors. Which cannot but procure further testimony of his honorable
inclination by the fruits of his relieuing hand and helping bounty, which in
deed are the chief tokens to the inferior deseruers, of the honorable
minded: without which there continues not long that true encouragement, nor
execution of duty in the unable poor attendant, which by a liberal hand may
be made ever unfeigned: for the fault cannot but be esteemed less for a poor
man that wants comfort, to dissemble love and duty to the higher in hope, by
honest endeavors, to gain power to do better service, then for the higher or
more noble person (having power in himself to gain many friends, and ability
to steed many) to frustrate the hope of the meanest, well affected. And
therefore it sounds nearest to true nobility, A necessary rule for noble
men.
to give plain demonstration of his purpose, toward endeavoring followers,
either to encourage or discou^age them, that they consume not more years in
mourning for time lost in vain hope, then in recounting the comforts received
by best endeavors. Fair words may be compared to a pleasing sun, Fair
words compared to a wa^me sun.
which warmeth only, but clotheth not, nor feeds the body: and as the sun
shines upon all, so fair words are free to all, from all. But relieuing
deeds are the substance, words but the shadow, Relieuing deeds.
performance is the fire, and promise but the smoke. There proceeds from the
heat of hateful flattery a twofold operation, it dries up the good and
wholesome humors of temperance and modesty, and makes to grow and spring
forth, A twofold operation in flattery.
as lively branches, Ambition and Tyranny: whereof as the first is bred by a
deep conceit of deserving well, imprinted in the thought by natural
persuasion, and watered by artificial flattery: so the second follows it,
omitting nothing unexecuted, (be it never so evil) to accomplish and
maintain the end of the first. But if this last evil be duly considered,
Tyranny a hateful handmaid to honor.
it will be found an hateful hand-maide to honor. For it is naturally rooted
in the hearts of all men, no less to detest tyrants, then to love and
reverence religious and just governors. And yet this ugly guest is entertained
sometimes into the tents of Nobles, and marches under the colors of Martial
men, by whose sinister counsel they turn oftentimes mercy into bloody
execution, where neither law of arms, The fruits of tyranny.
Christian religion or humane policy requires the same. And therefore let
every man, professing arms, abandon it from his company, and in place thereof
entertain mercy, and christian seue^itie, keeping a mean between fond
pity, and filthy tyranny. The more a soldier conformeth himself to be
pitiful, the nearer he comes to the sovereign goodness. And the more he
imbrueth his desires in the blood of such, as may without danger and breach of
military discipline be spared, the more he resembles the father of blood,
the prince of rigor and bitterness, and governor of hell and darkness, whose
members and instruments they are that thirst for blood. Tyranny and Justice
cannot dwell together.
Tyranny and Justice cannot dwell in one subject, no more then light and
darkness. For that tyranny forgets all regard of law and civil duty,
measuring all things by will, making no difference of things evil, from
things honest: but whatsoever may be effected by force and rigor, that it
holds lawful and expedient. Whereas Justice puts a difference between
the good and the bad, and proceeds in both, not as will, but as the divine
rule of right reason directs and allows: without which precise and godly
order, the best bodies are confounded with their heads. Sin has many
alluring sna^es.
And for that, sin, which attends every function and every sort of men,
has many branches, and many alluring snares, to deceive the most virtuous,
and finds none more auailable, then such as come in the most glorious robes,
bringing greatest variety of delights, answerable to the variable affections
of men, which cannot be numbered more the^ can the sins of men; it is
necessary that every Commander, as in military policy he mustereth his men*
to the end to see his strength, and to consider his power, as well by the
number, as by the weapons they bear: A soldier must often muster his virtues.
so it behooves him daily to take view of his virtues, how they stand
undefiled, and how he has subdued the sundry enterprises, and prevented the
many invasions of vain desires, which often prevail, where watch is not kept
over the thoughts. Every pleasure that a man imbraceth, is a delight either of
the body or of the mind: but where there is an absolute consent, there is the
whole man become a captive and a slave to that whereby he is overcome, whether
it be the lust of the eye, Lust and concupiscence inc^ude every sin.
or concupiscence of the flesh, which indeed include all the rest. And
therefore (above all other persons) the martial man, who stands upon his
magnanimity and fortitude, upon his ordering and governing of things tending
to victory, must stand upon his valor in th^se assaults of sin: wherewith
if he suffer himself to be overcome, The blemish of a soldier.
he loses the greatest part of his glory, in that he presuppos^th an ability
to encounter any other man, and yet is overcome of his own weakness, as if a
man should invade a house abroad, and lose his own city at home. But it is a
great argument, He is worthy to be a soldier that can subdue sin.
that he that can subdue him self and resist the pleasures of sin, is
worthy to be a soldier in the wars: yea, he deserves the place of a
Leader, because he knows how to conquer the greatest and mightiest enemy,
which indeed is his own delight and carnal desires: whereof whosoever is
overcome, is not worthy the name of a soldier, much less of the place of a
Commander. The wicked assertion of a military man.
But I have heard some of no small place in the wars affirm (with no less
audacious insolency, then he ought to have sincerity) that it is enough for
the Ministry to be masters of sin, and that it beseems soldiers to live
like soldiers, to swear like soldiers, and to sin like soldiers. Wherein
he showed little the parts of a true soldier, but rather thereby discovering
the liberty of soldiers, the security and careless lives of soldiers,
Soldiers should strive to exceed other in virtue
who ought indeed to strive to go before all other sorts of men in virtue and
godliness, having like soul and like body, like account to make, and like
reward to receive. Nay, what should so besot a soldier, or miscarrie a
Governor, that they should not have greater regard to live well, then all
other sorts of men, considering that other men have natural infirmities only,
and accidental casualties to bring their carcases to the grave: but they
(beside those) have the fury of mortal blows, and danger of the bullet to
finish their race suddenly. And therefore should so uprightly walk in their
lives and conuersations, as becomes Saints: knowing this, that after death is
no redemption. Soldiers must answer for every sin they commit.
And that they shall answer for every sin they commit, and for every idle
word they shall speak, much more for every oath they vainly swear, for every
blasphemy against God, and for every injury done to their brethren. And it
will be no excuse to say, I was a Soldier, I was a Captain, I was a
General, A frivolous excuse for soldiers to God.
and I sinned but like a Soldier, I did but like a Captain, or like a
General. This general answer will be a general rebuke to as many as take not
hold by times of the promised mercy in Christ, in true repentance,
reformation, faith and exercise of all godliness and piety. I counsel
therefore every military man, An exhortation to military men.
to whom especially I bend my speech in this poor treatise, that he will
bethink himself that he is a man, and that he must live as a godly man, that
he may dye like a godly man. If he be honorable, and have dominion and rule
over others, he resembles the nearer the divine power of religious men,
faithful and fearful to sin, he so much the nearer comes to the heavenly
nature. If he be a man inferior, and knows his duty to God, and forgets
or neglects it, God will remember it against him in judgment. If he be
ignorant, Comforts for the poor soldier fearing God.
and refuse knowledge, his judgment shall be just. But the poorest, fearing
God, is already exalted to the high and powerful protection of the chief
Sovereign, whose hand has taken charge to support him in the field, and to
adorn him with the diadem of mercy, which is the crown of eternal glory
after death.

I have aimed this silly treatise to the good of the most glorious
Commanders, and officers in our wars, in simple terms and unfeigned zeal of
their welfare, The prosperity of the Comma^ders the good of all.

Military function a high calling.


whose prosperity, as it is the general happiness of all: so all ought to set
their helps by best practices, and pray that God will bless their
proceedings. And because the function of military government is high and
sacred, Reason wills, and true duty and reverence to God commands, that
all suspicion of offending that high commander Jehovah, should be taken away,
by clensing every part of this body of government, from the dangers likely to
fall on us, by suffering unlawful things to follow our armies. And although
(no doubt) ^uery Commander in policy, grounded upon true religion, can of
himself discover the enormities, and reform them which seem to be most
perilous: yet I may, under their patience, briefly remember, The necessity of
discipline in ^arres.
that where the discipline of war is truly executed, there is commonly good
success: and where it is neglected, there it is uncertain. And therefore, if
abominable blasphemies, beastly drunkenness, common carding, dicing, and
whoredom, Atheism and Papisme, with such like were repressed, no doubt but
virtuous exercises would be better accounted of: for God would bless the godly
endeavors of the Commanders, and fructify the obedience of them that are
commanded. And for the more profitable exercising of all, it behooves the
General to enjoin his Captains, Id^enes must be abandoned.
the Captains their soldiers, that they will abandon Jdlenes, the mother of
all sinful actions, and that they will betake them to the hearing, reading,
and discoursing of the divine word, which is the lantern to light them to true
duty both to God and their governors. The benefit of spiritual exercises.
And let the spiritual minded have encouragement, that they may strengthen the
more weak, either by conference, or reading some divine treatise, to the
increase of a more general knowledge and zeal, in all wherein they may betake
themselves to often prayer, that God may guard their courts of guard, and be
present in their armies, to comfort every member, by supply of their private
and public wants. And what can this divine course of life, and daily exercise,
impair the credit, honor, or reputation of the chiefest? Nay, what an
ornament will it be unto them, to be seen first in the sacred service of God
with the people? It is too coldly embraced of many, A chief ornament for
Commaders to serve God with the people.
and l^ttle practiced of the most: who think it more co^sonant to their
professions, to betake them to more offensive exercises, wherein neither can
the God of heaven be glorified, nor their duty in arms truly discharged. What
hope then can there be of victory or good success, which comes of nothing
else nor by any other means, then of the favor of God almighty? who only is
ready to comfort, relieve and defend the godly, and lovers of virtue and
religion? God deals not with the wicked and godly alike.
The wicked and careless he regards not in love, but casts them off, and
suffers them to fall into their enemies hands. The Scriptures abound with
examples of the same, and threatens to such as fear not God, miseries and
calamities: but to the godly, it promises all prosperity and victory.
Whereby they have always cause to praise God, and to sing hymns of triumph to
his glory, We must praise God for his goodness and favor:
as Claudianus did in the behalf of the happy victory, wherein Theodosius
overcame Arbogastes and Eugenius at the Alps.

Omnium dilecte Deo tibi militat ether,
Et coniurari veniunt ad classica venti.
All things help them and fight for them that fear God: All things fight for
the godly.
whereof our late experiences, may more and more encourage us, to become more
and more obedient unto him, that makes his creatures so obedient unto us.

That all men should be ready to defend their Prince and Country: And how
inferior officers in arms, the common and private soldiers should behave
themselves, as touching their obedience to God, their Prince and Commanders.
The Argument of this second treatise.
Howsoever it may seem to some a needless labor and unprofitable, to send
forth so simple a discourse into the field among men of war, accustomed
rather to the pike, then to the pen; to the bullet, then to the Bible; and to
a careless course of life, then to level their actions, according to that
honesty and equity, which is required in the wars: yet (since Iayme my
desires for their good, their comfort and consolation) I presume to set down
in a familiar manner, some necessary considerations of their duties, as well in
regard of God, whom they ought chiefly to obey, as of their Prince and
superior Commanders, whom he commands them to obey: And to remember them of
the dangers which commonly follow such as neglecting virtue and exercises of
things commanded, do follow and embrace vice, and practice things forbidden.
Every man I know, will favor and follow my counsel, not as it is, but as they
themselves are; if good, they will receive it without disdain; if evil, they
will scorn it, and my good will. Sundry reasons have moved me to undertake
this work, and above the rest (God knows) the love I bear to my country
threatened by the rumors of wars: Reasons moving the auctor to the work.
and the good will I bear to my country men, that must undertake the defense
by war. Wherein as I have a little waded in the former treatise, to show my
duty to the highest in military offices, so I endeavor to speak something to
men of meaner qualities. And for that not only report but experience it self
does assure me that there is defect in the ma^ners and proceedings of some me^
trained up in that most honorable exercise of war, in regard of divine
duty: and consequently that by tradition, the corruption flows to the
perverting of such as either voluntarily, or by authority, are daily drawn
thereunto: and the matter yet being so slenderly considered, that no learned
has been seen to undertake any thing, whereby to give them the light, by any
peculiar treatise for their reformation and comfort, as is fit, (in that
regard) for the persons and for the time: I the most unworthy of all other,
adventure my poor endeavors to be censured of the learned, rather then to omit
a matt^r of that importance at this time, wherein the business is for the glory
of God himself, in maintaining his truth and the general preservation of all
our estates, against an adversary mortally disposed (as by many probabilities
appears) to lay all our honor in the dust.

Sith therefore there is no warrant promised, or assurance, to us to prevail,
or to maintain our own defense, without the assistance of God, the high
Commander of all hoastes, There is no hope to prevail in war without Gods
assistance.
we must prepare our selves to meet this enemy, and to show what we are, not
that it is enough to say we are soldiers, but that we can say, our consciences
and our professions do testify that we are christian Soldiers, soldiers
fearing God, then we may go forth with true boldness, The true soldier.
because David's faith has David's true courage, and that shall stand our
glory, after our mortality. Every man called unto these affairs, may (no
doubt) find for their military directions sufficient and able persons, above
them to conduct and lead them, who also will have care and regard of civil
government and military discipline. Though Leaders regard common discipline,
every soldier must have a private regard unto himself.
But it more concerns every man to have a private regard unto himself, that
as his outward actions are trained by discipline of war, to the knowledge of
the order of marching, charging, fighting, retiring, and such like necessary
points and observations of war: so he must be also instructed, how to behave
himself in loyalty to his sovereign, in duty to his commander, in fit
exercises in time convenient, in love and concord toward his fellow soldiers,
how to make true use of prosperity, wealth and plenty, of pleasure and
comfort, of sorrow and grief, of life and death: all which are the fruits and
effects of war. And especially he ought to learn how to eschew the things
that are evil, and to embrace and follow what is good, how to know God and to
serve him truly, The chief end of our creation
the principal and chief end for which we were created. And who so is thus
prepared, either in deed or in desire, Who may challenge the title of a true
sol^ier.
may challenge unto himself thetitle of a true soldier. He therefore that
will undertake this honorable profession, must consider that the principal and
chief mean to attain unto perfection is the fear of God, without which, he
marches as a naked man, be he never so completely armed on all parts at
proof: as an unskillful man, be he never so politic: and as a we^ke man, had
he the valor and force of Hector. And because it is presupposed that every
soldier is called unto arms by his Princes authority (as behooves) though
some of their voluntary inclination be as forward: All ought to be called to
the warr^^ by authority.

Obedience to our Sovereign


I will speak first of every man's obedience to his Sovereign, wherein he
must yield himself freely to her disposition, and consequently to the
direction of her Lieutenants and substitute Commanders, that he may with the
more freedom of a good conscience serve the Lord in that vocation. Obedience
is the mother of all virtues, and no man sauoureth truly of this obedience,
Obedience the mother of all virtues.
without he first obey God, and that obedience he must learn by his word,
with which obedience we will suppose, that all English men are already endued,
and so speak of their obedience, which they owe to Gods Ministers: whereof the
first is the chief Magistrate, the supreme governor, our Sovereign, whom we
must obey in all things, Obedience to the chief Magistrate.

Deuteronomy. 34.9. Josh. 1.16.

A good resolution of Subi^ctes.


as the children of Israel obeyed Joshua, saying unto him, All that thou
commaundest, we will do, and whithersoeuer thou sendest us, we will go. Here
is the true pattern of the duty of true subjects toward their Prince. They
must neither murmr nor grudge when they are called by authority, to
undertake what is commanded them, but willingly and without constraint yield
themselves ready, to go whither, and do their endeavors to execute what they
shall be commanded, and not to think evil thereof in their hearts, Exodus
22.28. Romans 13.1.2.
nor to speak evil with their lips: for that every soul must submit
himself unto the higher powers, for there is no power but of God: and the
powers that be, All must be subject to authority.
are ordained of God, and whosoever resists that power, resists the
ordinance of God, and they that do resist shall receive unto themselves
judgment. God himself, whose power they resist, will revenge it, and the
Magistrate has power from him to punish it. Tit. 3 1.
Therefore the Apostle wills Titus to put the men of Crete in remembrance, to
be subject and obedient to principalities and higher powers, and to be ready
to every good work. And Peter confirming the same thing, 1. Pet. 2.13.14.
wills all men to submit themselves to all manner ordinance of such as are
appointed of the Lord to govern them, whether it be unto the King as unto the
superior, or to such as are sent of him. Why obedience is due to Magistrates.

Wis 6.3.


And the Wiseman shows wherefore this obedience is due unto Magistrates:
Because (says he) rule and authority to command, and to forbid, is given
them from the Lord, and power both to reward and punish from the most high.
This is that acceptable thing in man, which God holds dearer then sacrifices.
In regard whereof, 1 Samuel 15.22.23.
every man from the highest to the lowest, is under the command, power and
appointment of the Prince, and at the direction of such as she sets in
office over them. We must obey inferior Commanders.

Heb. 13.17.


And therefore even to them also we must be obedient, as Paul commanded the
Hebrews, saying, Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your
selves. Here we see the warrant of the King of Kings to all the Princes of the
earth, who again by the same commission, Warrant for commanding and obeying.
warrant the inferior Magistrates to command us, which is also warrant unto us
to obey them. And this obedience is a duty, whereby we are bound cheerfully
and willingly, without force or the swords constraint, to yield honor unto them
we ought to honor, and to obey them whom we ought to obey. And since the ground
of this obedience is of God, to whom all men are so beholden, The ground of
true obedience is of God.
both for their creation, preservation, and for his infinite blessings
necessary for this life, as without which we were all naked, miserable, and
void of all consolation; how can any man show himself so unnatural and
thankles, as to deny to obey them, whom he commands us to obey? And
especially in the cause, The glory of God and our salvation the chief ends of
our obedience. We should obey our Sovereign for her own sake.
whereof his glory and our own salvation is the chief end? Let us therefore
become truly dutiful to our Sovereign, not only for the causes above said,
but for her own sake (who most lovingly tendereth the good of all her
subjects) and for our countries cause, for which we were borne. And what
greater commodity can it receive by our nativity, then to enjoy our uttermost
endeavors, to keep, preserve and maintain the same? Whereby also we shall
preserve our own laws, livings, liberties, wives, children and friends.
Wherein if we seem backward, and not ready, how can we hold our selves good
members of the Commonwealth? If the hand, the foot, or any other member
should deny to yield best help to defend the body in danger, who would not
think that member unworthy to taste of the comforts of the more principal
parts? nay worthy to be cut off and cast away. If we follow merely nature,
Nature challenges obedience and defense.
without respect to that divine duty before remembered, we cannot but employ
our goods travails and industry, and what else soever is in our power, in the
behalf of our countries weal. Which imports so many gracious commodities,
as humane society, nor life it self, without the preservation thereof, can be
maintained. And he that lives so unto himself, and for himself, as he will
not relinquish the care of his private profit, Who is worthy to be cast out of
humane society.
to add his best help of body and ability for his countries safety, is
worthy to be cast out of all humane friendship, and to be accounted worse then
the beast that will defend his kind, yea then the hog or the dog that will
defend their shelters: for that he is bereft and robbed of that duty, which
his Sovereign, country and friends may truly challenge of him. We have the
name of Christians, and no doubt but God has many in England that serve him as
true Christians; if we should be found more careless of our countries safety
in the time of danger, then Pagans and Infidels, Pagans and Infi^els have care
to defend their country.
that are no way qualified with the knowledge of civil duty, much less of
divine obedience; we might worthily be numbered among brutish cowards, and not
among the hardy ancients, who accounted it great happiness to lose their lives
in their countries cause. If we well consider the affection which nature has
imprinted in our hearts toward our country, Nature gives v^ a love to our
country.
by reason it is the place agreeing with the constitution and disposition of
our bodies, because we first breathed and took life therein, it could not but
be unto us as a firm obligation to bind us to defend it, besides the duty of
conscience, the cause of religion, and other divine respects, whose neglect and
breach is the forfeiture of all benefit, both of the favor of God, and the
protection of the relieuing laws of our own country. If we that are
Christian subjects, under Christian Queen Elizabeth, refuse to show willingness
to adventure our lives for our professed religion, for our Queen and country,
how far we show our selves more cowardly, and base minded, then the adherents
and subjects of Marcus Otho the Emperor: judge all men by the example. A
notable example of true hearted subjects.
The Emperor having lost the field in a battle against Vitellius and Cecinna,
contending for the Empire, was urged by the remain of his army to try
fortune again, and to use them and their persons as long as they had one drop
of blood in their bodies: In testimony of which resolution in them all, a
simple soldier having a sword in his hand, said unto the Emperor: Know this
oh Caesar, that all my companions are determined to dye thus for thy sake, A
desperate act to testify love.
and there withal slew himself with his own sword before him. Though this
president of a desperate person have no warrant to be followed, yet the true
affections and tried love of these resolute subjects, are of worthy memory,
and may make dastards and cold hearted men blush, to refuse to offer themselves
as sacrifices for the same. Wherefore let this suffice to move them, to whose
lot it falls to be employed in our countries defense, to be obedient, ready
and courageous. The obedience whereof is spoken, Obedience imports submission.
is proved to import a submission to the will of the Sovereign, and to the
direction of such Commanders as she appoynteth to be obeyed, and it spreads
it self into sundry particular branches: for preservation and maintenance of
which, prudence and experience have framed a law and decent order, and
prescribed the same to be observed of every member of an army, under pain of
that punishment, which by that law is threatened to be inflicted: which order
and law, truly executed, is called the discipline of war. To this discipline
belongs obedience, and punishment for the contrary. Discipline of war.
And therefore it behooves all men to show thereunto a continual zeal and
desire, to be seen rather apt and forward to maintain, then to resist and
violate the same. And because it must be supposed, that ancient soldiers and
appointed officers, Ancient soldiers are supposed to obey and to be able to
govern.
do know what it is to obey, and how to govern, and to be governed
(otherwise they cannot but discover themselves to have the bare name, and not
the perfection which their places require) I only speak unto the nouices in
wars, Nouices in war.
and unto such as come rawly into the field, without former education. If they
purpose to become soldiers, they must show minds and dispositions to be
directed. And howsoever they seemed at home, among their allies and friends,
praise worthy, for that they were apt and active in feats of vanity, and to
perform things (with delight to the beholders) agreeing with peace and
pleasure, they must now acknowledge ignorance, and covet the knowledge of this
new vocation, wherein they be as strangers, unacquainted with the course and
qualities of war: although it cannot be but commended, to have use of the
fowling piece, to handle the sword, to toss the pike, Things commen^^ble, and
yet not p^rfect.
and such like. But these are far from that which is required in a soldier,
the use of the small piece requires comelines, and quicknes in charging and
discharging, in marching, standing, and retreiting. The like is of the pike, in
whose use is required more then ability to bear it at the arms end, to couch
it, or advance it; the application thereof to best advantage, at the push to
annoy the enemy, and to guard himself, is the true end thereof. And whatsoever
warlike weapon or instrument the younger soldier takes in hand, A young
soldier cannot handle the instruments of war presently.

Nothing hand to the willing.


he cannot forthwith manage it after the art of war. And therefore it
behooves such, as will be indeed what they covet to be called, to consult
with the skillful, to observe practice and endeavor: for to the industrious and
willing minded nothing is hard. And he that will come soonest to the
perfection of a soldier, must yield most to discipline, and settle himself to
sustain all travails, to adventure all perils, and to be resolute rather to
dye in fight, in hope of escape by force in ouercomming, then to desire safety
by flying away: for death is more to be wished, in fighting in a just cause,
then life by escaping like a coward. For as immortal praise follows the one,
so miserable and hateful ignominy, (...) makes (...) more ^^^^ble.
the other. And doubtless, death is more bitter and terrible to the fearful
and faint hearted that fly, then to the valorous that desire to fight. There
are sundry virtues required in a soldier, yea when he enters the field
first, wherewith (for the most part) our English impes are not (for want of
education) acquainted at home: yet when they begin to take arms on their
backs, and would be called soldiers, whether they be pressed by authority,
or of their own forwardnes, they must endeavor to learn them speedily, Such
as will be soldiers, must cast off former consideration^.
and cast off all things that are behind, namely profit, pleasure, friends,
and fear of death, and march on valiantly, as to the school where they shall
be taught the substance of honorable virtues indeed, whereas they before
embraced but the shadows. For in stead of former profit and pleasure, they
shall have continual honor, the regal riches of Caesar: Honor the riches of
Caesar.
And as the way to the perfection required is obedience; so that obedience must
bring with it willingness to be taught, heedfulnes to learn, and forwardnes to
practice. And these things can never be without reverence and love to such as
are above them. And howsoever in regard of former times, What things a young
soldier must endeavor.
wherein some man that now must be commanded, has commanded at home, and
therefore this new obedience may seem irksome, he must now lay down his
conceit of being more worthy then his commander, The best in other regards
must become disciple to the skillful in wars, The fruits of obeying discipline.
and become a disciple to such as can teach him his new calling. For the
speediest course to become a commander, is to be willing to be commanded. He
that is truly obedient to discipline, shall proceed from one virtue to
another, until he become able to distinguish between the honorable
inclination of valor, and the ignominious sluggishnes of the faint hearted:
whereby he shall also gain true consideration, how to weigh in discretion and
with patience, all other circumstances of honor and dishonor offered in wars.
The principal virtue in a soldier is to fear God.
The first and principal virtue in a soldier, is to learn, and truly to
fear, and serve the living God, whose favor, love and protection, is obtained
by faith and prayer. Which last, howsoever it may be thought a work out of
use, in the wars of this age, God forbid that any Christian soldier, should
be ignorant how, or negligent when to pray, whereof I will say more in the end
of this work. As for the fear of God, and exercise of Religion, The fear of
God and exercise of religion is of necessity.

God is the Clarke of the band to the go^ly.


it is a matter of such necessiti^ and importance, as without it, no other
virtue, policy, instruments of war, munition, skonce, forte, castle, trench,
wall or best hold, strength or multitude avails any thing: for such is the
high Account that the Lord of hoastes makes of them that fear him, tha^ he
is as the Clarke of their Band, for as Malachi witnesses, he has a book of
their names, Man. 3.16.
written always before him, as a remembrance to save them in the day of
slaughter: wherein though multitudes do perish, yet shall they be as dear unto
him in that day, as a son to his father. The Lord never forsakes them that
fear him, neither shall any evil happen unto them: Ecclus. ^.11. Eccl. 31.1.
he will not fail them nor forsake them. What a necessary thing is it, how
sweet and profitable for a soldier to fear God? It brings with it sundry
sweet blessings to accompany the same, Luke 1.15. The mercy of God follows
the fear of God.
as his Mercy which is as a well of heavenly water, still comforting,
refreshing and renewing their wearied spirits and strengthening their weak
bodies. It is as an arm of brass, to hold the^ up, as a buckler of steel to
defend the^, and as a sword of power to confound their enemies. It is a comfort
in all their distresses. Psalm. 103.13.
Yea, as a feign, pitieth his own children* so has God compassion on all them
that fear him. The fear of the Lord is glory and gladness, Ecclus. 1.11. The
fear of God a holy knowledge.
rejoicing, and a joyful crown. It is a holy knowledge, and being compared
to worldly and carnal policy, it shines as the Sun in the dark. Who then
would go to the wars without this Jewel? and what a watchman is this to
keep our cities and houses at home? the soldier that has it, The effects of
the fear of God.
has glory already, and the practice of good things, increases his honor
daily, he has the true Philosophers stone, which turns all things, be they
never so cross or contrary to natural reason, The fear of God the true
philosophers stone.
into the pure gold of a quiet and undefiled conscience, by patience: and he
has within him a continual feast, and in the end he shall possess that most
joyful Crown of life eternal, whenever this mortal carcass shall be
turned to dust whereof it is. It makes him dear unto God even while he lives
on earth, howsoever base he seem in the world. It will not suffer him to
speak evil nor do hurt to his fellow soldiers, it transformeth a man into
the likeness of God, in innocence and holiness, as if he were made of the
same divine nature Some may think yet, A sclaunder to the fear of God.
that this Angelical quality beseems not a soldier, who indeed should be
courageous, dismayed at nothing, and ready to undertake all matters of greatest
danger, whereas the fear of God seems to make men ouercurious and too
scrupulous, and too precise, things deemed unfit in a man of war. But this is
a dangerous sclaunder against this inuanquishable virtue, The fear of God is
full of courage*
which indeed is so far from the fear of bodily harms, in just and lawful
adventures, as it always appears more forward then a mere humane and
carnal Roister that depends on nothing but his own power, and fears
nothing more, then his own vain valor to be seen foiled among men.
Wherefore did Joshua that most triumphant General over the host of Israel,
Josh. 24.14.
exhort the people whom he conducted, to fear the Lord? but because he saw
it was the way and mean to make them truly hardy, and whereby they always
prevailed against their enemies: whereof the people having had often
experience, they answered with one voice: God forbid but we should serve the
Lord our God that has done so many things for us since we came out of Egypt.
This is the true resolution of al christian soldiers, trusting in the living
God in fear and reverence, which is to serve him in holiness and
righteousness. And in doing this, God will be with us, as he was with David,
and he will make our adversaries afraid of us, as Saul was of David, The fear
of God makes enemies afraid. 1. Sam. 18.28. 1. Sam. 17.11.
which was not by reason Saul feared the person of David, but that God struck
a terror in Saul, for that David feared the Lord. All Israel was afraid of
blasphemous Goliath, because they feared not God as was commanded, but David
fearing God, became their prevailing Cham^ion, not by force but by faith,
fearing nothing but to offend the Lord, not in a servile fear as a coward, of
bodily wounds, Psalm. 119.53 Josh. 4.14.
or to die as faint-hearted, but to do evil. And this fear comes of love,
and is builded upon reverence to Gods majesty and his word. The fear of Gods
children is not to fear the faces of men, the power, policy or multitude of
men, nor the death of the body, Romans 13.4. The fear of God proceeds of love.
which they know shall rise again, and their souls shall never die: this
fear is a strong assurance of victory, not by force, but by God, on whom
David trusted when he ^estified his faith, saying, Psalm. 3.6.
I will not be afraid for ten thousand of men that shall beset me round
about. And this agrees with another place, where it is said. Whence christian
Fortitude comes.
Ten shall chase an hundred and an hundred shall chase a thousand. We see
then the fortitude of christian Soldiers and from whence it is, namely from
the trust and confidence in the living God, which trust cleanses the thoughts
from sin, and the body from committing evil, else is not that fear perfect
which has promise to prevail, and whereby the weak hands shall be able to
break a b^w of steel: the unapt hands shall learn to war, and the
unskillful fingers to fight. What a guide is this for young soldiers, Gods
fear the best guide to young soldi^rs.
that can both teach the skill, and give the courage? it is more then all
mortal captains can do. But since this high Director has allowed, and
approved inferior means, for his children by degrees to attain to greater
perfection in all necessary faculties, for the preservation of this life, and
waters them to the faithful, with the dew of his blessing: Let him that
comes into the field, fearful of the hissing invisible bullet of the
roaring Cannon, of the glittering sword, and of the other terrible instruments
and engines of war, and of death, be take him unto the protection of that
most Highest, who shall make him more valiant, How the young soldier may become
valiant.
give him courage and magnanimity resolutely to encounter every vaunting onset
of the enemy, assuring himself that as a sparrow lights not on the ground
without Gods providence, Man cannot perish in the wars before God decrees it
so shall not one hair of his head fall, much less his body perish without
that divine decree: And therefore to put away and cast off all slavish
fearfulness, and be endued with that true magnanimity which shall never be
quailed, but stand firm, especially if the defects thereof be supplied by the
precepts of Religion, and by the practice of other divine virtues, whereby it
shall become so absolute, as it will faint at no fortune. It will make a man as
confident and constant as Brutus, who being overcome by Augustus Caesar, was
persuaded by some of his followers to fly to save himself. The courage of
Brutus.
I mus^ fly indeed (said he,) but with hands not with feet. Meaning that he
would not leave that ignominy behind him, as that his life should seem unto
him more dear then his Countries liberty, and therefore he would fly to
that, which only hope reserved as his chief safety and defense, How soldiers
ought to fly.
namely his sword, whereunto every true English hand is pressed and ready to fly,
to preserve our Countries state, against usurping enemies. That magnanimity
and courage, which all men (fearing God) have decreed to maintain, can yield
no entertainment or place, to that hateful cowardly fear, Cowardly fear
hateful.
which is so much despised among natural men, that (although it have fortunate
success sometime) it is of odious account. And as all other virtues proceed of
this Magnanimity: so from this base root of cowardly fear spring most
dangerous euilles, as cruelty, treason, breach of promise, impatience,
idleness, sloth, covetousness, envy, The fruits of cowardice.
backebiting and all injustice, all these prevail where the true fear of God
is not. And every Christian else, as well as martial men, ought to be freed of
them, and the way to mortify these unsavory and hurtful weeds, which choke
virtuous proceedings, is the application of some deadly corasiue, to take the
life from the root, that the branches may die also, Cowardice being cut off by
the root the branches will dye.
and bear no more fruit to the sclaunder of a soldier, who must cut off the
maine stock, which is cowardice, the most deadly enemy to military
proceedings. The coward is a stock, and a dead block in the shape of a man, a
retyring shadow that dazeleth the eyes, The danger of one coward in an army.
and daunteth the courage of the valiant, and provoke the forward either to
stagger, or to retire. A whole army may be driven to a stand by the fearful
behavior of a coward. And therefore it is more policy, and better safety,
that Leaders (having knowledge of a faint hearted wretch) should dispense with
him, as Agamemnon did, and not to number him with soldiers, A Captain may
dispense with a coward.
but to thrust him out of the army with ignominy, after trial that best
encouragement cannot make him hardy. The coward to save his life (which he is
not worthy to bear) is most ready to complot such pernicious practices, The
coward is not worthy to live.
as may endanger the state of an army. There is no mischief so odious, but he
thinks it a virtue to purchase his private escape. There is little difference
between a cowarde, and one that is desperate of his life: for such is the
strength of imagination in both, The semblance between a coward and a desperate
man.
that they think every man aims at them, and that their very companions will
devour them: They have no use of reason for the time, but bend al their devises
to rid them from the danger, by what wicked and unlawful means soever the
misleading spirit shall argue most probable for them. For as al godly and
virtuous thoughts and actions proceed from a divine worker, and are effected
by the aid of the heavenly powers: so all wickedness and trecheries proceed
from an infernal instigation. Cowardice void of the spiritual life.
And the man possessed with cowardice, wants that spiritual life which faith
expresses by a godly resolution: and therefore cannot encounter any malign
motion, but yields his will and consent, his power and practice to execute
what mischief soever offers it self for his evasion from supposed danger.
And therefore should every soldier eschew this cowardly fear, least he be
thereby provoked to put forth his hand to cruelty, and to shed the blood of
his innocent companions, to escape the danger of honorable war: whose
effects, although they tend sometime to wounds and death; yet both the one and
the other gotten in the field in the face of the enemy, Wounds and death
gotten in wars bring fame.
bring immortal fame to the valiant. And therefore as he that has the marks
of true magnanimity, may be well said to be of a divine quality: so he that
is a coward, bearing the tokens of a slavish fear, may be truly said to be an
incarnate infernal spirit. For he that looks into the first degree of this
misshapen soldier servile timorositie, which can entertain no virtue; shall
forthwith perceive that it has only desire to shake hands with every vice and
wicked practice, Fear vn^^r^aketh no virtuous action.
and to account it the safest way to doubt all things that have best
probability in right reason, and to execute that which only is begotten of
suspicion, which is a passion of the mind engendered of fear and grief; What
fear is.
who practicing their force and power, grounded upon a false opinion of
danger, bereave the mind of al rest and tranquillity, and gnaw and consume
the life, as rust does the iron. And therefore said Alexander, Alexander his
opinion of fear
that such as are possessed with this fear, think no place so strong by
nature or art, as may preserve them from danger. All the hope of a fearful
man is in evasion, not by force of honorable arms, The hope of a fearful man.
but by the dishonorable practices of cruel tyranny, which often break out
into most odious treasons, which never find place in a noble heart. For such
is the effect of faith, and vowed allegiance to his Sovereign, and her
authorized ministers, as he will rather submit himself to a thousand deaths,
then seem to conceive a treacherous thought, much less to practice it indeed.
None but pertured persons commit treason.
For none but perjured persons, bewitched with vain expectation of unlawful
advantage, will ever give place to such an horrible wickedness, so highly
hated of God and good men. The ground of which monstrous affection is to
dissemble, and to lie in hope of small advantage: As the coward (to wind
himself out of the field) will feign himself to be infirm, and to be
possessed of some secret malady, unfit for the wars, being indeed sound and
of a strong body. And when that prevails not, Dissimulation and lying the
ve^tues of a coward.
he makes use of his falsehood and lying in a more high degree, as in seeking
to betray his fellows so he may escape. If that effect not, it grows to the
highest violation of his faith, and breach of his allegiance, as having a
sluice in his conscience to admit into it every wicked thought, not regarding
his fidelity to God himself. Whereas the man governed by reason and duty,
will not be seen in the least degree, Duty will not suffer a man to violate
his oath in private causes.
to violate his oath made unto a private man, what loss or danger so ever
ensue: Much more ought a soldier, sworn to be true to his Sovereign, and to
be ready to the uttermost of his power, to defend her and his country, be
resolute in maintaining his honor, by the effects of true fidelity, The
resolution of fidelity.
which is to lose his life rather then to be touched with cowardly untruth and
perjury. Let no faint-hearted Englishman think, that covert and counterfeit
shifts and devises to gain dispensation for being employed in the wars, are so
lawful or honest, but that they carry with them, and import in them very
dissimulation, Counterfeit devises to be ^ispensed from war, is per^urie.

Zach. 5* 4. Exodus 8* 17. Malach. 3* 6.

Lawful excuse may dispense with a man's going to the wars.


which indeed is no other thing then to lie, and to lie to the end not to
perform what he has sworn unto, is perjury in it self, which God curses
as a thing against which he will be witness himself. It behooves all men
therefore to be wary how they feign such vain matter, to violate their vowed
faith, which is of so high importance: yet upon just cause and reasonable
grounds, the most hardy and willing may make suite to be dispensed with; and
no Commander is so austere or severe in his place, but will accept of lawful
excuse. To the end therefore that a soldier may daily proceed to more and
more perfection, let him first trample this gross and cloggie companion,
dastardly fear, under his feet, with all the members and sequeles thereof
(though they be inscrutable) and examine such as manifestly appear to deface
the reputation of a soldier. The members and sequeles of fear infinite.
And because the profession of arms is an exercise of it self, not requiring
such continual practice, but that there are sundry times of intermission, apt
only for the sluggish and cowardly to entertain Idleness, the nurse not only
of all other vices, but of infinite corruptions and diseases of the body:
Idleness.
And therefore a thing (though sweet and pleasant to the basest minded) to be
abandoned, as the bane of all virtues and virtuous exercises. And therefore
does Paul condemn it, showing also the fruits of it to be dangerous. 1. Tim.
^ 13. ^. Thessalonians. 3.10.11. Prou. 12.11.
The very example of an idle person is hurtful to many: And therefore the
Wiseman says; He that is destitute of understanding will follow the idle.
Whereby it follows, that he that is wise will employ his time to profitable
things. Idleness was one of the causes of Sodomes overthrow, because it
engendered many evils in the mind, Ezech. 16 49.
which afterward opportunity caused to be put in execution, and that sometime
in the godly, how much more in the wickedly disposed? 1. Sam 11.1.
The manners, conditions, and natural dispositions of such as covet to be
idle, are so loathsome to the valiant minded, that they hold them profitable
neither for themselves, Idle persons unprofitable to themselves and other.
nor for other men. And it is the greatest discouerer of a dastard: for he
that has valor and fortitude, will apply his body to all lawdable exercises,
not yielding himself to a drowsy sottishnes, giving place to every motion of
bodily faintnes, and imbecilitie of the members; for that the body becomes
so much the more unapt to good endeavors, by how much it discontinueth exercise
and use. Cicer^es opinion of idleness.
And therefore Cicero proves idleness to be a thing in man against nature,
because man is borne to exercise and labor: and he that coueteth to be idle,
is transformed from the nature of a man to the nature of a beast, which
desires ease and to ^ate. And that is all that an idle person willingly would
do. There be some that come short of the diligence of the wild beast, Idle
persons come short of the deligence of beasts.
neglecting, through sloth, the provision of things necessary for li^e: do
not these come short of the industry of beasts? showing themselves more
brutish than humane? If unreasonable beasts spare neither light nor darkness,
heat nor cold, wind nor tempest, frost nor rain; if no impediment can
hinder them from their continual travail for things necessary for nature:
what may be thought of reasonable man, a soldier, to be seen lazy therein?
But if the desire of natural necessaries will not provoke him to be laborious,
painful, and industrious: let either hope of honorable reputation, or the
fear of shameful ignominy, prick him on to be lively and like a soldier.
Reasons why a soldier should sly idleness.
If neither of these will avail with him, let the contemplation of divine
justice move, which has set down a law, that he that will not labor should
not eat. As though the idle person were to be deprived of his food, yea even
where and when it abounds, and that it were unlawful he should be fed. So
odious is idleness before God, Poverty is the meanest punishment for idleness.
as he plagueth it in the meanest degree with poverty, and want of necessary
things, both for the back and bowels: and many times even with loathsome and
ugly diseases of the body, which make a man odious ever to his companions and
dearest friends. The Commanders in wars ought as carefully to punish them in
policy: Commanders must punish idleness.
for where that monster passes in an army unconsidered, it deuoureth a
multitude ere it can be cured. The Roman Captains saw the inconveniences and
dangerous effects of this moth and devouring vermin: and therefore caused
their soldiers to labor, in things not urged by compelling necessity, The
Roman Captains prevented idleness.
but merely to prevent the dangers of idleness and sloth. When it falls out
therefore that there is an intermission, and a time wherein an army desisteth
from the exercise of arms against the enemy, every man should betake himself
to some honest labor or lawdable practice, if not in things private to his
own behoof, Soldiers should do something to prevent idleness.
then for his friend, or for the common good of all. For he is a bare and base
fellow of slender gifts indeed, that has no quality at all to stead himself
or others, and his bringing up has been very swinish: yet if his capacity be
not very gross, and his conversation very bad, he may conioyne himself in
familiarity with some, that have such faculties as are not so intricate and
difficill, but he may become by use and practice, not only able to prevent
idleness; but a profitable member of the army, and fit for honest society. And
therefore he seems the happiest man that among many can make best means to
live, He is the happiest man that can live among many.
which without careful industry the most skillful cannot do. It were
therefore a matter of great discretion, if all fathers would endeavor to give
their sons some such quality either of the body or of the mind, or both,
as might stead him in the wars, considering that none is exempted from the
exercise thereof in time of need. It is seen a common fault in parents to
measure their childrens fortunes to come by their own present wealth, Foolish
parents measure their sons fortunes to come by their own present wealth.
whereby they covet to maintain them idle gentlemen without, not respecting how
beggarly they be within, qualified neither with inward virtue, nor outward
virtuous faculties. Furthermore, because the mind of every man is capable of
good and evil impressions, and from natural inclination do ever proceed
worst imaginations, whereby the members are often set on such exercises as are
not only not idleness, but worse then idleness it self; which comes to pass
by reason that the mind is putrified for want of right moving, The mind
brings forth evil things for want of divine counsel.
and the use of divine counsel and conference: And therefore has that most
wise prouider and right disposer of all things in man necessary, bestowed on
him two most excellent means, whereby the inward and better part may be
benefited and stirred up to virtuous contemplations, namely the tongue, the
instrument to pronounce; and the ear, the door of the understanding of that
which is spoken: whereby men of arms in their idle int^rims, Discourse of
virtuous and divine things great consolation.
have means to profit one another by discourse of virtuous and divine things,
the sweetest consolation that man can receive of man here in this life. And
although it be not in the power and ability of all men learnedly to dispute,
it suffices the willing minded, to discover their good and virtuous
inclination, in the simplest measure. And no doubt if conference be grounded
upon the fear of God, and do tend to the increase of knowledge and faith,
the heavenly Schoolmaster Gods spirit, Godly conference pleases God.
is ready among them, to teach the speaker how to utter wisdom, and necess^ry
comfort to the hearer. For God in nothing is more pleased, then with the
assembly of such, as covet to know him thereby, and to increase in
righteousness and true holiness, if it be but two in a consultation: and it
were a heavenly union and a wished yoking of companions in the field, if the
end of their society were to seek God, and the true knowledge of him, his love
toward them, and their duties toward him. And to that end, God in
providence affords to mortal man, The word of God left as a great blessing
unto us.
that the labors of the holy and blessed Prophets and Apostles, the records
of the will and pleasure, the love and favor, the power and providence of the
Almighty; are left unto all men, by his great benefit of Printing, which
sacred labors, whosoever willingly imbraceth, The ^tudiou^ of divine things is
well busied.
following truly the substance commanded thereby, is most divinely busied:
and it shall not only not hinder his military affairs, but make him both
cunning and courageous, and bring him to that honor that shall be app^oued of
God Many di^ine labors also of men learned and heavenly disposed, are offered
to all, to the end that all excuses both of idleness and ignorance might be
taken away: vain and lascivious treatises of worldlinges and wicked ones,
Vain and lascivious treatises embraced of soldiers.
offensive to God and every good mind, are embraced of soldiers for the most
part, whereby they may learn to love and line more viciously. But it were a
happy change, if they would abandon all these offensive and unprofitable
trifles, whereby they are taught to grow from evil to worse: and would
embrace the word of truth and salvation, and such other divine instructions,
as may make them the better and not the worse for the use. The Bible a
necessary companion for a soldier.
The new and old Testaments are to be recommended unto them, and to be
defended by them, as the most absolute Jewel that a soldier can carry with
him, to garnish his profession with, or exercise himself in at all times, not
to keep him only from idleness and doing nothing, but to teach him how to
forsake sin and to follow virtue and religious exercises, to quench and
mortify sin, which is fostered by vanity and idleness, and to practice
goodness more and more. Soldiers ought to be of Pythagoras mind, that laborious
and painful things will sooner bring a man to virtue, then those that are
nice and delicate. Painful things winn^ honor sooner then the delicate.
Things pleasing to the carnal mind, may be termed the fruits of idleness, as
are concupiscence, luxuriousnes, drunkenness, swearing, flattery, vainglorie
and such like vanities: which (though they haunt many, otherwise well
qualified, and be deemed of small importance) blemish the reputation of a
soldier so much among men, Pleasures blemish the reputation of a soldier.
as their best virtues become stained with their filth, and is long ere best
endeavors can win again what they have lost by such wickedness. But they so
far encounter the fear of God and divine duty thereby, Such as follow
pleasures, shall be rewarded with sinners.
that in steed of blessings which are promised to the obedient, they must
look to be rewarded with sinners: And therefore it were good that all men, as
they are acquainted with these plausible things and the sweetenes of them, were
acquainted also with the issue and end of voluptuous desires. Pleasure.
Pleasure is but a hook, whereby men are entangled and snared to destruction,
and yet such is the strength thereof, that it prevails sometime against deep
wisdom: but the effects it works, should rather become abhorred of the
wise, then the wise to become abhorred for them. For in deceiving them, it
leaves only behind it cause to repent, and makes them blush to bethink them
of it. Wheresoever it goes, it carries with it sorrow and grief, and these
are the best gifts she bestows on them that love her best. The best gifts of
pleasure to ^er lovers.
But if it were a true grief, working repentance not to be repented of, it
were a heavenly gift, for it would so detest the occasion, as he that repented
would never return nor consent to her allurementes a second time, A good
grief.
nor be snared again with her enchaunted baits: which as they are many, so
must our wisdom provide cautions to hinder every prone desire in our selves.
And because carnal wisdom or strength is not only not apt to resist, but to
yield to every encounter, we must fly unto the tower of refuge, to the mercy
of God, for power to stand against such a mortal illusion. It is unfit that
evil things should be once named amongst us, yet to the end to prevent more
evil, we may in fear and trembling, discourse of her fruits a far off, as
wary children do of the heat of the fire, the better to escape the peril.
Pleasure, Pleasure concupiscence and voluptuousnes.
concupiscence and voluptuousnes are of such semblance in nature to all
purposes of evil, as there needs no curious distinction of every particular.
Although we may say that pleasure is the general tree that bears all the
fruits that delight the senses: concupis^ence is that evil inclination, that
is in man by nature, continued to all posterities from Adam, whereby man is
drawn unto sin. Genesis 8.21. Concupiscence a secret enemy within us James.
1.14.15
And therefore says James: Every man is drawn unto sin by his own
concupiscence. We lodge then a dangerous guest in our own bosoms, which
coueteth to destroy us body and soul: It is an enemy more to be feared, then
any outward professed enemy, that has vowed our death, who prevails not, nor
seeks but to conquer our bodies: but this secret enemy, which every man
carries about him, even while it flattereth most, seeks the confusion of our
outward and inward man. Therefore has a soldier great cause to look about,
having enemies before him and behind him, within him and without him, least
while he strugleth with him that can but kill the body, he suffer himself to
be overcome in body and soul. And as he armeth himself very carefully
against the pike, A Soldier must arm him self against his inward enemy.
the bullet and the sword of his seen adversary, he must take heed he leave
not himself open to his interior enemy. He knows how to arm himself
without, and Paul tells him how to arm him within. Gall 5.16.17.18.
Walk in the spirit (says he) and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh; ye shall not satisfy your corrupt affections, which lust against the
spirit, the inward and regenerate man. The spirit lusts against the flesh,
and the flesh against the spirit, and these are contrary one to the other. And
if we be guided by the spirit of adoption, that which we do shall be
agreeable to God, although it be not in us (by reason of our inherent
corruption) perfect. Peter also teaches how we should arm our selves against
this inward enemy, willing us to abstain from fleshly lusts which fight
against the soul. We have then a fighting enemy within, as we have fighting
adversaries without us. Happy is that soldier that becomes a conqueror of
his concupiscence, delight and pleasure, which assail his own soul. The
happy soldier.
And if he foil ten thousand abroad, and suffer sin to prevail against
him at home, he is conquered: The unhappy soldier.
But if he overcome his nearest enemy, though he be foiled of him that is
far off, he is yet a conqueror. And to testify that he prevails over
himself he must deny to yield consent to any evil motion of the flesh. And
while he is in this warfare to walk honestly, not in gluttony and drunkenness,
not in chambering and wantonness, Romans 13.13.
nor in strife and envying: but to put on the Lord Jesus, that is, be conformed
in all righteousness and sanctity, not being careful for the flesh to fulfill
the lusts of it. And as Paul exhorts, Mortify your members, Colos. 3.5.
which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil
concupiscence, and covetousness, which is Idolatry: for which things sake the
wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience. What needs many words
in a matter so plainly set down by the pen of the spirit of God, to the end
that we should extinguish the strength of our corruptions, Our corruptions
strive against the spirit of God himself.
which warreth against all virtue and godly counsel, yea against the spirit of
God himself. Having so plain demonstration of Gods wrath against sin, where
is the cloak for a soldiers loose life? for a man of arms to be carnally
minded? Where is the defense for swearing blasphemy whoredom, A soldier
inexcusable.
envy, murder, drunkenness, and all voluptuousnes? Whether is it not honorable
for him to become a reformed man, to live in the spirit by faith, and true
obedience, and not in the flesh to fulfill filthy lust? since the reward of the
one is life, and of the other hell, death and damnation? Whether agrees best
with the honor and reputation of a soldier, to be carnal and careless, Colos.
3 8.
or to be watchful and sober? Put away then all wrath, anger, maliciousnes,
cursed and filthy speaking out of your mouths. It shall nothing diminish your
valor, neither shall you appear more singular then becomes Christians, To
put away vanity diminishes not the valor of a soldier.
if you clearly put off the old man with all his works, which clogge you that
you cannot march rightly like soldiers to the end of true honor. Put on the
new man which is shaped in holiness and knowledge: for by it most high and
precious things are gotten, even al things that pertain to life and godliness,
All necessaries are gotten by godliness.
through the knowledge of him that has called us all from the corruptions
which are in this world, to be partakers of heavenly things. And therefore we
must endeavor to add virtue to virtue, and faith to faith, that we may attain
to that absolute perfection, which embracing temperance, brings forth
patience, which imports that contentation that is never moved with any
temptation, but delights only in godliness, The true godliness:

2. Pet 9.5.6.


approved by brotherly kindness, which comes of love. He that attaineth unto
this mark which is set before all men to aim at, has the true fruits of the
knowledge of our chief Lord and commander Christ, who knows how to deliver
his out of all temptations, God can deliver the godly and punish the wicked

2 Pet. 2 9.10.


and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished, and
chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lusts of uncleanness, and despise
government, which are presumptuous, and stand in their own conceit, and fear
not to speak evil of them that are in authority over them. Thus does the
spirit most evidently depaint out the true mortification of our corruptions,
and the terrible threats of Gods vengeance, for disobedience to Rulers, and
loosenes of life. It is dangerous to show our selves rebellious against this
sacred counsel. And (by their patience) soldiers may be put in mind of too
much forgetfulness of their duties to God, and their immoderate boldness to
sin: Soldiers may be reproved.
wherein as I cannot altogether excuse my self, or any other; so I heartily
wish reformation in all, and all estates. For it is time to think of Gods
judgments begun, not only against our Christian armies abroad, encountering
the Turks, our own, Gods judgments begun against Christian armies.
and our neighbors near; but also against our selves here at home, whom God
has forwarned to forsake our pleasures, by plagues lately past, by dearth and
famine present, and by wars threatened. Among many other enormities,
proceeding of the want of wars true discipline, it is not the least that our
pretended soldiers returning from the wars, should have either hearts in
themselves, Vagabond and begging soldiers a great en^rmitie.
or sufferance by law, to become vagabonds: for their parts, they bewray their
cowardly minds, in that they will leave the honorable practice of war, and
betake them to ignominious begging, whereby the profession of arms is
dishonored, The effect of begging s^uldiers.
and the Magistrates power is thereby discredited, the force of the laws
showed to be of small effect, and the common quiet disturbed. But for such idle
persons as pretending shame to beg (which indeed is shameful to able
persons) seem not to be ashamed that they work and labor not, which is both
an honest and godly mean to relieve themselves, It is no dish^nor f^r a
soldier to labor.
without disparagement of the reputation of their military profession, as they
vainly pretend it. Indeed such is the casual course of war, that thereby
sometime the rich are made poor, and the poor enriched. Wars casualties.
And therefore it behooves a soldier to lay down before hand, to be
constant in every fortune: for if he faint under the burden of the adverse, A
soldier must be constant in every fortune.
and become more grieved than agrees with his professed magnanimity, he
bewraieth himself to be but a dastard. For it is no shame for a man to become
poor for his country in the wars: but the disgrace is his countries, if he
deserve well, and yet wants relief. If he be over much elevated in conceit
with prosperity, To be sick in the wars is but a thing incident to the best
at home.
he bewraieth his vainglorie, which he knows by experience may alter in a
moment. If he be sick in the wars, it is incident even to Princes that live
in pleasure at home, with dainties and physic: therefore let the soldier
bear it with courage, wherein it beseems the most worthy, yea the best
Commanders to be seen careful that al possible comfort be yielded to such as
are visited, for that they have no relief or comfort but inwardly from God, in
whom they ought to trust, and from their companions, (strangers in effect) who
indeed (if they be true soldiers) will aid one another. To be wounded in the
wars is glory, To be wounded or dye in the wars.
and to dye in a just cause purchases immortal memory. And because of all
other things incident to military men, nothing is so certain as death, for
that it is decreed that all flesh shall dye; and the effect of war is to kill
and to destroy men: The effect of war.
every soldier must say unto himself when he goes to the wars, he goes
to finish a long pilgrimage. Though we see it happens not to all soldiers
to dye in the wars, A^l soldiers ^ie not in wars.
yet some spend many years even from their young years to gray hairs
continually in the wars, enduring many bickerings, fightings, hurts and
hurting; and yet end their days in peace at home in their beds. Our own late
deseruers testify the same to their glory that shall not dye. But admit thou
knew thou should die in the field, be courageous, for death never
appaleth the virtuous. A soldier must not fear death.

Romans 14.18. Phil. 1.21.22 John 11.16.


For as Cicero says, All wisemen dye willingly. But the word of God affirms,
that the godly dye more willingly, for that they be the Lords. And that made
Thomas to exhort his fellows to dye with Christ. Paul shows a reason why the
godly need not only not to fear, but to be willing to dye, namely, to be
with Christ. There is a notable mirror of this disdain of death in
Callicratides, General unto the Lacedaemonians, who being ready to give battle
to his enemies, The resolution of Ca^licratides that knew he should be slain
was warned by his Soothfayer, that the entrails of the sacrifice promised
victory to the army, but death to the Captain: whereunto he answered, as one
resolute to dye, Sparta consists not in one man: for when I shall be dead,
my country shall be nothing lessened: but if I (to save my self) should absent
me from the battle, or go back, the reputation thereof will be diminished.
Whereupon he substituted Cleander in his place, and gave battle, wherein he
was slain. What Christian soldier will not imitate his r^solution to dye,
since we have a better assurance to live after death? And if our Creator have
decreed our death, since it cannot be avoided; let no man covet to start aside,
contrary to duty, in hope of safety; None must start aside to save himself.
for it not only avails nothing, but it increases the burden of our fear,
and it argues distrust in his providence that made us, and who can find us out
and confound us. But rather grounding our assurance upon future consolation,
even here reueiled to a good conscience; let us rest upon God, who is able to
save one among many, and let every one think he is that one. Gods power and
providence in preserving his.
A thousand shall fall on the one side, and ten thousand on the other, of him
that God will defend, and it shall not touch him: for every man's days, yea the
hairs of his head are numbered, and the time of his death appointed, neither
policy nor force can prevent it. If death daunt not, what can or should dismay
a resolute soldier? For he only is free and happy that can be overcome with
no distress. We may say of Religion and the fear of God, as Thales said of
virtue; He is happy that can be overcome with no distress.
Virtue (said he) is the profitablest thing in the world, because it makes all
other things profitable, by causing men to use them well. But we may say that
all other gifts and virtues too, are not only unprofitable, but hurtful,
without the fear of God, and use of religion, which is profitable to all
things: 1. Timot. 4.6.
wherewith who so is truly decked and adorned, He that fears God and
exercises religion, need wish for nothing immoderatly.
is so happy as he needs to wish for nothing with any immoderate affection
in this life, no not for the preservation of life it self, in regard of the
world and worldly things, nor to think anything grievous or evil, which the
ordinance of God brings upon him. And therefore the constant soldier needs
not to grieve at any hard success in war, nor fear death, since all things
both prosperity and adversity, freedom and imprisonment, loss and gain,
life and death, All things are at Gods disposition.
are all at the disposition of the highest, who gives and takes, heaueth up
and throws down, saves and kills whom he will, and all to the advantage
of them that fear him.

That Prayer is necessary among men of arms, as a principal and chief mean
both to defend themselves, and to annoy the enemy, and that after victory
they ought to praise God.
I Have endeavored before to show that the maine hope which a soldier ought to
have in the proceedings of war, is the fear of God, and the true practice of
Religion, as a thing whereby he becomes truly valiant, A man can be no
valiant soldier without the fear of God and practice of Religion.

Prayer follows the fear of God.

Revel. ^. 6. Prayer is an exercise of the godly only. Number. 3 1.


and without which he is but a dastard, and without strength, were he of as
powerful a body as Hector, Hercules or Goliath. Now it is to be known and
considered that this heavenly virtue the fear of God, has continually
following it an inseparable and most helpefull assistant, prayer, which is as a
spiritual incense ascending from the faithful heart to heaven, even unto the
throne of his Majesty, that descends again by his spirit, and dwells
where he finds so sweet a savor. This is an exercise only of the godly,
although the wicked also may intrude themselves into the same in outward show
like Nadab and Abihu, but their prayers pierce not the heavens, they profit
not by their prayers. The true exercise of prayer is not like the idle talk of
soldiers and other men, one with another, vain and wanton (whereby they
corrupt the air with the vapors of their sinful breathinges, and their manners
with filthy words) but like the joyful songs of the Angels in heaven, He
that prays truly, sees God by faith.
who see God face to face: as he that prays truly sees him by faith, and
talks with him by his spirit. Much has bin spoken of many of this divine
exercise, and much might be here remembered. But as ^ began heretofore to speak
of the necessary use of Religion, in men professing arms, whose profession
tends to obtain victory against enemies: so I hold it convenient to apply
this treatise of prayer also, as it may best steed a soldier in the wars. For
such are the singular effecte^ of this sweet exercise (if they could be all
numbered at full and spoken of at large) as it would appear an approved
remedy for all diseases, Prayer an approved remedy for all diseases, a mean
to obtain good and avoid evil Prayer overcomes God. God must be made on our
side.

God can not be hired for reward.


inward and outward: a mean to resist all the euilles which threaten us, and
to obtain all the necessaries that behooue us. It is a virtue of such power
and effect, as it overcomes not only our enemies, but even God himself, who
must be made on our side, or else we arm our selves in vain, we march to the
battle in vain, and we encounter the enemy in vain. And since he is not like
other princes, that may be hired for money, and like other men that may be
induced for gain, to take our parts: we must deal with him according to his
nature, which is to do all things freely, without compulsion or constraint,
without lucre or looking for any reward: So freely may we come unto him, so
boldly entreat him, and truly trust him in all things. And herein we must be
careful, that as we covet to be seen and noted to pray and to become instant
petitioners unto him, for any grace, favor or relief: so we must indeed be
truly prepared: In prayer we must be prepared within, as we seem without.

He that prays not rightly, prays not at all.

Ier. 14.10.11. We must pray in knowledge. 1. Cor 14.15.


for the word without the hearty and spiritual consent, is but a vain labor
of the tongue, whose effect is like Caynes sacrifice, rejected, and ascends
not whither it seems to be sent. And therefore he that is not first
instructed what prayer is, by what means it is effected, and to what end it
tends, (though he pray without ceasing, as he thinks) he prays not at
all: but utters with his lips an unprofitable sound, which conuerteth to
nothing, because it proceeded of no good ground, it came not of knowledge and
feeling, as Paul teaches, saying: I will pray with the spirit and I will pray
with understanding also. Whereby it appears that it is not enough to be wise
(as we may think us) in worldly things and martial feats, but w^ must have
understanding (not carnal wisdom) spiritual and sanctified knowledge,
praying in the spirit, that is, with the inward consent of the soul, moved
thereunto by that sanctifiyng spirit, which God sends to his children to
help their infirmities. The spirit teaches us how to pray.
By which we are made able to discover our necessities, according to true
knowledge. For if we well consider the cause, why God has promised to send
that comforter which shall teach us all things, we shall find it to be, for
that we are of our own natures, carnal, Why Christ promised to send the
comforter.

The cause why the carnal man asks and receives not.


corrupt and ignorant of every good thing, which does estrange us from God, and
God from us. So that if we speak as of our selves, we speak but of the
corruptions and vanities of our own thoughts, and our prayers are neither
heard, understood nor granted, and that is the cause that the carnal man
asks and receives not, for that he asks contrary to the meaning of the
spirit. But when that spirit of regeneration possesses our hearts, The
sppirit of God makes an affinity between our thoughts and Gods mercies.
we become capable of better things, illuminated by that spirit, which being
the third person of the Deity, teaches us the things of God, not suffering
carnal reason to take place in things we desire, but speaks it self in
us: whose affinity is such with God the Father and his Christ, that it
reueileth our wills to God and Gods will to us, making such an affinity
between the spirit of God and our spirits, as every good thought (but
conceived in the heart) is present with God, and his mercies again of his love
and bounty in Christ, meet our desires and supply our necessities with all
things expedient, yea better then we can ask or think. Psalm 86.4. What
Prayer is.

The fruits of prayer.

Exodus 17.11. Romans 14 6. Act. 20.36, 38.


Prayer is a lifting up of the heart to God, by the motion of this divine
spirit. And this is that spiritual thing that armeth and defends the
christian soldier: it is a helmet and a sword, a weapon both offensive and
defensive. The Jews prevailed more by this against Amal^^k then by fighting.
And therefore as Paul commands it as a thing necessary before we eat, and
before we undertake any labor: so, much more before we march toward the
battle, most of all before we fight. But how should men pray to him in whom
they believe not? they do but for fashion, they speak but the words that are
good of themselves, Prayer without knowledge and faith profits nothing.
if they proceeded from knowledge and belief: but because they know not, they
believe not: and because they pray, and believe not, the words they speak
(yea, be it the Lords prayer it self) profits nothing. And therefore such
as covet to pray aright, must first learn, and then believe with a full
assurance of the heart, builded upon that knowledge which is reueiled out of
the word of God by the spirit, whereby the promises of safety and salvation,
of rest and refuge, are declared unto them, and they apprehending them by
faith, are rightly prepared, How a man is made fit to prayer.
and made fit to talk with their Creator, not by the mediation of Saint or
Angel, but by the immediate intercession of the man Christ Jesus, who knowing
their infirmities and temptations, stands assured unto them evermore, in
whose name and for whose sake, they may ask and have all things. Let every
man therefore examine whether he know aright, In Christ we are assured if we
ask to ^eceiue.
and believe aright, then doubtless he may pray aright. But it is the fault of
too many, not only of soldiers, but of all sorts of men, to say in their
hearts there is no God: and therefore they say no prayers, Hipocrites pray
not, though they seem to pray.
though they seem to pray often, because they have no faith, and yet they
babble with their lips, as if they were truly devout. But as none examineth
the heart but God, and none finds out the Hypocrites, Atheists, and such as
deceive themselves and the world with fained shows of religion, but God: so I
leave judgment to God. But I say with David, God finds out Hyp^crites,
Atheists, etc.
such as deceive themselves in dissimulation, say in their hearts there is no
God to find them out: But they are fools, and become odious and abominable
before God. If soldiers be abominable, They are fools and abominable that
dissemble with God.
where is their hope of Gods presence with them? If God refuse them, nothing
remains with them, nor comfort for them, but fear and confusion. And
therefore if they regard their safety here in this life, and their salvation
to come, let them embrace that knowledge that may engender faith, that may
bring forth prayer which shall conioyne and knit them so to God, as they shall
be able to say with Job; I know that my redeemer lives. The perfection of a
soldier.
So every soldier shall be able to assure him that his defender lives, that
his strength, castle, comfort and refuge is in heaven, ready to help him, and
to relieve him, and to deliver him here in earth. Some are apt to many things,
some to all things, but they cannot pray. They can handle their piece well,
they can toss the pike well, they can use the sword well; decent qualities for
virtuous men, most fit for soldiers. Some can swear well, swagger well, Some
are able to do all things, but they cannot pray.
carrouse well, dissemble well, things proper to vicious men, most unfit for
soldiers. But when they come to hear the word well, when they should bear it
away well, and practice it well, to believe well, and pray well, they put it over
to other men, and say they be soldiers. But they are but single soul
soldiers, soldiers that have but the carnal and not the spiritual power that
was in Moses, Single soul soldiers.
David, Joshua, Hezekiah, Sampson, and others, without which twofold blessing,
they seem to be, but are not true soldiers, as ye devil seemed to be, but was
not Samuel. 1. Sam. 28.8.
It were a happy thing therefore if our English soldiers would look back a
little into the time they have had, to learn wisdom and knowledge, A
necessary thing in soldiers.
and faith and prayer, living as they have done, in a kingdom of peace,
brought up in Christian wars, and have had the use of the Gospel freely. If
they be ignorant, sin follows ignorance, Sin follows ignorance.
and death and hell sin. But it is not too late (being late) to seek
knowledge, to exercise faith, and practice prayer. This is the way to become
the soldiers of Christ, brethren with Christ, The glory of a reformed
soldier.
and heirs with Christ, who will yet grace them (if they come quickly) with
the title of Christian soldiers, and crown them with the glory of conquering
soldiers: but if they be negligent, and will continue foolish still, A ^^ueat
for soldiers.
they may covet it too late, and be shut out like the improuident virgins. If
then they have any spark of that spirit which teaches wisdom, let them
presently strive and without delay take hold of time, Time precious and
slipperie.
for it is slipperie and swift, yet precious, and not to be redeemed for any
price. A soldier thinks it a great grace that can obtain the place to lead
the Vangard of a battle, A vain danger to attain honor.
the Forlorn hope, which is to betake him into the greatest danger for a
little glory among men, and priseth life of little value, in regard of the
reputation of being desperate in the field: but when they be called to the
most honorable service, the service of the living God, which consists in the
former most sweet exercises of faith, An over sight in souldie^s.
religion and prayer, they seem happiest that come in the rereward (the
forlorn hope indeed) for they deceive themselves in preferring vain honor
before immortal glory. But were they qualified with these heavenly virtues,
then should their valor shine as the Sun in the forward of the battle, and
draw with them the maine bands with such godly resolution, True virtue a terror
to the enemy.

A w^shed sight.


as should quail their enemies with a spiritual terror. It were a most
worthy sight to see soldiers in the field to flock about the preacher, and
to accompany and confer with the godly, and to contend in virtuous
emulation, who should be most religious in an army, who could speak best of
God, live best before GOD, and pray best unto GOD. This is the weapon that must
prevail, Our surest weapon and preservation.
if we at all prevail; this is the fort that must preserve us, if we be at
all preserved: and without this, have they never so glorious a promise of the
flesh, it is peevish and vain. Some in an army may perchance have an
inclination to serve the Lord, which is a good token of a desire: But they be
not graced of their fellow soldiers, nor of their Leaders, as they ought, The
godly are not graced in an army.
they become rather scorned, then fostered or followed. But let them not give
over, let them rather proceed from good to better, from one good exercise to
another, from reading to hearing the word from hearing to more and more
knowledge, from knowledge to faith, The steps of religious soldiers
and from faith to continual prayer: let them do it faithfully, let them use
it zealously, and perform it reverently. For if they bring sinful prayers to
that holy Altar, and seem to sacrifice sin for sin, they increase sin by
dissimulate zeal. Sin cannot obtain pardon for sin, The offering of sin
for sinn^.
more then Beelzebub can cast out devils, without prejudice to his infernal
state: And therefore he that prays, let him pray in the spirit and truth. And
yet there is a matter more to be considered, in such as become suitors to God:
for as he that will be a suter to a king, must be sure he has no show of
disloyalty, treason, or disobedience to the king; if he have he must think he
has a cold suite. He that praeeth must be free from sin. Ierem. 11.11. 2.
Tim. 1.9.
So he that is a petitioner to God, must cleanse himself from sin: for God
hears not a sinner, though he cry unto him. And therefore he that calls on
the name of the Lord, must depart from iniquity. They must wash themselves
from sin by faith and repentance in the blood of that immaculate Lamb Christ
Jesus; as Naaman washed himself in Jordan: 2. King. 3.
then may they boldly go unto the throne of grace, where they shall obtain
mercy, and whatsoever may stead them in the time of need. Prayer is a most
sweet exercise for all men: but if a soldier rightly knew it, and would
rightly use it, he should say as David did of the sea; He that prays
zealously and instantly, shall s^e wonders.
They that go into the deep see the wonders of the Lord. But they that use
prayer faithfully, shall have experience of many wonders, though God use not
apparent miracles, as we imagine at this day. We deceive our own eyes, and
dissemble with our own hearts: for if we rightly consider Gods mercy toward
them that fear him, and his judgments toward the wicked, we shall plainly
see that the things he does are admirable to flesh and blood: and above all men
the soldier may perceive it in the wars, The soldier in the wars may see
the wonders of the Lord.
where God is always an appealant or defendant, and he shows mercy and
justice now, as he did in our fathers days, wherein he ever blessed the
faithful, and confounded the disobedient. Wherefore if a soldier be destitute
of Gods fear, knowledge, faith and prayer, he must look for judgment,
Infidels made scourges for Gods disobedient children.
the very wicked shall prevail against him: yea, the Infidels are ordained
scourges sometime of Gods disobedient children, though he cast the conqueror
as a rod into the fire after his service done. Ignorant and negligent soldiers
are more miserable then al other men, The ignorant soldier is in a miserable
case.
because they go as to a continual slaughter, if God be not on their side,
and they have no assurance of future life, without knowledge and faith, which
is confirmed unto them by the exercise of divine prayer: without which death is
terrible, yea the remembrance of death is fearful because they shall come to
judgment in the end, and receive the portion of careless and wicked ones. And
howsoever they may glory sometime in victory, Usurped glory in a soldier.
and wallow in the wealth gotten by spoil, it is but usurped glory, which
shall increase judgment, since it is not gotten by the true mean ordained of
God, namely, to sanctify their proceedings by obedience and prayer to him, and
to glorify him with praise, as they glorify themselves with victory. And
they can never truly give him thanks after good success, unless they crave
his aid before they adventure to fight. For thanks are due only for good
turns done: and how can they say it came of God, when they went on without
him, and acquainted him not with their desires? It is not enough to say he
knows all, and therefore needs no further matter but barely to refer it to
him in conceit: they must pray his aid, and instantly entreat pardon for
their sins, which are of force to procure ill success in a just cause.
S^nnes may procure ill success in a just cause.
To have victory without prayer, and to receive it without praise, is proper
to Infidels that know not God: But to begin with prayer, and end with thanks,
is peculiar to Christians. And it is as impossible for Christian soldiers to
undertake any expedition without prayer, as the Sun to shine without heat.
And a man may as well affirm, that fire can have no smoke, as to say a
Christian cannot nor will pray. Not to pray before we fight in the wars,
approves us to be but counterfeit Christians.
There is nothing does so plainly discover, that we do but dissemble our
selves to be Christian soldiers, then when we undertake matter of war
without prayer to God, without whom we can do no more then Goliath did, only
stand upon our strength and multitude, upon our practice and policy in
military business, which Papists, Turks and Pagans do: nay, they seek to
their saints and gods (such as they be) and consult and crave aid, and give
thanks: who never prevail against Gods children, Gods children are never
overcome, but when they forget (...).
but where they be fruitles in faith and prayer, to serve the true and living
God. And where that true exercise is indeed, and where the inward hearts agree
with the outward voices, in a lively and express duty, there the Lord of
hoasts has promised to be with an army of heavenly soldiers to assist them
(if need require). Exodus 23.20. and 32.2.

All Gods creatures fight for his children. Exodus 14.19. Josh. 10.12.


And as his Angel went before the Israelites to conduct them, and came behind
them to defend them: so shall he take charge of them that serve him, and seek
him with their whole hearts; his winds, the Sun, and all other his creatures
shall be come soldiers to fight on their behalf. This is Gods promise, which
will stand fast for ever. It behooves also them that exercise wars, as they
stand upon the guard of Gods defense: We must submit our selves to Gods will.
so not to presume beyond that which beseems them, but to submit themselves
unto his will in all humility: which shall be no detriment to a lively faith,
but a true testimony of their true obedience, to take althings that God sees
fit for them, in good part, whether prosperous or adverse success: for God
often finds out the fruits of our corruptions, which we ourselves may seem
willing to conceal, God sees cause to punish us when we think our selves safe.
flattering our selves yet with the hope of his presence and aid, when we
rather deserve to be corrected for our sins: yea, when we have tasted most
of his power, in throwing down our enemies before our faces. When we should be
most thankful, we become then secure, Security.
and security breeds ease and neglect of duty: and then God in his wisdom
and love, even in hi^ divine counsel is forced (as it were) to try his
children with crosses, and to suffer the enemy a little to prevail, to the
end that we may the more duly call account of our obedience, God causes us to
remember our sins by punishment.
how it has stood with us, and so the more seriously and earnestly seek him
again, in true and unfeigned repentance and prayer. All the godly in former
ages, worshippers of the only true and living God, have observed this
continual custom in the time of all their perils and greatest dangers, to
fly unto him by hearty prayer, that it might please him to yield them his
strength and power, which they acknowledged far to exceed the power of the
strongest, and policy of the wise on earth, and yielded themselves unto his
will, in a lively hope of his helping hand. And we have no less reason, in
religion, We have Christ our sworn defender.
having Christ our sworn defender (as long as we continue true Christians) but
to be faithful and forward, and in all our attempts to fly unto God, in the
name of our dear and never failing Mediator: by whom the weakest are made
strong to overcome the strongest, and without whom the mightiest fall to the
ground before the weakest. So that we see God is all in all, God alsufficie^t.
powerful, and alsufficient: and as David says; he is present with all that
call upon him in faith, and becomes unto them a tower of invincible strength,
to keep them from their enemies fury; a sword irresistable, to confound
their adversaries on every side. Happy are they that dwell under the shadow of
his protection, They are safe that dwell under the protection of God. Prayer a
terror unto the adversary.
for they abide safe for ever. The very Name of this great King is terrible
unto our enemies, and our prayer a greater terror unto our adversaries, the^
the roaring Cannon: prayer blesses our counselles and consultations, it
incourageth the hearts, it strengthens the bodies, it obteineth surest
victories, and best confirms peace. They called upon the Lord (says David)
and he delivered them. And of his own experience he speaks, saying, I called
upon the Lord, and he heard me at large. Wherein is expressed the patience of
the Lord, God hears men at large.
who disdaineth not to hear a man's whole grief. The immortal God is not so
curious to be spoken with, as mortal man. Nobles, men in great place and
dignity in the wars or common wealth, think it a great savor to hear a
poor suitor shortly, and think long ere they have done, they must be brief
to tell their tale, A fault in nobles and men in high place.
and they shall have answer at leisure: but the Lord of Lords hears the
poorest man at large, he is not weary to hear a poor suitors complaint. And
therefore may every poor soldier, captain and General have like free scope
to speak their fill to this most loving God: who will most assuredly answer
every one according to the necessity of his cause, and according to the
substance of his petition. And as he is the God of hoastes: so he disposes of
Armies as he will, and ever to the good of his children, howsoever it fall
contrary to the hope of flesh and blood. The God of hoastes disposes of armies
as he will.
The godly find not this true only, but even the very heathen can confess
that a divine power bears rule in the wars. And therefore such as attribute
the success of war and other weighty things, to uncertain fortune, do
slatly deny there is a God, Such as attribute success to fortune, deny there
is a God.
whose power is alsufficient, and whose justice is inviolable: and that the
effects both of falsehood and truth were of like hope or probability, and that
the issue of the one as of the other, should like necessarily follow, which
should deprive man merely of all faith and assurance, which are grounded upon
a certain knowledge of an absolute power. And it behooves a soldier to have
an especial consideration of this point, of the devils fallacies, To sta^nd
upon fortune is a fallacy of the devil.
who to bereave him of faith the maine anchorholde of safety and salvation,
sets this glimmering before the eyes of his thoughts, to hinder the pure
and pearcing light of divine reason: whereby he may easily discover all things
to come to pass, by an inevitable ordinance of God. Who (al^hough he precisely
govern all things by his own power) affords unto man sundry secondary
means to effect their endeavors. God appoints second means.
And by reason of man's own imbecillitie and corruption, these means be often
perverted, and come not (with wished effects) to the end intended, because
they wholly depend upon the bare means themselves, and cast behind their backs
the help which is from above (without which, The cause why we attribute
success to fortune.
nothing comes well to pass) whereby they want that blessing which is
promised to the faithful which rely upon God: and stumble upon that which is
contrary to their desires, accusing then this pee^ish and false governor of
events Fortune, never reproouing their own ignorance, and infidelity to God,
whereby they run headlong into that which he has forbidden, and refuse that
he has commanded. But the faithful and the true children of God, use not to
attribute the issue of their affairs to fortune, that is so muffled, as it
knows not the faithful from the infidel: but to the God almighty, of whose
mercy, love, Fortune is muffled.

The resolution of the godly.


power and providence, they are so assured, as they lay down all their
endeavors, in faith, at the throne of his grace; assuring themselves, that what
is fittest for their good, they shall receive, whether it be prosperity or
adversity, life or death: and that the godly shall not be sent away empty,
and the wicked rewarded, as it fa^eth with such as think that fortune and
mere casualtie dispose all things: A foolish conceit of fortunistes.
wherein they argue against all divine power, and seek to maintain humane
policy and warlike stratagemes above all religion, faith and prayer, which is
a most infernal practice, coined to the destruction and overthrow of all
godly discipline in war, Machiauil^ proposition^ vain.
which yet shall prevail when all Machiauils witty propositions shall be
confuted together with all carnal hope and inventions. But as it is strongly
defended by the word of truth, that only God alsufficient, by his power
effects all things as he will, yet it disalloweth not, but appoints
inferior means unto his children to work by, as has appeared by all the
acts of our godly fathers, as of David ^y a sling, Josh. 6.4.5 etc. Iud^.
19.20.
overcame Goliath; Joshua by the noise of trumpets of Rams horns, threw down
the walls of Jericho; Gideon with pitchers and lamps, discomfi^ed the
Madian^tes, and many such like, which are most weak means, but being blessed
of God by prayer, they prevail mightily. But such as fear God, attribute
their good success to the sword of the Lord, and not to fortune: they account
not that casual, which is assured the^ by faith: and if they succeed not as
they desire, they attribute their loss, The godly attribute all success to
their sins.
and the contrary issue of their hope, unto their own sins, as gentle
corrections for their offenses, and leave not the Lord (upon their fall) but
seek him again and again in faith by prayer, and leave him not til they
prevail again: This is the operation of faith, founded upon true knowledge,
and this is the power of prayer builded upon a true faith. So that neither
wished success can make the^ proud, neither does adverse dismay the godly upon
earth: The manner of the godly, in p^osperitie and adversity.
but the more they are afflicted and discomfited, the more they stick unto
this mean, and the better they prosper, the more thankful they are to God.
Ioabs encouragement unto his brother when they were to fight against the
S^rians may be remembered of Christian soldiers, wherein he said: Let us fight
for our people, and for the city of God, for the Lord shall do what is best
in his own eyes. A memorandum for martial men.
So must our martial men be encouraged, to fight for their country and word
of God, the Gospel of Christ, for whose cause it is a most honorable thing to
adventure our lives, and whether it be his pleasure to suffer us to stand or
fall, to foil or be foiled, all is to our comfort in him, if we fly not from
his favor by starting aside to humane devises: A soldier must be constant and
refer all things to God.
but to continue constant in hope, confident in prayer, and mortified to all
carnal desires, we may assure our selves of his presence, and of the aid of
all necessary means to attain unto that which is set before us, namely the
true honor of christian warriors here, and of the crown of immortal glory in
the time to come. For Christ himself for whom we fight, is gone before us,
The true reward of christian soldiers.
and has prepared both the way and the joys that are for ever absolute and
perfect. There can be nothing more available, more precious or more
comfortable, more honorable or praise worthy in any man, then the fruits of
true religion, faith and prayer: whose particular effects might be more at
large declared by examples. B^t for that they be so general in the book of
God, and that so free for every Christian: let men seek the same to their
further resolution and confirmation in the same book. Paul sets down^ the
effects of faith. Heb 11.

Io. 10.11.13. 2. King. 4 33.34.

The effects of prayer.


Paul in the eleventh to the H^brues seems to set down a catologue of the
famous deeds of faith and the wonderful effects of prayer. By prayer, Joshua
made the Sun to stand still in the firmament. Elisha raised the dead. Solomon
obtained wisdom. And Moses put his enemies to flight, and all by this worthy
exerc^se of prayer. Infinite things have bin and are daily done by prayer: it
defends from perils, it preserves in safety, it obtains good things, it
expels resists and withstandeth evil things: nothing is so hard, but
prayer makes easy; nothing so weak, but it makes strong; nothing so strong,
but it makes weak: nothing so hid, but it reueileth; nothing so grievous, but
it makes pleasant; Prayer the most absolute mean to prevail in wars
it is profitable in all things: but in the wars it exceeds all other
means, it makes all things prosperous, all men valiant, and is never
dismayed, neither at furious enemies, nor at unsavory adversity, nor overcome
by any temptation. This is made only to God by the godly. Now, if it seem unto
any a hard thing to pray well, because without knowledge how, and what to pray,
it is before proved that it is to no purpose, and avails not. Therefore let
all men covet to be godly, He that has a desire to be godly, shall be godly
and God will satisfy their desires, for he knows the very sighs of the
heart, and accepts the thoughts thereof, grounded upon belief, as well as
if the party prayed with most excellent skill, and cried aloud: as appears
by Moses and Anna. And therefore the willing and zealous soldier, Prayer
speaks as well in the heart as by the lips.
which inwardly speaks (as he marches) in his spirit to God, in humility
and faith, though he pronounce no word, nor utters voice, his prayer is heard
already: for God is near unto him that is true of heart, that is, of a pure
and regenerate spirit, for he is present ever in his bosom, and knows his
wantes before he speak, and grants his desires before he ask. And
therefore when he feels himself relieved in his wantes, When we have
comfo^t by prayer we must be thank^full.
comforted in his griefs, and preserved from his dangers: let him have his
heart ready prepared to be thankful, and let his thankefulnes appear, by
outward as well as inward, and by inward as outward action of obedience, in
reformation of his sinful life, in holiness, and continual prayer, because he
stands hourly in need of new blessings, and new comfortes, and new
assistance at the hands of God. For as long as we live, so long we lack the
help of the highest, and so long lack we the help of prayer, to obtain
continual supply of all our necessities; which as they be infinite, so our
p^ayers must have no end: not that we should say many pater-noste^s upon
account, The meaning of c^^tinuall p^ayer.
or other good and gracious words by observation of number or tim^; but that
every occasion should be answered with fit motions of the spirit, as they
administer several dangers unto our souls or bodies. And therefore in all
places, and at all times, marching, standing, fighting, retiring, walking, and
in all other exercises of the body, the mind may be busy in meditation and
prayer, even in it self, which shall be so much the more comforted, as it is
assured, that his thoughts be pure and undefiled, t^nding only to the
heavens, and desiring heavenly things, which have promise of all other outward
and earthly blessings. And withal it is a most necessary thing for a soldier
when he has his intermission, and desisteth from the exercises of war, to
apply himself to some means to stir up his zeal, A soldier when he has
time must use m^anes to increase his zeal.
as to hear or read the word of God. And as this singular inward exercise
avails much to the preservation and comfort of every private man, so if all
would thus privately confer with God, there should be a most happy army, and
invincible host, which would become so powerful and victorious, as it should
have just cause to become forward also in giving of thanks after their happy
success. Wherein they must in no case be seen slack, careless or negligent.
Soldiers after victory must be thankful. ^sal ^10.13.
But with David, they must take the cup of salvation and thanksgiving into
their hands, and praise God with their hearts, acknowledging their
deliverance to be only of him. For as by their prayers they cried for his
help, so by victory they are bound as by a former vow, to praise him and to
say with Melchised^ch: Blessed be the most high God, Genesis 14.20. Ex^d. 1^.12.
The man^er of the ex^resse thank^fulnes of the godly fathers.
which has given our enemies into our hands. Sing unto the Lord (with Moses)
for he has triumphed gloriously, the horse and he that rode upon him, has he
overthrown. The Lord is our strength and praise and is become our salvation.
The Lord is a man of war, his name is Jehovah. Sing also with Deborah and
Barak, take not disdain to look into the acts of old, and imitate the godly
in praising of God. For, to receive his blessings and be unthankful, is
odious unto him. Judge 5 12. Ingratitude odious to God and men.
Ingratitude is condemned among us men, as a fault not to be forgotten: but
fa^re more offensive to God, who looks narrowely even into the secret
thoughts of such as receive the fruits of his mercy, especially such as
obtain by him victory in the field against their adversaries. And, if he
find them lifted up with vaineglorie, and to attribute their success unto
themselves, either in regard of their power, multitude, valor, policies or
military stratagemes, We must not attribute good success to our selves but to
God, lest he become our enemy.

The sequel of Ingratitude.


he forthwith becomes their enemy, and diminishes their number, weakneth
their power, besotteth their devises, and makes their policies of none effect.
And so in steed of a second conquest against the enemy, he suffers them to
be foiled of them which they fear not. This is the sequel of ingratitude to
God, who will have all the glory as the chief worker, and gives unto man the
glory of faithful soldiers, which is more honorable the^ any humane praise can
express. So that it appears that it suffices not him to have the bare name,
as in our conference, to be said to have fought for us: What true
thankfulness. ^^
but we must express our thanks by a greater love in our hearts to his
sacred word, and by our renewed obedience toward him, wherein we must cast off
all occasions to offend his Majesty, endeavoring by all godly means to
become so united unto his favor, as he may continue the same his assistance
for evermore toward us, for his blessed Sons sake our everlasting redeemer.

A plain and forcible motive to stir up such as tarry at home, as well as
they that are addressed to the wars, to reform their lives, and to serve the
living God, not only in regard of their own safety at home, but also of
their brethren abroad: most necessa^ie for all men to read and consider.
IT has been spoken in all the former part of this treatise, unto military
men, stirring them up to virtue and religion in their proceedings in the
wars. And now it is fit that such as remain at home, should be put also in
remembrance how requisite a thing it is for them to serve the Lord in fear,
and to keep themselves unspotted in their ways. We ought to serve God at home
in their behalfes that are in the wars
And that we should consider what duty is required at our hands toward God:
not only in regard of our own safety at home, but of theirs also which are
in the wars in our behalf. Without whom our wealth is threatened to be turned
into want, and our peace and plenty into the dismal broils of woeful wars,
whose dreadful noise is the messenger of Gods irefull indignation, in kindled
against the disobedient, and whereby he has ever showed himself a triumphant
conqueror over all his proud adversaries. Not only over Turks, Pagans,
Heathen, and all other Antichristian infidels: but over such as profess his
name with their lips, and profane him with their hearts and deeds. Who are
especially thr^atned by this noise of war.
Such as have had the true use of religion offered them, by the right knowledge
of his crucified Christ, and yet have denied the power of his cross by the
loosenes of their lives; they especially are most deeply threatened with the rod
of Gods revenging fury. A matter not lightly to be passed over of us English
Christians, who have so long and so largely tasted the sweet bounty of his
favor in the free use of his sacred word: which is the pledge of our salvation
in Christ, the savor of life unto life, if we heartily embrace it, and truly
practice the substance of it. But unto the wicked, to such as hear it, and
hate to be reformed by it, The word of God the touchstone of salvation.
it is the savor of death unto death. So that it appears to be the mere
touchstone of every man's standing or falling, of their election or
reprobation. But forasmuch as in the latter times, Christ foresaw that many
should fall away and depart from the faith, that love should be cold among men,
and that the fruits of this divine blessing of God should be very thin, and
wickedness to grow ripe and full of force; he proclaimed that these we^e the
tokens that the end should be the^ near. By which means, and for which things
sake, another most notable sign should foregoe this general consummation of
al earthly things, namely, the rumors of wars. For as sin follows
security: so wars and other judgments of God follow sin. Rumors of
wars.
But it may be said, that not only the rumors of wars, but war it self
has been in all ages. An objection.
And therefore these new rumors a^e the less to be feared, for they are but
the fruits of ambition and envy, which have been from the beginning: and not
to be held so precise an argument that our general account is near. Were not
all the former Monarchies established, and brought again to naught by wars?
Have not all nations of the earth both heard the noise and felt the blows of
wars? why then should we think this time, and this noise more like to argue
an end than the former? If we rightly conceive the meaning of Christ, The
Answer.
in foretelling that rumors of wars should go before the dreadful day of
his second coming: This is the time foretold of the rumors of wars.
we may hold that this is the time above all the rest past, because it
comes nearest the end, in the declining estate of the world, though there
were bitter persecutions by the sword in the primitive time of the Gospel,
when Christ and his word began to be embraced by the good, and repugned by the
wicked. According to his own words, Wars about the mystery of Christ's death.
that he came not to bring peace, but the sword. Contentions began immediately
after his death about the mystery thereof, and the comforter which he
promised and did send, reueiled the truth to many, and the Church increased,
notwithstanding the sharp encounters of the carnal minded; but the brute and
rumors of wars were not so general as now they are. We see all Europe and
other parts of the world divided within themselves, one kingdom against
another: nation lifts up the sword against nation, and all for Christ or
against Christ: not that the comforter, the spirit of Christ, The wars in
these days are either for, or against Christ.
which teaches the truth, and discovers falsehood, should be held the cause
of these divisions, being pure, holy and undefiled; or that true Christians
stir up or long for war, which is of it self impure, and more and more
polluted by man's corruptions: but the great Antichrist Satan boiling in
continual hatred against the child of the woman, has heretofore, and now
especially does vomit out his poison and fury into the hearts of his great
ministers, to ye end that they may power out floods of bloody broils against
such as profess Christ truly, and maintain his truth constantly, The offended
and offending partie^ in these wars.
and follow it faithfully, who are the poor offended, and the Antichrists and
their adherents the offending party. Who yet as the woolfe challenges the
Lamb: so they and theirs seek quarrel against Christ and his Church, whose
harmeles and innocent members, are by their tyrants numbered already to the
slaughter, their lives reckoned already among the dead, and their souls
accounted among the wicked. And this is a universal terror sent abroad into
the ears of all, by the rumors of these threatened wars, which in their
conceits tend to the mere extirpation of all true Christians and Christian
religion, that the prince of darkness might rule his kingdom soly and alone
in carnal security, The cause why the devil and his ministers set kingdoms
together by the ears.
without resistance of any true member of Christ. And by how much the more he
prevails: so much the more the truth sustaineth injury, and true religion
is neglected: and by so much the more may we assure us, that this is the time
foretold of the rumors of wars foregoing the end of all flesh. Which time
shall be the sooner accomplished for the elects sake, who may through terror or
subtlety be also seduced, and won from the truth: as we see daily dangerous
relapses in many, by the enchantments of Antichrists ministers, a most wicked
and merciless people, who yet justify themselves to be Saints, being indeed
devils in the flesh, Iustitiaries, devils in the flesh.
roaring out this terrible noise of mortal war against the Lord, and his.
Whose fury, malice and arrogancy, the God of hoasts and armies, high and
invincible Jehovah, our God alsufficient and loving in Jesus Christ, has not
only willed us to resist, but has affoorded us means to defend our selves,
in his fear; and to stand upon our guard in his crucified son: who as he is
a party in the dishonor done unto his Church, Christ a party with his
persecuted Church.
whereof he is the head; so he will be a party with us in our defense, if we
behave our selves as his reformed children. We ought therefore to do nothing,
nor undertake any thing without him, whose will is warranted by his word. And as
we are in him allowed to use men and munition, and other military necessaries
abroad, We must pray that God will bless our military means.
for our safety at home: so we are commanded to serve the living God in their
behalfes, that he will blosse them, and us in them, considering it is our
sins and theirs, that have raised up this unpleasant noise of war, and
stirred up that proud people to thunder out their vain fury: Howsoever we
may seem to father the cause upon other reasons, as upon the ill disposition
of the adversary, his ambition and malice; Our sins the cause of war.
which though they also appear manifest, we must yet acknowledge and conclude
that our sins have inkindled their fierce fury to flame out against us,
either in the mercy, or judgment of God; either to rouse us out of our
security to seek the Lord in repentance, or to make us partakers of his
wrath, by the destroying sword of this cruel people. Whom as we need not to
fear, if we fear and reverence the Lord, were each of them as Goliath in
strength, or as Achitophel in policy: So if we live after our own lusts, and
flatter our selves in our sins, they may prevail, were they but gnats, and
we all as valiant as Hercules, and strong as Sampson. And therefore the Lord
open our eyes, that we may see the causes of these dangers: for surely if we
duly search, Where we must seek the cause of these wars.
we shall find the same to be even in our selves, in our Cities and in the
Country, in our Courts and in our Cloisters, in our hands and in our hearts,
in every man as well mighty as mean. And as every man has a share in the
cause of this unsavory noise of war: so are we all like to be partakers of
the dangers, without true humiliation and hearty reformation of our corrupt
lives For if falsehood, deceit, lying, swearing, blasphemy, envy, dissimulate
love, flattery, Adultery, drunkenness, cruelties, injustice, neglect of the
true practice of religion: and above all, if pride and covetousness, the two
infernal strumpers and bawds of all other mischiefs and impieties, be found
fruitful amongst us, and to pass current without punishment, we have cause
to fear: for the least of these former evils, has heretofore brought not
only whole families, but great cities, countries, and flourishing kingdoms to
ruin, and most lamentable desolation. All former worlds have tasted the wrath
of God for these sins, The danger of tollerating sins.
which, when they have grown hot by use and toleration, have inflamed and
become impostumate, and at last to ripenes and ruptures: and consequently have
yielded so loathsome a stink, as the true comforting spirit has abhorred to
lodge near the same; so that there has followed deserved confusion. God
forbid therefore that we should be thus infected: for then can we not be sure
of our safety at home, nor of our forces abroad, who cannot but prosper the
worse for our wickedness. It may be thought these evils are not great amongst
us, because we little consider them: they lie not heavy upon us (as it
seems) because we so little feel them. But there be some sicknesses, the
more dangerous they be, the less sensible they appear to the patient. And as
that patient prepares least to dye, because he little suspecteth death, A
secure kingdom soonest snared.
and yet dies suddenly: So a secure kingdom little regarding vengeance
threatened, may be soonest snared in it own sin, and soonest confounded in it
own vanity. And therefore we that are English Christians ought carefully to
consider, that as a body seeming lusty and strong may be suddenly be wrapped
in mortal diseases, without careful observation of a salutarie diet: so a
^late may be changed, that stands, in conceit, without danger, if it be not
guided by virtue and practice of Christian religion. It is in it self a
dangerous thing for a man to look into the sin of another, and to regard his
own little or nothing at all. If we should gaze upon the infirmities of our
adversaries, admiring their gross corruptions, and in the mean time wallowe
with pleasure in our own dangers, our condemnation (we having eyes to see)
should be more just then theirs, whom we hold blind. We have the light, How we
ought to show w^e have the light.
let us make use of the light, and show it by walking uprightly: for if we go
astray in the clear shining of knowledge, we shall be less excusable then
they that wander in the night of ignorance. It is not for naught that the noise
and rumors of wars are in our ears: for if they forerunne not destruction,
Wars the beginning of sorrows.

Matthew. 24.8.


yet we must confess what Christ affirms them to be the beginning of
sorrows. And as the lightning comes before the thunder, and a cloud before
the storm: so the noise before the effects of war. The wise seaman provides
against the tempest not yet come, to escape the danger coming. So let us by
our repentance, appease the God that raises this shadow before the substance
of greater peril fall upon us. God speaks daily unto us by his word, to tell
us, that the people that sin shall dye. Let us reply by our works, that we
be sorry for the sins which have stirred him up to threaten us: that he
finding us a reformed nation, a people in whose lips may be found wisdom,
and in whose hearts he may see righteousness and faith, whose proceedings may
favor of his fear and due reverence at home; may alter his purpose, and
bless us and our forces: for armor and men of strength prevail little
abroad, Forces alr^ad prevail little, without godly counsel and prayer at home
unless there be both godly counsel and faithful prayer at home. And
therefore as our share is in their perils that follow the wa^res, for our
defense: so let us serve the living God for them, that he will be their defense
for us. It is no argument that we are safe at home, because our forces are
strong abroad: but if they fear him in the field, and we serve him truly at
home, if we carry inviolable hearts and undefiled hands, our state is
irremoueable: True security.
for God shall be both a rock of defense for us, and a sword of offense unto
the proud that rise up against us. But if we leave off to do good, if we
neglect godliness, and embrace vanity, our staff is broken, and our strength
departed from us, yea when we think we stand upon a sure ground. For God is
ielous of our obedience, as also he is powerful, he can do what he will, he
is absolute and not partial in his proceedings, and being moved to anger, who
is able to abide his fury? He is not satisfied with the blood of some of his
enemies, he threatens all, and spares none abroad or at home, but such as
fear him, repent their sins, and walk in his ways. And he reputeth none
more deadly enemies unto his majesty, Gods especial enemi^s.
then they that have tasted the sweetness of his word, the comforts of his
preservation and protection, and the multitude of his blessings, and yet
neglect him in his due service, d^sobey his will, walk after their own lusts,
and stand upon their guard without him: as if they were Lords of their own and
could by themselves and of themselves, defend themselves and theirs. It
displeases him deeply when men's confidence in him decaieth, or when men
presume on him without testimony of obedience to him by godly life, and
religious conversation. For what is it but to deny him to be God, A denial
of God to trust in our selves.
when man trusts in his own wisdom, strength, or policy? things of
themselves good, profitable, and necessary, and yet become unprofitable unto
them that hold them, as absolute means of themselves to defend, preserve, or
relieve man. And how do they argue other thing then trust in these things
merely, when seldom or not at all they seek God to bless and prosper such
means unto them? Such as sit at home may not think it enough to number their
forces abroad, and according to the strength and weakness, multitude or
paucitie of them, to measure their hope or fear of success: for so they shall
show themselves either to presume or to despair (two forbidden extremes) for
were our forces abroad in our own conceits invincible, and our country at
home by nature and situation most strong; we have no assurance thereby of
security, without God: more then had the people of Jdumea a province of
Canaan, who putting their trust in the strength of their country, Idumea. ^ere
49 7.1^ 16
being rockie and unapt to be invaded, were threatened by the king of kings, to
be subdued, cast down and confounded for their disobedience. There is no
safety to the wicked, There can be no hope to the wicked.
whose hope is in carnal strength, though they can say with their lips, The
Lord is our strength. For as they have no love to him whom they grieve by their
sins: so is their offended God far from them in the time of their greatest
need: yea, though they cry out, The mercy of God is over all his works, and
make it therefore an argument it is with them who are also the wo^ke of his
hands. The disobedient cannot well brag that he is the work of God.
But herein consists their presumption, for that, though all creatures may
say they are the work of God by creation, the disobedient man may least brag
of it. And therefore they that testify not by godliness, faith, and the
practice of religion, that they be the work of God in Christ, by spiritual
regeneration, they shall be found bastards, children of darkness, and infernal
degeneration: who being led by vanity to an uncertain hope, have no further
assurance of Gods defense, then such as meas^re every issue by good or evil
fortune, Fortune the blind god of the wicked.
the blind god of wicked men. But as we are professed Christians, so our hope
ought only to be in the power of the God alsufficient in Christ, in whom we
may assure our selves (if we be fruitful Christians) that the God of hoasts is
with our armies abroad, and with us at home: and he will give them, and us by
them, most wished success, as he has already and many ways done. But where
is our thankfulness? As we look to be always partakers of his power and
providence, We must s^ew gratitude for former benefits.
of his mercy and protection: as we hope happy issue of our enterprises; so
we must show our gratitude for his former benefits, by our conformed lives, and
by daily prayers both abroad and at home. For if the Lord regard not the
strength of an horse, it follows he has no pleasure in the force of flesh
and blood. But his delight is in them that fear him, Gods delight is in them
that fear him.
and walk according to his commandments; faith prevails most with God,
being fruitful and lively. As for armor or armies, they neither prevail
against him nor without him. But that part wherewith he is a party, prevails
always: for he blesses their counsels, how and when to proceed: he
strengthens their hearts, and teaches their fingers the faculties of war.
And therefore when we speak of a multitude of men, whether of our own, or of
the adversaries, A multitude of men what they are of themselves.
we speak but as of a huge heap of grass, of many bubbles of water, of many
withering weeds of the earth. But when we speak of men fearing God, when we
speak of the faithful, and of men truly religious, we speak of divine
strength: for the Lord is with them, Men fearing God.
the God of hoasts fights for them, and by them: who then can resist them?
But he that has millions of men, and trusts in the^, as in a profane and
faithles multitude, is in the same accursed, because he makes flesh his arm,
as Goliath did, who putting his trust in his huge mass of arrogant dust, Goliath.
faithful David tumbled him to the earth as a handful of dung, in the name of
the Lord of hoasts: whom we are also to hold our only strength. And that we
truly do it indeed, we must bring forth the fruits of obedience to his
will, to testify the same: which is showed in love to himself above all men,
and in him one toward another. Besides which there is no true token that we
are the people, for whom the Lord has promised his protection abroad or at
home. The badge of true religion. Matthew. 32 39. Romans 13 10. Galat. 5.14 15.
The badge of that religion which is truly of Christ, is to show it in love:
for it is a thing so pure and holy, as it does no evil at all to his
neighbor. Wherefore love is the very fulfilling of the law. But if ye bite and
devour one another (says the Apostle) ye shall be consumed one of another.
The effects of this love are infinite, whose divine and sacred properties are
discovered in many places of the word of God at large. Saint Paul wishes
increase of this precious virtue to the faithful, Ephesians. 3.^7.
because Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith: which he cannot do unless
they be rooted and grounded in love. And this I pray (says he) that your love
may abound yet more and more in knowledge, Phil. 1.9.10.11
and in all judgment: that ye may discern things that differ one from
another: Love.
that ye may be pure and without offense until the day of Christ, filled with
the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the praise and
glory of God. And again, The Lord increase you, and make you abound in love
one toward another, 1. These. 3.12.13
that your hearts be stable and unblameable in holiness before God even our
father at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints. So
necessary is this most singular gift of love, that the Apostle seems to
labor it above all things, as the mean to bring men to absolute perfection,
in duty toward God and their brethren. And indeed it draws with it all
other divine virtues, and excludes al carnal affection, making men to live
according to ye rule of the spirit: The effects of love. Deuteronomy. 17.20. Mich.
3.11.
Magistrates to govern* and give sentence in matters of controversy, without
rewards: Priests to teach without lucre: Prophets to prophecy without money:
Judges to judge rightly, and all to embrace Christian religion. If this sweet
concording harmony be amongst us, we are assuredly the Lords, and the Lord
is ours, and with us at home, and with our forces abroad. But we must not
flatter our selves with the outward show of these divine things, it will little
advantage us: God sees all things.
for our souls lie manifest before the highest, and he sees all men's doings,
not only as they are done, but as they be intended: he surueieth every man's
secret chamber, and what is done therein: he searches the hearts and raines:
he records with us, or against all our actions, be they never so covertly
and closely done. The counsel of the heart cannot be so secret, nor the hand
so close, but he sees the desires of the one, and the defilings of the other.
A man is not ius^^fied before God by outw^rd things only.
And though a man may seem by his outward and open conversation before men to
be holy, it justifies him not before God, unless he be pure within. And
therefore in this case every soul is to examine himself, and purge the
dregs of such corruptions, as may seem to hinder his justification before
God in Christ: that is, he must reform his ways, and be wary in his
walking, that all things may answer divine duty toward God, to fear to do
evil, and to covet to do good. And when he has done his best, he must say his
works are unprofitable. And that if any be a sinner he is a greater, Every
man must cast himself down in his own conceit.
if any have deserved to be punished, he has deserved it: and to think worse
of himself then of another, and to think he never comes near enough to
God in holy conversation. So shall he proceed daily from knowledge to
knowledge, from faith to faith, from prayer to praise God: and never be idle
from doing the will of God, allowing all things expedient and profitable that
may please God, be it war or peace, life or death. And to hold all other
things base, vile and hurtful, that have only the words of the world, and not
the word of the Lord to warrant it. Yea, though a man think himself in the
right way, and find no stop or let, but all his desires are plausible to flesh
and blood, favored of the world and worldly minds, it is good to make trial
how he stands, How a man must examine how he stands.
by conserring his life by Gods laws, and his will with Gods word, and his
works by Gods will, and his safety by Gods assurance, and his dangers by
Gods threats. For the light of the divine spirit of God, discovers every
darkness, and his truth bewrays every falsehood. And therefore we cannot stand
upon a good intent, have we never so good allowance of fleshly policy. But if
we be studious in his laws, if we desire to know his will, and pray for his
direction, we shall never fail in our proceedings. The most doubtful things
shall be made plain unto us, the darkest shall be manifested, and the best
rightly performed. Such as are far from safety may seem secure.
They that are farthest from safety may indeed dream of security, building
their hope upon carnal means, which many times are blemished before the face
of God, by their own gross impieties, and so a curse rather then a blessing
may follow them. Such were the vainly hoping Israelites: to whom Esaias cried
out, saying, Esaias. 28.14.15.
Hear the word of the Lord ye scornful, because ye have said, we have made
a covenant with death, and are at agreement with hell, saying, though a scourge
run over and pass through, it shall not come at us: for we have made
falsehood our refuge, and are hid under vanity. This was the resolution of a
secure people, that put their confidence in flesh, and for gate the living Lord
of hoasts. This people spoke not thus vainly with their tongues, but testified
the corruption of their hearts by their deeds, that argued no less: and the
spirit of God found out their dissimulation, and proclaimed their madness to
posterities to their perpetual ignominy, for our learning that now live. But
woe unto the people that be in such a case, for while they carke and study
too much on vain things and rock themselves asleep with peace, peace, they
forget God their strength, and so discover their hearts, wherein they likewise
say, Every man has a conceit how he stands.
we need not to fear though the scourge come. Every man has a conceit of his
own estate, and how he stands, either fearing or presuming or resting
careless what becomes of these rumors of wars. And he that is the Lords,
and comes nearest to true obedience, he, in his own eyes seems most
unworthy of the favor and protection of God: and yet not so, but his fear is
a fear^ to offend, mixed with faith to be defended, not by his own power or
merits, but by the free favor of God in Christ. And the most wicked seem to
be at a league with death, The state of the wicked.
presuming that God sees not their sins, and therefore they are careless of
Gods judgments threatened, covering themselves with vanity as with a helmet,
and flatter themselves in their iniquities, as though it behooued them not to
remember their own dangers at home, nor the perilles of such as are in their
behalfes in the wars. If any such be amongst us English christians (as the
purest wheat has some chafe:) let them look about them, for they are near
the period of their prosperity: For their covenant with death shall be
disanulled, Esa ^8.18.
and their agreement with hell shall not stand, and when a scourge shall come,
then shall they be confounded by it. They that sin without feeling or fear,
and yet say, peace, peace, are but in a dream, for when the Lord in his fury
shall awaken the^, they shall stand dumb for the horror before their eyes. The
wisdom of these wise men shall perish, and their hope shall turn to trembling
and despair: for the sinners in Sion shall be afraid, and fear shall come
upon the hypocrites? and who may assure himself of safety? who shall be able
to abide the devouring fire, the day of Gods vengeance? even he that walks
uprightly, and speaks righteous things, Who shall stand in the day of trial.
refusing the gain that comes by oppression, that shakes gifts from his
fingers, that desires not to hear of blood, that shuts his eyes from
seeing evil: he shall dwell under the protection of the highest, his defense
shall be the mountain of rocks: bread shall be given him, and his water shall
be sure. They that fear God and walk in the paths of the most High, they
only shall be safe in the time of trial There is no other foundation of our
hope to be secure at home, nor promise that our forces shall prosper abroad,
Why we should pray for our forces in the wars.
but only our sure trust in the God of hoastes, whom we must also serve in
fear all our days, to whom we must pray for our selves and them, in faith;
that they may prosper in the wars: for we shall be partakers of their
success, be it good or evil. And were they never so strong in power, never
so godly in their proceedinges never so faithful and religious in the wars,
our sins may yet hinder them, What sin may do.
and our iniquities turn away Gods favor from them, and we may make a just
cause to succeed ill, by our ungodly lives. The Lord is jealous of his glory,
he will have all to serve him abroad and at home: and, though the natural
imperfections, which will perforce remain in flesh and blood, can not be so
removed or mortified, but that they wilsome time break forth to the blemish of
the best men: we must not make it an argument, that though we sin, The
exercise of the godly.
we are yet safe* But rather endeavor so much the more to weaken sin in every
of us, and to quicken our souls by continual meditation of God and good
things. Making our members rather instruments of the glory of God, then
permitting them to be defiled with licentious vanities. And howsoever unapt we
find our natural inclinations to this divine striving against sin, we must
struggle manfully to subdue the evil and to support good things in us, to
hate the one with a perfect hatred, and to embrace the other with a sincere
love. So shall we find a most glorious change in our minds, and a comfort to
our souls, The divine comforter helps them that are willing to do good.
for who so coueteth to do righteously, shall have spiritual help to
accomplish their desires. And, though the possibility be not in flesh and
blood to live godly, to know rightly, and to pray faithfully, the promised
comforter shall effect these divine thinge^ in us, and by us, if our affections
raung not after vain things. The Lord is most true in all his words, and
performe^h justly all his promises. And it is he that wills us to ask, and
he will give, to seek and we shall find, to knock and it shall be opened unto
us. The faithful therefore observe this rightly and obtain it truly: but the
faithless ask and receive not, seek and find not, and knock and enter not,
because they ask and seek and knock amiss. To pray rightly peculier to the
good.
It is the peculier wo^ke of the faithful, and proper only to true
Chris^ians, to do these things with profit. Profane men in deed may use
the words of prayer, but it is a usurpation of the work, and a fruitless
labor of the lips, for without a feeling consent and fervent ^esire of the
heart, prayer is no prayer. For as men may prophecy in the name of God, and
yet be strangers to God, ^o they may pray to God and not be heard, for God
approoueth them not to be the children of faithful Abraham that can only say
Abraham is their father, but such as bring forth the f^uits of Abraham's faith.
He holds not them to be true Christians that can say Lord Lord or Christ
Christ, but they that do the will of God, and take hold of the merits of
Christ, by a working faith. It is not the talking of divine things, nor
boasting that we have the Gospel, that can defend us, nor the sincere
preaching of the word and attentive hearing of it, that can preserve us, It is
not the talking of, but the ^ractise of religion that avails us
but the true practice of it in the faith of Christ Jesus only, that avails
us. Happy is the nation that has these divine blessings, but much more happy
that brings forth the fruits of them. The people of Samaria and other
provinces of the ten tribes, did hear Elias and El^z^us, Oseas and Amias
preaching most divinely the will of the Lord, and other most excellent men were
diligent also among them, to show them the judgments of God. A car^lesse
people.
But they were so far from believing, that in steed of repentance of their
old, they committed new sins, and in steed of faithful obedience, they
became insolent and careless of the practice of piety, flattering themselves
to be able to undergo whatsoever might happen unto them: saying in their
hearts, Peace, peace, but there followed war afterward, first by the
Syrians, after by the Asserians, so that by little and little war and
captivity brought them to naught. Stately Jerusalem was often forwarned by
divine I^remy the Prophet; Ier^salem.
and Ioachim and Zedechias her kings were by him put in mind of the peoples
security, disobedience, and sin: but they seemed not to fear, though he
told them plainly the Chaldees should ouer^hrow the City. The Apostles and
Christ Jesus himself preached most instantly in Jerusalem to draw the people
to repentance: but as it prevailed not, so it preserved them not from the
Romans. The sacred word affords many notable examples for our learning that
we by other men's harms might become more reformed and watchful, The
punishments of former nations i^ for our learning and fo^ewarning.
more humble and zealous, more faithful and religious: and that we should
appease the wrath of God, with our unfeigned repentance, before it fall upon us
in the strength of his fury. Though perchance, some amongst us may think
(and so the fruits of their lives testify) that Gods displeasure is not so
incensed against us, but that the ordinary course of their lives, A deceiving
dream.
and their superficial serving of God, may retain the favor of God well
enough, and stay his anger: This is a dangerous fancy, a deceiving dream. For
a father threatens not his son when he does well: and God never infecteth the
air with pestilence, nor makes a land fruiteles by barrenness, nor
threatens a nation by the rumors of war, but there is great cause that
moves him: sin provoke him to pronounce punishment or judgment. And
therefore we cannot say, ^ush we are safe, when we yet sin without sorrow,
One plague follows another
and submit not our selves more seriously to serve the Lord. It is a common
thing to say among our selves, one cross follows another: so one plague or
punishment of God follows another: not long since we had the pestilence, now
famine: and war is reported to be like to follow. And are all these for
naught? Surely, unless we repent we shall likewise perish. But where and whence
should repentance begin? That of Niniue began at the King, Niniue.
who commanded his Nobles, Citizens, Artificers, men and women, children and
babes, yea the beasts of the field were constrained to show some token of the
repentance of this City. Good examples of superiors profitable in a kingdom.
It is a blessed thing to see superiors to begin a godly action, whether it be
by reformation of general evils, or restoration of any virtuous and godly
thing: for their examples to the inferior are as strong cords to draw them to
the like, be it good or bad. If they be seen humble before the Lord, reformed
in their affections, and forward in the true and lively service of God; they
may see how it will work in the lower sort, who without constraint will become
true conuertes unto the Lord, All men ought to humble themselves.
if not, the sword of the Magistrate is not for naught. And since a general
humiliation is required of the Lord at the hands of all men, let all men seek
the Lord in fear, and come before him in reverence: and let us all testify in
our hearts through faith, that we take these gentle admonitions, as sufficient
motives to stir us up to repentance, that God may repent him of the evils
intended against us: and that he will deliver us from these imminent perils
which (as a mighty tempest) roar a far off before they come upon us. There
be many arguments of the love of God toward us.
Many notable arguments of the love of God toward us might be made: If we
could argue the like love in us toward him, we then might say, we are truly
secure; and more safe under his protection, then in a defenced city. He has
given us the use of his most blessed and comfortable word, he has afforded us
long and wished peace, great plenty, and many other high blessings, especially
the most sacred mysteries of christian religion, the Sacraments of Baptism and
the Lords Supper: and yet all these things can profit us no more, The use of
the sacraments profit us no^^ing without repentance.
without love and obedience, faith, repentance and prayer, then the Sacraments
of old did Israel, who were all Baptized under the same cloud, and did eat
with us the same spiritual meat, and did drink the same spiritual drink:
yet because of their stiffneckednes and rebellions, they were slain in the
wilderness. Such is the force of disobedience, Disob^dience polluteth the most
sacred things.
that it polluteth even the most sacred things, and prophaneth the most holy,
making a separation between the God of heaven and the abusers of his
blessings. In so much as no assurance remains of safety of our selves at
home, or of our armies abroad, unless we be holy as our profession is holy,
unless we be truly zealous as our profession is truly pure. The tabernacle
of the Lords covenant, and the most holy relics were in Silo; S^lo*
but it defended not the city nor the kingdom of Israel from the profane
Philistines: no more can a holy profession without holy fruits, make any city
or kingdom truly secure. There was not a more holy Temple then that of
Jerusalem, but it was profaned by the iniquities of the people, that would not
be reformed by the loving admonitions of the Lord, who cried unto them by his
Prophet; Amend your ways and your counselles, Ier. 6.
and I will dwell with you in this place, trust not in lying words, saying,
here is the T^mple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord. But were these lying words, to say that the temple of Ie^usalem was the
Temple of the Lord? So the Prophet affirms, for indeed they had made that
temple of God a den of thieves. So they that say, The religion of Christ, the
religion of Christ: and yet rest fruitless Christians, God sees all men what
they be.
do but dissemble before the Lord who measures and fadometh every conscience,
and lays open the heart of every hypocrite. And therefore (as says the
Prophet) Rather judge right between a man and his neighbor, oppress not the
stranger, the fatherless and the widow, What God requires of his.
shead not innocent blood, cleave not to strange Gods to your own destruction:
then will J let you dwell in this land that I gave to your fathers. Religion
indeed begets infinite virtues, where there is a working and a lively
faith, to testify it to be, as it ought to be, perfect, and among all the
effects of a lively faith, none is more profitable then prayer: for that it
pierces the clouds, Prayer.
and has the grace to have access unto the high Majesty of God, through the
means and mediation of Christ: and it effects great things with God, so it
be truly sent, either in the behalf of the petitioner himself, or any
other, to Gods glory, which in all our doings ought especially to be
regarded. Intercession in the behalf of our brethren in the wars.
Deprecation against our enemi^s, and what is required therein.
And therefore is intercession an especial work, and a sacrifice acceptable
to God in the behalf of our brethren in the wars.

And deprecation against the good success of our adversaries, is also
necessary: wherein yet we ought to bring a charitable zeal, least we
exceeding the bounds of Christian affection, break into that which may offend
the high God: who, as he is most wise, loving, and full of compassion (and yet
just as he is wise,) so we ought to refer all vengeance and judgment in our
prayers to him, and to yield our wills to his will. For when we absolutely
require vengeance of God to destroy our adversaries, without reference of our
wills to his wisdom; we seem to seek the spoil of them after our own lusts
and malice: and in craving God to execute our malice, we go about to make him
partaker of that forbidden passion of our corrupt affections: We must not a^ke
vengeance against our enemies, but as God will.

Luke 9 ^4.


for in asking vengeance without condition, we know not what we ask; and so
is our request turned into sin. This made Christ himself to reprove his
Apostles James and John, when they would have prayed that fire might have
consumed a city in Samaria, as Eliah did to the Captains. God knows the
means how, and the time when to do all things: and they that will urge him
absolutely in things which they ought to ask conditionally, shall have their
prayers not only not granted, but recorded against themselves amongst their
grievous sins. But we have warrant to pray that our enemies prevail not
against us, and that we may triumph over them in him, if it be his will, which
must be annexed to all our prayers, tending to any external blessing: for he
sees it fit and profitable for his sometime, to taste of his anger (even by
the sword of a cruel people) that will not repent at other his gentle
admonitions and corrections. God sometime de^ieth the requests of his dearest
children.
And he denies the desires of his dear children, when without knowledge of
his will they ask what he knows unfit to grant them: although it may seem
hard in our conceits not to receive what we ask, because he says, Ask and
ye shall receive. Patience digesteth both the denial and delay of God in these
things, Patience.
and conuerteth all to our profit: yea, though he touch us often with his
displeased hand, his fury is not perpetual: he is more ready to repent him
of his punishments, then we of our sins. But if he see us disobedient, and
hardened in our wickedness, he then will turn his punishments which are in
mercy, into intolerable judgments in his fierce f^rie. And therefore he
wills us to incline our hearts unto knowledge, whereby we may be able to
shape this heavenly exercise of prayer aright, both for the benefits of peace,
and against the dangers of war: he will be sought unto, called upon, honored,
and entreated to stand on our side, and to fight for us. For as he lovingly
calls us unto him when we be grieved, in danger or heavy laden: so in the
time of war especially he will be made a partaker with us, by our
humiliation and prayer, God will be made a partaker with us, or else he will be
against us.

Esaias. 1.15. Deuteronomy. 21.8.9.


or against us by our disobedience. He cries out against the careless and
wicked, that regard not his love, nor fear his fury, or are luke warm, or
cold in zeal: I will not hear you (says he) though ye make many prayers,
because your hands are full of blood. He spends his labor in vain, and
turns his prayer into sin, that prays for that in the behalf of another,
which he is not worthy to receive himself. They that seek the Lord must
depart from iniquity: for he hears not sinners, such as refuse to be
reformed. One man's righteousness cannot defend the iniquity and transgression
of another: Ezekiel. 14.16.
But the land that sins against me (says the Lord) and goes on in
wickedness, I will stretch out my hand upon it, and destroy all their
provision of bread, and send dearth among them to destroy man and beast in the
land. And though these th^ee men Noah, Daniel and Job were among them, they
should deliver but their own souls. And to the end that the godly should not
be dismayed among the wicked, he confirms his love toward them by Esaias, who
says: Surely it shall go well with the just, Esaias. 3.10.11.
for they shall eat the fruits of their godly endeavors. But w^e unto the
ungodly, for they shall be rewarded after their works. The Lord is found only
of the faithful, and they only are safe under his feathers: But as for the
unfaithful, Hab. 2.^. Why the wicked think them m^st s^cure.
their lives are not sure within themselves. Yet none seem more secure in
their own conceits, then they who finding all things to go well with them,
and all things to prosper about them, make it an argument that God loves them,
and consequently that he will not punish them. But the argument holds on the
contrary: they that have all things at their hearts desire, are not the
blessedst men: and if they were beloved of God, he would punish them: for whom
he loves ^e corrects. Some think it enough to talk of God, Worldlings
deceived.
to hear his word, and to serve him at idle interims, when neither matters of
pleasure, nor causes of private profit move them not; otherwise God is last in
their thoughts. Nothing is less in their practice then prayer, nor more
seldom in their mouths then the praises of God. Faith and the true fruits of
^eligion concur not with the affections of the carnal man: and therefore he
little or never seeks God for himself, or other men. And yet they can smile
at the worlds fawnings, and rejoice as one that finds gold in a dream: The
rejoicing of worldlings vain.

Galat. 6.34.


but the Apostle tells them, that they have no true cause in themselves to
rejoice. For if any seems to himself that he is somewhat when he is nothing,
he deceives himself in his imagination. And therefore let every man prove his
own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself only, True rejoicing.
and not in another. His joy shall testify his peace of conscience in
simplicity and godly pureness which is within himself, and not in fleshly
wisdom and carnal things that are only without, and not properly his. The
practice of the godly.
Such as are truly godly, and rightly zealous, and simply pure, and
unfeignedly faithful, are never idle, but still offer themselves by divine
striuings (as it were) unto the God of hosts, as well in the behalf of their
brethren in the wars, as of themselves at home. And surely some that are in
the eyes of the world very poor, base, and ignominious such as for their
outward glory seem unworthy to have access unto some men worldly glorious,
The godly, though base in the world, are accepted with God.
have daily recourse unto the most high and most glorious king of kings, as well
in the behalf of al their brethren, as of themselves: they seek not their
own, but the good and prosperity of other men, as their own. And as the
soldier stands in the face of the enemy to encounter him with the sword: so
they before the throne of Gods high majesty for mercy and pardon, that his
fury and irefull indignation may be changed into clemency and love. These
are, for the most part, abiects in the world, but accepted with God: these
poor are the Lords rich men: these mean men are the Lords honorable, and
these ignominious are the Lords glorious children. Whether they be rich or
poor, high or low, noble or base, Who are dearest with God.
he that fears the Lord and serves him truly, is embraced of him. He
respects no person by his wealth, or title, or office, or dignity in the
world: but as every man lives, and obeys, and works, and performs his
calling; so he is approved or reproved of the Lord, who respects the godly
heart within, and not the glorious habit without; the riches of the soul, and
not the wealth of the world; the fruits of the spirit, and not the works of
the flesh. Such as walk honestly, and live godly, and pray faithfully, and
praise him heartily, are his, and they prevail with him: and they labor in
love to prevent the dangers at home, and forget not the miseries of their
brethren in the wars. Yet may the impiety of the rude multitude, The sins
of the multitude may bring danger upon the m^st godly. Iere. 5.1.
draw the most godly into danger: For although the Lord would have spared
Sodom for five, and Jerusalem for one righteous man, yet we must not think
that God will spare many wicked for some few good men's sakes. Jeremy and
Baruch, and other godly men were at Ierus^lem when Nabuchadnezzar destroyed the
city. God is so far from sparing many for few, as he punishes many for one,
as al Israel for Acha^: God punishes many for one. Josh. 7.1. Hesiodus.

The difference between the death of the wicked and the godly.

Why the godly are punished with the wicked.


according to the Poets saying; Saepe luunt ciues quicquid peccatur ab vno: Not
only sinners, but the tolerators of sin are punished. And though the godly
fall among the wicked, it is but a correction in mercy: but the destruction of
the wicked is in judgment. And because all should fear the Lord and reform
their ways, and walk warily, and not participate with the sins of the
careless multitude, he punishes the godly in the day of the slaughter of the
wicked. The execution of justice without partiality, favor or foolish pity,
is a nec^ssary mean to stay the wrath of God incensed through sin, and fond
affection, and rewards (peruerters of justice) a dangerous increase of
judgment against a whole people and nation. For where justice is neglected,
Neglect of justice dangerous.
there laws penalties are bought for money: and where Gods word is a cloak
for sin, there is religion (as a garment on all sides alike) held
indifferent, and that the safest and surest that is professed of the most.
Deuteronomy. 19.19. Where the Magistrate maintains the word, there will be seen the
practice of religion.

Deuteronomy 19.20.


But where the word of the Lord denounces Gods threatenings for sin, and the
Magistrates concur to punish offenders, there cannot but follow a more
sincere course in every man's proceedings, more lively fruits of a Christian
profession, and consequently a more absolute assurance of Gods blessings and
divine protection both of our selves at home, and of our forces abroad,
confirmed so much the more unto us, by how much we show our selves by love
unfeigned exercised in faithful prayer, that all things may be done both of
our selves at home, and of our Commanders and soldiers abroad, to Gods glory,
and to our consolation in Christ Jesus, in whom we live, and by whom we shall
prosper and prevail. To him be glory for ever.

FINIS.

