A CHRISTIAN FAMILIAR COMFORT AND INCOVRAGEMENT unto all English Subjects, not
to dismaie at the Spanish threats. Whereunto is added an admonition to all
English Papists, who openly or covertly covet a change. With requisite prayers
to almighty God for the preservation of our Queen and Country. By the most
unworthy I. N.

Printed at London for J. B. 1596.

TO THE HIGH AND MOST VIRTUOUS PRINCESS Elizabeth, by the especial providence
of the Almighty, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, chief protector of
the right Catholic Religion.
ALbeit I may be justly censured (most gracious Queen) to have committed a two
fold fault in this mine enterprise: first in undertaking it, being most
unworthy: next, in exhibiting it to your Highness, being most worthy: I
beseech your royal patience to hear mine excuse, and as it may sound with
your known clemency, I may receive pardon for my boldness. To commit the
first, I had a two fold encouragement, the occasion of the time, and a
continual secret instinct urging me to do mine endeavor in this kind, not
intending thereby to prevent any better able: To adventure the second, I was
moved by discretion, namely, to commend the consideration of it (silly as it
is) unto your high Majesty, above all others: and that for two causes, the
one, in regard none has better power to protect it, being in any measure
worthy: next, none has like authority to pardon it, being faulty. And in
these regards especially, my most gracious Sovereign, duty and love being
witnesses of mine inward zeal, I humbly presume to leave this my poor
offering at the feet of your most prudent censure.

Your Majesty's loyal poor Subject, JOHN NORDEN.

To my Christian countrymen, faith in God, love to her Majesty, constancy in
Religion, watchfulness and magnanimity, be for ever more and more increased
and continued.
SAint Jerome being in Bethleem, at the time when the Turks invaded and most
cruelly wasted Asia the less, Arabia, Egypt, and part of Syria, declared that
the sins of the Christians there, were the cause of all that misery, and of
the fear which possessed their hearts, and gave courage and victory to the
enemy. And that there was no assurance of the mittigation of that fierce fury
of the one, or restitution of comfort to the other, before there were in the
Christians humiliation, and a true returning unto virtue and righteousness.
Which ancient counsel of that famous father may be renewed now amongst us,
when the professed enemy of the true Catholic religion has stirred up an
apparent indignation in the pretended King Catholic, against England, and
many other parts where the Gospel is sincerely preached, and that surely for
the sins of Christians, in the judgment of God, who looking upon the green
leaued fig tree of our profession, desiring to taste of the fruit which it
should bear, finds it not answerable to his expectation. And therefore,
unless we will return from our hypocrisy, and bring forth with our leaves
good fruit, it is to be doubted, that our God powerful and just, will permit
this professed adversary to rouse us out of our secure thoughts, and either
win us to more sincerity, or give us into the hands of our adversary. And
to the end we may all find out our selves to be faulty, that seem now to be
shrouded with security, it is fit that we should examine every one himself,
and amend what the word of the living God wills to be amended in every
particular person: so, howsoever the causes of this Spanish Hoobub may appear
to be in the man of sin, in malice, and in his chief agent the pretended
king Catholic, in ambition, we shall prevent the^ both of their vain purposes,
being strongly shrouded with hope of the performance of the promises of our
God, who will upon our reconciliation become again on our side, howsoever yet
our sins may deserve to have the shield of his protection taken from us, and to
draw the enemy to invade us. And therefore it is now required, and that with
speed, that we should deny our selves, and acknowledge him, forsake our selves,
and cleave unto him, disclaim the confidence of our own strength, and depend
wholly upon his vn^anquishable power, who shall be to us all in all, and who
shall strengthen us, and weaken them: fight for us, and against them: And to
this end have I (though most unworthy) sent unto you this simple Echo, to
that subtle Hoobub, not that it should sound to mine own vainglorie, but to
encourage us all ^o shape a new course in our lives, and such providence in our
^roceedings, that we all may answer our duties to God, loialty to Queen
Elizabeth, and love to our country. And so may every man rest truly resolute
in a good conscience, to withstand the practices of this roaring beast of Rome,
and all the power of his professed adherents, the enemies of God and us, with
an assured hope never to be overcome.

Yours in Christian good will, I. N.

A CHRISTIAN COMfort and encouragement unto all English subjects, not to dismay
at the Antichristian threats.
Cap. 1.
We must examine the special causes, why God has stirred up the Nation of
the Spaniards to pursue England.
THough in the judgment of God, there be many causes that may move him to
take displesure against us the people of England: yet before I proceed to
examine them as behooves, to the end they may be reformed: I will briefly
(as necessary it is) show the chief causes that merely move the Spaniardes
to this loud hoobub, without regard of the occasions, why God would make them
the executioners of his wrath against us, The Spaniardes ^egard not the ^ause
why God ^oueth them ^o invade us.
and the instruments to put us in mind of the breach of our league with him,
who has so long preserved us in peace, and given us freely the use of his
Gospel: the neglect whereof, and our contrary fruits, no doubt, is the
principal cause that God has called this nation from far, They have a ^wo
fold blind ^eale in their ^esire
to invade us, who yet of themselves are drawn thereunto, as ravished by two
blind devotions: the first and principal is, in that he is the Popes
vizeroy, lieutenant, and chief martial man, and has the title general of
the Catholic King. The king of ^paine ye Popes ^hampion
In regard whereof he is to stand as the Popes champion, to answer any
challenge that his holiness shall undertake, for defense and preservation of
his usurped title and Empire. And in that respect this mighty Goliath, this
blasphemous Rabsakeh, pretends a sufficient warrant from Senacherib of Rome,
to pursue Hezechia of England with this hoobub, that our God shall not deliver
us out of his hands, but that he only as the chieftaine Catholic of that man
of sin, has the sole power from him to conquer kingdoms, and therefore
soundes up this hoo and cry, Am I now come up without the Lord to England, to
destroy it? As if he should say, My Lord and master, Christ's vicar, has
commanded me, and therefore how dare English Hezechiah, or any other, that
trusts not in the power of my masters holiness, despise me, his grand
chiefetaine, or the least Captain of his under me? who are to pursue
heretics that have robbed him of his honor and glory, ^ngland has ^obbed
ye Pope ^f his credit
of his power and authority, holiness, and credit, whereby he is become of
less estimation among the kingdoms of the world. The supposed slanders which
England has wrongfully laid upon him, the dishonor and demerites which his
locusts have condignly received in England of latter times, for their treasons,
conspiracies, and murderous practices, are pretended to be so high a blemish
unto that painted beast, that by no means the quarrel is to be qualified but
by open force, and forcible invasion, that can take no better success by
deuillish devises. It is not unknown to all, how many secret practisers, even
of our own unnatural countrymen and others, he has sent to subvert the
quiet of our state, pretending openly the winning of men to the church of Rome,
wherein, and not else where (as they say) is salvation: but covertly have
stirred up rebellious thoughts and deeds in many, which otherwise might have
showed themselves loyal subjects. And this general practice has appeared to
be a device to steal away the hearts of the subjects from their due obedience
to our most gracious Queen: whereby we might grow into civil rebellions within
our selves, and so give him the more ease to make spoil of all. And since these
secret workers have not, nor can take no effect in their treasons, but
condign reward, deserved justice, whereby many have been rid most happily out
of our common weal: and their dispatch (no doubt) to us most beneficial: and
howsoever they be enchanted by the vain conceit of canonization and reward at
Gods hands, the whores deceiving baytes, What reckning the Pope makes of the
death of our Seminaries.
their confusion is no more regarded of his holiness, than the fall of a drop
from his nose: he loves not the name of an English man, but flattereth them,
only to use them to work secret mischiefs, and that they may come to the
more speedy confusion, And since I say, by their secret means he cannot get
again and redeem the decaies, that the truth of the Gospel here received;
has brought upon his kingdom of darkness: he has sent out this hellish
hoobub, with his blasphemous coniurations, commanding herein above all the
rest of his adherents, The things whereof we ^aue robbed the Pope.
this capital King Catholic to take knowledge first, of his iniururies
sustained by the English Nation, who have dispoyled him of all his Abbeys,
Priories, Monasteries and other relics, of his forged devotions: and with
all, of our detayning of the annual revenues, and pensions which he usurped
from us, great sums of money to maintain his high abominations: and which
is more, that we have bewrayed his darkness, which he would have the whole
world to embrace as the true light: which things have so deeply discovered
him, that he will be seen to pursue us as robbers, with this peevish hoobub,
the destruction of England. This no doubt is the first cause that inkindleth a
blind devotion in the king of Spain, dignified with the high title of King
Catholic, to pursue the matter, vi and armis, to discharge himself of the
trust reposed in him. The other cause invested meerelie in him self, without
having any eye at all on any other end, The second ^ause moving ^he king of
^paine.
is the desire and thirstinesse, wherewith he has been long tossed to subject
this land to his dominions: for since his atchyuing the gold of India, his
thoughts have never been quieted, but still seek how to increase his power,
and to become sole Monarch of Europe. And to this his ambitious desire, the
holy father brings more stubble to maintain the fire, to serve his own
turn, the better to support his black kingdom, well shaken by the thunder of
the Gospel, which he by the Spanish Inquisition, the court of hellish furies,
endeuoreth (but in vain) to extinguish. The Spaniard longs for England.
And forasmuch as England has been the best benefactor (in ignorance) to the
Sea of Rome: and of whose sweetness this Catholic king has some thing tasted,
and finding it plausible for his stomach to digest, he lo^geth for it, as the
purple whore with child of ambition, longs for her own glory: which
ambitious thirste can hardly be quenched, as appears, till the throats of
more of his invincible troops be stopped, with the waves of our narrow Seas.
The remembrance of whose former success in the same, may argue in us, if we
retire to our helping God, an assurance of the like issue of his blind
ambition now. Which makes him swell in regard he seems to be master of land
and sea, in both which he is deceived, and yet pricketh him forward to
equalize his territories with the great and large scope of the pristine Roman
Empire, which extended it self over three parts of the world, and yet could
not satisfy the ambition of Casar and Pompey, whilst the one could abide no
equal, the other no superior. The Pope for his part will be king of kings, and
will accept neither superior not equal, in causes either divine or humane:
the Spaniard privileged by his title of king Catholic, coueteth superiority
over all the rest, not only of the Popes vassal kings, but over others, and
therefore he wrestleth hard for Flanders and other provinces of Germany, How
the Span^ard fis^eth for kingdoms
he practices subtly for France, suborneth impiously Ireland, and
audaciouslye threatens England. But (no doubt) as the fountain of ambition
yields no better licour than thus to vsurp other men's territories and
kingdoms, so it will afford no better end than it did to the Lacedaemonians and
Athenians, The end of ^mbition
the one being master of the sea, the other of the land, whose glory as it
took beginning by ambition, so by the same they were brought both to confusion
in the end: and therefore need we the less to fear this ambitious hoobub,
wherein we seem to be pursued: first for that which belongs to God
himself, namely, all glory, power, virtue, verity, sanctity, and holiness,
which this beast of Rome usurps to himself, and would enforce us to yield
it unto him from our loving God, whose cause we shall defend, and not our
own, in resisting his chieftaine this Catholic king: secondly, seeing it
pursues us for our own kingdom, country, lands, liberty, wives, children,
and lives, things peculiar (under God) to our Queen, and under her unto our
selves, he has no color to challenge any property, title, interest or hope
in them, and therefore in defending them we shall preserve our selves, and that
which is merely our own. And yet thereunto will not that beast entitle him?
Thus we see the causes that move this loud hoobub against us in the mere
desire of the Spaniardes.

But forasmuch as we are in duty and christian policy to look back into our
selves, and to take surueigh of the occasions which may be argued to be in
our selves, The occasion is (...) our selves which has stir^ed up this hoo^ub
why God in justice should move this Antichristian host against us, having the
title of Christians, and to examine whether we deserve to taste of the plague
which is threatened by this fearful hoobub, or whether we may securely
follow that which we have hitherto practiced without reformation of our
lives: It is found by experience, that the body may be most sick when it
feels no grief at all, and a man that is most secure, may be suddenly
stricken, as appeared by Herod in his greatest pride: a city most careless and
wicked may be confounded, as Sodom, Gomorrha, Seboim, and the rest, Causes of
danger are not s^perficially to be glanced at
when they least suspected peril, were destroyed with fire from heaven: so may
secure kingdoms, as was the secure world by the flood: and therefore much more
may dangers be feared, when there are apparaunt causes, which yet cannot upon
a sudden view so plainelye appear, as when they are duelye considered. Our
superficyall thoughts of the causes of this rumor of wars, may be compared
to the judgment of a Physician, The diseases of a common wealth must be cured
in time.
who looks neither upon the party grieved, nor upon his state, and what
counsel then can he give to the patient? And therefore says the wise man, A
disease known is in manner cured; and as it fares with the diseases of the
body, which not being prevented, may suddaynly kill the person: so a common
wealth diseased, by unpunished vices, and overmuch liberty, stands in danger
of sudaine subversion. These causes therefore ought to be both known and
cured: Foreseen mischiefs hurt not so much as such as come unlooked for; and
therefore wisdom premeditateth by discretion, before what may happen
afterward. But security, Al things have a change.
which deeming all parts of the body well, may be suddenly touched with a
fever, which grows by reason of the superfluous and gross humors that have
grown by fullness of the best daynties. So it falls out with common
wealths, which foster security, being full of Gods blessings: whereby they
become sick of superfluous abundance, and loose the true taste of the best
things, and so fall suddenly. Every thing under the Sun has a change, a time
to grow, and a time to wither, a time to bud, and a time to be ripe* and when a
common wealth is risen to the top of all glory, then it is good that all men,
but the magistrates especially, look into the superfluityes and diseases
thereof, and having duly considered all things, to seek how to root out
the superfluous, and to foster and cherish the best humors: Every man must
look into him self.
not only in a generality, but every private man in himself, least every
thing having his course freely in the commonwealth, the violence of type
mischiefs breed a loathing thereof, as it were, in God, who cannot abide such
negligence in any commonwealth, especially of Christians, no more than he
could abide Adam and Eve in paradise after they had sinned: The fire of Adams
disobedience must be quenched in us.
and surely the fire of the ancient disobedience of them lies yet covertly
covered with the ashes of drousie security, not only in every private man,
but in every calling: so that it seems our commonwealth, howsoever it seem
to go in government and true religion before other nations, requires a kind
of necessity, that this fire be quenched before it flame forth, to the
consumption of our whole nation. If therefore we look to continue safe
(howsoever slender account we seem to make of these Spanish vauntes) we must
look both every man into himself, and the magistrates into the whole state:
so (no doubt) if they be not partyall in their searches, they shall find in
every man, in his particular examination of his own deserts, as also the
magistrates in their general view of the whole, cause enough, whereby it
cannot be denied but God may without injury unto any one, not only fraie us
with this hoobub, but suffer us to taste of the sword of this ambitious and
blasphemous nation.

To begin the examination, although I be the unworthiest to call men
thereunto, yet in regard I am the worst, I cannot but acknowledge, and in deed
I find that in my self, whereof would God all others were free, namely,
sufficient cause why I wretch should be rouzed up and pursued by this
pernicious generation, and if I should flatter my self, to deserve to be freed
from their tyranies, if I look unto my disobedience to God I should deceive my
self: and yet mine imperfections perchance no farther seen in the world, than
of such as seem to stand in this dangerous time, as men worthy for their
honest, zealous, and religious behauior, in their own conceits, to be
justified by the mouths of all their neighbors. And therefore surely it will
hardly appear that we have deserved to be punished, if we look no further
tha^ into other men, and so let our selves pass like the escape goats: for if
every one covet to find the cause in others, and pry not into himself, there
will be never a free man, yet all free, for every man will condemn all but
himself, and yet though none will condemn himself, he shall be condemned
of all. And therefore let every man acknowledge himself worthy to be
punished, so all men shall be condemned by their own mouths, and seek no
further witness. And this (no doubt) is the way to find the cause why God
has called this nation against us, Every man must look unto him self, and
not unto others
as Jonah was found guilty by casting of lots. For doubtless if we seem to
seek the cause of this danger without our selves, we do wrong to the justice
of God, who is not as envious man, that will strike one for an other, but the
soul that sins shall die. Lo then it is sin that draws on this hoobub
to pursue us, Sin the cause of this hoobub
even to our subversion, if we repent not of our sundry evils. We are
called Christians, and our adversaries Antichristians, but if we look into
the fruits of both, a man may be in doubt who is lykest Christ, by the
outward fruits. And surely, for that we have the fire with us, and yet show
no heat: for that we are true Gospellers in knowledge, if we show our
selves hypocrites in practice, Our fruits must approve us.
it must needs be granted, that our profession will not excuse us: then must
our fruits approve us, or reprove us. It is as true as the Gospel is true,
that we have the Gospel, and as true it is, that there is no true faith
without it, and no salvation without faith in Christ, which faith if it be not
lively and bring forth not only leaves, but fruit, it is not only like the
fig tree that Christ cursed, but a tree that shall be hewn down and cast
into the fire: so shall we stand in greater danger in our account, having
received much, than the adversary that has received less. And therefore it
had been better that England had never received the Gospel, nor the title of
Christians, rather than not be seen practisers of Christian religion, whose
effects are not as the religion which is in the adverse, that are doubtless
Antichristians, for that the one is in spirit and truth, whose object is
Christ only, the other outward, carnal, and altogether false, making more
Mediators than he: the one is cherished in the heart, The difference between
christian and Antichristian religion
by a lively working of the inward virtues, the other in the tongue by
outward behavior only: the one in all things is divine and heavenly,
inspired into the soul by grace, the other is profane and earthly, laid as
heavy burdens upon the consciences of men by force. Now then since we are in
ours, as in a large field of liberty, having freedom to perform all things
without scruple, doubt, or danger, only in Christ, how far should we excel
in sincere practice, those that flatter themselves with the outward action of
superstitious zeal, wherein they are restrained to wade any further in
knowledge, than may keep them in obedience, not unto God whom they ought to
know first, and then to honor him in spirit as he is spirit: but unto the
pretended church Catholic, whose honoring God, who is a spirit, is by the
traditions of men that are merely carnal. God forbid therefore that we, In
Gods mercy we inioye the gospel of Christ
who assuredlye in the frank mercy of Almighty God inioye this admirable
treasure, the Gospel, whence proceeds the true religion propounded by Christ
Jesus himself, and practiced by doctrine and example of the Apostles, should
so lagger in our lives, that Pharisees and meritours should go so far
before us, that we should be censured not only of GOD himself, who sees
the hearts, but of men, who see only our works, to deserve punishment in
his judgment, by our unholy lives, at their hands, whom we know most
assuredly are enemies unto the cross of Christ Jesus, who pretend in
themselves so much the more holiness of life, by how much the more they see
us come short of them in zeal. And the greatest and assuredst hope which they
have of their conquest is grounded upon their own deseruinges, The Spaniardes
build the hope of conquest upon their own deseruings
whereby they seem to challenge a special assistance of God, and upon our
fruitless profession, whereby they seem to conjure the high power to conform
it self to their wills, and thereupon they build strong hope to be revenged
upon us. And surely, if we reform us not, and conform our lives more
aunswerable unto our profession, it is much to be feared, that, as for sin
and disobedience he suffered his own peculiar people to be destroyed, the
city which he chose unto himself to be sacked, and the house wherein he
seemed himself to dwell, to be burned by the barbarous nations, he will
deliver us up to the will of this uncircumcised people, whose hearts are
highly inflamed against us, and whose hands tingle to be in our blood. The
Lord of hoasts be on our side, whom they blasphemed in their last frustrate
expedition, affirming that he was become a Lutheran, in regard of his helping
us and confounding them. But howsoever they blasphemed then, and howsoever they
consult against God himself and against his chosen now, there is no doubt but
it is to some wonderful end, in the secret wisdom of God: The Spaniardes
blaspheming God
and for our parts, let us forecast the worst against our selves, and say,
that for our sins for our negligence, and for our disobedience, God may
justly deliver us into their hands, so shall God turn his purpose, which
although it were to consume us, as it was toward Niniue, he will spare us,
if we repent like Niniue, and let us encourage our selves in the renewing of
our affections, so shall that God draw them on even unto the red sea of
their own confusion, as he did Pharaoh and his host, that his glory may
appear, both in the force of his Gospel, which we profess, and whereby we
reform us unto his will, by casting away sin, and apprehending true
righteousness, as also by confounding them that seek to persecute him in us.

Now it is expedient that there be some examination of the especial evils, An
examination of the special evils, which in ye judgment of God draw on the
Spaniard.
which seem, above the rest, to call this nation in the justice of God against
us, for it is plain that sin is the cause in general, which both preuenteth
well doing, and arraigneth us before the tribunal seat of God, in regard of
it self. But to make rehearsal of all the evils which are grown strong
amongst us, were a tedious labor, and beyond my purpose, and therefore I will
briefly call to our consideration some particular sins, that seem to be as
nurseries to all the rest, We make slender reckning o^ gross sins
and such as glide thorough our thoughts, as oil thorough our throats,
without seeling, and yet more like Elephants than gnats. Who sees not, and yet
who considers the most capital sin of blaspheming GOD? Where is there any
law to punish swearers, cursers, abusers of the person, the majesty,
Blasphemy no^ punished
the sanctity, and the sacred word and name of God? How freely do the lewd
Atheistes in this land, such as by their lives argue there is no God, behave
themselves in most vnreuerent taking into their uncircumcised lips the name
of God? How do they rent him, as much as in them lies, in pieces? his heart,
feet, nails, soul, body, flesh, and every part and member of him is
abused and dishonored, taking therein delight, as in a feast, And this sin
is not without some color of a virtue. Here is great magnanimity pretended
to be seen in these lusty fellows, nay, ungodly wretches and cowardlye, I
would it were free from great persons. And this is as far from being punished
amongst us, that he is counted too foolish and too precise, that will argue the
same to be a fault. God reform it, for the fault is greater than that which
we account fellonie, which robs but man of his goods, and is hanged: and
this robs God of his glory, and our selves of all show of the fear and
reverence of God, and yet is unpunished. May not the like be said of
unpunished drunkenness, which is a most pernicious vice, Drunkenness not
punished.
and the more intolerable, because it has no show of virtue, as other vices
have, and yet of late it has gotten a coat, but a beastly coat, yet the best
it has, and that forsooth, in drinking carouse, it must be to the health of
some great man, and sometime great men will use the name of greater persons in
this swinish sin, under color of wishing health to them, as if health could
be maintained by so gross a sin. It is intolerable, yet tolerated to the
high dishonor of God, who of Christians requires Christian sobriety. Does
not this help to pull on the Spaniardes? Yes surely. And is this all that is
amiss? Nay let pride come into the rank of unpunished vices. Pride unpunished
But by your leave this is a neat vice, it is a comely vice, it is a courtly
vice, and it is a vice that above all the rest may challenge place with virtue,
if vice may be so bold as now a days it is, and it is so plausible, that
they that should seek to kill it by spiritual disswasion, have taken it by
the hand also, and walk as courtly as the best: the very clown will snatch
at it too, and every man exceeds so far, as if it were one of the
cardinal virtues. And although many laws seem to tend to stop it, such is
the force of it in all, that al drink of one cup, and like birds of a
feather, hold all together: they strain courtesy who shall begin to reform
it, and yet contend who shall exceed in it. I have no more to say, but to
assure you that this is one of the ankers that holds fast the ship of our
peril to the shores of our seas. And are these all? Alas no. Let not
covetousness be forgotten, which is a thirsty sin, the sin of the wiser
fellows, a husbandly sin, and therefore is not to be punished in any case,
being condemned of none but of the beggarly minded, as affirms the usurer,
Covetousness unpunishable
the mannor-monger, the farm buier, the hoorder of gold and silver. But alas,
what fools are these, either they never read it, or never hear it, or else
they forget it, that Christ cries Woe unto the rich, for that they have their
consolation here. But if this did turn but to their own evils, it were the
more tolerable. It reaches to the ruin of the poorer sort, and it is seen
so apparently, and held so dearly amongst us in these days, that it is a fault
to be frugall, and therefore to spend all or spare all, are most embraced: the
one consumes what another has gotten, the other hoordeth up what by force and
fraud he can get, and this is mere prodigality in the one, and idolatry in
the other: the one spends lewdly, and is praised for a gentlemanlike mind, and
the other keeps wretchedly, and is counted to be a good husband: two horrible
evils, but maiden evils, for neither of them was ever punished by any law,
yet merely against Gods law, and arguments that they are nothing seasoned
with the continuance and long use of religion, which teaches love: where the
rich is to support, relieve, comfort, and stead the poor that want his aid.
And so far are they from these virtues, that they not only not comfort them,
but seek how to unclothe them, how to vncouch them, and how to unfurnish
them of lands, living, and all other necessaries. And it is not lightly to be
passed over, which by means of these cormorants has even now taken hold (as
in the judgment of God) upon this land: wherein (no doubt) and as is held
even of such cutthroates themselves, there is sufficient plenty of corn,
butter, cheese, and all other necessaries, and yet such is the decay of love as
it will not be brought forth but upon prices at their own wills, as though
they only were Lords of Gods blessings, and that the poor have no share in
them but to stand at their cold devotion. Coldness of love appears by ye
present dearth where plenty is.
And thus to rest unreformed, and the cry of the poor not heard, is a maine
cable to pull the enemy upon us.

It is a heavy judgment of God, when there shall be a common dearth in a
common plenty, as now there is, and who so affirms the contrary is no good
member of the common wealth, but sauoreth altogether of private gain, who
grind the faces of the poor with want of that wherewith they abound. But
surely, as for disobedience to God, there may be a fear where no fear is, so
by our fruitles profession, whose effects are love, there may be dearth where
plenty is. And surely it were good it were considered why such a judgment
should light upon us in the time of the Gospel, and that the decay of love
should appear so far, as to shut up, not only Christianity, but all
humanity among me^. Why may not a man glance at a great cause of this
judgment, which as (no doubt) it is one and the same with that which calls
our enemies, even our sins? Yet there is a peculiar cause which stinketh in
the nostrils of God, namely, the consuming of corn, the mere earthly blessing
of God to preserve man, Spending of corn to make starch, a cause of dearths in
plenty in Gods Judgments.
abut the strengthening of pride, in making of starch. A toeration intolerable.
Woe unto him that brought the devise first into our land. For it cries out
mainly to God, who will not abide that about our necks, in pride, that should
be consumed which should feed our bodies in penury. But it is made (they
say) with the coursest part of the wheat. Alas, let not Magistrates be
deceived, it is the most purest of the purest corn. Oh that it were reformed:
for it is a woeful evil, drawing with it both famine and war: and yet this
among many other sins, trippeth on like a vice that makes not only the
vicious, but the virtuous to taste of her vanity. Infinite evils there
accompany these former unpunished sins, and they are assuredly the maine
wind that fills as it were the sails of the Spaniards to invade us, whom
the Lord has stirred up either in mercy to reform us, or in judgment to
punish us. And surely as every one has his hand in these evils, and none can
excuse himself from bringing, and heaping one sin upon another, bewraying
thereby the breach of al our duties to God in general, in not performing what
we profess; let us not persuade our selves of safety, unless we can frame us
to repentance, and reformation. And as no doubt in this the negligent Minister
has much to answer, by whose careless discharge of his duty, The negligent
minister has much to answer.
and function, many of these evils have crept in and taken deep root: So they
must think that now is the time wherein they must redeem what they have long
omitted, and so by their new diligence endeavor to root out sin, and plant
faith, that there may appear fruits of every man's profession; that the cause
of this fearful hoobub being taken away, we may still possess our liberty;
and that our religion be not in show only, but in the simplicity of our
hearts: so shall it be unto us as the blood of the paschall Lamb, stricken upon
the shores of our seas, that the destroying Angel may pass by us, and cast
our enemies into the devouring gulf. Yet let me speak a little more without
suspicion of being too officious, or too forward. Surely the delays of poor
men's causes in our courts of England, Delays of suits.
and the procrastinations of dispatch of causes before Magistrates, has a
share in this matter, and the free oppressions of the poor by the rich,
without remedy: do cry among the rest to God for justice, and God again
calls the Spaniards to execute the same. Would God we could show our selves
no less tractable then children, who can leave their wantonness, if they see
but the rod. And if we could leave our vices, and embrace religion, God would
not proceed further to strike us, but like a loving father would cast this his
rod into the fire.

CAP. 2.
What is to be done to escape the judgments of God, intended by this
Antichristian hoobub.
FOrasmuch then, as no man can deny, but that the cause of this dangerous
hoobub of the Spanyard is our sin, which foldeth up our fear as it were in a
four fold mantle, answerable to the four fold causes thereof: whereof two
are in the adversary merely, and two in our selves, as before is proved. It is
time for us, in regard of these dangers, to call our selves home again, who
have long strayed in the course of our Christian profession: and for that we
are now found out by the judgment of him that sees us, We must reform
quickly or be punished severely.
being able no longer to dissemble our sins, but either to reform them
speedily, or to be punished for them severely. Who seems to be called into
the action against us? not meek Moses, but blasphemous Senacherib, whose
Captains are more furious then Orestes, more hasty then Ajax, more tyrannous
then Phalaris, more beastly then Sardanapalus. But seeing that religion is the
gift of God, and the work of the holy spirit, which cannot be brought in, or
driven out, by the violence of these men; how is it to be feared that these
wicked ones, out of whose nostrils proceed the furious flames of madness, and
out of whose mouths issue fountains of blasphemies against our alsufficient
God, Religion can neither be brought in or driven out by man.
shall prevail against this pure religion which we embrace? Surely there is
nothing more true, then that the force of man can neither bring it in, or
banish it out: for then had the tyrannous Emperors long since, utterly
overthrown it. But the sin that we commit, and the neglect of our calling,
has force and power to lose it quickly, which has been many years in
obtaining. And though the Gospel be a more invincible protector then an
invincible enemy, yet may we by abusing it, be punished severely, and yet the
Gospel continue safe. And therefore there must be a speedy mean used, that
sin may be reformed, and godliness embraced, that our profession be not in
show, but in deed, and in righteousness. But alas will some say, what a world
of business will this be? what an impossible thing is it to make such a sudden
change now, What natural reason flesh and blood will argue in this dangerous
time.
when the enemy is at the gate? we must now look into our Armories for
Munition, into our stables for horses, into our provinces for men, and into our
treasuries for money, to withstand the force of the adversary. We have no
leisure to look into our thoughts, and actions for sin, or to measure our
lives by religion, having matters of war in hand. We must have more care of
Captains then desire of Preachers; we must stand to the sword more then to the
word; we must fly to the field to fight, and not to the Church to pray. These
things indeed are to be regarded: but is it not to be feared that this is the
consultation of many in these days, that are awake? And truly the most I
fear are yet slumbring, who see no occasion to step out of their secure
thoughts, out of their counting houses, out of their worldly studies, The
conceyts of the worldly.
who think this as merry a time as ever came. While there is peace they dream
not of war: while they be full, they fear no famine. Therefore it behooves
that there should be a very diligent care had, how the people in general seem
to stand affected, both to war and peace. And although few have tasted the
one, and all have had the fruits of the other: let none be left secure, and
let the least care be of worldly things, Our duties to God carry with it a
great train of virtues.
which no doubt will be well supplied, if there be due respect had of our
duties to God. For that carries with it such atraine of virtues, as there
seems nothing wanting to supply any place in war and peace. And without
that efficient duty, what avails all the provision beside? which will stand
as a man without legs, and steed us in fight, as a man without hands. And
where it may seem an hard thing for us, being so great a multitude to reform
us in so short a time before the ariuall of the Spaniard, which is said to be
at this next spring: Let us call to mind that Nineueh, a bloody city full of
lies, and robberies, Nahum. 3. 1. for which the Lord threatened to make it
desolate, and wast like a wilderness, Zeph. 2. 13. which Jonah published in the
streets, saying, The repeatance Nineueh
Yet forty days and Nineueh shall be destroyed. Jonah. 3. 4. Yet such was their
obedience to the Lords message, that they generally repented and obtained Gods
mercy, before the forty days came, and were spared. And shall we think that
God was more merciful then, then he is now? nay his mercy seems greater to
us, for that Nineueh saw no danger, but were all secure. But he shows us
before hand that he has stirred up a nation, a puissant people against us,
who seem to threaten, The practice of Nineueh an example for us to follow.
Yet this summer and we will destroy England: and therefore what is to be done?
The king of Nineueh proclaimed a fast, let the Queen of England proclaim a
fast, and what more? he caused his people to cry mightily unto God, and
commanded every man to turn from his evil way, and from the wickedness that
was in him. Let Queen Elizabeth command all men to cry unto God, and command
them, yea compel them to turn every man from his evil way, and from the
wickedness that is in him. Let her constrain her subjects to bring forth the
fruits of love one toward another; and let us all submit our selves unto her
proclamations therein: to show our selves not only good subjects unto her, but
good Christians unto God. And what then? may we say with the Nineuites, It may
be God will have mercy on us: What will follow us, in our following the
reformation of Nineveh.
nay we may assure our selves that God will spare us, God will defend us, God
will continue us, and God will confound our enemies. And does this require so
long a season? no: for not only in what year, in what month, in what week,
in what day, in what hour we rep^^t God will pardon us, but in what minute of
time w^ ^urne unto him, he will receive us. Oh then let us detra^^ ^o time, but
with speed return home again into our own consciences: How we must reform
us.
let us examine every one his own ways, his disobedience to God, his greedy
following his own will, his rash receiving the pleasures which flesh and
blood, the world and sin do offer. And his obstinate refusal, not only to
hear, much less to practice the words of the Lord, which he has sent unto us
as it were from far, to the uttermost bounds of the earth, as if his peculiar
care, Gods peculiar love to England.
love, and mercy were such to England, as that he would teach us only and
leave so many other nations ignorant. Oh, who can measure the depth, the
height, length, and breadth of his wisdom, his mercy, his judgments, and
his providence: if we look into the huge circuit of the earth, and measure in
our thoughts, the quantity thereof, distinguishing this little angle from the
maine globe of the earth, we shall see that it is not the hundredth part of the
whole: and yet he has vouchsaued himself to be known in this little part,
more then in all the world beside: England not the 200. part of the earth.
And therefore expects of us to be served in sincerity and truth, more then
of all the rest. What fruits expects he of the Turks, who are his professed
enemies? who yet possess the greatest part even from Transiluania, to Persia,
East and West, and from the southmost parts of unhappy Arabia, (as it may be
called) to the sea Euxinus Northward, wherein are those holy places where God
was first honored, The Turks possess the places where Christ was borne first
preached.
now most blasphemed, as Palestine which was the holy land the land of Canaan:
where were sometime his peculiar people the Jews, whom he for their
disobedience, has cast out, not only of this blessed land, but into a
reprobate sense: and has made them runnagates upon the face of the earth: not
allowing them any peculiar country or city to dwell in. The Turk also
possesses those seven Churches of Asia, mentioned in the Revelation: and in
their places, GOD has most graciously chosen England far from thence, among
few others in these northern and northeast parts, many leagues from the
place where he was first honored: which indeed might strike in us the more
admiration of his providence, and the more duty and reverence in our callings
to his majesty. For that he has cut off the natural to engraffe us the
unnatural branches into his love. It were needless to show how he suffers
the most part, yea almost all the world to continue blind, and yet gives us
light, for there is no light without the truth, and no truth without the
spirit, and the fruits which proceed from that spirit again, is the true
light. And therefore no common wealth in general, can so far be charged as
England, who only has had the free use thereof many years. England is more to
be charged for breach of our league then any other nation.
If we should be found yet in darkness, which is argued by the fruits of
sin, we could not have so much hope of safety, as they that never had the
light. Alas shall we be then more blind then the Papists, who are zealous in
carnal ceremonies? Shall we suffer the Turk in zeal of his Mahomet, to go
beyond us in zeal of our Christ? and shall the Jew bring forth the fruits of
the law, more precisely then we do the fruits of the Gospel? Surely if it be
so, we must think that God will deal no more favorably with us, then he did
with them: whom he cast out for not receiving his son, borne among them,
preached, and preaching unto them, whom they slew bodily, How we kill Christ
again.
as we do spiritually, if we speak of him truly, and follow him falsely.
What then is required of us now in this dreadful hoobub? England shall be
destroyed? for that no doubt seedeth the Spanyard that he may possess it. The
way for us, is to retire our selves to the Gospel, and what we are thereby
taught diligently to follow, both to the confirming of them that are already
sealed, with the knowledge thereof, as indeed many are in England: and to
turn again the most obdurate, and wilful sinners from their obstinate
rebellions, against so loving a God. And surely unless the dew of Gods spirit
be merely dried up in our hearts, the word of God, joined with the reverent
and faithful use of his holy and blessed Sacraments, shall work our
regeneration, and shape in us new thoughts, new affections, new endeavors, and
new hearts: so that we shall so fair forget our old vanities and natural
inclinations, as Abraham forgot his own country and his fathers house: and
we shall have as longing a desire to frame our selves, according to the will
of God, and to go to him in well doing, as Abraham had to go to the land of
promise.

When God would stir up the children of Israel to turn from their
iniquities, which in their hearts they had so long practiced: he used no other
argument, but putting them in mind of the miseries wherein they were borne,
namely, in idolatry, and bondage in Egypt a cursed city, where they were made
slaves, Exodus 3. 10. and that their fathers were Idolaters, and themselves
given over to all voluptuousnes and pleasure, not regarding God, nor seeking
his religion. And surely the same argument may he make against us, whom he
has brought out of Romish Egypt, and spiritual bondage wherein our fathers
lived, and many of us were borne: yet God in his divine love, beholding us in
this woeful state, pitied our misery and thraldom; and when we were greedily
following our own destruction in darkness, he said unto us as unto his children
of Israel, ye shall live, and so anew (as it were) breathed into us his divine
light, by giving us the free use of the Gospel. When Joshua had brought them
into the land of Canaan, as Queen Elizabeth has brought us into the la^d of
truth, into the light out of darkness, he declared unto them the benefits that
God had bestowed upon them, to the end that they might be the more stirred up
by the remembrance thereof, obediently to follow GOD, that had brought that
mighty thing to pass for them. We must call to mind Gods blessings, which
will give us cause to reform out lives.
Therefore let us also call to mind Gods wonderful and many blessings toward
us, which as they are infinite, so deserves he all our studies, thoughts and
devises to be bended to his glory. And among the rest of his mercies, let us
not forget how he caused the winds and the sea to fight for us, against these
pursuers in their former invincible strength: and how he took the quarrel
into his hand and determined the same, both to his own glory and our safety.
And if we remember this, we shall avoid the occasions to displease so merciful
a God, so loving a father, so severe a Judge; who dealt with our enemies as he
did with Pharaoh and his host. Let us therefore be reformed in our actions,
and renewed in our minds. For as GOD no doubt chose us before we thought on
him, God chose us when we thought not on him.
so he will defend us, if now we trust in him, having such experience of the
riches of his mercies, wherein he loved us, even when we were dead in
trespasses and sins, when we were Idolaters. Let us not show our selves now
dead in sin, but let us be quickened in all obedience, and let us no more
be allured with the golden cup of our own vanities, which is full of poison
within. Is it not a sweet thing to remember that we were once bound, but now
are free? we have been in danger, but now are safe, and is not the contrary
dreadful? and shall we by our sins, which are the death of the soul and
the subversion of kingdoms, adventure to live in them for a moment, and be in
danger of captivity, or the sword here, and after dye for ever, rather then
leaving the^ for a moment, be freed from this present danger and live for
ever? Oh let us make haste to return unto the Lord: let us not lagger behind,
and so our captain Jehovah depart from us, and we fall into the enemies hand.
But to whom does it belong to see this weighty and most worthy work of the
reformation of our lives done? Every one has a court in his own conscience.
Surely to all in general, every one of us has a court in his own
conscience, wherinto all our thoughts, words and actions must be presently
summoned, and inquisition must be strictly made, what error is found in
himself, and finding himself guilty of any negligence in performing his
duty to God commanded, or pronenes to offend God in things forbidden, he
must as a Judge far from partiality, give sentence against himself, and
commit the evils done to true and unfeigned repentance: and bind himself by the
law of obedience, not to sin again. Which were it performed of al men in
particular, there were no need of the Magistrates sword, to compel the same
in general. But since our corrupt inclinations, do fight daily against this
godly course, Now is the time for the Magistrate to show himself zealous in
the Lords good.
the Magistrate, who bears not the sword for naught, must now, if ever he
did, show himself zealous in the Lords cause, for the good of all the land in
general. Which as it seems much missed with negligence of every man's
particular duty to God, and his Sovereign, whereby God is not honored of us
as he ought, nor the laws of the land obeyed as they should be, there must be
a general care in the Ministry, to teach every man his duty: for he is
bound to teach, to reprove, to approve, and improve, in season and out of
season: The word and the swor must concur.
and in the Magistrate an endeavor to see every man perform it, as far as to
his power and authority belongs, who must compel the^ by force, that will
not do their duties in love. And if then the vulgar and inferior sort strive
not to amend, and to conform themselves to the word of truth taught, and to
the example of the godly Magistrate, propounded before them, they shall all dye
in their sins but the Minister and Magistrate shall be excused. But if there
appear negligence in the Ministers, the watchmen of the whole flock, the
people will also be negligent: if they be ignorant, the people will be
ignorant: if they be wicked, the people will be wicked: as Hosea says, Such
priests such people. Therefore now call your duties to mind ye Ministers, and
speedily with diligence perform the same. And think it not enough to be
called the messengers of God, unless you speak and pronounce the will of God
truly: and disdain none that show their good wills to speak as the occasion
of this time requires: For they that fear the Lord understand his will. The
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. And therefore every one from
the highest to the lowest, Prince and Ministers, Magistrates and subjects,
Every man must begin his duty at the fear of God.
must here begin. As a Prince coveting to govern prudently: as Ministers
endeavoring to speak truly and boldly: as Magistrates desiring to rule in
their places righteously, and courageously: and as people willing to live
obediently and religiously. So shall there be a most happy concord, and
pleasant harmony in all estates. There shall be no want of blessings, no cause
to fear the enemy, no cause to complain one of another wrongs in our land.
Sin shall bear no sway, but godliness shall flourish in all parts of this
land: and then as we have already seen, how God has fought for us, so he
will give us new encouragements. And as Christ said to Nathaniel, we shall see
greater things then these: not only in his fighting for us, but in pouring out
his heart unto us, causing us to understand his word, God will keep our
adversaries blind, if we fear God and desire to see.
Prou. 1. 23. when yet ^ee will hold our adversaries still blind, that seeing
they shall not see, in hearing they shall not hear, and nothing that they
imagine against us shall prospet: but all shall turn to their own confusion.
Therefore let the eyes of us all be toward the Lord, and with David let us all
the day stretch out our hands to him that is one and the same for ever, loving
and powerful. And forasmuch as Princes, and Magistrates, must in this
necessary reformation give such examples, as may tend to the amendment of the
inferior sort: it behooves that they be learned and wise, virtuous, and
valorous: so shall the people follow their steps, as it were a light in the
dark. And therefore the Magistrate must pray for wisdom, What is required of
the Magistrate.
not to seem singular in policy, but religious in zeal: applying the same to
the glory of God, to discern betwixt good and evil, that by them sin (the
cause of our danger) may be removed, and faith and religion, the strength of
our land, may be increased: that the ungodly be not more set by then the
righteous: that vice be not more advanced then virtue: so shall every
Magistrate be able to say freely, Be thou my Judge O Lord, for I have walked
innocently. Surely as the Israelites thought themselves happy, A good song for
a Magistrate if he sung it truly.
when they had gotten Debora to govern them: so most happy are we that have
Queen Elizabeth to govern us. For as Debora seemed so much the more to be a
careful mother of Israel, by how much she liked those governors which were
likest her self, which appears by that she said, My heart is set upon the
governors of Israel: so doubtless the godly care of our gracious Debora, to
have all the causes of Gods displeasure to be taken away appears, in
coveting, Moses and Aaron, the Magistrate and Minister are to be Martialed
together in a christian common wealth.
as much as in her lies, to place godly Magistrates under her: God make them
apt to answer it. She matcheth Moses the Magistrate with Aaron the Minister,
the Word and the Sword: which both truly executed, must needs make due
obedience in the people to the Magistrate, and like in the Magistrate to the
law, and consequently in all to God. And then as the Magistrates are placed
above other men in authority, so they will go before the rest in piety: and
then no doubt but our Commonwealth shall be secure, and be in the protection
of the King invincible, who judges them that judge under him, and he will
subdue the disobedient hearts, to love and reverence rulers, and to fight
courageously against the enemies of our state, as he subdued the people unto
David, and made them all incline to his will: That whatsoever the King did,
pleased his people. We see then that we need not fear this vain hoobub of
the Spanyard, if every one would forsake sin, and conform himself truly to
seek after God. And to the end that God may bless the hearts of all, it
behooves all to pray, which shall be considered in the end of this silly
labor.

CAP. 3.
That all men ought to yield their uttermost power to resist the pursuers of
this blasphemous Hoobub, by experience of the power of God, showed unto our
fathers of old.
Having, as it is before said, taken away the causes why God has intended to
move this fierce nation against us, by a general reformation of our lives,
which if it appear by the fruits of our regenerate minds, let us rest
resolved, that God, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of Israel,
the God of the faithful, will be assuredly on our side. The Lord our God as
says Moses, shall fight for us, therefore let us not be afraid of them, that
in so high a malice have lifted up their thoughts, and prepared their weapons,
not only against us, but against Christ himself, and let us take courage by
the evidence of things before done, for Whatsoever is written before time, is
written for our understanding. All things are written for our instruction.
And for our better encouragement we may examine some particular examples out
of the sacred scriptures, employing them to assure us of Gods love toward
his, and of his power to confound his enemies by us, if we yield our hearts to
follow him as our guide. No doubt but this spanish hoobub may something dismay
the weak, in regard that it sounds with so open an exclamation, as if the
breath of their mouths could overthrow our Churches, and their little fingers
great mountains. But let us think, The Spaniards in strength are not like the
sons of Anake.
and we know them to be but men, and men of no such stature as were the
Anakimes, whom the little Israelites did master at their wills, as long as
they feared God, although at the first they were afraid of them, because the
spies returned such news of their terrible strength and fiercenes. But the
news dismayed not their captain Joshua, who by the spirit of the Lord gave
them such encouragement as qualified their fear, when he said, Fear not the
people of the land, for they are but bread for us. If such an invincible
courage came upon them that they feared not mighty Giants, and to enter into
the territories of such strong men, because they were assured by Joshua that the
Lord would fight for them, Which part God takes has the victory.
being assured that whose part the Lord God of host took, that side should
have the victory: It were more then weakness in us, for whom the Lord most
assuredly will fight to fear these men of farrelesse puissance then these
Philistines who also come to invade us, who are more apt to resist them, then
they to oppress us: they must land, we are on shore, they must pause and
refreshe themselves wearied, we are ready suddenly to receive them: they are
of number fewer then we, and therefore for any matter in themselves, or of
themselves, we need not to fear them. And the less, for that as Joshua says,
Their shield is departed from them: they have forsaken the Lords truth, and
they are led by a blind zeal on the one side, and by ambition on the other:
they are conducted by falshoode and pride; and the Lord no doubt is with us,
his promise assures us that he will be with them that fear him. War offered
by invasion, is fully furnished with military necessaries.
Although by the way it is fit to consider that war offered by invasion,
never comes without absolute provision of military necessaries. He that will
invade comes in all points resolute, resolute to enter, resolute to fight,
resolute to die, and resolute not to retire: but to the last, to hope for
victory. This resolution appeared in William the last Conqueror, William the
Norman, took from his men hope of retire.
when he fyred his ships to take from his followers all hope of flying: and it
may be said that this resolution is in all that endeavor a conquest. Al which
being granted, let us enter into our own thoughts, whether the thief that
comes resolutely to rob, can be so freely resolute to fight as the true man,
although no doubt he be desperate, yet is he fearful: but in the other it is
otherwise, who in true magnanimity is truly resolute to keep his own. So
fares it with us, and them that make this proud alarnm, to take away our
good, lives, and liberties, they come no doubt as men desperate, Wisdom and
truth bear away the victory.
but wisdom and truth bear away the victory. And were there in us but
ordinary hardines which rests in Paynims, and Moors, Turks, and Barbarians,
we should think our selves more able to keep our own, then to be dispoyled
by force. But we have the Lord himself on our side, who notwithstanding many
of our imperfections who are but flesh and blood, will not, though not for our
sakes, yet for his gospels sake, God will defend us for his Gospels sake.
which we hold inuiolate in it self, and have the true seals of our
obedience unto his majesty in our proceedings: suffer this Antichristian power
in their own opinion invincible, and therein most weak, to prevail against
him in ouercomming us. And to assure us further herein, let us look into the
time of king Hezekia, in whose days the blasphemous host of the proud
Senacherth made inuasio^ upon the inheritance of Gods children in Judah; having
like right as the spanish Senacherib to England, but only to enlarge his
dominions: and therefore did good Hezekia by help of his counsel call together
his captains and soldiers, preparing them against this mighty king and huge
army, who were not to come by sea, as this king Catholic must; but he was
come as it were to the walls of Jerusalem already to besiege it. But be
strong says Hezekia unto his people, Be strong and courageous, fear not,
neither be afraid for the king of Ashur, neither for all the multitude that is
with him: for there be more with us then is with him: with him is an arm of
flesh, but with us is the Lord our God. So does our good Hezekia Queen
Elizabeth, by the advice of her discreet Counsel, prepare against this
threatening host of Spain, Queen Elizabeth goes forth in person to encourage
her people.
and in her we are al encouraged to withstand the same, who in person goes
forth with her armies, and consulteth not only with her Counsel, and expert
martial men: but with the almighty, of whose power, mercy, and providence,
she has deep experience both before she took on her the Diadem of
government, as also since: and therefore she says also, Fear not the
Spaniards (my English subjects) whose strength is flesh, the Lord is with us
that will fight for us. But lo Hezekia prayed against this mighty multitude,
and the Lord out of heaven fought for him, who by his Angel slew all the
valiant men of Ashur, the princes, captains and soldiers, to the number of
185000. men: and in like manner, as we have had experience, shall he do with
this invincible navy and mighty host: for he is that consuming fire that
shall devour our adversaries as dry straw, and by the breath of his mouth
confound them that stand against his word, to pervert his truth. And therefore
Queen Elizabeth (no doubt) humbles her self in prayer, as Hezekia did, an
argument of like victory, Let us all join with her Majesty therein, and then
assuredly shall that God that sought against Ashur for Israel, fight against
Spain for England. Yet some amongst our selves, our unnatural contrimen, I
know, seek to put fear in the hearts of our people, saying most blasphemously
that we are heretics, and that God cannot prosper us; we are sinners, and
God cannot bless us. These are English Antichristians, Our secret Papists
discourage our people.
Spanish hirelings, and deceived and deceiving papists: who lurk amongst us as
snakes in a corn field, no more deserving the liberty of English laws, her
Majesty's protection, or benefits of our peace, then did the Philistines
amongst the children of Israel, to whom they were as pricks in their eyes, and
thorns in their sides, because they preferred humane policy in preserving
them to Gods commandments in extirping them. They argue against our trust in
God even to our faces, affirming us to have no such cause of hope of our
delivery as Israel had: and yet say they, and it is true, Israel was plagued
with sword, and captivity for their sins, being the peculiar people of God;
and how can we escape that are (as they say) fallen from the Catholic Church?
Whence we are fallen.
Which is false: but from Rome, which is Babell, from papistrie, which is
bondage, and from the traditions of men, mere idolatry: and idolatry,
worshipping strange gods, was the cause why Israel was within the space of 339.
years, six times oppressed by their enemies: when they went a whoring after
strange gods, then and not else were they oppressed. And although, no doubt,
we cannot excuse us of offending our good God, by our manifold sins, which
does deserve correction: yet assuredly God is amongst us, and by many true
Christians of England sincerely honored, In regard of the truth embraced,
notwithstanding our sins, God is with us.
his Gospel truly preached, his word freely embraced, and thereunto the lives
of many truly conformed. And on the contrary, let these Locusts that are
flowen abroad out of the bottomless pit, into this land, not only the wicked
Jesuits, but also obdurate papists, who so much obrayd us with our evil
living, learn this, that they only in their idolatry, blasphemy, and
spiritual whoredom, are aptly compared to Israel in their falling from God,
and not in the weakness of flesh only falling, as did David, Solomon, and many
other, whose kingdoms in the best service of the living God, were not free
from sin, wherein no flesh can be cleared. But holding the maine point, the
Christian and true Catholic religion sincerely preached amonst us, The true
catholic religion is with us, an argument of Gods presence.
and generally embraced of the most, (unless it be of such as like subtle
serpents stop their eats) confirms strongly that the presence of God
himself is still with us: assuring us also that his hand for their rebellion
against his truth, is turned against them. And therefore let no man believe
them, howsoever they dispute to defend their own holiness which is only
outward, their hearts being inwarldly seared with the iron of obstinacy, the
mark of the beast of Rome, deprauing us by reason of our frailty. But it is
necessary such pricks should be amongst us, to the end our lives, but
especially our religion, should be the better approved: for truth appears
then most plain, when it is opposed by error. How is the Romish religion
discovered by the sincere writings of sundry learned and devout men, to be a
spiritual bondage? who seeking the sincere truth in the light of the sacred
word, have left testimony unto all posterities thereof, which the most learned
of the adversary can never confute: but in striving to maintain their
darkness, they have undermined themselves, and are ready to fall by their
wonderful stumble, at the view of the heavenly light, which glimmereth in their
eyes as a candle far off in the dark. How many silly men, whose hearts have
been inwardly taught by the holy Ghost, without learning, have stopped the
mouths of these Catholic Doctors? approving their faith by the fire, Poor
unlearned Christians have stopped the mouths of Romish doctrine. The truth will
confound Antechrist.
which they have embraced without fear or fainting, not as desperate
Seminaries, suffering as Judas did, for treason: but as patient Christians
testifying their faith, builded upon the irresistable truth by martyrdom, as
Stephen did? This truth has broken the neck of Papisme, and this truth will
put him from his glory, and his glory from him, that seeks to deprive us of
this truth. Why then should we distrust God, and think that he will deliver
us into the hands of this Romish nation? Admit our sins do deserve
puhishment, and surely we cannot, nor dare justify our selves, as they that
have nothing but mere deseruings in them, The enemy stands on his own
strength, we on the blessing of God: they on the popes power we on Christ's
merrits.
and can of themselves atchieue haven by their own works: we only rely upon
Christ's merits, and disclaim our own worthiness, we stand to be defended by
the power of God, and not by our own strength, like this invincible nation,
whose trust is in themselves: we trust in God: they stand dissolute by the
delusions of Antichrist, who pretends to conjure the seas to be calm, and
the winds to be prosperous unto his Catholic army: and we rely upon the mere
blessing of God, that by the breath of his mouth did lately blow them from our
coasts, as he did the swarms of lice from the Egyptians, at the prayer of
Moses and Aaron; he cast them into the sea, as Christ did the swine, And let
us assure us that in the same his mercies, he will perform it in a greater
measure: that his glory may more appear, in being the protector of his own.
But what if we please our adversaries in his vain hope a little, and confess
our weakness, as they pretend it? saying, our governor is a woman, and
therefore weak, and the people in her not strong, our Nobility are not many,
and our Martial men few, and therefore the kingdom weak. But let them know
withal, that we have in her Majesty, under GOD, whom she serves, Queen
Elizabeth shall cut off the power of Antechrist.
absolute hope that she is the Judith that GOD has ordained of cut off the
head, namely, to dispoyle the man of sin of all his glory: she is the Iael
that shall pearce his stemples with the nail of consufion, if at last he
refuse to have his heart pierced with the truth of Christ, who^ now now he
persecuteth. And if weak Debora got such honor in delivering Israel from Iabyn
king of Canaan by Barake, notwithstanding his 900. chariots of Iron, will it
not be honorable to Queen Elizabeth, to break the force of the invincible
navy of Spain? and if it pleased the mighty of mighties to assiste Deborah
being a woman of no such reckoning for the show of her outward glory,
dwelling but under a palm tree, yet fearing God: shall he not assiste Queen
Elizabeth his anointed, his chosen, and her that he of mere providence
preserved and advanced to that high calling? the governor of his people of
England? whom by her as by the hands of Moses, he brought out of most cruel
bondage, under that purple harlot of Rome, and under her has this 37. years
preserved us from all foreign invasion, affoording us peace in his apparent
truth. But these Romists degenerate not from the ground of their religion which
is al outward, they rely only upon flesh and blood, The romish hope al in
outward things. They are strong enough and need not God.
arguing therein that God is exempted out of their company, that is full
already: they are mighty enough, and strong enough, and need not his help.
They reason as Senacherib did, that because he was strong, God could not resist
him, and therefore shall they receive as Senacherib did. They forget how God
chose Gideon a poor labourer to be a captain of his people, who also at the
first began to reason with flesh and blood as they do, saying, Oh my Lord,
whereby shall I save Israel, behold my father is a poor man in Manasseh, and
I am the least of my fathers house: wherein he reasons against the power of
God as they do, but the Lord answered him, I will therefore be with thee, and
thou shall smite the Midianites as one man, therefore will I be with thee
(says the Lord) because thou art mean and weak. What say these invincible
Giants to this? do they think our God is not that God that spoke this to
Gideon? God is strong in weakness.
do they think it is not that God that gave them success in the frustrate
last expedition? They know not that God is strong in weakness, but let them
dally with God, God will be earnest with them in our behalf: and let us not
fear them, for God chooses the weak to overcome the strong, who says, Look
not upon his countenance or stature: for that is not it that fitteth the glory
of God, who sees the heart, wherein rests the fitnes to perform the things
of God He fought by unarmed David, and overcame armed Goliath: he fights by a
few, and overcomes many: he regards not the number inuading, not the
weakness of the invaded. Joshua with a small company destroyed 31. Kings and
their people: David with 400. Few ouerco^e many.
men encountered the Amalechites, and slew of them a huge company, having the
killing of them from the twilight, to the evening of the next day. Eleazer one
of David's captains, alone smote so many of the Philistines, that the people
followed to spoil and not to fight. Admit then that the number of our nobles
were less then theirs, and we had fewer captains and soldiers then they,
should we yet dismay? God forbid, for we see the invincible hand of the Lord
shall destroy them: but we exceed them also in number. They proceed to fear us
yet with another skar-crow, They fear the weak in diminishing our munition.
that they exceed us in munition and experience of war: for the first, who
amongst us all does not see the contrary? for all are by due regard of her
Majesty and Counsel, sufficiently furnished: but admit it were not so, and
that we had nothing but the protection of our profession, which ever has
been in it self a forte offensive, and defensive in all ages sufficient,
being testified by true fruits, and warranted by God as was Gideon, who with
300. men discomfited the Mydianites a strong people, not with canon, bow, or
sword, but by blowing of trumpets, and breaking pitchers, with burning lamps,
as appears by the storye glorious to God, and comfortable to us, mentioned
Judge. 7. What weapon had Shamgar when he slew 600. Philistines, but an ox
goad? wherewith did Joshua overthrow Jericho, but with the sound of Rams horns,
and the shout of men's voices? Iosu. 6. And surely these are necessary examples
for us, whereof we may make a twofold profit; for thereby is seen the power
of God performed in weakness, which may also be applied to a spiritual use:
namely, that as by blowing of trumpets, and shoutes of men, the walls fell
down: so by the sounding of the trumpet of the gospel, by the voices of his
preachers, the defense of Romish Babylon shall fall, the earthen pitchers,
carnal conceits being broken, the lamp of the truth shall give light unto
their hearts. Queen Elizabeth a chosen woman to confound Romish Ihericho by
the protection of the word.
And surely to this weighty enterprise (as God always deals by the weakest
to perform the greatest action for his own glory) is Queen Elizabeth, a
chosen woman of God, ordained in the mere providence of the almighty; and
therefore let us all yield our hearts, hands, and help thereunto, as well as to
withstand these loud Hoobub, the pursuers whereof, no doubt God has sent to
begin the way of their own confusion, toward the destruction of Babell. For
a small company of the house of faithful Abraham will serve, not only to
withstand this antichristian king, but put down that red Dragon, and turn the
usurped glory, power, and authority of that purple whore into shame, and to
lay open her filthiness which she now so cunningly cloaketh, to cause not only
the Spaniard, but many other kings, nations and people to commit fornication
with her. For the promise of the Lord is general to the godly, who war
either in defense of his truth professed in themselves, God will assist such
as war either to defend his truth professed, or to win any thereunto.
or to procure it to be received of others: that five shall chase an hundred,
and an hundred shall put 10000. to flight. And therefore assuredly, if we
truly serve this our God, this threatened invasion shall turn to the glory of
God, and our notable comfort: for God shall no doubt give them their deserved
hyer, who as they are become drunk with the wine of Romish inchaunements, so
shall they fall into deserved shame. And their hoped victory shall turn to
their own overthrow, though they have already cast lottes of every man's land:
nay the kingdom it self is disposed in conceit, and cunningly by the aid of
some notable devil entitled falsely, to bear the better color, as did the
French buy and sell our English nobility at the field of Agencourt in France,
Agencourt field.
in the time of Henry the 5. where the French in regard of their multitude,
and the paucitie of English men, cast lottes for their furnitures before the
victory: but such was the power of God in abating their pride, that the
English got the field, and slew a mighty company of them, together with the
most of their nobility slain, or taken. This is the reward of pride, let us
therefore so much the less fear this cacholique king, by how much he vaunteth
of his invincible power. And where they seem to flatter some with the conceit
of our want of military experience, although therein there is no such
necessity, as that without it there is no hope to stand before these supposed
Martialistes: yet let them know, The Spaniard has tasted English power and
policy, to his pain. The Spaniards no doubt would not admit the trial of the
contrauersie to equal multitudes.
as indeed they have well paid for the trial, that the English nation comes
not short of the Spaniard, neither in policy not courage. And were the
quarrel to be referred to the encounter of equal multitudes, who dreameth but
that if the equity of the cause seemed indifferent, the Spaniard would stand?
they have too well tasted the sharpnes of English valor. But as is proved
before, God is seen to be strong in weakness: yet for that we stand not upon
miracles now, we no doubt are so sufficiently provided in all things, as
behooves watchful Christians: If not, what rests but a speedy supply of
the wants? And referring then the issue of the matter to the wisdom and
mercy of God, who finding the prince, the ministers, the magistrates, and
subjects every one in his place watchful, with reformed hearts and prepared
hands, he shall never give us a pray unto the enemy.

CAP. 4.
A Christian caveat to English Papists, how to answer this Antichristian
Hoobub.
Only thus much for the love I bear you, in regard you are my countrime^, I
advise you, whom GOD forbid to stand in these perilous times, either zealous
papists, in regard you would be seen constant in error: or not dutiful to
your Queen, Gods anointed, in regard of any secret vow made to be true to
Antichrist. To reason much of the controversy of the religious, I leave to the
learned. But I will only speak of the danger whereinto you fall, if you in the
least degree harbor any desire, liking, or love to the enemies of your
country. Inward desire of the Princes danger or subuersio^ of your country, is
before God high treason.
If your thoughts have entertained but a willingness to see the subversion of
your natural country, your prince, and people, under whatsoever color;
albeit you have in show kept your hands from arms, your tongues from speech,
and al your outward actions from suspicion of being disloyal subjects: you are
ipso facto within the compass of high treason to your Prince, before God, who
knows as well your hearts to harbor it, as he knew what Anna desired when she
spoke nothing. In this short discourse I will not only confirm what I speak,
by approved examples of sacred scripture; but also of others witnessed
elsewhere. And by the way, before I proceed further, know this, that the
Spanyard, who seems to have your hearts, and to be sure of the use of your
hands for his purpose, although he find you fit agents to sound up this
hoobub, howsoever he may use plausible and kind words by his ministers, to draw
you into this his society; as Achitophel secretly won David's people to
affect Absolon, and to rebel against David their anointed King: be you
assured, that you shall find no more favor in his faunnes, or better wages
for your wickedness, then Baanah and Rechab had of David for killing their
master. The Spaniard abhors traitors, though he make much of the^ for a time.
For howsoever evil this nation be, in most capital offenses else: it, of all
other nations, is noted to abhor trytors, and treasons. No Chronicle
reports of any such matter among themselves, not being done in their behoof,
can endure it, but to make use of it, only flattering the parties for a time,
but at last gives them what they deserve. And therefore let this be
sufficient, you shall have the reward of traitors of them, for your treasons
done against your Queen. It may be, you take view of some English runnagates,
that have thought themselves bound by their alleagiance to their holy father,
to break their sworn obedience to their natural prince, and to convey
themselves to these people, with aduertisements against their country, prince,
kinsfolk and friends: and you have a will to follow them in hope of large
entertainment: they have been most coursly handled, even the best of them, the
Earl of Westmerland, the Lord Paget, and others of highest estimation, who as
your selves have heard, The course entertaynement of the best of our English
runnagates.
if you be not willingly deaffe, have, and do receive hard measure at the
hands, not only of such as were in calling their equals, but of Spanish
slaves, who have called them traiterous villains to their faces: and they
kindly digest it, making necessity a virtue, abiding that perforce that they
can not amend. You also know they lived there in poor estate, for men of their
place in England, yea more base then an Artificer under Q. Elizabeth. If these
men had so cold comfort amongst them, being great, what think you to receive?
It may be you may think that if traitors were so odious unto them, they would
give them their condinge reward quickly, The cause in policy why the
Syaniards hangs not traitors presently.
and not foster them at all. But their policies teach it otherwise, and so does
common reason. As if you covet to take up two dogs, if when you have one, you
begin to bear it, be assured the other will fly you, but if ye cherish the
first, the other will fawn upon you, and offer himself unto you. So it fares
with you traitors, and their policy: they make of the^ that they already have,
but stales to allure you; and when you are al in his net, as your selves
desire, he then will make short work with you, he will handle you like
dogs, and the stales too: for then he shall have no more use of you, and
therefore soon dispatch you. If you believe not this, but play about his
allurements, like a fly about the flame, when you feel it, it will be too late
to cry Solon Solon: your end is misery in the best sense, The best end of our
traitors if the Spaniards should prevail.
if this good master should prevail, whose shameful end and yours will first
appear. In the mean time, what shall become of you? you will never be quieted
in thought. Will your desires be so smothered in the ashes of hypocrisy, that
you shall not appear at all? Truly either you will flame out at some narrow
chink of your hot desires, or else you will consume within, If God have wrought a
mean beyond reason to dicouer a murder, much more will he discover treason.
and burn as Judas did. For think, that if God in justice hating murder,
have ordained so admirable a mean to discover the murderer, as your selves
know, by the blood of the murdered: how much more shall he discover a
traitor, that seeks to murder Gods anointed? whereof you have seen proof
enough, if you could beware. If you say you go not about it, you belie your
own consciences: for if you desire a stranger to come in, to take the Crown,
you cannot but acknowledge you desire the subversion of the state, and
consequently the death of your gracious Queen: for either you must love, or
hate, there is no third. If you love, your love will appear in obedience:
which if it be not counterfeit, and so no obedience, it cannot but wish well to
your Sovereign: There is in all subjects love or hate, which will show it self
by the fruits.
and in that regard to none else. If you hate, your hate will be seen by the
contrary: and if your obedience be such as it ought, you will conform you also
to her proceedings, which are most holy, founded on the true Catholic
religion. If it otherwise appear in your conceits, refer you to the learned
and godly of your own country, and if you can convince them of error, your
work is done: and no doubt but Queen and Council, Ministers and people, will
shake hands with you, and embrace that which appears by the truth to be
palpable error. But if they convince you, as you are convinced, become one and
the same with them, and fly from error. Lie not in such secret ways, seek no
covert, come forth and appear, you have the most merciful Prince that ever
reigned under the Sun: therefore fear her not, if you do well: and show not
your selves one thing without, another within: for Cicero that knew not God,
says, that all they that speak one thing and mean another, ought to be taken
for faithles, wicked, and malicious men: whereas a good man will neither feign
nor dissemble in any sort, either to buy the better cheap, or to sell the
dearer. The difference between plain dealing and dissimulation.
Therefore it is a great fault in you, and a blemish to your wisdom, that do
dissemble to buy your own destruction dear, and to sell your salvation
cheap. It is ill for you to aggrauate your fault, by denying this, since your
consciences bewray this. And howsoever you flatter your selves, that all your
desire argues your Catholic zeal, the confusion of your country, the spoil
of your Prince, the loss of your lands and goods, The end of blind zeal.
the destruction of your wives, children, kinsfolk, and friends, and your own
perpetual thraldom, you purpose shall tend to Gods glory, thinking you shall
please God therein. Alas silly deceived wretches, you shall please God as they
that in the like blind zeal burned their own children, and sacrificed their
own bodies to devils. But be not deceived, your inward thirst is but the
drouth of treason: and although you carrouse not with Ballard and his heroical
crew, The thirst of papists is the drought of treason.
to quench yet the least drop of your desire to see this wicked practice
performed, is high treason. For whosoever follows not Paul's counsel to submit
himself to the higher powers: let him think in resisting them, he resists
the ordinance of God. If you wish prosperity to the Spanyard, you obey not
your Sovereign: If you disobey her in so high a measure, how can you be free
in your souls from wishing her death? which is merely treason. And in whose
behalf do you it? in the enemies of God, the professed enemy of the English
nation, who, howsoever he seeks your love, for the time, with promise to
love you still; assure you he will not only answer you, A glass for traitors.
as Caesar Angustus did Kymetalces King of Thracia, who had forsaken Antonius
to join with him: and boasting of his treacherous act, Caesar drank kindly to
the rest, and said to him, yea Kymetalces I love treason well, but I love no
traitors. Mark what was the reward of a King, who breaking his faith with one
to whom he was not bound, as you to your Queen. And what, will you think that
this new master will love your treasons less, or you traitors more, then did
Caesar? Nay assure you, he will not only not drink unto you, but he will
vomit you out of his conceit ever to be true to him, that are false to your
lawful anointed Sovereign. The Spaniard think them never true to him, that
are false to your anointed prince.
It is not your painted religion, beautified with counterfeit zeal, that can
draw him to dream of your loyalty, and therefore be sure your reward shall be
as of deserving traitors: and think in the degree of his love what will be
offered by the basest of his people, who will not cease be sure to give you
your right titles traiterous villains, wherewith our former ignobled
ru^nagates are well acquainted in Spain, as Lasthenes was in Olintham, where
he was an inhabitant: who having betrayed the town to Philip king of Macedon,
The spaniards are rude like the Macedonians, to call a traitor a traitor.
was to his face by every rascal called traitor, who complaining to the king
for remedy, had this conceited answer. The Macedonians (says he) are
naturally rude and gross, calling a spade a spade, and all things else by
their proper names: by which answer the king covertly called him traitor too.
And therefore you may think that if you seek reformation of such slanders, by
actio^ of the case against the Spaniards, the judge in your action, is as rude
as the Macedonians, to approve traitors to be traitors: and so to give you the
reward of traitors. Lo what a glorious thing is it to be a traitor, The
state of a trayor.
whose beginning is blind zeal, whose continuance is vain hope, and whose
end is death, and whose death is death eternal. Be not therefore still like
such as sharpen their tongues like a serpent, for all your stings you see are
in vain to hurt whom God protecteth: for the poison that is in your thoughts
does but inuenome your souls to destruction. But it may be you will say that
your Romish school master tells you, that you must not hearken to any other
scripture then to his decrees, for that he has power to dispense with the
scriptures, and with your treasons as he list. And it is he, as he makes you to
believe, that knows more then the ancient, more then the wise, and more then
the learned. But take heed, for he that cannot say with David, My heart
meditateth a good matter: cannot say, My pen is the pen of a direct writer. So
that all his decrees are counterfeit zeal, not written by the pen of the holy
Ghost: they are founded upon the fond invention of man like Mahomets. And that
spirit teaches not him to write a dispensation of your disobedience, that
taught Peter to say Christ was the son of the living God. Distinguish the
spirits.
So flesh and blood teaches him, and the holy ghost taught Peter: he plays
the serpent with you, If you will eat the forbidden fruit (says he) your
eyes shall be opened: The pope is like the serpent that commands forbidden
things with promise of reward.
If you will follow his forbidden lies, and refuse the word commanded, you
shall be saved. He will not have you associate your selves with the godly; nor
read the scriptures that testify of Christ, and teach you obedience to your
prince, and whereby you may prove what the will of God is. And this i^ you be
not blind, you may see tends to no other end but to entrap you, not only
with treason against your Queen, but in rebellion against the high GOD, that
will have the Kings whom he has ordained to be truly obeyed. It may be
wondered at, A wonder that Papists wonder not at their blindness.
that you wonder not at your selves, that you should degenerate by his magical
enchauntments, not only from the rules of humanity, but from the natural
disposition of bruit beasts, who ever love the place of their education: Beasts
love the place of their education, showing better loyalty the^ papists.
a dog affects that house, a horse loves those fields, a lion that desert,
and all other beasts those places where they have had their beginning or
bringing up, and do as it were respect there allies and familiars. But you
countrarie to all natural civility, seek to dispoyle your own country
far beyond the liberty of the affections of heathen men, who have been
moved to abhor to do il to their unkind country from which they have been
banished by their cruel countrymen. Themistocles a heathen man, being unjustly
banished from Athens, and kindly received of the King of Persia, from whom he
received so great benefits, as that he to comfort himself and his children in
banishment, said, We had been undone, if we had not been undone: Could not
yet be won to serve the Persian king in his wars, which was between him
and the Athenians, although he were offered a place of great honor, but chose
rather voluntary death then to be treacherous to his country. How unnatural
are you the^, that being not only not banished, but fostered, even in the
bosom of your natural and loving country, should so far embrace the
counterfeit love of a stranger, The pope fawneth on papists like a Crocadile,
who sheds tears when he will destroy.
that fawneth upon you like a weeping crocadile; as that you should in heart
wish, much less by arms offer any show of disloyalty to your country or
gracious Queen? Think this, that beside the sweet affections which nature it
self has imprinted in the hearts of all men toward their country, the
benefits that you have received within yours, and the protection which her
Majesty's laws has yielded you, Benefits received in our natural country, is
an obligation to bind us to be true unto it.
should be unto you as an obligation to bind you (if religion and divine
equity were not) to serve the public wealth of your own country, to the
uttermost of your powers. Much more are you tied to this duty, since the truth
it self, the bond of al obedience, calls you back from your disloyal
thoughts, wherein you seem to steal covertly away from the substance of
natural love, to run after the shadow of impious zeal: zeal not only
without knowledge, but zeal builded upon mere treason, Antechrist the head
corner stone of blind zeal.
Antichrist himself being the head corner stone. And therefore doubtless your
understanding is much obscured, how wise soever you seem in your selves, and
howsoever you be flattered by them that would make use of your wickedness. And
you can no more perceive their cunning, as appears, then David could conceive
of the cause why God prospered the wicked in his days, and punished the godly.
The way to find out the cause of blindness, is to repair to the truth.
But as he found it out by entering into the sa^ctuary of God: so seek you how
to apprehend your true duty, by becoming conformable to the true word of
God, casting away the idle inventions of the man of sin. And as Aaron might
not enter into the sanctuary where God did answer, until he had sanctified
himself: So sanctify your obedience, and enter into league with Christ, by
becoming loyal subjects to his anointed. And believe them not that give you
counsel to lie as you do, lurking to look for a good hour, as you are made
to believe it: beware it will be a dismal day unto you, that you so greedily
gape for: The day which the papists wish to see, will be to themselves most
fearful.
by what badge soever you seem to be distinguished: you will be unknown to
the Spaniards, your speech will bewray you: you will not be able to pronounce
Shibboleth, as the Spanish Gilliadices do, but Sibboleth like English
Ephramites: you will as easily be discerned as the Guelfes from the Gybelines:
they are a subtle generation that shall deal with you. And therefore gather
your selves together, and before that day come, join with God against
Beliall, take part with Christ against Antichrist: receive light and abandon
darkness: fly treason, and become every man true unto Queen Elizabeth and your
country. Take counsel not o^ me, but of Zephaniah the Prophet, Seek
righteousness, seek lowlines. Submit your selves to her Majesty, before the
fierce wrath of the Lord come upon you: Imitate the counsel of the wise man,
who wills you to Put away a froward mouth, and let all your ways be ordered
aright. And think not your own blind conceits to be the way of life: The way
of the fool is right in his own conceit.
for the way of the fool is right in his own conceit: but he that is guided
by counsel is wise. And therefore refuse not to know this, that if the people
of Israel were commanded to pray for the peace of Babylon, wherein they were
held captives, and to pray for him that had dispoyled them of all their goods
and possessions: how much more ought you not only not to rebel or wish evil
unto your so gracious a sovereign? but to pray for her, and for the peace of
your country, wherein also you may have peace. We ought all to pray for the
peace of our country.
Learn of David who said, God forbid that I should lay hands upon Gods
anointed: for (who says he) can lay his hands upon the Lords anointed and
be guiltless? It is needless to tell you how the pope, that liar does yet
encounter David, and says, go and lay thy hands on the Lords anointed, and
thou shall merit heaven: oh impious wretch that commands forbidden things, and
forbids things commanded. And yet alas wretches, how are you blinded that will
not see? Learn therefore that it is your duty above all things to beware of
contemning or violating the authority of your prince, who is replenished with
virtue, religion, and Majesty amongst you: and all confirmed by God, whose
ordinance you break in contemning her, much more in your treasons against her.
How our papists might become happy.
Therefore most happy were you, if after these your dangerous consultations,
and rebellious practices, you again would return and embrace obedience:
consecrating your souls to God only with unfeigned dedication of your bodies,
lives, and goods to the service of her: that in so doing will lovingly embrace
you; and God most assuredly will pardon you. Come out from among them then and
be saved.

A dutiful admonition, not only to all inferior Magistrates, but to all
loyal subjects, to show themselves watchful in these dangers, and with
careful diligence to seek to prevent all occasions, which may move the
unadvised multitude to any sudden, and indiscreet hurly burlies: with an
exhortation to all men to be valorous.
HE that seems worthy to be a Magistrate, Every magistrate ought to know
what duty belongs to his charge.
or to be termed a fit man to govern the least charge in a Common wealth, not
only a kingdom, a province, a hundred, yea a family, must endeavor himself
to know what duty is required at his hands, and the same to perform, with
premeditate discretion. And for that I wish wisdom to all, being able to
teach none: I will omit the superior, and give my best advise to the lower
sort. He is indeed a silly man, and not worthy to bear the burden of a
Tithingman, much less of a high Constable, least of all of a superior
Magistrate, that cannot examine how he stands in his place: whether he be as
a hand, an eye, a finger, or a foot of a Commonwealth: knowing that every
Commonwealth is a body politic, compared to a body natural. And as the
head is the chiefest part, Every commonwealth is a body pollytique.
the guide and superior governor of the body, and all the members are as
officers under the same; some of a higher quality and authority then other,
as the heart, the eyes, the hands, and legs, which are principal members,
servants in office to the superior; so are the fingers, toes, etc. petie
officers unto the former, every of them being bound to his next superior: and
so all by a natural duty, are servants to the head, and that for the
preservation and supportation of the entrails and maine body; which is so
much the more safe from danger, by how much every member has ablenes, and
skill to perform his place, in true duty, not one part whereof is void of
some necessary function; as reason it self accompanied with our daily
experience, does plainly witness unto us. So is our superior Magistrate, As
every part of the body has a necessary place, and in his place steadeth the
body, so every man in a common wealth.
the head and governor of us, who being many in number, make up a complete
body politic: some in Magistracy and superior authority, and some in
inferior functions, and all in true duty to one head: who being by our
negligence, or unadvised proceedings in our several places, any way
endangered, the danger cannot but descend from it to our own confusion. And
therefore does policy dismember a body, of a leg, an arm, a hand, or
foot, desperately infected, to preserve the rest of the body: So a
Commonwealth cutteth off every evil member thereof as we see by the laws of
our land, lest it should infect the rest* and so endaunger the whole state
politic. And as it fares with a Commonwealth in general, Sundry petty
bodies within the whole body of the commonwealth.
so it does with the parts thereof: as with a province, shire, and county,
whereinto a kingdom is divided, and with Hundreds, Rapes, and Wapentakes,
wherinto provinces are divided; with Tythings, Borowsheads, and such petty
limits, wherinto Hundreds, Rapes, and Wapentakes are divided; yea with
families, and h^uses, wherinto Parishes, Tythings, Borowsheads, and such petty
liberties are divided: every of which is of it self a petty body politic,
of the universal politic body of the kingdom. And this for the better
mannaging, rule and government of the whole, every of these several bodies
have like members: the Earl or Shiriffe of the shire, Diverse inferior heads of
diverse inferior bodies.
is the head Magistrate of the province, shire or county: The Constable, of
the Hundred: the Headborow, or tithingman, of the parish, or tithing: the
master, and father, of the family. These several charges thus politikely
distinguished, ought to be disposed all to the good of the supreme head: from
whom proceeds by her laws, a kind of spiritual power, whereby they all
work lively, as members powerful, in their places. And he that bears the
name of chief in any of these, and yet is either negligent or ignorant, is
forthwith to be cast out, and a more fit to be placed for him. For this kind
of politic divisions, Peace dangerous, without car^in Magistrates.
is an experienced rule to be preserved inuiolate, both in peace and danger of
war. For as peace may breed security, and security emulation, and
emulation discord: so may peace be said to urge cause of sedition. And
therefore peace must be regarded, preserved, and maintained, by diligence of
officers, when there appears no suspicion of war: Officers, as also every
subject ought to discover a dangerous person.
But much more are officers, and men of all sorts subject to any politic
body, to be watchful, careful, diligent, and circumspect when there is fear
of war, least that among them, and within their several charges, there lurk
any dangerous member, whose concealeme^t may be hurtful, not only to that
family, Tithing, Hundred, and Province, but unto that kingdom wherein he is.
As has appeared unto us all, in sundry places of our Commonwealth, in our
days. And no doubt, although in the kingdom of God (as Paul says) there is
neither Jew, nor Grecian, bond nor free, Scithian nor Barbarian, but Jesus
Christ is all in all: yet amongst us there are still both loyal subjects, and
covert traitors; good Christians, and dangerous Papists: and therefore every
man must wait in his office, and perform his duty to reveal the evil, to
take them away: and to approve the good and to foster them. Inferior
Magistrates have their power from the higher power.
And forasmuch as these civil offices cannot be performed by man only, as
they ought, without some further working of a better spirit: Let every man
subject himself to the higher powers, knowing that they are of God. So shall
they learn every man his own duty by the ordinance of God: whereby he
teaches al men both how to govern, and how to be subject, how to command,
and how to obey. Aristotle says, to command and to obey, are necessary and
profitable. So that Magistrates must learn how to obey the power above them,
that they may know the better how to command such as are under them: both which
do tend to the preservation of civil justice, Civil justice is the common
wealths public benefit.
which is the Commonwealths public benefit. And since it is apparent that
religion is the foundation of all Commonwealths, of the execution of good
laws, of the obedience of subjects toward their Magistrates, of their
reverence toward princes, of mutual love among themselves, and of justice
toward others. And that it has pleased the Almighty, to lay amongst us this
sound foundation, let every one build thereupon such affections, and such
obedience, to God and man, as may season their places, whether they be
Magistrates to rule, or subjects to be ruled, as may stand with their
allegiance to both: which no doubt may easily appear in all, War appreueth
or reproves the faith all men toward their country.
even in the worst, while peace affoordeth all safety: but war and the noise
of war will approve or reprove what now seems indifferent. And therefore it
is to be carefully considered, how every of these before said chiefs or heads,
ought to behave themselves in the time of trial, of their wisdoms, care, and
loyalty, which will then be seen when any occasion of sudden tumult among the
rude multitude, shall be offered. Discreet premeditation therefore is of al
things most to be regarded in Magistrates, what, and when they are to command;
and in people what and when they in duty to the highest and chief head, are
to obey: least the Magistrate discover his weakness, by saying, non putaba^, I
did not think it would have fallen out so: Premeditation of every man's duty
is necessary before the run to far under a good intent.
and the people their disloyalty by their rash and unadvised tumult, saying
afterward, we did it in a good intent. Therefore there must appear neither
overmuch negligence in the one, nor overmuch rashness in the other. But as every
man has two eyes in his face to see the things present: so the Magistrate
ought to have the eye of the mind always open to foresee things to come. The
Magistrates ought to foresee things to come.
And this is the eye of wisdom, and providence, that sees in the time of
peace, what is to be done against the time of war: and in the danger of
war, what is to be done to redeem peace, or to prevent war. The rumors of
war are to the weak fearful, to the rude dreadful, or desperate, and to the
wise, a cause of watchfulnes. The report then of invasion, must of necessity
draw in all men either courage to resist, or a present bewraying of the
cowardly minded. For the examination of every man's affections in himself,
cannot but testify one of these in him. And as I take it, The English always
valorous.
none of our English nation can retain the last, since all their progenitors
have so resolutely in deeds witnessed the former. And therefore since all (no
doubt) as it were with one mind, one heart, one hand, and one consent, will
be ready upon occasion to encounter the enemy: so shall their magnanimity
the more be approved, by how much they shall proceed by discretion, and
military direction: and not by a desperate hardines according to every man's
conceit, Rashness to be avoided.
and inward humor, whereby they may seem to covet, to show their forwardnes:
which being rashly put in execution, without regard of the matter reported, or
form to be used in the proceeding, will either discover them to be wilful,
tumultuous, and ouerhastie: or else procure unto themselves the danger of
seditious people. For it behooves us to think, that as the enemy boasts of
his strength, so he stands upon his policy: wherein, as he has many ways
practiced by secret treasons to move, and stir up civil sedition among our
selves, which God has reueiled, and our watchful Magistrates discreetly
prevented: so has he published by his wicked ministers, lurking amongst us,
sudden reports, dangerous brutes, and open hoobubs, A subtle practice of the
enemy to move tumults amongst our selves.
to move an indiscreet tumult among the rash multitude, to the end that by
reason thereof, some factious people might draw the rest to violate their
sworn obedience, and by their forcible rashness bring a danger in conceit of
the rest, where none is indeed: which kind of practice is new in our
thoughts, most frivolous for his purpose, praised by God. Yet he that has
been so long his open prompter, the blasphemous beast, he, even he, will leave
no mischief unpracticed, to pull on the indiscreet multitude, under color of
some public good for them, or of some imminent danger toward them, to run
out like men unadvised, to the end they might work their own confusion, and
yield the more ease to the enemies purpose. And therefore it highly behooves
all men, both Magistrates, and private people, Pryuate men must not stir
before the Magistrate.
to have an eye to every alarm, and not upon the sudden to be over rash, nor
too secure: but to look into the cause, and shape their proceedings
accordingly: and in every of the particular limits, before rehearsed, to play
the Bees, not to swarm before the master Be: and when the Magistrate shall
sound a call, and enter into the action, as the king of Bees, going forth
first, then ought the inferior to follow, and to keep themselves in diligent
attendance, performing what is commanded only: wherein whosoever, Magistrate,
or common person, shall show himself more forward, then shall be warranted
from the superior Magistrate, shall no doubt incur the danger of disobedience:
and therefore must every inferior have an eye unto the superior: so by degrees
shall there be true observation of duty in every place her Majesty and
Counsel is as it were primum mobile, Her Majesty and her counsel the first
mouers.
whatsoever moves must begin from thence, and by direction from thence, must
all the rest move as upon the axetree, which carries about all the government of
this commo^-wealth: and as all inferior Magistrates, namely the chief of
every province, city, town ecorporate, cunstable of hundred, and the rest,
are to move by degrees: so must the private multitude move, but as the first
mouer shall direct: and which can not immediately be sensible unto them,
until it be by the ordinary motious of the other mouers intimated. And
whosoever seems to move of himself and to move others, without this
ordinary motion, he cannot but be censured a usurper of that office, an
untimely comet which would show light being darkness it self, and therefore
to be abondoned out of all the true constellations, which have their due
motions and light from the first. It is a dangerous thing in these days to
admit any news of matters of invasion to fly abroad, Suddayne news
dangerous.
whereby extraordinary motions may be stirred up amongst the people.
Howsoever it seems necessary that truth should be delivered, to the end it
may be apprehended of such especially as have authority and discretion to
manage a course accordingly. And because none ought to set his hand unto the
arc, but he must be called thereunto: so none must undertake as of himself,
to lead any tumultuous crew upon any supposed alarm, without superior
direction. And for that the great charge lies most, yea altogether upon the
Magistrates: how far behooves it them to be both wise to direct, Three
things to be avoided in followers.
and courageous to go before the rest? wherein they must fly three things:
fear, whereby they should be moved to fly: cowardlines, whereby they may
discomfite their followers: and rashness, whereby they may endaunger themselves
and others: but to be truly magnanimous, dismayed at no tidings, fearing no
danger, nor admitting no occasion to absent them from the face of the enemy.
For to live or die are not of themselves good, but to do both of them rightly
and in a good matter, brings honor. And therefore Cato Senior to encourage a
man to true fortitude without too much fear, or too much rashness, faith, that
there is great difference between much esteeming of virtue, and little waying
of life: whereby he shows that it is a commendable thing to desire life to be
virtuous: rather then rash without discretion to be famous. But if you show
your selves provident in your charges, and as occasion serves, forward in
true fortitude for your countries safety, you shall be reverenced, and be
worthily famous: and not for desperate running on with a furious crew of
brainesicke people, but for your discretion, which more prevails by a few,
then hasty fury by a multitude.

That prayer must be added unto all the former means which in Christian
policy we are allowed to make, to resist this Antichristian host.
IT cannot be denied, but weapons are fit and very necessary for wars, walled
cities, fortes, and castles, for defense, policy is a requisite matter in
martial affairs. But all these are to no more effect then a wooden dagger to
defend one, or offend another, as of themselves, without GOD bless the use of
them. For he can frustrate every action by his power: Weapons and policy
nothing unless God bless the use of them.
he can withstand the proud, and defend the simple: unarmed David by him was
able to smite armed Goliath, and kill him with his own sword. And as therefore
it is most expedient, that in his fear all things be carefully provided in a
Commonwealth fit for the wars: so to put no more confidence in the same,
then in a reed, unless withal we crave God to bless them: who by his
providence and power can convert al things as he will, namely the sword of him
that trusts therein, to kill himself. A horse is a vain thing to save a
man: whereby David proves all military implements frivolous, if God give not
power thereunto: and unless he teach a man to fight, strength or policy can
prevail nothing. And although we may see daily that the sword of the wicked
prevails against the wicked, and sometimes against the godly, which may
argue a virtue in the same thing: it must not so be taken, God gives the
victory in a combat between two sparrowes.
for that the providence of God has a share in a combat between two
sparrowes, and whether of them he will, prevails. And therefore we that
pretend to be true Christians, have a peculiar promise to be defended and
preserved by him: and between him and us is such a spiritual affinity, that
if we add unto these outward things inward faith, and faithful prayer to
him, he will so bless our weapons and our proceedings against the enemy,
that we shall accomplish that admirable matter which he has promised us to
perform, namely, ten to chase an hundred, The force of prayer more then the
force of weapons.
and one hundred to put 10000. to flight. The Israelites fighting with the
Amalekites, prevailed more by Moses prayer, then Joshua and the soldiers did by
battle, Exo. 17. 11. The like did they against the Philistines, by the prayer
of Samuel, 1. Sam. 7. 3. The prayer of the just person avails much: and
therefore says David, Call upon the Lord in the day of trouble, and he shall
hear thee, and thou shall glorify him. The eyes of the Lord are over the
righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers. Whereby we may assure us
of his presence with us, in this dangerous Hoobub, if we pray to him. And for
our further encouragement against this wicked nation, he says: The Lord is
against them that rise against his. Prayer is a most victorious virtue, a
hidden power, whereby God himself is as it were overcome; yea when he has
determined the destruction of a rebellious people, God is moved by prayer to
alter his decree.
he is won by prayer to repent him as it were of his decree: as appears by
Nineueh, who joining repentance with prayer, appeased God. And because prayer
in faith is of such a force with him, he says unto Jeremy, Pray not for this
people: as though he should have said, though I have decreed to destroy the^,
yet I may be overcome by prayer to spare them, and therefore pray not for
them, that will not pray for themselves. The prayer of one prevails with God
to preserve a multitude.
It appears then that the prayer of one prevails with God to preserve a
multitude: as among many other examples is seen by Judith, who prayed for the
deliverance of the people of Bethuliah, and obtained not that alone, but a
mighty destruction of the enemy. Hereby was the counsel of Achitophel made
void, and took no effect against David: and if we therein repare unto our God,
all these threats, great provision, and huge host of Antichrist shall be made
likewise frustrate, as it has been once, fresh in our memories, when he
fought for us by his winds, and brake their power by his providence. Therefore
let us set not only this his late mercy before our eyes, wherein he defended
us and confounded them: but apply the example of Hezekiah, who prayed against
the invasion of his enemies, with their invincible armies, at whose petition
GOD slew of the Assyrians 185000. men, 2. Chron. 32. 25. So did Iehosaphat
obtain against his enemies, a mighty and memorable victory: how shall we
then dismay at this foolish Hoobub, whereby onley the weak are daunted: such
as know not the power of the highest are afraid? But let us above the
multitude of our men, the furniture of our munition, take hold of this assured
anchor, and pray to God, who will hear even before we speak, he considers
the thoughts, Prayer a sure anchor in danger.
and will give ear to our sighs. And let us think that if one have prevailed
for many, surely he will hear many for England, wherein there are many godly
that pray continually for the preservation thereof, not unto the helples
Saints, but to the helping God, to the God alsufficient. To whom let us only
run in a lively confidence, not omitting the necessary implements of war,
which by faith God will so bless in every man's hand, that we shall have the
victory, and God the glory. Let us begin to hate sin, and continue constant
in righteousness, and let us not doubt but that he which has freely embraced
us with so great favor already, will defend us also most mightily, and to
our great comfort deliver us from the wicked.

Now my loving countrymen, why should we fear the force and threatenings of
these men, seeing we have the Lord himself to be our king? Let us not be
afraid, but trust upon the sure protection of this our alsufficient God. Let us
magnify his mighty name, which is most terrible to our adversaries: it is
holy, and therefore all honor, power, mercy, praise, and thanks be given
to him, by whom we are only saved.

An humble petition to God, for the preservation of Queen Elizabeth, and the
protection of the Church of Christ, not unfit to be daily used of every
Christian, but also in every Christian family.
OH most high, mighty, and invincible God, king of all the kings and kingdoms
of the earth, we fall down before thy majesty, not as though we would
dispute with thee, why the heathen do rage against us, and why the
Antichristian crew do mutter within themselves, as if we were ready to become a
pray unto them: we come not to charge thee with injustice, in that thou
suffer the kings of the earth, and the multitudes of malicious men to band
themselves against us, the sheep of thy pasture, and against our Queen, thine
anointed: No, father, merciful, and loving, we come unto thee as wretches
deserving thy heavy displeasure, wherein thou may, without doing us any
injury, bring upon us this uncivil people, by whom if thou will thou may
justly punish us for our sins: yea thou may do with us what thou will, who
have not done in our callings to thee, as thou have commanded. Yet Lord for
thine own names sake, cast not out of thy merciful remembrance thy sweet
promises annexed unto thy Gospel, which thou have given us long time to enjoy.
The fruits whereof we do acknowledge, have not so fully appeared in us, as is
required at our hands: and therefore are we the less assured of thy
protection. But Lord, since thy mercy exceeds thy justice, consider that we
are but flesh, and therefore prone to fall as were our fathers. Look not so
narrowly, oh Lord, into our corruptions, neither take thou such vengeance
against us, as that we should become captives to such as seek to persecute
us, not for our faults, but even thy Son, in the truth of his sacred Gospel
in us: although thou only know us and them. Thou searchest as well their
imaginations, as our sins: wherein as we have offended thee, so Lord let us
by thy mercy reform us, or at least receive punishment from thee in love, and
not in their futies, whose hearts are bent against thy true Catholic Church:
and who covet to bereave us of our Queen, whom thou have in mere love to thy
chosen children, placed as a mother in thy Church of England, whose life they
have by many wicked and rebellious practices sought to take away: showing
thereby, oh Lord, that there is no true religion in their proceedings, no true
faith in their works, nor true zeal in their desires: but all that they do
is by the power of sin, as if they should openly vow to prevent thy
providence by their power, to pull down and set up whom they list, when they
list, and inioyne them to do what they list, pretending in all their devises,
be they never so bloody, and sterched with open massacres with dispoyling of
thy people, eating up even innocents as if they did eat bread, to do thee
great service. Oh high and loving father, consider this, and look into their
thirstines, wherein they will never be satisfied with blood, if thou give them
scope, yea but a little to prevail. And therefore give them not the power to
work what they have imagined, least that thine elect be turned through the
bitterness of their tyrannies, to doubt of thy mercies. But for as much as thou
broughtest us out of that cruel bondage, wherein we were tied and fettered
with humane precepts, which are contrary to thy word, by the hands of our
Queen Elizabeth thine anointed, as were thy children of Israel from Egypt by
the hands of Moses and Aaron: so Lord give her long life to govern us, and
power under thee to protect us from these cruel men, whose hearts are
hardened, and whose consciences are seared, as appears that they will not be
pacified, but (if thou prevent not) will seek to swallow us up. We
acknowledge, oh Lord, our weakness, and appeal to thee for strength: we
confess our sins and fall down to thee for pardon; hear us and deliver us.
Let thy Gospel dear father for thy Sons sake, not only continue amongst
us, but let the fruits of our true zeal be so watered with thy holy spirit,
that they may become acceptable unto thee: that thou may be unto our Queen
an high tower, and a safe refuge to us that are afflicted Rise up, rise up, oh
God invincible, list up thine hand in our behalf against the power of this
mighty Senacherib, who in his vaunts declares that there is no help for us
in thee. But thou can smite them, oh Lord smite them upon the cheek bones,
break their hairie scalpes, and make their devises vain. Our fathers trusted
in thee, oh Lord, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them. Strengthen
our faith dear Father, that we may likewise trust in thee, and be delivered:
So shall not the praise redound unto our selves, but unto thy glory. And all
the world seeing how thou protectest us, shall likewise come unto thee, seek
thee, honor thee, and as thou have been, art, and shall be unto us all in
all; so all nations frame their obedience to thy will, as unto the
al-sufficientito whom be immortal praise, as thou only deseruest.

oh Lord increase our faith.
A private Prayer to be said of Magistrates, that they may be fit to perform
in these dangerous days, what their several places shall require.
OH Father full of wisdom, power, and Majesty, for as much as every man in
himself, and of himself is so far from all ablenes to perform what is
required of him to the discharge of his duty, not only to thee in regard of
his service due unto thee, but also to his country, in regard of his place
wherein he is to live in the commonwealth, as that he can perform nothing
aright: and therefore I do come unto thee, beseeching, that as thou have found
me out, howsoever unfit of my self to discharge it, and have laid upon me the
function of a Magistrate, to rule thy people in the place whereunto thou have
appointed me: Let me now be shaped and framed anew: let my thoughts, my heart,
soul, and body, be changed from vanity to truth, from sin to repentance,
from weakness to strength, from ignorance to knowledge, from pride to humility,
and from all things that I ought not to be, to that I ought to be. That as mine
eyes are to be set on all, to the end I might see al, approve or reprove al,
and punish or defend all within my charge; and as every man's eyes are on me to
note my steps, how I walk in my function: so I may conform my self not only
to the precepts of superior powers, in performing the^ to the public example
of others, but also in true zeal to thy word, I may be a la^tern of light unto
them, and not by my slacknes in my calling, in breach of any duty give
example to any to follow that is evil. Therefore teach me thy statutes oh
Lord, that I may walk in thy ways: guide me in my paths, that I may
practice righteousness, and execute justice truly. That I may appear to be as I
ought to be, and not to follow mine own will, which is prone to evil
evermore: supply all my wants oh Lord, in giving me an understanding heart, a
merciful heart, a contrite heart, and an humble spirit, the spirit of
meeknes, the spirit of knowledge, the spirit of love, the spirit of faith, and
the spirit of true fortitude. That as now the man of sin is busy, his
ministers diligent, and his most dangerous practices ready to be put in
execution, to subvert justice, equity, truth, religion, and to suppress thy
word by violence: So make every man, but especially such as thou have made
rulers over any, to be vigilant and full of true wisdom and courage, all
which as they are thy gifts, so grant unto me oh Lord, and to all other in
authority, that we may not bear the name only of Magistrates, but may be
endued with all virtues requisite for Magistrates. That by our negligence,
nothing may be done to thy dishonor, or dangerous to thy Church, and that
nothing may be omitted which may advance the same. And as religion is the best
and most glorious robe and ornament that a Magistrate ought to be decked with,
for that out of it as out of a pure fountain, thou causest to flow wisdom
how to govern, and all other virtues answerable to that high function: grant
that we may all fly thereunto, and embrace it in such sort, as like a light
the fruits thereof may in our proceedings, shine to the inferior by our
examples: and vouchsafe that our obedience to our superiors may learn the lower
sort how to obey, and as we are taught by thee, know how to govern. And far
be it from us to glory in our high callings, but to rejoice only in this, that
thou have taught us how to perform our duties both to them that do well, and
to the offenders both in peace and war: and that we accordingly perform the
same, that in the end when we shall give account of our bayliwickes; thou
may acquit us in the mercies of thy son, as faithful dispensers of our
several callings. Amen.

Oh Lord increase our faith.
FINIS.

