OXFORDS Triumph:

In the Royal Entertainment of his most Excellent Majesty, the Queen, and
the Prince: the 27. of August last, 1605.

With The Kings Oration delivered to the University, and the incorporating of
diverse Noblemen, Masters of Art.

LONDON Printed by Ed. Allde, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard by
John Hodgets. 1605.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, and worthy Lover of learning and virtue, Sr. Thomas
Middleton Knight, one of the Aldermen of the Honorable City of London, A. N.
wishes increase of all Honorable virtues.
SVch (Right Worshipful) as from tim to time, have employed their pens in
publishing the praise of good letters, have likewise for the most part selected
such patrons, (as well strangers as of acquaintance) as have been known, and
reputed to be learned, well minded, and well descended: imitating which
custom, and prescription (aduenturing the pardon of your discretion) I have
imboldned my self (upon good notice taken of your true generous disposition)
to present unto your favorable acceptance this little Book, being a true
discourse of the Kings entertainment at Oxford.

I humbly entreat your Worship will be pleased to vouch of my labor, and
favor a Scholars pen, with your gracious acceptance, who answers in
affection, what he wants in eloquence. So shall I rest devoted unto you, and
bestow my future studies to effect matter of better deserving. Ever remaining:

Yours Worshippes most humbly affectionate. Anth: Nixon.

Oxfords Triumph:
In the Royal Entertaynment of his most excellent MAJESTY, the QVEENE and the
PRINCE. The 27. of August last: 1605.
POrphyrius records in a Treatise of his De vita Plotini that when Plotinus
(a famous PHILOSOPHER in Rome) entered into his School to perform his
accustomed use of reading; casting his eyes aside, he presently espied Origin
prepared to be his hearer, At whose aspect rubore suffusus blushing, Plotinus
ceased to speak: which Origin perceauing, requested him to proceed: but the
Philosopher replied, that it was time for a professor to hold his peace, when
his Auditors before hand knew what he intented to teach.

I make no doubt but the very Title and inscription of this little Treatise
gives good notise and inckling what shall be the subsequents, wherein I might
very well hold my peace with Plotinus being an eye witness of so many learned
Philosophers and others in place, that could both ornatius dicere, and
concinius agere, a matter of such worth then my self. But as in causis
vniuocis est semper verum, that nemo dat quod non habet: So in officious
performances where there wants ability, the next degree to well doing is to
be faithfully willing, and desirous to do well. For Bona pars est probitatis,
toto pectore velle fieri probum.

Therefore having been a member of that famous University, and fortunate
Mother of all learning, that from her fruitful womb, has sent forth so
many sufficient Scholars to supporte her own reputation, and to supply the
defects and imperfections of others: I among the rest, (though the vnworthyest
of all) in grateful remembrance of some former benefits received from her,
have taken so upon me to set down the true Joy which she expressed by
external actions, as voice and gestures (the signs of eternal love and
passion.) Through the windows whereof a man might easily pass with the sight
of his understanding, and discover the secret affection and gladness conceited
by the approach of his most excellent Majesty, the Queen, and young Prince,
unto that their worthy City of Oxford.

For upon Tuesday the 27. of August last, his Majesty coming from
VVoodstocke to Oxford, the Earl of Dorset Lord Chauncelor, accompained with
the Vice-Chauncelor, the Doctors, Proctors and certain Senior Masters, rode
forth upon their foote-cloath Horses, very richlye furnished to meet the
King, whom they expected about Aristotle's Well, where having intention that
the Vice-Chauncelor should first salute his Majesty with a speech, Master
Mayor with his company passed by without regard to them, purposing indeed that
his Orator should first speak, which when the Lord Chauncelor perceived, he
presently sent to the Mayor, and charged him to surcease his purpose till the
Vice-Chauncelor had finished his Oration to the King: with which message the
Mayor was little pleased, yet his mends were small, for he retired with
speed, and had no better excuse for himself, then to say he did not see
them, notwithstanding they were hard by him, and all in their Scarlet Gowns.

After this, his Majesty drawing near, the Lord Treasorer and the
Vice-chauncelor repaired unto him, who stayed his course, and rayned his Horse
of State whereon he rode: the Vice-chauncellor presenting himself with his
speech unto his Highness, surrendering up the Keys of the University, and the
Beadles deposing their Staves, and laying them down at his Majesty's feet:
Further delivering unto him the New Testament in Greek, very fairly bound,
and richly gilded: unto the Queen a Purse, and to the young Prince a pair of
gloves. With which Oration at his first meeting, and the several guiftes
presented unto them, the King, Queen and Prince, were so well pleased and
delighted, that the whole University received much content and comfort.

After the Lord Chauncelors, and the Universities salutation, Master Mayor
addressed himself toward the King: and by the mouth of the Towns Orator, he
and his brethere^ pronounced an English speech to his Majesty, and presented
three several Cups: the one to the King, another to the Queen and another
to the Prince. Master Mayor rendering up his Mace, striued with himself to do
all duetifull obeisance that might be accepted, which the King discovering,
very graciously encouraged, and gave him great and heartye thanks for his
good will and loving duty toward him.

This finished, his Majesty passed along till he came before Saint John's
College, where three little Boys coming forth of a Castle, made all of
Iuie, dressed like three Nymphs, (the conceit whereof the King did very much
applaude) and delivered three Orations: first in Latin to the King, then in
english to the Queen and young Prince; which being ended, his Majesty
proceeded toward the East gate of the City, where the Townes-men again
delivered unto him another speech in english.

That speech ended, the King with all his train of Noble men and others,
entered the City, where in the after noone about one of the clock, by the
ringing of a Bell at Saint Mary's Church, the Scholars in their formalities
according to their several degrees, were gathered together and repaired
toward Christe-Church gates, where they began to be placed and rancked. They
stood all of one side of the street without any intermixion either of
strangers, Townes-men, or any others that were not Scholars of the
University, and were of the left hand of the King as he passed by. Next to the
gates of Christ Church (where his Majesty was received) stood the Doctors of
Divinity in their Scarlet: next the^ the Doctors of Physic, and then the
Doctors of Law: next them the Batchelers of Divinity, and the Senior Masters
of Art in their silk hoodes: then the Batchelers of Law, and the Regent
Masters in their Miniuer Hoods, and then the Batchelers of Art. All which
graduates, reached from Christ's Church to above Carefex. Next to those
Graduates, stood the under Graduates, whose rank thus placed in this seemly
decorum, reached to St. Giles.

His Majesty still passing along into the City by the East gate of it,
where (as is before remembered) the Townes-men delivered a speech and the
Scholars gave him a viuat.

From the East gate, his Majesty marched along till he came to Carefex, where
Doctor Perin was placed in a Pue, and saluted him with a Greek Oration, which
while he was pronouncing, the Queen asked the King once or twice what he
said? and he answered her, that he spoke very well and learnedly.

From Carefex, the King with the Queen on his left hand, and the young Prince
next before them (all on their several great horses) marched down the street,
till they came to Christ-Church, where at the gates, the Universities Orator
made an Oration unto him.

After the speech was ended, the Deane and the Prebends with all the Students
of Christ-Church, were ready at the Gates in their Surplesses and Hoodes to
receive his Majesty: and carrying a Canapie over him, they first conducted him
to the Church, at the entering whereof there was an Oration delivered unto him:
and in the Church the Deane himself made another Oration, and so went to
Prayers, After which his Majesty accompained with the Queen and the Prince,
and a troop of Lords and Noblemen, was brought unto his lodging.

The Prince having accompained the Kings Majesty unto the Chamber of Presence,
departed: and betaking himself to his Coach, went straight to Magdalen
College, where the President standing in the Gates, received him with all
joyful reverence and duty, and passing into the Chapel, he had an Oration
pronounced unto him. After which, the Prince going unto his lodging, heard
disputations, that were made before him by certain Noblemens Sons, which at
this time are Students in Magdalen College, with the which he outwardly
showed, how inwardly he was delighted.

After Supper his Majesty, the Queen, and Prince, with the Noblemen, had a
Comedy played before them in Latin in Christ-Church Hall, which continued the
space of three hours and more.

Upon Wednesday in the morning, being the 28. of August, betwixt nine and ten
of the clock, his Majesty came into St. Mary's Church to hear the exercise:
where first the Kings professor in Divinity, created the Deane of Salisbury
Doctor of Divinity before his Majesty, which being finished, they addressed
themselves to Divinity disputations.

The Questions being:
Whether the Saints and Angels do know the thoughts of our hearts?

Whether in the time of Pestilence the pastors of the Church are tied to visit
the infected?

The Moderator.
Doctor Abbat Deane of Winchester.
The Answerer.
Doctor Aglionbye.
The Opponents.
Doctor Gordon, Deane of Salisbury. Doctor Holland the Kings professor in
divinity. Doctor Tomson Deane of Windsor. Doctor Field. Doctor Riues. Doctor
Harding. Doctor Ayrie.
Whereof the Prior opponent, first proposed the questions unto the Answerer,
then the answerer after repetition made of the questions, made also a short
speech consisting of a brief preface unto the King, and a short explycation
of the questions, and so entered into disputations, which continued the space of
two hours and more: all which time the King was very attentive, and much
delighted and pleased. The Proctors in the mean time, as in all other
disputations following, sat according to their accustomed manner in their
formalities, and in their Pue, used the same form of speaking, as they did in
all other usual acts.

On Wednesday after dinner, Law disputations were had before his Majesty in
Saint Mary's Church.

The Questions being.
1. Whether the Judge be bound to follow the lawful proofs, or evidence
produced in judgment, against the truth privately known to himself?

2. Whether a truce or league is to be considered according to good meaning,
or according to the strictnes of Law?

The Moderator.
Doctor Gentilis.
The Answerer.
Doctor Blincowe.
The Opponents.
Doctor Weston. Doctor Bird. Doctor Martin. Doctor Husey. Doctor Budden. Doctor
Lloide.
In these questions, his Majesty (as chief Moderator) did speak some six or
seven times in very good Latin, and to very good purpose, and so
sufficiently satisfied the standers by of his learning and wisdom, that they
highly applauded the same with exceeding admiration: for at every time his
Majesty spoke, all the people clapped their hands, and cried viuat Rex Iacobus.

These disputations continued from two, till five of the clock in the after
noone, which Doctor Gentilis as Moderator, concluded with a speech. Where
observe by the way, that Doctor Martin (one of the Opponents) after that he had
given over disputing, and an other had urged his Argument, Doctor Gentilis
being forward to speak, and taking upon him, otherwise then was accustomed by
other Moderators to interpose his sentence, and to answer to Arguments which
were urged; Doctor Martin (I say) not liking well of Doctor Gentilis his
answer which he made to his Argument, did upon a sudden rise up, and began to
dispute again, saying that he might as well dispute out of order, as Doctor
Gentilis might moderate out of order. Wherewith the King was wonderfully moved
to laughter.

Upon Wednesday at night after supper, there was a Tragedy set out by Magdalen
College men, acted before his Majesty in Christ-Church Hall, which was very
long, for it continued from nine till one of the clock, The subject whereof
was of Ajax and Ulysses, But the device was so costly and curious in setting
the same forth, that it was not thought teadious, but the King showed himself
very well pleased, and content with it.

Upon Thursday in the morning, being the 29. of August, betwixt nine and ten of
the clock, Physic disputations were had before the King in Saint Mary's
Church.

The Questions being.
Whether the manners and disposition of the Nurse is taken by the Infant in
sucking her milk?

Whether the often taking of Tobacco be wholesome for such as are sound and
in health?

The Moderator.
Doctor Warner.
The Answerer.
Doctor Paddy Knight.
The Opponents.
Doctor Aileworth. Doctor Bust. Doctor Guinne. Doctor Gifford. Doctor Ashworth.
Doctor Chennell.
In one of these questions, Doctor Paddy being answerer, held against Tobacco,
being a great drinker of Tobacco himself. Here his Majesty was exceeding
merry and pleasant, for there were many jestes which ministered laughter. For
one in his speech did bring forth a Tobacco Pipe, and urged the manner of the
Physicians in India, which was that they should be drunk with Tobacco, and so
go to their Patients: whereat the King laughing heartily, said that our
Physicians should go to the Indians to be drunk, that so they might minister
Physic. These disputations were concluded by Doctor Warner, who made a
learned, judicious and well approved speech before the King, which his Majesty
did very much applaud, and commend.

After Physic disputations were ended, the Kings Majesty, the Queen, and
the Prince, with all the Noblemen, rode to New-Colledge to Dinner, being
invited thither, by the Right Honorable the Lord Treasorer, Lord Chauncelor of
the University: who of his Noble mind, and love to learning and her
professors, the same day sent to every College a Bucke, and twenty shillings
a piece to be bestowed in Wine, wherewith the Scholars did so thankefully
frolic it, that by exterior means they manifested their interior minds and
gratitude for so great favor from so worthy and Honorable a personage: for as
virtus laudata crescit: So do Scholars then most strive to prove absolute,
when they find the Nobility, to supporte their studies, and to cherish their
indeauors, as did Virgil by the liberality extended by Mecoenas. And what made
Alexander by learned pens so eternized to succeeding ages, but his bounty in
giving gifts, and bestowing benefits? and his magnificent deportme^t in
pouring foorh his treasures to the encouragement of learning? This won him
incomparable Love of all that dealt with him, and of the learned professors of
his time. For the dignity of any principle, enchaunceth the effect. As a mean
work proceeding from an excellent workman, wins in regard of the Author,
far more credit, and reputation, then if it had proceeded from an Artificer
of lesser account. So in like manner a small gift coming from the hands of a
great person, carries ever a sent of a certain greatness, and relisheth great
power to produce great effects in the receiver, and stirs him up to a
continuing desire of deeper and further deserving.

Well, I will not be nimis curiosus in aliena Republica, but return to what
proceeded in the after noone.

After dinner, his Majesty, together with the Queen, made great haste to
Saint Mary's, where first of all, Natural Philosophy disputations were acted.

The Questions being.
Whether Gold may be made by Art?

Whether Imagination may produce real effects?

The Moderator.
Master Porter.
The Answerer.
Master Andrews.
The Opponents.
Master Lapworth. Master Baskeruile. Master Clayton. Master Mocket. Master
Pinke. Master Boulton.
To these questions, his Majesty gave great heed, and many times interposed
his opinion of the Arguments, which were proposed very learnedlye and
Philosophically, especially of this one question, which was:

An Ars Chimica possit producere aurum?

Concerning this, he made a long discourse in Latin, which did so fill the
Auditors with wonder, and admiration, that they generally concluded, and
pronounced our Country to be that Commonwealth, which Plato affirmed, to be
happy and blessed, under the government and protection of a King so learned,
wise, and virtuous: and every man prayed that the poysonfull hearts of his
enemies, might no more prevail against his might, nor no more impair his
greatness, then an Emetts blaste the mountains of Hircan, or Caucasua.

After Natural Philosophy disputations were concluded by the Moderator,
disputations begun in Morrall Philosophy.

The Questions being.
Whether it be more to defend, or enlarge the bounds of an Empire or Kingdom?

Whether that is just and unjust, consists upon Law only, and not upon
Nature.

The Moderator.
Master Fitz Harber Senior Proctor.
The Answerer.
Master Ballowe.
The Opponents.
Master Barkham. Master Langton. Master King. Master Winniffe. Master
Iuckes. Master Thorneton.
In this also the King did speak with such learning, as Apollo, if his Tripos
were up again, would pronounce him his Socrates, especially in that question.

An melius sit fines Imperij propagare, quam tueri? Wherein he many times
urged contrarieties to find out the certainty, indeauouring in knowledge to
win a full and complete perfection. And it seems that he had much
accustomed himself to study and disputations to attain that inward comfort:
Quod nemo nouit nisi qui accipit. For as use had bred in him facility, and
facility confirmed Nature; So his nature seems stronglye inclined to virtue,
and that can hardly be diuerted from her common course, but follows still her
virtuous determination. Therefore great hope (to a general comfort) is to be
conceived of happiness to the people, where the King both by nature and
custom has wrought in himself a perfection of understanding, which once
purchased is not easily supplanted: Whereunto agrees that vulgar Axiom of
Philosophers: Omnis habitus est difficile separabilis a subiecto.

But these Disputations, by reason of the shortness of the time, were very
compendious and brief, For least his Majesty should be wearied with
teadiousnesse or prolixities, The Proctors did cut off the Opponents very
suddainelye, insomuch that before all the Opponents had disputed, they spoke to
the Moderator that he should conclude: which the King perceiving, and that
there was one left out, which had not disputed, his Majesty gave commandment
that he should dispute also, so desirous he was of hearing.

After that, the Senior Proctor, which was Moderator in the Morrall
Disputations, made conclusion of all. The which being ended, and that being the
last of the disputations and exercises, his Majesty did as here follows
make a most gracious and pitthy speech in Latin to the University, which did
so glad the hearts of the hearers, that every man went away, and parted
sorrowful for the Kings so short tarryance and so sudden departure. Which for
that nothing is so curious, and thirstye after the knowledge of unknown
matters, then the nature of Man, (for so says Chrysostom, Homil: 9. ln 1. ad
Thessa) Nihil it a curiosum est, et auidum ad rerum incognitarum cognitionem,
vt humana Natura. I have for the satisfaction of such as understand not the
Latin, truly set down the same afterward in English.

ORATION Regis in Comitiis Oxoniensibus.
NOn potestis a me comptam, and politam orationem expectare, neque enim vnquam
otium habui colloquendi cum Doctis and disertis viris, and Oratoribus, Ideoque
disertus and literatus esse non possum, Hoc vero expectare potestis, quod vt
sum, and semper fui, ita ero literarum, and literatorum omnium Mecaenas
ornatissimus. Quod vero ad illustrem vestram Academiam attinet, hoc certo
certius vobis persuadere potestis, quod ei semper futurus sum propitius. Vos
vero debetis puru^ Dei verbum retinere, Romanas superstitiones fugere, and
fugare and schismata, ac nouellas opiniones remouere, respuere, and aduersari,
Inartibus autem vestris, and disciplinis, (vt heri quidam ex ornatis vestris
Theologis dixit) no^ oportet vos gradum sistere, sed progressus semper facere,
and praxim cum Theoretica coniungere, vt vita vestra cum professione vestra
maneat reco^ciliata: Sic, and eo modo viuendi, Dei gloriam promouebitis,
expectationem meam implebitis; meque Regem vestrum gaudio replebitis, and vobis
ipsis fructum vberem facietis, et locupletem.

The Kings Oration Englished.
YOu may not look from me for any polished or refined Oration, for I have not
had leisure at any time to confer with learned men, or eloquent Orators,
Therefore I my self cannot be eloquent, and ^^arned. But this you may expect
at my ^^nds, that as I am and always have been, (...) will ever remain a
worthy, and faithful ^^^caenas to learning, and the professors thereof. And as
concerning this your famous University, you may certainly be assured that I
will always be a favorer unto it. Then you for your parts must be careful to
maintain the pure word of God: to fly and put to flight all Romish
superstitions, and to remove, forsake and abolish, all scismaticall, and new
opinions. And in your Arts, and Disciplines (as one of your learned Divines
taught you but yesterday) you ought not to stand at a stay, but always to
go forward, and to join practice with your Contemplation, that in your life
and profession there may a sympathy and coherence. So shall you advance the
Glory of God, satisfy my expectation, make me a joyful king, and reap unto
your selves a most plentiful harvest, and a most worthy commendation.

With this speech thus concluded, his majesty arose, and gave unto the Doctors
and the rest, many thanks, for their pains that they had taken: and unto all
he showed himself so gracious, and with so loving a countenance, that by his
outward appearaunce might be well discovered, how inwardly he was satisfied,
and pleased, with their learned answeares unto the several questions: and so
returned back again to Christchurch.

Where upon Thursdaie at night after supper there was a Comedy played by
saint John's men before his Majesty. The subject whereof was the four
Complexions. This comedy was so richly set forth and beautified, with such
curious and quaint conceits and devises, as that it made his Majesty
pronounce himself as much delighted therewith, as with any sight (of the
like nature) at any time heretofore presented unto him.

The next morrow, being Fridaie, the thirtieth day of August, was the day
of his Majesty's departure from Oxforde, and as soon as the Sun had veiled
the curtain of the night, he got up, carrieng the opinion of Caesar.

Lucan. lib. 2. in fine. Nil actum credens, cum quid superesset agendum. That
he had done nothing, when any thing was left undone: and mounted himself with
diverse of his Nobles to see the Universities Library, which is in length all
over the Divinity School. The situation whereof is so pleasant, that the
ground whereon it is seated is Diapred with Floraes riches, yet is it far
more glorious, having placed within her circumference so famous a Monument of
such work, and workemanshippe.

Round about, in form of an Amphitheater, are placed Colleges, and in the
forefro^t thereof, in the place of Oaks, Elmes, and Pine-trees, all which are
comfortable trees to defend her from the furious wrath of wind and weather,
are planted the Schools of the seven liberal Sciences, to adorn and beautify
her with the inward plenty of their wisdom and treasure.

As for the Lybrarie it self, it has a very long, large, and spacious walk,
over the school of Divinity, inter-seamed on both sides, from the one end
unto the other, very thick with several Partitions, with certain seats and
Deskes before them to sit down upon and read. These partitions are in
every place filled full of shelues, and unto the shelues are there many Books
fastened with chains of Jron: every volume bearing his name and title,
written on paper or parchment, in fair Roman letters, and every partition
has an Jnscription of the Faculties, As whether her books be either of
Theology, Philosophy, Astronomy, Geometry, or any other Art, etc.

The Books that are contained within this Lybrarie, are very rare strange
and scarce, seldom or not at all to be heard of or seen in any place but
there. All of them very richly gilded, and many of them bossed either with
Silver or Gold.

All these are so fairelie kept and maintaind, as if the Goddess of wisdom
had selected and reserved it a Paradise to entertain the Muses: Therefore J
conclude of it thus, that Dignitatem eius, difficile est vt homo explicet
sermon.

This object being presented unto the sight of his Majesty, did so sensibly
discover his delight therewith, that he reported it a most admirable ornament
to the University: and graciously promised himself, a royal friend and
Patron for ever.

Whilst his Majesty was thus busied in taking of this survey of the library;
the queen and Prince were in the mean space, as much delighted with an English
Comedy, presented and plaide before them in Christ-church hall, by certain
Scholars: which was as rich lie set forth and performed, as with as great
applause, and commendation as any of the rest that had been before since the
Kings coming to Oxford.

Jn the mean time also diverse of the Noble men went to Saint Mary's in their
hoodes, and formalities, and were presented, and incorproated Masters of Arts.
As The Duke of Lennox. The Earl of Northumberland. The Earl of Suffolk. The
Earl of Salisburie. The Earl of Pembroke. The Earl of arundell. The Earl of
Oxford. The Earl of Essex. The Earl of Montgomerie. The Earl of Rutland. The
Lord mounteagle. The Lord Howard Baron of Effingham. The Lord Howard Baron of
Waldon. The Lord Vicount Cranburne.
with diverse others, of the Noblemen and Knights, that came in so confusedly
that as yet there is not a perfect register gathered of their names.

After his sight of the Universities Lybraries, he betook himself toward
Magdalen College, to see that also: accompanied with diverse of the Nobility,
whereas the president and diverse the rest of the fellows, stood ready to
receive him, also at the Chapel door he was Royally entertained and at his
entrance, there was a Latin oration pronounced unto him.

Which being ended, he stood a pretty while reading the verses that were
written in Latin by certain Noblemens sons students in the same Colleges,
and set thick on both sides of the chapel gate, as there was also diverse
others placed round about the courts of other Scholars writings.

Thus when his Majesty had viewed the Chapel, he was forth with conducted
into the Cloisters, and from thence into the squadrant Court within the
Cloisters, wherehe stayed a good space, taking a through view of all such
several Pictures as were there set up round about, and now against this
entertain were newly trimmed and painted, which caused his Majesty to demand
the meaning of them, wherein the President and others fully resolved him.

From thence he returned back to Christ church again unto the Queen and
young Prince, and in the way (as is credibly reported) he would needs be
guided to Brazen Nose College gate, that he might be made an eie-witnesse of
that, of which he had so often heard, and that whereof the College carries
the name.

And both as he passed forth of Magdalen College gates, and so vpwardes all
along, the Scholars cried Viuat uiuat, etc. and the others of the multitude,
with a loud voice, God save king James, etc.

Much about twelve of the clock the same day he took his leave, and left the
University, addressing his course toward Windsore Castle. And a little on
this side Whayt ley, some five or six miles from Oxford, his Majesty and the
Queen parted, the King purposing that night to lie at the Lady Russels a
little from Maidenhead, and the Queen at Sir Francis Stoners, a little from
Henly upon Thames.

Thus was Oxford left a mournful place for the sudden departure of her most
dread Sovereign. Crying, Oh istos (Augustae) dies, oh profer in annos,
and lustrum ex annis, elustris soecula surgant,
E soeclis aeuum, nullo numerabile motu,
Vt nostros dudum quot quot risere dolores
Gaudia iam numerent, intabescantque vicendo.
Oh Emperor draw forth these dais to years,
Years to an Age, Age to eternity:
That such as lately ioyed to see us grieve,
May sorrow now to see our perfect joys.


But all in vain, For as Titan appears not from the East, to make one place
only gorgeous with his Sunne-beames. So his Majesty is now departed from
thence, to make other places also hapie and joyful at his royal presence, and
to present such with the brightness of his favors, as have much languished
for his long absence. Thus as his entrance into the Cittye, filled every part
of it with great joy and admiration, so likewise his departure left the
University thus lamenting his short continuance and tarrying amongst them.

Oh think (Augustus) how the Muses moorn,
Which ioyde of late to see thy sovereignty:
think how at this retire they wring their hands,
Distilling from their eyes salt shewers of tears
To bring in Winter with their sad lament?
and to this purpose play their several parts,
For how can So^mer stay, when sun departs?
Think how Syluanus sadly sits, and grieves,
to see that Autumn with his withered wings,
will bring in tempest, now thy beams are gone Leaves,
and fill each Colledg-groue with wind-faln
That did but lately flourish with green trees
think how at this each college feels her smarts
For how can Sumer stay when Sun departs?
Think how thy learned grave Collegians
which at thy entrance shew`d their inward joys
And smooth`d the way, and strew`de it with sweet flowers,
Now if they durst, would stop it with green boughs,
least by thine absence the years pride decay,
Such grief conceit thy scholars (me^ of Arts)
To see how summer slides, when Sun departs.
Thy students weep, and Colleges mourn in black,
Birds cease to sing, and every creature wailes,
to see the season alter with this change,
And how thy going works a sudden woe,
Turning our mirths to sable sad lament,
our joys are now turn`d al to mournful parts,
To see how Summer slides when sun departs.
Return then soon, oh soon return again,
For Summers parting is thy peoples pain.
Oh come again, thou art thou art our worlds bright ey,
Whose presence so adornd our Academy,
Thou art our Sun, then bring again thy light,
Else does thine absence make eternal night.
Well: hope is a sweet stringe to harp on, which sends a second comfort to
cure all discontent, for his Majesty's most Royal favor and countenance
considered, gives the whole University hopeful persuasion that he will always
remain her faithful remembrancer. Which God grant he may do, and that he may
continue many and most happy years, to favor and foster her, and all others
which do truly love, and honor him.

FINIS.

