The welspoken Nobody.
God that is all good and almyghtye
Has showed his power upon me Nobodye,
For whear my mouth with lock was sparred
He has it burst and my speech restored,
Wherefore I will sing praise unto his name
Because I may speak without any blame,
And though the pope with all his trayn
Do me rebuke and against me sayen
That as tofore I should now hold my peace
Yet Gods honor to set forth I can not cease.
Nobody is my name
that beyreth every bodies blame


Many speak of Roben hoode that never shot in his bow
So many have laid faults to me, which I did never know,
But now behold here I am
Whom all the world does diffame
Long have they also skorned me
And locked my mouth for speking free
As many a Godly man they have so served
Which unto them Gods truth has showed
Of such they have burned and hanged some
That unto their ydolatrye would not come
The lady truth they have locked in cage
Saying that of her Nobodye had knowledge
For as much now as they name Nobodye
I think verilye they speak of me
Wherefore to answer I now begin
The lock of my mouth is opened with ginne
Vurought by noman, but by Gods grace
Unto whom be praise in every place
My Iourneyes I make both far and nere
To seek whear people Gods justice fear
In that place would I make my habytation
Trusting there to have a continual mansion
In print tofore I did never appear
Yet many could me not well bear
But no marvel for the proverb says
All men can not abide to here the truth
A companyon must he be with these good fellows,
As long as they will have him in their companyes,
But sometime they forget him, until he be
Molded or wormeaten, and than for heresye
They do him burn secretly as in the night
The Jews took Christ, so these by their might
Follow the other, being sore afraid,
Lest these their prankes should be bewrayed.
In the Dedication day, than out of the steple
Do they him hang to espy the people,
And with a little bell them for to warn,
Because the prestes should catch no harm
In studiyng Gods word the flock to feed.
No this is enough, they have no other sede
To sow, therefore they shall reap
Vvynde, as they sowed wind a great heap.
Vvo be to me says Paul, if I should not preach
No says the Pope my ceremonies teach.
But what do they teach show the meaning?
Well, Gods word gives me smellyng
That Paul and your opinyon contrary be,
Should men leave Paul, and follow the.
On relyke Sondayes, than bring you forth trompery
Your relykes must be washen, that water say yet,
Is good for sin and sickness of beast,
Thus of Christ's blood make you a gest
So is thy soul spiritually fed,
With Christ's most blessed body and blood,
Which forthy sins was offered on the rode,
With which oblacyon Gods wrath is satisfied
Never hereafter to be Reoffered
For with one oblacyon by him self made,
He has made us perfect, therefore be glad,
For unto perfection nothing can be added
Where be now such, as masses have said
To be propiciatory God them forgive,
And convert their hearts, whiles they do live
That they look for none other propiciation
Than that which Christ made him self alone,
In remembrance, whereof to confirm our faith
He bade us receive as the scripture says.
This holy communyon. No come and see
Stare on it (says the Pope) and ones a year take
Nay not so neighbor take not, but gape.
Thy finger would rot if thou touch but the chalyce,
O holy Paul, thou bade men be wise,
And ware of such, as should admonysh
From ha^dlyng and touching, which things do perysh,
Even with thabuse thou say. Well
Now seeing that all men begin to smell
All you that be prestes I Nobodye pray,
To repent and be learned, resist not I say

