THE Foot-Post of Dover. With his Packet stuffed full of strange and merry
Petitions.



LONDON, Printed by Edw: Allde, and are to be sold by John Deane, dwelli^g
just under Temple bar. 1616.

A STRANGE-FOOTE-POST, WITH A PACKET full of mad Petitions.
Just about that time of ye year when yt Spring begins to command her
handmaide Flora, to stick the bosom of every watery maedow, and sedgie lake,
with nosegayes of party colored flowers: having dulled my spirits with serious
meditations, and plunged my senses in the quicksands of Invention, as well, to
shake of a sullen Melancholy that attended me, as to entertain some quick,
and more public recreation: I walked into a neighboring meade, where it was
my chance to light upon an Arbor so privately seated, as if Nature had built it
a Cave, or receptacle for Solitude: environed so close, with the long and
slender arms of Osiers, and so curiously intermingled with the leauy fingers
of Woodbine, and sweet Eglantine, that neither cold nor rain could easily
pierce it. In whose windows, the feathered Quiristers of the grove, shipping
from twig to twig, song pretty (though idle) notes, to the murmr of a silver
spring, which made such soft and solemn Music, that what with wondering, at
the more then common workmanship of Art, and the Metaphisicall endeavors of
Nature, in their ignorant (yet well according) Harmony, Leaning my hand upon my
elbow, (being at that time destitute of a softer pillow) I fell into a sudden,
yet sound sleep, during which, my imaginary insight apprehended a most strange
vision.

Me thought I was elevated into the Zodiac, where like a Stranger cast upon a
foreign Coast, I was stricken with vn-vtterable admiration, wondering at the
strange obiectes I beheld. Gazing thus on every side, like a
Country-Gentlewoman at her first coming to a famous City, one clapped me upon
the head, whose very sight did much affright me, that it was enough to have put
me out of the wit I had: For the party I speak of was headed like Hydra, The
description of Opinion.
having more Tongues, then Esope provided for his Masters dinner: and for
eyes, he was no Cyclops, or Polypheme, but an other Argus: The clothes he
wore, were for all the world fashioned like a fantastical Englishmans, a
gallimawfry of most Country cuts, but not of one Cloth, Stuff, Satin,
Ueluet, etc. as theirs are: Nor of one, two, three, four colour^^, as for the
most part theirs are; but here a piece of Ueluet, there a piece of Uellure,
here a piece of Satin, there a piece of Sackcloath, filled with sundry
patches of several patterns, like a Tailors hole, or rather Hell, whereinto
he casts many bodies of men and women.

This Monster seeing me so pitifully perplexed, told me that he was not so
terrible as he seemed and that his name was Opinion, so Headed, Sighted,
Tongued and arraied, to show the multiplicity, variety, and contrariety of men's
Opinions, Fantasies, and Conceits: And that the place wherein I then was, was
named the Metrapolitan City of the World, seeming indeed like Heaven it
self, inhabited by Spirits of all sorts, adorned with Sun and Moon, like a
contributarie King and Queen, Girt about with all the Signs of the Zodiac,
garnished with Planets, which like Rulers ouerswayed Sublunary Creatures:
Beautified with Stars of three sorts, whereof some were termed Fixae,
resembling virtuous and constant women, keeping in their Sphaeres, as in their
houses. Others Errantes, wandering Stars, gadding like Gossips, which ride
from Cities to Countries, running from their own Mansions to Tauernes, from
their husbands bosoms to other men's beds. The third, Cadentes, that is, falling
Stars, whereunto wantons may be compared, which fall from the Heaven of
Honesty, to the unmovable mass of Misdemeanour and immodesty: Forth with he
led me through many Lanes and showed me the signs as we passed along the
heaven street: Here (said he) is Aries, the sign of the Ram: What the
Ram in fleet street thought I? This is Cancer the sign of the Crabbe: Here
is Virgo, the sign of the Maid: That is a rare sign indeed, many a young
beginner would be glad to dwell at that sign: This is Scorpio, the sign of
the Scorpion, a venomous Serpent which hurts with the tail: That is
Capricornus, the sign of the Goats head, some Cuckold languisheth there,
while his wife laugheth abroad: This is Gemini the sign of the Twins, there
dwells a good member in the Commonwealth, which gets two at once: Here is
Leo the sign of the Lion: There is Libra, the sign of the pair of Scailes:
Terras Astraea reliquit, Justice has forsaken the Earth, and keeps shopp
there: That is Sagittarius the sign of the Archer, blind Cupid makes
bird-bolts there to dazzle Woodcocks: This is Aquarius, the sign of the
Water-bearer, I supposed at first a Uintener dwelled there, which carries so
much water to quench the fire, which would else rise out of his Seller, till I
gazed for a Bush and could see none, but the bush Beard of a Brewer: After he
conducted me by the seven Planets, seven Gates of this City: The first and
lowest he called Luna, The Postern
which being then in the Ecclips, I deemed the Postern Gate shut close: The
second Sol the Sun, which I resembled to Mooregate, Mooregate.
because it is more delicious and pleasant then the Moon, with beams and
rays, or rather rayles on the oneside: The third Mercury the God of Thieves,
Cheaters, Nymble-fingered-fellowes, which made me call it Newgate: Newgate.
Algate. Ludgate.
The fourth Venus, the Goddess of Love, which I termed Allgate, because all
go thorough that Gate: The fifth Mars, which looked sternly like King Lud,
whose very aspect at that time wrought in my conceit that I feared a Sergeant
was dragging me to Lud-gate: The sixth Jupiter, Aldersgate.
which I surmisd to be Alders-gate: The seventh Saturn, old, feeble, and
deerepit, which I thought might somewhat fitly be nominated Cripple-gate:
Cripplegate.
Are here all said I? I have one gate yet, standing void to be shut up with a
similitude: What gate is that said Opinion? It is Bishops-gate said I. Some
Philosophers cavil about it said Opinion. But Aristotle and Plato make
reckoning of an eight, which is called Sphaera octaua, that is, the firmament
containing the fixed stars. Why then this Sphaera Octaua is Bishopgate,
containing all the fixed stars: that is, the faithful Ministers:
Bishops-gate.
And the Philosophers which cavil about it, are none but contentious
Brownists, and Separaters: which because the eyes of their true understanding
are plucktout, would pluck the whole house upon their own heads, to the
overthrow of the Rulers. But let these Byases pass by like asses, with bag and
baggage to Anser-dame, so long as we have Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers,
and Plato the Divine on our sides. Our gardens will prosper the better when
they have in them not one of these Elders, whereupon so many covetous Iudasses
hang themselves.

By this time we had passed through all the Planets set about with stars, like
so many gates with watchmen; and were entered into the air, the heavens
suburbs: Here (quoth Opinion) you may daily behold diverse that pass to and fro
from all parts to present their several petitions to Fortune and implore her
aid for some good hap: which many times they obtain, if their Petitions go
not through many hands: for then they are either lost or torn, or come to some
friends hands, against whom they are preferred, and the Petitioners are checked
and called seditious knaves, and go home perhaps an hundred miles with a Flea
in their ear.

Then me thought I was very importimate to know the several suitors, that
became so suppliant to Fortune: and even as Opinion was telling me he would
certify me of them is order, Behold (quoth he) yonder is one traveling a
pace, that ministers matter to give you some satisfaction. And as I was thus
giving my attendance, and observation, I might see a femall coming, indeed a
peart one she was, as ready to give the welcome to her customers, as a boy in a
bar, and as nimble as a Parasite in an old Comedy.

The harlot passes by them.
FIe upon her (said I) she will never have good success in her suite, The
Harlot.
she has such Anticke attire, and does so trip and go with her Petition: What?
a woman of tall stature, and upright body? (would she were as upright in her
life and behavior) high brows, fair hair? (has she not robbed the dead for
it)? round cheeks, currall lips, dimpled chin, sleeke neck, and slender waste?
It Is good if they be not hooks to draw men in, and birdlime to tie the frathers
of every stranger, that none may escape them. But I fear she is (as some say
of wanton women) like Circes witches, and can turn vain glorius fools into
Asses, gluttonous fools into Swine, pleasant fools into Apes, proud fools
into Peacocks, and when she has done, scourge them out of doors with a whip.

This is one (said Opinion) whose face is a painted Sepulcher, The Opinion of a
Harlot.
whereas her mind is a Tomb full of rotten bones and Serpents: her brows
(like the Diamond) contain virtue to relieve, and payson to kill: her looks
are like Calenders, that can determine no certainty, but (as a certain leaf)
which is most dry, when it looks most moist: so when she smiles, she
imagines deceit, and her laughters are tempered with envy and revenge: her vows
are but as words written in the wind: her promises Caracters figured in the
air: her flatteries, figures graven in the Snow, which are blown with the
wind or melted with the Sun: and her love, like the passage of a Serpent over a
stons, which once past, can never boseene. She will promise mountains, and
perform Molehils. She will say she loves with Dido, and yet feign with Crefida:
follow Demophon with Phillis, and yet be more straggling then Luna: she has
smiles (at her wish) to bewitch, and tears (at command) as the Crocodile, to
betray. If thou proffer her any thing, she will pockeeat all: if thou have
gold, she is a Horsleach, and will not out of thy bosom: but she hates an
empty purse, as the Hyenna does the fight of a man, and will fly from thee,
when thou art poor, as the foul from the Faulion. In plain terms, she is a
proud prorhane Harlot. And were she not profane, what Athiest would frequant
her? were she not bawdy, what Puncquatero would show his rotten teeth to her?
Were she not ridiculous, what country Gentiles would come to her? Were she not
full of toys and gewgawes, what Citizens would flock to her? In a word, Were
she not as she is, she would be like a Politician without a profound head, like
a flatterer without a glib tongue, like an Astronomer without eyes, a Musician
without hearing, a Soldier without hands, a Porter without a strong back, a
Gentleman usher without strait legs, a Lackey without feet, in no reputation.
But it is not so with her, for she is a Bona Roga: and the Petition which she
comes to present, must needs (no doubt) bring some good fruit, from that
corrupt tree.

Vouchsafe to look upon the lines of your humble Petitioner, The Harlots
Petition.
who from fifteen years of age has hene a woman of no carriage, living
always chaste both in town and country, and have had much dealing with many
of great ability, till of late that I failed of your furtherance, and missed
many of my customers. For whom, when I made a secret inquisition, and privy
search (fearing they had made a voyage to settle themselves in Virginia) I met
some of them prepared for Tiburne, others I found encountered with Counters, and
some laid up in houses of Hospitality: which unexpected sight did so appaleme,
that forthwith I thought good to present this Petition unto you: requesting
that such as are my well willers, may have some longer continuance of your
favors, and not taste so suddenly of your frowns, (which will be my utter
undoing) so long as they have money or means. But when they are destitute of
both, then cast them off, let them steal and be hanged: which if they deny, I
wish you send them far enough: for there is nothing more combersome, then
impecunious hangers on.

There be also some of the officious (to whom I wish none of your favors) as
the only causers of our overthrows. Where there is one of these officers, I
would there were twenty.
For they hunt us like Hares, and ferrit us like Conyes. They tie us to stakes
like Bears, and whip us like Iades. They drive us from post to pillar, that
were we not predestinate as it were to live chaste, they would compel us even
against our Fate to become chaste, they do so chase us from country to city,
from city to suburbs, from houses and husbands, to cousens and allies, where
we lead a life like brute beasts among grass, trees; etc. Or live like the
old water-Nymphs, or Fairies (which pinched poor men) in wels and ditches. As
Shorditch and Clarkenwell. I therefore sue to have an Habeas Corpus served upon
them, especially certain little Annimals, called Beagles, who seeing poor
Does prostrate before their feet, have notwithstanding the heart to hurt, and
draw blood from their ribs and shoulders.

Maddona Meretrix.

The Baude comes to the Harlot.
Go thy ways, The Baude.
thy fools bolt is shot a Cookheight against the stars, which will light
upon thine own head. Here is a Petition indeed, if all Petitions should be
granted. But there is another come unto her, she should be a young woman by her
great belly: but now she yawneth, I see the mark is out of her mouth, she
walloweth like a Sow with pigge, talks very imperiously, and is clad most
modestly But I mistike one thing, she cougheth so sorely, are her lungs sound?

Out upon her (said Opinion) though she speak purely, The opinion of a Baude.
swear sparingly, look demurely, and walk sagely, yet her life is loathsome,
and behauior beastly. She has her roguish Rhetoric at her fingers, ends, and
can winch, kick, and fling when she sees her opportunity. She goes to the
Church with an ill will, unless to pick a pocket, or to pervert some honest
man's wife she is pued withal. But she will bestir her ^^mps to get easy room
in a Theater; and twenty to one she will lure some Buffard to dog her home at
the end of the Play. She lives by usury, but here is the difference: the
usurer puts but ten (over and above) to his hundredth in the year, But she
brings an hundredth to ten, nay to two sometimes in a week, Abominable filth as
she is, I wish thee to stop thy ears at her words, for she is a Mer-maide, or
rather Mar-maide.

Afilthie Baude.

The Spendall passes along.
Room for a Gentleman, The Spendall.
mark the motion my Masters: his dublet is of the ragged rank, with never a
button on it, and his breeches are very faulty, they must be mended, I marvel
he buyeth himself no better clothes now his rents begin to come in so fast:
Four pair of yarn stockings would make no great show upon those spindle
shankes: he looks very Lentenly and conuneth halting on.

This tottered Colt (said Opinion) which once had high desires, The Opinion of
the Spendal
has now low fortunes; his thoughts were wont to reach at stars, but now
stumble at stones. He was his fathers dotage, and his Mams darling: a toward
Springall you will say, when he lay with his mothers Chambermaide at sixteen:
and an untoward Spendall, when he had lauished the sixth part of a Million
before he knew six and twenty Birth days. He did of late swim in gluttonny,
but now is pinched with pennury. He was wont to devise what to eat, and is now
destitute of any food. He has worn more upon his back then the gold (which
procured passage for the Ass into the Castle) would defray. His quondam full
feeding makes him now took so emptily. His drinking so many healths has taken
all health from him: his so often leaping the pale, causes him look so pale:
his close following the fashion, brings him now (as you see) out of all form
and fashion: had he taken time before he might have lodged in an house like a
palace, as he does now in a place like a prison, lying like a Nutmeg in a
Grate, being the Emblem of unthriftiness, the Hierogliphicke of Riot, the
picture of the Prodigal, and the Indiuidium vagum of a poor pitiful
pennilesse Spendall.

Most humbly sueth a cashierd Caualiere, The Spendal^ Petition.
no Gentleman yet a knights son and heir, being richly bequeathed, and well
mannered, consorted with men of choice fashion, with women of famous report:
much indebted to merchants, and greatly bound to their wives. But at last
wanting present means to repay the one, and competent matter to come even with
the other, which did put me to my plunges, that I was constrained to colleague
with a Miser, Qui nummos admiratur: An usurer that does make much of money, who
upon some consideration of my good conditions did supply me for a time, but
when Doomes-day came, that I should render an account for all, all was gone, my
lands were seized upon, my credit ceased, and I clapped up amongst Bankrupts,
and borrowers: where now I must lie like a forlorn wretch, even ready to die
for want of relief: my friends pity me, my enemies play upon me. The end of
Riot.
All fly from me, none come nigh me, but merciless keepers, and miserable
caytiffes, who make me remember what I learned long ago.

Cum fuer is foelix multos numerabis amicos,
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes:
When I was mounted upon the chariot of Fortune, Gallants would converse with
me, Lawyers give attendance to my suites, Tradesmen cappe to me, Dependants
crouch to me, Brokers borrow for me, Usurers lend me, Flatterets extol me,
lusty Lasses advance me, stoop to me, and hang about my neck like goodly
Jewels, as they prove. But now I am trampled under the wheel of Chance, all is
turned topsie turuey, Qui nuper albus eram, nunc sum contrarius albo. Gallants
in their Pasquill humors begin to gird at me. Curia pauperibus clausa est.
Lawyers have no feeling of my case: Tradesmen will have no commerce with me;
Dependants hang down their heads as if they were going to hanging: Brokers
become boisterous: Usurers misuse me. Thus am I used for using them: thus am I
deceived for trusting them: thus am I despised for embracing them: thus am I
become a castaway for casting away my money amongst them. Now there is no
wealth left, they are all lost, now my gold is flowne they are all fled, and
now am I in want, they are all vanished like unto an empty cloud. Oh that you
would but send some Revenge upon some of them, that others of my rank, seeing
some of their falls, may shun the like places, and amend their follies, and they
themselves relent, and have their remorseles hearts turned: if out of their
bellies, honestye and upright dealing should have no great loss.

The Spendall.

The Sergeant attends on him.
Would all our Lusty-Guts would look in at this looking glass. The Sergeant.
He was as well rigged a Pinnace, as some that make a greater show, and as well
manned till the boisterous blasts of his own affections splitted him upon the
rocks of Riot. He was as lovely as Laeander, before he cast himself into the
Sea of sensuality, and might in time have proved a Co-adiutor of his countries
weal, had he closed his cares at the inueigling of Sea-Lures, and shut his
mouth when Circe preferred him the cup to quaffe, which turned him to a beast,
or more wretched then a beast in these days, A beggar. But what is he that
attends him so closely in the gown.

It seems (said Opinion) that you neither trust nor are trusted: The opinion
of the Sergeant.
Either you have stood in no need of money, or you want credit to borrow: or if
you have borrowed, you pay according to promise, and appointment; else he would
have been so bold as to have clapped you upon the shoulder, and been better
acquauited with you, though you cared not greatly for his acquaintance, if ever
you came into the precincts of his Jurisdiction: He is an Officer, whose office
I disallow not, but dislike some of his fratrernitie in their extreme
executing of their duties, which will fawn like Spaniels, on such as bribe
them, and will be inquisitiue after them, where they are sure they are not: But
merciless Furies to haunt out poor men, which are disable to fee, and feed
them with rewards, and that which shows them to be no Christians on the
Sabboath day: He is at the best but a decayed Tradesman, or unthrifty Occupier,
which, how dissolutely or basely soever he lived before, is good enough to be
as he is, The quartaine Fever to a Spendall: the Plague to bad Pay-maisters:
the Usurers foisting hound: a necessary nail in the finger of the Common
wealth to claw men by the poles.

A Sergeant.

The country Client passes along.
HE has never a Petition to prefer, The country Client.
unless against such as are wise enough to keep their money, while they have
it, and pay duly where they owe. But stay, what is he that noddeth next? if my
eyesight fail me not, a short corpulent fellow with a full face, and foul
hands, covered like a Capease all with leather, backed with a broad dagger, a
long sword which handles the forepart of his stops very rigorously: now is his
brown bonnet whipped between his legs, and he stands groping for his Petition.

This man (said Opinion) you see so plainly attird, is quite tered with
following the law: The opinion of the country Client.
who though he seem so plain, has as many crooked conditions in his
Costrell, as a slight of your finest fashionmongers. If he be Churchwarden, the
Parishoner he maligneth, is summoned upon suspicion, if he give but a well
looking Less a good morrow, or good night. If he be Constable, all the
Alewines are vndons: If his neighbor trespass against him, he will never
forgive him. He will worship any man for his commodity, but where he neither
fears nor hops, He is hail fellow, well met. Cocknies may laugh at him, as
he laggeth along the pauements, and Guls giggle when he passes by their proper
personages: but if he could get vantage, he would make them pay for the whole
dozen: Let him alone, whether he have his Oats, Pease, or Beans, yet he
wants no fetches. Lend an ear to his Petition, if it be truly speld, he
will conjure somebody.

Long have I lived, The country Clyents Petition.
and grieved to see so many citizens become Bankrouts, when Lawyers flourish,
and breath and braule to the utter ruin and undoing of such pooremen as my
self, who having an homely wife and children at home, am compelled to come in
Coram to this most dear City, where I lie at exceeding charges, following
the Law, which I feign would fly: But necessity has no Law, for having no
fees, I may find a Lawyer (adding but a Master to it) who has either no Law
in his budget, or no conscience in his breast. So my case has been considered,
and hung so long in Westminster hall, as my fathers Bowcase in mine own hall,
ever since he died, and left certain lands to be parted amongst his sons,
who, because we could not divide them according to every one of our contents,
were contented to crouch to certain Lawyers, who conceiving the controversy,
and perceiving us at such variance, like our friends and welwillers promised to
take our parts: and indeed not to belie them, they have been as good as their
promises, and have taken our parts, and not left us an hole, or part to thrust
our heads into. And now we lack vnde: they come over us with a Quare, which
puts us into a Quandary, to be sent far with never a farthing. It were
ingratitude not to requite our welwillers and partakers, or at least, to wish
well unto them that we cannot requite. My Petition therefore is, that you would
confer an hundredth marks or two upon such Pillars, or rather Caterpillars, I
mean such marks, as may mark them, to make others mark and beware of them.
But for those rare, admirable, miraculous, honest, conscionable, grave
deciders, which weigh the matter more then the money, prefer the Commonweal,
more then their own private wealth: plead for the poor, as well as Nobles:
permit the not guilty, overthrow the guilty; I pray that they may live many
merry and Hillarie terms, for the good of their country, and profit of
themselves, and their posterity.

The country Client.

The Hostler follows him.
SUre, said I, this Petition was never of his own making, it is pincked so
Pedantically, The Hostler.
cut upon fustian Phrases, and bound about with Mocke-adoes.

Resolve your self (answered Opinion) your countriman in many places is so
metamorphosed in manners now a days, and quaint terms, that you shall hardly
distinguish Pan from Apollo, but by the habit, and so captious in words, that
you can utter no ward that he will not equivocate, if the Idiome will bear it.
He speaks so ambiguously, that if his speech be construed one way, he knows
how to interpret it after another signification, and is not the man you take
him, for if you take him for a plain, silly, honest man at all times, The
Hostler leads the country Clients horse after him.
and in every respect. You have said enough of him, but I pray you what is he
for a man that does follow him, he has a stick in his hand, which he whisketh
as he leads the horse by the bridle.

He is as full of complement as his master an Innekeeper: You are welcome
Gentlemen, The opinion of a knave Hostler.
is all his eloquence, and that he shows as well to a clown, as a knight. At
your entrance into his stable, he will be so obsequious and servile, that he
will wipe your very horses heels. He stinketh like a Curricombe, and smells
as rank as Stale. He will give your horse a pecke of prouender (if it be your
pleasure) and steal half of it, if you eye him not narrowly. At night he
fills tho rack with hay, but in the morning you shall not find an handful,
though your horse, nor any other by him eat not a mouth full. If you abide any
long time and will hourly look unto your beast, as it is best (for the eye of
the master makes the horse fat) he can take order for his eating overmuch, by
greasing his teeth with a tallow candle. He loves drink likely, and a drab if
he be not married. He has no yearly wages of his master to maintain him,
but that which guests bestow upon him. To be brief with him: at your
departure, if you give him any thing in the chamber, when you make clear with
the house, he has a switch in one hand, and the bridle turned over the maine
of your horse, standing in readiness, to hold your stirrup steadfastly, and
bid you heartily farewell: But if he find you miserable, your saddle girts are
tied but slackly, and if you like them not, you may mend them your self, and
if you look not before you leap, you may perchance rue it. But he will hold
your stirrup if you bid him, he dare not deny it, it is a special point of his
profession, but slackely, and with the head on the one side: and he will bid
you farewell (as his master may hear) and be hanged, (that he muttereth to
himself.) Though he be a knave, yet he is a man of great calling (especially
when travelers ride early on their journey.

An Hostler.

The old Serving man passes along.
ECce autem alterum, Behold a blew coat with never a badge on it, The old
Seruingman.
the crown of his head like a Franciscans, Leno in facie, he looks leave in
the face, and lanke in the belly: All his apparel look as though they were
cast, a sign of a weak stomach to bear strong liquour. Look how he kisseth
his hand as if he were in love with it, and licketh the superficies of the
floor with his knees. Fie upon it, how semonious he is in delivering his
Petition. Those low legs, and kissing the hand (if he can cogge, and lie to)
would get him a service with some in the world, if he would serve three or
four years for no wages, he should have half a crown at parting.

Nay (said Opinion) he has been long enough in that predicament, and now can
show naught of his getting, The opinion of the old Seruingman.
unless children he dare not father. He was a pretty boy, an handsome
strippling, a proper man: peevish in his childhood, proud in his youth, and
prodigal in his best years: He has wasted his portion in hope of preferment:
spent his substance, looking for advancement; consumed quite all, in
expectation of some requital. His greatest felicity was to court the
chambermaids in some corner, and his chief exercise to make his masters
friends Seruingmen.
dependants drunk. He was trained up in some piece of a ioyners trade to make
legs, and the best part of his Rhetoric was, I forsooth, and No forsooth. The
iniunctios that he was tied to, were to rise at all hours, and to ride in all
seasons, eating that which was left, wearing that which was left, and marrying
oftentimes that which his master left. Which shows what he was, and is the
One that goes before.
Anteambulo of a Gentlewoman, the One that follows.
Subsequent of a Gentleman, the One that sits before.
Presedent of a Portmantle, or a Cloak bag.

An old Seruingman, a young beggar.
Not without cause do I creep to you with my Petition, The old Seruingmans
petition.
praying either better fortune hereafter, or revenge upon them that have so
slighted me off heretofore; who from my youth was brought up in service, not in
Gods service, but in the service of man and woman, waiting for that which now I
shall never get, because I can wait no longer. So long as I was strong, I was
backed with something: so long as I could perform all serviceable duties, I
wanted for no promises. But Time which turns all things, has turned me out
of service, and Age which alters all men, has changed me from the top of
Favor to the toe of Contempt. Being now used like an old horse, my cloak
plucked of my back, as his skin: Or an old dog, kicked with disdain of every
vpstart. Thus have I been served for all my serving: gained a dainty dish, for
caruing so many dainty dishes: got a goodly catch, for all my watching, and
catching cold, for all my running, and riding, tending, and tendering the
welfare of those, which consider none, but themselves. A man were better serve
hogs, then some men, many wives, most widows. Yet I would be loath to be
misconstrued, or thought to censure any, but curious fools, that none can
please: ungrateful wretches, which although a man has spent the prime of his
youth, hindered his fortunes, discharged the part of a faithful steward, when
his beauty fades, and strength fails, will thrust him from them (because he
cannot perform his wonted charge) without recompense or remorse. For the world
knows, and thousands acknowledge, the munificent liberality of true Gentry,
extended toward them, who by service have climbed up to honor, their masters
not envying them, but lending their own hand and strength to their ascentions,
whose childrens children are bound to pray for them: when others, respected
like my self, are forced to become humble Petitioners as I am, and are
contrarily indebted, to them and theirs, if they do not degenerate from their
Predecessors.

The old Seruingman.

The widow with the old Seruingman.
WEll (thought I) though the fellow have gained small wages, The Widow*
yet has he great words (wheresoever he got them) and can say something for
himself, though it avail him little. Let him he traveling toward Beggars
bush, and think of his sins in his masters Buttery. But stay a while he is
in communication with a seeming well demeaned woman, some what stricken in
years, yet well favored, and not past marriage.

She may do well you think (said Opinion) to make him a man, The opinion of
the widow.
which made her a woman, when time was (or else there are liers.) But if she be
wise, she will not hazard her goods and her self. That she has, she is sure
of, and put the case she wastes any thing her self, it will be less care,
then to have another to lash it out. The wild colt may prove a tame horse, but
a wild youth is oftentimes a wilful man. Vincere consuetudinem dura est
pugna. It is a fore conflict to subdue custom. She leads now a single life
(a singular life) she has her neck out of the yoke, she need not thrust it
into it again, unless she lust. If she can keep her self as she is, she is
well and a wealthy Widow.

The maid gotten with child comes along.
LEt them go together on Gods name (said I) but hei mihi, The maid gotten
with child.
what a woeful spectacle is this? faciem pulchram, an amiable face, and lovely
look: Pretty soul, why does she powder those fresh cheeks with salt tears?
Alas, she can scarce wallow, her belly is so full, yet she ioggeth along,
though every foot she looks to lie down.

This is one (answered Opinion) whom Nature has imbellished with her rarest
ornaments, The Opinion of the maid with child.
but fortune furnished with none of her riches. She was poor, therefore
despaired of an husband. Light of belief, therefore at this time heavy
bellied. Another Dido to believe some wandering AEneas: another AEnone to
credit some wandering Paris: another Phillis to trust some swearing Demophon.
He promised, and has fulfilled (but I do not say his promise.) Because he
swear he would never forsake her, she supposed he would surely have her: as
though he which makes no scruple to break the seventh Commandment, will make
any conscience to keep the third. The apples were fair, the tree comely, and
the devil at hand made her fall to them, which procured her fall, and that
fall was the cause of this swelling.

If ever any might proffer a Petition for right, The Petition of the maid with
child.
or revenge, I have as great reason as any, Being a pure and untouched virgin,
voted to Vesta, and devoted to Chastity, till a venerous villain with daily
assaults and nightly trecheries, never left battering the weak bulwark of my
heart with piercing words, vows, oaths, and protestations, darted from his
smooth tongue, till he had surprised me. Hearing him oftentimes swear, seeing
him tear his hair, nay, which is more strange for a man, weep in most
seeming sadness, kiss my hand with fear and trembling, and voluntarily
proffer, and perform much feruitude, which I neither desired nor deserved.
Being guiltless of effecting deceit, was free from suspecting: fearing to
break an oath, or violate a vow, trusted that he had been possessed with the
like fear, (as he was not) at last condescended. Which so soon as he had
accomplished, he left me: It is no glory to deceive a maid, no manhood to
overthrow the weaker vessel, Yet being outwardly garnished with the gorgeous
workmanship of Art and Nature, what labor will not some men take to attain
this vessel? what watchings will they not undergo? what wealth will they not
wast to compass it? And when they have gotten it, how do they esteem it? even
a toy to be played with for a time, and after too. For so soon as they eye
another device, they cast away the old, and never are in quiet till they are
fingering the new, Fie upon such, they are like warriors of old time, which
would spend much cost, and labor to subdue a city, and when they had brought
in into subjection, they would instantly leave it, and so march to another,
etc. Or like the fantastical fellows of our time, which cannot keep long in
one cut, but every foot have a fling at a new fashion: but all not so, and I
would there were fewer that are so.

The maid with child.

The Parriter rides after the maid with child.
I See one a far off, riding as it were to this maid, he will not be here
very soon, The Parriter
he is so ill horsed. In the mean time I will acquaint you with a jest not
unfit to be inserted in this place. There was a pretty maid which in her time
had many suitors, the first whereof was very urgent to have his delights with
her (as I heard a crooked legd knave term it:) she being a tender hearted
thing, as it seemed this was, after a little willing waywardness was won,
and lost together. After he had forsaken her, a second came, and served her in
like manner: then a third, and after a fourth, (birds of a feather, they flew
all after the foremost.) Being thus handled, she began to ware wary, and
forswore trusting. In this resolution a fifth came unto her, whose condition
was to try all, and if they did agree, he would come no more there. This
Gentleman wooing the foresaid supposed maid, set his wit and wealth upon the
tenters, to obtain his purpose, but nothing could prevail. She rayled most
egregiously against his dishonest and unjust request, and scorned the motion:
which pleased him very well (though he seemed discontented) and married her.
The second night they lay together, he began to speak thus unto her: Thou
know (sweet heart) how earnest I was to lie with thee before I might
lawfully; and I protest, if thou had suffered me, we had never been married
together. The wife, whether she was half a sleep, or ouer-ioyed, ^or had the
heart of an Owl (which they say causes women to reveal their secrets) laid
to her left pappe, Gesner.
answered him thus. Nay, nay, husband, I was wise enough for that, I trow: for
three or four had served me so before I ever beheld your face. This tale I
thought meet to set down in this place, that if any maid chance to read
over this book, she might take heed how she dishoner her self with any,
whether she marries or marries not, for it will breed future jealousy,
though she never after deserve it. The Parriter serves a Process, etc.
But now the horseman is alighted and reads something to the maid gotten
with child, what he is I cannot certainly say, but I do not like his looks,
nor that piece of parchment in his hand.

I will not run (said Opinion) into any particulars wfth him, The Opinion of
the Pariter.
he is better known in the country then in the city. And whosoever are
intus, or in cute (as I may speak) acquainted with him, know him to be an
honest man, or a knave.

Pariter.

The rejected lover walks along.
LEt him return that answer to the Court, and see if they can have an action
of slander against you, The Lover.
and observe him now that comes next with his Petition, so trimly tricked up:
not a hair amiss with him, unless that which hangs on the one side of his
shoulder, what a pourblinde Earber was he which polled him last. Come a little
nearer me, I see now, he can make his old cloak serve the turn, in the last
edition newly corrected and augmented, laced and interlaced. He has a stiff
neck, which God hates, and a strait dublet, which no faithful drunkard can
endure, for if he had it but one sitting, he would not leave if worth a button:
but the fashion of his breeches, sure he had an honest Tailor, else he might
have taken as much from both the outsides next his knees as would have made
him two ends of a wallet, which now are very like a pair of Smiths bellows,
standing with the smallest ends upwards. A sweet youth no doubt, for he has
two Roses on his shoes to quallifie the smell of his feese, if he have no
sockes, or one would make a Pope of him, and kiss his toe. But why does he
sigh so deeply, and look so sleepily?

This finicall fellow is no fool, although he be none of the wisest: he cares
no more for money (if he have it) so he may please his mistress, The
description of the Lover.
then for such metal as serves only for servile exchange: He can fit his
humor to every estate. If he be among Scholars he has Aristotle at his
fingers ends and every phrase smells of Cicero. He can show wit in quicks of
Sophistry, and reading in disputations of Philosophy. Amongst Courtiers he ran
brave it out as well as the rest, and court women, with most loving and amorous
prattle: with them he is in his Q. and keeps the old text, Bonum est nobis
esse hic. But their company so besets him, that he forgets with Ulysses to
stop his ears, and therefore the Sirens put him to shipwreck. He carries not
the Antidote of Caveat Emptor, against the alluring baits of their beauty,
and therefore Folly (for the most part) is his next haven.

He remembers not, that the eyes of wicked women are snares, and their words
charms; that their deceit is much, their desires more, The Lovers Petition.
and their covetousness most; which the more it drinks the more thirsty it
is: their consciences like a Pomice stone, light, and full of holes: whose
loves are for lucre, whose hearts are light on his person, and whose hands are
heavy on his purse. If he hit upon a Curtezan that is a little coy, though she
be altogether unchaste, his delight is to be on her lap: there he lies at
rack and manger, and thinks there are no more maids then Malkin. There he
sits like Sardanapalus, dallying with the flame, till he burn in the fire.
So as in the end, coming home by weeping Cross, he buyeth repentance with too
dear a price, and becomes at last, A fond, despised, and rejected Lover.

Being worn with grief, and wasted with discontent, I am constrained to seek
remedy and some ease to my mind, which you may afford by doing revenge upon
an inconstant Female, who plighted her faith to me, and privately proclaimed me
the sole Lord of her Microcosm: but before I was installed I was forestalled by
the undermining persuasions of a treacherous usurper, who with his servile
courtesies has insinuated himself into my dominions. Who would trust the wind?
A woman's words: who would rely upon a broken reed? a woman's oath. They sigh
for them that hate them, and laugh at most that love them. They will have some
that will not, and will have few that would feign. Some feeling of their folly
had he, which when he beheld his neighbors wife hang her self upon one of the
trees in her husbands orchyard, requested a graft of the same tree, to see if
it would bear any more of the like fruit. And no light burden did that
passenger account his wife, who, when the rest in the ship were willed to cast
all the bag and baggage, which did surcharge it, ouerboord, was most willing
to hurry his wife into the Sea. Some to show their learning, or rather
ignorance, may make large volumes of Encomi^ns in their behalfes, and get
perhaps a Judas kiss, or a flap with a Fox tail for their labors. For he
that has seen or read any thing at all of this Common place, shall find for
one Vesta, many vicious; for one Diana, many darlings; for one Lucrece, many
lascivious: did never any but Semeramis lie with her own son? Did never any
but Mirrha twine with her own father? Did never any but Biblis dote upon her
own brother? Did never any mistress but Josephus tempt her household servants?
One is no number, I would there were no number of these ones, upon which if you
fall, you will be

The forlorn Lover.

The country Schoolemaister comes to the Lover.
IT is happy you are so short, else we had been wearied with your lovely
Petition. The Country Schoolmaster.
Me thinks yonder is one that cringeth to him: all his apparel is not worth
one Mark, yet he has a hat on his head of the Spanish block: put the block
and his head together and see what they spell. Well done honest genus and
species (for thou seem inclining as it were, that way by thy habit, and pen
and inkehorne) read a piece of Ovid de Remedio amoris to him, for though he
rail unreasonably against women, yet I am persuaded he does chastise them, non
quod odio habet, sed quod amat.

Atque hoc humanum est (said Opinion) This man you see which makes such action
with his hands, The Opinion of the country Schoolmaster.
as he talks with the Lover, is one that keepth a foul coil in the Chancell
or Belfree of a Church. He is a most horrible Tyrant over little children, and
makes their breeches quauer with the shake of his Scepter, alias ye Rod. He
gets his living, non per se, but for the most part, per accidens. Yet he can
teach Grammar and AEsops Fables, for he has them both in print, translated
verbum de verbo. Howsoever scholars do esteem of him, ignorant Hobnailes hold
him for a rare Scholar, for he will speak Latin amongst them extrumpere, and
scan verses at his fingers ends. He is a man of sharp learing, which pearceth
hard words: he works by Rule, like a Carpenter, and can cast a figure, as if
he were a coniurer. He is very curious, and stands much a upon points, he may
fitly be coupled with the Lover. For either he is enamoured of his own good
parts, or in love with the waiting maid, if he tabled in a Gentleman house, and
sometimes wins her goodwill, but never can get her friends consent. To be
brief with him, as he is with his infants, a word and a blow: He is the
outside of a Schollee, an imperious commander over boys and wenehes, the head
master of the Peepe-taile trade

A Pedant.

The old woman married to a young man comes next.
SO let them all walk Newgate fashion, two by two: Who is that which hobleth
next? Christ bless the woman: The old woman married to a young man.
So, wipe your mouth with your Handkerchiefe after your coughing and spitting.
Her forehead is wrinckled like a paper lantern, which boys make: with two
thin cheeks, like two washed trenchers, between which, her nose seems like
the socket, wherein the snot stands like a piece of a farthing Candle. Her
mouth like a Cave with two clap doors, to wit, her two lips, without a bolt,
that is without a tooth, containing a Pilgrim, a wandering tongue, which mouth
(like a Cave) stands like a Cave between two sharp pointed hills, whose tops
do almost touch one another, her Nose and her Chinne.

Mock Age (said Opinion) and see how you will thrive. This toothlesse, The
opinion of the old woman married to the young man.
saplesse, senseless Beldam, was wife to an honest substantial man, who
during his youth endured much labor in gathering riches to maintain himself
in years, and her, if she should be superstes, or out live him, as she has.
So she had all he left (which was sufficient) at her own disposing, who was
bad enough disposed as it seemed: For as soon as her husband was surely
buried, she was all on the hoite, she could not lie alone. An husband was all
her care, and many grave men she had choice of, but she gave small
intertainement to any of their hair, she had rather have the leg of a Lark,
then the body of a Kite: yet the feathers hang in her Maw, which she cannot
digest nor vomit, till death lance her throat with his razor. Her Petition
will reueals all, for women cannot keep their own secrets. Only this, she
is, as it were, a bush of thorns thrust to the hinder parts of a Colt. A very
old woman married to a young man.

Though I might have been better advised by my friends, The Petition of the old
woman married to the yongman.
forewarning (I confess) yet since I am in the like pickle as others, and have
had no less misfortune then they, I may water my woes, and cannot choose but
put up my Petition with theirs. Who as it is well known, was wealthy, and
therefore soon won: an old woman, and therefore soonest wronged by a
beggarly varlet: who at my first view seemed so ciuilly behaved, as none could
mislike him: so well proportioned, as I could not choose but like him,
especially having an honest vocation, as he professed, and was well descended
though a younger brother, which had his portion to take, as he brought me
Certificate. But now I perceive these were but tricks to catch Dotterils. His
smooth tongue being his only friend, the lleight and craft of his hands, his
only handie-craft, his proportion his only portion, which he had to take. For
after we were married he soothed me up, till I showed him my substance, and
improuidently without any further trial, committed it to his tuition: which
when he had made sure, he handled me most ingratefully: never touching my lips
but with his fist, nor warming my fides, but with an ell I used to measure
cloth: alleging that if I exclaimed against him, he might safely swear, he
did never beat me without measure. He would not be contented to waste
himself and my riches amongst whores and roysters all the day: but at
unseasonable times, when I was in bed, rush into my house with his queans at
his heels, and rouse me out of my rest: make me to remake my bed with fresh
sheets for his Truls, and would leap in amongst them, I being compelled to
hold the candle to the Devil, whilst he did his deeds of darkness: Thus did
he use me, till I complained to Authority which relieved me, reviled and
extruded him my house and company. Then did he depart like a Sheepe-biter,
retiring himself into a private chamber, cast off his gilded Rapier, spruce
leather Boots, and Spurs, got him a Cloak without laces, made a Dublet with
a falling choler, wore Gloves of sixepence a pair on his hands: no points on
his Breeches, but at the wastband: a pair of sad colored stockings, tied up
straight with Garters no broader then an Usurers belt, and his Shooe-latches
bound together with russet Inckle: frequented Sermons, sent me most passionate
letters, that he had renounced Roisters, abiured whores, settled himhimselfe to
a stayed and religious course, and that he shamed to appear in the place I
dwelled, he had so wronged me and himself. But if I would go into the country
with him, he would purchase some convenient place, where he might live
solitary from all company, but my self, and servants. His fained repentance
seemed so hearty, and his flattering lines wrought so with me, that we became
attoned, made money of all, and went together, and for three or four days he
used me kindly and lay very quietly with me in the nights, but the fifth night
(being far from my friends) when I was fast asleep, and never dreamed of any
such matter, stole all I had, and ran away, what way I cannot hear, or
learn any tidings.

The old woman married with the young man.

The Clarke comes to the old woman.
THis is the end of liquorice, The Clarke.
when a woman has never a tooth in her head to chaw it. At a glimpse I see a
young man with her. Has she not yet abandoned the company of men without
beards? If he be not the man she spoke so much of, what is he?

He is one that you shall seldom see without clean linen, The opinion of a
Clarke.
he wears good clothes, and can write a legible hand: he has a little
learning, and will show it all if you conferro with him: when he rides abroad
with his master, he carries two hats, and walks with a case of Rapiers, one
by his side, the other in his hand, his masters and his own. At dinner or
supper, either at home or elsewhere, he waits at his masters elbowe with a
trencher at his back, yet he can reach a clean voider to any of the table,
if he take a liking to the piece he has en his foul trencher, he marries his
masters daughter sometimes, which he has stolen away, (God a mercy
Opportunity.) He can make bonds and obligations to pleasure the parish, if
their Uicar have not so much Latin, and indite a love letter for himself or
his fellows: if any misdemeanour be committed near him, when complaint is
made thereof, he writes warrants to apprehend the offenders. He is a Justices
Clarke, which may warrant this old woman for getting her husband or her goods
again, though she pray, and pay never so many warrants.

The young woman comes married to an old man.
ANother passes on passing portly, The young woman.
a sweet woman, she smells hither: and a rolling eye she has, it turns
with a trice on both sides: a fair hair, if it be her own: a rare face if it
be not painted: a white skin, if it be not plastered: a full breast, if it be
not bolstered: a strait back, if it be not helped: a slender waste, if it be
not pinched: a likely leg if it be not lined: a pretty foot, if it be not in
the Shoomakers stocks: a fair, rare, sweet, meet body, if it be not
dishonest.

Your supposes pose me (said Opinion) neither can I say or gainesay. The
opinion of the young woman married to the old Man.
Nature in beauty is better then Art; yet Art in show surpasses Nature. She
is proudly attired, yet perchance humbly minded: loftily advanced, yet it may
be lowly descended: vildly suspected, yet peradventure virtuously addicted. The
world now adays is round with such as she is, and too rash in their censures:
condemning such as are innocent, and quitting many that are culpable: but that
which is past mending is past meddling withal. Therefore leave it, and look
upon this luster: fair she is and virtuous: riches she enioyes, yet has no
great joy of riches: married she is, yet I make question, whether she be a
maid or no, being a young woman married to a very old jealous man.

My requests are not unreasonable, The Petition of the young Woman married to
the old Man.
nor void of good cause, being a woman of tender age, as your eyes may
witness, and of a vexed spirit, as these lines will manifest: that would choose
rather to be laid in my grave then on my bed; feed of the worms, then eat
with such a worme-eaten old jealous husband as I do: whose age I do
reverence, and find fault with no deformity, which time has thrust upon him,
but with his causlesse suspicions, and immerited mistrusts of me. For did he
hemme more then a town of Taylers, or hawke oftener then a country of
Faulkners, I could endure it, I am so enured thereunto: were the parts of his
body never so nauseas and detestable, I could away with the^, so his reason
were sound and sauory: but his wisdom (like his eyes) is sunk into his head,
too far for hereafter appearing: his will stronger then his breath: his
understanding feebler then his fingers: and his judgment corrupter then his
body. The praise of some old Men.
It is an admiration to see the difference of some of his years, how directly
they will talk, what majesty is in their looks, what wisdom in their
discourse? Not a word without his weight, not a sentence without good sense:
not a deed unless absolutely performed. They will blame nothing that is not
blame worthy, nor condemn any without assured reason. But my Zelotipus
raileth without reason, knocks his staff against the stones, blames me without
offense. Oh that some good Fortune would therefore cure me of this care, and
salve me of this sorrow: For never shall I reap days rest, nights content,
hours quiet, minutes mirth, so long as I have this impostume in my head, this
pin and web in mine eye, this canker in my nose, this scabbe on my lip,
this jealous old husband.

The young woman married with a very old jealous man.
Now I hear this Petition, it brings into my mind a merry conceit. There
was a very old man, which married a maid, who meeting a friend of his, did
importune him to know what the people spoke of his marriage. Who made him this
answer: There was a poor man which had but one pecke of corn to grind, and
would needs build a Mill to grind it, and when he had ground his corn, the
mill stood empty, so that afterward all the neighbors came to grind their
grists there. This I infer, not to defame any, but to show how ready the
world is to speak the worst.

Whatsoever you say (said Opinion) unequal marriages do mar ages, and such
made matches as these, prove but mad matches, yet of the two, I hold it more
conuient that old Tithon should have a fresh Amora, then an aged woman to be
linked in matrimony with a beardlesse boy.

The Cuckold passes along.
SUfficnt for this theme, another does appear or rather peer. The Cuckold
Heavens secure my senses, if I be not distracted, he is a Proteus, a Camelion,
an Omnigatherum, God make him an honest man, for I would be loath to make any
one such a one as he is.

He will trouble me to paint him, The Opinion of a Cuckold
(said Opinion) I know not what colors to lay upon his face, for some times
he is of a sanguine complexion, sometimes he looks pale, sometimes tawny, or
Moritawny, like Tobacco. Neither can I tell how to frame him, for he is
sometimes tall, sometimes low, sometimes gross, sometimes gracile. Nor
expressly say what vocation he is of, for sometimes he is a Citizen, sometimes a
Farmer sometimes a Lawyer; sometimes a Scholar, etc. He has a proper woman to
his wife, yet common, he toyleth to maintain other men's labors, yet he
reapeth that which he never wrought for, he wastes all the corn in his own
hatches on other men's Barnes, yet he keeps that which he never got, But to
draw you out of this Laborinth with one line, Cornu ferit ille, If he have not
Corns on his Toos, he has Horns on his Head. He is his wives fool amongst
her copesmates, wanton wenches pastime amongst themselves, and wagges game to
play at with two fingers.

A Cuckold.
Loath I am to bewray my griefs unto you, The Cuckolds Petition.
did not the loathing of the life I lead egg me against my nature to wish
that I would not: I have many years been bound in a bond, which has undone
me, yoaked with a curtall which has plaide me many Iades tricks, a wanton
wayward well favored wife: who falsifying her faith and breaking the bonds she
sealed most solempnely before a congregation, does often that which shame
sylenceth me for uttering. I dare not meet her, she keeps such courageous
company I cannot content her any way, she has outwardly what she likes
vnwardly: and what she thrustes away with one finger, she pulles again with
both her hands: when I fawn on her, she will be froward: If I be but a little
absent, she wishes my presence. Her thoughts are like Babyes fancies, that
will, and will not. My deeds cannot suffice her, for she is a woman, My speech
cannot please her she is so captious, nor my looks like her, she is so
curious. None feel the rages of deseases, but they which have them. None so
truly know the torments of hell, as they which feel them? Nor any feels the
torments, or knows the rages, that I do, unless he live in such an hell, or
have the like desease, as I have. Many, are haunted with hagges, but never any
with such an haggarde: They live caute though not cast: but my Venus lies so
visibly in her Networkes, that not only Gods eyes, but men's behold her. Yet
feign would I reform her, but neither fair means can persuade her, nor foul
scarre her. If I endeavor with good counsel to dissawde her from her former
follies, her answer is, I preach too learnedly for her to edify by me. If I
plead plainly with her, then at the next word, I am Sir John Lacklatine: If I
can collect some witty saying fit for my purpose, that will touch her to the
quick, then she says, I am all wit, or a wit all: If I threaten her, she has
enough to shield her: If I mention but a bill of diuorcement, it is her only
desire: If I keep her short of money, she makes deuillish oaths and vows
that she will have Money, or some body shall pay for it: if I for quietness sake
should lock her up into her chamber, the next time I stir abroad, I am
arrested for some debt of hers, which she ran into for such a purpose. In me
turba ruunt luxuriosa proci,
In mea regnant nullis prohibentabus, aula.
Never shall I enjoy rest, so long as she and I breath together. Such
therefore as have not the same causes of complaints as I have, and yet live
not contented I wish their fortunes to be, that they may be troubled with my
pain and headache.

The Cuckold,

The old Soldier comes along.
BUt stay, heeres an other limpeth a long: pity a me, an Hetaroclite, The old
Soldier.
he lacks an hand. There are scarres on his face, would scarre a timorous
body to behold: he looks gravely, as though he had not long to live, and
leans upon his trunchion, as if his body were about to fall away: come
along lustily, and halt not before thy friends. Sure he is a man of worth
for he has his hangers on.

Your jests (said Opinion) are too tart, The Opinion of the old Soldier.
and your merryment over much upon so monefull a Man, which deserves to be
pittyed, rather then to be plaide upon, and meriteth releife more then mocking.
He has borne Arms, howsoever now he be disarmed: he has had a sword to
stieke by him, though now he has no other weapon then a stieke in his hand: he
has lost his limbs but not in some drunken fray, and got those Cycatrices,
but not in the defense of any Cocatrices: He has fought against the walls of
the enemy but never fought against any for the wall, as he walked in the
street. He will not stabbe for the lie, and yet he will not take the lie in
his Countries disgrace. He is none of your swashing Captains, that usurp the
title, when they never fought under any colors but Venus-es: and they will
dye rather then they will fly from her colors. Never handled piece, unless
of meat, bread etc. Never discharged shot unless in a Tavern where they met
with too hot shots sometimes for their discharging. Neither is he any of your
counterfeit Duello's, discoursing of battles they never came near, telling of
monsters they never beheld, unless in a painted cloth: swearing they were hurt
in the defense of Christianity against Mahomotistes, when if they were wounded,
it was at Groyne at farthest. He is no Triton of his own praises: nor
Chronologer of his old exploites, he is an arrant Coward in wrangling brawles,
a more Crauen in unjust conflictes, a very Pigmey in paltrey frayes: but in a
just cause as valorous as Hector, and as puissant as Hercules, a true,
faithful and religious Soldier.

My humble suit is for better Fortune, The Petition of the old Soldier.
for men are now become so ungrateful and hard hearted, that they do not
consider those which have been their friends, nor reward such as when need
served, warded them from imminent distresses: the times past no man thinks
upon: the time to come few dream of: but all are for the time present. A
Soldier has helped them, and now God help Soldiers, for not many will: a
soldier may help them, and then may help himself, and then they will help
him also: but now a Soldier does them no good, and therefore they will do him
as little. They live in peace, that brings plenty, and that pride: but pride
may have a fall, and peace and plenty their hoods turned over their heads:
which I neither wish nor pray for, but if they have, Spernitur orator bonus,
horridus milos amatur. In the mean time, we, who have wholly decayed our
limbs, and impouerished our estates in the wars, may show our scarres to
vncompassionate eyes, and receive no further help then Christ help you, good
words, would we were able: good wishes for themselves: when as the superfluity
of one pair of their shoe-ties would yield us much comfort: but I cannot,
neither will I go about to condemn any absolutely, the world is so pestered
with idle vagabonds, which under the name of Soldiers and forged pasports,
have so wronged some, that it withdraws the hearts of most from conferring
their benevolence upon any: for I am persuaded that no true borne spirit will
deny some relief to a true Soldiers in his want. And Pre-eminence has
allowed them well, though it be ill enough distributed in some places: the
fault is not in the giuers, but of inferiors which are put in trust to dispose
it. But the God of war has so many Apostataes, that the true borne, fare the
worse for the illegitimate. This boon I therefore crave, that all the ranks of
rogues, and runnagates, shrouding themselves in the cast-suites of Soldiers,
might be rooted out, or sent upon a boon voyage to the new found Land, by
which means Hens and Capons may sit at roost quietly in the night, and pecke
about the garth all the day: shirts and other naperie hang upon hedges, till
the Sun set, shops be kept shut, and windows stand vvide open to let in air,
without fear of Creepers, to the great comfort both of city, and country.

The old Soldier.

The Prentise comes along.
When the Lion was old, The Prentise.
the Ass came and kicked him: and when a Soldier has lost his limbs, every
coward will crow over him. I would say more in thy behalf, and do as much as
I speak, if I were able. But I am anticipated by the speedy entrance of
another, with his cloak clapped under his left Arm. A pretty youth, very
decently apparelled, but he goes very fast, as if he went of an errant, what
may he be.

He may be a man (said Opinion) if he live, The opinion of the Prentise.
an honest man man if he live upright. A sound man, if he fly surfets, and
whores: a thriuing man if he shun riotous company: a rich man, if he be
thriuing: a Sheriff, if he be a rich man: An Alderman if he be a Sheriff: A
Mayor, if he be an Alderman: a Knight if he be a Mayor: But yet he is a
Prentise.

Diverse are the calamities of some of my rank, The Petition of the prentice
and many the miseries they are exposed to, faring hardly, and laboring
hardly: but such as will we are Gold must get it, they which will win honor
must wage with many adventures: He which thincketh to proffit must cashier the
very thought of pleasure, Ryding with care and running with pain: Sitting with
providence, and lying with consideration: Eating with frugality and drincking
with moderation: Since therefore honorable men must endeavor for Renown:
Learned men study for their knowledge: Richmen labor for their gains:
Tradesmen travel for their Sciences: All men, (which will live like men in
their age) labor like beasts in their youth, unless they have Lands to trust
to: My meaning is not to disparage learning, because it is hard to attain
dispraise honor, because it is difficult to get: discourage Prentises, because
their beginnings are laborious: for I have read that the base of Pernassus is
full of briers, thorns, and thistles, but the top, plain as heaven, and
smooth as the Moons face. I have heard that the steps which ascend to
honor, are like the stairs which mount to the hight of a Maze, many and
endless. The doors conducting thereunto, infinite, and intricate, but the top
like the top of Olimpus, and the rooms pleasant, and spacious, garnished
with more then mortal objects. And I know by Experience that the skill and
secrecy of mechanical Arts, are not got (like a loose woman) at first sight.
Neither will yield any great proffit at first laboring, any more then a
barrein ground at the first sowing, I do not therefore Cavil with my calling,
nor am pensive for the pains I endure; but the original of all my sorrow is a
Mistress so peevish, proud, petulant: oh si fas dicere. She came naked into
the City and shall return naked out of the city, unless she do penance with
a white sheet pind about her when she is dead, as she deserves now she
lives. Her Mother is very well known for a poor woman, but I think she
never knew her father. My honest master married her for love, and had naught
with her, and he is likely to have naught so long as he has her: yet she
flaunteth with the finest, and gaddeth abroad with the giddiest: looks for
greater service then an Empress; and more duty then a Duchess: envying all
that are more bravely trapped then her self, and confederates with few, but
such as are wantonly entrapped as she is. Her Wenches feel the weight of her
light fingers, and we have many a peale wrong about our ears too: We wait all
the day to serve our masters Chapmen, but when any of her Customers come, we
are sent abroad on a sleeuelesse errand, and then what becomes of our masters
ware? I do now wish that some fair Chance may light upon her, to rid my
suspectlesse master of so foul a mischief, both for his own sake and
welfare, and the future quietness of his trusty Servants. But to all good
Mistresses, whose conditions are contrary to hers, I do wish Fortune to pour
upon them the abundance of her favors.

The Prentise.

The Mal-content walks along.
Well said young Prentise, The Malcontent.
Macte tua virtute puer, Sic itur ad astra. Proceed as thou have begun, and
doubt not to become a good Common weales-man, when thou have gotten thee a
bigger purse, a better office, and a larger beard. Another ioggeth along,
spurning the pauement as if he were angry with it. For shame let not thine hat
hang over thine eyes? Do thou despair of thy face, thou maskst it so with
thy cloak? hold up thine head like a man: and pin thy band thou slouen;
Button thy wrists, it is wholesome, and garter thy stockings it is hansome.

His thoughts (said Opinion) are as confused, The Opinion of the Malcontent.
as his apparel: he brableth with his stars, and brauleth at his creation:
he wishes the Caul which wrapped him in his mothers womb, had been his
winding sheet: and he which breathed that Promotheon fire into him, had put it
out. The welfare of others is his bane, and their ruin Balsamum to him: He
thinks better of himself then he diserueth, and worse of others then they
demerit: He preaches that which he will not follow, and follows that which no
true Christian will preach: his words are lightning, which though they alight
upon all, yet they fire few: what he thinks, he bolteth out without charity.
He wipeth vices tail with his tongue, and that is the reason his words are so
unsavory. He is like a bauling dog, that barks at all that gallops on
horseback, when he goes a foot: like a mad dog that snappeth at all that
meet him: like a mastiffe that worrieth oftentimes such as come near him. He
is other men's foe, and none of his own friend: he disliketh both extremes, and
thinks meanly of the mean: he is a Misanthropos, which hates men, a
Narcissus which loves not women, a Diogenes which carpeth at all, a malicious
Mal-content.

If you tender the welfare of a Discontent, The Mal-contents Petition.
whose perturbed Spirit, haunteth you in this white sheet, pour down your
disastrous accidents upon the worlds wasters, disorders, vice, and villainy. Say
this Petition be prejudicial to many: many have stradled over the like style,
and more would walk in the same path, were they not extruded and excluded.
What rare Machiauils (right matchless villains) how many be directed to the
Barathrum of beggary, so they be mounted upon the heaven of honor? What
remorse has a reprobate who starve and want clothing, so he be full fed, and
gorgeously arrayed? I am no Spaniell to fawn upon men, nor little Puppy to
lick the excrements of women. The Devil domineereth like a great commander,
and his soldiers march under the color of honesty, which now a days is
accounted like a strumpet, He which uses it shall die a beggar. Covetousness is
become a Tradesman, and Pride his wife. Drunkenness the only sociable
companion, and Lechery the sole good fellow: Gluttony is a great man, and Envy
a younger brother: Sloth has got a living: Oh Sodom, thou wast fired for thy
sins, yet thy sins escaped, and range hic and vbique, Old Tire, thou wast
dejected, new tires are erected: Redit or bis in orbem. The Ass has got on
the Lions skin, lusty Hearts cast their horns amongst the Faunes: Spiders make
their Cobwebs in kings Courts: little Conyes undermine huge Castles, and pull
the walls upon their own heads: Omnium rerum vicissitudo. Freemen are become
slaves: Rich men turned beggars: Beggars changed to rich men, Asperius nihil
est. Oh tempore, oh mores! Beasts lie in houses, Serpents craule in corners,
Cooks keep in cities, Dawes in old Churches, Wag-tailes in great places:
Saint Peter's Vicar is turned Myner, and does traffic with Salt-peeter;
Monstrum inform, ingens, cui lumen veraepietatis est ademptum.

The Mal-content.

The poor Scholar walks by.
HE fisheth finely and is likely to catch Carpes, The poor Scholar.
and powtings. But what Mounsier Male-goe is this, that comes next, so
displaying the fretted Tuffe-Taffity-facing of his thread bare cloak? Cannot
he walk uprightly like an honest man, but iet it so like a Iennet, and wagge
his head to and frolike a Weathercocke? Fie upon it what Rusticall lagges he
makes like a Tennant, or a country Curate, which never came any nearer to an
Uniuersity then Lincoln Minster. Odit prophanu^ vulgens, He is none of your
Plebeians in his own conceit, but Apollos godson, christened in the Pirenean,
or Hyporrenean fount, he is a common Soldier under Mineruas ensign, and
fights like a Grammar scholar with Pen and Inkhorne.

Oh forbear (said Opinion) do not beray your own nest, The Opinion of a
poor Scholar.
turn not student of the law, and forget your old Academicall associates: yet
I think you speak not this out of malies to the parties, but of mere love,
that they seeing their foolish gates gibed at, may amend them: for theere are
some of your peart Iuuenals, that mince it, as if they were citizens wives: and
yet I will not say that it proceeds from any pride, or ouerweening conceit in
all that do so: but of an ill habit, which they have gotten by a careless and
fantastical carriage. But let that pass, and i will show you what this present
Petitioner is: to wit, One which though he did never eat Porridge in the Innes
of Court without a spoon^, yet he has made foul shift to devour his dinner
in a College without a Trencher; though he cannot carue a Capon without the
help of a Cleauer, or unlace a Rabbet like a cunning Caruer. Rostra disertus
amat, yet he can eat roast well enough to please himself. He is a King in his
own conceit: and has more in him then every one can conceive: He deserves
better favor then the world affords him: and yet he has as good favor as
any in the world which has no better then he has: How he has been estimated
in former times, it boots him not, yet he has Boots when he rides, though
he borrow them. To be short, and serious, he is rejected of fools, respected of
the wise, held in disgrace among profane, but in reverent reputation with
those, which are sincerely religious, Nothing regarded by the covetous and base
minded churles, but greatly rewarded by the liberal and truly descended
Gentilitie, a Scholar.

Would it not grieve that gentleman, The poor Scholars Petition.
which had sold his signories, and spent the money upon hopes of preferment, and
in fine, behold his inferiors advanced, and himself obtain no greater reward
then fair promises and faithles protestations? Would it not kill that
Soldiers heart with grief, which when he had lost his limbs, and left his
living for his Countries good, returning feeble, and decrepit to his native
Country, to be Caged, Stockt, and baited with Beadles? And would it not pine
that Scholar, and make him look like the vicar of Saint Albones, that has
been brought up seven years under the lanching lash of a left handed
Schoolmaster, and after that feed with 3. penny chops, and very singular beer
in an University, rose early, and watched late, Per tot discrimina reru^
tendimus ad latium, thorough many troubles we attain to Latin, and after all
this, to be a poor Pen-an-Inck-horne wearer, a Pedagog, one that teaches
Scholars for 5. pence the week, and at the quarter day is glad to take
choake-cheese, and barrel butter for the Summa Totalis: Proh deum, atque
hominum fidem. Oh that some fellow which had but a little wit, and no wisdom,
might trauerse this Parenthesis: Me think I apprehend him already how
unreasonably he would rail upon the 7. liberal Sciences, wish Pernassus
turned to a Molehill, and that Vulcan, when he claue Minerua out of Jupiters
brain, had knocked out the brains too, because that he carrying the Muses, as
familiars about him, should be pinched with want, when he knows many servile
grooms, whose qualities or dimentions are no way surpassing his, promoted from
the stable to the table, from the table to the bed. But hoe there Signiour: He
that can pick any thing out of a painted cloth, may perceive by fortune
painted muffled in a tree, throwing down upon some, Crowns: others, military
weapons: some bags of Gold, others Sackes of Salt: Some one thing, others
another thing: Some must be Kings and ouerrule all, some must be Soldiers, and
fight for their Country, some must be husbandmen, and dig commodity from the
earth, some must be Astronomers, and pluck proffit from the stars: some must
have more then they can carry, and such are richmen: some must be men of good
carriage, and can get little, and such are Porters: some must have livings
enough be queathed them, and some must not have so much as an hair left them:
some must lead the world in a string, and some must leave the world in a
string: Quae cum ita sint (oh most mutable) I do not grudge at my calamities,
but the causes: Aueroas Maecenasses and dunsticall Dondegoes, which will allow
a Scholar no more, that should waft them to heaven, then a Sculler that should
carry them along the Theams, or any other havens: Musas facientes Mulos:
Making the Muses, Mules, Iades, or Hacknies: For suppose a Scholar (like old
Byas) carries all his Lands about him, be intertaynd into any of their houses,
as many be: Though he be a good Gramarian, one that can chop Logic, and like
the freshman, returning from Athens, make three eggs of two, and his father
eating the two, bad him take the third for his cunning: imagine he can pretty
well in Philosophy natural, and metaphisicall, tell half an hundredth lies out
of Pliny: has some insight in Poetry, and if he had maintenance and
countenance would be come a sound Practitioner in the deepest Science: This
fellow for all this shall be lodged next the kitchen, where the Cooks, and
sculles keep such a scolding that they will take order for his studying: or in
some ruynous room, where his Masters Fathers Ghost is reported to walk: and
Robingood fellow and Hobgoblins, are said to play their fagayries in the night,
so that he will take no rest for sleeping and all the day he shall spend
himself poaring over my Lady Faynewoulds capable eldest: and three or four
froward (I should say toward) younger Brothers: for which turmoyles his yearly
stipend shall be 5. marks, besides the Patrons, or the Widows countenance:
Which may be so good that few Scholars having reasonable Noses in their faces,
would be loath to have it for forty pounds. Now for his fare, it is lightly
at the cheifest Table, but he must sit under the Salt, that is an Axiom in
such places: and before he take his seat, Memorandum he have two legs in store,
one for the Master, another for the Mistress: Then having drawn his Knife
leisurably, unfolded his Napkin mannerly, after twice or thrice wyping his
Beard (if he have it) he may reach the Bread on his Knifes point, and fall to
his porridge and between every Sponefull take as much deliberation, as a Capon
cra^ming (least he be out of his porridge before they have buried part of their
first course in their Bellyes) And at the second service (if there be any such
hot service) the refuse of the former shall be set before him, but oftentimes
like a rifled Soldier, having not so much as a good piece left, or like the
picture of death, all bones, which puts him in mind to decline bonus, bona,
bonum: but this must be understood to happen at an hunting dinner, or after he
has whipped his eldest Scholar, for so long as my young Master likes his
Scholemaister, and may take no farther at his lesson, then he list, his mother
will be most respective, but if he once contradict him, and printe winger upon
his posteriors, then laments are raisd, there is an insurrection amongst the
pen-boys Peter Prouin the horse-keeper will do Zauods that he will. The Cook
will put poison in his porridge, or work him some other mischief, if he
durst: then enters the Fleire, like the Chorus in a Tragedy, and tells all.
The mother like a tender hearted Auditor, pittieth the Scene, busseth her boy,
and tells him he shall be beaten no more, No, that he shall not. Thus does
the old fool hug young lackanapes, till she spoil him: yet here is not
the full Catastrophe, for she will never rest till she have lifted him out of
her house, and will have another in his room, it makes no matter what he be,
so he will not whippe her boy and serve for little wages, he will serve the
turn: I mary, this makes so many wild youths, and wise aged men: When the
earth is not well manured, tilled and ploughed, it is rank, and sterile, and
where youth wants nurture, age is ignorant, and ill mannered. The Bear by
licking her whelps brings them into some form, but many mothers by lolling
their children turn them out of all good fashion. The love of Parents toward
them children is natural and not to be blamed, but this Cockering is fond, and
hurtful: Wax being soft, will suffer any impression, and children being
young are as capable of goodness, if they be trained up thereafter: as they are
prone to knavery without any great inducements. The Colt at first backing will
curuet, and winch, but after he has chancked the bit a while, and felt the
Spur in his side, he becomes more tractable: Not an Hedgeplasher but can
say, he which will have a thorn, must cut a thorn, and if they would have
these tender plants to prove godly Columns in the Commonwealth, let them be
lopt, and dressed in dry season: let them be carefully tutored, and encouraged
by fair means, and reasonable recreation: If that will not work with them,
use a stronger potion: Qui non vult, duci, debet, trahi, He that will not go
gently, must be dragged discourteously: The tranquil government of our
commonwealth does sufficiently manifest, how much our Land is blessed with a
thrice worthy King: provident Counsel, upright Judges, learned and well
educated Gentlemen, zealous Divines, any cunning Lawiers enough, yet it may be
observed in some places where many are congregated about public affairs,
others shuffled in, which whilst the others are poising the weightiest matters,
sit like Ciphers, and if any question be put unto them. Obmutuerunt; Putas ne
verbum potuisse proloqui: They can tell the Clock dandle their gloves, or play
with their forepoints, their Mothers taught them those Lessons, when they satte
playing with them upon their Knees: They think they pleasure their Country,
if they vouchsafe their presence, and grace themselves, if they put of the
hatte hansomely, and nod the head with a Clowdy countenance, as who would say,
it is an hard case, but Verbum non amplius: And what is the cause of this, but
whilst the one kept close at their books both at home and abroad in the
University and Innes of Court, the other were yalping after a Kennel of Hounds,
in their youth, or whoping at an Owl in an Iuybush. Their parents would not be
at the cost to maintain a good Scholar to train them up* nor their Mothers
suffer them to endure any hardenesse, or labor: without which true knowledge
cannot be attained: And as many of these are careless for the well educating
of their children: So most of them are supine and negligent of themselves. What
cares the covetous Patron, so he can compound to his contentement: Be he one
of Bale Priests, or a bald Priest, if he can read the Authorized Service: Be he
of what Tribe he will, if he can hoble over an homily with a weeks warning: As
for monthly Sermons, it is but greasing a Parater; and the Churchwarden, is
his Tennant: he will be sworn on a book to an omne been: Infoelix oh semper
ouis. Too many places are full of such, which are more meet to be fishermen,
then fishers of men, and fitter to catch soales, then, souls, which either
behave themselves like the dog in the Manger, which neither would eat hay
himself, nor suffer the beast: Which either keep the childrens bread from
them, or if they give them any, they do so mouth it, and mangle it, that it
becomes most loathsome, coming from such filthy hands, and handling, which I
wish were otherwise, that the pouerties of pour Scholars might be pitied,
their Petitions preferred, their fortunes bettered, and what is amiss, might
be amended.

The poor Scholar.

The Scholar has frustrated my expectation (said I) for I did expect he
should have wished ill luck to light upon his enemies as the others have.
Touching his speech I durft auerre it to be true: For drones drive out the
Bees, and the wolves in sheeps clothing werry the Lambs: They take the
tithes, though they take not the pains. Amongst all which I think it reason,
that that Parson should have tyth porridge, which out of the heat of a good
stomach (I judge it was) taught his parishioners wives in a quarterly Sermon
four ways to heel a pot, when it began to sees over: A right worthy
domestical Chaplin for Helihogabalus, yet if you mark, it is a profitable
dish of doctrine, for unless it be fellowed, all the fat is in the fire: But
how now? who comes next? There are many Petitioners behind. How chance they
step not forward? I perceive the Beadle is angry, and will suffer no more to
be preferred or brought into the City, till answer be made to the rest that
are already exhibited.

A PROSOPOPAEIA OR IMAGINED ANSWER TO THE FORMER PETITIOners. by Dame Fortune
NO more Petitions, I have heard too much,
Too mischievous, and monstrous wickedness,
Nor will I condescend to any such
As seek by others woe to purchase bliss:
Your suites so wicked, your Petitions full
O sensual appetites, I disanull.
Fond worldlings, think you, that every furious curse
Belcht against your foes, shall bring them to their wrack?
Or every foolish wish your fancies nurse,
Will with an approbation be sent back?
Then should the world be as it first began,
Repleate with beasts, but dispossessed of man.
For as you are by natural instinct
Infirm, and subject to affections:
So are your wilful Supplications linckt
With others ruins, and subuersions:
But he that knows best what is good, what is ill,
Pays all, not as they would, but as he will.
And therefore know, that whosoere you curse,
Are not accursed for your curse alone,
Nor they whom you wish punishments, are worse
For your rash wishes public or unknown:
Nor I my self, if that I would, can do
Hurt to the parties, you incite me to.
For that Ens Entium, all the worlds first maker,
Existent without fine, and uncreate
Makes any thing the cause and joint pertaker
Of his consuming rage, to ruinate
His chiefest earthly fabric, when and where
He please, it from a sinful earth to tear.
Thus much ingenerall: Now I will regresse
More specially to each particular,
And as you did appear at first, redress,
To here your answers, which I Will not defer
With dull procrastinations, but begin
With her, who first put her Petition in.
Detested woman, The answer to the Harrlot
shame unto thy Sex,
Which prostitut'st thy body unto all,
Making thy self the filth and loathsome fex
That brings thine own decay and others thrall:
Leave of thy loathed trading, and be bound
A new to honesty, that's safe and sound.
Consider why thou were created first
To serve thy Maker, and bring forth increase,
From which, thy loathed life, and quenchles thirst
Of variable lust, compels thee cease.
For thy foul life so odious in heavens eye
Can leave the world no prosperous progeny.
Next call to mind the pleasures thou have past,
The dainty fare, sweet music, and delight,
How momentarily and soon they wast,
Like to a flash of lightning in the night,
Or like a Lark, that swiftly mounts the sky,
Now seen, but out of prospect by and by.
And last of all, think but upon thine end,
When Age begins to nestle in thy bones,
What anguishes thy former courses send,
Fraught with heart-wasting aches, pangs and groans:
And after all, how thou art sure to fry,
If thou do persevere, eternally.
Thou which have lauisht thy estate, and spent
Thy prime of time, To the Spendall.
in vnaduis'd excess,
Do not mispend the refidue that's lent
To cure thy cares, and drive thee from distress:
If thou have grace, there is grace enough in store,
For him that truly can that grace implore.
Lust, Pride and Riot, wrestling in thy breast,
Have given thy Fortunes, and thy self the fall,
Yet lie not groueling with despair oppressed,
Although thou can not all tha's past recall,
Thou may redeem that thou have pawned to hell,
Thy pittious soul hereafter, living well.
Thou country Client with inuectiue Jaws,
Darting thy malice and intestine grief, To the country Client.

Upon some bad peruerters of the Laws,
Shall ease thy self and purchase great relief,
By shunning the occasions of thy falls,
Uncharitable deeds, litigious brauls.
If thou would have revenge upon them all,
Live orderly, deuoyd of wrong and strife:
So may thou such contentious wrangles gall,
By leading a contented and mylde life:
For while each petty trespass, brawl and taunt,
Are took in snuff and dudgeon, Lawyers flaunt.
The Seruingman came next, which has reuilde
The slight rewarding of his youthful pains,
Though some that trust to others, are beguild,
Yet faithful service often reaps certain gains,
Ingratitude if rife, yet there are such
That deem no guerdon for their servants much.
But seeing thou felst (as thy Petition shows)
Between the griping claws of auerous churles,
Impatient speech, proclaimed against all those,
To further inconvenience hurles
Thy desperate state: how ere it did commence,
Take It as thy sins deserved recompense.
Thou, which were credulous to judge all true
A young man uttered in the heat of blood, To the Maid with child.

So piteously do now too late bedew
Thy cheeks with tears: it is a token good,
If they do trickle from a sorrowing soul,
Not for thy Loves loss, but thy deeds so foul.
Where sores are cureles, there is no help by care
Content will mittigate each Discontent,
Kept as a shield to ward thee from Despair,
And fierce assaults of future languishment,
The causer cannot thrive: what heretofore
You did commit, Repent: but sin no more.
You are too hot, too eager, and to keen
Against those you love so well, the female kind,
Bolting outrageous terms, To the Lover
oreclog'd with spleen,
From the distracted passions of your mind,
Sincerely virtuous, many may be found,
Though some with many vices do abound.
If one have wronged you, wrong not all for one
Nor dote on her, that has forsaken you,
One precious stone does cut another stone,
There Is plenty yet abroad, go get a new,
Seek with discretion, and doubt not to find
A constant Mate, that may content thy mind.
Old woman, To the old woman married with the young man.
leave complaining, it is too late
For you to lodge within a youngsters bed,
You are decrepit, and grown out of date
To reyne a flinging Colts, unwieldy head
A prayer book linckt to your shaking hands
Were fitter far then youngest wedlock bands.
Do not repine, To the young woman married to the old man.
or grudge, young lovely creature
At vnescaped Destiny, Marriage:
Nor macerate with cares your beauteous feature
Banning cannot abate your grief, nor rage
Nor any other thing salve your disease,
Until the cutting Destiny does please.
Imagine that thou art a weaned child
Hugd in the bosom of an aged nurse
Let deeds and words be dutiful and mild
Least they do make thy anguishes the worse,
For in a moment Age with Rage is tossed
And waxes most impatient, being crossed.
Thou that Petition'st against thy wives offense
Se thou be clear thy self of the like spot, To the Cuckold.

Then may thou with more right thy suite commence,
Or else take quietly thy crooked lot,
For he that strikes with Sword, it is decreed
Shall be restruck with Scabberd, till he bleed.
Courageous Soldier, To the Soldier.
whose true valorous heart
Was never daunted with inuading foes
But causd thy greatest enemies to start
(At thy assayling them) like timorous Doos,
Vanquish thy self, and chance which pulls thee down
A thing more mighty then to win a Town.
Live carefully young Prentise, To the Prentise.
be no waster
Of others goods, abandon filthy whores,
And dissolute assemblies: Please thy Master
And all the night keep close within his doors,
Roue not about the suburbs and the streets
When he does think you wrapped between your sheets.
Too many take such courses vile and base
To their own miseries and masters fall
But if thou do thy duty in thy place
And prouidently keep within thy stall,
When they ride bound, or lurk in some by-lnae
Thou may ride with thy foot-cloth, and gold chain,
Thou that in vain do wrangle with thy stars, To the Malecontent.

And cavil at the factes by others done,
Leave of thy selfe-destroying civil wars,
And intermedling with all others, shun,
Enormeties enough thou have to mend
If to thine own affairs thou do descend.
And to conclude, To all.
let all for certain know
That Gods reuengefull Iron Bow is bent
And shaftes in readiness to overthrow
Sins harbourers, that do not soon repent,
Let each one therefore his vilde courses meud,
A wicked life makes seldom a good end.
With that, me thought, I saw Fortune transported out of sight, and the
Petitioners made such an huming at her departure, as if it had been at the
applonsiue end of an Uniuersity oration, or other Scholar like exercise, that
they awaked me with the noise, who in the end, writ the premises.

FINIS.

