A PENSIVE Souls delight: OR, The Devout man's help. Consisting of Motives,
Meditations and Prayers,


For all persons and purposes, upon what occasion so ever, either private or
public.

By JOHN NORDEN.

PHILIP (...)

Be nothing careful, but in all things (...) be showed unto God in prayer and
supplication with giving of thanks. And the peace of God, (...) passes all
understanding, shall preserve your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

LONDON Printed by Will. Stansby, for John Busby, and are to be sold at his
shop in S. Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetstreete. 1615.

1. January called of the Latins, Ianuarius. Graecians. Gamelton. Hebrews,
Tebeth, and is their 10. month.
has 31. days.
1 A Calends. The first day of this Month Christ was circumcised, Luke 1. 21.
The tops of the mountains appeared unto Noah, Gen 8. 5. The Israelites put
away their wives, Ezra. 10. 16. 2 b 3 c Nones of Ia. 4 4 d Nones of Ia. 3 5 e
The 5. of this month word was brought unto Ezechiel the Prophet, that the
City Jerusalem was ^mitten, Ezechiel 33. 21. 6 f Day before the N. The sixth
of this month Christ was worshipped of the wise men. Mat. 2. 1 etc. baptized,
Mat. 3. 15. turned water into wine, Ioh. 2. 1. etc. as testifies Epiphanius. 7
g Nones of Ianuar. 8 A Idus of January. 8 9 b Idus of January. 7 10 c Idus of
January. 6 The 10. of this Month Nabuchadnezzar, King of Babel, moved thereunto
by the rebellion of Zedechiah, besieged Jerusalem most fiercely, as may appear
2. Kings. 25. etc. Ier. 52. 4. Also Ezechiel was willed to utter his parable,
Ezech. 2. etc. 11 d Idus of January. 5 12 e Idus of January. 4 13 f Idus of
January. 3 14 g Day before the Id. 15 A Idus of Januarie. 16 b Calends of
February. 17 17 c Calends of February. 16 18 d Calends of February. 15 19 e
Calends of February. 14 20 f Calends of February. 13 21 g Calends of
February. 12 22 A Calends of February. 11 23 b Calends of February. 10 24 c
Calends of February. 9 25 d Calends of February. 8 Paul called, and converted
the 25, of this month, Acts, 9. 3. 26 e Calends of February. 7 27 f Calends
of February. 6 28 g Calends of February. 5 29 A Calends of February. 4 30 b
Calends of February. 3 31 c Day before the Galends of Feb.

Festiual days in this month be Circumcision the first Epiphanie the sixth
day.

2. February, called of the Latins, Februarius. Graecia^s, El^phebolio^.
Hebrews, Shebat. and is their 11. month.
has 28. days unless it be year Biss^util, and then 29.
1 d Calends. The first of this month Moses repeated the Law unto the children
of Israel. Deuteronomy. 1. 3. 2 e Nones of Februar. 4 The second of this month our
Savior was presented to the Lord, and Marie purified, Luke 2. 22. 3 f Nones of
Februar. 3 4 g Day before the N. 5 A Nones of Februa. 6 b Idus of Februar. 8 7
c Idus of Februar. 7 8 d Idus of Februar. 6 9 e Idus of Februar. 5 The ninth of
this month, Noah. 40. days after he had seen the tops of the mountains, sent
out of the Ark a Raven, and afterward a Dove, which returned, Ge. 8. 6, etc. 10
f Idus of Februar. 4 11 g Idus of Februar. 3 12 A Day before the Id. 13 b Idus
of Februar. 14 c Calends of March. 17 15 d Calends of March. 16 The 15. of this
month, the Jews spend merrily together, for that the Spring of the year does
enter then, as they think. 16 e Calends of March. 15 The 16. of this month,
Noah the second time sent out a Dove, which returned with an Olive branch in
her bill. Genesis 8. 10. 17 f Calends of March. 14 18 g Calends of March. 13 19 A
Calends of March. 12 20 b Calends of March. 11 21 c Calends of March. 10 22 d
Calends of March. 9 23 e Calends of March. 8 24 f Calends of March. 7 The 24.
of this month, Zechariah was commanded to prophecy, Zechary 1. 7. Matthias was
elected into the number of the Apostles, Acts 1. 26. 25 g Calends of March. 6
26 A Calends of March. 5 27 b Calends of March. 4 28 c Calends of March. 3 29 d
Day before the Calends of March.

Festival days in this month be the 2. called the Purification of Saint
Marie. The (...). which is Saint M^thias day.

3. March called of the Latin^, Martius. Graecians, Mouuichyon, Hebrews, Adar:
and is their 12. month.
has ^1. days.
1 d Calends. 2 e Nones of March. 6 3 f Nones of March. 5 The Temple of
Jerusalem was finished the 3. day of this month Esra. 6. 15. In the 1. of Esdr.
7. 5. it is said to be the 23. of this month. 4 g Nones of March. 4 5 A Nones
of March. 3 6 b Day before the N. 7 c Nones of March. 8 d Idus of March. 8 9 e
Idus of March. 7 10 f Idus of March. 6 The tenth of this month, Christ was
advertised that Lazarus was sick Ioh. 11. 3. 11 g Idus of March. 5 12 A Idus
of March. 4 13 b Idus of March. 3 A feast was celebrated among the Jews, for
the overthrow of Nicanor the 13. of this month, 2. M^^. 15. 37. Also upon the
same day all the Jews under Ashuerosh were commanded to be put to death, Esth.
3. 13. upon the same day the Jews had a privilege given them to slay all
their enemies. Est. 8. 12. This day also the Jews solemnized for their ioifull
deliverance, Est. 8. 17. 14 c Day before the Id. The 14. day of this month was
called of the Jews, Mardocheus day, 2. Macc. 15. 37 also Purim, as may appear
Est(...). 9. verse. 21. 26. 15 d Idus of March. The 15. also is another day of
Purim, Est. 9. 21. 16 e Calends of April. 17 The 16. of this Month Lazarus
was raised from the dead, John 11. 43. 17 f Calends of April. 16 18 g Calends
of April. 15 19 A Calends of April. 14 20 b Calends of April. 13 21 c
Calends of April. 12 22 d Calends of April. 11 23 e Calends of April. 10 24
f Calends of April. 9 25 g Calends of April. 8 26 A Calends of April. 7 27 b
Calends of April. 6 28 c Calends of April. 5 29 d Calends of April. 4 30 e
Calends of April. 3 31 f Day before the Calends of April.

This Month has one testiual day called the Annunciation of Saint Mari^,
celebrated the 25. of this month.

4. April called of the Latins, Aprilis. Grecians, Thargelion Hebrews, Abib or
Nisan, and is their (...), month.
has 30 days.
1 g Calends. The first of this Month Noah uncovered the Arc, and saw earth,
Ge. 8. 13. Moses reared the Tabernacle, Exo 40. 2. 17, the Temple began to be
sanctified, (...). 29. 17. 2 A Nones of April. 4 3 b Nones of April. 3 4 c Day
before the N. 5 d Nones of April. 6 e Idus of April. 8 7 f Idus of April. 7 8 g
Idus of April. 6 9 A Idus of April. 5 10 b Idus of April. 4 The 10. of this
^onth the children of Israel ^aised through the river Iorda^ on dry foot, I^su.
4. 19. the Paschal Lamb was chosen. Exo. 12. 3. 11 c Idus of April. 3 12 d Day
before the Id. 13 e Idus of April. The 13. of this month the edict of King
Ahashuerosh came out for the murdering of the Jews. Esth. 3. 12. 14 f Calends
of May. 18 The 14. of this month the Passover was kept, Exo. 12. 6. Leuit. 23.
5. Ios. 5. 10. 15 g Calends of May. 17 The 15. of this month the Israelites
departed out of Egypt. Numb. 33. 3. 16 A Calends of May. 16 The 16. of this
month Hezekiah made an end of sanctifying and purging the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 20.
17. 17 b Calends of May. 15 18 c Calends of May. 14 The 18. of this month the
children of Israel walked on dry land through the midst of the red sea, Exodus
14. 19. 19 d Calends of May. 13 20 e Calends of May. 12 21 f Calends of May. 11
22 g Calends of May. 10 23 A Calends of May. 9 24 b Calends of May. 8 The 24,
Daniel saw his vision, Dan 10. 4. 25 c Calends of May. 7 26 d Calends of May. 6
27 e Calends of May. 5 28 f Calends of May. 4 29 g Calends of May. 3 30 A Day
before the Calends of May.

The 25. of this month the feast of S. Mark is observed.

5. May, called of the Latins, Maius. Graecians, Scrirophorion. Hebrews,
Liar, which is their 2. month.
has 31. days.
1 b Calends. The first of this Month Moses was commanded to number the
children of Israel. Numb. 11. etc. 2 c Nones of May. 6 3 d Nones of May. 5 4 e
Nones of May. 4 5 f Nones of May. 3 The 5. of this Month Christ is thought to
have ascended up into heaven, Mar. 16. 9. Luke 24. 51. Act. 19. They which
could not keep the Passover at the day appointed by the Lord, were willed to
celebrate the same the 14. of this month. Nu. 3^ v. 10. 11. So did the
Israelites at the commandment of King Hezekiah. 2. Chapter 30. 15. 6 g Day before
the N. 7 A Nones of May. 8 b Idus of May. 8 9 c Idus of May. 7 10 d Idus of
May. 6 11 e Idus of May. 5 12 f Idus of May. 4 13 g Idus of May. 3 14 A Day
before the Id 15 b Idus of May. 16 c Cal^nds of June, 17 The 16. day, Manna
rained from heaven. Exodus 16. 14. 17 d Cal^nds of June, 16 The 17. day Noah
entered the Arc, and the flood began. Genesis 7. 11. 13. 18 e Cal^nds of June, 15
19 f Cal^nds of June, 14 20 g Cal^nds of June, 13 21 A Cal^nds of June, 12 22 b
Cal^nds of June, 11 The 22. fire from Heaven consumed such as murmured against
the Lord. N(...) (...). 23 c Cal^nds of June, 10 The 23. the Israelites with
great joy triumphingly entered into the Castle of Jerusalem. 1 Mac. 13. 51. 24 d
Cal^nds of June, 9 25 e Cal^nds of June, 8 26 f Cal^nds of June, 7 27 g Cal^nds
of June, 6 Noah, the 27. the water being dried up, came forth of the Arc,
Genesis 8. 14 etc. 28 A Cal^nds of June, 5 29 b Cal^nds of June, 4 30 c Cal^nds of
June, 3 31 d Day before the Calends of June.

The first of this Month is usually celebrated for the fea^^ of Philip and
Jacob.

6. June, called of the Latins, Iunius. Giaecians, Ekatombaion. Hebrews.
Siuan, which is their third month.
has 30. days.
1 e Calends. The first coming of the children of Israel unto mount Sinai was
the 1. of this month, where they abode 11. months, and 20. days, in which
time all those things were done, recorded in Exodus cap. 19. 1. etc. 2 f Nones
of June. 4 3 g Nones of June. 3 4 A Day before the N. 5 b Nones of June. 6 c
Idus of June. 8 The sixth of this month Alexander that mighty Monarch of the
world was borne, of whom Dan. c. 11. 3. does prophesic. Also on this day that
famous temple of Diana in Ephesus, numbered among the 7. wonders of the world,
was set on fire by Herostratus. The Jews likewise kept their feast of
Pentecost on this day. 7 d Idus of June. 7 8 e Idus of June. 6 9 f Idus of
June. 5 10 g Idus of June. 4 11 ^ Idus of June. 3 12 b Day before the Id. 13 c
Idus of June. 14 d Calends of July. 18 15 e Calends of July. 17 16 f Calends of
July. 16 17 g Calends of July. 15 18 A Calends of July. 14 19 b Calends of
July. 13 20 c Calends of July. 12 21 d Calends of July. 11 22 e Calends of
July. 10 23 f Calends of July. 9 The 23 of this month the first edict came out
for the safety of Gods people the Jews, against Haman, and the rest of their
enemies, Esther. 8. 9. 24 g Calends of July. 8 25 A Calends of July. 7 26 b
Calends of July. 6 27 c Calends of July. 5 28 d Calends of July. 4 29 e Calends
of July. 3 The 29. of this month the Arc of Noah throught the increase of
waters was lifted up from the earth, Genesis 7. 12. 30 f Day before the Calends of
July.

Festival days in this month, are the 24. which is the feast of S. Ioh.
Baptist, 29. which is S. Peter's.

7. Iulie, called of the L^^ins, Iullus. Oraecia^s, Metag(...). H^brewes,
Thamus, being their 4. month.
has 31. days.
1 g Cale(...)s. 2 A Nones of July. 6 3 b Nones of July. 5 4 c Nones of July. 4
5 d Nones of July. 3 The 5. of this month Exechiel saw his visions. Ezeth: 1.
1. 6 e Day before the N. The 6. of this month the Capitol of Rome, counted one
of the 7. wonders of the world, was burned: and the mirror of Christian Princes
King Edward the sixth, died the sixth of this month, Ann^ ^553. 7 f Nones of
July. 8 g Idus of July. 8 9 A Idus of July. 7 The 9. of this month Jerusalem,
after it had a long while been besieged by Nebuchadnezzar, was (taken, Ier. 39,
2. 10 b Idus of July. 6 11 c Idus of July. 5 12 d Idus of July. 4 The ^2. of
this month, Julius Caesar, the first Roman Emperor was borne. Of him is this
month called July. 13 e Idus of July. 3 14 f Day before the Id. 15 g Idus of
July. 16 A Cal^nds of August. 17 17 b Cal^nds of August. 16 18 c Cal^nds of
August. 15 The 18. of this month, the Egyptians begin their year, Plin. lib.
(...). cap. 4^. 19 d Cal^nds of August. 14 20 e Cal^nds of August. 13 21 f
Cal^nds of August. 12 22 g Cal^nds of August. 11 23 A Cal^nds of August. 10 24
b Cal^nds of August. 9 25 c Cal^nds of August. 8 26 d Cal^nds of August. 7 27 e
Cal^nds of August. 6 28 f Cal^nds of August. 5 29 g Cal^nds of August. 4 30 A
Cal^nds of August. 3 31 b Day before the Cal^nds of August.

The 25. of this month is the feast of S. James the Apostle: and upon this day
K. James was crowned King of England. 1603.

8. August. called of the Latins, Augustus. Graecians, Boedr^mi^n. Hebrews,
Ab, which is their 5. month.
has 3^. days
1 c Calend. The first of this month, Aaron, 40. years after the children of
Israel were come out of Egypt, died on mo(...) Hor, Number. 33. 38. Also on this
day Ezra with his company came out of Babel unto Jerusalem, Ezra. 7. 9. 2 d
Nones of August. 4 3 e Nones of August. 3 4 f Day before the N. 5 g Nones of
August. 6 A Idus of August. 8 7 b Idus of August. 7 The 7. of this month
Nabuchadnezzar burnt the house of the Lord, and al Jerusalem. 2. King. 25.
(...). 9. 8 c Idus of August. 6 9 d Idus of August. 5 10 e Idus of August. 4
The 10. of this month, some think Jerusalem to have been burnt by the
Babylonians, Ierem. 52. 12. Josephus (lib. 5. cap. 26.) said it was burned
afterward by the Romans the same day. Therefore do the Jews on this day
observe a most straight fait, and go barefooted, and sitting on the ground,
read twice over the Lamentations of Jeremy. 11 f Idus of August. 3 12 g Day
before the Id 13 A Idus of August. 14 b Calends of September. 18 15 c Calends of
September. 17 16 d Calends of September. 16 17 e Calends of September. 15 18 f
Calends of September. 14 19 g Calends of September. 13 20 A Calends of September. 12
21 b Calends of September. 11 22 c Calends of September. 10 23 d Calends of
September. 9 24 e Calends of September. 8 25 f Calends of September. 7 26 g Calends
of September. 6 27 A Calends of September. 5 28 b Calends of September. 4 29 c
Calends of September. 3 30 (...) Day before the Calends of Sep. 31 e

The 24. of this month is usually called S. Barthelmewes day.

9. September called of the Latins, September. Graecians, Maimacterion.
Hebrews, Elul, which is their 6. month.
has 30. days.
1 f Calends. The first of this Month Haggai the Prophet began to prophecy,
Hag. 1. 1. 2 g Nones of September. 4 3 A Nones of September. 3 4 b Day before the
N. 5 c Nones of September. 6 d Idus of September. 8 The sixth of this month Ezechiel
saw another vision. Ezece. 8. 1. 7 e Idus of September. 7 The 7. of this month
our late most noble Queen Elizabeth was borne at Greenevvich, Anno, 153^. 8 f
Idus of September. 6 The 8. of this Month, Anno, 73. Jerusalem was utterly with
fire and svvord destroyed by Titus the Emperor. Joseph. lib. 7. cap. ^6. 9 g
Idus of September. 5 10 A Idus of September. 4 11 b Idus of September. 3 12 c Day
before the Id. 13 d Idus of September. 14 e Calends of October. 18 15 f Calends
of October. 17 16 g Calends of October. 16 17 A Calends of October. 15 18 b
Calends of October. 14 19 c Calends of October. 13 20 d Calends of October. 12
21 e Calends of October. 11 22 f Calends of October. 10 23 g Calends of
October. 9 24 (...) Calends of October. 8 25 b Calends of October. 7 The 25. of
this month, Nehemiah finished the vvalle^ of Jerusalem. Nehem. 6. 15. 26 c
Calends of October. 6 27 d Calends of October. 5 28 e Calends of October. 4 29
f Calends of October. 3 30 g Day before the Calends of October.

Festiual days in this month be the 21. S. Matthew. 29. S. Michael.


(...) O^^ob. called of the Latins, October. Graeciaus, Pianepsion. Hebrews,
Thisri, and is their 7. month.
has ^1. days.
1 A Calends. The 1. of this month the Jews celebrated the feast of Trumpets,
Leuit. 23. 24. the later Jews call this day the beginning of the new year.
Jerusalem, after it had bin possessed of Christian Princes 88. years, through
mortal dissension came into the hands of the Saracen, Ann. 1187. 2 b Nones of
October. 6 3 c Nones of October. 5 The 3 of this month some hinke the Jews
fasted for the death of Gedaliah: whereby occasion was offered to bring them
again into the miserable servitude of the Egyptians, 2. King. 25. 25. Ierem.
4^. 1. 2, etc. 4 d Nones of October. 4 5 e Nones of October. 3 6 f Day before
the N. 7 g Nones of October. 8 A Idus of October. 8 9 b Idus of October. 7 10 c
Idus of October. 6 The 10. of this month the feast of reconciliation was kept,
Leuit. 23. 27. So did the year of Iubil^ every fifty year begin as on the
same day, Leuit 25. 9. 11 d Idus of October. 5 12 e Idus of October. 4 13 f
Idus of October. 3 14 g Day before the Id. 15 A Idus of October The 15. of this
month the Jews observed the feast of Tabernacles 7. days together, in memory
of the ^ords protecting them in the desert, Leuit. 23. 34. 16 (...) Calends of
November. 17 17 c Calends of November. 16 18 d Calends of November. 15 19 (...)
Calends of November. 14 20 f Calends of November. 13 21 g Calends of November.
12 22 A Calends of November. 11 23 b Calends of November. 10 24 c Calends of
November. 9 25 d Calends of November. 8 26 e Calends of November. 7 27 f
Calends of November. 6 28 g Calends of November. 5 29 A Calends of November. 4
30 b Calends of November. 3 31 c Day before the Calends of Nouemb.

Festival days in this month are, 18. day, S. Luke. 28. Simon and Jude.

11. November called of the Latins, November, Graecians, Anthesterion.
Hebrews, Marbesuam, their 8. month.
has 30. days
1 d Calends. 2 e Nones of Nouemb. 4 3 f Nones of Nouemb. 3 The third of this
month Constantius the Emperor, Son to Constantinus the great, departed out
of this world, An. 364. Hist. tripart. in the end of the fist book. 4 g Day
before the N. 5 A Nones of Nouem. 6 b Idus of Nouemb. 8 7 c Idus of Nouemb. 7 8
d Idus of Nouemb. 6 9 e Idus of Nouemb. 5 10 f Idus of Nouemb. 4 The tenth of
this month An. 1483. D. Martin Luther was borne in Islebia. 11 g Idus of
Nouemb. 3 12 A Day before the Id. 13 b Idus of Nouemb. 14 c Calends of December.
18 15 d Calends of December. 17 The 15. of this month was made a new holiday by
Jeroboam without the commandment of God, whereupon he committed most ^icked
Idolatry in Dan and Bethel: but he remained not long unpunished, nor his people
vnplagued for the same, as may appear, 1. Kin. 12. verse 32. 33. 1. King. 13,
1 2. etc. 16 e Calends of December. 16 17 f Calends of December. 15 Queen
Elizabeth began happily to reign for the advancement of the Gospel of our
Savior Christ, the 17. of this month. 1558. 18 g Calends of December. 14 The
18. of this month T^tu, the Emperor most cruelly executed to death a great
number of the Jews, Joseph, lib. 7. cap. 10. 19 A Calends of December. 13 20 b
Calends of December. 12 21 c Calends of December. 11 22 d Calends of December. 10 23
e Calends of December. 9 24 f Calends of December. 8 25 g Calends of December. 7 26 A
Calends of December. 6 27 b Calends of December. 5 28 c Calends of December. 4 29 d
Calends of December. 3 30 e Day before the Calends of December.

Festival days in this month are the first day. The feast of All Saints. The
30. and last day, Saint Andrew the Apostle.

12. December called, of the Latins, Dec^mber. Graecians, Poseidon. Hebrews,
Sisleu, and is their 9. month.
has 31 days.
1 f Calends. 2 g Nones of December. 4 3 A Nones of December. 3 4 b Day before
the No. 5 c Nones of December. 6 d Idus of December. 8 7 e Idus of December. 7 8 f
Idus of December. 6 9 g Idus of December. 5 10 A Idus of December. 4 1^ b Idus of
December. 3 12 c Day before the Id. 13 d Idus of December. 14 e Calends of
January. 19 15 f Calends of January. 18 The 15. of this month Antiochus
placed an abominable Idol upon the altar of the Lord. 1. Macc. 1. 57. 16 g
Calends of January. 17 17 A Calends of January. 16 18 b Calends of January.
15 19 c Calends of January. 14 20 d Calends of January. 13 The 20 of this
month Esdra, exhorted the Israelites to put away their strange wives 1. Esd 9.
5. 6. etc. 21 e Calends of January. 12 22 f Calends of January. 11 23 g
Calends of January. 10 24 A Calends of January. 9 The foundation of the
second Temple was laid the 24. of this month. Hagg. 2. verse 11. 19. 25 b
Calends of January. 8 The 25. of this month our Savior Christ was borne of the
Virgin the year after the worlds creation, 40 18. On which day also Antiochus
Epiphane^ ent^ed into Jerusalem with a mighty army, (...) spoiled the same,
Ios. lib 21 c 16. On this day he profaned the altar of the Lord, 1. Macc. 1.
6^. which day also the Jews kept holy, because thereon the Temple was purged
from idolatry. 1. Mac. 4. ^9 26 c Calends of January. 7 27 d Calends of
January. 6 28 e Calends of January. 5 The 28. of this month He^od caused the
poor Inno^ents to be ^u^thered, thinking thereby to have sla^ne christ, Mat.
2. 16. etc 29 f Calends of January. 4 30 g Calends of January. 3 31 A Day
before the Calends of Ianuar.

Festiual days in this month are the 21. Thomas Apost. 25. The Natiu^ty of
Christ (...). (...). Steven. 27. John the Euang. 28. Innocents, called commonly
Childermas day.

A rule to know how many days be contained in every month in the year.
Thirty days has November,
April, June, and September.
The rest have thirti^ and one,
Except it be February alone,
Which al^aies has twenty eight mere,
When it is no Bisextil, or Leap year.
A note of the Months, weeks, days and hours, throughout the whole year.
The year contains
Months 12. VVeeks 52. Days. 365. Hours 69478
Day Natural, has 24 hours.
Day Artificial, has 12 hours.
An Almanacke for ten years.
The year of our Lord. The prime. Sundaies letter. Leap year. Ash wednesday
the first day of Lent. Easter day. Whitsunday. 1615 1 A Feb. 22. Apr. 9. May.
28 1616 2 G F Feb 14. Mar. 31. May. 19. 1617 3 E Mar 7. Apr. 20 June. 3. 1618 4
D Feb. 18 Apr. 5. May 24. 1619 5 C Feb. 10. Mar. 28. May. 16. 1620 6 B A Mar.
1. Apr. 16. June. 4 1621 7 G Feb. 14. Apr. 1. May 20. 1622 8 F Mar. 6. Apr. 21
June. 9. 1623 9 E Feb. 16 Apr. 13. June 1. 1624 10 D C Feb. 11. Mar. 28. May.
16.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL JOHN DACKHAM ESQVIRE, ONE OF the Masters, of Requests
to the most Mighty, JAMES, King of Great Britain.
SIR,
EVER SINCE, through your favor, I have had access, upon occasions, unto your
house: And having seen the religious ordor, which you observe in the course of
your divine exercise of prayer with your people; I have studied to give some
testimony of my tha^kfulnesse; that you were pleased to admit me an often
partaker of the same with you: as also of your immerited favors, in many other
kinds, not being able to recompense the least of them. Now, to show my self
in some measure mindful that I owe you thankfulness; I am bold to leave with
you this silly pawn, the Pensive Souls Delight, consisting of Motives unto,
and Prayers for divine purposes, to stir up such as have any holy desire to
that most sweet exercise: for, in nothing does true godliness show it self
more, then in faithful prayer, with the sincere practice of a holy life. And no
action produces more solid comfort, in all occasions of the hearts heaviness,
then does the practice of true prayer, and supplication in the spirit to God,
who is more moved thereby, then with any other, whatsoever, sacrifice of man:
and the neglect of this most holy duty, is more inexcusable, then any other
divine action whatsoever. Every man cannot give alms, by reason he wants the
means; yet may he Pray: many godly duties may be omitted by necessity: but
Prayer never: nothing pleases God more, nor appeaseth him sooner then Prayer.
And nothing more wounds, and resists that spiritual enemy, then it. And
that makes him seek, and execute all means, to prevent, pervert, and hinder
it. As long as a ma^liueth carelessely, carnally, and senseless of the
necessity of this divine duty, Satan never trobles him; he is at peace with
him: but let him begin to address himself to God in Prayer; then will that
subtle Serpent thrust in a thousand opposite thoughts, to cross his holy
intention. Prayer is a most ir^some exercise to Satan: he never has or will
permit a man truly to serve God, but he will pervert his will and holy
affections, as much as in him lies: and therefore must every man that will live
in this sacred service of God, arm himself to the combat, as every true
child of God well knows by experience. The reading of proph^ne books,
gaming, surfeting, drunkenness, whoredom, corporal, and carnal delights,
and worldly affairs, pass without breach of league with Satan; neither
troubles it the mind of the secure man. But Prayer so far troubles and
disquiets the Serpent, that he roares like a Lion against it; which argues
Prayer to be the only and safest defense against Satan and Hell, and the
vanities of this life to be the weapons which mortal men bear, and use to
fight for S^tan against God. A fearful condition it is to be bewitched with
these corporal, carnal and worldly enchantments, which so possess the hearts
and souls of such as neglect Prayer, as they are already dead in their
souls, being yet alive in their bodies; they are already partakers of that
black and infernal darkness here, only weeping, wailing, and gnashing of
teeth, futurely attend them. Happy therefore is that man, and happy is that
family, that have the holy exercise of prayer in continual use, though in
continual war with Satan, and his Angels, and instruments. It is frequent in
your family, let no worldly occasion discontinue it. It seasoneth all your
actions, and makes them acceptable to God, helpful to men, and profitable to
your self. God has given you a rich taste of his blessings: let him still
smell that sweet savor of your continual supplications and thankfulness,
which you have begun: you run well, continue to the end. Look not back, lest
you lose the rich prize you first aimed at, for a vanishing shadow, that will
fly from you, and fail you, when you come to your race end. I need not
advertise you, that there are in every man two contrary substances, the Soul,
and the Body: and that every man is even so capable of two contrary and
incompatible pleasures, the spiritual and the carnal; and so far as does
the substance, so far does the pleasure of the soul exceed that of the body,
which being but a painted and temporary pleasure, is never desired of those
that are truly acquainted with the delights of the soul, which are eternal.
Thus I write (Right worshipful) not to teach you, but as a loving Prompter, to
put you in mind of your first love to him that loved you first: love him and
serve him still and he will bless you still; and so I wish, in him, whom he
loves best, Christ, our common Savior and Redeemer.

Hendon, this 6. of May, 1615. Your Worships ever to be commanded: JOHN NORDEN.

A FAMILIAR Admonition to the Christian Reader, touching the most comfortable
exercise of Divine Prayer.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. Esai.
55. 6.
THere are three things, especially to be considered in the true seeking and
calling upon God: The first is Preparation before we call upon God in prayer:
The second is Attention in Prayer: The third and last is, Thanksgiving after
prayer.

Preparation to Prayer.
As touching the first, namely, preparation, we may observe and use a kind of
imitation of men, occasioned to comunicate with mortal Princes, who are
observed to to preponder with themselves, first how to shape their behavior,
and external gesture: Secondly, how to^ frame their speech to gain Attention
of him, to whom they speak: and how to avoid the censure of indiscretion, in
the delivery of what they affirm, or defend. If such curiosity and
carfulness be necessarily observed, in our communication with men, whose
breath is in their nosthrels: how much more obseruant and careful ought we to
be, when we address our selves to speak unto the Majesty of the immortal
God? To intrude abruptly into the presence of this great God, and unadvisedly
to speak unto him, becomes not a petitioner, but bewrays an unsanctified,
and an unprepared heart; rather tempting and dishonouring, then glorifying of
the name of God. And therefore, before we presume to present our petitions to
God, in hope to be heard; we must prepare ourselves, not in our outwardgesture,
only in eloquence of words, and Pharisaicall outward holiness: But in rightly
ordering, and disposing the affections of the inner man; which, if they be set
on carnal, or earthly vanities, if our hearts delight in the fruits of the
flesh, and the unprofitable works of darkness: (though our words be never so
good of themselves) we may fear the reward of Ananias and Saphira his wife,
who brought a part of their substance (hypocritically conceiling the rest) and
laid that part at the Apostles feet. So, if we come unto God, giving him good
words, keeping back our hearts, to serve our own carnal and profane
appetites: Shall we think that God will be content with the leaves of our good
words, when we give the fruits of our hearts to the world? will God take such
hypocrites by the hand? we must know, that unless we can truly and unfeignedly
cast off our carnal thoughts, corrupt desires, and sinful affections, it
cannot be that God, who loves holiness and truth, in the inward affections,
can look upon us, as upon his children, who speak unto him, as to a father,
with counterfeit words, proceeding from unsanctified hearts. When we come
therefore unto God in prayer, we must depart from all iniquity, knowing that
he hears not sinners, such as the promises of God cannot win to obedience;
nor his threats enforce to forsake their sins; who yet will adventure to
rush rashly into the presence of God, in a formal kind of praying with the
lips, without any premeditation preparation, or reformation of the heart, at
all. These offer words for deeds: Leaves for Fruit: Wolves for Lambs; and
all manner, halt, lame, blind, and blemished sacrifices, and yet would seem
holy: And so, instead of a blessing, procure a curse unto themselves for their
hypocrisy. We must consider that God is a jealous God, and holds none
guiltless, that takes his name in vain, as they manifestly do, that come
near him with their lips, when their hearts are far from him. It is a kind
of spiritual adultery, outwardly to seem wholly to be gods, and yet inwardly
to be mere worldlings. Before we open our mouths therefore, to God, we must
cast out of the Temple of God, (which is our heart) all buyers and sellers, as
Christ did out of the Temple of Jerusalem: for as long as our hearts do
harbor the desires of worldly profits, and carnal pleasures, above the
sincere service of God, our heart, the Temple of the living God, becomes a
den of thieves, that steals away all our godly affections, to settle them on
Belial. Let us look unto the man Christ Jesus crucified, by whose blood we
are redeemed, by whose mediation we are sure to have our prayers heard of God,
and granted; especially, if for our further and more perfect preparation, we
can truly observe the rule of Christ, to forgive our enemies, knowing that if
we forgive not our brother that offends us, God will not forgive us, that
far more grievously offend him. And therefore, Christ counsels us, that if
we bring our sacrifice to the Altar, namely, if we intend to pray; and there
remember that a brother has ought against us, we ought to leave our offering
before the Altar, that is, forbear for the time to pray, yet to continue our
holy intention to pray; and to go first, and be reconciled to our brother,
and then to come to offer our gift; namely, our prayers, freely unto God in
Christ: for before we be unburdened of all rancor, malice, envy hatred, and
all other profane desires; it is not only not available, but lamentable, that
so many will (as do) presume to come before God, with hearts so fearfully
fraught with these unholy affections; and stagger no more to press into Gods
presence, nay, not so much, as some that come unto God, with most prepared,
peaceful, and most sanctified consciences. Let such castout the bond woman
with her son; namely, the old man, the works and lusts of the flesh: and give
entertainment unto the freewoman, and her son, the new man, which, after God
is created unto righteousness, and true holiness: And so recommend our prayers
unto God, the object of our prayers, in Christ the Mediator of our prayers, by
the holy Ghost, the Author of all holy prayers.

Attention in Prayer.
Being thus prepared, let us endeavor to yield due and true attention in our
prayers, that is, to give ^eed to what we pray, to whom we pray, for what we
pray, and with what zeal we pray: which are the truest tokens, and greatest
arguments, that our prayers are lively, powerful, effectual, and of faith;
which properties can never be in lip-labor: for there cannot be a more
apparent discovery of a rank Hypocrite, then to make outward shows of
Devotion, with the gesture and lips, and yet the heart to be busied, in the
cogitation of idle, ^arthly, and profane things. And nothing more discovers
an idle heart outwardly, then the wandering of the eye in the time of divine
prayer: for it is probable, and often found by experience, that the eye
withdraws the heart: and if the eye be inconstant, the prayer has not, nor
can have the due attention of the heart: yet it does not follow, that although
the eye be fixed on any certain object, or be shut, that therefore the heart
is rightly set on God, for oftentimes the eye follows the heart, the
cogitation of the heart making the eye to forget it object: as when the heart
is wandering in the fields of corn, viewing the herdes of cattle, and flocks
of sheep, when it is in the warehouse, in the shop, in the chest, minding
bands and payments, overcome with pride, plotting revenge, oppressed with
fear, besotted with pleasure, i^tangled with cares, or otherwise perverted by
any profane and ungodly cogitations. Prayers made witls such an extra^agant
heart, be they in words never so holy, they are imputed unto us as sin: for
shall we think, that God will hear our prayers, to our profit or comfort,
when the thoughts of our hearts, in the mean time, dishonor him? Many pray in
their own familiar language, and yet consider no more what they speak (for
want of attention) then if they spoke in an unknown tongue: and yet such men
will hold themselves very devout, and to have power in themselves to pray when
they list: as if true prayer were of that facility and ease, to utter, as is
an idle tale, and as it seems by beggars, that tumble out the Lords prayer,
with one breath at a door, and yet mind nothing but their alms. Such men are
to be pitied, and to be wished better to advise themselves, before they attempt
this service of God most holy; for Prayer is not an easy work, it is of a
deeper strain then a tale, that is but from the tongue to the teeth, from the
teeth to the lips, and so into the air. True prayer is cordial, and of that
force and efficacy, as it constrains the heart to sighs, groans and
tears, with such inward ^e^uencie of holy zeal, as tenters the heart with
such internal gripes, as may be truly said, the r^ting of the heart. And the
more we feel our hearts thus inwardly sharply touched: so much the more
comfort it yields to the soul of the faithful petitioner, yea such, and so
great consolation, as he that feels it, cannot express it with his tongue, be
he never so eloquent; neither can any conceive or apprehend the sweetness of it,
that is not exercised and experienced in the same; for nature apprehends it
not. No man can say that Jesus is Christ, but by the holy Ghost: and, none can
desire the Spirit of God, but by the Spirit of God. Flesh and blood cannot as
much as desire spiritual things, spiritually; for spiritual things are to be
compared with spiritual things, and spiritual gifts are obtained by
spiritual means: And therefore are words without the spirit, as naked and
bare incense without fire: but, being inkindled in the heart, and sanctified by
the holy spirit of God, who is promised to assist our spirits, they are as a
lively and acceptable sacrifice to God, working so powerfully with him, through
Christ's medi^tion, as they never return empty of what soever blessing we
desire. Prayer can never be effectual, (...) there be some certain spiritual
object of the mind, to move the attention of the heart, which object is God:
and we must consider, that when we pray unto him, or yield him any other
worship, that we are not to conceive him, in the form of any earthly or
heavenly, bodily, or spiritual creature whatsoever: for in that manner, not to
conceive him, is a degree of co^ceiuing him a right, according to Master
Perkins. God must be conceived of us in our prayers, as subsisting in the whole
three persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. The unity in
Trinity, and T^initie in unity is to be worshipped, retaining in mind, the
distinction, and order of all the three persons, without seuering or sundring
them: for, as they are conjoined in nature; so are they to be conjoined in
worship. And therefore, he that prays unto God the Father, for the
forgiveness of his sins, must ask it of him, for the merits of the Son,
and by the assurance of the holy Ghost: and he that prays for the remission
of sins to God the Son, must pray that he would procure the Father, to
grant him pardon, and to assure it by his Spirit. He also that prays for the
same to God the holy Ghost, must pray that he would assure unto him the
remission of his sins, from the Father, for and by the merits of his Son.
Thus must we apprehend the Trinity in our prayers: so shall we avoid that
idolatrous conceiving of him, embraced of some, who cannot pray, unless they
have the figure of a humane creature, to represent unto their bodily eyes, the
shape of God the Father, in likeness of an old man, and a crucifixe, figuring
Christ, suffering on the Cross, and the holy Ghost, by a Dove, whose worship
cannot be reputed spiritual, but carnal, and their prayers, not heavenly,
but profane. Prayer is a spiritual action, proper only to the children of
God, who are Saints by calling, sanctified in Christ: And they, and none other
truly call upon the name of the Lord Jesus: profane persons pray not, though
they seem to pray. But most happy is that man, that comes unto God, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, truly prepared, and duly attentive; he may boldly
ask, and confidently assure himself, to receive grace for grace, and all
blessings spiritual, without limitation, and all benefits corporal needful.
If* our prayers be made in us, by him, who has promised, and has power to
give what we ask, shall we think he will fail to perform? The hope of
hypocrites in deed shall perish, and their prayers vanish as the smoke:
because they wait upon lying vanities, and desire carnal pleasures, and
worldly profits. But the Lord will surely fulfill the desires of them that
fear him, because their prayers tend to the setting forth of Gods glory, to
the good of the Church, to the remission of their own sins, and other men's,
to the obtaining of Gods graces, to the increase of the understanding of
heavenly things, that they may walk before God, and be upright, that they may
do the works, and bring sorth the fruits of the spirit. These are the prayers
that are the PENSIVE SOVLES DELIGHT. These are the prayers that wound the
Serpent, and that please God, bringing peace to the conscience afflicted. But,
(which is to be lamented) all men are dull by nature: And the very elect,
sometimes weakly disposed to pray. And therefore is every godly man to use all
holy means, to inkindle their hearts, to the right performance of this
heavenly duty: And nothing more prevails therein, then Meditation: whereunto
we are also very unapt by nature, and know not how, nor upon what ground to
lay the foundation thereof: yet, if we can truly frame our hearts to a holy
Meditation, we shall find, that it is the very key, that opens our dull
hearts, locked up under grief, under fear, under trouble, under persecution
and misery; and sends forth by little and little, the fire of true zeal, which
at length becomes a great flame of prevailing prayers, which thing they
easily find, that are conversant in this sacred exercise of Meditation and
Prayer: who yet, many times find themselves most dull, and most unapt to pray,
having yet an inward desire thereunto, which desire they cannot contain: but
laboring a while in silence, speaking inwardly to God, in sighs and groans,
at length they speak effectually with their tongues. Seeing therefore that all
men need motives to stir them up to prayer: let every man address himself
to the word of God, or peruse some godly work of religious men. And although
vocally he cannot read, by reason of his natural dulnes; yet, if his heart
can be but conversant, and duly attend the sense, as the eye observes the
letter, his mind by little and little shall mount it self from earth to
heaven, fixed on the Trinity, whence shall arise such spiritual fruits of
faith, and feruencie of spirit, as shall fill the soul with more sweet
consolation byinkindled prayer, then the tongue can utter. And to this end
(gentle Reader) according to the small measure of mine understanding, I have
prefixed before every prayer, a Motive or Meditation, touching the substance
and matter of the Prayer following.

Thanksgiving after Prayer.
The third and last duty in this holy exercise is Thanksgiving, which cannot
but follow sanctified prayers, and that with such joy in the holy Ghost, as it
cannot but break forth into most unspeakable inward tha^kfulnes to God, who
has been so graciously pleased, not only to forgive our sins, but to help
our infirmities by his holy spirit, by whom we have had access unto the
throne of grace, and found such favor with God in Christ, as we have obtained
by the holy Ghost, both the will and the power to pray. Also we ought in all
things to give thanks to God, for every blessing and benefit we receive at
his hands, according to the counsel and precept of the Apostle, who commands
us to give thanks always for all things unto God, even the Father, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5. 20. Thus much touching the admonition.

Great Britains happiness, in regard of the free use of the Gospel, in respect
of other Nations.
FInally, I think it not impertinent altogether, by way of comparison, to
consider of our happiness, in being partakers of the free use of the Gospel, in
respect of the most unhappy condition of many Nations, and infinite people,
that either know not God at all, or knowing him, honor him not as God.

The Old and New Testaments have been freely opened unto us, near threescore
years without Persecution: and so it has not been in any one Kingdom we read
of. Some Kingdoms and Free States, in their Jurisdictions, have and do in a
sort, permit the Gospel; but with the same, tolerate contrary religions and
professions. Where does the freedom of the Gospel appear, as in Great
Britain? In what Kingdom is it so publicly received, so plentifully
preached, and so freely professed, without danger or contradiction? We have
heard, and seen the troubles of the Netherlands, and the Massacres of France,
and the persecutions in other territories for the profession of the Gospel:
and we all this while have quietly enjoyed that, for the profession whereof many
have perished. May we not therefore truly say with David, The Lord has not
dealt so with every Nation? Queen ELIZABETH restored Religion, almost
smothered by Queen MARY'S persecution, which was maruailous in every man's eyes.
But which is more maruailous, the same Religion is continued by the mere love
and providence of God, in raising unto us a Prince of most admired learning, of
sincerest piety: And that when it was universally either expected, or
suspected to have bin utterly abolished and rooted out, upon the dissolution of
the precedent Gouernesse: we having then the free use of the means of our
Salvation under God, by our worthiest of Kings, we should show our selves most
unworthy both of it and him, if we should not most lovingly embrace him,
unfeignedly honor him, cheerfully obey him, willingly aid him, and zealously
pray for him. Many other Princes tyrannously suppress, what he religiously
maintains, the sincere service of God. In so much as in regard of the time
that we have had true Religion in free use, we might have been all teachers
of the Truth, yea, the meanest amongst us, of competent age, might have been
as Doctors, and all our Divine Doctors, as the Angels of God. But (which is
lamentable to be considered) the most of us are not only not able to instruct
them of our own households, but have nee de that the principles of Christian
Religion should be taught us anew. How shall we then answer the Master of this
great Family, that has given us many talents to use to our souls profit; who,
when he shall come to take our account, and find that we have not only not
profited by them, but to have wasted them upon our vanities: will he allow our
counterfeite hearing of his Word, our idle prayers, our works of darkness?
He has given us the light of truth, and hidden it from many millions of
souls (altogether) in Asia, Africa, and America, and dazeled the eyes of many
in Europe, that only see a glimmering of that light, which lighteneth the
world, and yet many in their pretended light comprehended it not. To pass over
such as are ^emisted in Europe: let us look into some of the territories of
the East and West Indies: Into Brasill, Callicut, Virginia, and many other
Nations in those parts, who know no other GOD, but the Devil, to whom they
pray, whom they worship, and to whom they do sacrifice; offering their
dearest children unto him. The Guyneans adore for their god, the Creature which
they first meet^ in the morning, Beast, Bird, or Serpent. The Angolans honor
the Sun, as the greatest god, and the Moon as the less: Besides which,
every man has his peculiar god, according to his own private fancy. In the
Kingdom of Loaugo in Africa, are a people called Anziques, having in use the
S^ale of the first Covenant, Circumcision: yet has God left them to that, more
then bestiall condition, as they will cut their own flesh, and butcher
themselves, for their deceiving Mahomets sake yet do they eat one the other,
fatting their slaves like hogs, having a Shamble Market, and Cookeries of man's
flesh: and the nearest of kin, is killed and eaten for the greatest and rarest
dainty. Many other like Canibals are in those parts, visibly seen to eat
men really: But in some other more near territories, they devour men alive:
Covert Canibals. It were much to remember all the nations (infinite) under the
apparent captivity of Satan, who, how he bewitched the old world with false
gods, the Canonical Scriptures do declare. The Sidonians adored Balaam and
Ashteroth: The Ammonites, Moloch: The Moabites, Chamos: The Babylonians, Bell,
the father of Ninus: To whose counterfeit, that great king Cyrus did worship,
and allowed a daily diet, of twelve measures of fine flower, containing of our
statute measure, thirteen bushels and a half, forty sheep, and six great
potts of wine; of our measure, threescore gallons. This was a gluttonous god, a
beso^ted king, a bewitched people, and most accursed priests, that coozoned
their god of his victuals, whom, by this means, the devil robbed of their
Salvation. Besides these, whom God has shut up under darkness, the dispersed
runnagate Jews, are most of all the rest to be condemned, who wilfully
abandoned their Messiah, whom they knew and crucified; And according to their
own imprecation, are held still in most palpable blindness, and in ^^auerie,
both in bodies and souls: having neither Scepter, governor, nor government,
nor any certain place of commorance. Insomuch, as if all the people, nations,
and tongues in Asia, Africa, America, and Europe, were truly calculated, and
their Religions discovered, as Master PVRCHACE has most worthily begun:
there would not be found upon the earths universal Globe, one of two hundred
parts, truly professing Christ; without whom there is no promise of
Salvation: which discovers the most miserable condition of infinite millions
of people under the slavery of Satan, and our most happy, and most blessed
estate under Christ, whose Gospel we enjoy, whose promises we have, whose
merits are ours, whose mercies we find, the aid and help of whose spirit we
feel. Greater blessings God could never have bestowed on man: for these in
earth are but pledges of our salvation in Heaven: which being well weighed and
compared to the former forlorn Nations, cannot (in reason) but move us to
love, and to serve this so merciful a GOD with such sincere and entire
affection, as should swallow up in us all worldly and carnal desires, and (as
it were) ravish us with most spiritual contemplations. But, if we that have
received so many and sure tokens of our blessedness in Christ; and having
promised and vowed obedience to GOD in him* If we (I say) that have the name of
Christians, should live like these Pagans: It had been better for us, never to
have known the truth: for it shall be easier in th(...) day of judgment,
for Pagans that never knew GOD, then for us that know his will, and do it not.
And it is probable, that if the blindest of these blind Nations, ^ad had the
time of the learning of Christ crucified, as we have had, they had been
Christians, and exceeded our present sincerity, sanctity, zeal, obedience,
and true service of the living God, in CHRIST, by the Holy Ghost. Let us
therefore well weigh our happiness, in respect of theirs, that are in a most
cursed condition, and let us consider, that there is with GOD Mercy and
Justice, he can call them in his free mercy, as he called us, and reject us
in his Justice, for our contempt of his Word. And therefore as we have the
light, let us walk in the light, as children of the light. Let every one, as
he professes, practice the truth, and depart every one from his evil way,
and cheerfully call upon the Lord Jesus: Let us abandon all our carnal
affections: our moderate liberty, our too much security, and our coldness in
our Religion: knowing that most unsavory servitude follows these at the
heels. For GOD has his Pharaoh, his Nabucadnezer, and many other like
Ty^a^ts, always readily prepared, besides infinite other plagues, to afflict
and confound a rebellious and thanklesse people. He has often and fearfully
threatened us, and yet he has still put up his rod again in mercy. But did
he not see many things amiss in us, he would forbear to threaten as he
has done. And who so sees not many things out of course, in the carriage of
men in their ungodly actions, wilfully shuts the eyes of reason, and sees
nothing a^ all with the eyes of Religion.

Let us therefore be continually watchful in prayer, that, when the Lord
comes to Judgment, we may be so prepared with our Lamps in our hands, to
attend his coming, as becomes the children of God.

Thine in Christian goodwill, IO. NORDEN.

A PENSIVE SOVLES Delight.
A Motive to Prayer.
IN our preparation to prayer, we must first consider, that he to whom we
speak, is the Father of light, and we are by nature the children of darkness:
we must therefore call upon him in the sincerity, and vprightnes of our hearts;
for he loves truth in the inward affections. Secondly, he is the Father of
glory, we must therefore come before him, with fear and reverence, for we are
but dust and ashes. Thirdly, he is the Father of mercy; therefore we must
repent of our sins: and then being thus prepared, let us draw near unto him
with a pure heart, in assurance and faith. So will he hear us, and grant
better things unto us, then we know how to ask.

A prayer for the assistance of Gods holy Spirit, in any spiritual or godly
corporal action, or endeavor; fit to be used before every lawful enterprise,
especially before every divine exercise.
O Gracious Lord God, most merciful, loving, and helping Father; the supporter
of the weak, the light of the blind, the teacher of the ignorant, the
directer of all that call upon thee in their godly endeavors: I humbly beseech
thy Majesty, in the name of thy Son Christ Jesus, to hear me, in whom thou
have promised, to give unto thy children, what they ask, to find what they
seek; and to open unto them when they knock. I come unto thee, good Father,
not in mine own, but in his name, entreating thee not for mine own, but for
his sake, to accept me into thy presence, to give me thy holy Spirit of
wisdom, that I may receive mercy, and find grace. Open unto me the gate of
true knowledge; and assist me in mine intended enterprise: for, of my self, I
am of a dull and weak understanding, of a corrupt conversation, of a polluted
heart, and of profane lips; unworthy of my self to attempt any worldly or
corporal enterprise, much less worthy to take thy blessed name into my mouth,
or to intermeddle with any divine office, function or calling. But touch my
heart, Lord, and inkindle it with a coal from thine Altar, so shall my heart be
renewed, reformed and enlarged, the words of my mouth sanctified, and the works
of my hands blessed. According therefore unto thy promise, Lord, open my mouth
and fill it: strengthen my hands, and confirm the powers and senses both of my
soul and body, to every good and godly action. It is not in my power, without
thy power, to open my natural lips, much less able, ye^, altogether unable
to open the door of my heart, and to prepare mine own affections, to any
divine and holy action, or to frame the powers of my body rightly in any
comfortable enterprise, without thy mere working in me both the will and the
deed. Only my confidence is, Lord, that thou will be pleased to assist me, to
inlighten my heart, to increase my knowledge, and to give me understanding
according to thy word: That by thee I may be enabled in all mine actions,
enterprises, and in^euours, to set forth thine own glory. Sanctif^e my inward
desires, bless the will and the work in me, and accept my weak will for the
effectual deed; And so season me in both, that I may be sanctified throughout.
And grant that the fruits of all mine endeavors, may so effectually appear,
that my self in them, and by them may be comforted; and thy children, to whose
use also, as to mine own, I truly intend them, may be benefited, and stirred
up to a more lively feeling of their own wants, and a more serious desire to
pray to thee for thy blessings, and to praise thee for thy relieuing favors:
That we thy weak children, feeling the Comforter to assist our weakness, we
may in our several callings, offer up such daily sacrifices unto thee, as
being, for Christ, accepted of thee, thou maye^^ be more and more glorified,
and every one of us comforted and kept in thy favor for ever, through Jesus
Christ our Savior.

O Lord increase my faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be used in the Morning in private Families.
IT is a common course, and an ordinary care of worldly me^, before they
enterprise any thing, that concerns their corporal estats, to forecast how,
and by what means they may do it to their best advantage, and most safety:
which providence is not only not to be condemned, but commended, yet so far,
as it may justly reprove themselves, for being so careful for their bodies
necessaries; and so remiss and careless of their souls safety: which being
truly provided for, first there follows a blessing to the second, by divine
promise. Seek first the kingdom of God (says Christ) and the righteousness
thereof, and then all other things necessary shall be administered unto you. How
grossly then do they err from a Christian course of life, that are never but
conversant and careful about corporal things, that rise up early to seek
their profits and pleasures, and seek not God the giver of goodness, without
whose mercy and providence, we neither can enjoy our sleep, nor safety in
sleep? we cannot work in our callings, nor profit by our labors, health of
body, wealth, peace, plenty, friends, and all whatsoever we enjoy in this
life, or hope for in the life to come, do all proceed of his free mercy, who
requires nothing for recompense, but our thankfulness for them, and our
prayers unto him, for the continuance of his favors toward us, in them. All
which will rise in judgment against them that usurp the^ without
acknowledging them to be his gifts, and that in Christ, blessed unto them. What
differs the carnal man, that rises in the morning, leaving behind him the
print (as it were) of his pollutions in the bed whence he rises; and neither
praises God for his sleep nor safety, neither craves pardon for his sins?
But from his bed betakes him either to his worldly profit, or carnal
pleasures. What differs he (I say) from the brute beast, who rises in the
morning from his den or rest, and betakes him to his'prey or pasture, looking
unto no other giver, then his own brutish care? No more do they that eat, and
drink, and labor, or delight them in their vain pleasures; without seeking
first in the morning a new blessing for the day following, by their hearty
thanksgiving, for their rest and preservation the night past, and by craving
pardon for their sins. Howsoever things may seem to succeed to their great
contentment, they do but deceive themselves, for there is no blessing promised
to such careless me^, though they have the names, and receive the seals of
Christians. And therefore let every man that fears God, and desires to see a
good day to follow the morning: let him begin the day with the service of God
in prayer: if he have a family, let him convent them, and conioyne with them
in prayer. If he have none, or be absent from it, let him serve the Lord in
private. The faithful herein finds such lively comfort, and assurance of Gods
providence, as he fears not whatsoever the day following can cast upon him,
all things shall work together for his consolation: And whatsoever he does,
it shall prosper.

A Prayer for the Morning for private families.
Lord increase our faith, prepare our hearts to prayer, and open our lips.
O Merciful Lord God, loving father in Jesus Christ, we thine unworthy people
fall here down before the footstool of thy Majesty, and with unfeigned
hearts give thanks unto thee for thy mercies, in number more then can be
numbered: for they are more then our sins, and our sins more then the sea
sands, which are without number. Thou have been our watchman this night: thou
have not only kept us from bodily dangers and harms, but have given us rest,
when our weak bodies were infeebled with weariness and labors, and have
brought us to the beginning of this day in safety: whereas many have perished
this night in their beds, and have not risen to praise thee. How unthankful
should we show our selves, Lord, if we should enter into our worldly affairs,
without remembering thy mercies, and our own sins in asking pardon for them?
Receive therefore, we humbly pray thee, good father, at our unworthy hands,
the sacrifice of our humble prayers, and praises which we offer unto thee this
morning, in the name of thine own dearest Son: in whom thou have
acknowledged thy self so well pleased, as thou deniest nothing to any
faithfully asking for his sake. Jn him, and by him, and for him, we come (Lord)
unto thee, humbly and heartily praying pardon for our sins, whereby we have
transgressed thy laws, offended thy great Majesty, in whose displeasure is
death. Pardon us, merciful Lord God, pardon us, remove our sins far from
us, and wi^e them out of the book of thy remembrance. Remember the merits of
Christ our Redeemer, leave us not in our own miserable estates, lest we should
forget to be mindful or to be ignorant how to praise thy Name, for thy goodness
past, and enter into our worldly occasions, without being reconciled unto thee
in Christ, for thy wrath being inkindled toward us never so little, nothing
can truly prosper that we take in hand: we may labor, and yet without thy
blessing, it shall not profit us: (...) may eat and drink, but it shall not
nourish us, we may follow our vocations, with great diligence, rising early*
and taking rest late, yet shall it not feed us. Oh gracious Lord, let thy
blessings accompany all our labors; And grace us ever with thy presence,
according to thy promise, not to observe our imperfections: but to direct our
hearts in prayer, to prepare us to obedience, to season us with thy holy
spirit, and to bless and prosper all our actions: That whatsoever we think,
speak or do this day, may be acceptable in thy fight. So shall all things go
well with us, and prosper under our hands, we shall praise thy name, and extol
thy mercies and goodness, which have been, are, and shall be toward us for
ever. And as thou have taken away the vale of the darkness of night, which
resembles death: And have opened unto us the windows of heaven, to give us
the light of the Sun, which resembles life: So abandon thou the works of
darkness and ignorance, put away our faintness and dullness in prayer: And
let the light of thy saving truth; shine unto us, and the Sun of
righteousness extend his beams of heavenly understanding into our hearts,
That we all may walk this day, in the way which is Christ the Lord, embrace the
truth, which is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, And
ever enjoy that life which is eternal in him, which was, and which is, and
which is to come. So shall our rising from our natural rest this morning, by
thy power, as out of our graves of mortality, assure us of our final rising
out of the grave of our sins to immortality. And as thou have blessed unto us
our temporal sleep this night: So vouchsafe to bless unto us this day, the
use of thy creatures, that they may all serve to our comfortable use in Christ
Jesus, according to our necessities. And grant that we abuse them not to riot
or wantonness: but may carefully and religiously watch and be sober, that when
our final sleep shall overtake us, we may lay down our mortal bodies, not
unto the resurrection of death unto death, but of the resurrection of life unto
life eternal. And during the time of our mortality; remember us, O Lord, in
the abundance of thy mercies, lest that we who are but dust and ashes, should
so fasten the eyes of our desires, upon the base things of this life, that we
should forget the life to come: Grant rather, Lord, that we may use the things
of this life at thy hands, so as we may not be seduced by them, but rather led
by the consideration, whence and from whom we receive them, unto the author
and giver of them: So shall they not only, not be unto us vain or base; but
worthy to be had in reverence, for thy sake that give them freely, and
blessest them graciously unto our use and comfort: which great mercy of thine,
cannot but advance the eyes of our dull understandings, to the contemplation of
thy spiritual and heavenly blessings. As how we were freely from all
beginnings elected to salvation by thee: how we were created when we were not,
by thee: how we were redeemed, when we were captives unto Satan, by thee: How
we were sauctified, when we were most profane, by thee: How we are justified,
being guilty of judgment, by thee: How we have taken hold of the hope, future
glorification of our corrupt and vile bodies, in the life to come by thee.
These thy super-abounding mercies, O Lord, who has a heart to conceive, or a
tongue sufficiently to express? The Angels that attend thee in the heavens,
beholding thee face to face, and minister thy will, in heaven and earth, are
not yet able to declare the good things themselves enjoy, by the glory of thy
presence. Much less are we, Lord, who lodge in houses of clay, able to
comprehend thee, and the height and depth of thine incomprehensible goodness,
showed to them in earth, whom thou have made heirs with thy Son, of the
glory in heaven. How much less able are we to conceive the glory prepared,
for thine elect in the heavens? Give us therefore, good father, hearts of love
unto thy Majesty; that we may strive, with a godly egernesse, rather to
abandon all lets and impediments, which may hinder us from that promised glory,
then curiously to seek to kn^w, in this mortality that (the secrets whereof)
thou have reserved until our immortality. And let not the cares of this
transitory life, and the blind affections which we naturally bear unto the
pleasures thereof, choke the good seed of grace in us. Make the way of our
salvation familiar unto us, as thou have made it plain for us. And let not our
bodily labors hinder our hearts from continual meditation of thy goodness
toward us. Let us lift up pure minds unto the heavens, with a longing desire
to with thee: where is no labor or sweat, or fear, or care, or hunger, or
thirst, or nakedness, or enemies, or strife, or pain, or grief: But all
comfort, all joy, all peace and blessedness, and glory unspeakable: Give us
therefore longing hearts, to remove out of this body of miseries: yet so, as we
omit not our callings, until thine appointed time: but that we may labor
accordingly in the world, not, as we so loved the world, as we should embrace
it as our home: but use it as our Tabernacle, or lodging place, for the time of
our pilgrimage. And let thy blessing be so upon our labors this day, as we
may live thereby, have sufficient of all necessaries; as food, raiment,
friendship, peace, plenty, health of body, preservation of our limbs and
senses, and a blessing upon all that belongs unto us. That we be not
constrained to use unlawful means for our relief. Then as we by thy
blessing, have entered into this morning, shall pass the day with comfort, and
end the same in peace of conscience and consolation of the holy Ghost: and so
continue from day to day, until the last of our days, when we shall surrender
again unto thee, to be disposed both our souls and bodies, for ever to live
with thee in the glory purchased by Christ our mediator, our hope, our
strength, and our everlasting redeemer, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost,
be all power, majesty and dominion ascribed for ever,

Amen.
O Lord evermore increase and confirm our faith.
A short prayer for the morning, to be said of one in private, or in a Family,
using the plural instead of the singular number.
Almighty Lord God, whose presence is always light unto thy Saints, vouchsafe
as thou have banished the darkness of the night past, and made the light to
shine unto our corporal eyes: So let the saving Sun of thy holy Spirit,
lighten the darkness of mine understanding this morning. And as the Sun of
the firmament clears, cheereth, and comfort all thy creatures in earth,
with the beams thereof: so let thy sacred and saving countenance recomfort my
sad and dulled heart: and as it has pleased thee to give me power and
ableness, to rise out of my bed of corporal rest; and by the sleep which I
have this night enjoyed, have in some measure shaken off the heavy sluggishnes
of my fleshly part: So I beseech thee to give me power to rise out of the bed
of sin and security, and with cheerful alacrity, to cast off the dulnes
and drowsines of my corrupt heart, that with full affection and entire love, I
may praise thee for thy love, wherein thou have preserved me this night from
perils and dangers of the darkness, wherein the secret arrows of Satan and sin,
are sent forth to wound, even the upright in heart; wherein diverse casualties
befall them that are dead in their sleep, not able to prevent the least danger
incident to soul or body: and have now graciously brought me to the beginning
of this day in safety, the end whereof, nor the least remaining part, what it
shall afford me, thou only know, from whose all-seeing eye^ nothing is hid,
but as well the times to come, as the seasons past and present, are alike
manifest. As thou therefore know what shall succeed me this day, turn those
things from me, Lord, in thy providence, which thou know dangerous, and
bless unto me all things for my comfort, and whatsoever befalls me contrary
to my health, wealth, or peace, make me wise to make use thereof to the
confirmation of my further faith in thee: knowing, Lord, that all things shall
work together for the best to them that love thee. And therefore give me
patience to undergo al thy corrections and trials, and to be unfeignedly
thankful for all thy benefits. And for as much as nothing can prosper unto us
without thy blessing: bless Lord, I beseech thee, unto me all such thy
creatures, as I shall have cause to use this day, and give a blessing unto all
that appertains unto me, whomsoever, or whatsoever, and let the meditations
of my heart, the words of my mouth, and the labors both of my body and mind,
be sanctified unto me this day; that whatsoever. I do, it may prosper. I
recommend my self, my soul and body, and all that I have charge of under
thee, into thy fatherly tuition and defense this day: for I know, Lord, and am
assured, that thou, to whom I commit me, ar^ able and willing to keep me. Let
not my sins, gracious Father, which I have no power to resist, prevent thy
mercies, but in thy mercy prevent my sins; for Satan, the World, and mine
own corruptions, are ever ready to draw me into forbidden vanities. But
strengthen thou the arms of my faith, teach my spiritual fingers to fight
valiantly against their enemies: give me the sword of the Spirit, the
breast plate of righteousness, the helmet of salvation, that I fear not their
assaults this day, that fighting the good fight of faith, I may prevail, and
receive the crown of victory, through Christ, that triumphant Lion of the
Tribe of Judah. Remember thy promises made unto all that believe in him. I
believe Lord, help mine unbelief. Let the fruits of that love, that is
greater then faith, and hope, appear in mine actions this day; the chief
whereof is obedience unto thee. So shall I pass this day in thy faith, fear,
and due reverence of thy great and glorious name: and daily more and more
prepare my self in a holy readiness to attend thy calling me out of this
mortal, to an immortal condition. And for my greater comfort in this my
pilgrimage, give me a true feeling of the joys promised in the Kingdom of
glory, even here in the Kingdom of grace, that having here received the
earnest of thy holy Spirit, I may daily look for the principal, in the
Kingdom purchased by Jesus Christ, in whose name I humbly recommend my self
and all my labors this day, unto thy blessed providence and direction,
yielding unto thee all praise in Jesus Christ, by the holy Ghost, blessed for
ever and ever.

Lord increase my faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer, to be said in the Evening in private Families.
IT is a matter too common with many, to pass the day in a kind of lawless
vanity, and the night in careless security: as if the day and night were
only made for man to serve himself, with the pleasures and profits he can make
of either; forgetting the true end, for which either themselves, or the day and
night were made, that themselves were made to glorify their Maker, in reason
and religion. The day to serve them, for holy exercises and lawful labors:
And the night for their corporal rest. But contrarily, themselves, they
profane through many sins. The day they abuse by idleness, wantonness, and
vanities: And the night they pollute with many forbidden evils: And yet pass
from day to night, and from evening to the day light; never calling to mind
that holy duty required of them, thanksgiving to God for blessings received,
their humble prayers for pardon of their sins committed, and their continual
supplications, for their safety and prosperous success in their labors and
affairs. Does the profession of a Christian require no more then to eat and
drink, to labor, or loyter, to pass the time in gaming, pleasure, idleness,
ease and sl^^pe? Are not these the works that worldlings wallow in? Some are
too great and glorious to labor, and yet have no leisure to pray. Some are so
busied in worldly affaire^, as they can admit no time to serve God, but the
Sabbath day, and then to come to the Church to see and be seen, is the
devotion of many. Is this to love God above all things, as all have vowed? to
serve him before all things, and to depend upon him in all things? It rather
argues that the Love of God is not in them, the Fear of God is far from
them, and the Grace of God is not with them. Remember ye, that thus forget
God, that as the day is past, that gave light to the eyes, and darkness come,
that shadoweth the Sun: So the day of Life passes away, and the night of
Death approaches, wherein (if we live not in the light of grace, while it is to
day) we shall never see the light of glory to our comfort in the night of our
bodies death. Therefore, before we betake us to our rest, let us commend our
selves, and all that we have, in faithful prayer to God, calling together, and
conioyning with our families, if we have any; and in a holy and reverent
humiliation of bodies and minds, fall down before him, that sees us, and who
has promised to be in the midst of two or three gathered together in holy
prayer.

A prayer to be said in private Families in the Evening, before they go to
rest.
Almighty and most loving Lord God, Father of compassion, infinite in power,
just in thy Judgments, wonderful in thy providence, ever ready, and never
failing in mercy, them that fear thy name: we acknowledge thy great goodness
toward us this day past, and our own unworthiness to partake of thy mercies,
by reason of our manifold and great sins; which, as it seems, thou neither
see nor obseruest, in that thou have, as it were, passed by them, so
patiently this day; as in stead of punishing them, have made us rich partakers
of many most acceptable blessings. Yet, Lord, we do not, by this thy
forbearance to punish us, either iusti^^e our ways wherein we have walked this
day, or think our selves freed from thy displeasure for our sins: but do^
utterly condemn our selves, and wholly attribute our preservation from
punishment; our health, out peace, our plenty, and the good success of our
affairs unto thine own free mercy; and whatsoever cross, loss, hurt or
detriment has be fallen us this day, in bodies, goods, credit or reputation
among men, we lay it, and impute it wholly and altogether unto our sins,
which have worthily deserved much more then we feel, or are able to bear:
what we or any of us have done against thee this day, thou know, what thou
have done for us, wet cannot express with our lips, nor conceive in our hearts,
for thy mercies are so infinite, and thy providence so high, and so far past
finding out, as the more we search and seek, to know the hid treasures of thy
love toward us, so much the more ignorant we are of knowing what thou are: we
therefore acknowledge our selves st^ners, and thy self the Father of
incomprehensible mercies, which as David thy servant confesses, are more then
he could express. Great and manifest have bin thy favors toward us, we have
found them, felt them, and enjoyed them this day, and all our days in thy
keeping, feeding, clothing, and comforting our mortal bodies. In giving unto
us, and preserving for us many things for our use; the beasts of the field, the
plants of the earth have been serviceable unto us, through thy blessing. Give
us, we beseech thee, understanding and feeling hearts to acknowledge thy
mercies. Teach us to know, and to take knowledge of our own wants, which are
many; and grant that they may be supplied by thee. Let us look into our own
corruptions that they may be reformed and weakened by thee: for Nature
reuenleth not unto us our spiritual wants, nor can cleanse us from our sins,
which are many, and yet we account them few: great, and yet we see them not:
weighty, and yet they seem light unto us: we are spiritually poor, and
spiritual* blind, yet not poor in spirit, as we ought, we are rather barren
of spiritual knowledge, and blind to our own imperfections, which puffs us
up with a vain concei^ of our own worthiness. Our faith is feeble, frail, and
imperfect, yet we think it strong; our prayers are cold and weak, our minds
and affections wavering, and inconstant in that divine duty; yet would we seem
religiously zealous. Thou find in us, Lord, these imperfections, and we dote
of our own merit, which is a mere forbidden presumption. Open, Lord, the eyes
of our understandings, that we may find out, and feel our own errors, and
look into the working of thy grace, wherein thou acceptest us, as poor in
spirit, by the imputation of Christ's humblenes, our faith perfect, through the
perfection of his obedience: and our prayers available through his prevailing
mediation. So that thy spiritual consolations in Christ, are far more
abounding toward us, then we are able to comprehend. Open therefore, Lord, the
door of thy divine knowledge, that we may become wise in thee, and enter into
that holy of holiest, in purity of spirit, in faith sound, with prayers
fervent, and thanks unfeigned: Stir up in us a greater measure of obedi(...),
then hitherto we have showed unto thee, that we receiving grace for grace, may
add faith to faith, wisdom to knowledge, and find how sweet a thing it is
to serve thee truly, to walk before thee in vprightnes of heart. And as we are
now come to the end of this day, and consequently have finished the travail
thereof, and now covet our rest: so we may watch for the evening of our days,
and so labor while it is to day; that when the night of our last and final
sleep shall overtake us, our works may follow us, not to condemn us, nor as
able to justify us, but to witness with us, and for us, that we have not
labored altogether in thee in vain: but according to that measure of grace,
which thou art pleased to bestow upon us, we may work out our salvation with
fear and trembling.

Look, Lord, upon us here gathered together before thee, in a reverend
humiliation of our hearts. And because naturally we are obdurate, and our
affections hardly brought under or subdued: subdue, Lord, all the rebellious
imaginations, that intrude now, or at any time into our thoughts: And let us
give no entertainment unto those desires, which tend to vanities, whether of
the mind, of the will, or the pride of life. Let no evil accompany us unto
our corporal rest, much less, Lord, unto our final sleep. Let us now begin
to cast off the dregs of sin, while we have time. Let us not put off our
repentance until to morrow. Rather, as the day is past, that gave us corporal
light, and the night come, threatening darkness: let us live this night in thy
spiritual light, and let the darkness of sin vanish, as the light of the
day, never to rise again unto us; That we beginning even now to live in that
light which lighteneth the hearts of thy Saints, we may never ad^it the
darkness of ungodliness, to ouershadow us again. But let us make use of the
night, not for sleep only, but rather meditating of the resemblance the night
has with the state of impenitent sinners, who living out of thy favor, are
still in darkness. And as our sleep resembles our bodies rest in the grave:
So give us grace, Lord, to consider, that we are even at the end of our final
day, wherein we shall, until the day of our resurrection, commend our dust to
dust, as we now for a night betake our bodies to our beds. And as we hope, and
humbly desire thee, that our sleep this night may be unto us more for the
relieuing our weariness, then for wanton delight: So we likewise hope and
desire, that when we shall lay down our bodies in the grave, it may not be as
of the savor of death unto ^eath; but of life, unto everlasting life.

Grant, gracious Lord God, that thy power and providence may preserve us safe
in body and soul until the morning, that we may then betake us again unto
our lawful callings: and that when our bodies shall rest in our graves, our
souls may be preserved under thine Altar among the rest of thy Saints, until
the most wished and glorious morning of our resurrection, when we shall no
more return unto our labor, no more fear dangers, no more hunger, thirst,
nor care for bodies necessaries, but for evermore enjoy the most blessed Crown
of eternal glory: which grant, gracious Lord God, in, and for thy Christ, in
whom all things for this life, and the life to come, are blessed unto us: to
whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor, power, Majesty,
and dominion, for evermore.

Amen.
O Lord increase our faith, bless us and preserve us this night, and for
evermore. So be it.
A short Prayer for the Evening, to be used of one man in private.
O Lord my God, merciful and loving Father in Jesus Christ, I yceld thee
humble thanks, for thy mercies, and loving favors, showed toward me this day
past: wherein thou have bountifully testified thy fatherly care of me, and have
largely dealt with me in the use of thy good creatures. And as I have found
grace and favor at thy hands this day, shorten not thy hand of comforts, now
the night is come, wherein we are beset with many dangers, the more in regard
of the darkness of the night, wherein all that work wickedness, take their
fittest oportunities to work their devices. I have no defense, thou know,
no protection, no refuge, no means of safety of my self, but all my help
stands in thy Name: Thy power and providence, Lord, is my sure defense, and
the least measure of thy favor is sufficient to deliver me from an host of
enemies: much more from all the power, practice, and devices of Satan and his
ministers: who howsoever subtly they lay wait, and furiously assail me; yet
are they limited by thy power, and beyond the bounds of thy permission they
cannot go: only my own corrupt nature, and mine own sinful inclination,
make readiest way for their attempts. I am a sinner, not worthy to approach into
thy presence: but as the poor Publicane, crying, Lord be merciful unto me a
sinner: Cleanse me from my faults committed this day, wash me in the blood of
the Lamb, that I be not bard from thy presence, who refusest to hear
sinners, among whom I am the greatest: and therefore in forgiving me, the
greater shall thy mercies appear: and the more bound shall I be unto thee,
who have forgiven much, and I shall love thee much, in him whom thou love
most. In him hear me, and for him forgive me: and let not the faults that I
have done this day, be registered against me in the heavens, nor reserved to be
witnesses against me at the day of mine account. Blot out of the book of thy
remembrance, my sins done yesterday, and to day: and henceforth guide me in
so sincere and perfect obedience, that I sin not, though darkness
ouershadow my body. Let the light of thy love shine in my soul, that although
my body sleep, and be senceles of many dangers, thy providence may watch
over me, and in my deadest slumbers preserve me: and the more the darkness of
the night does blind my corporal eyes: so much the more let me covet and
obtain the light of thy saving countenance: That howsoever I have through
weakness, fallen this day, I may be now raised again to newness of life,
that I carry not the burden of my sins, unto my bed, but cast them off as the
rotten rags of my natural corruption: and being cleansed, I may become more
watchful and constant, that the errors of darkness seize not upon me: That
the enemies of my present happiness in thee, and of my future glory with thee,
take not opportunity, in the time of my sleep, or night wakings, either to
plot or practice my hurt, or my souls trouble, by vain dreams or fearful
visions, which grow partly by the distemperature of our corrupt humors: but
especially by Satan's temptations. And because, Lord, the night is as a closet
of wandering fantasies, by reason of the darkness thereof, wherein many vain and
idle imaginations arise to provoke us to evil, when sleep cease: let thy
holy Spirit, O Lord, rule in my heart, and keep the house of my soul, as the
strong man, that the works of darkness creep not into myheart: but as an holy
prompter unto my soul, he may stir up in me divine meditations, and prayers,
that my heart being truly and zealously exercised therein, in my wakings, I may
admit no idle thought, to possess the same, nor give Satan or mine own
corrupt affections, opportunity to snare me, and to seduce me from the works of
the spirit, to the deeds of the flesh: but that sleeping and waking, I may ever
rest under the shadow of thy powerful protection out of the ^each of all my
corporal and spiritual enemies, who are ever restless in their practices and
devices. Be thou therefore, Lord, on my ^^d^, prevent them of their purposes,
guard (...)ee with thy holy Angels this night, keep me, and whom, and
whatsoever belongs unto me: let all things prosper under my hands, O Lord,
let neither the darkness of the night, the distemperature of the air, the
sterilit^e, and barrenness of nature, hinder the prosperity of the creatures
ordained to my use. Neither let my sins make breach of thy favors toward
me: let the health of my body be at thy good pleasure, continued, my limbs and
senses preserved, my sleep blessed: and all my thoughts, words, and deeds,
san^ti^^ed unto me in Christ my Savior and Redeemer, this night and ever,

Amen.
Lord increase my faith, and watch over me this night.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer for the members of Christ, to be used after private
prayers in families.
IT were a matter much to be wondered at, that any member of a body should be so
little careful of it fellow members of the same body, as that it should not
extend it uttermost power, to support and aid them all. As if the one hand
should suffer violence, and the other should disdain to assist it: or that the
foot, or any other part should be annoyd: and the eye should scorn, to look
unto it, or the hand to help it. How much more lamentable were it, if the
members of our spiritual body, whereof Christ, our common Redeemer is the
head, should not pray one for another? What can a man do less for an ordinary
friend, then to speak for him, to him that may steed him, being at no further
charge or trouble, then to use the breath of his mouth for him? And shall we
think it too tedious a labor, to use our petitions to God in the behalf of
such as are our fellow members, and our dearest brethren in Christ: being
professors of his name with us, and of the same fellowship, and communion
together with us; having the self same seals of adoption that we have? God
forbid. The neglect of which spiritual duty, implies our want of love unto
our head Christ, wherein we also break the law of Christian Religion, which
commands us to love our neighbors as our selves. If we then think it our
duties to pray for our selves, we ought to pray also for them; which Christ
intends in teaching us how to pray; not as in our own names, my Father: But
in the name of all the Church, Our Father, though upon some particular
occasions, a private man may use it in the name of himself. But in general
supplications to God, it is a duty inseparable in Christian Charity, to pray
one for another: yea, and for all men. Let us therefore in all our private
prayers, either with our families, or by ourselves, add this consequent
prayer, or to the like purpose; that we discharging that Christian duty for
others, God may the more esteem our prayers for our selves, and stir up
other faithful members, to do the like for us, which may be much comfortable
to all: for the prayer of the faithful avails much, if it be fervent, Iam.
5. 16.

A Prayer for the members of Christ, whersoeuer dispersed, fit to be used
after our ordinary prayers of Morning and Evening.
GRacious Lord God, merciful and loving Father, the keeper and protector of all
that truly profess the name of Christ thy Son: we the poor and weak
members of that mystical body, whereof he is the head, as feeling the wantes
of our brethren, as our own, do here humbly present our petitions unto thee
for thy whole Church, and the members thereof howsoever, or whersoeuer
distracted, dispersed, and* estranged, by nation, tongue, or place from us.
That it may please thee, who know who are thine, to have a fatherly care
over them: and whom thou have already called to the knowledge of thy truth,
grant them, Lord, merciful, loving, and constant hearts, to stand in the
profession thereof, without wavering or starting back, call and incorporate
such as are contrarily minded, and whom thou have in thy fore-election
appointed to salvation: That they also may be made of the same holy Communion
with us. And such as yet sit in darkness, and in the shadow of ignorance, by
the seducements of the ministers of Antichrist, or of any other aduersaris*
inlighten and bring home by thy word, unto the sheepefold of the great
Shepherd of our souls. Multiply thy saving spirit upon us, and upon all that
belong unto the kingdom of thy Son. A^^ vouchsafe, good Father, to enlarge
the hearts, increase the knowledge, confirm the faith more and more, of all
those that have any chief place in Church or Commonwealth, Kings, Priests, and
People. About the rest, Lord, open the heart of our King: give him a complete
measure of true wisdom, not only in governing his subjects in due obedience
to his own laws: but in a religious course of obeying and serving of thee in
holiness and truth. Protect and deliver him from all plots, complotments and
conspiracies, of whatsoever adversaries, domestical or foreign. Suffer not,
Lord, the peace of thy Church, or Commonweal, to suffer violence, by civil
tumults, treasons, or rebellions. Preserve his health, increase his strength,
weaken his enemies, and confirm his crown to his son, and his sons
sons, to the end of time, Bless and prosper in virtue and truth, his
Queen, and all that truly love him, in and for thee, love thou them, and
comfort them: for thou have made him a true maintainer of thy truth, and an
enemy of all thine enemies. Bless unto him a godly, religious, and wise
counsel: learned, zealous and painful ministers, faithful, religious, and
truly loyal subjects: comfort, help, aid, assist, and relieve all and every
true member of thy Son: Those that are persecuted for thy truth, comfort, and
confirm, that they may constantly endure unto the end: Them that are weak,
strengthen: Them that are poor and distressed, relieve: Cure or comfort those
that are sick. Many are the troubles of thine own children, Lord; and
according to thy promise, deliver them out of all: make them able to endure,
and la^ no more upon any of them, the^ they shall be able to bear. Touch the
hearts of all thy children, that they may be watching in prayer, considering
the days wherein we live are evil. And as thou have promised to be present
with us, and with all thy children in their meetings before thee in prayer:
Stir us all up, we beseech thee, to a more holy desire, to accompany one
another, in that most holy exercise. And where one, two, or more prepare
themselves to thee, in divine supplications, assist them with thy holy Spirit,
that all for one, and one for all, may pray unto thee, in the name of our
Redeemer, That all our hearts may agree in so holy a harmony of praying one for
another, as thou may be pleased to bless us all with peace in Christ, with
plenty, health, and the use of all necessaries for this life, and grace to
obtain the glory to come, for his sake, who has ever been, is, and shall be
our Mediator, our strength, and our Redeemer,

Amen.
O Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO the confession of our sins to God, and to stir us up to pray
for the remission of the same.
THE beginning of our salvation, is the true confession and acknowledgement of
our unworthiness, and to ask pardon for our sins in a lively faith in
Christ Jesus: For whose sake, God, faithful and just, has promised to forgive
us: So that we need not to fear to confess our sins, seeing he that is
faithful and true, has made us a promise to forgive us. And therefore says
the Wise man, Be not ashamed to confess thy sins, especially unto God in
Christ our Mediator, who is not ignorant of our infirmities: but knows
whereof we are made: he remembers t(...) we are but dust, he was tempted as
(...) are: but resisted the tempter, to teach us, to withstand the assaults of
Satan, whom God permits to try us, to the end that we may strive to
prevail: and having sustained any foil, falling into any sin, that we might
learn, that we have an advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ t(...)
righteous, who is a propitiatio^ for our (...). Let us not therefore be ashamed
or afraid to confess our sins to God; for it is the first step to
Repentance: But men generally are more ashamed to confess their sins that
they have committed, then they are to commit them, and more willingly do they
undergo the committing of sin, then wisely to repress, or strongly to
resist it: the knowledge of our sin^, and the confession of them, is the
chiefest token that we are in the way of salvation. And nothing more witnesses
against us, then a purpose to hide our sins from God, or to think he sees us
not; when in deed he not only is privy to all our outward actions, but
knows our very thoughts long before. And therefore our pretense of conceiling
our iniquities from him, aggrauateth the sin, arguing, that God is not an
all-knowing God: which implies a denial of his omnipotence, and comes near
unto the fool that says in his heart, there is no God. Let us therefore be
wise in searching out our sins, which lurk under the cloud of our natural
blindness. Let us observe, whereunto we are most inclinable, and what sin is
our chiefest Dalilah, our corrupt hearts Delight: for howsoever men are subject
to many sins, yet there is one above the rest, a master sin, which though
all other sins seem to hide their heads, when the stronger man, the spirit
of God begins to possess the house of our souls: y^^ that predominant
sin will hardly be clean thrust out. And therefore are we to be wise as
Serpents, to observe and prevent sin, and innocent as Doves, to live a godly
life: which can never be, where sin of any sort bears the sway. If we
confess them, God is faithful and just to forgive them, according to his
promise, which he has also confirmed by many examples, David, Paul, Peter,
Mary Magda^ene,* The Publicane, and m(...) lively figured by the Prodigal
son: God is most rich in mercy, and m(...) ready to forgive, as David does
w^nes. I will confess (says he) my sin, and mine unrighteousness against my
self, and thou forgauest me the wickedness^ (...) my heart. So ready is God
to forg(...) as if we do but truly purpose to confess and repent, he even
then receueth us to mercy: how much more(...) with a lowly, contrite, and
brok(...) heart, and an humble spirit, we (...) pardon, in Jesus Christ the
right(...) shall we obtain favor and find gr(...) If our sins be as red as
scarlet, (...) will make them as white as snow. (...) us therefore pray for
remission of (...) sins past, and for power to resist (...) ^ure temptations,
if there remain (...) us any hope of salvation.

O Lord increase my faith.

A confession of sins, with a prayer for pardon for the same.
O Great and most merciful God, maker of the heavens, founder of the earth,
governor of the raging seas, and Creator of all things visible and invisible,
who all obey thee in their conditions; Man, the most glorious of all creatures,
excepted, who rebelled as soon as he was created, I the poorest and
unworthiest of creatures, do here cast my self down before thy mercies
seat: and with the poor sinning Publican; humbly acknowledge mine iniquities,
who am a man of the seed of transgressing Adam, in whom, by whom, and from
whom, the most deadly infection of original sinn^ is fallen upon me; which
has so polluted mine understanding, that I err in judging between good and
evil. So tainted my will, that I run after forbidden vanities: so blinded
mine affections, that I love what thou lothest, and adhor what thou would I
should embrace: and my heart is so defiled and corrupted, that I lay up in
store, as in a treasury, within the bosom of my soul, a huge mass of most
loathsome sins, whence arises, as out of a stinking dunghill of detestable
uncleanness, most ugly and abhorred transgressions, and most desperate
rebellions against the^; more and more provoking the^ to indignation, by my
continual offending thy laws, by contemning thy mercies, by abusing thy
longsuffering, by despising thy most sacred word, by not believing thy fatherly
promises, by not fearing the terrible judgments, and by (...) cursed and
careless course of life, whereby I have defaced that divine Image of purity
and sanctity; wherein I was first created (...) thi^^ own Image in Adam.
Infinite are my sins, Lord, and pa^ finding out; oh cleanse me from my secret
sins. If thou, Lord, straightly ma^kest what is done amiss, who shall (...)
able to stand? Lord, turn away t(...) face from my sins, put away (...)
transgressions out of thy remembrance: consider not, Lord, mi(...) offenses,
how ready I have been to embrace those forbidden fruits of the flesh, which
being the savor of death unto death, and how wilfully I have rejected the
fruits of the Spirit, sauouring unto life eternal. It is too much, Lord, that
I brought death into the world with my life; but much more by adding actual to
mine original transgression. There is no part within me or without me, free
from deserved condemnation: my heart is corrupted, my tongue and lips profane,
mine eyes blinded, my hands defiled, my feet polluted, and all the members of
my body stained with the filthiness of sin, sinful sin, sins of all sorts,
committing things forbidden, and omitting things commanded: So that I cannot
but confess against my self, I am wholly not only sinful, but a lump of sin
it self, a puddle of putrefaction, a sink of uncleanness, a gulf of gross
impieties, and a carcass of most filthy leprosy, full of spiritual
rottenness, unworthy the light of the Sun, to lighten my corporal eyes to
see to do evil: not worthy to breathe in the air, to speak evil, nor
worthy to partake of the ordinary food of men, to strengthen my flesh the more
to sin, nor worthy to consort with humane society, to make them sinful by
my sin. Oh wretch that I am; how have I plunged my self into thy heavy
displeasure? how have I lost thy love, who love righteousness, and hate
iniquity? Oh wretch that I am, how have I run, without right reason, to my
ruin rashly? Lord, I am unfeignedly sorry for my sins, and I long to be
reconciled unto thee; lest I go to my grave with grief, lest from the grave I
should come into judgment with horror, and be enforced to hear that fearful
and final sentence of reprobatio^ pronounced against (...), never to be
revoked, endure torments, never to be eased. Oh Lor(...) merciful and loving,
remember I am but dust: forget not how orignall sin seized upon me, before I
had sense or power to commit actual sin: call to mind that I was conceived
and borne in sin, and brought corruption in my flesh, from my mothers womb,
which I could not prevent. And although it be the rule of thy severe Justice,
to lay the guilt of parents upon their children: yet let thy mercies which are
above thy Judgeme^ts, show themselves now, when else there is no hope.

Amen.
Lord increase my faith, and forgive my sins.
Another shorter prayer for forgiveness of sins.
O Heavenly father, thy promises are many, faithful and comfortable. Thou will
not the death of a sinner, but desire rather that he should repent and live.
If thou then desire rather that I live then perish, give me a repenting heart,
renew a right spirit within me: reform me, and I shall be reformed: for in me,
Lord, there is no goodness, no power, and as little will to do good, but a will
and power to do evil only. Let therefore thy grace work effectually in me a
new heart, a new mind, new affections, holy and sanctified: So shall sin
become loathsome unto me, which I have loved: and holiness of life shall be sweet
unto me, which I have neglected: thy Commandments that I have transgressed, I
shall endeavor to fulfill: thy patience which I have abused, I will answer with
more filial obedience. The curses then, that I have deserved, shall be turned
into blessings: and I shall frame the residue of my life in better actions: I
shall abandon, as deceiving vanities, those sins wherein I have delited, and
shall shun the baits wherewith Satan has allured me to sin, and whereunto I
consented, by the vanity of mine unregenerate affections. Oh pardon, pardon my
sins good Father in Jesus Christ, fill my heart with the lively apprehension of
thy mercies: speak peace unto my sad and sorrowful soul: revive my dead and
distracted thoughts plunged in despair: cast thine ey^ upon Christ thy
beloved, and in him, (...) loving eye upon me; who without him, am a castaway.
Hear him (...) mediator for me; hear me a sinner, for his sake, and pardon me
for thy mercies sake. Take me now, Lord, out of the dungeon of fear, wherein I
have bin long a captive, sold under sin. Set me now free from the danger of
death and hell. Let Satan fly and fall before my face. Let sin have no more
power over me: receive me into thy favor: assure me of full and free remission
of my sins in Christ: work true peace in my conscience. The sting of death
being broken, the fear of the judgment to come, may be turned into a lively
assurance of salvation; that white I live here, I may evermore feel the lively
work of thy holy Spirit in me. Make the residue of my days, the days of
unfeigned mourning for my former offenses, and of a most upright and righteous
conversation to come: and let faith evermore prevail against all future
temptations, that I may finish the course of my life in that peace which
proceeds of perfect love, which love brings forth filial obedience unto
thee, which obedience is more acceptable in thy fight, then the sacrifices of
bullocks and goats. Accept me now, good Father, in Jesus Christ, into thy
favor, remit my sins, number me amongst thine elect, and seal me up in thy
mercies against the day of my final visitation. Hear me, O Lord, and let thy
holy Spirit guide me ever unto that day, through Christ my Savior, my
Mediator, my Strength, and my redeemer.

Amen.
O Lord increase my faith, and pardon my sins.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer, for a godly and holy life, and for power of resisting
Satan and sin.
THe course of every man's life declar's what kind of man he is, whether carnal
or spiritual; for as the tree is known by his fruit, so is every man known of
men by his life and conversation. And it is much to be lamented, that men,
though carnally minded, will justify themselves, and make protestation of
their hope, that they shall be saved, as well as he that walks most sincerely
before God and men. And this out of a voluntary ignorance and blindness, in
not knowing, and truly distinguishing between the ways of sanctity and
sin: the first leading to heaven and eternal life, through grace and faith
in Christ: the other to hell and reprobation, through our own corruption, by
the obeying the will of Satan. It is more then wonderful to observe the
courses of carnal men, who pretend that they are traveling to that blessed
New Jerusalem, and yet take the direct way to Cursed Ierico: they covet, in
conceit, to ascend the holy hill of Sion, and yet will not leave that wicked
Babylon. They profess to live after the Spirit, but do the works of the
Flesh. They would seem to live in Light, but behold, they are in Darkness: not
considering that he that lives after the flesh, shall die: yet how loath are
carnal men to leave the way that leads to destruction, and how unapt and
unwilling to walk in the way of life, which is Christ? in whom, if we truly
believe, we walk in him; if we truly walk in him, we truly live in him, and
that life is the sum and end of all our hope; it is the mark whereat we aim
all our holy endeavors. Let us therefore determine with our selves, and
constantly resolve to walk before God, and to be upright. Let us make our
supplications in his presence, with our whole hearts. And let us duly consider
our ways, what they have been. And let us now turn our feet unto his
testimonies. Let us strengthen and confirm our resolutions of a godly life, by
continual prayer: otherwise, what good we determine to day, will be repented
to morrow, and we through our weakness shall fall again, contrary to our godly
resolutions. Our supplications to God for his assistance, and strengthening of
our resolved reformation, must be continual, because our spiritual
adversaries are continually working, to seduce us out of the way of a
sanctified life. A ship, as soon as her sails are hoised, feels the wind,
and begins to make way: if then there be no skillful pilote at the helm to
steer, she either rusheth upon some rock, or drives the contrary course. So
are men's affections swayed with the good or evil spirit. Needs there not
therefore a wise consultation of all the senses of the inner and outer man, how
to steer the affections aright? which, as the sails are to the ship, so are
they unto the mind; for, being once hoised, they carry the desires, as the
sails the hull; and if it want right reason to steer it, it never can shape
the course of godliness. Let us therefore pray, that we may be able to manage
the ship of our affections to the port of true obedience, in a sincere course
of life. And happy is that man, that truly determines, constantly continues,
faithfully prays, and wisely considers the course of his life, and ever
remembers his end.

A Prayer for a godly life, and to resist sin and Satan.
O God my God in Jesus Christ, maker and creator of all things, governor of
heaven and earth, preserver of our souls and bodies, the giver of life and
light: The framer and disposer of all right and religious hearts, The
perfecter, and finisher of our faith. In, and by whom are all things, and
without whom nothing can have any being: Much less corrupt man, have any
existence in life, though be seem to live in the body, except thou live in
him: for our life, which is our salvation, and our glory, and our crown, is
hid with thee in Christ. Such is thy mercy toward us, as thou vouchsafest to
show us, our blessed being with thee in the heavens, in this our mortality in
part, as in a glass: lest we should faint in our trials, power down^, O Lord,
a full and large measure of thy saving grace into my heart, that I apprehending
in part, the sweetness of the life to come, may frame my self, to that course
of life here, as may assure me of that which is to come: Abandon and abolish
the darkness of mine understanding, and give me the light of true judgment,
that I may warily, watchfully, and wisely foresee, observe and shun, the
subtle baytes and allurements of sin and Satan: give me grace to walk in
the way of life, leave not the powerful power of Satan, nor the poisoning
sting of death in me. Settle mine affections upon the hid treasures of thy
love, guide and guard me, with thy saving power, instruct me in the way of true
wisdom: Adorn me with all thy spiritual graces, and divine virtues: sow in
me the seeds of sanctity, water me with the dew of thy holy Spirit: purify
and cleanse my heart, rectify mine affections, bless my godly enterprises and
holy endeauours, frame all the parts, powers, faculties and senses of my soul
and body, that they may all meet in the love of thee, and every one perform
his office, according to the greatness of thy name: Let my heart harbor holy
thoughts, let my will ever be framed after thy word; let mine understanding be
manifested by righteousness, and a sanctified life: let my memory never let
^^ipthe good things thou have done for my soul: Let my hands be purely
cleansed from pollution, my tongue from profanation, mine eyes, from the gilt
of concupiscence, my feer from following vanity: and all the parts of my body
from the least appearance of (...): That I being thus cleansed, and reformed, I
may walk ever in thy faith, live ever in thy fear: and at the last, yield my
body to the grave, in thy favor: where the power and sting of death shall
fail of further pursuing me: and there shall I leave that sinning part, until
it shall be made a shining part with my soul, by the brightness and glory of
thy presence in the heavens: Thy goodness and mercy showed unto sinners in
this life, leads the seriously penitent, and truly faithful, to the
consideration of their present weakness, wants, and imperfections, and to the
contemplation of their future fullness of joy, comfort, and euer-continuing
consolation. O stir up in me a lively hunger and thirst for spiritual graces
in this life, where we are pressed down with a mighty mass of corruption, and
compassed about with a dark cloud of errors: Insomuch as I, a man begotten,
conceived and borne in sin; can never be able to stand under the burden of
the one: or to comprehend thee, my Light, and my salvation, through the other.
How then, Lord, shall I be able to walk in thee, who art the true way:
understand thee, the saving truth, or attain unto thee, being eternal life?
Therefore Lord, vouchsafe to enlarge my heart in all godly forwardness, to
proceed from knowledge to knowledge, from faith to faith, from one divine
grace to another: until I attain to full perfection in Christ, in whom all
our holy indenours be evermore blessed, sin evermore weakened, and all
goodness evermore increased. But many are the blocks, which Satan lays,
and covers them with the veil of pleasure and profit, which make many to
stumble and fall. Many ministers he uses, to snare us, and many miseries and
mischiefs he plotreth and practices against us, to dismay us from following
of thee: but he has not so many agents, to allure, or terrify us, as thou,
Lord, have means to prevent the one, and to defend us in the other. Plead thou
therefore my cause, and defend me against that spiritual enemy, that fights
against me; leave me not in his power, shorten the extent of his chain, break
his teeth, that he may have no power to seize upon me, weaken the poison of his
enchantments, that he pollute in me neither the will nor the deed: That I may
lead my life unspotted in the world, and that all mine actions and endeavors
may prosper: that sin, that hangs on so fast, may be cast off: And give me
a sound knowledge of thy good pleasure, that I may truly determine to shake
clean off the unprofitable works of darkness, and be truly clothed with the
holy robes of righteousness, and sanctity: That I may be ever able and ready
to pray unto thee, and obtain at thy hands, the direction to live uprightly in
thy sight: and that I may ever consider mine own weakness, and
imperfections; to the end I may endeavor to keep a good conscience in all
mine actions: for, as our senses, and the members of our body, are many, and
every one subject to sundry infirmities and temptations: and every of our
actions open to diverse infections and pollutions: So, Lord, I beseech thee, to
bless all, and every part of my soul and body, in all holiness and
sanctity, that in all my life I may truly walk before thee, in ^i^^all fear
and obedience, and be of an upright conversation before the sons men: Grant
this for Christ thy Son,

Amen.
O Lord increase my faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer before the receiving of the holy Communion, or the Lords
Supper.
THis holy Sacrament is called the Lords Supper: because Christ Jesus did
institute the same, at his last Supper with his Disciples. It is called the
holy Communion, because many faithful communicate together at this holy Table,
as common partakers together of the body and blood of Christ. It is left unto
us, to be received of us, as a seal of our adoption into the inheritance of
that new Jerusalem, purchased by Christ. It is a mystery, and therefore not
understood, according to the spiritual end, by the outward and carnal eating
and drinking of the bread and wine, which are only visible signs of an
invisible virtue: which makes the worthy and truly faithful receivers,
lively members of Christ's mystical body. And yet not every one that
partaketh of this holy Table, is therefore a member of Christ; for, the outward
communicating, not only avails nothing to the unworthy Receiver, but turns
to his greater condemnation, as appears in Judas. And therefore a most
fearful thing it is, to presume to come to this holy Table, with an
unprepared heart, though as well the unworthy, as the worthy Receivers,
understand by the letter of the word, that the Body of Christ, crucified upon
the Cross, is signified by the Bread, and his blood shed, signified by the
pouring out of the wine: yet how the Receiver does eat the flesh, and drink
the blood of Christ, every Receiver understands not: And therefore a
dangerous presumption it is, lightly and rashly to press to this holy Table,
as if the bread and wine were of ordinary use, the taste and verdure of either
differing nothing, to the carnal sense, from ordinary bread and wine. But such
is the spiritual use, as it works either to the salvation, or damnation of
every one that receives: Every man receives, as he is prepared in his heart.
The godly affected and sanctified, that have truly tasted, and do retain the
grace of Gods holy Spirit, bringing forth fruits worthy amendment of life,
partake worthy of this holy mystery. But they that remain in their sins,
carnally minded, such as delight in the works of darkness, worldly and
fleshly vanities: what show soever they make of the outward reverent receiving
of this blessed Sacrament, they do but eat and drink their own damnation:
because they make no distinction or difference between this holy Table, and
the ordinary table of carnal meats* They only feel, and feed on the
visible signs: but the spiritual and invisible grace, they taste not of.
Therefore it behooves all that purpose to communicate at this holy Table,
first to examine how they stand prepared, or unprepared; if they find
themselves fit to partake of this heavenly mystery, it will appear in their
regeneration and renewed life, by truly believing in the name of Christ Jesus,
by unfeignedly loving one another, as Christ commanded: by well weighing, and
duly considering their ways, and turning themselves, in faith and obedience
to the commandments of God: by truly repenting their sins, and applying
their hearts to righteousness, and true holiness. He that is not thus
prepared, but continues in his sins, in infidelity and disobedience, ought
to forbear this holy Sacrament, and to employ his heart to search all his
imperfections, to seek the means of reformation, by the ministry of the
word, and prayer: left he come to this holy* Table, thinking to please God with
a bare show of Religion, having neither faith nor repentance, offering the
sacrifice of fools. And so in stead of remission of sins promised to the
worthy Receiver, he increase his own condemnation, by unworthy receiving.

A Prayer to be said, before the receiving of the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ.
O Gracious Lord God, Father of our Savior Christ Jesus, and in him ours: I
thy poor creature, wretched and full of sin, do here humbly fall down in
thy presence, to be partaker of that holy Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
that Lamb that takes away the sins of the world; Jesus Christ, who took
upon him the burden of thy heavy indignation* inkindled against all the sons
of sinning Adam, and refused not the ignominious death of the cross; to take
away the curse, which lay upon all mankind, pressing us all down even to the
hels: and has redeemed again into thy favor, and reconciled to thy grace, as
many as truly believe in his death and satisfaction. Thy mercy, Lord, did it,
wonderful in our eyes: yea, a work beyond the apprehension of humane
wisdom, a mystery incomprehensible. Open therefore the eyes of our spiritual
understandings, that we may comprehend, and take hold by a lively faith, of
the free remission of our sins, and consequently of our real, and perfect
adoption into the right of inheritance of eternal glory with Christ in the
heavens: Reveal, Lord God, ever loving, this most hid and heavenly mystery,
unto every one here gathered together, to partake of this holy Table: and give
us understanding hearts, truly to know, what a high and heavenly mystery we
here are to communicate: for we cannot but acknowledge, that although the
creatures, whereof we desire corporally to partake, be visible, and our eating
the bread, and drinking the wine, be unto us in taste and verdure, as are other
like bread and wine: yet there is an invisible, and spiritual operation, in
the worthy and unworthy receiving: namely, salvation or damnation; as appears
in that unworthy, and most wicked Judas. But good Father, as he was marked from
among the rest of thy Disciples to reprobation: let this thine holy ordinance
be a sure seal unto us of our salvation, howsoever unable we are to comprehend
the height and depth of thy great mercy and wisdom, which in this most holy
Communion, thou offerest for the salvation of all worthy receivers. But who,
Lord, can account himself worthy? who dare presume to approach unto this holy
and heavenly Banquet of the Lamb, as of his own merit, to partake worthily?
How can sinful man, by eating the bread, and drinking the wine, assure
himself of remission of his sins, not being spiritually instructed in this
heavenly mystery? Sin and sanctity, truth and error, light and darkness,
agree not: and therefore man, as he is in himself by nature corrupt, ignorant,
and in the shadow of death, cannot worthily partake of this mystical banquet of
the body and blood of thy Son our Savior, without the inward working of thy
grace in his heart, whereby it may please thee to give him a lively feeling of
his imperfections, a desire and power to cast off the loathsome clogge of sin,
and to be truly sanctified to the participation of so effectual a mean to
obtain salvation. But how far we wretched sinners, here gathered together,
are short of feeling our own wants of power to cast off our sins; and how far
from true sanctification, thou know. And therefore, loving Father in Jesus
Christ, cleanse thou us, and we shall be clean, sanctify us, and we shall be
holy: and though our imperfections be great, though our faith be weak, we shall
be made perfect, and our obedience confirmed by the sincerity of the obedience
of Christ our Savior, whose righteousness and merits are made ours, by thy
fatherly and free imputation, requiring of us, mortal men, only to believe: I
believe, Lord, help mine unbelief, that I may lift up a pure heart unto thee,
beg faithfully of thee, and receive plentifully from thee all spiritual
graces; that I coming unto this holy table, having fully cast off the habit
of sin, may be clothed with the sacred Robe of Christ's Innocence, and be
found among the rest of thy Saints, having on that heavenly wedding garment;
that I be not taken from this holy Table, thrust out with shame and horror into
the place of weeping and gnashing of teeth. Remember not our offenses, Lord,
bury them in the grave of everlasting forgetfulness, forget not whereof we
are made, and be not unmindful what an army of spiritual enemies do
continually assail us, and how in our most deuotest and most religious actions
and exercises, they are most busy to seduce and circumuent us. Assist us
therefore, Lord, and be thou on our side, grace us now with thy blessed
presence, that we may here offer up unto thee our souls and bodies, a holy,
lively, and acceptable sacrifice, and become worthy Receivers of this holy
Mystery; that as we eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, we may truly
find an effectual mortification of our sinning part, and a lively vi^ification,
and regeneration of our spiritual part, and may be more and more changes in
our lives, that we may walk before thee, and be upright, from henceforth all
the days of our earthly pilgrimage; and teach us ever more and more to obey
and love him, who so infinitely loved us, that he contented himself to give his
body to be crucified, and his blood to be shed for us: which great love of his
being here represented unto us, by these thy visible creatures of bread and
wine, give us truly and faithfully believing hearts, that we may worthily
receive them, and rightly retain the reverend memory of his death, and be
ever the better enabled to resist, and abandon sin; and cleave unto
righteousness, all the days of our lives; that at his coming again we may be
raised, and ascend with him, as members sanctified, and heirs adopted into
that inheritance, which he purchased with his blood in heaven. Graciously grant
this, O Father, for his sake that suffered that ignominious death and seal up
in our consciences, by thy holy Spirit, a full and lively assurance that we
are truly ingrafted into him our head, and in, and by, and with him shall live,
eternally glorified in heaven,

Amen.
Lord increase our faith, and prepare our hearts to a faithful and reverend
receiving of this holy Sacrament, to our souls comfort.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be said after the receiving of the Lords Supper.
IT is a dangerous thing, upon the recovery of health after sickness, to suffer
a relapse, and falling down again: but much more dangerous to fall into new
sins after repentance, and reconciliation with God. A man having polluted
himself with pitch, and being cleansed, is worthy to suffer shame, if he wallow
in it again. How much more shameful is it for a man, that has vowed
reformation of his corrupt life, and to forsake his sins, and has thereupon
received, in token of forgiveness, the seal of Gods promise, the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ, to bind him, upon pain of condemnation, to new
obedience, if he wilfully fall back again. Thou therefore, whatsoever thou
be, that have been partaker of this holy and most sacred mystery, remember
what thou have done, how thou have eaten thy salvation, or damnation, for there
is not a mean between this; if therefore thou (having been a guest at this
heavenly Feast) feel in thy self, a heart not so well formerly prepared, as
the holy Ghost commands, retaining still the froth and filth of thy sins,
begin now to cast them off, and put on instantly the wedding garment of true
regeneration, that thou may be found worthy to sit at this holy Table, and
to partake of the saving food of thy soul, by chewing the cudde of continuing
repentance, and newness of life, here, that hereafter thou may enjoy the
fruits of thy new birth with Christ in heaven. And for as much as no man has
power of himself to perform that obedience in the inner man, which he may
promise by outward words, there is no surer or more prevailing means then
prayer. And therefore, it behooves thee to continue and end this heavenly
exercise, with hearty prayer to God in the same Christ, that he would be
pleased for that his Sons sake, to accept thee into the inseparable society of
his Elect Saints. And let not this desire be as a pusse of wind, or as a flame
suddenly quenched, but let it be a daily exercise, to meditate of this thy holy
union with Christ, that thy back sliding to sin heap not up a more heavy
weight of condemnation against thee in the time of thine account, when it will
be demanded how thou presumest to come to that holy Table without the habit of
true faith and obedience: it will not boot thee to say thou came for fear
of the law, or for company, with the congregation; for who so comes not for,
and apprehends not inward and spiritual comfort, comes unworthily, and he
that falls to his old sins again, has eaten this Spiritual bread, and
drunk of that Spiritual rock, which is Christ, to his own damnation.

O Lord increase my faith.

A Prayer to be said after the receiving of the holy Communion.
GReat, good, and most gracious Lord God, the Author and finisher of our faith,
who of thy free favor, have now vouchsafed me to be a guest at this thy
heavenly banquet, where I have been refreshed, not so much with the visible
creatures of bread and wine, for the strengthening of my weak body, which
without thy corporal nutriment cannot long endure: But with the heavenly
Manna, the food of the souls of thy Saints, the blessed body and blood of that
immaculate Lamb, who sealed our atonement with thee, with his blood upon the
ignominious and grievous cross, and there cancelled the handwriting, which
was against us; and of the bond^^aues of Satan, made us the free men of the new
Jerusalem, and in our nature, and for us, and in our behalfes, triumphed over
Satan, Death, and Hell, and now, Lord, as it has pleased thee to accept me
into this holy communion, and to make me partaker of that most holy mystery, by
the outward receiving of visible bread and wine: work, gracious Lord, in me a
true, lively, and spiritual feeling of the grace which thou have promised unto
all worthy Receivers. And for as much as our assurance depends upon thy
promise, and thy promise confirmed unto us by a lively faith; and that faith is
thine own free gift also, by the operation of thy holy Spirit: work in me,
Lord, this faith, that may confirm unto me the effect of thy promise, the
free forgiveness of my sinues, newnes of life, a holy and sanctified
conversation, a right reverend use of all thy creatures, a religious fear to
offend thee, and unfeigned love of thee in Christ: that as I have bin now a
partaker of the outward elements, I may also and absolutely partake of the
invisible grace, that my soul may be lively and continually fed with that
heavenly bread, which makes our souls strong in and by him, whose body and
blood I have here sacramentally eaten and drunk, and thereby through faith am
united even of thy free mercy unto, and made one with thee in him, in whom,
whosoever is truly ingrafted, shall live for ever in the glorious heavens with
him, as coheires of that endless Kingdom of glory, which he purchased by his
obedience to the death of the Cross. Good father, let the remembrance of that
his death be so imprinted in my heart this day, that I never forget it, but
covet to renew, and continually retain the remembrance thereof, by often
communicating at this holy Table, which, though it be as a snare unto the
unworthy partakers, it is a sure seal of salvation to the faithful and truly
penitent. And therefore, good Father, confirm my repentace, renew mine
obedience, strengthen my faith: Make me a lively member of Christ, that as I
have this day promised to become a new creature, and thou have renewed again to
me, thy promise of remission of my sins, and of my reconciliation with thee,
through the blood of the Lamb: Let this holy, and heavenly condition be truly
performed in my behalf, for ever. So shall I be assured, that thou will never
fail in thy sacred covenant of grace to me, being ever the same, yea, and
Amen. Thou, Lord, know my strong corruptions, and the feebleness of my
natural power to resist sin, and what strong and powerful adversaries there
lie in wait for my soul, laying continual snares to entangle me anew, to
make (if it were possible) this my reuniting into thee in Christ of none
effect, and to seduce me again into the ways of ungodliness. But good Father,
prevent me with thy grace, that as I have promised this day to forsake sin,
and cleave unto righteousness, so I may perform and persevere in a sanctified
life unto my lives end, through Christour Lord.

Lord increase and confirm my faith evermore.
A MOTIVE TO a Prayer to be said of a man in any kind of trouble.
ALthough the word of God do approve Affliction to be necessary for them that
shall be saved: yet is it otherwise thought, and held of the carnal man, who
can hardly believe, that it is a token of the love of God toward him: he
rather persuades himself, that when God sends him great increase of Cattle,
Corn, Oil, Wine, Health, Worldly prosperity, and the pleasures of this life,
that then God loves him. But how far he is deceived, the holy Ghost
declares by the Prophet David, who confessed, that it was good for him, that
he was afflicted. And Christ himself affirms, that through many troubles,
his Saint^ must enter into the kingdom of heaven: Not by pleasures, delites of
the flesh, and vanities of the mind. If we did remember the sentence pronounced
for Lazarus, and against the Rich man, and did duly consider it, we could not
but think prosperity rather dangerous then delightful: and that a mean
estate is more profitable then painful. Thou have received thy pleasure,
says Abraham, but contrarily, Lazarus endured pain: Therefore art thou
tormented, and he is comforted. No other reason is alleged of either
sentence, and yet neither of them is said to be punished, or preserved, for the
ill or good that the one or other did. Only fullness, and want, plenty, and
penury, pleasure and pain, are said to be the causes of either condition: Not
that the ones riches in themselves deserved damnation, but the abuse: or that
the others poverty deserved salvation: but his patience, which yet was not the
cause, but the effect of Gods election: And the others abuse of the blessings
of God, an argument of his reprobatio^. But God, to prevent the gross fruits
of corruption in us, makes our powers weak, and our wills thereby the more
conformable to his will. As Physic often preuenteth a disease that begins to
seize on the body, and for the time, is harsh, loathsome, bitter, and much
unsavory, yet salutary in the end. So is Affliction of whatsoever kind,
medicinable, to such as can brook, and digest it through faith, patience and
prayer, and brings the affections into a sanctified temper. That the unholy
humors of pride, arrogancy, avarice, lust, and other corporal and earthly
vanities, oppress not the soul, which is carried, by the violence of
superfluous vanities, into many noisome desires: and consequently into infinite
hazards of making shipwreck of salvation. Take it not therefore heavily,
whatsoever thou art, that art visited with whatsoever cross, or trial,
although in it own nature it be evil, being a punishment of sin: for he that
made the bitter waters of Mara sweet, and changed the nature thereof for his
Isreal's sake, has changed the nature of the cross, to them that are his,
insomuch, as they not only find comfort in it: But many sweet effects, it
brings forth, making them glorious in their baseness, rich in their
poverty, strong in their weakness, and lively in their seeming death.
Moreover, it causes us to see how just, how provident, and how merciful the
Lord is, how weak and miserable all mankind is: And how fickle, how
inconstant, and false the world is. It beats down the pride of nature, and
humbles us, that we are not so prone and apt to sin, as when we have
prosperity at will. As our sins and transgressions are the fruits of our
corruptions: So are afflictions and crosses necessary, to mortify them, and
to prevent their increase. To speak of the kinds of trouble, they are many:
yet may be reduced, under these three heads: poverty, sickness, enemies:
under the first, are comprehended the want of al necessaries: under the second,
the griefs of body and mind: and under the third, whatsoever is adversary
unto us. And therefore, the prayer following, is fit to be used in any of
these, that the Lord will be either pleased to remove them, to moderate their
extremity, or to give patience to undergo it.

A general meditation or prayer in whatsoever trouble or cross.
GRacious and most merciful Lord God, whose wisdom is past finding out, and
whose providence disposes of all the estates of men, in mercy and judgment:
thou liftest out of the dunghill, the humbled poor, and hurlest down the
mighty: thou give and take, when, what, from whom, and wherefore it
pleases thee: All thy ways, O God, are mercy and truth, to them that fear
thee: Thou Lord, art righteous in all thy works, and holy in all thy ways.
Howsoever thou correctest thy children, it is for their purgation, to cleanse
them from the rust, and dross of their corruptions: And make poverty,
sickness, enemies, and all crosses, not only not burdensome or irksome unto
thine, but sweet and easse to be borne: though the natural man seem to kick
against them, the man regenerate, and borne a new of the holy Ghost, imbraceth
them as the true tokens of thy fatherly affection toward him: who having
learned out of thy sacred word, that through many troubles, thy Saints must
enter into joy, and through disgrace into glory: He fears most, when he is
most free from crosses; left that he should not be of the number of them that
shall be saved, whose salvation is the more certain, by how much thou correctest
him by thy fatherly visitations. All flesh is corrupt, and all men sinners.
Thou therefore, who art just, clean, and pure in all thy ways and works,
can not but use thy rod of gentle corrections, upon them whom thou love in
Jesus Christ: But let the wicked, either to lie securely in a reprobate
sense, or to lay thy heavy judgment upon them, even in this life, where they
begin their condemnation. But good Father, Enter not into judgment with me:
Let not thy corrections become curses unto me: but rather, Lord, let them be
merely medicines to cure the disease of sin in me. So shall I, by the
working of thy holy spirit, become more and more mortif^ed in the affections of
my heart, which are then most offending thy Majesty, when I am in greatest
security: And therefore, loving father, take from me all grudging, discontent
of mind, and murmuring against thy corrections, of what kind or quality soever
they be: for thou have testified unto us by thy word, that thou scourgest every
son thou receiuest. And therefore, he that wants thy fatherly
chastisements, seems to be a bastard and no son. And forasmuch, Lord, as
the causes of men's troubles in this life be many, and hidden, some to correct
for sins already committed, some to prevent sins, whereunto we are
inclinable, and some to manifest thy power, by way of judgment against the
impenite^t wicked: Take Lord, away from the eyes of my dark understanding, the
veil of ignorance, that I may see and feel in my conscience, a sure
testimony of thy saving spirit; that thy corrections light not upon me in
judgment, but in mercy, not to condemn me, but to approve me to be one of thy
Church militant, whose members have their continuing afflictions, which
howsoever outwardly they seem to blemish them, yet do they make them
beautiful within, and most amiable unto thee, howsoever we seem unto the
world, outcastes and castawayes: yet are we thereby made the more like unto our
Savior, who procured out salvation through affliction. And thereby thou, Lord,
knowing our weakness, to undergo his crosses, lay no more upon me then
withal thou may be pleased to give me grace and strength to bear it,
according to thy promise: and then lay upon me what thou will, poverty,
sickness, enemies, and whatsoever crosses may make me likest unto thy son in
his patient sufferings: although I have learned, Lord, that all the afflictions
of this life, are not worthy of the glory that shall be showed in the life that
is to come. And therefore, Lord, assist me with thy grace, that I with patience
and godly rejoicing, may undergo whatsoever it shall please thee to lay upon
me: As did Saint Paul, Silas, Saint Peter, and other thine Apostles, who
embraced all thy corrections, and their troubles for thy names sake, with
heavenly alacrity, and spiritual consolation.

O Lord increase my faitli.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be said in poverty and want of this life's necessaries.
OF all the miseries, that can befall a man in this mortal life, none is more
bitter, and burdensome, then poverty, and want of this life's necessaries. And
therefore we may observe, how all men generally strive to avoid it, by means
lawful or unlawful. It made Jacob to pray for sufficiency, left want should
constrain him to unjust means to supply his necessities namely, to clothe and
feed himself* and them that he has committed to his ear: for there is no
other real want to be complained of, but the want of food and raiment: if a
man have to sustain nature in the meanest measure, and to cover his nakedness
in the basest manner, and be free from danger of debt, and be not an idle, but
a dilligent man in some lawful calling, he having the fear of God, cannot be
said a poor man; for the fear of God makes him wise, and wisdom makes him
patient, and patience content, and he that is co^te^t in this mean estate; is
rich. He that treasures up the word of God in his soul, though he have neither
Silver nor Gold, he may be rich, as Peter, who wanting these, was yet rich in
all Christian virtues, and much beloved of the Lord; and upon such poor men
does the Lord cast his fatherly and loving countenance, he watches over them,
and feeds them: Harken, my beloved brethren (says Saint James) has not God
chosen the poor of this world, that they should be rich in faith, and heirs
of the Kingdom, which he promised to them that love him? God prefers the
poor in worldly goods, being faithful and just, before the unfaithful rich;
howsoever carnal judgment makes great difference between the worldly rich,
whom it reuerenceth, and the corporal poor, whom it scorneth. But let the
bodily poor, whom the Lord has enriched with spiritual graces, rejoice in
their tribulations; for God has provided for them a City, a Crown, glory,
and immortality; where they shall neither want silver, gold, raiment, food, or
any necessaries: for the Lord Christ shall be unto them all in all things. But
it is to be understood, that it is not the poverty of any, that can deserve
these future favors, but they are the free gifts of God in Christ to the godly
poor, not provided for the idle profane, wicked, and dissolute, that assume
unto themselves voluntary beggerie, or consume their corporal means lewdly,
and so become poor, using no lawful calling, to maintain and support their
estates; when they shall plead their poverty and mise^i^, in time to come, it
shall be said v^^o them, Go^ ye vnthrif^ie servants into everlasting poverty,
perpetual naked^^sse, and endless hunger and thirst. Whosoever therefore thou
be that art pressed with poverty, seek the riches that shall never diminish,
Divine Knowledge, (...) Faith, and pray unto the God of Lazarus, that if it be
his pleasure, he will remove thy poverty, and renew thy corporal portion, or
that he will give thee patience, that may inure hope, that may ever hold fast
the assurance of the glory to come. To which purpose the prayer following, or
the like, may much stead thee, and comfort thee.

A Prayer to be said in poverty and want of this life's necessaries.
Almighty Lord God, most powerful, and most loving, I humbly recommend my
self into thy holy protection, and to thy fatherly providence, who madestine
and createdst me of nothing, and I came into this world poor and wretched,
bringing nothing with me but nakedness, and original misery, more hardly bested
(of mine own power) then the beast that perishes. And in this manner all men
came, and daily come into the world, from Adam to the last that shall be borne
into the earth: yet in thy great and unsearchable wisdom, thou disposest of
men in diverse manners, according unto thine own will. Some, Lord, thou make
Princes of the world, some abiects in the world; and yet neither the greatest,
nor the meanest, by their high or low estate can be judged by humane reason,
happy or unhappy, Teach me therefore true wisdom, Lord, that I may rightly
conceive and judge of mine own ^enury and poverty, not as a judgment
inflicted, but as a favorable and fatherly portion given me, lest I should
presume upon, and rest the more secure, and consequently become the more proud
of a more rich and more glorious worldly estate: for thou, Lord, best know
whether poverty or riches be most agreeable to my condition: and therefore I
humbly accept and embrace that portion which thou have given me, though it be
to flesh and blood har^ and unpleasant: make it yet, good father, spiritually
sweet unto (...) by thy grace: because it is thy will that I should be poor in
worldly, make me so much the more rich in heavenly things. So shall I bo^ my
portion, Lord, great and glorious, howsoever I seem outwardly base and abject.
It is manifest, that thou causest the Sun to shine, and the rain to fall upon
the good, and the wicked. So give thou and distributest riches and poverty,
to the just, and unjust, but to diverse ends: and they likewise receive and use
them diversely; the first, both riches and poverty, to one only end, namely, to
thy glory, and their own true comfort, being rich, as if they were poor, being
poor, as if they possessed all things: and this by the working of thy holy
Spirit on their sanctified hearts. Sanctiste my heart therefore, Lord, and give
me patience, and a truly contented mind, in my greatest wants, and unfeigned
thankfulness, for the least supply or increase of thy bounty toward me, and
let not my poor estate direct me, as it does the hypocrites, who in
prosperity wax proud, and in poverty grudge and murmr, and so offend thy
Majesty, who workest all for the best, to them that are thine: my weakness
by Nature, I confess to be such, as I am prone to fall both in fulness and in
want. And were I not vpholden by thy grace, I should in the one run headlong
into many noisome iustes, and forbidden vauities: and by the other, into unjust
dealing to supply m^ necessities. And therefore, good and gracious father. I
humbly pray thee, for Christ, thy Sonues sake, either to enlarge my portion, in
a competent measure, that I be not driven through too much penury to repine,
as of mine own nature I am apt: or else, give me that true patience, through a
lively faith in thy providence and mercy, that may work in me that hope, that
may never make me ashamed. The world, thou know, Lord, loves her own, on
whom she faw^es: But thy base ones are hateful unto worldlings, disdained, and
abhorred, which is a sharp trial, and made thine own dearest David to
stagger in his troubles, and welnere made he shipwra^h of his faith and
constancy: but when he considered thy purpose in afflicting him, when he had
consulted with thy word, he then found and confessed that it was good for him,
that thou had afflicted him. Lord, lend an ear unto my petition, and
remember thy promise in Christ, thy beloved, that thou will lay no more upon
thine, then they shall be able to bear. Lord, thou know my weakness, to
bear this heavy burden of poverty, and disgrace among the sons of men: and
therefore, let it please thee to make it more light: or give me sufficient
strength, and then lay what thou will upon me more: only, Lord, be mindful of
me, who know, what I need before I ask. And therefore, give me grace to
avoid that presumption, which offers to limite thee, the holy one of Israel,
either in the time, the manner, or matter of my help: I will rest me only upon
thy providence and mercy; make have to help, O Lord, my God, my strength, and
my Redeemer.

Amen.
O Lord increase my faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be said of such as are in prison.
AS liberty is a great blessing of God, and much pleasing unto all creatures,
reasonable and unreasonable: So is imprisonment and restraint most unsavory to
man and beast. Although some men rather make choice to live in that kind of
captivity, then to tedeeme their freedom, by discharging a sound and sincere
conscience, by paying their debts, being able, or yielding unto some honest and
lawful condition: for refusing whereof they endure, wilfully undergoing that,
which with more sincerity they might avoid, which kind of voluntary
imprisonment, implies a most unchristian disposition* For how can he that
knows he does ill, and perseuereth therein, think that the prayers which he
makes, can be acceptable to God? admit, his resolution be grounded on will,
not to give way to his adversaries just demand, it is erroneous and dangerous:
yea, though it arise in regard of a fatherly care and affection he has to his
children and posterity. If he show not himself willing to make satisfaction,
according to his ability; If then the Creditor obdurate, will not accept his
honest offer, his help is then in God, to whom he must repair in faithful
prayer, that he will be pleased, either to moderate the extremity of the
Creditors demand, or, to enable him to satisfy the debt. But as men's occasions
of dealing, and their mutual commerce, are many and diverse: so are there
diverse causes of men's restraint, and imprisonment: and all are, or ought to be
lawful and just. The lawful restraint ought to be the more grievous, because
it is always for breach of the law, the unjust festraint, needs not much
press the conscience, for that he is innocent of the accusation, or crime
suggested: for it is far better to be falsely, then truly accused. But, for
as much as there are diverse occasions of this affliction, it behooves every man
thus restrained, to consider with himself, that whether it be justly or
unjustly laid upon him, it is not yet by chance: for God observes in us, what
we our selves conceive not of our selves, and punishes sin after a diverse
manner. And therefore, though a man say, he has this ^nflicted upon him, upon
an unjust complaint, or for a cause surmised, and untrue: yet does God bring it
so to pass, by such instruments, as are fit in his providence, to be (though
against their wills) the Physicians of his children: for among many medicines,
that God uses to cure our spiritual lepro^^^, this Imprisonment (be it, in
respect of the purpose of the instrument, right or wrong) is one of the
principal, and the more available, by howmuch it is capital: for when a man
is bodily fettered, and gyued, that he cannot walk at his former desired
liberty, and is in fear of the censure of the law, then is the mind set at
large, not restrained as before, with the d^sires of forbidden vanities: but
making use of the time, recapitulate^ the course of his former liberty (...)
looseness: which then appeare^ most, when the body is lest at liber(...) he
recommendeth himself to G^^ mercy. Therefore, for what cause soever a man is
in this manner restrained, if he have the wisdom of the spirit, to make true
use of the same, it is profitable, though ignominious and disgraceful. And
though such as are in a spiritual cap^iuitie themselves, and never in
possibility to redeem their liberty, through all eternities, will sco^^e at
poor men (...)strained, and be the cruel executioners of their restraint;
which is but for a moment, in respect of theirs, and nothing grieuousin respect
of the perpetual torments they shall endure in the infernal dungeon, with the
reprobate spirits: Therefore, take in good part, thy captivity, whatsoever
thou'be, and for whatsoever cause it be: make use of it, in redeeming of thine
abused liberty: ask mercy, seek the favor of God, by true repentance,
submit thy self to the Lords will, in well doing, in repentance, and prayer,
make Jesus Christ thine advocate, to work th(...) atonement with God the
father* and remember, what holy men have gone before thee in this affliction
Mu^aia^ the Lords Prophet, Joseph, a chosen of God, Paul, Peter, and other the
Saints of God in the old and new Testaments: and since, many worthy sons and
servants of God, as well as many profane men, who by their imprisonment, have
become holy and sanctified: It is a furnace to refine the gold, to euaporat the
sulphur, and to consume the dross. And such as have no spiritual purity, it
makes to (...)ear the dregs of confusion and reprobation, and the pure gold to
shine as the sun.

A Prayer to be said of one in prison, for what cause soever, changing the
word^ according to the occasion here set down.
GRacious Lord God, the most just, and most wise, thou disposest all things for
all men, according to thine own will, in mercy and judgment: In both which,
the wisest caruall man is most ignorant, censuring thy ways according to his
weak understanding, taking, and imagining, thy favor and love toward men, to
consist it thy plentifully furnishing them, with the fulness of worldly and
carnal comforts; and thy hatred, and anger to appear, by leaving them naked of
corporal consolation: and imprisonment, to be the highest argument of thy
heauiest displeasure. But thou, Lord, know thine own ends, in restrayning
men of their liberty: wherein they have scope to run into all forbidden and
ungodly actions, delighting themselves in vanities, in wantonness, and sinful
security: and therefore thou restrainest the^ whom thou love, lest their
liberty should so admit carnal delights, as thy fear being far off, there
should be neither time, place, or occasion to call upon thee: but thy
Judgments are secret, and therefore mistake^ of the seeming wisest men of the
world, who look not whereunto their own liberty tends, as to occasion them to
run into forbidden lusts, and consequently into a reprobate sense: wherein yet
they dream of highest happiness. And thy mercies are also misconceiued of
such as want the light of thy saving truth, as all men do by nature, who
think every affliction or cross bitter, and unpleasant: but imprisonment the
sharpest trial that can befall them. Flesh and blood, Lord, cannot conceive,
but as thou have made all thy creatures, at their beginnings free: So should
man, thy most excellent creature, be ever free, and live at liberty: But thou
know man, better then man knows himself; and see and considerest,
whether liberty or imprisonment is most profitable unto him: and forasmuch as
I am of the number of them whom thou please to try with this kind of
affliction, and of the number also of such as are by nature ignorant, whether
this thy trial be in mercy and judgment: Teach me, Lord, the right rule of
divine knowledge, that I may truly find this thy correction to be in mercy;
that thou have found me out in mine offending course of life, and that my
liberty, rather tended to thy dishonor, and mine own danger, then to the true
service of thee, and mine own true comfort. And therefore, assist me with thy
sweet, and truly comforting grace, that I may make a godly use of my restraint:
namely, Lord, to abandon all the remembrance of former carnal delights,
vulesse to repent them, and wholly, and altogether to dedicate my self, to the
meditation of divine and heavenly things, to earnest, zealous, and faithful
continual prayer for the increase of thy mercies toward me, and mine
obedience toward thee: And that it may please thee, Lord, so to season this
thy medicine of Imprisonment unto me, with the gift of true patience, that it
may make me^e to abhor, from hence forth, the vanities, wherein. I delighted,
in my liberty: that if thy pleasure be to restore me to my former freedom, I
may live, as if I were still really restrained. Thou, Lord, know the hearts
of those, by whose means, in thy providence I suffer this restraint, and the
cause on my part.

If for debt, say thus.
WHich I confess to be just, in that I am-indebted, and not able to make
present, and full satisfaction unto my creditors: But I appeal unto thy mercy,
and providence, beseeching thee, to mitigate the extremity and rigor of their
desires that thus oppress me; or else raise up some comfortable and prevailing
means, to enable me to pay all that I owe unto al men, that I owe nothing to
any man, but love. Thou did incrense the oil and me^^e of the istressed
widow of Sareptha, so as she was enabled to pay what she ought: thy power is
still the same, and thy love is not lessened toward them that love thee: give
me that love, Lord: So shall my want, and mine imprisonment, and all other
crosses, work together for my greater consolation through Christ.

Amen.
If for matter for which life or member is in danger, say thus.
WHich I cannot but acknowledge, to be deservedly inflicted upon me: for I have
not only transgressed thy laws, but broken the precepts of thine anointed,
and stand worthy of the censure of corporal punishment: But thou art a
merciful God, and disposest the heart of all then. If thou will, thou can
deliver me, or moderate the sentence against me: or else give me patience to
undergo whatsoever shall be laid upon me, and as I acknowledge, (...)t my
sin is the cause of my restraint, and of my corporal fear, and am truly
sorry, for mine offenses: So, Lord, I beseech thee pardon thou me in Christ,
that whatsoever become of my bodily punishment, I may be yet assured of thy
favor, in the kingdom of glory: through Jesus Christ,

Amen.
If upon unjust occasion, say thus.
For thou, Lord, know, although I cannot but confess, that I have many
ways offended thy high Majesty: yet in this whereof I am accused, and for
which my liberty is restrained, I am innocent. And therefore, good father in
lesus Christ, give me patience, and work in the hearts of mine oppressors,
some remorce, that they may recall and repent of their injustice Thou know
how innocent Joseph was falsely accused: And thou yet were pleased to permit him
to be restrained long: but in the mean time did give him favor with the
G^olor, and in the end did advance him to honor. Be pleased, I beseech
thee, to deliver me, if it may be, for my good, or make the prison easy, and
the ^^olor loving: and give me wisdom to make right use of my present
restraint, and to acknowledge it to be for my sins, and for my reformation.
And when I shall in thy providence, receive my former liberty, let me not be
ashamed of my restraint: but rather glory in thy mercy, yt I suffer upon an
unjust accusation, though I stand guilty before thee of infinite sins, for
which I am sorry, and humbly crave pardon, and thy divine direction, that I may
lead a holy life, in a godly and sincere conversation before men, and to walk
before thee in vprightnes of heart through Christ my Savior and Redeemer.

If for the testimony of thy faith in Jesus, say thus.
THe witnessing of thy truth, the profession of thy name, which my persecutors
persecute in me more then me, for they aim more to suppress the confession of
thy glorious name, then them that profess it; they more seek to abandon the
public practice, and religious use of thy word and Gospel, then the abuse. And
therefore, good Father, as thou have in some measure enlightened mine
understanding of thy will, and by thy spirit taught me how to profess thy
name, according to thy truth: So confirm my faith therein, and mine obedience
to thee: that neither this loathsome prison, the fury of my persecutors, nor
the fear of death, terrify me from the constant profession of Jesus Christ,
whom these men seek to persecute in his members. And therefore, Lord, gracious
in him, in him look upon me here at this time restrained, for his sake, and
either in thy mercy work^ my delivery out of their hands, and out of this place
of restraint by some ordinary means, as thou did extraordinarily deliver
thy servants Paul, Silos, Peter, and other thine Apostles, out of their cruel
captiuities: or else give me constant patience, to endure thy trial, to undergo
whatsoever shall seem good vn^^ thee, to lay upon me: And graciously consider
the weakness of flesh and blood: which if thou suffer to prevail in me, I
cannot stand. And therefore, assist me with thy holy spirit, that as I have
begun, so I may preseuere in thee, and be sustained by thee unto the end, Let
neither the unsavory prison, nor the bitterness of death, remove my heart, nor
let my tongue, from professing thy name unto the end: and if thou think me
worthy of the glory of martyrdom, and to crown me with the honor of being a
witness of thy truth, give me an obedient heart, and a thankful mind,
willingly to lay down this earthly. Tabernacle, to whatsoever kind of death it
shall please thee to give mine, and thine own adversaries power to inflict
upon me: That after this life ended, I may be really crowned with the merits,
not of my suffering, but with the merits of him who suffered for me, and for
whose sake, grant, Lord, I may constantly suffer, what thou please to lay
upon me,

Amen.
Lord increase my faith, give me patience and comfort in Jesus Christ.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer, that we may be always ready to die, and to be so
prepared, as we may not fear death.
THough it had never bin written that it is appointed by God, that all men must
once die: yet common experience, and the continual practice of death, could
not but assure all men, that they must die. If any man had bin privileged from
the power of death since the creation, men might have been persuaded, that
they might have the like immunitie and freedom. But seeing death has not
spared the strong, the wise, the rich, nor the persons of mightiest potentates;
but all the godly and the wicked have tasted of the cup of death: What man is
he that is so so^^ed, as to think he shall not die? Nay, to think, that by
reason of the strength of his body, he shall live many years? Yet so
foolishly persuaded are many men, and assume unto themselves a kind of
desperate boldness, to commit many gross and grievous sins, promising unto
themselves a time of repentance in their decrepite age. A preposterous rule of
godless men: who, though they know, that as sure as they live, they shall die;
and as sure as they live, and shall die, so surely they shall live or die
eternally, yet, being deluded by the opinion of their strength, and health, and
bewitched by their vain, idle, and forbidden lusts of the flesh, and the
mind, they delay their preparation to die well, until the time they have no
power to reform their wicked lives past: So that their present lively carnal
life, is a begun spiritual death: And the time of their foolishly prefixed
repentance, is the beginning of their endless condemnation. But the truly
wise indeed, guided by grace, have the time of their dissolution continually
before their eyes, and in a holy meditation of death, prepare themselves to die
daily, thinking every day they rise, that that is the day of their dissolution:
and when they betake them to their nightly rest, they recommend them to their
beds, as to their graves, and persuade themselves, that that night may be the
dayspring of their spiritual and never ending life. Such as thus prepare
themselves, have never any fear to die; but in their hearts wish to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ And because that this holy preparation is not
wrought, neither can a man desire, to leave, and remove out of this earthly
tabernacle by nature, they cannot but naturally fear to die. And therefore,
when the messengers of death begin to summon men, unprepared to their graves,
they cannot but entertain horror, in stead of hope, and despair, in stead of
assurance of the life to come. How much then does it concern all men to
abandon sin betimes, and to seek atonement with God by well doing, to walk
before God, and to be upright? Thus whosoever prepares himself in a
sanctified life in earth, he cannot fear death, which is an entrance into a
glorious life in heaven; where God, before whom he sincerely walks, has
provided him a City, a Kingdom, a Crown. He then, that longs to see good
days while he lives, will be ever studious to please him, by whom he is
assured he shall receive that endless inheritance when he dies. Let every man
therefore, while it is to day, pray, that God will vouchsafe him his grace, not
to prolong his godly preparation to die, but to teach him wisdom in the inner
parts, that he may so rectify his conversation, as he may be acceptable to
God, through Christ, in his life upon earth, and wishedly surrender up his
spirit to him that gave it, when he requires the same. And to this holy purpose
serves this prayer following.

Remember ever that thou must die, and thou shall never do amiss, nor die
eternally.

A Prayer to be often used, that we may so live, as we never need fear to die;
fit to be often used of all men, especially in sickness.
GOod and gracious Father, who formedst me of dust, and breathedst life into a
lump of earth, where of I am made, and have made me partaker of thy Spirit,
and so a living soul, of an eternal being, beyond that which thou have done
for any other earthly creature, who dying perish, and turn wholly to dust,
whereof they are wholly and only made. As for me, thou have taught me to know
thy more then wonderful work-manship, and thy more then apprehensible favor
and love, in that thou have not only made me a living creature, as are the
beasts of the field, the fowls of the aite, and creeping things of the earth,
but little inferior to thine heavenly Angels, giving me a soul divine and
immortal, which lives eternally. And of thy further and more free grace, have
vouchsafed me a seed of the light of divine understanding, and thy word of glad
tidings, to teach me thy will, to direct and encourage me in the way of
salvation: lest having received the testimony of thy lou^ here in this life,
and the earnest of thy Spirit, I should yet live to die, and not die to live.
Thou, Lord, know whereof I am made; thou can not forget, yt I am but dust:
give me grace to remember always my mortality, and that I am borne to die,
and that then comes judgment. Lord, we are all the children of ssinning
Adam, elected, and rejected according to thy will, vessels of honor, or
dishonor, as thou please to make us; we are the clay, thou the Potter, thou
give life, and again thou say, Return ye children of men to dust. Oh
what is man, yt thou so regardest him, or the son of Man, yt thou so fatherly
vis^test him Thou have clothed him with glory: And he has brought shame upon
himself: thou off re^^st life unto him, but he has embraced death. And he
shall die, thou have so decreed, yet have conceiled from him the time when, the
place where, and the manner how, to the end that none should presume upon his
strength, health, wisdom, or wealth, to become secure, and in their security
to forget thee, sin against thee our Creator, wh^, as with the breath of thy
mouth thou made us living souls, so by the breath of thy mouth can thou
confou^d our bodies and souls: yea, Lord, our dearest souls, dear, in
respect of thee who gave them: dear, in respect of him that shed his dearest
blood for them: but most dear unto us wretches, if for our minds vanities,
and our bodies pleasures, we should lose our bodies, and make shipwreck of our
souls. Precious in thy sight is the death of thy Saints; but most fearful to
the wicked in the death of their bodies, that sleeping in the grave, send their
souls before them, to be mutually tormented, when they shall meet in
Judgment. This fearful separation, Lord, amazeth me, when I consider it in
my natural understanding, not looking into the course of thy love, wherein
thou did send thy dearest Soune to die for sinners penitent. Oh teach me thy
ways, instruct me in thy Commandments. Give me a repenting heart, and
sanctified conversation, that before I go hence, and be no more seen, I may
assure my self that I am of the number of them, to whom thou imputest no
sin. Let thy word work fruitfully in me, the savor of life unto life.
Teach me and guide me in the true course of holy obedience, in righteousness
and true holiness, that I may ever walk before thee, and be upright: give me
a prepared heart, constantly and faithfully to desire to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ. Take away the frailty of my fainting flesh, increase and
confirm my faith in thee, and my hope of the glory promised in Christ after
this mortal life. Let me always wait the time of my delivery, and be
willingly content to, lay down this my earthly tabernacle, and to give up my
soul into thy hands: give me a continual watchful heart, that death come not
upon me unawares: a prepared heart, that I may be still ready, when or where,
or how thou have determined my dissolution. Let nothing be so dear unto me, as
Christ my Savior. Let me esteem all things as dung, in respect of the glory
to come. Let nothing bewitch or entice me to the love of this sinful life, nor
dismay or terrify me from embracing death: But that I may use this life, as if
I used it not, and fear death, as if I feared it not: That when my life shall
be swallowed up of death. I may then enter into that new life, and tread down
death and the power thereof under my feet, by Christ, that triumphed over
Satan, death and Hell, upon the Cross for me: grant it for me, my Lord, my
God, my life, my light, my strength, and my Redeemer.

Amen.
Lord increase my faith, and grant that I may live in thy fear, and die in thy
favor.
Amen.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be said of one in his sickness, or in any disease, or
defect of his senses or limbs, fit to be read of, or unto the sick and
diseased person.
Sickness of the body is the gentlest and most favorable cross that God
lays upon his children, and yet it is grievous to flesh and blood, which
delight altogether in Ease, in Health, in Strength of the body, to which grief,
sickness and weakness are contraries, and therefore unwelcome to carnal men,
who think nothing more to be wished, then power to sin, which power is
diminished by sickness, and consequently in most salutarie, and healthful for
the soul. And therefore does the Wiseman counsel us to humble our selves
before we be sick, and while we yet have power to sin, to show our
conversion* whose counsel, whosoever truly and carefully follows, preuenteth the
fear of death: for he that (before sickness seize upon him) duly considers
that death is the end of all flesh, and that sickness is the forerunner of
death, cannot be suddenly surprised, because he still expects the coming of
that, which, whether it tarry long, or come quickly, come it will, and finding
us secure, and wanton, and careless, and deliting our selves in the strength
of our sinning parts, it will be so much the more grievous and irksome, by how
much we affect the strength to sin, which is thereby weakened. And to that
end does God even in love punish his own children with sickness and maladies of
the body, to kill sin presently possessing us, and to prevent the power of
future sinning, and threatens the stifnecked and rebellious, with many
infirmities, as to smite them in the knees, and in the thighs, with a fore
botch, that they shall not be healed, even from the sole of the ^^ore, to the
top of their head. The Lord will make the plagues of the disobedient
wonderful, and of long continuance, and their diseases cruel, and of long
durance. For as much then, as Sickness is both the reward of sin, as also
the physic for sin: It implies both the mercy of God toward his, and his
judgments against the impenitent. And therefore whosoever thou be, that art
visited, with whatsoever bodily disease or infirmity; think that God has sent
it, as a cure or a curse. A cure to them that enter into the examination of
their sins, and truly repent them: and a curse unto them that make no use of
it; as too many worldlings do, who in their sickness are as inclinable in
desire to sin, as in their health: And nothing preuenreth the act of sin,
but weakness to effect it, or opportunity to attempt it. If therefore the will to
do evil, be not mortified by the sickness of the body, it is an argument,
that, that man or woman has his or her conscience seared up, which is a
fearful estate, and full of horror, howsoever it be for the time hidden, even
from his, or her feeling and sense; in fine it will work in the accusing
conscience, and bring forth the fruit of despair of recovery of bodily health,
and plunge the soul into the pit of inevitable perdition. It is therefore a
most dangerous negligence in men, so little to consider the inconstancy of
corporal health, which is long in decaying, yet sudden in surprising men of
greatest strength* and when men are taken and cast down, be he as strong as
Samson, he is enforced to yield unto weakness, and if he have any spark of
grace, he will then endeavor to turn his heart unto God, as Hezekiah did: but
then cannot his petitions be so powerful, as when he enjoyed his health,
neither can his repentance be so well manifested, being, as it were, wrested
from him, by this kind of extremity, as when it is wrought in bodily
strength: for whatsoever comes by compulsion, is not so acceptable, as what
is voluntary, yet is repentance truly begun in sickness, and effectually
continued, though weakly, in respect of the bodies infirmity; yet may it be
most true, through the strength of faith, without repentance there is no cure
comfortable to the soul or body. Though God may permit a wicked man to be
cased or cured of his bodily disease by humane physic; yet the soul lies
still in almost deadly sickness. The truest ground of prevailing physic, is
to make peace first with God, the good and great Physician: according to the
counsel of the Wiseman, who thus advises: My son, fail not in thy
sickness to pray unto the Lord, and he will make thee whole: yet he adds a
condition, That he leave off from sin, that he order his hands aright, and
that he cleanse his heart from all wickedness: and if hw be able truly to say,
as Hezekiah in his sickness did, I beseech thee, Lord, remember now, how I have
walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which
is good in thy sight: Then he may be assured, that his sickness shall be
turned from a curse to a blessing; and God that has made the wound, will bind
it up and cure it, he will raise him again, or give him patience, in a lively
hope to change this mortal for an immortal estate: and for his patient
suffering this medicinable cross, will give him a glorious crown of
eternity. Whosoever therefore thou be that art visited, turn unto the Lord,
pray unto him, trust in him, and recommend thy life and death unto his free
disposition, who works all things for the best to them that love him.

A Prayer to be said of one that is sick or diseased.
LOrd God almighty, Father loving in thy Son Jesus Christ, cast thine eye of
compassion ^n me thy creature, whom thou have at this time touched with
sickness, and brought low by thy present visitation. Thou createdst me in the
beginning, not to live ever in this ^abernacle of dust, but that my living
body of dust should be again dissolved into dust, without life, at ^hine
appointed time: for all ^lesh is grass, and as the flower of the (...) it
withers and decays with (...)* sickness, or grief of mind: we are all but
as ^arthen vessels, whom thou can^^ make and confound with the breath of thy
mouth: and howsoever, and whenever the most Iustie and strong stand conceited
of their health, and permanent security of their bodies agilitie, and the
^imble^es of their limbs, and senses, suddenly thou touchest them, and they
become feeble in strength, their beauty changed, their senses dulled, their
hearts fainting, and all the parts and powers of their bodies altered; and the
whole man turned, as it were, into the very image of pale death it self. Thou
have appointed that all men shall once die, but thou conceilest from al men the
time when, the place where, and the manner how they shall die: and therefore it
beh^ueth all men to be ever watchful in well doing, that when thou shall send
thy Messenger, Sickness of body, to put them in mind, that their day is
coming, they be not found unprepared, and great happiness it is to him, whom
when he is suni^^one^, he may chearefully say, I am heere^, Lord, ready to
attend thy will. Oh make me thus ready* dear father, that now thou call me.
I may not only, not fly from thee for fear of death, but heartily, willingly,
and faithfully cry, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, for I am no better then my
Fathers, who are fallen asleep: and therefore, if this my sickness be unto
death, fortify me against the fear thereof: The spirit, Lord, is willing, but
flesh and blood weak and fearful. But assist my spirit by thy saving Spirit.
So shall (...) heart within me rejoice, that thou remembrest me: and my weak
(...) feeble body shall sing forth thy goodness in this sad and sick estate* all
the powers of my body, and faculties of my soul, shall conioyne in the
heavenly harmony of thy saving truth, in the peace of mine own conscience in
Jesus Christ, i^ hope that thou will either restore me to happy health, or in
thy good time take me to thy more happ(...) kingdom: and howsoever the will
shall be, make me patient in my greatest fits of pain: and (...) mitigate the
extremity of my disease, that I be not driven to be senseless of my sins,
or forgetful of thy promises through the violennce thereof, nor lay more upon
me, Lord, then I shall be able to bear.

Another prayer to be said of a sick man.
I Do^ confess unto thee, Oh father, my sins, for which I do acknowledge
thou do deservedly afflict me: I cannot bear, nor undergo the stripes that
I have deserved at thy hands; who knowing thy will, have not done according
unto the same, but have cast thy holy Comma^dements, and mine obedience unto
them, behind my back; what I should not have done, that I have done, and what
I should have done, I have not done. O unprofitable servant that I have bin:
yet cast me not away, good father, for I am the work of thine own hands: as
touching the framing of this my earthly tabernacle; as for sin, it is of
myself, therein was I begotten and borne: and thereby do I daily offend thee,
and so much the more have I sinned, by how much I have enjoyed the health and
strength of my body, and the use of my senses: and I cannot but acknowledge,
Lord, that it is good for-me, tha^ thou have afflicted me with this thy
fatherly visitation; give me grace to accept it as a favor of thine, and the
fruit of thy mercy, for my renouation and reformati^on: and let not Satan
suggest or persuade me that it is in judgment, as the fruit of thine
indignation to drive me to despair of the saving health. The health of my
body is a sweet blessing unto me, yet thou know, Lord, what a spur it is
to forbidden vanities. And sickness, as it is in it self, is most grievous and
loathsome; yet being seasoned with thy inward grace, a sweet remedy against the
killing disease of sin. Oh show it down, Lord, into my distressed soul, the
sweet showers of thy sanctifying Spirit, that I may he sanctified throughout:
so shall my sick and weak body be richly and sweetly comforted in this
comfortless condition, which, were it not supported by thy favor and love,
could not but faint, and all the powers, both of my soul and body fail within
me. Oh speak comfortable things, Lord, unto thy diseased servant, extend a
fatherly helping hand to make my bed in my sickness: Thou art the Physician of
our souls and bodies; I am sick in both, cure me, Lord, in both; my sick
soul has need of the blood of the Lamb to refresh it, and to cleanse it from
spiritual leprosse: and my body, Lord, lies at the footstool of thy mercy;
and as thou by thy word did make me in the beginning, so by thy word can
thou revive me, that am near both spiritually and corporally dead. If thou in
thy wisdom think, yt this my infirmity be more profitable unto me, then
health, or death more convenient for me the^ life, perform thine own good
pleasure toward me; only make me inwardly and outwardly ready, that I setting
both the houses of my soul and body in order through Christ, I may recommend
both into thy most sacred and saving disposition. Grant this, Oh Father, for
Jesus Christ thy bear Sons sake, who lives and reigns with thee in the
heavens, with whom, and in whom, grant, Lord, that I may live, and after this
life, reign for evermore.

Amen.
O Lord increase my faith, evermore.
Meditations upon the sick man's recovery of his health.
I Will praise thee, O Lord, with all my heart, and I will magnify thy name
for ever, for many are thy mercies toward me, for thou have delivered my soul
from the lowest grave. Therefore, now, as th^^ have renewed my outward health
renew my inward obedience. Rectify my judgment, make true peace in my
conscience, bless my senses, purify my affections, order my memory, increase
and con(...)e my love of thee, who have shew^^ me more mercies and favors then
my tongue can express. O my soul, praise thou the Lord, and all that is
within thee, praise his holy name: my soul, praise thou the Lord, and forget
not all his benefits, which forgiueth all thy sins, and heals all thine
infirmities, which has redeemed thy life from the grave, and crowned thee with
mercy and loving kindness, which fills thy mouth with good things, and
renueth thine age as an Eagle. Thou Lord, are full of compassion and mercy,
slow to anger, and of great goodness: thou will not always child, neither
keep thou thine anger for ever. Thou have not dealt with me according to my
sins, nor rewarded me according to mine iniquities. As a father has
compassion on his son, so have thou compassion on them that fear thee. I
will praise thee, O Lord, among the people, I will sing unto thee in the
congregation of the Saints, for thy mercy is great above the Heavens, and thy
truth reaches unto the clouds. Thou know^st whereof I am made. Thou
remembrest that I am but dust. Let my soul therefore live, and it shall praise
thee.

Lord increase my faith, and confirm it ouermore in Christ Jesus.
Amen.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be said of such as visit a sick friend or brother.
MAn that is borne of a ^^man, has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery. Therefore is every man subject to sickness and death. To bewail
therefore the sickness or death of our dearest friends, beyond that which is
^it, is much to be reproved, because it argues a kind of discontent, that God
should visit us in the visitation of our friends, children, or dearest
parents. We must therefore avoid two extreame^, ^^^st, that we sorrow not, as
do the Heathen, that have no hope of a future better life. Secondly, we must
beware we follow not the steps of Jeroboam, who ^ought help at the hands of
Baal-zebu^ for his son: And as did Ahaziah in his own sickness: we must
rather enter into an holy consideration, that God, in whatsoever he lays upon
our selves, or upon them we love as our selves, it is for his own glory, and
therefore to be praised of us, both for ours, and the good of those our
friends, whom he afflicts; if we believe his promises, that all things shall
work together for the good of them that love him. The best office then, and
the most Christian duty that a Father can perform for, and in the behalf of
his sick child, or one dear friend, or brother for another, is first to
admonish him, that sins cause sickness, and to move him to repent them; that
every man is borne to die, and therefore to persuade him to prepare himself
for another condition: not to flatter him, as too many do, as that they seen^
cause why he should fear death at this time: they seem rather to assure him
he shall recover and live with them: which kind of comfort, is rather injurious
then friendly: for what if the party thus idly secured, perish without
repentance? These kinds of comforters have little cause to imagine, they have
performed a Christian duty, in this their visitation of their sick friend,
whom they seemed to love much, bewailing his sickness, and yet content to send
him away with the heavy burden of his sins. A second Christian duty is to
pray for the sick, either in private, or in public assemblies of, and with
such as are present with the sick person, wherein also the sick person may
conioyne either in the whole prayer, by an inward lifting up of his repenting
and faithful heart to God, in a holy meditation of what they pray; or to
conclude with them all, Amen. The prayer of the faithful avails much, if it
be fervent. The Lord by this means, will strengthen him upon his bed, raise
him to health, or translate him in his good time. To visit the sick, is an
action most acceptable to God. Ye have visited me (says Christ) when I was
sick, therefore c(...) ye blessed, etc. Them that comfort the afflicted, God
will comfort: He is the Father of mercies, and comfort us (...) all our
tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any aff(...) by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.

O Lord increase my faith.

A Prayer to be said for a sick man, or woman, of his, or her friends that
visit them.
O Most gracious Lord God, who have made all things, and preseruest even the
meanest of them, by thy providence: a sparrow lights not on the ground
without thee: Much less can any thing befall man, but by thy will and
determinate counsel. So that we do acknowledge, that thou visitest this thy
servant, here at this present languishing, and that the present infirmity,
wherewith he is afflicted, is of theesent, to humble him for his sins. Let it
please thee, O Lord, to behold him in mercy: and lay not upon him too great a
weight of thy dispeasure, knowing, that man in his greatest strength, is weak:
how much more feeble, being crushed, as it were in ^eeces, by the violence of
thy visitation* mitigate, if it please thee, the extremity of his sickness,
and give him patience, to bear this thy light and loving correction: And for
that sin is the cause of all troubles, and tribulations: Remove Lord, the
guilt of all his offenses, through the merits of Jesus Christ, and moderate his
punishment, though in justice, the most just man is worthy of more stripes then
he is able to bear: yet thou refusest no truly repenting sinner; be his sins
as re^ as scarlet, thou have promised to make them as white as snow, through
the blood of Jesus Christ, the saving Lamb that takes away the sins of the
world. Touch the heart of this thy servant, with a lively feeling of his sins,
and a full assurance of thy mercy in forgiving them: That he being really
reunited unto thee, through an ^ufained faith in Christ, may ^ouze up his
fainting soul unto thee, and by thee, that howsoever his corporal weakness
may argue the heavy displeasure toward him, thy holy Spirit may yet work such
peace in his conscienc, through the assurance, that his sins are freely
forgiven him, that he may take this thy visitation as a fatherly correction,
and loving chastisement for his former offenses: And that, if thou be pleased
to restore him to health, it may work in him a true renouation, and
reformation of the rest of his life: hear, have mercy upon him, O Lord, have
mercy upon him: and according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away all his
offenses. Look favorably upon him, cure him, if it please thee, restore him
to health, if it may stand with thy glory, and his good. But thou know,
Lord, whether sickness, or health be most expedient for him, whereof both
he, and we are ignorant: And therefore, we recommend him unto thy fatherly
disposition, beseeching thee to confirm his hope, assure him so of thy mercy,
that he may embrace life or death, at thy pleasure, and willingly to undergo
this affliction, knowing that all the tribulations, which man can bear in this
life, are not worthy of the glory, which thou have prepared for them that love
thy second coming; wh^^ thou will give to every man according to his works.
And therefore Lord, turn his heart from the love and vanities of this life,
unto the love of the joys to come: And (...) him no longer set his heart and
affections upon this world, or the things in the world: but only and
altogether upon heaven, and heavenly things: That when the moment of time shall
be, wherein th^^ shall determine the separation (...) his soul from the body:
let (...) the common enemy of our salu^tion prevent him: But let thy
sanctifying spirit possess all the powers of his soul, that with holy
alacrity, and cheerfulness, he may commend his spirit into thy hands: and be
thou pleased to re^^iue him, as one of thine adopted children, into that
celestial inheritance, by the merits of Christ: And in the mean time, while
he shall rest here, either in health, or sickness, be ever present with him,
for whose bodily recovery, and hi^ souls salvation, O Lord, hear^ our prayers,
and let our cry come unto thee,

Amen.
O Lord increase his and our faith, for evermore.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer before a man b^gin his Journey.
He that well considers the casualties of this life, and has but the least
measure of understanding, and of the fear of God, cannot attempt the least
enterprise of the body, but will forecast diverse dangers, incident in every
action: much more taking a Journey, on horse or foot, being subject to so many
misfortunes, and crosses, as he makes steps in his ways. It is not rare to
hear of one breaking his leg, another his arm, a third bruzing his body, a
fourth coming to untimely death, by falling off, or from his horse: nay, the
slip of the foot has many ways occasioned death, besides hazard of meeting
with, and suff^ring danger by the ministers of Satan, and by malignant men,
laying wait to do mischief. Our bodies being thu^ daily and universally beset
with peril, requires watchfulness in our ways and walkings: But it is not
in our power and wisdom to prevent the least cross: much less able are we to
defend our selves, as of our selves, from the hidden and sudden misfortunes of
this life's casualties. And therefore had we need to leave our own self
wisdom, and providence (though not our Christian care) and betake v^ to the
holy protection of the Holy one of Israel, who guided Jacob in his Journey
toward Laban, and the servant of Abraham, iourneying for a wife for Isack. But
they prayed for good success. So must every faithful man, if he hope of the
like: Otherwise as the Lion met the Prophet, and s^ue him: So can God raise
many (if not the wild beasts of the field) other unsuspected means to hurt
us, or destroy us. Moreover, as no man takes a Journey in hand, but it tends
to some profitable or n^cessary end: So ^e wishes the good success of his
intentions: and he that stands upon his own wit or judgment only, or upon
his own strength, depends but on a broken reed, and often merely misseth
of his purpose, to his apparent hinderance: whereas, if he truly and
sincerely recommendeth himself and his occasions, to divine direction, in a
lively faith in Christ Jesus, in whom all things are blessed unto us, he may
then assure himself that all things shall succeed unto him for the best* So
shall he travail in assurance, and rest in safety; as when David had
recommended himself to God, though he were in danger, yet he lay down in
peace, assuring himself, that it was God that had taken charge of him, and
would make him dwell in safety. It is a sweet contentment to a faithful man,
to rest assured of Gods presence in all his ways, and of the aid of his holy
Angels, whom he sends ministering spirits, for the good of his: nothing can
hurt them, of whom God has taken charge, neither can any thing but prosper,
which he blesses unto us. And therefore, he that wilfully omitteth this holy
duty of serving the living God, cannot assure him of any good success of
whatsoever he attempteth.

Lord increase my Faith.

A Prayer before a man begin his Lo(...) (...) attempt any weighty corporal
(...)
MOst gracious Lord Go^ most wise, loving, and provident, who in thy wisdom
disposest all things in the love, preseruest them that see(...) thine aid, and
in thy providence (...) uentest all dangers, and prouidest (...) necessaries
for them that as(...) them at thy hands: Let it pleast thee, good father in
Jesus Christ* to guide me this day, in my Journey, and give me good success of
(...) occassons: for I do acknowledge mine own weakness, and (...)blenesse,
to perform my trau(...) being but dust and ashes, not able to endure without
the strength of thy grace working strength in my members. Many dangers and
casualties also lurk in the way, where thou art not pleased to be a guide, in
number and variety so many, as cannot be numbered. And therefore, gracious
Father, favor me so much this day, as to accompany me in my ways: send thine
^uly Angels to administer comfort unto me, direction and protection, that (...)
going forth, and comining in, may the prosperous and in safety: and leave me
not to my self, who am as a beast of my self, neither knowing what dangers lie
in my ways, nor how to avoid them. But thou know all things, and take
charge of them that recommend themselves into thy hands; thou defendest them,
and deliuerest them: take me, Lord, into thy defense: let no evil happen unto
me: be unto me a strong tower and a place of safety: for nothing can hurt
them, whom thou keep: keep me, Lord, and I shall be safe: give ableness
unto the creatures, which necessity inforceth me to use: that they may serve
to my use: give me all necessaries for my Journey, and bless them unto me:
and as thou, Lord, know, whereof I have need, give me daily and continual
supply, according to thy will. Thou know also mine occasions, and the end of
my present intended (...) nails: let it please thee, to worth for me all
things for the best, give me wisdom to manage it, and to perform it, to the
discharge of my godly duty, and according to a go^^ conscience. I commend me
(...) thy hands, Lord, Lord, receive (...) keep me, hold me up, that I (...)
into no peril of soul or (...) keep my cogitations ever holy (...) hands
clean, my heart pure, (...) all the parts and powers of my (...) by, ever
prepared, with a (...) affection to serve thee, in a sanctified conversation to
thine own glory, and mine everlasting consolation, and send me a comfortable
return,

Amen.
Lord increase my faith, and bless my Journey.
A MOTIVE TO Prayer to be said after the return from a Journey, or coming to
the Inn or place of rest.
ALl men in their Iourneyes wish for good success, but not according to true
zeal, and that is the reason, when they return safe, they do not give the
glory to God, they asked not his presence to be with them, and therefore give
they the glory to their own abilities to travail, to the goodness of the
horse, and to the good company they had. If evil happen unto them, or hurt
befall them, they lay it upon the creature, or upon some sudden accident,
neither giving thanks to God, by whose providence indeed they returned, or came
safe to their place of rest, nor their crosses to proceed of their sins and
neglect of the service of God. If every man would truly, and without
partiality, enter into the examination of his own heart, how many would find
in themselves a true desire to have the^ iourneyes or enterprises blessed (...)
God, by their zealous prayers made unto him, before they attempt them* And how
many would there be found so thankful, as to praise God seriously, when they
return or come to their place of rest in safety? It is the last work in
every action: And therefore God, although he permit forgetful men, to succeed
wishedly in their affairs, yet retains he their unthankfulness in
memory, and often turns their glory to shame, their joy into sorrow, and the
things, whereunto they ascribe their greatest preservation, into their sudden
destruction. It is a matter too common, to receive good at the hands of God,
and to reward him euilly: as do all men that begin their travails without
him, and seek not his favor and direction in their occasions; which makes
many to forget their religious thankfulness, and to be(...) them to
wantonness and vanities, (...) soon as they enter their place of ^bode* if
but for a night; whereas (^deed) it behooves them that profess a divine
providence, to seek safety, preservation and direction at the hands of God:
and having received the success, be it according, or against their desires,
they may assure themselves it falls out for the best, because God does all
for the good of true believers, whatsoever is done; and therefore requires
thankfulness in the conclusion of every Journey, action or enterprise: for
true thankfulness for a benefit received, stands in place of a prevailing
petition for and obtaining a new blessing.

Lord increase my faith.

A thanksgiving after the return from a Journey, or coming safe to a place
of rest.
MOst gracious and loving Lord God, I give thee most humble and unfeigned
thanks, that thou so mercifully have blessed me this day in my Journey and
travails, preserving me from many perils that I have escaped, even by thine
own power and providence, and have in safety brought me unto this place of
rest, which yet, without thy blessing, may become a place of trouble: for as the
fields and ways are full of hidden dangers, which without thy protection could
not but have fallen upon me: so is not this place, whereinto I am safely retired,
by thy providence, free from perils: and therefore, as thou have hitherunto
kept me, keep me now in this place, wherein, if thou dwell not by thy power and
loving favor, there cannot but abide, Satan, sin, and vanities, powerful
enemies, and able to surprise the strongest natural man. Strengthen me, Lord,
above nature, and help the parts of most infirmity, that my soul and body
being strengthened, I may be able to give th^^ the more sound praises, and have
spiritual power to resist whatsoever shall spiritually seek to seduc^ me; and
in thy providence preseru^ me in body safe, give me whatsoever is needful for
me in this place, and continue thy loving favor toward me, that all things,
at all times, in all places, may prosperously succeed unto me: depart not from
me, good Father, but bless me first, that I may be ever blessed; So shall all
things go well with me, both going forth, and coming in, and all things
work together, for my continual consolation: wherefore give me grace ever to
love thee in Christ mine everlasting Redeemer,

Amen.
O Lord increase my faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer, to be said before a Sermon.
MAn by nature being a sincke of corruption, and a gulf of hidden hypocrisy,
and his conscience naturally oppressed with a slavish fear, lest his inward
and secret evil thoughts should be reueiled, and his hidden iniquities
discovered, as much as in him lies, coueteth to shun the light of the word of
God, which comprehends both the killing Law, and the saving glad tidings of
the Gospel: by the one he is condemned, and therefore hates the sentence which
pronounces, that whosoever sins, shall die: yet apprehends he not, either
the grieuousnesse of his sins, nor the misery of the Gospel, which is the
preaching of repentance, and the forgiveness of sins; but lying securely in
his sins, thinks not of any account, and therefore regards not much the
word preached, But when shame or authority presses the carnal man to hear
the word, he th^^ hears sin reproved, and the sinful condemned: which is
so v^sau^ry unto him, as he wishes himself out of the hearing. Herod could
not endure the preaching of John Bapti^^, reproving him for his brothers wife:
be it the Law, or the Gospel, that such men hear, it is as harsh unto them, as
the words of Michaiah to Ahab* yet we must understand, that though man deliver
the word, it is not his, but the word of God: and therefore, no man, but such a
one as is yet in the state of reprobation, will refuse to he are, God who is
merciful and loving, speak unto him; if it be but the threatening Law, which
teaches what is sin* and what is the reward of sin, whereby being cast
down with sorrow that he has committed things so contrary to the will of his
Creator, he may seek atonement, and reconciliation with his offended God, by
the Gospel, the testimony of his love: Are not my words (says God) good, unto
him that walks uprightly? Therefore none but the obstinately wicked, will shun
the word preached, which as well offers remission of sins committed, as it
threatens death to the impenitent. The Scriptures in many places command us to
seek the Lord, which argues that we by nature are strangers from God,
separated by sin, and to remain so, is the most miserable condition that can
befall the sons of men. And where is the Lord to be sought, but in his word,
which is the life of the soul? As the soul and body are knit together, and
conserved by breath: So are our souls connexed and conjoined unto God, by the
word of truth preached by Gods minister, apprehended by faith, and practiced in
spirit and truth. The natural man couets and delights to refresh himself in
his griefs and crosses, by music, by merry company, and by reading profane
books, or hearing pleasant conceited songs or comedies; which do not only
not comfort, but rather increase their griefs. Contrarily David protested,
that he sought and found the only true comfort in the word of God. So do all
that are truly qualified in the rules of right religion, though worldlings
account it a melancholic weariness, to sit an hou^e to hear God speak unto
them. But let them think, that this weariness shall be a witness against
them that they belong not to the Lord. Every man desires to see his image in a
glass, for two ends, the one to see his feature, the other to correct his
deformities. And Saint James compares the word of God to a glass, wherein are
two sorts of Images discovered, namely of Nature and Grace: The first, shows
what we our selves are: the second, what we ought to seek to be: namely, to be
like unto our head, Christ Jesus, in all sanctity and holiness, in suffering
patiently, and obeying God truly. This is by no other means learned, but by
the word of God preiched. But some, that have made the least progress in the
love to godliness of life, think it sufficient, to read the word of God, or
the works of good and godly men, at home, an exercise not to be, in it self,
condemned, but in respect of it, to neglect the word preached, is the contempt
of Gods ordinance, who has in greatest favor instituted his ministers, to
teach by the powerful preaching of the word: which works a more deep
impression in the heart of the hearer, then of the reader. For if we consider
the authority of the word preached, it is from God, the ministry from the
mouth of man, who is the mouth of God: he therefore that neglects or contemnes
the word preached, neglectes the means of his salvation, which is faith in
Christ Jesus: For faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God
preached.

It is not yet sufficient to hear the word, but as Marie laid up the word in
her heart, so must every profitable hearer retain the word in their minds,
permit it to rule in their affections, and to bring forth the fruits thereof
in their actions, rejoicing when they do the commandments of God; and
grieuing, when they transgress the same. And because there be many things that
hinder the growing of this saving seed, and many grounds receive it: but only
one, namely, good ground can bring forth the fruit: It behooves to pray, that
our hearts may be made fit to hear, our affections fit to love; and our whole
man apt to cherish this seed, by continual holy practice.

Lord increase my faith.

A Prayer to be said, before the hearing of a Sermon.
THou, Lord, have commanded us, or rather lovingly invited us to seek thy
face; and yet thou art in the highest heavens among thine Angels, Seraphims,
and Cherubims: and we dust and ashes, are in the earth, full of infirmities,
not able to look unto, much less into the heavens to behold thee there, no
the very Angels hide their faces at the glory of thy great Majesty. And as for
man clothed with mortality, thou affirmest, cannot see thy face and live. And
yet thou say, Seek my face. Lord, what is it to seek thy face, but to
seek thy truth, and to search thy word, to covet to know thy will, and to be
truly instructed, and faithfully and sincerely inclined to keep thy
commandments? Thy word is a light unto our paths, and a lantern unto our
feet. It is the life of our souls, the heavenly Manna, without it, there is no
light, no hope, no spiritual comfort, no assurance of salvation. O how dear
ought this word then be unto us? Far more sweet then the honey, or the honey
comb, more precious then gold, yea, then the finest gold: therein, Lord, see
we thy face, therein behold we thy loving countenance, there find we the
hid pearl, which, to purchase, the wisest will sell all worldly vanities:
yet is it to the foolish foolishness, and a stumbling block unto the carnally
minded. It is a mystery, Lord, and a secret hidden from the wise of the world,
and revealed only unto the humble, to such as acknowledge themselves ignorant,
and hunger and thirst for the knowledge of the truth. Such have thou promised
to teach, and to instruct in the way of true wisdom, by revealing thy word,
which howsoever it seem in the outward letter easy to be understood, it has
a spiritual and divine sense, which requires a spiritual and divine
interpretation, which comes not, neither can it be apprehended by nature. And
therefore, in thy great mercy and love thou have ordained means, whereby they
whom thou have appointed to salvation, may be made able to understand the
same: namely, the outward ministry of men, and the iuward elumination of thy
holy spirit: for without the second, the first avails nothing, neither in the
minister that speaks, nor they to whom he speaks: unless he be sent of
thee, and the hearers ears opened, and their hearts prepared by thee, he
preaches, and they hear in vain. To the one a woe is pronounced, as not
preaching the Gospel sincerely, to the other a curse, for not receiving the
good word of truth, as into good and fruitful ground, bringing forth the
lively fruits of a life answerable to that word, which is either the savor of
life unto life, or the savor of death unto death. O Lord, I am now come into
thy, presence, to hear thee speak unto us here assembled, by the mouth of thy
servant, whom thou have sent to preach thy word: open therefore mine ears,
prepare my heart, sanctify mine Attention, inlighten mine Understanding,
strengthen my memory, rectify my will, that I may diligently hear,
attentively harken, retentiuely remember, and willingly embrace and practice,
what shall be truly and sincerely delivered by thy minister. And let not thy
word, Lord, that shall fall from his mouth, be either choked in me with the
thorny cares of the world, nor be cast into so corrupt a heart, as the vain
delights of my mind should devour it, nor into so ^arraine a heart, as should
not bring forth fruit, at the least twenty fold, to the glory and praise of
thy most blessed name, to the be^^ering, and better direction of my
conversation before men, to the assurance and sure sealing up of my salvation,
in Jesus Christ, to whom with thee, O Father, and the holy Ghost, (...) praise
for ever,

Amen.
Lord increase my faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be said after a Sermon heard.
AS the body of a man (...) beast, neither grows to strength, nor
co(...)nueth in health, without natural food^ no more can the soul of man
live without Spiritual food, the word of God. And as man by art helps nature
to concoct and digest his food; to make it nutratiue to his body: So the
spiritual man having heard the saving word of God, uses the means to make it
profitable to the soul: for as natural food taken into the mouth, and
instantly spet out again, though it be a while detained and chawed, and not
taken into the body, relieueth not the body: So the Word heard with the care,
and not conveyed into, and retained in the heart, yields no comfort unto the
soul; but rather works a kind of contempt by custom, and a kind of
lothing of the Word, as a matter, without the which his soul may live: for as
that meat, wherein the pallet has no feeling of a pleasing taste, delights
not the appeti^^: no more can that Word, which is not sauourie and delightful
to the soul, be pleasing, or profitable to the outward ear, and consequently
nothing comfortable to the unfeeling soul. But it is not in the power of man
by nature, profitably, or with comfort to hear, much less to make true use of
the word of God. It is the gift of God to open the ear, which is common to the
good and bad hearers; but a work of the holy Ghost, to open and prepare the
heart to receive the Word, and to bring forth the fruit thereof, without the
which, it is not only not an idle sound, but a killing letter: for it never
falls into the ears of any, but it is either the savor of life, unto life,
by the operation of faith and repentance, or the savor of death, unto death,
by the hardness of the impenetrable and impenitent heart. Therefore it much
behooves Christians, not only to be careful to hear, but to be diligent and
considerate how they hear, to lay it up in their hearts, to make use of it
upon all occasions, in prosperity and adversity, in sickness, and health, and
in what estate soever he is: for it is as a treasure, to purchase in every
calamity, comfort, through patience, and in all consolation, inward or
outward, lively and true thankfulness. Whatsoever or whosoever therefore thou
be, that have at any time tasted of the good word of God, forget not, that
although it be pronounced by man, it is the word of the most Highest, who will
take an account of thee, how, and what thou have heard: and if thou fold it up
in the napking of forgetfulness, and put it not forth to the use of thy soul,
it shall be taken from thee, even that thou have, and thou cast out of his
presence, whose word and counsel thou have so neglected. Be not therefore
forgetful to ruminate, and as it were, often to show the cud of that word thou
hear, as at the mouth of God: and because we are naturally al flow to hear
what we should hear, and our minds very hard to retain the good things
proceeding out of the mouth of God; we are to pray, and humbly to petition the
Lord of life, to turn the word heard, to the savor of life, unto our
eternally life, it ought to be our continual study; yea, above al our worldly
cares and occasions, to meditate of the word we have heard, that it slip not
out of our minds; it is a Jewel which we shall hardly keep, unless we lay
it up in our hearts, for the enemy goes about to steal it out of our hearts,
by many carnal delights and vanities: It is the seed sown, to bring forth
good fruit, we must beware that we admit no tares, cockle, or darn^l to grow up
therewith, sin and iniquity: let it fructify in goodness, and pray that the
grace of God, watering our hearts, may keep down the weeds of sin, and
fructify the good fruits of righteousness, to make us holy, and of upright
conversation before God and men. God has made a promise to the faithfully
praying, to send his holy Spirit to help our infirmities. And to this end use
this Prayer following, or some to the like purpose, whenever thou hear the
Word preached, it shall much confirm thee in a godly desire to hear and
practice; and thou thereby shall find comfort in all thy ways.

A Prayer to be said after the hearing of a Sermon.
MOst bountiful, and most loving Lord God, the giver of all good things,
feeder, releeuer, and preserver of our souls and bodies: I yield thee most
humble and most hearty thanks, for that thou at this time have so lovingly and
Fatherly revealed unto us thy will, out of thy word, and ha^^ made our fainting
souls partakers of that celestial and blessed Manna, thy saving word. Good
Father, as thou have plentifully now fed us with the milk of thy sacred word,
give it, Lord, a relieuing and nourishing power, to refresh and strengthen our
souls, to walk before thee, in lively and acceptable obedience, and a
sanctified conversation. Grant that the word now sown in our ears, may take
deep root in our hearts, and bring forth fruit manifold: Let not the envious
man prevail in casting in amongst thy good seed, the cockle, tares, and weeds
of sin and iniquity, to the perverting or preventing of our new obedience.
Let not the thorny cares of this world trouble and choke, nor the vanities of
our corrupt minds vinder the growth of this saving seed in our hearts. Let not
ye scorching Sun of over heaui^ afflictions cause this fruit of salvation to
wither: but water it, Lord, with the continual dew of thy holy Spirit; and as
our unfruitful and harren hearts shall grow weak, wanting this lively food,
supply it, Lord, from time to time, by the preaching of thy word: and give us
diligent ears, and observing hearts at all times: and grant that we be not
hearers only, but doers of thy will. And for that our hearts are hard to
conceive, open our understandings: and for that our memories are short, and
unable to retain the saving word, give us hearts of continual holy
meditation, that we may be ever chewing the cudde of that heavenly food, and so
digest the same, that it may more and more strengthen our faith unto salvation.
And let the words, O Lord, which we have now and formerly heard, never return
in vain, but work that holy effect, for which thou have appointed it, namely,
the increase and confirmation of our faith in thee, obedience, repentance, and
newnes of life, that we ever more and more hungring and thirsting for this
sweet and saving food, may at length be made able to live in all holy and
spotless conversation, before thee our heavenly Father, and endeavor with all
holy alacrity and ioyfulnes, to take the advantage of all oportunities, to
hear thee to speak unto us, to follow and perform what thou command, and
to shun, and with carefulnes to avoid what thou forbiddest. Let nothing hinder
us, Lord, from a loving desire to repair unto thy house, to refresh our souls
with the bread of heaven: and let us not covet to be seen of men, only
hearers, but found and allowed of thee, doers of thy will. Grant this, Lord,
for thy Christ's sake.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be said against malicious adversaries.
FOr as much as the holy Ghost testifies that our Savior Christ Jesus had his
enemies, he living in all holiness, integrity, and innocence: should we,
mortal sinners, corrupt, and many ways transgressing wretches, think much to
be hated, maligned, envied, and persecuted of men; or does any man think, that
if he do as his Master has commanded, he shall not find the same measure,
that his Master found, who himself did, what he would we should do, and was
only envied for his well-doing? Happy is that man, that procures enemies by
his godly conversation; for it is certain, they that hate him for his
sincerity, are not his, but Gods enemies also. But to draw men to hate us for
our vices, their hatred is rather (...) virtue commendable, then a fault
reproueable: for it tends not unto the hurt of our bodies, but the
reformation of our lives: and as we shall begin to incline to godliness, so will
the hatred of the godly turn into love. And though Satan then step in, to
incou^ter us with his malignant ministers, there is no cause to fear: for
thought thousands compass us about to devour us, there shall be more with us,
then with them, and five shall chase an hundred, and an hundred put ten thousand
to flight; The Lord shall cause thine enemies, that rise against thee, to fall
before thy face: (...) he made the enemies of Jacob to fear him; for he feared
God! God sometimes punishes the enemies of his children by other means, then
by them to whom they are enemies; as he gave the enemies of Lot into Abraham's
hands: if we obey the Lord, he will persecute them that covet to persecute us,
though we be silent, and desire no revenge; Vengeance is the Lords, and he will
reward. There is no greater revenge to be offered against an enemy, then to
leave him to Gods revenge, and to live in the presence of the enemy so, as he
can take no exceptions against our co^uer^ation, upright before God and men: it
breeds a terror in a tyra^nous adversary, to see him, whom he hates, to live
in the fear of God: furious Saul was a^^aid of David, because he saw the Lord
was with him. If we could truly judge of Gods purpose, in sending us enemies,
we should never be so disqui^ted at their practices against us, whether they
threaten to kill us, as Saul did David, and the soldiers Paul, and Iesabel
^liah, or whether they vex us at the Law unjustly, or slander us maliciously,
or work any other mischief against us treacherously: if we fear God, and rest
upon his providence, he shall turn all their devices to our good, as he did
the envy of Ioseph^ brethren: Joseph was condemned for an Adulterer, Daniel
for a Rebel, Job for an Hypocrite, and Christ our Savior, for a Malefactor.
And how did God work for these? Joseph was freed and exalted, Daniel cleared
and justified, Job restored and approved; though Christ were condemned for us,
he was glorified, and shall glorify us. Enemies are most necessary evils, as
a man may term them: evil in themselves, yet necessary for us: we know that
an enemy desires to hear, or see, or find some reproachful blemish in him,
whom he loves not, and to that end will observe, and mark our conuersations,
and will solicit others to pry into our ways, to the end he may bring us
into slander. But the man that is wise, as a Serpent, will seek also to be
innocent as a Dove, knowing that he walks in the light, and his enemies are
ever attending on his ways in covert. It therefore concerns us much, to
consider how we walk before men, much more how we stray before our enemies: and
because it is not in our power, to walk before God or men, and to be upright,
the first and principal thing for which we ought to pray, is, for the grace of
God, to live an upright life, that our enemy the devil have no advantage
against us. So shall our corporal enemies be enforced to be silent: and having
cleansed and conformed our conversation to a righteous course, then our prayers
to God for delivery against our enemies, will be truly available: for then
will he take our cause into his own hand, and he will be our buckler, sword,
and defense, and we shall be safe under the shadow of his wings, especially if
we seek according to the rule of Christ, to do them good, that seek to do
us hurt: for it is the part of a true Christian, to seek atonement even with
his enemies. And as the Wiseman counsels, If he that hates thee be hungry,
give him bread; Christ commands the same. So may thou overcome him, and so
win him, that his own conscience shall move him to turn his hatred into
love, or else shall thou heap coals of wrath on his head, and God shall have
respect to thine offering, and accept thy prayers. Use therefore this prayer
following, or some to (...) purpose, and God shall work for thee, and turn all
enmity of men and Satan to thy good.

A Prayer against enemies.
LOrd, look down in merci^ from heaven upon me, mark and consider mine
enemies, what they are, and how many that lay wayt to do me hurt. Many (...)
there is no help for me in thee So proud and malicious are they, th(...) they
forget that thou art God, who defendest the poor and oppressed that call upon
thee. They remember that thou ^ittest a righteous Judge, to judge thy people
with equity: how thou crushest the enemies of thy people, as an earthen pot,
with a rod of iron. Lord, let them know that th^^ art God, (...) thy delivery
of me out of th(...) (...). They are too strong for (...) too wise and
politic, to^ too malicious: for, Lord, thou know I would gladly be at
peace with them, but when I seek it, they (...) the more insolent, and the
read(...) to oppress me: And therefore I appeal unto thee for succor, to
whom salvation belougeth. Lead me, and direct my ways aright, O Lord, because
of mine enemies, deliver me from them, and save me for thy mercies sake. O
Lord my God, I trust in thee, save me from mine enemies, and deliver me, lest
they devour me: lift up thy self on my side against their malicious furi^: let
their malice come to an end, let their snares be broken, let their devices come
to naught, and their policies whereby they plot my hurt, become foolishnes, and
turn to their own shame. Maintain thou, Lord, my right, and my cause, for
thou art set in the throne, and iudgest right; yet deal not with me according
to my sins. But to mine adversaries what offense have I committed, I know
not, yet would I be reconciled, and live at peace. But if thou have raised them
up to try me, Lord, give me strength and patience, and then let them rage and
swell, for I know thou have limited their power, they cannot do what they
list; and therefore J will not fear what they can do unto me; they may
rail, as Shem did on David, they may seek my life, as Iesabel did the life of
Eliah, and as Saul did the life of David, they may vow not to eat nor drink,
until they have done me some mischief: but thou have a ring in their
nosthrills, thou have bound them within the compass of thine (...) will and
power: keep them (...), lest they prevail against me, and say thou art not
able to deliver (...) out of their hands; as they said reprochfully of thee,
touching the dearest Son, Let him deliver him if he will have him. Oh save
me, (...) deliver me in that thy Son, from the power of this malicious
generation. Thou have ever been, (...) yet art my strength, my defense, and my
salvation, therefore shall (...) not much be moved at their contentions; but
under the shadow of the wings will I rejoice. Teach (...) thy way, O Lord, and
I shall walk in thy truth; knit my heart (...) thee, and I will fear thy
(...). So shall mine enemies (...) put to (...)lence: they watch over my
way(...) and covet to catch me in my sins, and lay baits to allure me to the
breach of a good conscience, that they may color their hatred with the seeming
desire of sincerity. But thou know me and them, I cannot justify mine
integrity before thee, for I am a man full of infirmities: but these men I have
not offended, therefore judge between me and them, and leave me not in their
power, nor in me a revenging spirit, but rather that I may covet to do them
good, that if they will not be heartily reconciled, the coals of thy
displeasure fall on their (...) ^ates. And my soul shall rejoice in thee, yea,
I shall rejoice in thy salvation: I shall praise thy name, who have delivered
me from him that is too mighty for me. And let not mine enemies, Lord, vuiustly
rejoice over me; let them never say in their hearts, nor see the day wherein
they may truly imagine, or say that they have prevailed against me. So shall
my tongue utter thy righteousness, and praise thy goodness, thy providence and
mercies, while I have any being. Which grant, Lord, for thy dear Sons sake,
my only Mediator.

Amen.
Lord increase my faith, and defend me from mine enemies.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be said of every true Christian, for the Ministers and
Preachers of the word of God.
IF men did duly and religiously consider, what a blessing it is to have the
word of God sincerely preached unto them, they would be more thankful to God
for them, who are as the conduite pipes, to bring and convey the water of life
unto them, the glad tidings of peace, and reconciliation with God in Christ.
Men naturally love them that give them corporal food and necessaries, they
dearly esteem and reverence the Nurses and Eoster-fathers, that yield them
but things to strengthen and maintain their natural lives: and the
Physicians, by whose art and industry, they persuade themselves to have
received health for their bodies. And is it not much to be admired, that men
receiving the nourishment and vital strength of their better part, the soul,
should so little regard the means, by whom they receive it? the Ministers of
the word of Salvation, the Gospel of Christ? Many will protest they love
Christ, and yet the contrary appears, when they not only regard not, but
despise his Ministers, whom he has sent as Ambassadors of his will? We
beseech you, brethren (says Saint Paul to the Thessalonians) that ye have the
Ministers of God in singular love for their works sake. We should love all
men, and pray for all men; how much more for them that lead us to the well of
life? The same Saint Paul wills the Ephesians, not only to pray in an
ordinary manner, but in the Spirit, with perseverance and watchfulnes, even for
him, that utterance might be given unto him, and that he might open his mouth
boldly, to publish the secret of the Gospel. And are we less bound to pray
for them that have the Spiritual charge over us, the care and cure of our
souls, that they may be able to deliver the Word sincerely, to open their
mouths boldly to our edification and consolation in Christ? And that they,
namely, the Ministers, may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men? for we
know that Christ and Antichrist, Truth and Falsehood, Christ and Satan cannot
stand together. And he that preaches the word truly, is the means to bring
men out of darkness to light, from sin to sanctity, from Satan to Christ.
And therefore Satan will ever oppose himself, and instigate evil men to
encounter, scandalize, and persecute such as are truest, and most painful
laborers in Gods Spiritual harvest; whereby it comes to pass, that the
word of God is oftentimes hindered, the Church of Christ diminished, Ignorance
increased, Religion despised, Vice advanced, Faith decreased, Obedience to God
neglected, and Truth among men merely abandoned and contemned. And all this,
where Prophesying and Preaching fail. God gives not to man a more special
blessing in earth, then the preaching of the word, which is as the net to catch
men: there were three thousand men so caught at the first preaching of Peter:
and by his continuance in that spiritual fishing, there were caught five
thousand persons out of the snare of Satan. Let all men, therefore, love and
pray for them that thus fish to save the souls of me^, that have the oversight
and rule over them: they are the watch men of Christ; and whosoever loves Christ
the Master and Lord, cannot but love his Ministers, and pray for them, not only
as brethren, but as men appointed by Corist, to direct them the way of
salvation. And let no man think it is not their duty to pray for them,
because they are appointed and ought to pray for others, and not others for
them, as some profanely affirm. It is a needful and required duty, to pray
one for another, especially for the Ministers, who are, or ought to be as Gods
mouth unto us, to teach us his will; as Gods hand to support us by spiritual
counsel; as Gods eye to observe our ways, and as Gods Ministers to reprove us
of sin, and to pronounce pardon in Christ to the truly penitent. Pray
therefore for them, that the gifts of the holy Ghost may abound in them, that
men seeing their good works, may glorify God, our, and their Father which is
in heaven.

A Prayer to be said for the Ministers of Gods word.
GRacious and merciful, O Lord our God, art thou in all thy ways and works
toward men, and in nothing more gracious then in thy word preached unto us;
whereby thou do open and reueile unto us the mystery of our salvation,
according to thy good pleasure in Christ our Lord. Thou teach us heavenly
wisdom in earth, by thy holy Spirit given unto men, whom thou do set apart
to that holy function, as men chosen to win men to thee. And for as much as
neither thy beloved Saints, Peter, nor John, nor Paul, could preach or
prophecy before they were sent; neither were they sent, before they were
sanctified: Sanctify and send forth, Lord, worthy Laborers into thine
harvest, and sanctify and bless them, whom thou have sent, with such
spiritual gifts and graces, as may enable them to be instant in season and out
of season, that they may winue many unto thee. Inlighten their hearts with the
light of true knowledge: Touch their tongues with the coal from thine Altar,
that their lips may preserve knowledge, and in their hearts may be true zeal,
that they may still call upon thy children to walk in the light of thy truth.
And as thou did send down upon thine Apostles the holy Ghost in fiery
tongues to teach the^: so instill into the hearts of all thy Ministers,
Preachers of thy word, the fire of true zeal, and a godly boldness to speak
thy truth without respect of persons, not to flatter the wicked, nor to spare
the rebuking of sin: and let them comfort the weak hearted: let the^ be able to
bring them that err, into the right way, that they may convert and live, that
they may believe and live: for Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
preaching of thy word. Let therefore the beautiful fruit of the^ plentifully
appear amongst us, yt bring glad tidings of peace wc the^, ye glad tidings of
our salvation. And let the^ speak nothing, but as thy word teaches the^, yt
they may be found good disposers of thy graces. Let their conuersatio^s be
upright before thee: let the^ be as lights set on a hill, that they may teach
as well by the example of their own lives, as by preaching thy Word: that thou
in all things may be glorified, through Jesus Christ, to whom is praise and
dominion, for ever and ever.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer for the Church Uniuersall.
THe Church which S. Paul calls the House of God, 1. Tim. 3. 15. is the
Congregation of the faithful dispersed throughout the world; and in regard of
the universality thereof, is called the Church Catholic. Of which
Universality are many and several societies, distinct by place, united by
faith. And every several company professing one and the same truth, confessing
one and the same faith, and holding one and the same form of administration of
the Sacraments, are one entire body, which body is the universal Church,
whereof Christ is the head: one Spouse, whereof Christ is the husband. He has
begotten this dispersed congregation by virtue of his word, and made them one
by the unity of his Spirit: By which Spirit the Fathers believed in Christ
before the came in the flesh, and were of the same mystical body, whereof we
that believe his word, being come, are also members, and whereof Christ Jesus
has bin, is, and shall be the everlasting head. The parable of the Sower,
which Christ propounded, Matthew. 13. 24. shows by the evil seed mixed with
the good, that this Church shall never be free from offenses both in doctrine
and manners, until the day of the fina(...) harvest; when this holy
Congregation, as good corn, shall be gathered into the celestial garner: and
the wicked and unclean shall be cast off into utter darkness. And therefore
are the faithful to arm themselves with patience, and to undergo with
constancy the offenses of the contrarily minded: for therefore is the Church of
Christ called a Church Militant, because it is still exercised with enemies,
whom we are to resist, and encounter with the weapons of the Spirit. The
contrary also are called a Church, but a malignant Church: a Church full of
vanity and profaneness, sin, Schisms, Hypocrites and Reprobates: Who also
encounter and exercise the Church Militant, with spiritual weapons, the
weapons of iniquity, whose head is Satan, the Red Dragon, the man of sin,
the son of perdition, Antichrist. So that Bethel, the house of God, has
continual war with Bethauen, the house of the Devil; Sanctity with Sin;
Truth with Falsehood; Light with darkness; Christ in his members, with Satan
and his adherents; heavenly holiness, with spiritual wickedness, Ephesians. 6. 12.
Zechar. 3. 1. 2. The Church of Christ being thus continually assailed, has
only refuge in danger, to her head Christ Jesus, who has promised, not only to
send the Comforter, to teach us all things, but to defend us, and to be with us
to the end of the world, Matthew. 28. 20. And as he has thus promised unto the
body, so is he ever with every member: and where two or three be gathered
together in the name of that one head, he will be there in the midst of them:
and therefore it does not only behoue every Christian, to be continually
watchful against these many and malignant adversaries, spiritual enemies: but
to power forth continual supplicatio^s to God the Father in his Son, by the
Spirit, not for himself only: but for the whole, and every part of this
Catholic congregation, that he will defend us, as well from enemies, threatening
outward persecution, as working inward tentation. And it much imports the
Church in general, and every member of the same, to seek, and daily to pray
for the reformation of the corruptions cast into the field of the Gospel, by
that wicked one, which does not only spring up among, but choaketh, and
hinders the growth of the good seed of sincerity, by the errors of
doctrine, and works of wickedness. And therefore does the heavenly husbandman
threaten the extirpation even of the good seed that he has sown, and to
leave the ground unto the weeds of sin and vanity whereunto it is especially
inclined: to deprive it altogether of the manurance of his word, and never
again to water it with the dew of his holy Spirit, lest therefore, that he
suffer strangers, Satan and his ministers to break down the hedges of our
religious profession, and holy practice of obedience, and the wild beasts of
the field (sins of all sorts) to root up, and devour the fruits of our holy
conuersations, and lest he should take away, or break the sta^^e of our
spiritual strength, the food of our souls: Let us be stirred up, to pray
unto our head Christ Jesus for grace, and that he will still preserve,
mainetaine and defend, what his right hand has planted.

A Prayer for the Uniuersall Church, and for every member of the same, fit to
be often said of every Christian.
ALmighty Lord God, the fountain of all goodness, the creator of all men, who
in Jesus Christ thy Son, have redeemed them that were captives, recalled and
brought home them that estrayed, received and embraced them again that were run
from thee, and saved them that were lost: Look now upon them whom thou have
chosen, and behold in mercy whom thou have redeemed: and as thou have in thine
own free mercy, favor and love, gathered unto thy self, and set apart for
thy service, a remnant out of the whole number of mankind, a peculiar
company, and have vouchsafed to make them of many, one sanctified body, all by
the merits of thy son, in whom they are adopted, and made heirs of heaven,
in whom they live, move and have their spiritual and heavenly being: So, Lord,
be thou still their succor, their shield, buckler, and everlasting defense:
thou have vouchsafed (good Father) to set apart this elected and small company,
for thine own sacred service in this mortal life, calling them by the voice
of thy word, sounding through all parts of the universal world, and by the
inspiration of that holy comforter, left unto thy children by promise, have
taught them that wisdom, that is far about the wisdom of the wisest
mortal man, and endowed the^ with that sanctified integrity, that far
exceeds the sincerity of the best qualified carnal man, and have thy self
promised to continue with them by thy spirit to the end of the world, lest they
should, through overmuch heaviness and affliction, perish in the way of their
pilgrimage: Some thou have released of their warfare, some, the more to
testify unto the world, their faith and constant assurance of thine eternal
love and providence over them, suffrest to fall into the hands of them that
could but kill their bodies, their souls being safe in thy protection, and
have in part received their reward in heaven, having escaped the presentors
hands: Some thou have called by a natural dissolution, elected, redeemed,
sanctified, and in part glorified. And as yet, good Father, there is a small
dispersed remnant, which have not finished their warfare, but are still
incountred with Satan, with sin, and with their own corruptions, and still
afflicted, persecuted, and distressed: be near unto them according to thy
word, assist them by thy grace, enlighten them, teach them, and be evermore
their defense: and as successively from age to age, the end of days, there
shall be an increase of people: So let thy Gospel continually propagate, and
beget new children unto thy self, and let not the light of thy word decline,
but rather shine daily, more and more clearly. Let not the power thereof
diminish, nor the sound thereof cease, until it have gained and completed the
number of all that shall be saved. Send forth godly and painful laborers,
that they may be instant in season and out of season, give them power to bent
down the power of sin, to stay the violent current of backessiding, and
Apostacy. Send forth thy word into all lands, let all nations hear it, and
al tongues profess it: where thou have planted it already, water it with the
continual showers of thy grace: where it is not yet sown, let it fall and
fructify: where it has been sown, and is withered, renew the lively spring
thereof: continue, increase, and beget more and more children unto thy self
through all parts of the world through thy word. And although we be fallen into
the last and most declining age, and as it were into the period of time: wherein
(as thou have foreshewed) sin increases, godliness diminishes, holy zeal
waxes weak, love becomes cold, and counterfeit, and thy saving word become
of none effect among many: yet forget not to be good unto thy chosen, leave
not thy Saints unto the spoyler, rather, shorten these days of sin, lest
that the increase of ungodliness seduce even the righteous, and they perish
also by straying from the way of life.

Lord increase our faith.
Another Prayer for the Uniuersall Church in the time of affliction or
persecution.
MOst gracious Father, as thou have showed thy self in former times a most
powerful protector of thy Church, ever since the propagation thereof, and by
thy holy spirit have conserved it in the unity of thy spirit, in a constant
and true profession of thy word, in a bold and sincere confessing of Christ,
the head of that sanctified body, even when persecution unto death raged and
tyrannized most: Be still mindful of the same thy little flock: feed it
still with thy word, defend it still with thy mighty hand, guide it ever with
thy holy spirit, and evermore preserve it as the vine, which thine own right
hand has planted. Gather together thy sheep scattered upon so many
mountains: let not the wolves seize upon thy tender lambs, to tear them in
pieces while there is none to help. Let not the subtle foxes bewitch them
with a false religion. Let not the wild Bo^e of Antichristian persecution
devour them: Let not Satan, nor sin prevail against them. But as thou have
promised, let thy Church, and every member of the same, be as Mount Sion, that
shall never be moved: let them stand fast for ever. Let them flourish in all
faith and obedience, as trees planted by the rivers, and bring forth fruits of
religion, and true pity abundantly: compass them with armies of thine
Angels, as thou did compass Elisha with horses and chariots of fire: and
as the mountains compass Jerusalem: So let thy preuayling power compass them
about: Suffer none, O Lord, to do them violence: but if in thy wisdom thou
think meet to make any member of thy Church, a witness of thy truth, give
him the spirit of true understanding of thy word, faith and constancy to
embrace what measure of affliction or persecution thou shall think fit to lay
upon him for the same: forsake him not, O Lord, in his trials, nor lay no more
upon him, then it may please thee to give him power to endure. Make thy
children, O Lord, strong, and then cannot the threats of the cruellest Tyrants
dismay thy outwardly weakest witnesses, from undergoing the extremest passion
of martyrdom. O fortify all them whom thou have appointed to any kind of
torment, for the testimony of the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Season
them so with the assurance of their future glory, that they fly not, nor start
back for fear of whatsoever torture thine enemies may threaten or execute.
The least of which, not being assisted and made easy, by thy all-shining
countenance upon the soul of the persecuted, cannot but dismay him, and
dismaying, make him faint, and fainting, make him fall, and so to deny thee.
Look down therefore, O Lord, upon, and visit all thine afflicted members,
protect them from secret conspiracies, open practices, and violent incursions,
plotted by Satan and Antichrist, and attempted by their bewitched instruments,
by whom thy Church and the members thereof and daily afflicted, and endangered*
Take thou, we humbly beseech thee, our defense into thine own hands: Stop the
breach, which the enemy has made. Maintain, Lord, thine own word, protect
and keep thine own people: convert, reuert, or confound them that fight
against thee, by word or sword, and fight against them that fight against thee
in thy members, that thou may be glorified, thy Church increased, and every
member of the same everlastingly comforted in Christ their head. Be it so, good
Father.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith.
Another short Prayer for the prosperity of the Church and government thereof.
GOd Father in Jesus Christ, look down from heaven upon, and visit the vi^e;
which thy right hand has planted; Send laborers into thy vineyard, that they
may so prune it, and dress it, that it may branch, and bear plentifully good
fruit: Suffer n^ loyterers or idle persons in stead of laborers, to enter
into, or undertake to husband this vine: Let no profane person have any
superintendencie within the same: But let the holy, the faithful, the diligent
industrious, and such (...) have care to advance thy Gospel and glory, to
instruct, to exhort, to improve, rebuke, and to be instant in season and out
of season, be established overseers in this vineyard: By whose watching and
work, all the branches may be so succored, and carried upward, as they may
not cease growing, until they mount up unto the perfection of spiritual
knowledge, and practice of all piety, and fi^^all obedience; and consequently
became members of that celestial Jerusalem. Send, Lord, such watchmen to keep
thy vine, as by the sword of the spirit, may be able to encounter and keep
out, expulse, abandon, and drive away all hurtful and profane beasts, all
Swinelike drunkards, all Lyonlike furious, and Wolfelike denouring and ravening
persons, all Camelionlike Hypocrites, all Leopardlike spotted Professors, and
all Foxelike crafty deuisors of, and in^i^^rs to new and false doctrines, which
the Gospel of thy Son Christ Jesus warranteth not. Let only the meek
sheep, and humble lambs, the truly religious and holy, be evermore
governors, and the governed in this heavenly Vineyard, thy Church. And
although no visible Congregation can be without these hidden and dangerous
members, known only to thy self: confirm the faith of every child of
thine, that they may be more and more enlightened and confirmed in their hope,
through a sound and sincere profession of thy truth, never to be removed unto
the end.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be said for the Kings Majesty.
WHen God had caused to be divided the land of Canaan into parts, according to
the Twelve tribes of Israel, he substituted (as under, and in the name of
himself) first Judges, and after Kings, to govern the^, whereof some were
virtuous; religious, and fearing God, and they defended the truth of God, and
protecte^ his Church under them. Some wero^ dolaters, perturbers of the Church
(...) God, and Tyrants. The first respecting the laws of God, and good of his
Church, made the laws of God the pattern of their governments. The second,
either not knowing God, or knowing him, did not honor him as God, but fell
from the living God themselves, and caused the people to fall likewise from God
to Idols: thereby highly incensing God to indignation against them, who
grievously punished them with their Kings. David, Josiah, Hezekiah, Asa, and
Ieboshaphat, were Kings that feared God, 1. King. 15. 12. 2. Chron. 17. 3.
These did God advance to comfort his children, by the free use of his word, and
to defend them from the adversaries hand, 2. Chron. 1. 11. Contrarily, he
sets up tyrants, for the punishment of a rebellious people; as Nehemiah
complains, Nehem. 9. 37. Manasses made the streets of Jerusalem to swim with
the blood of his religious subjects. Good, and gracious Princes are as
defensive walls unto a people, against the rage and violence of enemies, such
as of whom David speaks, Psalm. 47. 9. Gebal, and Ammo^, and Amal^^h, the
Philiflims, the inhabitants of Tire, and such like conspiratora against, and
oppressors of the children of God, that stick not to say, Come, and let us cut
them off from being a nation, Psalm. 68. 4. 7. David complained in his time,
that the kings of the earth did band themselves, and Princes assenibled
together against the Lord, and against his people: and has it not been seen
in our days, that mighty potentates have conspired against Gods anointed, and
us? And that secret trecheries have been coined, to endanger the peace and
safety of prince and people? And has not that God, that delivered David from
Saul, delivered us from them that rose up against us? And shall we think, that
the public and prinate petitions, which the godly have made for their
Sovereigns, has not much prevailed, to prevent the dangers which have been,
even at the point of execution? Let us therefore never forget his goodness,
but so much the more become instant suppliants unto that great King of kings,
that he will bless, preserve, protect, and defend his most excellent Maiestic,
whose virtues shine to the glory of the kingdom, his integrity, learning and
religious constancy admired: were he a tyrant, we ought to pray for his
prosperity: how much more, being most graciously loving unto his subjects,
ought we to intercede for him to God, according to the precept of the Apostle,
2. Tim. 1. 2. where he charge that all men should pray for kings, who are
appointed by God? Let us therefore pray for his health, wealth, peace,
prosperity and safety: that we likewise, in and by him, may still, as we now
do, partake of thos^ excellent blessings, peace, plenty, and the free use of
the Gospel of Christ. And as David prayed, that the counsel of Athithophel
might be made foolishness: So let every one of us pray, that God will destroy
all the devices of such as seek or wish the hurt of his Majesty, the
disturbance of his Church, or Commonweal: and to that end, let this prayer
following, or some to the like purpose, be often used.

A Prayer and thanksgiving for the Kings Majesty, to be often used of every
good subject.
O Mighty and everliving Lord God, who dwell in the most glorious heavens,
in greatness and glory, whose wonderful and irresistable power protecteth those
that fear thee, and confoundest the strongest and mightiest princes that rise
up against thee. Thou afflictest the subjects of rebellious princes, and
comfortest those that are conformable unto thy will, kings, and people: (...)
cannot forget how the multitude of thy mercies did compass us abo^^ on every
^ide, in the days of thy late chosen Elizabeth, under wh^^ thou gave us
peace, plenty, (...) above all, the use of thy sacred word, the staff and
strength of our souls, which has the promise of all kinds of blessings, which
(...) inioyed until her translation from us unto thee. At what time (a^ thou
Lord well know) such was our general fear of peril to have succeeded her
departure, as the wisest of our Ancients became doubtful what would be the
success of the succession: yet far beyond our imaginations, but far more
beyond our deserts, thou (forgetting our sins) remembredst thy mercies:
Insomuch, as although thou tookest from us a most worthy. De(...), yet thou
have in her stead given us in thy providence, a Josiah most worthy, who still
leads us thy people through the wilderness of many spiritual dangers, toward
mount Sion, the holy hill of assurance of salvation, through Christ thy Son,
and labors, through a holy zeal, to bring them that err from thy truth,
into the way that leads unto eternal life; to reconcile the obstinate, and to
confirm the weak: So that we cannot but acknowledge, that indeed, thy
mercies are infinite toward us, in him. O, that men would therefore praise thy
name, for thy goodness, and for thy blessings bestowed upon us, the most
unworthy amongst the children of men. Lord, we confess, that among all thy
mercies and miracles, there is none more admired in the world, then is thy
goodness and love toward us, (howsoever unworthy) in keeping us,
notwithstanding so many Antichristian stratagems, under thine own protection,
continuing to us the light of thy sacred truth, that shines amongst us more
bright the^ the (...)nne in her strength: As if th^^ had a more special
respect unto us th^^ to any other nation, (...) thine own dearest and peculiar
people. Thou have anointed unto us a religious ^ing, to watch (...)uer us, to
nourish us with the (...)ilke of thy saving word, and have not permitted a
stranger from thy truth to intrude upon us: But with the sword of the spirit,
have hitherunto guarded us, from the entry of foreign Potentates, enemies
unto thy Gospel. Inlarg^ therefore, good Father, thy gift of wisdom and
power, unto thi^^ own peculiar choice. James thi^^ Anointed, that he may be
watchful to observe, and powerful to withstand the enemies of thy truth,
abroad and at home. Let no Achitophel be near his person, nor any sinister
counsel be heard, or malicious hand be lifted up against him. Be a Father of
mercy unto him, and to his seed, that under thee, he and they that have and
shall proceed from his or the loins of them that proceed from him, may be
fathers, and furtherers of many comforts to thy Church for ever. Take him not
from us, as thou have taken our neighbor kings, though our sins deserve it,
and have already made a dangerous breach in that Royal stock: wherein, under
thee, our hope of happiness depends much. And therefore, Lord, deprive us
not of him (nor any of his issue) in thine anger, who brought us peace after
peace, and is as David unto us, a man chosen after thine own (...)uing
kindness, to rule us, (...) to continue us in the rules of right religion, a
blessing above blessings. Give us not ^uer therefore, unto the will of his, and
ours, and thine own enemies, who under the counterfeit color of the name and
cause of Christ, seek to persecute Christ himself in his members, falsely
persuading themselves, that the murdering of Princes, and massacring of people,
is a sacrifice acceptable to thee, and a mark of Catholic religion. How it
had fared with us, the king and people, if thou had permitted that plot of
confusion, lately practiced, to have prevailed, thou know. Thy chosen Israel
wanting a king, all people did what they listed. If then Lord, they had
deprived thine English Israel; of King, Counsel, Bishops; Judges and Chief
men of the land, what could have succeeded, but universal confusion? We
confess thy power and providence, to ^e absolute, and could have raised and
restored others for thine own glory: But our sins deserving the first, could
not be worthily seconded by the latter: but that Antichrist would have
reinuested himself, where now Christ Jesus is unto us, all in all. Blessed be
thy name, O Lord, whose eye beheld, and whose, providence prevented them, and
whose arm, as with a rod of iron, brake the actors in pieces like a potters
vessel. To thee therefore, most loving Lord God, to thy Son Christ, and to
the holy Ghost, be praise for ever.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith, and evermore preserve thy servant our King.
A short thanksgiving, and prayer for the Kings preservation.
Dear Father, infinite in power toward us, give us hearts to remember, with
thankefulnes, thy too much forgotten goodness, in so mercifully defending our
King, and us thy people, from many dangers. And forget not, Lord, how the
wicked still study the means to effect that, which thou in mercy did then
prevent. Consider how they secretly thirst for the blood of thine Anointed, and
of his most worthy branches likely to prove powerful protectors of thy truth,
and consequently long for the confusion of thy people. It suffiseth that thou
see it: but it suffiseth not for us, to have the words, and not to use the
works of assurance of thy protection. And therefore, we humbly pray thee,
gracious Lord God, and most loving father, to pardon our sins, which are the
greatest adversaries that can rise up against us. Thou sendest good and
religious kings to a people, from whom thou expectest the fruits of holy
obedience. But if they wax cold in profession, and slack in practizing thy
reueiled will, thou take their godly, (...) religious and loving kings from
them: and in stead sendest them Tyrants, merciless, and irreligious princes:
and neither the wisdom, nor power of man can prevail: where thou art a
party in the judgment. Wherefore, loving Father, as th^^ have furnished the
heart of James thy servant our King with heavenly wisdom, furnish our hearts
with true obedience, to follow thy will reueiled in thy word: that so our
obedience, beginning toward thy Majesty, may appear, and work more and more
in our continual thankfulness unto thee (...) him, and our love and true
loyalty to him, that thy word may still prevail with us, and remain amongst
us, and we evermore abide constant in thee: that howsoever enemies rage,
whatsoever evil counsel they take, we may be either still free in thee
protected by thy hand, or may with patience undergo thy fatherly trial,
knowing that all things work together for the best, to them that love thee,
and are chosen of thy purpose, in him, by whose merits, both he, our king, and
we thine, and his people, have received the promise, that thou will never fail
us, nor forsake us.

Lord increase our faith.
A most pi^^ie and patheticall Prayer for the King, and overthrow of
Antichristian religion, and enemies of the truth.
Bless LORD, and graciously defend and preserve our King, look v^n him, as
thou did upon David, chosen after thine own heart. Lead him by thine own
right hand, in all his ways, that he may lead us thy people unto thy holy
Sanctuary. Give him a rejoicing heart to see his subjects ready to resort
unto thy holy Temple, receiving thy blessed Sacraments, and faithfully serving
thy sacred Majesty, by his religious example. Let him ever be instant to call
upon, stir up, and incite the Ministers of thy word, that they be instant in
sounding the trumpet of thy word unto thy people, that sin may be weakened, and
obedience to thee increased, that mercy and truth may meet together, and
righteousness and peace may kiss each other. Give him evermore a prevailing
power, to bring to naught, or weaken the power of Idolatry and superstition
within his Kingdoms, and to further and construie the sincere service of thee:
let him never cease, O Lord, until he have banished, or fully reformed the
Favorites of Antichrist, namely, such as have the mark of that Beast in their
foreheads, or in their hands, whose names are not written in the book of Life.
Give him, Lord, an eye to find them out, and a right resolution to abandon
them, without respect of persons, together with all flatterers, and Hypocrites:
And bless unto him godly, wise, religious and faithful Counselors: and as
thou have given him a sword and Scepter: let him truly and valorously use them,
to the cutting off of all the dangerous branches of sin and impiety, and
all the inormities of thy Church and Common. weal, and to the defense of the
godly and innocent. Let his person (Lord) be ever in thy protection: keep him
as the apple of thine eye: prevent all secret practices and open violence
pretended against him. Stand between him and the enemy, and let the
hailestones of thy severe judgments fall upon the heads of them that hate him:
wou^d the hayrie scalpe of all that rise up against him. And in all his
occasioned incounters with Antichrist, or any of his adherents, give him
Ioshuahs prosperous victories, David's zeal, and Elishacs faith. Discover unto
him largely the counsel of thine own will, give him a forward, willing, and
constant heart, to effect what thou command: and grant that he dismay not
more in the overthrow of Antichrist, then Ioshuah did at the confusion of
Ierico. Be thou his buckler, whet his sword, bend thou his bow, make ready his
arrows upon the string, and let them all, and always be directed by thy
providence, to the destruction of his and thine irreconciliable enemies: as was
the Sli^^ of David against Goliath, so let the. Judgments be against the wicked
in the day of battle. Let his Subjects love him: let his enemies fear and
fly him: let all Nations admire his righteous judgments, Princely government,
and religious constancy: let them all be moved to follow him, as he deliteth
Lord, to follow thee, in truth and equity, to the glory of thy universally
admired name, through Christ, in whom let him ever be blessed: And so bless
us, Lord, that we may bless thee for him.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be used of such as are of the Kings Majesty's privy
Counsel.
IF men, of meanest professions be moved by common reason, to seek
understanding to manage their own private occasions: how much more ought men of
most eminent places, especially Counselors to Kings, crave wisdom and fitnes
of God, for so high a calling? How can they consult, devise, deliberate, direct
and determine matters of weightiest consequence, without extraordinary gifts
of prudence? How can they marshall the care and carriage of him, that has the
care and charge of the government and defense of Kingdoms and people, in peace
and war, not only in matters Civil, but Ecclesiastical, Spiritual, and
Temporal? Is it a small matter, says David, to be son in law to a King? So
may a man say, Is it a small preferment to be thought a fit man to be of the
secret counsel of a King? Many thirst, no doubt, and desire this highest
honor, who have not first truly examined their gifts of ablenes to discharge
the office according to judgment: it is not enough to be a deep Politician, a
profound Naturalist; but to be a religious Christian, well seen in the book
of God especially, and in the Laws and ordinances of the Kingdom: to be of an
upright heart, of a godly conversation: qualified in the virtues diuino? the
first whereof is to respect Gods glory: secondly, the honor of the King, the
good of the Church, and Weal public, to shine before men in godliness* for
that ministers joy and consolation to the good, and terror to the wicked. It
is impossible for him to give good counsel to men, that has not taken
counsel before of God, Psalm. 33. 10. And therefore, he that seeks not
wisdom, where Solomon found it: let hi^ be as wise in humane affairs, (...)
was Achitophel, it will either come to naught, or redound to his own disgrace,
to the dishonor of the King, and hurt of the Church or Commonweal. Great
happiness then it is to that King and Kingdom, where men of worthy not for
their Religion, Prudence, and Integrity, are invested in that most honorable
society: and therefore much behooves it all honorable persons, of that most
worthy rank, to commence in humility, and in the fear of God, from whence
cannot but proceed that true wisdom and sincerity, which are the truest
arguments of the Kings and Subjects happiness and safety. And for that these
supernatural gifts no man attaineth unto by chance, art, or carnal means;
they are to be sought for by prayer, at the hands of him that freely gives them
without remuneration, Iam. 1. 5. He then that loves righteousness, and is in
this eminent place, cannot but desire true Wisdom, and that instantly, in
regard of the virtues that accompany her: As Sobernes, Prudence,
Righteousness and Fortitude, Wisd. 8. 7. ornaments of highest honor, to such
as are of the secrets of Princes. But fearing lest I should seem to light^
candle to give light to the Sun, I crave pardon and patience, only I
adventure to insert this among other Motives, not to teach, but by way of
well-wishing unto all of that most high and most honorable association, whose
wisdom and judgment is a light in the Court, and life of the Kingdom.

A Prayer not unfit to be sometimes used of a Counselor of Estate, as he has
opportunity.
O Gracious Lord God, most wise; provident, and loving Father, I acknowledge my
self far unworthy of the pl^c^ and dignity, whereunto thou i^ great mercy
have advanced me, a man of meanest understanding. What am I, O Lord, that th^^
should respect me so? That tho^ should associate me with the grauest and
most prudent, to m(...) me partaker of the secret counsel of thine Anointed? I
know, that wit^ thee is wisdom and counsel, mercy and judgment: but I am
ignorant, only thou art the Author and fountain of true wisdom, and give
prudence and knowledge abunda^tly, to them yt truly and faithfully ask it of
thee, to the end to do good, to execute Justice, to aduante thy word, (...)
love, countenance and defend the true professors of the same: not to seem the
more singular in Natural and Humane policies: But indeed, to be the more able
to prevent the evils, which the enemies of thy sacred and saving truth, plot
and practice against thy Church, and thine Anointed. And therefore Father
All-sufficient, seeing it is thy good pleasure, to put into the heart of thine
Anointed, to call me (unworthy) to his Counsel: make (...) more worthy, by
infussing into me wisdom to advise, judgment to determine, and strength to
perform all the godly duties required in my high calling. Make me especially
studious in thy wor^, and give (...) understanding according unto the same;
lest I through ignorance or rashness, should propose, deliberat, or censure
any thing to thy dishonor, to the danger or damage of our Sovereign Lord, to
the distaste or disturbance of thy Church, or against the peace or profit of
the ^^^eale public of the Dominious under the charge of thine Anointed. And
above all things, Lord, give me a religious heart, that in a godly and right
constant resolution, I may more and more seek the propagation, increase,
continuance, and advancement of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and more and more
seek to weaken and bring to naught all Idolatry and superstition. Take from
me a parciall eye, that in respect of persons, I seek not to free the faulty*
or to discountenance, or condemn the innocent. Give me a loyal heart to my
Sovereign: season my love toward him with thy love, that as much as in me
lies, I may ever defend his person, though to the loss of whatsoever is
dearest unto me: and that I may seek to discover those that hate him, and
endeavor to bring them to their deserved shame and punishment.

Lord increase my faith, and mine understanding according to thy word*
Another short effectual Prayer to be said of a privy Counselor, fit to be
said before consultation.
Fructify my heart, O gracious Lord God, with righteousness and sincere
judgment, that I may wisely consult, sincerely censure, and judge justly all
things, that at any time shall be propounded to mine opinion: for of my self,
Lord, I do acknowledge, that I am a man of weak understanding, of a corrupt
heart, and ignorant of perfect equity; and therefore* I humbly beg knowledge
and wisdom of thee. Keep my feet aright in all my ways, and free my hands,
and keep them ever clean from gifts, that they cause me not to pervert
justice, and wrest sound counsel. Indue me with a merciful heart, and let
mine affections be ever such, as may in all things administer true tokens of
mine integrity. And for as much as things may diversely fall out to be debated,
and determined by us of this high calling, and of so worthy and weighty
consequence, as may concern the life and state of Church and Commonweal, and
we being but men, not able to fadome by our wisdoms the end of thy secret
purposes, nor to sound the depth of thine unsearchable judgments, be pleased
to reveal unto us thy will, for the good of thine Anointed, under whom thou
have placed us, that we may accordingly consult and determine; for nothing
succedeth wi^^ without thee: and against thee there is neither wisdom,
understanding, or counsel that can prevail. Thy Judgments are unsearchable,
and thy ways past finding out. Furnish us, therefore, O loving Father, with all
graces and virtues necessary, to the performance of out bound duties to thy
self, thine Anointed, thy Church, and the Commonweals under the government
of our Sovereign Lord, thy servant, through Christ, our wisdom, our
Strength, and ou^ (...)^eeiner.

Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer, to be said of every good subject, for the good success
of the Counsel Royal.
SAint Paul in the first to Timothy, cap. 1. 2. exhorts all men to make
prayers and supplications for kings and men in authority, and yields such a
reason to move thereunto, as whosoever wilfully neglects the performance of
it, cannot be guiltless of a suspicion, that he wishes not well to the state
of the weal public, in seeming indifferent whether it go well or ill with
the people, whose prosperity, comfort and security consists in the right
rule of magistrates government. And therefore, is every Christian bound, by the
rule of religious obedience, to pray especially for the King, wherein they
cannot omit to pray for his Counselors of estate, who are (in that they part
ache of his secrets, and are of his counsel) a part of the head of that
politic body, whereof themselves are members: and he that refuses to wish
well unto, and to pray for the good of the head, whereof himself is a member,
is not worthy to partake of the blessings which good members do enjoy,
neither peace nor plenty; But as an unprofitable droane, to be expulst the
Hyue, that the rest, according to their godly desires, may live and enjoy, in,
by, and with the head, true peace, religion and mutual love, the end of all
our prayers: for, unless men in most eminent places, be religious, and
virtuously qualified (which is the gift of God) it is impossible for King, or
Kingdom, Church or Commonweal, to stand sound or secure: and among all that
are in authority under the King, none are of so eminet place, as are
Counselors of Estate: none have a more heavy burden, none need more wisdom
and integrity then they, for they sway matters of greatest civil importance.
And therefore none are more observed, none in deeper danger by the enemies of
the King, and Kingdom. Who then will show himself so base, barbarous, or
irreligious, as not to afford, among other exercises, some moment of time, to
seek at the hands of God, the good of these most honorable persons? namely,
that their qualities may correspond their high callings, godliness and honesty:
the first implying sincerity in Religion: the second civil carriage in their
place, and justice toward men: the first for the good of the Church, the
second for the Weal public: with these virtues has God promised to indue
them for his Churches sake, Eccle. 10. 4. And therefore ought ever member of the
Common wealth, to pray for them, that Wisdom and Prudence, Faith and
Judgment, Godliness and Honesty may be given them: for it falls often, that
for the wickedness of a people, good Magistrates become evil; and at the
instance of the godly, the evil are made good; for their hearts, their
counsels, consultations, and determinations are in Gods disposing, for the good
or evil of a King and people: examples whereof are many in the Scripture, 2.
Chron. 12. 3. 4. 5. and 2. Sam. 10. Therefore to avoid Gods Judgments and
indignation which may befall us, for contemning the counsel of the Apostle:
let us pray, not only in public assemblies, but every man in his private
closset, in sincere affection among, and above other ordinary Magistrates under
his Majesty, for the Counselors of Estate, that God will bless them with
wisdom and counsel from above. Romans 11. 33. 34. So shall the King be rightly
advised, the Church of Christ rightly ordered, and the Commonweal peaceably
governed; and all the people shall give glory to God that gives it.

A Prayer to be used of every good Subject, for the Kings Counsel of Estate.
Eternal, and al-knowing God, the fountain of true wisdom and holy
counsel, who not only gouernest the hearts of kings, but do raise up and
provide for them that obey thee, gra^^, wise, and religious Counselors, by
whom they consult and determine all things for ye maintenance of thy Gospel,
and ye godly government of (...) people committed to their charge. Bless them.
O Lord, whom thou have set in that high place: grant that they may be truly
religious, religiously prudent, and prudently grave* Me^ fearing thee in their
hearts. And ^ ^ (...), but the rightly wise in thee, whose (...) thou have
touched, and (...) up with the (...) of thy hoholy Spirit, to (...) forth all
holy af(...) (...) to the (...) professors, an^ (...) of thy (...) (...) (...),
which (...) both (...) (...) of true wisdom, and the ^and of Christian
obedience. (...) them with watchful hearts to foresee, providence to (...)
(...) strength and courage to suppress, all dangers proposed, (...), (...)* or
practiced against thine Anointed, thy Church or any superior power, Minister,
or member of the same, (...), ye^, leave them not unto their (...) humane
policies; but reach them by thy word, holy and heavenly wisdom, to determine
and dispose a true and religious course for the safety of Prince and people,
whenever any vnaccu(...) occasion or danger shall be any way offered. For
thou know the hidden devices, and covert practices of the enemies of thy
truth, who are wiser and more politic in their generations, then the children
of light, by transforming themselves into the likeness of Angels, being yet
inwardly Satanical, seeking under the color of religious obedience, to
undermine and supplant (if it were possible) the very word of truth it self,
the principal defender of the same, and the very elect in Christ, professing
it. Make them therefore, good Father, whom thou have conioined in counsel unto
thine Au^inted, watchful and prudent in their places, wisely to consult,
religiously to deliberate, and rightly to determine all things to thy glory, to
the preservation of thine Anoiuted, the comfort of thy children, and good of
the Co^mon-weale: knowing that the prosperity of all (under thine unsearchable
providence) depends upon their integrity, prudence, and Christian policies.
Be thou therefore unto them, good Father, a guide, lay before the^ and learn
them the book of thy laws: season their understanding with the salt of thy
grace, adorn their hearts with righteousness and true holiness; make the way of
their consultations plain: remove al difficulties and needless impediments,
from their godly resolutions, tending to thy glory: for, nothing pleasing unto
thee, can be dishonorable to the King, distasteful to thy Church, disprofitable
to the kingdom, or displeasing to thy people. And whatsoever is contrary to thy
will, bear it in humane opinion never so fair a pretense of conueniencie,
vtility, or safety, it works nothing less. Therefore, Lord, be thou always
present, and president in all their consultations.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith.
A short prayer for the Counsel Royal.
THou know, O Lord, that al humane creatures, what office or title soever
they bear in Church or Co^mon-weale, are of themselves but of natural
understanding only able to co^prehe^d carnal things carnally, and can
comprehend things of no higher or lower moment, then may be fadomed by natural
reason. So that their collectio^s of ye causes of thine unsearchable purposes
in sending adverse accidents amongst a people, and their providence to prevent
danger, and to establish the security of the people committed to their
government, cannot but often fail of that wished success they aim at. And
therefore in all humblenes, we (...) that, good Father, to assist and direct
them, whom th^^ have* appointed Couns^ll^rs of Estate under our King, by the
rule of right reason, and divine wisdom, that all their consultations and
determinations may tend unto, and come to a holy e^d, being (...)rated in thy
fear, and sanctified by prayer. Hear our petitions for them, hear them for
themselves, and us, and hear them and us, for the safety of thi^^ Anointed,
for the good of thy Church, pr(...) and peace of thy people, in and for thy
Christ, our sol^ and only (...) and (...) to whom with (...) and the holy ^^^st
be praise (...)nally.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be used of Judges, and Superior Magistrates, that
have power and authority to hear and determine causes between man and man:
which Motive is fit to be often read and considered of them.
Above all the men in the world, Judges, superior Magistrates, and Ministers
of Gods word, have greatest cause to seek wisdom and judgment at the hands
of God by prays; for that, Rule and government is given them of the Lord, and
power by the most high, who will try their works, and search their
imaginations, Wisd. 6. 2. (...). If they judge justly, he will justify their
Judgments: but if they perueit Justice, horrible and sudden will be ^pp^are
unto them, and a ^ard judgment shall they have, that rule, and rule not
according to right. Let them pray that God will give them grace to keep their
hearts upright, and their hands clean* for nothing peruer^^th the heart of a
Judge, as do bribes, they bewitch him, they make him of a free man a slave, for
being once corrupted with reward, he lets slip the reins of Justice, and
wresteth the cause to the Briber, whose hireling he is; whereby the just man is
oppressed, and the oppressor freed, the laws of God neglected, the laws of
Commonweals perverted, the King abused, Subjects wronged, the common peace
endangered; Gods judgments threatened, and confusion feared. God will be a
severe Judge of all partial and corrupt Judges, and the people shall perish,
where bribery and corruption ouerswayeth Justice* The Judges of the house of
Jacob, and the Governors of the house of Israel, did abhor Judgment, and
pervert equity, they judged for rewards; thinking, as corrupt Judges do, that
God saw them not in their private studies, and therefore could there be no
accuser, consequently no danger follow. But the Judges were punished, the
people oppressed, Sion plowed as a field, and Jerusalem became a heap of
stones, Mich. 3. 9. 11. Such desolation follows, where Judges are corrupt,
where the Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets prophecy for money. These
may be all set in the table of Judges. Ecclesiastical and Civil Judges were
coupled together by Micah the Prophet, and therefore may they hear one and the
same admonition: namely, that they be diligent to seek wisdom and learning
together, Ye are al Judges of things in the earth, and in earthly vessels of
things Divine. I endeavor not to teach them, but to move them to seek wisdom
at the fountain Jehovah, and of him to learn Judgment, for he shall be the
Judge of their Judgments, and he shall reward them that take reward against
the innocent. If therefore they would remember and ruminate the exhortation of
Iehoshaphat, which he gave to the Judges in his time, that they should take
heed what they did; considering they executed not the judgments of men, but of
God: They would be circumspect in judging; and the more, if they considered
what Iehu said unto Iehoshaphat, Will thou help the wicked, and love them that
hate the Lord? As all Judges do, if for affection or bribes they suppress a
just and prefer an unjust cause. Judges may be compared to beautiful women
in their places; for, as the deformed are seldom or never assailed or tempted
to inco^tine^^ie, but the beautiful eagerly and often. So common persons are
seldom, or not at al tempted with brib(...) but Judges and Magistrates
strongly* and many times. And happy is that Judge, that keeps his heart free
from parriall affection, and his hands from gifts. A Judge first mounting into
his chair of Judgment, ought to pr^meditate of the weighty task he has
undertaken, for h^^ is entered as into the seat of God himself, in his ^^ead to
execute Justice justly. If they fore he poruert Judgment, he does what in him
lies to make God unjust. It is an office not vashly to be desired, not
unadvisedly to be undertaken, for if they run before desert, and find not in
themselves fitnes for experience, and sincerity, and be there unto called, as
God commanded Moses to constitute such to be Judges of the people, as would
administer righteous Judgment, fit it were to forbear. But being lawfully
called, and finding ^^tnes inwardly for gifts, let him the^ pray that God will
enable him with wisdom and (...) Judgment, that he may discharge a good
conscience, without respect of persons or bribes, two strong enemies to
Justice; and impossible it is to prevent them, without the especial grace of
God, who being instantly petitioned, is ready to give wisdom, and to keep the
heart clean from unjust rewards: pray therefore, and be warned, ye that be
Judges of the earth, for fire shall consume the houses of bribers, Job 15. 24.

A Prayer to be used of Judges and Magistrates.
O Gracious and merciful Lord God, Father of mercy, inst in Judgment,
absolute in wisdom, pure and holy in all thy ways and works: Lend thine ear
of mercy unto my petitions, who am a man weak in understanding, ignorant in
judgment, apt to err in opinion, unworthy of the high calling, whereunto thou
have advanced me to execute Justice and Judgeme^t, as in thy stead in earth,
and in thy name to give sentence according to equity. But I am by nature of a
corrupt heart, of pr^phane lips, and of a de^^led conversation. Therefore of
mine own disposition and wisdom unable to judge justly, and consequently
unfit for so high a function. But thou, loving Father, art ye fountain of
wisdom, the directer of the heart, ye mouer of ye tongue, and the giver of true
knowledge: And therefore I do humbly beseech thee to fill my heart with wisdom
from above, my will with equity, and mine understanding with just judgment,
that I, laying aside all mine own wit, policy, and pretended prudence, which
naturally is merely carnal, may only rely upon thy holy and heavenly
direction, and obtain it, that I rightly co^ceiuing the equity of all causes,
that shall be tendered unto my censure, I may judge justly between parties
without respect of persons: and that I may truly imitate thee, who art just in
thy judgments, and acceptest no person for reward. Give me an understanding
hare, to distinguish between truth and falsehood, between ye wronged and the
wrong-doer, that I punish not the just, and let ye wicked go free. Let no
private respect (Lord) either of mine own benefit, or steeding a friend,
miscarry my judgment: but let thine own glory and reueiled will, move me to
deal evermore justly: knowing that I fit not to execute mine own will, or
man's judgment, but thine: And if I wilfully err, thou will not hold me
guiltless, but wilt judge me unjust, and punish me justly: Let not the
opinion of the multitude, either ouersway the truth in me, or terrify me from
giving sentence, according to equity: And let me never be weary of well
doing, but if cause so require it, give me strength, as thou did to Moses,
to hear, and justly to determine all controversies, from morning to night:
give me a sincere heart, free from malice and revenge: close mine eyes, shut up
mine ears, and claspe my hands, that neither affection blind me, nor bribes
pervert judgment in me: but that I may do all things to the glory of thy
name, ever aided by thy holy Spirit, in and for thy well-beloved Sons sake,
Christ Jesus.

Amen.
Lord increase my faith, and in me confirm wisdom, and just judgment.
A MOTIVE TO be used of Christians, for Judges, and superior Magistrates.
THe necessity of establishing Judges and Magistrates, to govern, direct, and
punish, does give us to understand, that such and so many are the corruptions
of our crooked, deformed, and rebellious nature, at could not but break into
most inhumane, unnatural, impious, and dangerous actions: as, if it were not
prevented by la^es, ordinances, punishments, and executions, would breed
speedy confusion among men. And were there not Magistrates and Judges, to
arbitrate and administer justice and judgment, every man would be Judge, and
revenger of his own pretended wrongs, and would do right to none: he would
maintain his own evil ways to be upright, his oppressions to be justice,
and his actions, were they never so impious, to be lawful and right: the
weakest in power, in their iustest complaints, should be judged unjust. We may
observe, notwithstanding laws and statutes, that in stead of Justice, and
righteous dealing among men, Rapine, hatred, dissension, wrongs, and murders
universally abound: and what might we think, would be the state of things, if
Justice should cease to execute her office, and offenders go without
punishment? Would not cain kill Abel? Would not Haman conspire against
Mordecai? Would not Iesabel murder Naboth for his vineyard? Would not Shemei
rail upon, nay, take away the life of Gods Anointed? Would not Achan take the
excommunicate thing? Would not Judas betray his master? Nay, would not Zimri
and Cozhi commit wickedness openly? Would not all, and all sorts of men run
out of rule, and would not sorrowful confusion soon follow? God foresaw this,
when he prescribed the laws in two tables, and constituted governors to keep
the people in obedience, by inflicting punishments upon offenders, and to
defend the cause of the innocent. Moses, and his Centurions, first governed the
multitudes of Israel: then I^shuah, after them Judges, and lastly Kings: and
were it not, that Justice continued her force, neither Church, nor Commonweal
could stand. If God should deal with us, as oftentimes he did with his own
peculiar people, the Jews, for their sins, namely, to send us corrupt
Judges, irreligious, and tyrannous Magistrates; would it not be unsavory unto
us, and burdensome for us? And nothing more procures it, then our disobedience
to God: and there is no other mean to free us, but our obedience to godly and
religious Magistrates, and to the wholesome and Christian laws, established
for our peace: not for fear of punishment, but for a religious conscience
sake. If we obey God, we cannot, but love and obey such as he has set
governors over us: and if we love them, we cannot but pray for them: not as
they are men only, and as they are members of Christ, mystical body with us:
but as they are Gods ministers, and bear the sword, to correct the guilty, and
to defend the innocent. Let no man think it therefore, a superfluous, but a
Christian duty, to pray for Judges, and superior Magistrates, that God will
indue them with graces and gifts, answerable to their callings, as with
Wisdom, Justice, Righteousness, right Religion, Courage, and Christian
integrity: that they doing their duties as governors, we may, as rather led
by their godly examples, then by their severe justice, neither fear the
punishment for disobedience to Gods Magistrates; nor they our governors, the
threats denounced against such as pervert Justice and Judgment.

A Prayer for Judges and superior Magistrates, to be used of all good and
Christian subjects, and especially of them that have causes depending before
Judges and Magistrates.
FOrasmuch, most gracious God, and loving Father, in Jesus Christ; as thou
being the Judge of Judges, have appointed Justice and Judgment to be done in
earth, and have for the execution thereof, appointed ministers, called Judges,
and have commanded thy people, to obey them: we appeal unto thy mercy for
our disobedience unto thy laws, which we daily transgress, and thereby cannot
but incur the danger of Judgment, even in this life. And we acknowledge that
the sentence of an earthly Judge is not his, but thine: he pronouncing our
punishment, th^^ confirmest it. Their censure (...) thine, if it be just; if
unjust, it is not thine, but theirs: yet their mini(...) is our just reward for
our (...) (...) therefore humbly beseech (...), to direct our hearts and our
c^^^ersations, in all obedience to thy laws, and to the constitutions of thine
Anointed, who bears the sword to punish offenders, and to defend the
innocent, the fatherles, widows, and the oppressed: and from his supereminent
authority under thee, the power of inferior Judges and Magistrates is
deri(...) to hear and determine causes of controversy, between man and man,
and matters of offense against the stare of superiors, the peace of the Church
and Commonweal. They are indeed bu^ (...), whom we see in their s^^t^s of
Judgment: whom we (...) (...) (...), whom we obseru^ to (...) (...), and
(...) th(...) censure they pronounce: but their hearts are in thine hands, and
their sentence by thy direction or permission: thou directest none, but
according to equity, yet permittest injustice to be done unto men for their
iniquities; he that judges unjustly, and he that is unjustly judged, have
their punishments: the one in augmentation of his (...), to his greater
punishment to ^^^ne: the other either in judgment for sins past, or in mercy
to reform him. Consider therefore, most gracious Lord God, how and in what
porill thy people stand under the censures of Judges unjust: and lay not upon
us the burden of their injustice, but conform their hearts to true Judgment,
and account none to that high office of judging thy people, but such as thou
shall first furnish with wisdom, experience, and true sincerity. Let them be
of like, and of one mind with thee, abandoning partiality, bribery, and
respect of persons: and be thou always with them, and direct them in all
causes of Judgment: let them neither admit reward, and so corrupt Justice, nor
follow the opinion of the multitude: and so overthrow the truth. Let thy laws
be always before their eyes, let them never swerve from thy statutes, in
condemning the innocent, and instifying the wicked. Bless them, Lord, with
true knowledge of the word, direct them by thy holy Spirit: so shall they not
err in Judgment, and thy people be freed fr^^ injustice and wrongs, thy
Church shall be in peace, and every member receive justice: the Commonweal
shall flourish, righteousness and peace shall meet together, mercy and truth
shall embrace each other.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be said of a man or woman unmarried, intending to
marry.
IT is the highest point of discretion in a man, or woman, to be very careful
and circumspect, in making choice of a husband or wife: for rash and
inconsiderate marriages have bred dangerous inconveniences, not only between
the man and wife, and in inferior families: but Cities and Kingdoms have been
ruined by unequal and irreligious unions of men and women of contrary humors,
qualities and conditions, Gods holy institution profaned, religion slaundered,
and the Church of God offended. Marriage makes two persons one before God: but
how can light and darkness, truth and falsehood, sin and sanctity, good and
evil agree? can fire and water be at union in one vessel? how then can a
faithful man, marrying an Infidel, a good woman knitting her self to a
ribald, a religious man or woman, uniting her self to a wicked and irreligious
party, become one holy body. How can it be, but the evil will rather pervert
the good, then the good reform the evil? For all men and women are by nature
more apt to be overcome with duill, then to permit their evil to be overcome
(...) goodness, And therefore, dis(...) premeditation, holy consultation,
(...) deep deliberation ought to p(...) this kind of resolution. Lawful it is
for every man and woman to (...)ie, yet, in the Lord, namely in his fear, in a
reverend regard of his holy institution, respecting the ends of that holy
mystery, procreation of children, mutual society, and help one of another.
And how stands the conjunction of the religious, and profane, of the
believer and the infidel, of the godly and the wicked, with the former ends?
Can there be concordance, or sweet society between these contraries? It may
be said, that the unbelieving wife shall the saved by the believing husband:
and t(...) unbelieving husband, by the believing wife, but not, without the
belief of either for the unbelieving wife must learn to believe of the
believing husband, and the unbelieving husband, of the believing wife, and so
be saved: otherwise, he or she shall not be saved: for every man and woman
shall be either saved by his or her own faith, or not at all. But for a man or
woman, for any carnal respect, to adventure conjunction with the contrary
minded, and qualified, tempts God, and consequently, in stead of a promised
blessing to them that marry in the fear of God, a threatened curse follows
them. The godly wife of the religions, husband, shall be as a fruitful vine
upon the walls of his house, his children, like olive branches, round about
his table: Thus shall the man and wife be blessed that fear the Lord. This
blessing yet consists not in the fruitfulness of the wife, nor multitude of
chlidren only: for so have many heathens been blessed, that neither know God,
nor fear him. But the substance of the blessing is in the virtues, and
religious carriage of the loving wife, and in the obedience and goodness of
the children, wherewith God will bless a godly man, and virtuous wife: for
there cannot be (in it self) a greater burden or cross to a virtuous father,
then to have many, and they vicious children. It behooves therefore these
kinds of unmarried persons to observe, in this weighty action, some necessary
rules: the first, not to consummate the contract, without approbation of their
parents or governors: secondly, if either party respect any private end, more
then the virtue, and religious conversation of the other: that party gives
testimony, that it is not the fear of God, that he, or she stands upon, but
the satisfaction of his or her carnal affection, which commonly is met
withal, in the justice of God, with many crosses and domestical or foreign
afflictions: wherefore, it behooves every man or woman, thus intending to
couple him, or her self in marriage with any, to ask counsel of God in
prayer. So, no doubt but God, according to his promise, will be the marriage
maker, and yield them mutual continuing comfort one of another. But if they
rashly run into it, without the approbation; and allowance of the word of God,
it is seldom avoided, but mischief or misery succeeds.

A Prayer to be said of a man or woman unmarried, intending to marry.
O Gracious, everliving, and most loving Lord God, vouchsafe, I humbly beseeth
thee, as thou in the beginning did create man and woman, and did
institute the holy order of marriage, that the one of them might be a helper
unto the other, and have confirmed and approved this holy conjunction, by many
divine examples of thy blessed presence: As also by thy providence, in ayding
and assisting the unmarried depending on thee, to make their choice according
to the rule of right religion: Be pleased, Lord, that I feeling in my self a
desire to enter into this sacred order, may be directed by thee, that (I
setting apart all carnal respects, as chief motives) I may aim only, and
altogether, to make such a choice, as above all things may please thee, who art
the author and giver of all goodness, without whose providence and direction,
things of meanest importance cannot be effected, without great affliction and
danger: And by whose favor and mercy, things of weightiest consequence are
easily and most comfortably brought to pass. Forasmuch therefore, gracious
father, as this mystery of marriage is most high and honorable among all men,
the bed vnde^^led: Let me not rashly run into my choice, as if mine own
wisdom or natural policy could work my contentment or comfort. But advise
thou me, and direct me, O Lord: and although I confess it not expedient, that
I should expect from thee public revelation, or visible Angels to lead me:
yet let thy holy Spirit so guide mine affections, that I like not whom thou
think not meet to be conjoined unto me in thy fear. But let all things so
succeed my proceedings, as may argue and assure me of thy fatherly furtherance
and divine allowance; as thou did in all things further, with blessed
success, the servant of Abraham, in choosing a wife for Isaac: So let all
things, O Lord, be blessed unto me: prevent mine own desires, if they concur
not with thy good pleasure, and alter my will and intention, if they answer
not thy will, and give me an understanding and feeling heart, that I give not
way unto my natural motions, and vain inclination, which in this single
estate often ouerswayeth in me the rule of right reason. And grant, that I may
duly consider, that two thus conjoined, shall be made one flesh. And
therefore, not unadvisedly to be attempted, lest of a member of Christ my
Savior, I should make my self the member of some profane and wicked person:
which is not in my power or policy, but in thy providence, to prevent. Prevent
it, Lord, and whomsoever thou please that I embrace, we may be both made one
entire body, sanctified throughout in Christ Jesus, that our union being thus
made holy, it may resemble that heavenly union, which is between Christ and
the Church his spowse: And let our hearts and affections be so truly and
entirely knit together in thee, that after the consummating of this sacred
mystery between us, there may succeed no cause of disparadgement, no breach
of thy sacred ordinance, nor any offense i^ thy Church: But that, coming
together in thy favor, we may live in thy fear, prosper by thy providence, be
blessed in the fruit of our bodies, govern our selves and our families
religiously, live in thy Church sincerely, deal with all me^ justly, and
obtain of thee necessaries plentifully: That we; and for all things, may give
glory and praise unto thee joyfully, and (...) our lives in thee faithfully,
and after reign with thee in glory et^^nally, through Christ our Savior, and
everlasting red(...)

Amen.
Lord increase my faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer to be said of married folks.
NAture teaches every man and woman to love themselves: what then, but the
perverseness and crookednes of our natures, makes that a man, and his wife,
being of two made one flesh, should not love, nourish, and cherish one another,
as the Lord loves and comfort his Church? Never man yet bated his own
flesh, says Saint Paul: And therefore, Every man ought to love his wife, as
himself, and let the wife see that she fear her husband, Ephe. 5. 33. Whereby
it appears, that under love and fear, are comprehended the special duties
of man and wife, one toward another. Love imports all desire of ayding and
helping, and fear implies all care and diligence, to prevent occasions of
offending one the other. To this kind of mutual love and fear (if it be in
the Lord) are promised many blessings, peace, plenty, fruitfulness, and
sweetest contentment. But if it be counterfeit, and usurped, contrary to the
holy ordinance of God: namely, for carnal respects only, there will follow,
in stead of comfort, crosses, contentions, and many discontentments. And
therefore, it much behooves men and women, thus of two made one, to consider
the ends of their uniting: whether they asked first counsel of the Lord by
prayer, had the consent of parents, and approbation of the word of God. If so,
then to be unfeignedly thankful to God, by whose providence they became man
and wife. If they find any impediment, or defect in their first insinuation,
communication, or consummation of this high and holy mystery, they are
speedily to appeal unto God for pardon, for their not craving his aid in so
weighty an action: and to redeem their rashness, by unfeigned repentance and
prayer. Such is the frailty of our natures, as the most men and women err in
this point, from the rule of right religion: having their affections, either
naturally blind, and miscarried, or by the means of parents sinisterly
wrested. Lust and Lucre are two main cords to draw the affections of men and
women, from making convenient choice, according to the rule of Gods word,
following their own idle and vain fantasies; coming together not as
Christians, in the fear of the Lord, and in sincere love: but, many, after a
beastiall and brutish manner, heaping upon themselves shame and misery: Their
dissembled love, proves hatred, their vows falsified; the promise of each to
other plighted, wilfully and perfidiously broken. It behooves therefore all
men and women, thus coupled together in marriage, to be especially mindful of
their duties to God: for without the savor of God, no true duty can be
performed by either to other, to their children or families. Tokens of a good
husband are, to be loving to his wife, to be wise in his words, to be mild in
his conversation, to be faithful in his promises, to be circumspect in his
government, to be careful for the education of his children, to be discreet
in disposing of his goods, to be patient in troubles, and to order his family
religiously.

Tokens of a good wife: to be no common gadder abroad, to be modest and grave
in company, to be neat, and always well busied in her house, carefully to
save what the husband gets, to attend, and tender her children motherly: to be
modestly silent, patiently to suffer, constantly to love her husband,
prouidently to care for her household: And the husband, and the wife to be
religiously careful to please God together. So shall God be pleased to bless
them in all things, in their going out, and coming in, in their house, and in
the fields, in their goods, and good name, in their children and families, and
whatsoever shall concern their comfort in this life, and the life to come.



A Prayer to be said of married folks, either privately or mutually together.
O Heavenly Father, that made in the beginning, all things of nothing, man of
the dust of the earth, and woman of the man: that as she came of the substance
of the body, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones: So to be reunited unto
man, and in a mystical manner, became one body with him, by the holy
institution of marriage: which we having, by thy providence in thy presence,
solemnized, by our mutual conjunction: we pray thee in Jesus Christ, to
bless us, according to thy promise in all things: And although through our
natural, and original weakness, we cannot but confess, that we have erred
from the right, and religious rules of thy holy ordinance, in yielding too much
unto our own carnal desires, foolish fantasies, and frail affections: Pardon
us, we humbly pray thee, knowing, and we confessing, that flesh and blood
cannot so precisely contain: but that it will fall into many noisome desires,
offending thy Majesty. Cleanse therefore, O merciful Lord God, cleanse our
hearts, and conform our conuersations to thy will, give us power to abandon
all lightness, wantonness, and vanities, that we may become truly and
religiously affected one toward another, keeping our selves clean, without
incastitie, and without any violating of thy holy ordinance, in thought, word
or deed: and our hearts and bodies undefiled: That with the more integrity of
love, and hearty obedience toward thee, we may pass our limited course of
this life. And forasmuch as thou know, Lord, that many crosses commonly
accompany the estate of wedlock: and many, both domestical and foreign
troubles, distract our affections, especially, while we remain in our
natural vanities, season them gracious Lord, whatsoever they be, or shall be,
with thy favor and love: So shall they not prove the fruits of thy
displeasure, but of thy mere goodness, to keep us vnderthine obedience. Lest
our continuing tranquillity and prosperity should cause us to forget thee: Give
us, we beseech thee, holy conuersations, that we may ever walk before thee in
all vprightnes, that we may prosper in all our ways, by thy blessing: grant
that our children may grow up in all goodness, virtues, honesty, religion, and
to means, whereby they may pass this their pilgrimage, with much spiritual
comfort in Jesus Christ. Increase, according to thy good pleasure, our stock
and store, multiply thy many and blessed benefits unto us, and perform thy
promises unto us and unto our seed, as thou did to Abraham, Isaac, and
Iaacob, and to their seed: make us and our seed faithful, that we may be
blessed with faithful Abraham, and as the house of Obed edom was blessed for
the Arkes sake: so, Lord, bless us with thine own presence, that we, and the
house wherein we remain, may be ever blessed, and all that belongs unto us,
Through Jesus Christ our only mediator.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO Parents, to stir them up to instruct and pray for their children.
THere can be no stronger band of love and mutual affection between humane
creatures, then is, or ought to be between parents and their children; being
of one flesh and blood. But this love appears in some by counterfeit marks,
as by their continual care, carke and toil in the world, to get wealth to
enrich their posterity: Some in a doting manner, pamper up and deck their
children like peacocks, making them admired guls, for their vanities: Some
through a blind affection, not only permit, but encourage their children, to
take their vain delights and pleasures, in dycing, carding, company keeping,
drinking, and in all kind of unseemly, riotous, and irreligious courses: and
some Ignorants of the world, commend such foolish, and doting parents: But not
only Religion, but mere humane reason condemns this kind of love, and holds
it rather madness then modesty, rather wickedness then wisdom: for Seneca
says, It is impossible for that man to be of a virtuous disposition, that is
wantonly brought up, in rioting and pleasures. Wise parents and religious, care
more how to bring up their children in honesty, virtue, and in the fear of
God, then how to make them to live wealthily, pleasantly, and gloriously in the
world. They consider, that it is better for their children to be esteemed of
the good, for their virtues, then to please the fantasies of their fond
parents, and others, by their beauty, bravery, comlines, and the liniaments of
their bodies, which are most graceful in their silly parents singular opinions:
yet is it a common course of worldlings, to care more for the bodies, then for
the souls, more for the wealth, then for the wisdom; more for the health,
then for the happiness, and more for the present prosperity, then for the
future salvation of their dearest children. A preposterous kind of love, and
contrary to the counsel of the holy Ghost, who teaches parents to learn
their children the laws of God, as Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Thou shall rehearse them
continually unto thy children, and shall talk of them, when thou tariest in
thine house; and as thou walk in the way, and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up. In all places, at all times, and by all means, parents
ought to instruct their children. It is reputed a great glory, and a special
blessing to have many children: but it is not the number, but the virtues of
them, and the comfort parents take of their godly qualities, that gives the
blessing. Gideon or Ierubaal had 70. children, and one of them (Abimelech) slew
threescore and nine of them. What comfort or consolation can parents look for
of profane and irreligious children, but grief and vexation of spirit? It
behooves parents therefore, not only to take care of the instruction of their
children, and educating them in the fear of God, but to pray for a blessing
upon them also. For parents may teach, and children may hear, but without a
blessing from God, it little profits. Paul may plant, Apollos may water: but
it is God that gives the increase. Eli could say unto his sons that were
wicked, Do no more so, my sons, do no more so: but they reformed not, but
were slain by Gods judgments, and at the news, Eli their father fell
backward from his seat, and brake his neck. Adramelech and Sharazer, impious
sons, killed Senacherib their wicked father. If ever there were a time of
necessity for parents to instruct, exhort, rebuke, reprove, and pray for
their children: This corrupt age, of necessity requires it: for there is none
so ignorant, but may observe the irreligious, vain and unbridled courses of
children of both sexes, who without the especial grace of God, we see daily to
fall into so gross inormities, as draw down upon them their swift confusion,
to the perpetual shame, intolerable grief, and deserved ignominy of their
careless parents.

A prayer fit for parents to make unto God, in the behalf of their children.
O Gracious Lord God; father of mercy and loving kindness: I give thee hearty
thanks for thy goodness, in blessing me with the gift of children: Bless me
also with wisdom and understanding, to instruct them in the knowledge of thee,
to educate them in thy fear, to confirm them in thy faith, and to win them
to thy love. This duty thou requirest at the hands of parents toward their
children, and punishest the neglect thereof, as in Eli. Power down, Lord,
therefore, into the hearts of my children, thy holy Spirit, that they may become
fit members of that mystical body, whereof Christ thy Son is the head: lead
them by thine own right hand in the way of knowledge, faith, and obedience:
that their obedience beginning at them, it may extend unto us, their parents:
and assist us, that we may teach them, instruct them, rebuke them, reprove
them, and wish all goodness unto them, which yet is altogether fruitless,
without thy blessing and grace; fruitless in respect of our selves, their
parents, unless thou bless us with a holy and powerful zeal, to perform
our parently duties toward them, religiously and faithfully in teaching them,
fruitless in respect of them, unless thou enable them by thy holy Spirit to
learn and embrace such religious and wholesome documents, as thou may be
pleased to furnish us with, for their instruction. Season my heart, I humbly
beseech thee, with a holy desire to seek their salvation: and season their
hearts with an humble and holy inclination to obey thy truth. All humane
creatures are prone to sin against thee; youth especially, who are most apt to
fall into many forbidden vanities and therefore need they not only continual
instruction in, and to goodness, and debortation from sin, but continual
watchfulnes, and careful diligence, to observe and follow the good, and to
prevent and avoid the evil; which neither we their parents are able
sufficiently to teach, nor they our children to perform by nature: furnish us
therefore, most gracious Father, with understanding and apprehending hearts,
that we in teaching neglect not our duties, nor our children in learning and
obeying thee, be found unwilling. Teach us all thy word, O Lord, that we may
direct our duties, and frame our conuersations thereby, that we and they may
walk before thee, and be upright. Incline their hearts and their affections
unto such course of life, as in thy providence may best stand with their
ingenious inclinations, for their honest relief in this life* knowing that all
are bound to betake them to some vocation or calling in Church or Commonweal.
Direct them therefore by thy providence (good Father in Christ Jesus) that they
may embrace such callings, as may best stand with thy glory, and their comfort:
add blessing upon blessing unto their honest endeavors: give them religious
hearts and holy minds, that in sincerity of conversation they may walk
before thee, and evermore discharge a holy and Christian duty, before, and
among men: and never leave them, Lord, unto their own natural corruptions,
which are strong cords, to draw them from good to evil, from obedience to
rebellion. Let thy grace bear chief sway in them, that they may ever and in
all things, prosper in this life: not as worldlings in fullness of forbidden
pleasures, and carnal contentments, but in a competent estate of this life's
necessaries, as able rather to give unto thy needy members, then to be
enforced through penury, to want or beg their bread. I recommend them, Lord,
into thine own Fatherly disposition and protection; they are thine, left unto
me by thee: and therefore, good Father, take a fatherly care over them, that in
this life they may so live, as after this life, they may be made partakers with
thee, of the heavenly inheritance, in Christ our Savior.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer, to be used by children for their Parents.
THere is, or ought to be such a sympathy, or mutual passion of affection
between children and parents, as one grieueth not, but the other soroweth; the
one rejoices not, but the other is glad; what measure of good or evil the one
enjoys, or suffers, the other partaketh. But the burden of care lies upon
the parents, fears, griefs, sorrows, pains, and expenses, in fostering,
protecting, educating and instructing their children. Therefore ought children
to endeavor with all diligence, and diligent carefulnes to love, reverence, obey
and perform whatsoever may work to the comfort of their parents, not only in
outward obedience, but in inward, and a sincere affection of the heart, never
forgetting their parents pains, patience, and perplexities, which for their
childrens sake they undergo and endure. Love them, therefore, ye children,
heartily, without flattery; fear them truly, without hypocrisy; reverence the^
unfeignedly, without dissimulation; pray for them zealously, without weariness;
and do them good cheerfully, without grudging. And when ye have done all the
good offices that ye can, yet shall ye be continual debtors unto your parents,
especially to such parents, as strive religiously to educate you godly: for it
is not the wealth parents leave you, but the wisdom they teach you; not the
pleasures they permit you, but the practice of honesty they learn you, that
shall steed you most, and help you best in life and death. Good and gracious
children are an ornament to their parents, more then their wealth or beauty;
but irreligious, wicked, wanton, riotous, and rebellious children, the shame
and sorrow of them, more then their wits weakness, or their bodies deformities:
But where there is a religious, and a holy mutual affection between parents
and children, and love and obedience of both to God, infinite blessings,
corporal and spiritual, cannot but follow. David was old, and had been
young, yet never saw he godly parents forsaken, nor their godly children to
want. And where this sweet harmony is between parents and children, there
cannot faithful and mutual prayer but be, on all sides, frequent: and
blessings on all sides shall follow, both upon parents, who have a promise,
that they shall see their childrens children, and peace upon Israel: and
children shall have their days prolonged, in peace, plenty, and all
happiness. Therefore I counsel all children of discretion, to be evermore
loving, and obedient to their parents, and be evermore conversant in prayer to
God for them. And because it is no ordinary thing for youth to be able to
pray, by nature, let them inwardly hunger, and desire with inward sighs to
God, the good of their parents, and the increase of Gods blessings and benefits
upon them and themselves; and endeavor by little and little to utter words, as
God shall enable them, in secret to God, who knows their desires, and will
grant what they in heart require, tending to the obtaining of spiritual
graces, for themselves and others. And for their better furtherance, I have set
down this weak Motive, and a form of Prayer fit to be used of all good
children (or the like) for their parents, according to the flesh, as also for
such as are any way helpers in their virtuous and religious educations.

A Prayer fit for children to use for their parents.
GRacious Lord God, and loving father, in thy beloved Son Jesus Christ: as
thou have brought me into this world, by the carnal propagation of natural
parents, and have given me a life and being here in the earth, and afforded
me of thy great goodness, some measure of natural and spiritual understanding,
whereby I apprehend a duty, which I owe unto my parents according to the
flesh: So give me grace, I humbly pray thee, to perform all dutiful obedience
unto them in thee: and grant that their godly care, and religious endeavors,
tending to my education and instruction in the true knowledge and fear of
thee, may take such root, and work such effect inwardly in my heart, as may
approve me to belong unto thee, by whom I am begotten anew in Christ Jesus.
Accept my hearty thankfulness, O gracious Lord God, for thy spiritual
blessings, and for thy goodness toward me, in not only taking me out of my
mothers womb, wherein I had perished, and she with me, had not thou been the
Author of her strength, and my delivery: but also in preserving me from many,
both spiritual and corporal dangers, whereby I could not but have vin many
times confounded, without thy goodness and providence, in giving me careful
and loving parents, who under thee have been the means of my often
preservation. What recompense, Lord, shall I give unto thee, for thy great
goodness, and manifold mercies toward me? Thou requirest no sacrifice, but
obedience, which with thee is more precious, then the offering of many Bullocks
and Goats. Give me therefore a faithful heart, that I may search to know, and
endeavor to (...) thy will. So shall I be the better able to yield unto my
parents condign honor: for by nature I am as ^n untamed Hey^er, or unbridled
Colt, prone to disobedience, wantonness, and all forbidden vanities, unable of
my self to wish well unto them that have done much good for me: much more
unable to perform that good toward them, that I would and ought. Forasmuch
therefore as I have no power of my self, give me at least a will, that my
inward destres may work with thee, by the mediation of thy well-beloved Son, to
the obtaining of inward love, and filial affection toward them, and be able
to express it, in my continual faithful prayers for them. Deal with them
mercifully (O Lord) heap upon them thy blessings, the peace of a good
conscience, plenty of divine knowledge, holy and religious hearts toward
thee, the continual abundant supply of all necessaries, health of body, the
strength and use of their limbs, aid in whatsoever their need, defense from
enemies, and prosperity in all things. Bless them with all spiritual
blessings and graces in heavenly things. Let them hear thy word attentively,
let them believe it faithfully, let them embrace it cheerfully, let them
practice it religiously, and in a good conscience: and let them taste of thy
favors and love continually, and seek to please thee in all things truly:
give them comfort, I beseech thee, in my well doing, and of the virtuous and
religious conuersations of al their children, friends, ^llies, and servants.
Let not (...) misbehauiour or unseemly course of life, procure their grief or
shame: but grant that they li^i^^ long (according to thy good pleasure) in thy
faith, fear, favor (...) love, they may so give up the(...) souls in peace,
into thy hands th^^ gave them, through Christ Jes^^ our Lord, and our
everlasting Redeemer.

Amen.
Lord increase my faith.
A MOTIVE TO stir up Masters to a godly government of their servants, and to
pray for them.
AS there is areciprocal duty between the husband and the wife, between the
parents and their children; so is there likewise between masters and servants.
In every of these there is a superiority, and a power to command: and
Subjection moving inferiors to obey. It is a great privilege that masters
have over their servants; yet not such as some masters do impose upon their
servants: for although they have a liberty to govern and to command, it is
not so absolute, but it has it limitations and bounds: for now as well
servants as masters believing the promise, are equally within the covenant. And
therefore servants (although bound to corporal masters, as touching their
bodily service) are yet the Lords free men, and so fellow members of Christ
with their believing masters, which makes them brethren in the Lord, whose
fear should prevent too much severity in the master, and move the servant to
the more obedience and faithful service. The strength of Israel said unto me
(says Samuel) Thou shall bear rule over men, being just, and ruling in the
fear of God. Here is the bound and limit of man's authority over them whom
they govern. Justice and the fear of God, whereby we are taught, that masters
are not to quarrel with, and threaten their servants, or afflict them without
good cause, they may not unjustly tax them, or correct them; neither ought
masters to conceile, but teach them their trades and mysteries. The fear of
God imports a divine office, which the Masters owe unto their servants; and
that is, to endeavor to make them the true members of the Church of Christ, by
godly education, and counsel, to use the authority they have over their
servants, modestly and holily, seeing that they in another respect have a
common Master which is in heaven, who will judge both the bond and the free,
the master and the servant, without respect of the ones glory, and the others
baseness; of the ones authority to command, or the others servitude and
bondage: and it is not commendable for masters, too much to insult over their
servants; or mistresses and stern dames, to tyrannize over their maids, who
were begotten, borne, and brought forth in as glorious a manner as the proudest,
richest, and most vainglorious master or dame; wh^ have but gotten, as it
were, the start of their servants by Gods permission, who (as we daily may see
and observe) hurleth down, and confounds the most imperious and insolent
masters, and exalts the humble and obedient servants: ye masters and dames,
threaten not, nor abuse your servants, they are but lent you, for your ease and
service, by their, and your Father, and Master for a time, who will take an
account of you, how you have governed them; and of them, how they have served
and obeyed you: and if you take astrict account of every offense committed by
your servant; how think you that your Master which is in heaven, should winck
at, or pass by your many transgressions against him, as if there were a
privilege for you to offend the God that made you men and women, and made you
masters and governors over men and women, your government being but only
carnal, and their service but corporal* whereas your Master which is in
heaven, governs, spiritually, and your service toward him ought to be holy
and truly spiritual. And think that if your servants disobedience be
offensive unto you; what are your sins and rebellious courses of life unto God
your great Master, which sees your sins in secret, and will reward them
openly? Make the case of your corporal servants disobedience unto you, your
case of disobedience to God: and consider, whether you could be content that
every sin you have committed, should have it due reward: would it not be a
terror unto you, and make you less furious, and less bitter unto your
servants, for every trifle in committing of a fault, or omitting some small
duty to be done? I move not this, to defend or encourage evil and
disobedient servants: but to advise masters, and women commanders to use
Christian counsel to their servants, and to govern them in the fear of God,
according to the rule of religion: and let none of them think it a needless,
a superfluous, or a base duty, for masters and governors to pray for their
servants, and such as are under their command. But let them know, it is a
duty required of, and performed by all godly masters and dames, that God may
be pleased to make them honest, religious, and fit for the business wherein
they use them, to make them dutiful and obedient, fearing God; so shall such
masters and governors be blessed, for such godly and religious servants sakes,
under whose hands, all that they do, shall prosper. And to this purpose I have
framed a form of prayer, which (or some other to the like purpose) such
Masters and Dames may use, as desire the means to have good and gracious
servants: and whosoever scorneth or neglects the means, is worthy to be
crossed by their crooked behavior; and a more excellent mean there is not,
then godly counsel, and divine prayer, to keep them in obedience.

A prayer to be said of masters for their servants, not unfit to be used of
all that have command over others.
GRacious Father, who gouernest all thy creatures by the power and providence,
making many and great differences in the estates of humane creatures; as some
to govern as Kings, some to obey as subjects; some masters, and some servants:
I acknowledge thy great goodness, in that thou have made me (though a subject to
thine Anointed) as a King to command in (...)ine own family, and have given
me servants, to whom I say, Go, and they go, Come, and they attend: Give me
wisdom to command nothing, but what may be^ lawful, expedient and
necessary, tending evermore to thy glory: and give unto all that are under my
command, obedience unto, knowledge of, and willingness to accomplish all things
that shall concern their duties, and my necessary service. Let thy holy
Spirit be upon them, to teach them, and to direct them in all their endeavors.
Let them strive in a godly emulation one to exceed another in well doing, that
they may truly and religiously perform whatsoever is fit and consonant to
their places and functions: for it is neither the skill, nor the desire, nor
the service done, can succeed, either to my private profit, to the good of
others, or to thy glory, without thy special direction and blessing. Bless
me therefore in right commanding, and bless my servants in rightly performing
what in thy fear and reverence to thy Majesty they shall attempt. Give us all
understanding hearts, not according to the high points of humane knowledge
only: But especially according to the right rules of Christian religion. Make
me apt, able, and willing, to instruct and direct them in the principles of
divine knowledge, that a spiritual blessing may ever accompany their corporal
callings: and give me patience to forbear their infirmities, in committing
offenses against me: for I cannot but confess, that thou art to me a Master,
whom I have and do more often, and more egregiously offen^ by my many sins,
then any, or all my servants can trespass against me. Give me therefore a
feeling heart, O Lord, that I may make use of my servants offenses against me,
in recounting mine own transgressions against thee. And as thou have ever bin
patient toward me, in forbearing to punish me according to my disobedience:
so I may bear with my servants weakness, not maliciously offe^ding me. Guide
the^ by thy holy Spirit in all truth; make them (though my servants in respect
of their corporal service to me) thy sons and daughters, by their spiritual
serving of thee: and grant that we all may conioyne in one true obedience to
serve thee, hearing thy word attentively, and praying unto thee continually and
faithfully, that both thy spiritual blessings and corporal comforts in Jesus
Christ, may always abound amongst us, and that we may prosper together in all
truth, peace, plenty, godly love and happiness, making no spiritual (though
there seem some worldly) difference between ye governor, and the governed,
knowing that thou have no respect of persons; but the Lord and servant, the
bond and free, the outwardly glorious, and base, fearing thee, are equally
accepted with thee.

Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO stir up servants to obey, and pray for ablenes to serve their
Masters and governors truly, and to profit in their callings.
ALthough it seem a harsh and unsavory servitude, and a base condition to be
a servant, it is not as it is commonly taken; unless to be the servants of
Sin, and of Satan: but to be a Christian servant to a Christian master,
according to the flesh, is to be Gods freeman according to the Spirit: all
creatures are servants, and serviceable unto man: Why then should not one man
be serviceable unto another? We cannot be all masters; but servants we are all,
either unto God in well doing, and in a holy execution and performance of his
commandments, to the world, or to Satan. A servant is nothing else but an
agent or instrument to be commanded by a more eminent person, one whom he
obeys; whether it be to God, as unto our Father and preserver, unto sin and
Satan our seducers, to the world, as our deceiuer; to our vain affections, our
betrayers; or unto man, our fellow member of that body, the Church, whereof
Christ is the head. A Christian and believing servant may be in the house, and
do service to an Infidel, and an Idolater; as Jacob to Laban, and Joseph to
Potipher, who in their corporal service to man, performed spiritual service
to God, who requires obedience in servants to their masters, in all things,
not with eye-seruice, as menpleasers, but in singleness of heart, cheerfully
and heartily, fearing God, as doing their service to God, not unto men: so shall
they that are bond servants unto men, be made the Lords freemen, and this
freedom the Lord does not only not prevent, but further their submission and
obedience unto their masters according to the flesh. Saint Peter commands
servants to obey their masters, with all fear, not in a servile and slavish
fear, but a fear accompanied with godly love, which love binds the
conseience of all godly servants, to deal in all things honestly and carefully
for their masters best advantage, not only when he is present, but when he is
absent, to be true and faithful, diligent and vigilant, embracing direction,
and accepting reproof with patience. And because these virtues are not of
nature, but of grace: It behooves servants to be humble petitioners unto God,
that he will bless their labors and endeavors, to give them understanding
hearts, and ability of body, and dexterity of wit, to apprehend and perform
their duties, both toward God, the high and heavenly Master of all, to their
masters in the earth, and for their own good, in learning, apprehending, and
performing the trade, mystery and function whereunto they are called. And for
their better instruction, it behooves them to give heed to the word of truth,
to frequent the place where the Word is preached, and to endeavor to practice
the same in all sincerity. And to this effect the Prayer following serves.

A Prayer fit to be used of servants.
GRacious Lord, and loving Father, I acknowledge my self unworthy to be
called thy servant, much less thy child; by reason of my great weakness and
manifold sins: turn thy loving countenance toward me again* O Lord, and
although I be a servant, and subject to the command and authority of another,
according to the flesh, as deserving bondage, by reason of my too much serving
of Satan: Make me yet free in thee, and of the servant of man, make me thy
son. Let thy grace so govern mine affections, that I be not seduced by the
suggestion of Satan, nor by my carnal and corrupt affections, from that
subjection and sincere service, which I owe unto my corporal master and
commander in thee: In thee, gracious Lord, without whose mercies and grace no
service can be performed, nor any true duty done. I am dull, I am ignorant, I
am unapt of my self to every good work, but from thee proceeds the
perfection, both of the will and the work, of the desire and the deed.
Inspire into my heart, gracious Father in Jesus Christ, good and godly motions:
indue me with a truly obedient heart unto thee, that so I may truly obey, and
sincerely serve in the place thou have called me unto: give me wisdom,
understanding, and dexterity of wit, to apprehend and perform my calling:
instruct me perfectly in the mystery, trade, function, and employment, which I
do profess and practice: for, without thy assistance, I confess, I can do
nothing as I ought to do, neither in the discharge of mine own duty and
service to my master, according to the flesh, for mine own profit or relief,
nor in answer any duty in any thing. But thou, Lord, teach the ignorant,
thou guidest the heart, and framest the hand to every perfect work. Grant
therefore that I may discharge my duty in all things, faithfully, religiously,
honestly, carefully, and cheerfully unto my corporal master, not in
eie-seruice only but at all times, in all places, and in all things, that I
give not occasions of offense, by reason of mine ignorance, negligence,
idleness, or disobedience. Give me a religious heart to serve thee before all
men, to fear and love thee above al things, that thy blessing may so possess
me* that the goods of my master (under my hand) may rather the better, and more
and more increase and prosper, then to miscarrie, or diminish for my sake.
Labans goods prospered for Iaakobs, and Potiphers for Joseph's sake. So bless
me, that what I do, may be blessed, Give unto my Master, and confirm in him
a wise and understanding heart, that he may know how to direct and command
according to true knowledge in thy word; that he commanding me, and I obeying
him in thee, we may live godly, peaceably, plentifully, and helpefully
together, as long as thou shall be pleased to continue me in corporal service,
and after dispose of me in thy mercies, according to thine own will.

Amen.
Lord increase my faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer, to be used of Artificers and handicraftsmen.
THere is no mystery, trade, occupation, or handycraft, that of it self, be
the actor never so exquisite in skill, never so industrious in his labors,
never so wary in disposing, that can truly and permane^tly prosper without the
blessing of God. The rising early, and laboring late, profits not, unless
Gods assistance be therein faithfully desired, and really obtained. And yet it
is too commonly observed, that men of all conditions are too careless and
backward in this point, standing only upon their own wit, art, and carnal
means, as sufficient preuentions of future penury, want and misery, which,
as we daily see, do suddenly seize upon men best qualified, much more upon
the irreligious and profane men, that think their duty discharged, if they
endeavor to get by their labor, to eat and to spend as they gain, never
craving a blessing at the hands of God upon their works, because they feel no
present misery: and therefore dream of the continuance of the means to
relieve and support them still, forgetting the many causualties that attend
every profession, especially such as depend upon the labor of men's hands: one
by sickness of the body; a second by the decay and dimnes of sight; a third by
the weakness of his limbs; a fourth by the distractio^ of his senses, is
disabled to work in his vocation: besides the many mean of diminishing of
goods, as by casual losses, by fire, by evil servants; and by many hindrances
that may be fall men suddenly. Therefore to prevent these, or the better to
prepare to patience* it behooves every man of these faculties, to deal
uprightly, conscionably, and religiously in their professions with all men, to
seek understanding in the word of truth, to pray unto God in faith, that he
may be pleased to bless their labors, and to make them prospor: and their
conuersations with modesty, honesty, and temperance. So whatsoever shalbefal
them, shall work for their good: prosperity shall make them thank full,
adversity patient, and whatsoever they do, it shall prosper. And for them that
are religiously affected, I have set down a form of Prayer, not unfit to be
used of all handy-crafts men and artificers.

A prayer for Tradesmen, Handicraftsmen, and Artificers.
GReat and gracious Lord God, merciful and loving Father in Jesus Christ: thou
have made the glorious and the base, ye mightiest and meanest of condition;
some to govern, some to labor: I beseech thee, look upon me of the lowest
rank in this life. And although I were borne to labor, as ye bird is created
to fly, and the fish to swim, let me not be yet, Lord, so abiected, and cast
out of the society of men, as not worthy of some place or function in Church or
Commonweal. I am a member of thy Church, confirm me so, I pray thee, in
Jesus Christ, ye I may be the more fit to steed the Co^mon-weale by my
vocation, though mean; for, thou have not left me so naked of understanding, I
tha^k thee, but yt in thy (...), I am able in some measure to perform yt
calling that thou have allotted unto me, yet, not so exactly, and exquis^tely
as I ought, by reason of my many. natural infirmities: and therefore I
instantly crave of thee, my heavenly Father, who createdst me, and has^
brought me to the estate and calling wherein I stand, that thou will teach me,
and instruct me in this my l^wfull trade of life, that I (...) be able to
perform it lawfully, perfectly, iudicially, religiously, and sincerely, and so
prosper and live thereby; knowing that ignorance, deceit and corrupt dealing in
my calling, cannot but offend men, with ^hom^ my profession occasioneth me to
deal; and my corrupt and deceitful dealing with men, cannot but extend to the
dishonor, and consequently offend thy most righteous Majesty, who punishest
unjust dealing, most justly and severely, showing thy holy dislike of all
unholy dealing with men. Bless me therefore, Lord, with spiritual, together
with my humane knowledge, that the last being sanctified by the (...), I may
study in all equity to perform my calling to the good of my brethren, and to
thy glory. Let the labors of my hands prosper, let all things go well with me:
give me health of body, the use of my limbs, and of my senses: let no
euill-happen unto me, in body, goods, or good name. Give me careful, able and
faithful servants: preserve unto me, whomsoever, and whatsoever belongs unto
me: that although I be enforced to ^^te my bread by the sweat of my body,
according to thy just sentence pronounced upon our original transgression: yet
I beseech thee bless my lawful calling unto me, and bless me in it; that I
may end my labor in plenty, and my life in peace, through Jesus Christ, and
be finally sealed up among the number that shall be eternally saved.

Amen.
Lord increase my faith.
A MOTIVE TO stir up Husbandmen and Plough-men to prayer unto God.
THe Hu^bandman and (...)ler of the ground, is the meanest in common
reputation, but in use the most necessary member in a Commonwealth: for by
him, and by his labor, the accursed earth, which naturally brings forth
nothing more plentifully then weeds, and unprofitable excrements, gives bread
to strengthen man's heart, wine to comfort him, and oil to make him of a
cheerful countenance: God giving blessing, who in the beginning made all his
creatures good, al serving to h^ own glory, and to the use and relief of
man. But for sin they were accursed, and the use of them restored unto the
faithful in Christ, by Christ: yet are all men to use the ordinary means to
cause the earth to bring forth fruit, by labor, art, and industry: Adam the
first man that transgressed, God appointed first to manure, till, dig and
dress that land, which by, and for his disobedience, he caused to be accursed:
and we, his generation, have the same (...) imposed upon us, either to till,
ma(...)re, plant, and to use the best means to cause the earth to bring forth
her increase, or else to suffer it, according to it natural inclination, to
ouergrow with unprofitable weeds, and so perish for want of necessary relief:
Disdain thou not, therefore, whatsoever thou be, la(...)ious work, nor the
husbandry, which the most High has created. And know that he that tilleth the
land, shall be satisfied with bread. But he that is idle, wants
understanding, and shall come to poverty, Prou. 12. 11. That righteous Noab
became a husbandman, a tiller of the land, a planter of vineyards, Genesis 9. 20.
Vzzi^h, a King, delighted in husbandry, 2. Chron. 27. 10. Many good, godly,
great and famous men, have been husbandmen: Abraham and (...) were
shepherds; so was Moses: Elisha was a plough-man, 1. King. 19. 19. Gideon,
that famous Captain of Gods Host, was a thresher of corn, Da^id was a
shepherd, Jacob also, and all the Patri^rks, husba^d-me^, or herdsme^: now is
this famous, become an infam^us profession among many; Gentility is of so high
request, and of so admired glory, that many leave the plough, not as Elisha
did, and the threshing. flore, as Gedeon did, to follow the Lord of life: but
to embrace profane liberty, and a licencious and lascivious life. They, whose
fathers by their sweat gate sweetness out of the earth, many of them swear it
and swagger it, and sweat it away sweetly in sinful sin; so that the second
or third generation of many of them, either return to the cart again, or to
beggerie. The modern courses of humane proceedings in this kind, are to be
lamented, so much degenerating from the ancient. The plough, and the plow-m^n
were in reputation, as long as they kept themselves under the title of
Husbandmen and Yeomen. But since they turned Gentlemen plow-men, they do not,
but command to be done, while the Gentlemen follow (not the plow) tail. They
follow what they should fly, and fly what they should embrace. A preposterous
course, and that is the reason why so many good Graunges, and Country Farms
(...) hospitality have lost the means (...) relieve the poor, as formerly
they were able. It were good that these new coined Gentlemen did take their
fathers old occupation again; it will not only not be their disgrace, but
greatly to their commendation to take the plough tail in time again, and go
with the oxen, as Elisha did, and to threshing, as Gedeon did; and not to
scorn that profession that supports a kingdom. But leaving them that have
looked back, and left the plough, I exhort all men, continuing of that rank,
to rejoice in their labors, that follow that worthiest of humane endeavors, the
manuring of the earth; for there is a blessing promised to the religiously
painful, and industrious in this kind. Wherefore pray unto God seriously and
faithfully, that it may please him to send a blessing upon your labors; for you
may sow, and set, and plant, yet see small increase, without the blessing of
God. Paul may plant, Apollo may water, but God gives the increase. Cattle,
corn, oil, wine, and all the necessories for man's life, are given and
preserved by God for man: let us then pray when we commend our seed to the
earth, that God will bless it with increase: so shall our flocks increase and
prosper also, our oxen shall be strong to labor, there shall be no want, nor
complaining in our streets. True it is that the word of God affirms, that it
raines as well upon the corn and the cattle; and all things belonging to the
wicked, do prosper in humane understanding as well, and better then of the
godly: but it is to be remembered, that the small things that the righteous
has, are better then the great abundance of the wicked. I have framed a brief
prayer, not unfit to be used often of all that deal with corn, cattle, and
manuring the earth, not ^ying any to the form, but moving them to heavenly
meditation.

A Prayer fit to be used of husbandmen, not unfit for all men whatsoever.
WE cannot but with sorrow and shame call to mind (most loving Lord God in Jesus
Christ) our common accursed condition, by the view and consideration of the
earths sterrititie, barrenness, and unaptness of it o^^ accord to bring forth
those thy good creatures, whereof all men have need for the sustentation of
their mortal bodies: much more are we put in mind of our original
transgression and disobedience, by beholding the natural fruits of the earth,
briars, thorns, thistles and weeds, in stead of things profitable for man's
use: agreeing with our cursed nature, which brings forth sin in stead of
sanctity, the works of darkness in stead of the fruits of light, the fruits
of the flesh, in stead of the fruits of the spirit; and justly remains that
curse in force against us wretched men, and upon the earth for our sakes,
perseuering in our old accursed corruptions. And therefore, good and gracious
Father, lee the death and merits of that immaculate Lamb restore us b^ a
lively faith, unto the privilege of our first sincerity, that we being
inwardly sanctified, we may be made partakers of all thy corporal comforts;
according to thy promise made unto all true believers in him, that they shall
be blessed in the house and in the field, in their corn and in their cattle,
and in all things touching this life and the life to come. Be pleased
therefore, loving Father, to bless our labors in tilling the earth, in our
sowing, setting, planting and dressing of the same. Let the earth bring forth
her plentiful increase, thirty, sixty, and an hundred fold, according to thy
good pleasure, to our use. Let our flocks prosper, and bring forth thousands,
and ten thousands in our streets: let our oxen and catt^^ be strong to
labor. Send seasonable showers, good Father, upon o(...) fields, fatten the
furrows thereof, and refresh the dry and thirsty land when it is weary.
Shower down^ the former and latter rain upon the earth: let our corn grow
(...), and shake as the Cebars in Lebanon: let our pastures yield plentiful and
wholesome food for our c^^tle: let our servants be unto v^ ^^^stie, strong,
faithful and diligent in their labors. Teach us rightly to manage the things
we take in hand, and bless all our handy labors and endeavors. Continue the
strength and use of our limbs and senc^^, that we may be able to undergo
that burden patiently and thankefully, which thou laidst upon all mankind in
the beginning, the tilling and manuring of the earth, which without thy
blessing, we cannot but confess, can yield us no increase to our comfort: our
rising early, our hardest labor, and our late and little taking rest can
profit us little, without thy blessing. Bless us therefore, Lord, and our
labors: bless all that and those that do belong unto us. And as thy blessings
and plenty shall increase and abound unto us; so let our continual desires to
do good, increase, and according to our means, be helpefull to the poor and
needy, and charitably perform all the works of true piety. If riches
increase, make us the more humble; if they diminish, make us patient: let not
Satan delude us in either with pride or despair. Let not our corporal enemies
have power to prevail against us, to hurt us, in body, goods or good name.
Let us walk before thee in true sincerity, let us live in thee religiously
and faithfully, in thy fear and love, and die in thy favor in Christ Jesus.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO A prayer to be used in the time of, and to prevent any of these
three several common calamities that may happen upon a people namely of war,
of famin^, and of the p^stilenc^.
THere are three capital and chief scourges wherewith God uses to correct a
disobedient people, war, famine and the pestilence: the least of them of
force to confound kingdoms. War is a grievous affliction where it is acted,
especially civil and internal combustion^ in a kingdom, where the father
shall be against the son, the son against the father, brother against
brother, and one neighbor to shead another blood: Where one friend stands
suspicious and fearful of another; where is no certain freedom, no assured
safety of any man's person or goods; but infidelity, treachery, rebellions,
treasons, murders, thefts, rapines, rauishments, and universal confusion
threatens all men, in all places, by ^ll impious and bloody means. How many
Countries, kingdoms, nations and people have tasted of this unsavory cup,
histories humane and divine amply intimate. Our own Chronicles record many
civil miseries to have infested this kingdom and parts of the same: where
insurrections have begun, especially in the time of the dissension between
Henry the third and his Barons, the troubles of the two houses of York and
Lancaster, and other like troubles of later memory. And what calamities have
accompanied this kind of punishment, are likewise at large related in
domestical and foreign, in profane and divine histories: namely, famine and
pestilence. Samaria being besieged, such was the famine there, as an Ass^s head
was worth fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a kab of Doves
dung was sold for five pieces of silver: mothers did sees and eat their own
children, 2 King. 6. 25 28. 29. The like at the siege of Jerusalem according to
Josephus. And, as Pliny reports, when Hambal besieged Cassilinum, a City in
Italy, a mouse was sold for ^00. pieces of money, and he that sold it, died of
famine, and he that bought it, saved his life. In these extreme famines, things
most loathsome became dainty food^; horses, dogs, rats, mice, hides of beasts,
shoes, boots, and many other abhorred things. As not only diverse cities in
France, and other foreign parts, but our own native country can too well
witness, not unfit to be remembered as a necessary caveat. Acts and M^n. In
the time of Edw. 2. the Sco^s (taking opportunity by the quarrel^ that rose
between the King and his Nobles about Pierce Gauestone) invaded England in so
furious and hostile manner, as our Country men under the cruelty of the
enemy, were, besides the general slaughter, driven to that penury and want
of victuals, that they were enforced to feed on the former most unwholesome
relics. The King himself could hardly get corn and victual to sustain him
and his followers. Some did steal other men's children and ate them: many
prisoners were in that height of hunger, as they took and tore in pieces
newcome prisoners, and ate them raw and half dead. And this extreme famine and
war, with the pestilence that followed the war and the famine, consumed the
greatest part of the people in the land: for it is commonly found by
experience, that wars follow security, famine war, and the pestilence
follows famine. A statute was thereupon made in respect of the scarcity of
bread, that no corn should be used in making of drink: a statute fitly to be
in part put in execution at this day, being so highly abused to drunkenness; one
of the most capital sins that draw down threats of these calamities to be
renewed upon us. And how is it considered? what prevention is there fought?
fulness and plenty breed security, our security idleness, our idleness
Atheism, Idolatry, self-love, contempt of God and his word, oppressions,
cruelties, pride, riotousnesse, lasciuiousnes, wantonness, and consequently
the neglect of prayer. And these call for wars, wars for famine, famine for
the pestilence: and these come with armies of evils upon a people forgetting
God, fearful to be considered: even the least of these, namely, that which
David chose, being enforced to undergo one of the three. It is an affliction
much against our natures to yield unto; yet more tolerable then terribl^ war,
or intolerable famine: It threatens death yet with a milder countenance then
stern war, or meager and consuming famine. But seeing sin is the impulsive
cause of all these miseries, in the fierce wrath of God, who again is the
efficient and working cause; how forgetful are we wretches, that find in our
selves this cause of the causes of our dangers, and will rest careless how, by
whom, or by what means to prevent the coming of them upon us? knowing that
they are sudden. And if the wrath of God be inkindled, yea but a little, how
shall we be able to stand in his presence? how shall we avoid the coming
forth, and the execution of his most fierce decree? If one destroying Angel
could in one day, by one of these three dreadful calamities, send so many
souls unto their places, as of the people of David, and host of Senacherib:
what may we think if he send his other most fearful ministers together to
visit our trespasses? Let us therefore seek atonement with God in Christ in
time. Let us not play the secure servants, that persuade them selves, their
Master will be long in coming: if he come and find us in our drunkenness, and
surfering, and bribing, and tyrannizing over our weak fellow members, it will
be too late then to seek to avoid the danger, when the blow is given. The
very terror of the miseries present will so astonish and perplexe our hearts, as
we shall run as men amazed for succor, and shall find none; for relief, and none
will give it, and for safety, and none shall be able to preserve us from the
destroying angels hand. Our faith will fail us, our prayer will be cold and
not steed us, when we shall run here and there as at our wits end, for fear
of the dangers before our eyes. O let us therefore delay no time to fly unto
God, not with our old polluted rags of sin and iniquity, but with renewed
hearts and hearty repentance. Let us meet the Lord as the Ninevites did: so
shall we recover our spiritual strength: and if any of these calamities fall
upon us, we shall be hardy in Christ our Savior, and with courage meet the
enemy in the gap, namely, the sword; undergo famine with constancy: and in
pestilence rest boldly on the providence of him, that has promised to keep
his faithful ones, in whatsoever danger. And therefore let us be moved to
some consideration, that as our fathers have been visited with these calamities
for their sins, we cannot dream of greater immunitie, considering our sins
are as ripe and as rotten as were theirs, and Gods power is not diminished, but
his heavy and punishing, and destroying hand is ready to be stretched out
still.

A Prayer to God to be used in the time of peace, to prevent war, in plenty,
to prevent famine, and in the time of health, to prevent the pestilence, fit
also to be used in the time of war, famine, and the pestilence also.
GReat and terrible art thou, O God, and in thy fury take vengeance against
a rebellious, stubborn, stifenecked, and a wicked people. Be patient with us,
O Lord, be patient with us: and although we be of unholy co^uersations, spare
us, and be merciful unto us. Shoot not the arrows of thy displeasure against
us, for the least of them is able to wound the hayrie scalpe of thy mightiest
enemies, and to crush them in pieces like a Potters vessel. O stay, stay thine
anger against us, prevent wars, draw not thy sword upon us, take not the
staff of bread from us, send not the pestilence among us; for we are not able
to stand in thy fight when thou art angry. Be appeased toward us, good
Father, in Christ our Mediator: free us of the dangers which we have
deserved, and which (as we cannot but fear) do houer over our heads for our
sins. Our sins are many, monstrous, horrible, and (as it seems)
incorrigible. Thou have shaken thy sword over us, we saw it, and were for the
time afraid: thou have punished us with pestilence, we have felt it, and were
endangered. Thou have weakened the staff of bread amongst us, we have tasted
it. And yet we continue in our wonted disobedience* we go on still in our
wickedness, like unto those rebellious Jews, that put to death the Lord of
life: who are given up unto a reprobate sense. We also have eyes to see, and
yet see not our dangers, ears to hear, and yet we hear not with sense thy
fearful threats for sin, and thy severe judgments upon them that
transgress thy commandments wittingly: we have hearts to perceive, and yet we
seem not to understand those things that belong unto our peace and punishment;
we are not sensible of thy displeasure: but we lull our selves asleep with the
sweet deceiving delights of our fleshly affections, and harden our hearts as
Adamants against thy word. O gracious Father, give us repentant hearts for our
sins, understanding hearts of thy will; give us obedient hearts to practice true
piety and holiness in faith unfeigned, that we may appease thy wrath inkindled
against us through Christ, the Mediator of all that return to thee in a holy
submission. Turn us therefore, Lord, and we shall return from our evil
ways, and obtain mercy in him that is our advocate with thee, Jesus Christ
the righteous, by whose intercession it may please thee to spare us thy people,
spare us: let neither the sword that deuoureth without mercy, come near us:
let not famine too much afflict us, that has no measure in pinching: and let
not the pestilence steal upon us, that secretly flies and strikes without
respect of person, sere or age. Lord, give us repentance, and accept thine own
gift, our repentance and our atonement with thee, that, if it please thee,
these evils fall not upon us as we have deserved: but being made one again
with thee, thine eye may be upon us ever in mercy to deliver our souls in
death, and to preserve us in fa^ine. Thou art God, a strong hold in the day of
trouble: let us not esteem our selves strong in our own might, nor lean upon
our own wisdom to defend our selves, when any of these calamities shall be
inflicted upon us. Make us righteous, so shall thou preserve us* thou art the
strength and hope of Israel, of all that are of a holy conversation, faithful.
Be unto us a strong rock, whereunto we may always resort in war, in
famine, in pestilence, and in all the calamities that accompany or follow
them. Make us constant in all goodness, give us help against trouble; for
vain is the help of man. Harken therefore unto the prayer of thy servants,
and deliver us in Christ.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO A short prayer to be used in the time of war.
THe children of Israel continuing to commit wickedness in the sight of the
Lord, the Lord raised the Philistims against the^, who made war upon them, and
made them their servants for forty years, Judge. 13* 1. he raised likewise the
Ammonites against them, who vexed them 18. years, Judge. 10. 7. and gave them
into the hands of the Midianites for 7. years, Judge. 6. 1. As men fall from
God, so he sends them enemies, as it were to enforce their reformation: and
if these kinds of afflictions cannot win them, he gives them over to more
sharper calamities, as he did the children of Israel, whom he delivered into
the hands of mere spoilers, and sold them into the hands of their enemies
round about them; and which way soever they went, his hand was still against
them, Judge. 2. 14. 15. yet when they repented, and cried unto him, he raised up
means to release them, and delivered them. Judge. 3. 9. 10. whereby we may be
moved to seek the Lord, before the Lord send forth his persecuring
ministers, as the children of Israel entreated Samuel to pray unto God for
them, before their danger fell upon them, that God might be pleased to prevent
that which they feared; and at Samuels intercession they were preserved, and
their enemies scattered and confounded. 1. ^am 7, 8. 9. This is the course that
Christians ought to take, first, to cleanse themselves from sin, and then to
repair unto God in humble supplication for defense and preservation, and by
promise they may be assured of timely deliverance in the instant of their
greatest danger, Some trust in chariots, and some in horses, but let us
remember the name of the Lord our God.

A Prayer to be used in the time of war.
O God of hoasts, we beseeth thee look down upon us thy people, oppressed
and afflicted with the fearful visitation of the sword, wherewith thou
threatnest to punish us for our disobedience. Thou art the God of peace, send
peace, if it please thee; and if they will not be appeased, break the swords
of thine, and the Kings and thy Churches enemies, shiuer their spears in
sunder, confound their counsels, distract their league, dissipate and disperse
their companies, stop their fury, frustrate their hopes, strike terror in
their hearts, weaken their arms, take from them the staff of bread, and stand
thou in the defense of thine Anointed: encourage his heart, and the hearts of
all his subjects, to show themselves faithful in thee: gir^ thou their
victorious swords upon their loins. Manage thou their battles, and give them
the victory. Give them such success as Iehosh aphat had against his enemies
by thee. Confound the enemy, as thou did Sennacheribs soldiers: do unto
them, as thou did unto Pharaoh, and to his host. Prosper them that fight for
thy truth, as thou did David against the Philistims; and let thine Anointed
take up the triumphant song of David, The Lord has divided mine enemies
asunder, as water is divided. Go out before our Captains, as thou did
before Deborah and Barak: give us vi(...)ie as unto them: for it consists in
thy power and providence, not in Goliahs strength, nor in Achitophels counsel,
nor in multitudes, but in thee alone: and therefore in thee do we trust, let us
never be confounded. It is sin, we confess, that stirs up these
calamities against us: give us repenting hearts and reformed spirits. Let us
lift up pure hands with undefiled hearts, as Moses did unto thee, and prosper.
Let our enemies fly before us, as before Iosuah: and let their strong hol^^ be
as the walls of cursed Jericho: hurl them down, and let them never be built
again to trouble the peace of thy Church. Thou art the author of peace; extend
thy peace over her like a flood* Lord, lift thou up thy countenance upon us,
and give us thy peace in Christ.

Amen.
Lord increase my faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer in the time of famine or dearth.
FAmine is the most grievous plague that can befall man in this life: for the
want of food causes the body to pine and consume, it pincheth the very
entrails of al creatures, brutish and humane, without respect. In so much as to
appease this greedy monster (as it may be termed) men are enforced to feed on
things most loathsome, and unwholesome, instead of things salutarie and good.
There may be a Dearth without Famine, but never Famine without a Dearth: for to
appease the violent fury of hunger, men will give their greatest Jewels, and
in the times of much necessity, hunger is of so homely a condition, as (where,
in the time of abundance it scorned base and homely meats) she scorns not now
the basest nor the vilest things. Famine is a Tyrant, Dearth but a thief: the
one favors neither poor nor rich, but oppresses all, without respect of
person, age, or sex; the other is parciall, steals from the poor, and
gives to the rich, it pineth the needy, and fills the wealthy: and
therefore is Dearth uncharitable, unreasonable, and unconscionable:
uncharitable, in not giving to the poor: unreasonable, in not observing where
most need is: unconscionable, in withholding from the poor, and giving to the
rich: but they are both the instruments of Gods heavy displeasure for sin,
and therefore not be prevented or relieved, without true repentance and
faithful prayer. God has promised, that such as seek^ him with a faithful
heart, shall want no manner of thing that is good, and in the time of dearth
they shall have enough. Wo^ be unto them that in the time of dearth keep in
their corn, and other victuals, to inhaunce the prices; that grind the facts
of the poor; they shall be numbered among the wicked, and their names shall be
written among those that have no love: but the faithful shall feed and be
satisfied, and the little that the righteous has shall be better and more
comfortable unto him, then the great abundance of the ungodly. Therefore in the
time of this kind of visitation, it behooves all men to pray unto God, whose
power is able to do wonderful things, to make a cup of cold water, and a
morsel of bread to give strength, whereupon to walk forty days, as Eliah
did, and to increase the small portion that we have, and to make it powerful
to nourish us: as to the widow of Sarepthah. Trust thou therefore in the Lord,
be doing good, and thou shall be fed assuredly. They shall not be confounded
in the perilous time, that trust in the Lord, but in the days of famine they
shall have enough.

A Prayer in the time of Famine and Dearth.
O Great and powerful, merciful and loving Father in Jesus Christ, who have
made man to serve thee, and all creatures to serve man. Look down, we beseech
thee, upon us, now in the time of distress, and want of necessaries to
sustain our mortal bodies. Thou know whereof we are made, remember that we
are but dust: and our lives are sustained by those thy creatures, that thou
have created for our use, which thou have now so diminished and decreased, as
the staff of our sustinance is broken, and we wax faint under the burden of
thy heavy displeasure. It is our sins, Lord, that have drawn down this
fearful visitation upon us, which we are not able to bear. And therefore, as
thou art gracious, merciful, powerful and provident, forgive us our sins, in
thy mercy in Christ. Relieve us by thy power for his sake, and provide for us
in thy providence: call to mind thy mercies of old, wherein thou relieuedst,
not only our faithful Fathers, but such as were strangers also unto thy
Covenant, the Egyptians, to whom thou did send Joseph to provide for the
Famine to come; a special work of thy wonderful providence Come now unto us,
Lord, co^^ now unto us; increase our small store, and bless it, as thou
did the oil and meal of Eliahs h(...), fail us not, nor forsake us in
the (...)e of our greatest need; leave us not in our distress. Thou had
compassion, Lord, upon four thousand, which were to depart from thee, and
did feed them when they had nothing to eat, and thou gave them
sufficient, with seven loa^es ^as also five thousand, with five lo^^es and a
few fishes; all men suffised, and many fragments remained. Why therefore should
we fear, or despair of thy providence, seeing thou can feed so many with so
little show of outward means; and as thou can relieve with little in
quantity, so can thou with things mean in quality: Daniel and his fellows
lived by pulse and water, and were more strong, and in better liking, then they
that had the full measure of the Kings choice dainties. Great and wonderful art
thou in thy power, unsearchable in thy providence, and thou art one and the
same for ever, thy love is not diminished toward them that love thee, neither
is thy power weakened, neither can thy providence be hindered; but whatsoever
thou willest, comes to pass in Mercy and lustice. Will thou therefore, good
Father, will thou, and work our comfort and relief, and whatsoever we then
need, shall be supplied unto us. Mollify the hearts of such as have relief in
abundance, that detain it, to enrich themselves, when the poor perish. S^ffer
us not, Lord, to fall into grea^^^ misery and want then we can beart, Our
flesh is weak, and unable to undergo the want of necessary food: give us,
Lord, competent relief, that we faint not, nor perish altogether, for thy
Christ's sake, our only Redeemer and Advocate, for whose sake thou have promised
to deliver the souls of thine from death, and to preserve them in the time of
famine: Therefore, Lord, hear and grant our requests.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith, and bless unto us competent relief.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer, to be said in the time of the Pestilence.
THe Pestilence, of all other p^^gues, is the most loathsome and grievous,
especially to the parties infected, for that their dearest friends commonly
fly them, and forsake them: none are readily willing to visit them: and yet
of all the three inevitable plagues that God tendered to David's election, he
made choice of this, as willing rather to fall into the hands of God, then of
me^. To fly before furious enemies in the wars, is a fearful thing: and to
pine and perish for want of food, more grievous then Death. Therefore is the
Pestilence rather to be undergone, then either the Sword or Famine: but that we
are not at our choice, as David was: But as touching sin, in the same danger.
Sin was the cause of his, and sin is the cause of our visitation. And
therefore, to prevent the danger, we are to make peace with our offended God,
by true repentance, humble submission, faithful and unfeigned prayer. It was
the remedy that David used, whereby the Lord was appeased with the Land, and
the plague ceased, 2. Sam. 24. 25. Gods anger is easily appeased toward them
that are truly penitent, and hum^^y seek him in faithful prayer. It
appears that we have provoked the Lord by our sins to wrath: and in his
displeasure be visits us with this heavy correction. Let us offer the sweet
and acceptable sacrifice of prayer unto him, in unfeigned sorrow for our sins.
It may be God will recall his destroying Angel out of our coasts: But if he
will not be, appeased, and pleased to stay his hand from punishing: Let us
submit us to his will in all Christian patience, avoiding, as much as in us
lies, the wilful running into the danger; and then if God have numbered us
among them that he has marked out unto death; let us not be dismayed, or
discouraged: let us not only not think us the more unhappy: but far the more
in the favor of God, in that he vouchsafes unto us such a fatherly
premonition, to prepare us that, which by the course of nature, in few years
cannot be avoided, death, which seems far more terrible then indeed it is:
for though it has the name of bitterness, yet it is indeed the end and
co^summatio^ of all the unpleasing things, which our deceived affections are
miscarried by: it is the end of sin and sorrow, of dangers, fears and miseries;
and is terrible to none, but to such as only consider the dissolution of the
soul from the body, and do not look to the immediate conjunction of the
soul with God: we leave indeed our corporal friends behind us, whom we
love: But we ought to know, that we go to a more blessed fellowship in the
heavens, to Christ our elder brother, whom we yet never saw: but if we love
him, as he loved us first, we cannot but desire to see him, which we cannot do
in our mortal flesh. Let us therefore with Saint Paul, desire to be dissolved
and to be with Christ, with the Angels, and with the spirits of just and
perfect men. And let us be of good courage in this danger of the body, which if
we cannot fly, let us not fear, knowing that whether we live or die, we are
the Lords, in Christ, in whom we are assured that all things shall work
together for the best, and to the consolation of them that love God, in life
and death. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

A Prayer to be said in the time of any mortality, Pestilence or infectious
sickness.
O Lord our God, who of the dust have created all mankind for a time to breathe
in this mortal life; and at their appointed times thou say, Return again
into your dust, ye children of men. Look, we humbly beseech thee, upon us,
under thy hand visited with great mortality, so bes^t on every side with the
terrors of death, as we cannot but deem out selves near unto the grave. Our
festered corruptions have brought forth stineking sins, that have de^^^ed our
bodies, and infected the very air wherein we live, whereby we have
deservedly drawn upon us in thy justice, this fearful visitation. Give us,
Lord, repenting hearts, and renew right spirits wi^i^ us, that we recounting
our manifold and gross sins, may truly bewail them in the bitterness of our
hearts; fill our heads with water, make our eyes a fountain of tears, that
both inwardly and outwardly our sorrows for our sins may be unfeignedly
expressed, and by our constant obedience, and sincere service of thee, our
renewed conuersations may be approved. Make us, we beseech thee, always
watchful over our ways, that we err not from thy Commandments, in this time
wherein many are stricken with thy hand, and many are finally fallen asleep.
Bless us, we beseech thee, with that blessed prerogative, to be thy truly
adopted children in Christ: so shall we be safe, according to thy promise, and
this thy visitation shall not come near our dwellings: a thousand shall fall
on our rig(...)hand, and ten thousand on our left hand, and yet not touch us.
But what are we, Lord, that we should presume upon this freedom, having
deserved as heavy a weight of punishment, as any whom thy hand has visited?
Let not thy patience, and long forbearing of us, persuade us, that either thou
see us not, or that for our own worthiness or desert, thou passest by us: but
rather to think, that we are also of the number of them, whom thou have
ordained to partake of this visitation, that we may apply our selves to a
serious calling to mind of our offenses, and unfeigned repentance for them,
before thy decree come forth against us. Give a holy preparation unto our
hearts, willingly to submit our selves to thy good pleasure, for life or death,
whether of the^ thou shall be pleased to work for us: work in us for the one,
such thankfulness as thou deseruest, for so great a blessing, as the prolonging
of life, and patience in the other; knowing that it is appointed to every man
once to die. Lord, let not death, which is but the dissol(...)ion of the soul
from the body, be over terrible unto us: But rather make us so to consider the
benefit of our conjunction, which through the mercy in Christ, we are assured
shall follow our dissolution, that we may rejoice, that the means of our
dissolution is foreshewed unto us: which yet, if thou in mercy, may be
pleased for a time to forbear, it may be unto us a lively and prevailing
Motive, to stir us up to a more religious, faithful, and holy course of life
before thee, that with patience and hope, we may wait the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and appear blameless in that day: and in the mean time
walk worthy of thee, pleasing thee in all things, strengthened with all
might, through thy glorious power, to all patience and long suffering, with
ioyfulnes. And grant that our souls may evermore depend on thee our God, for
of thee comes our health, and our salvation: have mercy upon us, have mercy
upon us, O God; for our souls trust in thee, and in the shadow of thy wings
will we trust, until this thy visitation be ouerpast.

Lord increase our faith.
A MOTIVE TO A Prayer, to stir up Soldiers to live in the fear and service
of God.
AMong all other professions in the world: none is more dangerous then the
military: for Soldiers are ever nearest unto casual and untimely death: yet
(which is to be admired and lamented) no sort of people are more loosely,
lasciuiously, and barbarously given then they. Whoredom, Drunkenness, Rapine,
Blasphemy, Oppression, Tyranny, and all kinds of ungodliness, are frequent
among them. Much to be wondered at, that men abandoned, as it were, to the
merciless bullet and sword, should walk so inordinately, as if there were not
a God in mercy to preserve them, or in judgment to confound them. Above all
men, Soldiers ought to be most watchful over their ways, and most mindful
of their uncertain condition, knowing that Captivity, Wounds, and Death, are
inevitable companions of their profession. The very title of a Soldier
imports two kinds of warfare, external with corporal, internal with
spiritual enemies. If a professed Soldier faint or fail in the first, he is
censured cowardly, and not bravely minded, which for outward disgrace he will
seek to avoid. If he be foiled in the second, men and Angels will condemn
his weakness: if he prevail in both, how great is his commendation? If
therefore you that be, or desire to be Soldiers, perfect and complete, subdue
and conquer, first your own inward and private enemies: then encounter the
common enemy with courage: for, before you have manfully fought against, and
conquered Sin and Satan, and your own carnal affections lu^king within your
hearts* you can never with Christian courage, confront the visible enemy
marching furiously toward you: for he that fears not, nor serves God, how
valiant so ever he seems outwardly* yet fears he death, and consequently
fears the ministers and instruments of death: but whosoever fears and serves
God aright, needs not fear the fury of mortal man, who can kill but the
body; but the invisible enemies kill the inward and better part, the soul
with the body. Therefore seek you peace, and be reconciled to God, before
you undertake warre^ with man; for if God be against you, if the strength of
Goliath, the policy of Achitophel, the power of Senacherib, the host of
Pharaoh, were all conjoined on your side, you should come to like end, as these
vain men did, that thought themselves invincible. But if God be on your side,
you need not fear: One shall be able to encounter ten, ten shall chase an
hundred, an hundred shall put ten thousand to flight. It much imports you,
that would be accounted martial men, therefore to walk before God, and to
be upright: pray unto him for courage and good success; but before you pray,
you must strive with a godly resolution to abandon all your ungodly behavior;
for, God hears nor, nor respects the prayers of hypocrites, such as draw
nigh him with their lips, and entreat him in their words, utterly denying
him in their works. Cast off the common course of profane soldiers, too
well known to be too impious; follow the counsel of Christ, who wills you
to do violence to none, to accuse no man falsely, and to be content with your
wages, Luke 3. 10. Being thus qualified, repair unto God in a lively faith,
using all means to increase in divine knowledge, which begets all holy
virtues, wherewith being furnished, whether you live or die, ye shall be the
Lords.

O Lord increase our faith.

A Prayer to be used of soldiers.
OH God of hoasts, look down upon me thy unworthy servant, who in this life
labor both in a corporal and spiritual warfare, fighting within and without:
Assist me first with thy grace, faithfully to encounter, strongly to resist,
and truly to triumph over sin and Satan, who lie in ambush with armies of
infernal soldiers, seeking to surprise my inward and better part, my soul,
and to deprive me of al godly affections, that so I being conquered within, may
not be able rightly to perform my outward calling, wherein thou Lord know, I
walk in coutinuall danger of my mortal life, having of my self neither power
nor policy, to avoid the ordinary perils and calamities that accompany (...)
in this course of life. I am much sinful, and therefore I may the more fear
that thou, who hear not sinners, wilt refuse to go with me to battle,
which every where, and at all times threatens me with captivity, wounds, or
death, as one abandoned (in humane opinion) to the merciless bullet and sword.
Give me therefore, Lord, a repenting heart, and a truly reformed conversation,
that seeing by so many means death houereth over my head, I may be ever ready
and prepared in a holy and sanctified life, to meet the same without fear;
knowing that death is but the issue out of a wilderness of miseries, troubles,
calamities, and dangers, and an entrance into that most sweet, pleasant, and
Paradise, plentiful of all good and most wished things: wherein is no war,
but peace; no care, but comfort; no fear, but joy; no misery, but mirth; no
hunger nor thirst; no want, but abundance of all good things for the soul to
enjoy. Make me therefore, O gracious Lord God, an upright and faithful
soldier in this mortal warfare, that I seek not, nor sinisterly take the
goods, or sh^^^ the blood of any man. Take (...) me al desire of unjust
revenge, (...)pine, and doing wrong to any. Conform mine heart and mine
affections, to sobriety, modesty, patience, and true magnanimity and boldness.
Prevent in me wantonness, ryoting, drunkenness, swearing, blasphemy, whoredom,
and such a profane and ungodly course, as commonly too much accompanies this
military life. And seeing, Lord, that I, in duty, am enforced to use the sword
against those that rise up against us, bless the use of it to me, as thou
did the sling of David, and the sword of Gideon; teach my hands to war, and
my fingers to fight. Give me a courageous heart, and undaunted spirit, to
encounter the enemy as often as need requires: make strong my loins, and
fortify my arms, let good success befall our armies: daunt our enemies
hearts. Teach our Leaders and Commanders wisdom and Christian policy to
direct us, and give us courage, strength and obedience to perform our duty
with good conscience. And if in thy wisdom, peace be more to our profit and
comfort, and to thy glory, then war, send us peace, in thy name: and let both
peace and war, life and death, be to our advantage in Christ, in whom al
things are blessed to them that truly serve thee. Let us want no manner of
thing, Lord, that is good: vouchsafe us all things necessary for our warfare.
Stand ever on our side, and let thy saving and protecting Angel preserve us in
all danger. Remamber thy loving promises, and thy mercies of old: be unto us a
shield and buckler of defense, and a sword of offense against our enemies;
accept us into thy blessed protection: never fail, nor forsake us, O God of
hosts. Go evermore forth with our armies; keep every one of us free from
the excommunicate thing, sin and iniquity: And sanctify us with thy holy
spirit, that in thoughts, words and deeds we may be approved not soldiers
carnally valiant, or desperately bold, but truly and religiously courageous,
both in our outward and inward warfare., through Christ: to whom with thee and
the holy Ghost be^ ascribed all ^ouor and power for ever.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith, and evermore mightily defend us.
A MOTIVE TO a prayer to be said of such as travail by sea.
SVch as use the seas (as David observes) and have occasion to pass the great
waters by ship, see the wonderful works of the Lord. Wonderful in deed, in
the creation of so huge a heap of waters, wonderful in containing them within
appointed limits; wonderful in ebbing and flowing; wonderful in violence and
rage; wherein sometimes it swells and works; wonderful in respect of
Jehovah, at whose word the most furious waves thereof are appeased. And lastly
wonderful, in respect of man, whom God has endued with the understanding to
frame a vessel, wherein, as in a house, he may safely fly, as it were, through
the furious furrows of so merciless waters. But all these wonders may be
knitte up in one, namely, in the wonderful power and providence of Jehovah:
who by his word has made the seas, and gathered the great waters into one
place, and commands them not to pass their bounds, and they obey: he has
given man judgment and art to frame the hull, to place the Roder, to stretch
out the Tacklings, and to spread the sails, to descend into the deep. But if
God should there leave him to his own will, wit, power or art, though he have
his card and compass to guide him, he should never attain his wished port:
when the winds blow, the tempests rise, the seas rage, the waves lift them up
as upon mountains, and hurl them down again as into deep gulfes. What then
can art or force do? Do not their hearts then melt for fear, until the winds
cease, the tempests appease, the seas calm, and the waves be still? And who
works this wished and most comfortable change? only that mighty Jehouah: he
that made the seas, he commands them to rage, to show his power, and again
wills them to be quiet, to show his mercy. Are not these the wonderful
works of God? who but he commands, and the seas obey? Ye therefore that are
occupied in this dangerous trade of life, be not unmindful to serve the
living God: for ye see by experience, how suddenly he commands, and calls
for a tempest, and then ye think your selves near unto the door of death
Yet, as says David, When they cried unto the Lord, he delivered them out of
their distress, and brought them to the haven where they would be. There is
none that uses the seas, but has seen and felt this. If then they confess
not the power, providence, and loving kindness of Jehovah, and acknowledge the
wonderful works that he has done for them, even before the sons of men:
Let them be assured, that a thousand perils futurely attend them. But the most
of them that exercise this kind of travel, show themselves temporizers: when
dangers appear, they seem much humbled, promising reformation of their
finfull lives; they pray, and are cast down with importable fear and sorrow:
but the danger past, they forget it, and God that delivered them from it,
especially when they approach the haven where they would be, in safety, where,
in stead of giving of thanks to God for his mercies, in leading and conducting
them; the first thing they do, is to show they owe him no duty, by presently
falling to transgress his will by drunkenness, wantonness, whoredom,
swearing and blaspheming him, as though the danger past were the last they need
to fear, or could befall them. But they deceive themselves; for God is patient
and long suffering, but never forgets them in judgment, that so forget and
neglect his mercies. He follows them, when they think dangers farthest off:
Shipwreck, Pirates, Famine, or some other Judgment seazeth upon all careless
Seafaring men. Wherefore ye that occupy the Seas, remember, that as in
discretion you prepare all needful things, fit for your Sea voyage: so are
there things most material to be provided to^wards your heavenly
peregrination; Godliness, Faith, Obedience, true Fear and sincere Love and
service of God; which, if you omit, let your corporal provision be never so
plentiful, let your ship be never so strong, never so swift of sail, never
so well manned and munited, the least breath of the Lords mouth is able to
confound you. No men have more interims, and times of leisure to serve God,
then Seafaring men. Why then spend ye not those times in searching the word of
God, in prayer, and in holy exercises? that God may be your guide, your
defense, preserver and protector: so shall all things go well with you, and
whatsoever ye do, it shall prosper.

A Prayer to be said of such as have occasion to use travel at sea.
GRacious Lord God, mighty, merciful and loving Father in Jesus Christ, who
have made all things by thy word: And by thy power and providence do govern
all, and all obey thee in their kinds, the heavens, the earth and the seas: but
man only is disobedient, only rebellious; therefore do thy creatures whom thou
made to (...) (...), become adversaries unto man, especially the seas, which
oftentimes rage and roar under the burden of their sins that pass in them,
much daunting, dismaying and threatening the dry land, and the inhabitants
thereof, much more such as in thy providence are appointed to have their
travel and traffic therein; we therefore in all humbleness come unto thee, O
Jehovah, who art the God and governor of the immensible and vnfadomable sea.
Thou call for and command the tempests to arise; thou liftest us the
waves thereof, and we are mounted up to the clouds, and suddenly descend into
the deep again. So that we are even at the door of death: yet such is thy
might and thy mercy, that at thy rebuke they are still, and at thy word the
tempest cease. Receive us therefore into thy blessed protection, for we
recommend our selves unto the seas in thy name, confessing that it is neither
the strength or swiftnes of our ship that can save us, neither can our power or
policy prevent the dangers of the merciles waves. It is not the Card nor
Compass that can direct or bring us to the haven where we would be. It is
only thy power, providence and conduction, whereupon we do depend. In thee is
our hope and help: for thou command, and the Seas obey; at thy word, the Red
Sea ^laue in sunder, it stood still in heaps, to give way to Israel: a work
against the ordinary course of nature; and therefore much more easy may it
seem to us, for thee to give way to us through the Sea^ by natural and
ordinary means. And the rather, for that we know, that at thy rebuke, the
Sea of Ienazeret being in violent rage, was suddenly appeased. Speak the word,
and the Seas shall give us comfortable, and free pass, without any impediment.
The winds and Seas obey thee, thou art omni^^tent; thou can do what thou
will in mercy and judgment. Go with us, O Jehovah, and be our guide, as thou
were near unto thy Disciples when they were like to perish i^ the merciless
waters. Prosper (...) voyage, bless our means: let thy holy Angels accompany
us, as assisting and prevailing ministers for our safety and good success.
Rebuke and quiet the winds and tempests when they arise. Defend us from
merciless and tyrannous ^^rates* when they assail us: keep us from ship
wrack, when we are in peril: Supply us with all necessaries for our
corporal sustinance and safety. ^ouchsafe unto us health and strength of
body, wisdom and power to manage our affairs, to thy glory and our comfort.
Take from us, and every one of us, all impiety, sin and uncleanness; furnish
us with heavenly knowledge, increase and strengthen our ^aith in thee, confirm
our hope of happy success: make us entirely to love thee: give us true zeal
to serve thee, and to call upon thee, ^^tonely in all our calamities and
^angers as of necessity, but conti^ually, as of a Christian duty: That thou
may be pleased evermore to guide us, and by thy mighty hand, in thy mercy,
to direct our course, and bring us to the haven where we would be, and leave us
not unto the merciless waters: for without thee there is none that can deliver
us. O give us hearts never to forget thy goodness, watchful and obedient
hearts, that we never fall from thee to our natural vanities and corruptions:
give us not over to our own hearts lusts, to sweari^^, swaggering,
drunkenuesse, whoredom, and to the profane course of life, whereunto by
nature we are inclined: But assist us ever with thy grace, that we we may live
orderly, honestly, religiously, and ^olily before thee, to deal faithfully and
truly with all men, at land and sea: ever depending on thy providence, who
never failest nor forsakest them that call upon thee in spirit and truth.
Bless our going forth, bless (...) voyage, bless our endeavors, bless our
calling and traffic, and (...) us a comfortable, prosperous, and happy
return. Make us thankful in holy obedience, which is the sacrifice, wherewith
thou art (...) pleased. Grant us, gracious Father, these and all other
blessing^ corporal and spiritual, for the Christ's sake, in whose bless^^ name
we augment these our (...) prayers, with that heavenly (...) which he has
taught us. Our F^ther which art in heaven, etc.

Lord increase our faith.
A Prayer before meat.
PArdon, we beseech thee, O merciful Lord God, our manifold sins which we have
done, and do continually commit against thy Majesty, and thereby have deserved
to be deprived of al thy blessings, and of these which now thou plentifully
tendrest unto us for our nourishment. Thou in Jesus Christ have promised to
bless thy creatures unto our use. Bless these unto us, we beseech thee; and
grant that they may be unto us the comfortable means to strengthen our mortal
bodies. Let us not abuse them by excess, but use them soberly to thy glory,
and our nourishment, through Christ our Lord.

A thanksgiving after meat.
WE acknowledge, good Father, loving in Jesus Christ, that of thy free mercy
and bounty, we have at this time, a^ all the days of our lives, been
plentifully nourished with corporal food: Enlarge the gifts of thy
sanctifying spirit in us, and in all the members of thy Church Preserve
evermore our King, give us peace, plenty, health and happiness, through Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.
A brief Table of all the Mottues and Prayers, contained in this Book.
Prayers.
A Motive to Prayer. 1 A Prayer for the assistance of God* holy Spirit, in any
spiritual or godly corporal action, or endeavor; fit to be used before every
lawful enterprise, especially before every divine exercise. 2 A Motive to a
Prayer to be used in the Morning in private Families. 5 A Prayer for the
Morning for private Families. 8 A short Prayer for the Morning to be said of
one in private, or in a Family, using the plural instead of the singular
number. 17 A Motive to a Prayer, to be said in the Evening in private
Families. 21 A Prayer to be said in private Families in Evening, before they
go to rest. 24 A short Prayer for the Evening, to be used of one man in
private. 32 A Motive to a Prayer for the members of Christ, to be used after
private Prayers in Families. 37 A Prayer for the members of Christ, whersoeuer
dispersed, fit to be used after our ordinary Prayers of Morning and Evening. 39
A Motive to the confession of our sins to God, and to stir us up to pray
for the remission of the same. 43 A Confession of sins, with a Prayer for
pardon for the same. 47 Another short Prayer for forgiveness of sins. 51 A
Motive to a Prayer, for a godly and holy life, and for power of resisting Satan
and sin. 54 A Prayer for a godly life, and to resist sin and Satan. 57 A
Motive to a Prayer, before the receiving of the holy Communion, or the Lords
Supper. 63 A Prayer to be said, before the receiving of the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ. 67 A Motive to a Prayer, to be said after the
receiving of the Lords Supper. 73 A Prayer to be said after the receiving of
the holy Communion. 76 A Motive to a Prayer, to be said of any man in any kind
of trouble. 80 A general Meditation or Prayer in whatsoever trouble or cross.
84 A Motive to a Prayer, to be said in poverty and want of this life's
necessaries. 88 A Prayer to be said in poverty and want of this life's
necessaries. 91 A Motive to a Prayer, to be said of such as are in prison. 96 A
Prayer to be said of one in prison, for what cause soever, changing the words
according to the occasion here set down. 100 If for debt, say thus. 103 If for
matter for which life or member is (...) danger, say thus. 104 If upon unjust
occasion, say thus. 105 If for the testimony of thy faith in Jesus, say thus.
106 A Motive to a Prayer, that we may be always ready to die, and to be so
prepared as we may not fear death. 109 A Prayer to be often used, that we may
(...) live, at we need never fear to die, (...) to be often used of all men,
especially i^ sickness. 111 A Motive to a Prayer to be said of one in his
sickness, or in any disease, or defect of his senses or limbs, fit to be read
of, or unto the sick and diseased person. 117 A Prayer to be said of one that
is sick or diseased. 122 Another Prayer to be said of a sick man. 125
Meditations upon the sick man's recovery of his health. 128 A Motive to a
Prayer, to be said of such as visit a sick friend or brother. 130 A Prayer to
be said for a sick man or woman, of his or her friends, that visit them. 133
A Motive to a Prayer, before a man begin his journey. 137 A Prayer before a man
begin his journey, or attempt any weighty corporal action. 140 A Motive to a
Prayer to be said after the return from a Journey, or coming to the Inn or
place of rest. 143 A Thanksgiving after the return from a Journey, or coming
safe to a place of rest. 145 A Motive to a Prayer, to be said before a Sermon.
147 A Prayer to be said, before the hearing of Sermon. 152 A Motive to a
Prayer, to be said after a Sermon heard. 156 A Prayer to be said after the
hearing of a Sermon. 160 A Motive to a Prayer, to be said against malicious
adversaries. 163 A Prayer against enemies. 168 A Motive to a Prayer, to be said
of every true Christian, for the Ministers and Preachers of the word of God.
172 A Prayer to be said for the Ministers of Gods word. 176 A Motive to a
Prayer for the Church Universal. 178. A Prayer for the Universal Church, and
for every member of the same, ^it to be often said of every true Christian. 182
Another Prayer for the Universal Church, in the time of affliction or
persecution. 186 Another short Prayer for the prosperity of the Church and
government thereof. 190 A Motive to a Prayer, to be said for the Kings
Majesty. 192 A Prayer and Thanksgiving for the Kings Majesty, to be often
used of every good subject. 196 A short Thanksgiving and Prayer for the Kings
preservation. 201 A most pithy and patheticall Prayer for the King, and
overthrow of Antichristian religion, and enemies of the truth. 203 A Motive to
a Prayer, to be used of such as are of the Kings Majesty's privy Counsel. 207
A Prayer not unfit to be sometimes used of a Counselor of Estate, as he has
opportunity. 210 Another short effectual Prayer, to be said of a privy
Counselor, fit to be said before consulation. 213 A Motive to a Prayer, to be
said of every good subject, for the good success of the Counsel Royal. 215 A
Prayer to be used of every good subject, for the Kings Counsel of Estate. 218
A short Prayer for the Counsel Royal. 221 A Motive to a Prayer, to be used of
^udges and superior Magistrates, that have power and authority to hear and
determine causes between man and man: which Motive is fit to be often read and
considered of them. 223 A Prayer to be used of Judges and Magistrates. 227 A
Motive to be used of Christians, for Judges, and superior Magistrates. 230 A
Prayer for Judges and superior Magistrates, to be used of all good and
Christian subjects, and especially of them that have causes depending before
Judges and Magistrates. 233 A Motive to a Prayer, to be said of a man or woman
unmarried, intending to marry. 237 A Prayer to be said of a man or woman
unmarried, intending to marry. 241 A Motive to a Prayer, to be said of married
folks. 245 A Prayer to be said of married folks, either privately, or mutually
together. 249 A Motive to Parents, to stir them up to instruct and pray for
their children. 252 A Prayer fit for Parents to make unto God, in the behalf
of their children. 255 A Motive to a Prayer, to be used by children for their
Parents. 260 A Prayer fit for children to use for then Parents. 263 A Motive to
stir up Masters to a god^y government of their servants, and to pray for
them. 267 A Prayer to be said of Masters, for their servants, not unfit to be
used of all that have command over others. 272 A Motive to stir up servants
to obey, and pray for ablenes to serve their Masters and Governors truly, and
to profit in their callings. 275 A Prayer fit to be used of servants. 278 A
Motive to a Prayer, to be used of Artificers and Handicraftsmen. 281 A Prayer
for Tradesmen, Handicraftsmen and Artificers. 283 A Motive to stir up
Husbandmen and Plough-men to Prayer unto God. 286 A Prayer fit to be used of
Husbandmen, not unfit for all men whatsoever. 290 A Motive to a Prayer to be
used in time of, and to prevent any of these three several common calamities
that may happen upon a people, namely, of War, of Famine, and of the
Pestilence. 294. A Prayer to God, to be used in the time of Peace, to prevent
war, in Plenty, to prevent Famine, and in the time of Health, to prevent the
Pestilence, fit also to be used in the time of War, Famine, and the
Pestilence also. 301 A Motive to a short Prayer, to be used in the time of
war. 305 A Prayer to be used in the time of War. 306 A Motive to a Prayer in
the time of Famine or Dearth. 309 A Prayer in the time of Famine and Dearth.
311 A Motive to a Prayer, to be said in the time of the Pestilence. 315 A
Prayer to be said in the time of any mortality. Pestilence or infectious
sickness. 318 A Motive to a Prayer, to stir up Soldiers, to live in the
fear and service of God. 322 A Prayer to be used of Soldiers. 326 A Motive to
a Prayer, to be said of such as travail by Sea. 330 A Prayer to be said of
such as have occasion to travail by Sea. 334 A Prayer before meat. 339 A
thanksgiving after meat. ibid.
FINIS.

