The Governance and preservation of them that fear the Plage.

Set forth by John Vandernote, Physician and Surgion, admitted by the King his
highness. Now newly set forth at the request of William Barnard, of London
Draper. 1569.

JMPRINTED at London, by Wyllyam How, for Abraham Veale, in Paul's churchyeard
at the sign of the Lamb.

The preface.
TO THE honor of Almighty GOD, and profit of al Christen people, and to
maintein health in the hole bodies, and to remedy them that are corrupt and
infect with the infections of the Pestilence, I John Vandernote, Physician and
Surgeon admitted by the King his highness: and sworn unto my Lord of Suffolk
his grace, now abiding at the late graye Friars in London do think it mete to
wright certain things concerning the pestilence, as well drawn out of diverse
autentique doctors and experimenters, as of mine own experience being
conuersaunt and a mynister (under God) in the said infection, in Rome, Italy,
Lomberdy, Napels, Poelles, and Iowe countries, by the space of many years.

And because gentle Reader that the great and long sermons and prolixite of
sentences ar often occasion of tediousnes and small frutefulnes to the Reader,
because so many circumstances ar comprised in one matter wherefore gentle
reader, I thought it mete and expedient, briefly without any ambiguite to
wright chiefly the most substance and effect of this pestiferous disease, and
to declare it shortly, to the intent it may be borne by heart away of them that
shall have need of it, as I pray God no person after this have, as grant us
the holy Trinite.

The contents of this book are these.
The first. Of the Pronostication of the Pestilence. The second. Of the
causes whereof the plage does engendre and come. The third. Of the remedies
against the Pestilence. The fourth. Of the comfortinge and strengthening of the
heart and other the spiritual parts. The fyfte. Of the Fleobothomie or
letting of blood in the time of Pestilence. The sixte. Of meats, drinks, and
sawces to be used in the time of the Pestilence.
The tokens and Signs which do Pronostyque the Plage or Pestilence to come
are seven.
i. The first token is, when the day in somer often does change: as in the
morning inclinyng to rain, after to darkness and after to wind, specially
winds coming fourth of the Southe.

ij. The second when the days in somer are dark, and like often to rain and
do not rain.

iij. The third, when upon the ground are many Flies fliynge nere the
ground, that is a token that the air is corrupt.

iiij. The fourth, when ye stars are like often to fall or slip, this is a
token that the air is inflamed, and full of venomous vapors.

v. The fifte, when there does appear in the air a Comete or a slidyng Star,
as Aristotle says in Mytauris. It signifies great war, sheddinge of
blood, and the death of a great multitude of people, the destruction of many
Towns, drownynge of ships through great tempests of the Sea. And the
darkness of the Sun, signifies changing of Regions. And that the common
people shall have dearth and Pestilence.

vi. The sixte figure is, when it does often lighten and thundre, and
specially when it comes out of the South.

vij. The seventh, when many winds blow or come forth of the South, for they
corrupt the air.

When these for said signs do appear, then it is to be feared of a great
Plage, or Pestilence for to come, without the great mercy of almighty God do
it withstand.

The cause of the Pestilence.
The cause of Pestilence are three manners.
i. Sometimes it does engender through ye vapors and corruptions upon the earth.

ii. Sometimes it does engender through the vapors and corruption of the Sky
and Elements, or bodies above.

iii. Sometimes it does engender throw the mixting of them both.

i. The plage is sometime ingendered, through the vapors and corruptions coming
of the earth, as we do daily se out of Priues, Dikes, filthy Canels, standinge
muddy waters, being near ye place where the people does rest and sleep a
nights, and through this the air becomes infect in her substance and
quality, and that only in some places. And this particular corruption comes
every day. And through the same comes often Pestilente Fevers, which often
do deceive the Physicion, which do not take them for to be the fever
pestilenticall. The Plage or Pestilence comes likewise sometimes through the
stink of dead bodies, as well of mankind as of beasts. Also it comes
through standing Mudde, stinking Pooles and waters, and this does corrupt the
air, and this pestilence is sometimes universal, and sometimes particular.

ij. Secondarely, the Plage is sometime engendered through the vapoures and
corruptions of the Skies and Elements or Bodies above, and that through ye
virtues of the Sterres and Bodies above, and through the same the spiritual
living spirits and bodies beneth are infecte. And of the same Auicen says in
his fourth book saying: that the bodies are often inflamed and corrupt through
the infections of the bodies above, for the corrupt air does infect the
sprites beneth, and so the living spirits in mankind is often infecte.

iij. Thirdly, the Plage does engender through the mixynge of them both: yt is
when through the impression or influence of the bodies above, the air being
corrupt, and through the putrefaction of caryon liynge upon the earth and
stinking air, a syckenesse is engendered in mankind. And the same sickness is
often caled Febris Pestilenci alis and sometimes and often an apostemacion, for
sumtimes the air that we do draw in our bodies is corrupt and venomous. And so
infecteth the heart, where through it is agrauate strongly, in so much yt she does
eat and gnaw filthy infection: and then the vryne and the disgestion is then
often like for to be good, notwithstanding that ye pacyent is still declining
toward death. And through the same many Phisycions are often deceuid. And
therefore it is needful that every body provide him self of a good and expert
Physician: not only seen in learning, but also well and better in practyse,
concerning the premises.

A question.
Wherefore does the one dye and the other not, being both infect? likewise more
in one place then an other.

Answer
This may be through the means of two causes.
i. First through it, that is working.

ii. Secondarely through it that is sufferyng.

i. First through it that is working, that when the heavenly influences regard
more the one person then the other, and the one place more then the other.

ij. Secondarely, through it that is suffering, that is as when the one body is
more inclined and disposed to the Plage then the other is.

Nota.
These bodies are most inclined or disposed to the Plage or Pestilence. First
all those yt are hot or warm, and those that have great sweating yssues: and
bodies that are corrupt. All those that has their sweating yssues stopped. And
therefore are the bodies fore inclined unto the plage, wherein be come great
resolucyons: like as in them that are great medlers in Lechery, and them that
serve in hot houses: and all they that do lightly sweat through small labor
or travail, or wax hot, and all they that lightly wax angrye, hot and
fumous, al such are inclined unto the plage.

An other question.
Whether such infectyon of the Pestylence be contagious or infectiue or not?

Aunsvvere.
Such infection is infectiue and contagyous. For through the bodies of the
infect persons, comes such venomous vapors and humors that do not only
corrupt the other hole bodies: but also the air where through comes
infectyon. And therefore ought every person to eschew the infect persons. And
moreover when ye plage rayneth, you shall not stand among many people for
fear if any of them should be infecte unknown. And therefore stands the wise
Phisycyons (which do viset such in the Plage time) a far of from the
pacientes, beholdinge with their face the window or door. Also they shall do
likewise, that do serve them.

Nota.
It is very good for the paciente that he do often change his chamber, and
that his windows stand and open toward ye east, and north east, but the
windows which open toward ye south, shall ever be closed or locked, for the
south wind has in him two causes of corruption.

i. First he debiliteth and weakeneth nature, as well of whole people as of
sick.

ii. Secondarely, like as it is written in tertio Aphrorismorum, the southwinde
aggrauate the hearing, hurts the heart, for he opens the sweating issues of
mankind and so enters into the heart. And therefore every hole person shall in
the time of pestilence, when the south wind does blow, tarry in the house the
hole day. And he needs must goo forth, yet shall he tarry within so long til
the sun be hie and long risen or up.

The remedies against the Pestilence.
Here shall be said how every body shall preserve and keep him from ye infection
of the plage or Pestilence.

i. And first for the same every christian creature shall be advertised by the
word of Jeremy the prophet, which commands that every creature shall eschew
the evil and follow the good ways, and that he repentantly with a meke heart
shall confess him of his offenses and this is the most surest medecin in the
plage time.

ii. The second, that every person fly the places infect if it be possible.
And they that can not avoid the place, let them abstain of all things causing
putrefaction, as much as is possible, like as is overmuch copulacion between man
and woman, and the south wind which naturally is infectiue. And therefore
shall every person keep the windows locked in the morninge till eight of the
clock standing against the southe.

Also they shall avoid all manner of stinkyng savors, as of stables, streets,
kanels wells, standing mudde waters, and specially of all manner of foul
stinking carrion, or dead bodies. And most of all of all manner of old stinking
Vrines and waters, for in some houses, they do keep it two or three days
long, and in some houses are some kanels running under or above ye ground:
where great stink ingendreth and remains, and all this does ingendre great
putrefaction. And that is the cause that more people be infected and diseased
more in those places where such are, then in other places where none such is.
Likewise do the people more die and be infecte where places are where they do
sell cabushe and wurtes, for that ingendreth a dangerous humor which does
infecte mankind, when they be rotten or perished. And as through odours
aromaticke or good savors are the hertes and other the spiritual parts
recreated, renewed, comforted and strengthened: Likewise through evil foul
savors, are they debelitated and infected.

Therefore every person shall so use their houses, that no such air or savor
come in being corrupt as is aforesaid, for the corrupt air is moist, and
ingendreth through his own nature a putrefaction in the house and in the places
where they do sleep. And therefore shall you air and cleanse the houses and
chaumbers with light flames of fire, being made with Oken wood. Also you shall
after that perfume the place with these herbs following, as Bays, Juniper
buries, Organum, wormwood, Ysope, Rue, and Moogworte. Lignum Aloes perfumed is
best of all, were it not so costly or dear. Al these airs and perfumes
conforte and strengthen the inward part of the body, when the air enters
through the mouth or nosethrilles.

You shall also cleanse and abstain of all manner of fulsumnesse or replecion of
humors. For the bodies that are replete with humors are sone infected and
inflamed. For Auicen says in quarto canone. That people which will be often
filled with meat and drink do shorten their life. Also you shall avoid
much bathinge or sweating in baumes or hot houses. Also for to be conversant
among great congregation of people to the intent other being corrupt and
infecte: do not corrupt and infecte you, you being clean. And when you come
not among the congregation or company of people, then shall you use this
followinge.

i. First in the morning, when you do rise, you shall eat a quantity of
hearbegrace or rue, well washed with a little salt and one or two cornels of
nuttes well cleansed. And when you can get none of this, then shall you take a
crumme of bread depped in good vineagre and eat next your heart, and specially
when the air is dark, misty and not clear. And it is not good in the plage
time for to walk in the towns or vilages, but rather to tarry at home with in
the house, then to goo forth.

ii. Secondarelye, you shall spread or sprinkle the house (and specialy in
summer) with vinegre, with roses, with vine leaves. And it is good that you do
often wash your hands in water and vineagre, and then often to smell the
hands when they be dried. Also al sour and sharp sauoures are then wholesome
for to be smelled on, as well in winter as in summer. And it was for bodden me
to show it unto the commons in Rome, where I was constrained for to go from
house to house I being a studient and prentes there, where I went daily to
minister and dress the people, and took but only a crumme of bread, or a
piece of a spounge being depped in strong vyneagre and the same held I before
my mouth and nose for to smell. For all sour savors stop the flux of humors,
and do not suffer the venemosite or corrupcion to enter the body. And this
dooyng I was (through the help of God) and the premises, saved from the said
infection, at which my companions did marvel.

All these premises have I my self experimented and found true, in diverse
regions and countrees, as in Rome, Italy, Lumbardye, Naples, Poyelles,
Calabers, Almanye, Flaunders, and likewise in England this.xvij. years. I
being sworn unto the noble late French Queen's grace my Lady Mary, and my
Lord of Suffolk his grace.

Here follows of the confortinge and strengthening of the heart, and the other
spiritual and special members of the body.
THe comforters of the Heart are Safferon, Camphir, and Plantaine with other
herbs, which do cleanse the living spirits within, and conforte. And these
are good for ye common people, which are lightly infected one of an other. And
therefore shall every one beware that they do not receue the breath coming out
of the mouth or nosethrilles of an other, Also the sight is darkened through the
infecte air, when they do not bear such like herbs in their hands.

It is very good that you do wash your face, mouth, eyes, and hands with
rosewater myxt with vyneagre. And when you have none of the premysses, and
must needs go among the people, then take and use good vineagre, and then
boldly go among the people. Also solubelnesse of the womb is a great help in
this case. And when you can not have by the way of nature solubelnesse, then
provoke him with suppositories: or after the counsel of learned and expert
Phisicions. And likewise shall you find at ye Apotecaries Pillule Pestilenci
ales, which are very good. And you shall always keep your houses good fire,
for that lets the impression of the sky, and clarifieth the air,

Item fine triacle is best for the same, as well for them that are in health as
for them that are infect, of this shall you take twice a day in clear wine, or
with rosewater, or with clear ale or bear. And every time that you take
Triacle, you shall not excede the quantite of a common pease at ones, and of
the water ale or bear, the quantitee of two sponefulles. The Triacle shall be
first dissolved in a cup with the wine, water, ale or bear, and then shall you
not eat after by the space of four or five hours, to the intent the Triacle
may have her due operacion within the body.

Then you shall eat good meats and drink good drinks, as good clear Wine,
Ale or Bear, and that shall be soberly, for superfluity causes corruption and
putrefaction of the humors. Also you shall abstain from all manner of thing
ingendring heat, as Peper, Garlike. And yet notwithstanding that Peper does
pourge the flewme of the brains, and the other members of viscose humors, yet
it does to much inflame and cause heat. And to much heat gendreth
putrefaction. And therefore is the bitterness better then the heat, smellyng
or sauoringe of the Peper, and Garlike pourgeth the Flegmata and euel humors,
and provoke appetite to eat, and suffer not the dry air to enter into the
body. Notwithstanding, because the Garlike perturbeth the eyes and the head
with heat, to them that do often eat or use it, therefore it shall be in this
time abhorred and abstayned.

The Plage is oftentimes augmented and increased through hot causes.
Such meats as are sonest disgested ar best, the sooner the better, and in the
morning and at none shall they eat sodden meats, and at nights roasted. All
manner of pape meats and caudels shall be abstayned and eschued, except they
be acetouse, or somewhat sower. For sower or sharp things are better in this
season of pestilence, then any other medecines. Also you shall abstain of all
manner of fruits being not sharp, nor having no soreness in them, except
Cheries, Pomgranates, Orrenges and few pears or appels dressed in stead of a
medecin, for all manner of fruits does ingendre putrefaction.

Spices being apt and good in this time, are Gynger, Cynamon, Commyn, Macis,
Saffron, and of the same ar made good preservatives for the rich people. And
the poor shall occupy Rue, Salge, Nuttes, Parcely, and this shall they mix
with salt and vineagre. And ye mean people of substance, shall take Commen
and Saffron and mix them with vyneagre. This is marvelous good for to be taken
inward, for it defends inward the putrefaction.

Mirth of heart is a great comfort and help of health in the body. And
therefore fear of death is a dangerous case in this time, but only to be
merry, and set the hole hope and confidence upon God, and to commend him to his
godly pleasure.

Here follows of the blood letting in the Plage time.
ONes in a month you must be letten blood, when age, strength, or any other
cause does not let, like pilgrims, sick and extenuated people, and such as are
very solubel, or laxe. And the Fleobothomi should be done in the left or
right arm, in the Liver vain, Baselica, in the arm before meat. And when
the Liver vain is stricken then shall you be merry, and drink good drink, as
good Wine, Bear or Ale, temperatly, and that same day shall you not sleep, and
specially when the Liver vain is let blood.

Item, when any does feel himself infecte or any curnell or Apostumations
appear or prick, then shall he wholly abstain from sleep. But go walkinge
abroad, for the sleep leads the venomous hotenesse to the heart: and to the
other special members, in so much that no Herbs can resolve the same, and
bring it to the first estate, which would not be so, if the body were
walking and sturring.

A question.
What shall a man do, that has his natural sleep after he be infecte?

Aunsvvere.
In the time when plage does raygne when you will sleep after your meat,
you shall prolonge it with walkyng in the Feilde or Gardens, and then sleep
an hour after meat. And therefore Auicen says: when you be disposed for to
sleep, it shall be wholesome then after the sleep, to drink a good draught of
drink. For that person that is sleaping draws unto him many humors, and
such evil humors are let through a good draught of drink.

A question.
How shall you know whether any be infecte or no?

Aunsvvere.
He that is infect does eat that day but little, for he is full of evil
humors. And when he does eat he does covet sleep and does feel great
hotnesse with cold and has a great pain in the forparte of the head and thus
shall he bring away by walking and going abroad. And that person that is infect
does holy abhore walking, or to ride a horseback, or otherwise, through
slothfulness and heaviness.

Every person that is infecte, does require, desire, and covet sleep every
hour for that inward venim perturbeth the living sprites, in such wise that
they ever require rest. And of the same signs may every person know whether
they be infected or not. And when any does not believe this, let him tarry
half a day after, and then shall he feel an impostome in his arm holes, in
his gruinde or behind his ears. And the best remedy is when they do feel
any of these in the time of Pestilence, not for to sleep. For in the sleep do
the living spirits rest, as is aforesaid, and then all the infections spredeth
through the whole members of the body. All these premises have I proved before.

When any man or person feels himself infecte that same day shall he
immediately after, be letten blood plenteously til swoninge, so soon as it be
possible, or else till he wax faynte, for a small voydynge of blood does
stir and move the blood. And when the person will open but one vain, and not
many, so shall he let her blood so long as she will, for a small voydyng does
stir the venomous infection, as is aforesaid.

Item every person that is letten blood: infecte or whole person, shall beware
that he do not sleep that day till midnight. And the said lettinge of blood
shall ever be done, in the same side where the apostemacion does appear. And
when the apostemacion does appear under the right arm then shall they be
letten blood in the same arm, in the mediane. And when the apostemacion does
appear under the left arm, then shall the lettinge of blood be in the said
left arm, in the mediane, or liver vain, upon the hand next the ear finger.

And when the apostemacion does appear by the grynd or privy members, then shall
they be letten blood in the same side under the anckle or nerer the hele. And
when then the letting of blood shall be done in the head vain, near the thumb,
in the same side where the Apostemacion appears, or in the Mediane of the
same arm, or else by the ear finger. And when the Apostemacion does appear
by the ears, then the letting of blood shall be done in the head vain in the
same side, or else in the vain between the thombe and the next finger, to the
intent that the venomous infection do not desturbe the brains, or in the vain
by the ear finger, or else in the vain, Basilica named.

And when the Apostemacion does appear in the shoulders, then shall the blood
be taken forth, with Boxyng and Sacrification, howbeit before shall the Mediane
be opened: or the Heart vain. And when the Apostemation does appear upon the
back then ye letting of blood shall be by the great Toe, called Sugar pedica^
magnam, all the foresaid Fleobothomyes or lettinge of blood shall be done before
the infecte person has sleapt, or before the appearing in the prickyng of the
Apostemacions.

When any does feel the Apostemacion after that they have sleapte, then shall
the Fleobothomies be in the contrary side, in the side where the Apostemacion
does not appear, like as here, if the Apostemacion does appear after the
sleapinge in ye right arm, then the letting of blood shall be in ye left arm,
in the Liver vain, or Mediane, or else in the hand in the vain called Basilica.

And when the Apostemacion does appear under the left arm, then shall the
letting of blood be in the right arm, like as is said of the left arm. And
likewise shall you do of all other Apostemacions; in what places they do appear,
all times in the contrary side, if it do appear after sleep.

When the pacient is very faint and weak which is letten blood, then he may
sleep somewhat, or else half a day, but every space of a half day must the
pacient be sturring, softely riding or walking. And when the apostemacion does
wax big and great, that is a good sign, the nature does expel the
venemosite outward, and makes the body whole.

And to the intent the Apostemacion may be the sooner ripened, matured and
opened you shall make this medecin: Stamp the leaves of Elder, and do to it
powder of Musterd seed, and make of this a plaster, and lay it upon the
apostemacion. Some Surgeons do mix unto this triacle, which I do not like, for
the Triacle will repercusse inward again the said risynge and venemosite,
howbeit I do counsel that they shall drink it, to the intent the venemosite
may be driven outward.

An other remedy, take Barbam Iouis or Houseleke, or Senegren, scerpillum
plantaine and a little Rye flower, and rub all these together till you perceive
water coming forth, then mix that water with woman's milk, and give it him to
drink that has the apostemacion, but this must he done before they have
slept, in an empty stomach or fasting, for then it does work better in the
body.

As soon as any does perceive the curnels or apostemacions, they shall take
hasel nuttes, Figs and Rue, and stamp them together and eat it, or lay it
upon it.

And every person that does govern him after the premises, shall well enough
avoid the dangers of the Plage or Pestilence with the help and aid of God,
without whom nothing can be.

Here follows a governance or preseruacion for all them that fear the Plage,
in vsinge them selves in meats and drinks.
First, the substance of their bread shall be white, one or two days old,
well leauened, and of pure wheat, well bulted from the Branne. In this bread
shall be baken the Annisseede and salt, and shall be well baken.

Your drink shall be white Wine, clear shininge, of good savor, not to read
nor to hot, nor to fumous, to the intent that the quick spirits and the
humors wax not to hot, the wine likewise shall not be to small. And if it be
possible, drink old Wine, for that is best, for he cleanses and dries best.
And is not so waterishe as the new wine is, and this wine shall be mixte with
sothen water, and that more in summer then in winter.

Item it is good that you shall take and drink a draught of Malmesey, or of
other strong Wine, before you go into the air for by the mean of this, many
evil airs and vapors be dried up, the sprites be quickened and conforted.

Item your sothen water, shall be running water, or else that comes from the
rocks or sandy ground, or Well water, and the savor of this water shall be
sweet.

The governance of sauoures and sauces.
ALl manner of Sauces in this time shall be made with Lemans, Orynges, with sour
garnate Appels, mixed with this powder: Take the best Cynamon that can be had,
Gynger, Cloves, of each half a dagma, Be white and read of each a dragma
Coral white and read of each a dragma, Cardamomi two dragmas, Saffron half a
dragma, and as much fine Sugar, as of all the first, of all this shall you make a
subtel powder, and of this powder shall you use in your meats, and more in
Summer then in Winter.

And when there is no lettinge or impediment, that do hyndre, as coldenesse of
the stomach, then shall you use Orynges, Pomgranates, and Sitrins. And the
seeds of the aforesaid have a special property in the premises. And
therefore in the Pestilent time shall you often occupy the powder of these
seeds with Sugar like a dredge, or else sees the seeds with flesh or other
meat or suppynge, when the stomach is not hindered by the same, through
coldenesse.

Of Vyneager.
When there is no impediment, then shall you use good vyneager, and with that
season your meat. And this vyneager shall be best, when it is made of good
white wine or Malmesey. Save those that have impediment in the Breast, or
Lunges, or Throat or Coughe, or short wind, and those that have cold
stomachs, shall not so much occupy of the vineager, but moderatly.

Of Potage in this time.
The Potage which shall be eaten in this time shall be made with wheat flower, or
rise, or of lenttes. Howbeit, the first water shall be cast away. Or else you
shall eat aleberies made with bear and bread or with red Cicers with ye shells.
The root of Fenel of Smallach are good in pottage, and eaten, and all manner of
meat made with eggs, Save potaige made with dough or other common potaiges are
not good, save potaige of Spiniage, of Percele, of Burrage, harttestonge, ar
very good. And all manner of herbs that have a sundry virtue, as Rue,
Scabiousse, Isop, Marubin, and such like.

Of Fruits and other meats that shall be eaten in the pestilent time.
Capers made with vinegar, are good to eat at the beginning of the meal. But in
winter shall you myxt to it some of the spices beforesaide. A small quantity
of Onions with vinegar eaten likewise is very good, for the Onio^ does engender
certain humores which do corrode the poiso^, and consume. Auicen says in
secundo canone yt all other scharp meats save Onions in the pestilent time,
shall be abhored, and forborne. The yolke of eggs potched in faier water, are
very good.

You shall abstain from all manner of fish through their moystnesse, and
specially those that have great scales. You may sometime use small fishes of
rivers, or small sea fishes, how be it you must scrape of the scales and cast
forth their intraelles, and they shall be well washed, and rubbed with anisseed
and vinegar. And then shall they be roasted and not fried in butter or oil, and
and after that they shall be eaten with the foresaid spices, and in ye winter
shall be put more spices to it then in so^mer. And when you have eaten of this
fish, then shall you drink thereupon good strong wine, and like wise you shall
eat with it almondes or hasell nuttes.

You shall abstine of all manner of milk for through her comes soon
corruption.

After the meat or drink you may eat these, for he comfort the disgestiue
strength. All manner of fruits are evil yt time and in the stead of fruit:
it is good to to take confits of Coria^der Auicen says in secundo canone,
that this is specially good and profitable.

In the beginning of the meal, yt is to wete diner or supper, it is good to
eat.iii. leaves of Rue two dry figs and one nutte together for this is a
special medecin for the plage, and against al poison. And therefore all they
that fear poison or pestilence let them use it.

Of the superfluity of meats and drynkes.
EVery one shall be ware of to much meat or drink in the time of Plage, but
shall be sober in meat or drink, more then you be used unto in other times,
for many superfluities are engendered through much eating and drinking.

Many and sundry meats in one meal is not good, every one shall be content with
one dishe. And if you be where many disshes are, yet feed upon one which is
light of digestion, you shall keep your self solubel, when nature will not,
with glisters Suppositories, or Pylles, which are said in this present book.
Also you shall hold open the veins of urine with drinks or opening medecines.

Also you shall fastinig rub your skin to open the sweat holes in the
skin, or with clawing.

Also you shall pourge your brains through the nosethrilles and mouth.

Also you shall pourge your body of all superfluity, as far as possible
shall be.

Of the Fleobothomy.
When the blood is superfluous in the body, then shall you be letten blood, to
the intent it be to the better complexion, and specially you shall be let blood
in the pestilent time once in a monethe, and that but little, and that is good
and helthfull. And when the other humors of the body are superfluous, like as
is Melancholy adust of the color, which is mixte with the blood. So shall you
be diligent in driynge, in euacuacion or pourginge the same, and all such
pacientes shall beware of such things as do ingendre the same.

The first medecin.
THe first shall be a certain of Pills written by Auicen, in the fourth Canon de
preseruatione a Pestilentia, and are made thus. Take Aloe Epitacum two dragmes,
of Myrre and Saffron, of each a dragma, and make of this foresaid Pills with
the iuce of Myntes.

Take of these pills every morning fasting, for they do resolve and dry up
the evil humors, and lets the putrifiyng.

Item when any that does use those pylles, is inclined or apt to take the
syckenesse, in summer shall take and put to the said confection of pylles,
sealed claye, called terra sigillata one dragma, and those Pills shall be made
with Rosewater.

In other seasons the Pills shall be made as is aforesaid.

The second medecin.
Shall be good and fine Triacle, at the least.x. years old, of this shall be
taken one dragma every week in summer with Rose water, and in Winter with good
strong Wine, or with the iuce of Roses, or with water of Citrie. And this
shall be done six hours before meat fasting in an empty stomach.

The third medecin.
Shall Be Mythridatum a confection so named and of this shall you take more in
quantity then of ye Triacle, and every week shall you take of it a dragma,
howbeit you must fast after it five hours, and it must be taken in an empty
stomach, this Mithridatum or confection so called, must at ye least be a year
old.

The fourth medecin.
Shall Be Coriander confittes, and of this shall be taken every morning a small
sponefull fasting, and thereupon, or after immediately shall be dronken the third
part of a Goblet of good wine. And also when any great heat is or great
warm wether, then shall they take Sugar of Roses.

The fifte medecin.
Shall Be against the worms, wherefore al they that are inclined toward the
breeding of worms, shall sees wormwood in good Wine, till half be sothen in.

The syxte medecin.
Shall Be a precious syroupe, allowed and made by diverse Autors and experime^ters
in the said sickenesses, and I my self have found this true, for she does
cleanse the body of all superfluitee, and dries likewise the body, conforting
the heart, the brains and liver, and all other interior parts of the body,
howbeit of this syrup shall be taken but an ounce and an half at ones.

And this is the syrup, and is made thus Recipe cortici citri, Radicu^ Caparis,
Berbaris, Sandalorum vtriusque Spodij of each two dragmus, Gariofilate
Buglosse, Melisse, Boraginis, Cicorie, of each one ownce Acetose, Epatice,
Marubij, of each half an ounce, Lactucesyluestris two dragmus, seminum
Communim, Violarum, of each.i. ounce, Thimi epithimi, Seen Polipodij, of each a
dragma, Succi Absinthij, succi Fumiterre, succi Rebuloru^, of each one ounce
Diagredij, two dragmas, Succare albe.ii. pound. Of this shall you make a
Siroppe, and this shall you cleanse with the iuce Citoniorum or Quinshes til it
be enough, and this shall you occupy.

The vsyng of these foresaid six medecines.
The first day early in the morning shall you take of the Syrop, and after
sleep upon it one hour or twain.

The second day shall you take a dragma of the Triacle.

The third day shall you take a sponeful of Corianders confite.

The fourth day, shall you take the decoction against worms.

The fifth day shall you take a dragma of the Pylles.

The syxt day shall you rest.

The seventh day shall you take any of these.

And it is very good, for to take ones in a week one dragma of these Pills.

When soever you do take any of these Pills, that day you shall take none
other medecin.

Of sleaping and watching.
Beware of to much sleep and specially in the day, also you shall not sleep
immediately after you have taken your meat before the meat be digested, or
before the first digestion is done or passed. It is very evil to sleep upon
your back. In the first sleep lie upon the right side, and there after two
hours upon ye left side. And then again the whole night upon the right side
Also you shall lie hie with your head, and be well covered with clothes. It is
good that you keep you waking two or three hours after your meat before you
sleep.

Of resting, or waking, or moving.
When the pestilence strongly reigns, then must you beware of great travail
and labor, and specially in the open air. And when you will labor, so shall
you do it fasting and in a close air. And in time of Pestilence shall you
keep you temporate in labor, for to much quietness, and to much labor is
naught.

Of the accidents.
Every man shall be ware of anger, of sorowfulnesse, of dredefulnesse, and of
such like, but you shall be merry, glad, and be among mynstrels Harpes, Lutes,
and other melodies, read fond and merry stories and songs.

A medecin of King Henry for the Plage or Pestilence.
TAke Marigolds, Sorrel, and Burnet, of every of them a handful, Rue and
Fetherfew of every of them an other half handful, and of Dragons a quantite
of the crop or of the root, and wash them in running water all clean, and
sees all them softly in a pot, with a pottell of runninge water, till it come
to a quarte of licker, and then set it back till it be cold, and then strain
it in a fair linen cloth, and then drink it, if you cannot drink it for
bitterness, put thereto Sugar Candy. And if this drink be taken before the
marks of God be upon them, he shall be whole by the grace of God.

FJNIS.

