THE DIGNITY OF MAN, Both IN THE PERFECTIONS OF HIS SOVLE AND BODY.

SHOWING AS WELL THE FAculties in the disposition of the one: as the Senses and
Organs, in the composition of the other.

By A. N. Prodeo vt me perlegas: Perlege vt proficias.

LONDON, Printed by EDWARD ALLDE dwelling upon Lambert-hill, near old
Fish-street, 1612.

QVod CRVCE cuncta tua purgas mea crimina CHRIST,
Tu Redamandus eris Redimens; Redimar Redamando:
Vt sic non Redamem nisi quae REDAMANDA Redemptus.
Hinc mihi tuta Quies, et Honos; PVLVINAR honores
Signat; BIS-BINVM format CRVX ALBAque firmat;
Te, sancte, et digne, et sincere vt semper Honorem.
AREA sanguinea est, Fugiam quo ad Sanguinis Aram
CHRIST tui, et curas inter secure quiescam.
CRVX dignum, tutum PVLVIN, facit ARRA firmum;
Inde REDEMPTOREM vt Redamem; and REDAMANDA Redemptus
A. N.

TO THE WORTHY, LEARNED AND INDICIOVS GENTLEman, WILLIAM REDMAN of great
Shelford, in the County of Cambridge Esquire.
SIR,
It is a prescription of such privilege, and so familiar a custom at this
day, to dedicate Books to some person or other, either of great place and
calling, or of honorable mind and disposition, that he keeps not Decorum
with these times, that accompanies not the same course. The fashion at first
was propagated by two parents, Affection and Care: the one rising from the
merited good conceit of the Patron: the other to prevent the malice of
detractors under the shield of Protection: for weakness has need of help and
supportance, as well in Politic as Natural bodies, so likewise in the
studies and labors of the mind. Such, whose fame goes still before them to
dilate their acts, crave no other Apology then their own worthiness, because
their power is able to defend them: but in private and inferior studies, that
want countenance in themselves, the extensiue power of greatness gives
strength and encouragement to intensiue weakness, when our endeavors (though
unworthy of acceptance) are suffered in their insufficient age to grow up,
and prosper in the defensive bulwark of Protection, against the storms of
envious, and calumnious tongues, that by continuance through use and practice
they may happily afterward prove worthy of regard.

Knowing therefore your eminent knowledge in matter of learning, and that you
are a Readman in all the faculties of the mind: in all affection I bear this
work to your worthy judgment: presuming, in the want of mine own worth, to
shield the same under your worthiness, and to pass it under your patronage,
against the sour humors of such, as still doing nothing, yet value themselves
by detracting from others; for Liuore nihil sublimius, and dogs even by
Nature must bark against the Moon.

The work I consecrate unto your view, is as a Tree spreading with diverse
branches, and bringing forth several fruits, in which if any of them prove
pleasing and acceptable to your taste and liking, I shall hold the pains well
bestowed, that have brought the same to such ripenes and perfection, and
pretermit no times or occasion, wherein I may show my thankful remembrance of
your love in some worthier labor hereafter: but ever rest,

Devoted unto you in all affection: Antho. Nixon.

The Dignity of Man, Both In the Perfections of his Soul and body.
Of Man. And of the Conjunction of his Soul and body.
Question. WHat is Man?
Answer. A creature after the Image of God, compound of Body and Soul, and
capable of reason.

Q. To what end was he made?
A. To set forth the glory of his Creator.

Q. What is his duty?
A. To know his own Nature, and to contemplate the Nature divine.

Q. What are the effects of the knowledge of our selves?
A. To be humbled greatly, and to glory, and rejoice: to be humbled in
respect of the Sense and feeling of our Vanities, and to glory in respect of
the mercy of God, By whose grace we recover our selves from the danger
thereof.

Q. What guides have we, for obtaining of the same?
A. Three: I Godliness whereby we know God to be our Creator:

2. Holiness, whereby we yield unto him continual praise:

3 Religion, by which we meditate upon his benifits, and are knit unto him by
Faith.

Q. What be the effects of Regeneration?
A. 1 To covet that perfection, and glorious liberty, whereof Man by Adam is
deprived.

2. To gather Physic out of holy writ, if not to cure, yet to repress his
wicked inclinations.

3. To account calamities, as chastisements for sin.

4. To join together the Active, and Contemplative life, in hope of life
eternal.

Q. What is the chief good of Man?
A. The rest and tranquillity of the Soul.

Q. How is the Conjunction of the soul and body?
A. It is wonderful, for the one is light, the other heavy. The one is a
Celestial fire, the other cold and earthie: the one invisible, the other
palpable: the one immortal, and the other mortal: and are maintained by
agreeing discords.

Q. What is the greatest thing, contained in a little place?
A. The Soul of Man, placed in man's body.

Q. Why is Man more careful of the body then the soul?
A. Because his mind stays wholly in things subject to sight: and because of
the soul is invisible, it is the least of his care to furnish her with that
which she desires: whereupon it comes to pass, that the least
discommodityes of the flesh seem grievous, but the incurable diseases of the
Soul, are not so much as felt.

Q. Why are we afflicted with bodily diseases?
A. To awake us out of our sin: to warn us of our duty, and to keep us in
awe: for there are in the body certain natural passions properly belonging
unto it, even from the first creation thereof, which are not to be taken away
without the abolishing of Nature.

Q. What is the cause of Passions?
A. Pleasure, and grief:

Q. What is Passion?
A. The perturbations of the Soul never arise, for that which is the true good
of the Soul, but only for that which Fools do falsely call good, and
Philosophers call the goods of the body and of Fortune.

Q. What is the difference between the Soul and the Spirit?
A. The Soul is common to all things that have life, But the Spirit (which is
immortal and capable of Reason and knowledge) is proper to Man only: Or we
may say, the Spirit is the first and principal part of the Soul, wherein the
mind, understanding, and memory are contained. The mind a as white paper,
wherein, as Man grows in age and judgment, he writes his thoughts, and
cogitations, which the studies of learning do afford.

Q. What is the fight between the Spirit and the flesh?
A. First, By the Spirit, we tread the path to immortal happiness.

2. By the flesh we stray into the way of death, and misery.

3. By the Spirit we think to live justly.

4. By the flesh we are stirred forward to iniquity.

5. By the Spirit we contemn the world:

6. By the Flesh we desire worldly delights.

Q. To what end is the creation of these things?
A. To set forth the infinite power, and greatness of their workemaister, which
is every ones duty to be careful of.

Q. What is duty?
A. The bond of the Soul, cheerfully, and willingly without fear and
constraynt, to give to every one which belongs unto him, as Honor to whom
Honor, Reuerexce to whom Reverence, Tribute to whom Tribute, Succor to whom
Succor belongs.

Q. How many parts are there of duty?
A. Two: the one toward God, the other toward our Neighbor.

Q. Duty toward God, what?
A. Love, testified by Obedience.

Q. To wards our Neighbor, what?
A. To love him. as we love our selves: For Duty is the end whereunto Virtue
tends: All things are made for Man, and Man for the benefit of Man: He
lives most happily, who (as little as may be) lives to him self. And who so
applies his course to this observation, disposes his actions to the end and
purpose of every good work.

Q. What is requisite in every good work?
A. Two things: First that the intention, and end of our actions be rightly
framed. Secondly, that the like means be found out to attain the same: for
God is the fountain of all virtue and duty: From this fountain issue four
rivers. First, Prudence, which knows what is profitable for it self and
others, and for the Commonweal.

2. Temperance, the mistres of Modesty, Chastity and Sobriety.

3. Fortitude, which makes a Man constant, patient, and courageous.

4. Justice, which is the bond and preservation of human society, by giving
every one that which belongs to him, by keeping faith in things promised, by
succouring willingly the afflicted, and by helping every one as ability serves.

By these four Cardinal virtues, the Soul is rectified in her power.

Prudence rectifieth The Rational power, Fortitude The Power of anger:
Temperance The Power of Concupiscence.

But Justice rectifieth all the powers, and contains in it self all the
Virtues.

Q. Why are these Virtues called Cardinal?
A. Because as the door is turned upon the hindge, so on this, Man's life is
turned, and ruled.

They are sometimes called Politic, because by these a civil life is ordered,
and they pollish and adorn a Man, and rule the life, as touching outward
things, and as far forth as they fight against vices.

They are also called Human: because they are gotten by Man's study, except
they be infused by God.

They are sometimes also called Consuetudinall, because they are not gotten by
one action, but by custom. To conclude, Even as God is a divine Sampler of all
things, So these patterns of virtues abide in him, and flow unto Man, from
the fountain of his divinity, whereof they are called Exemplares.

Of Man's body.
Q. HOw many parts are there of Man's Age?
A. Four, vidz. Infancy, Adolescency, Virility, Old age.

Concupiscence reigns most in Adolescencie: therefore that age has most
need of a guide: For the defect of strength comes rather of the vices of our
youth then of old age. From 29. to 50. is counted Virility, because then a Man
is in the hight of his strength, and soundnes of discretion: from 50. to 70. is
called Old age, because then the natural power, and strength of Man begins
to decline, and fade away.

Q. How is Man's age compared?
A. First, his Infancy to the Spring, because it is hot and moist.

2 His Adolescencie, 'to Summer, because it is hot and dry.

3 His Virilitie to Auttumne, because it is cold, and moist.

4 His Old age to Winter, because it is cold, and dry.

Q. How is Man's body divided?
A. Into two parts.

1. Simple. 2. Compound.


Q What are the parts Simple?
A. They are those, which being divided do notwithstanding keep the name and
title still of the whole, whereof they were a part, as every piece of flesh is
flesh.

Q. How many are the parts Simple?
A. Nine, videlicet.

1. Bones, 2 Ligaments. 3. Gristles 4. Sinews, 5. Pannicles. 6. Cords, or
filaments. 7. Veins 8. Arteries. 9. Flesh.


Q. How may they severally be distinguished?
A. First, Bones, are the foundation and frame of the body, Senceles, dry,
cold, and earthy.

2. The Ligaments, are white fastenings, proceeding from the Bones, void of
blood and Sense.

3. The Gristles are a stay to the Bones, that they rub not over hard one
against another, and are more earthy, dry, and hard then Ligaments, but not so
much as the Bones.

4. The Sinews are a tough substance, proceeding from the brain, or marrow of
the backe-bone, and give sense and motion, which the former do not, being
altogether insenscible.

5. The office of Pannicles (which are little skins made of Sinews and
Ligaments) is to defend, and keep together the members, and to impart (unto
many of them) sense: as to the heart, liver, lunges, Spleen, and and kidneys.

6. The Filaments serve to draw nourishment (being as it were slender threeds)
and some to retain the same, and expel what is superfluous.

7. The Veins, are thin and slender pipes, carrying the thicker blood, and
have their beginning of the Liver.

8. The Arteries are pipes of thick and strong skin, which carry the vital
Spirit through the body, and proceed from the heart, they are also called
Pulses. The veins, and Arteries are joined together, to the intent the
Arteries might receive nourishment from the blood, and the blood in the veins
warmth from the vital Spirits in the Arteries.

9. The Flesh is a substance made of thick blood congealed, and is as it were
the clothing of the body.

The Anatomy of man's body.
Q. WHat commodity comes by Anatomy of the body?
A. It puts us in mind of our mortality, and teaches us that if the
providence of God be so wonderfuil in the composition of the vilest, and the
earthly parts, It must needs follow that it is far more great, and
admirable in the creation of the Noble parts, especially of the Soul.

Q. How many principal parts are there of the body?
A. Four, viz. The head outward parts Arms The breast Hands The helly, and
Legs outward parts Feet.

Q. Parts of the leg how many?
A. Three, viz. the foot parts of the foot 3. the toes the leg the sole,
the thigh the heel

Man does counterfeit the works of God by the agility and virtue of his hands.

Q. Wherein do the works of God, and the works of man differ?
A. In three points: First, God made all things of nothing, but man cannot make
any thing without fit matter to work upon.

2. Secondly, God gives both matter, and form to his works; Man only form
and fashion: and that not of himself, but if the similitude and shapes which
he has seen in the works of God.

3. Thirdly, God gives life, Sense, and being to his works, which Man cannot
do.

Q. What be the abuses of the hand?
A. The abuse of the Hand is twofolde: In unlawful actions, as murder, theft
and such like.

2. Indiuination by the hand which is called Palmestry.

Q. What is the use of the hand?
A. To touch, to take hold, and to defend.

Q What is the property of the Nails?
A. To cover, or arm the fingers, to adorn, help, and take hold. The parts
af the hand are three: The fingers, the palm the wrest. God has given Man an
upright shape, to the intent he might cast off the care of base and earthly
matters, to contemplate heavenly. No other creature, but Man, has the
backe-bone made according to the straightness of the legs.

Q. Whereon does the backe-bone consist?
A. Of four and twenty several bones, and is compared to a chain, for the
likeness thereof: if it were all of one piece, man could not stoop, but
should be like a hog, or the body of a tree. The Philosophers call a Man a
tree turned upward, because he has his roots in his head.

Q. What is the backe-bone called?
A. It is called Spina Dorsi, by reason of the sharp ends or points, which
each of them has on every side for his defense, as it were thorns. The
Sinews proceed from the marrow of the backe-bone, which marrow proceeds from
the brain. Ten false ribs, and fourteen others meeting together in the
breast for the defense of the heart, and lungs, which are vital parts.

Q. Why is not the belly covered with ribs?
A. For two causes: First, by reason of the meat in it received.

2. Secondly for the benefit of women that bear children. The Share-bone is as
a bulwark to the bones. The bones are nourished with marrow, as the tree with
sap. Vapors, fumes, and smoaky excrements mount upward: therefore the bones
of the head are not so thick, and solid as the rest, to the intent those fumes
might euaporate and pass through the bones, for the better disburthening of
the brain.

Q. How are the bones of the head commodious to the brain?
A. The bones of the head are to the brain in sted of a Helmet to defend it.
All beasts that want neck, want voice, as in fishes and those which are called
infecta animalia.

Q. How is the brain compared?
A. To a VVaggoner: the muscles are compared to bittes, and bridles; the
sinews to reins; the members that move, to horses: and the rest of the body
to the chariot it self so carried.

Of the Flesh.
Q. What is the use of the Flesh?
1. A. To fill up empty places.

2. To strengthen those parts that are environed with it.

3. To defend the members against heat and cold.

4. To serve as a boulfter or pillow, if any man fall or lie down.

5. To shadow the body against heat.

6. To be as a gown against cold.

Of the Kernelles.
Q. What kinds are there of Kernells in the body?
A. Two: Some are more thick and dry, and serve to fasten the upper partition
of the members, and vessels of the body, to the end they should neither break
nor cleave: as in the neck, groyne, arme-pits and other parts.

Others there are not so thick, but more spongie and moist; and full, either
of milk, seed, or a flegmaticke glewish humor.

Q. What is the use of Kernelles?
A. To soake, and drink up (as it were sponges) the fleame that descends
from the brain, that it do not fall upon the lunges or into the stomach, or
other parts, to the danger thereof.

The least part of man's body is full of admiration, and very profitable.

Of the Pappes.
Q. Why are the Pappes situated upon the breast?
1. A. First, to conter-gard the most noble, and necessary parts, as the heart
and lungs.

2. Secondly, to receive heat, and warm'th from the heart.

3. Thirdly, to beautify that part of the body where they are placed.

4. Fourthly, for easy and comodious giving of suck in women, which they may
do either sitting, lying, going or standing.

5. Fifthly, for a testimony of love in the mother toward the children, and
again in the children toward the mother.

The Infant in the mothers womb receaueth nourishment, and breath from the
Nauill: That nourishment is the menstrous blood, which after ch^dbirth
ascends into the breasts, and is converted into milk: The color of it is
changed in the breasts, to the intent it might not seem loathsome.

Of Fat.
Q. What is the use of Fat?
A. To cloth the body and keep it in natural heat, and to supple and anoint
those parts that are in greatest motion. Besides tbe outward skin that couers
the body, there are certain skins within, which are called membranes.

The hair of the head is engendered of gross and fumy excrements.

Q. Where are the bodily Senses situated?
A. They are principaly in the head, which although it be a narrow room, yet
by reason of their consent and agreement, the one does nothinder the office of
another: So ought it to be with men; for the world is big enough, and has
goods enough for all, if we had will to bear one with another, and every man
would be contented with his estate: We ought notoneneighbour to incroach upon
another, no more then does upon the ear.

Of the Senses.
Q. How many Corporal Senses are there?
Sight, Hearing, Taste, touching, Smelling,


A. Five, which are ministers to the Spiritual Senses, namely, --

Q. How many things are required in every Sense?
1 A. Four: First, the power and virtue of the Soul?

2. Secondly, the Instrument.

3. Thirdly, the thing sensible.

4. Fourthly, the mean or way which receives the object, and conueyeth it to
the Instrument.

Q. As for example in the sight?
1. A. There must be first, the power of seeing, which rests in the Soul.

2. Then the eye which is the Instrument.

3. Thirdly, the object, which is seen: as a man, a horse, white, black, etc.

4. Fourthly, The mean by which thelight is communicated with the eye, and so
of the rest of the Senses. The Sense of touching is general to all the parts
of the body. There are some members absolutely necessary, without which death
ensues: as the heart, lungs, liuor, spleen, stomach, etc. Others not so
necessary, but that we may want them: as eyes, ears, nose, tongue, feet.

Of the Eyes.
Q. What are the eyes?
A. The windows of the body. The admirable work of God is perceived in the
matter, whereof the eyes are made; in their beauty and diversity of colors,
and in their use, and commodity.

Q. Why are the eyes given to man?
A. To lead him to the knowledge of God, by the contemplation of his works:
they are the principal members, as being given to the rest. Many Sciences
cannot be learned but by the help of the eye: as Astronomy, and the Anatomy
of man's body, with diverse others. Sight is the first that provoke men to the
study of Wisdom: Science and doctrine is to the mind: as light is to the eye.

As humane bodies are illuminated with the light of the Sun, so the soul and
spiritual bodies are illuminated with Understanding, which is the Eye of the
soul.

As the Eyes cannot see, if they have not as much light as is needful, so if
they have too much they see less: therefore it must be dispensed unto them by
just measure, according to their capacities. God would have some proportion
between the heavens and the head of man: therefore eyes are in him (being
alittle world) as the Sun, Moon, and there lights are in the heavens (the
great and vniuersallworld.) The Eyes have more agreement with the nature of
fire, then any other member belonging to the corporal Senses.

Q. What is the use of the eyes?
A. To behold the works of God, and therefore we ought to beware that we feed
them not with the sight of profane and dishonest things, least they poison the
soul, whose messengers they ought to be to declare unto it virtuous and
healthful things: As the Eyes are placed on high: so they ought to have their
prospect toward heaven: according as King David says, I lift mine eyes to
thee, that dwell in the heavens.

Of the Ears.
Q. What is the use of the Ears?
A. For one Man to communicate his knowledge and the secrets of his mind with
another, and to receive discipline, and instruction of Wisdom. Only man and an
Ape have their Ears immovable.

Q. Why are the Ears made winding, and not outright.
1 A. First because the sounds would not be conveyed in.

2. Secondly, soundes entering too thick ot confused should not be so well
understood.

As too great light does not only dazzle the Eyes, but does also hurt them: so
ouer-great soundes would mar the hearing, if they were not distributed
according to the capacity of the Ear. There must always be an answerable
proportion between the Sense and the thing subject to Sense.

Q. How many bones are in the Ear?
1. A. Three small bones. The first like an Anuile.

2. The second, like a Hammer.

3. The third, like a little Stirrup. The Ears do judge of soundes, notes,
and harmony.

As the Eyes are given to contemplate the works of God: so the Ears are to
receive his word.

As the air carrying the sound into the air, moves the Hammer of the Ears,
and causes it to strike upon the Anuile, and so makes a sound by means of
the little taber, through whose sound the Spirits of hearing are awakened: even
so, God works in his Ministers, who receive his voice after a divine manner,
and then are they (as it were) Hammers to strike upon the Anuile of men's
hearts, by which sound the spirits of the hearers are stirred up.

Of the Tongue.
Q. How many are the uses of the Tongue?
1. A. Three; the first, to frame the speech.

2. The second, to help the taste.

3. The third, to prepare the meat that is chewed in the mouth, for the
nourishing of the body.

Q. What be the instruments of the Voice?
1. A. The Tongue. 2. The Neck. 3. The wesell of the Throat. 4. The Wind
pipes. 5. The Lunges and Breast.


Q. What is the use of the wesell of the Throat?
1. A. To stop the air for rushing in too fast, or ouer-cold.

2. To divide and distribute the air, when it ascends from the Lunges.

3. To help the Tongue to articulate and frame the voice.

Q. How many things are requisite in framing the voice into speech?
A. Five, that is, -- Understanding is nothing without speech, and speech
nothing without Understanding.

The Tongue The Palate The Teeth The Lips The Nose.


The Tongue is given to glorify God, and to show forth his works. The heart of
man is like a Treasury, or a Larder, or a Pantry in a house, out of which all
things necessary for the use thereof and for the maintenance of the whole
family, are daily taken. It is also like a Celler, or Garner, where counsels
and thoughts are locked up, and the Tongue a Steward to draw them out, as need
requires.

Q. How many sorts are there of Speech?
1. A. Two, the one Internal and in the mind: 2. The other External
pronounced by the Tongue.


Q. By what degrees do we come to Speech?
1. A. By four: first, the mind must receive the Images of things presented
unto it by the corporal senses.

2. Secondly, having received them, Reason must discourse to know and consider
of them well.

3. Thirdly, Judgment is necessary to make choice of, and to follow that
which it shall judge convenient and meet, and to reject the contrary.

4. Lastly, all must be uttered by significations, apt and convenient for every
thing. Speech is insensible to all the Senses but hearing.

Although the voice vanish quickly out of the Ear, yet the thing signified
remains in the mind. Voice generally taken, comprehends all soundes, and
things that bring any noise to the Ears. Nevertheless it is most properly
attributed to those soundes, which living Creatures are able to make with their
throat, to signify any thing thereby: man only has articulated and well
distinguished soundes: he that has his Judgment and Reason ripe and pithy, is
able to speak eloquently.

Q. What is Eloquence?
A. Eloquence is a good conceit of the mind, of that which ought to be spoken,
and an ability to utter it inapt words, and sentences, well knit together. The
voices of beasts have no significations but affections. Eloquence is like a
golden chain fixed to men's ears, by which they are drawn to attention by a
sweet and pleasant violence.

As the internal word bred in the mind departs not from it, neither is
separated, and yet imparteth an Image thereof in the hearers, to whom it is
declared; So the Eternal word begotten of the Father, is always resident in
God, and yet imprinteth his Image in the hearts and minds of men.

The tongue is a fleshy member full of Sinews, Arteries and Veins.

Sinews, by reason of the sundry motions it has, and the Sense of Taste and
Touching.

Arteries, that it might have abundance of Spirit. Veins, that it should not
want nourishment.

Q. What is the use of Spittle?
A. Although it be an excrement, yet it is profitable to wet and moisten the
Tongue. There are two kinds of Kernels underneath the root of the Tongue,
called Almonds, which serve to moisten the whole mouth.

Q. What is the difference between Voice and Speech?
A. The one is confused, the other articulate and distinguished, Rhetoric and
Logic are but vain babbling without the knowledge of Gods word. Men are as
Organ-pipes, having neither good sound, nor voice, nor tongue, nor mouth, to
speak of God and his works as we ought, and to praise and glorify him, but
only so far, as he being the Organ-plaier blows and inspireth us with his
holy Spirit. The Tongue is a Messenger and an Interpreter of the Spirit and
mind, and therefore is placed near the brain where all the Spirits lodge.

The external Senses are as messengers to the internal: The heart is the
guide and Counselor of the Tongue; and the brain, the Lord and master: so
that it is fortified both above and beneath.

Q. Why is the Tongue soft?
A. The Tongue is tender, soft and pleasant, to signify that our words should
not be harsh, crabbed or ungentle.

Q. Why is it tied with many threads?
A. to restrain and bridle it. It is blunt every way: whereby we are
admonished that our words ought not to be pricking or hurtful.

Q. Why is it enclosed?
A. It is enclosed with a quicke-set, and Rampire of Teeth, and gummes, and
with lips, which are as gates to shut it up, for fear it should take too
much liberty.

Of the Mouth.
Q. What is the mouth?
A. The Mouth is as a Mill: the Jaws and Teeth as the Mil-stones, and the
Tongue as the hopper. Or thus: The Mouth is as a bake-house, and the Tongue as
a Baker to knead the meal, and as a peele to set and convey it into the
stomach, which is as the Oven.

It is also as a kitchen, and the Teeth as a Cook, to shred and prepare the
meat before it comes to the stomach.

By this we ought to understand, that God has not created them to be idle, as
though he had given them nothing to grind or bake, but as a good worke-maister
has furnished them, and does daily set them at work.

The nether Iaw of all creatures moves in chewing the meat save only in the
Crocodile. The upper Iawe is not moved, for fear of shaking the brain, or
bringing some inconvenience or other unto it, or to some other principal
members placed thereabouts.

Q. How many sorts of Teeth are there?
A. Three -- Incisory or the fore-teeth Dog Teeth The grinders or Iawteeth

Q. What is the Epiglot?
A. The Epiglot is the cover of the Winde-pipe, in fashion triangle like an
Iui-leafe, over which as over a draw bridge the meat passes into the gullet:
so that to speak when we are eating is dangerous, least any thing fall into the
windpipe. The Epiglot must not be so fast shut, but that breath may always
issue forth, and that some thin humor may enter in, to moisten and supple
the lungs, otherwise potions, appointed for that purpose by Physicians, were
vain and unprofitable.

God has made nothing without order and government: and therefore the
Philosophers call the whole frame of the world Mundus, that is to say, an
Ornament, or a well-disposed order of things.

Of the Taste.
Q. What is the Sense of Taste?
A. It is that whereby the Mouth judges of meats, and drinks, which are
good, and which are the contrary. The Taste with those sauorie relishes that
agree with it, receive their virtue and nature from the Elements.

Q. What is the use of the Taste?
A. It serves not only for things that nourish, but also for Medicines, for
all things which the earth brings forth are not good to feed: some things are
diverse from nourishment; as earth, wood, clay, and stones.

As things that are extreme cold or dry, have no smacke or taste, as flax or
towe, so things extreme cold and moist, have their taste less sharp, as
water.

Q. What is the occasion of the Taste?
A. The Taste and relish of things is caused by the good commixture of heat and
moisture. Heat principally preserves life, and least it should consume it
self, Moisture is joined to it to bridle and keep it back.

Simile. As in a Lamp there must be Oil, Wicke and Fire, so in the body of
man, to maintain life, there must be meat, drink, and natural heat to digest
it: for as oil will not burn without wicke, nor wicke without fire, so meat
cannot nourish without heat, nor heat be of any continuance without moisture.

As in a Lamp, an equal proportion must be kept between the oil and the
wicke, least the wicke being too little, the oil do drown it, or the oil
being scant the wicke be too suddenly consumed: even so there ought to be a
moderate proportion in our diet, least by too much meat and too little drink,
digestion be too sudden, or by to much drink and too little meat, Heat (which
causes digestion) be drowned.

As a fire in a chimney decays and goes out, unless it be maintained with
wood, so natural heat in man's body decays and brings death, unless it be
daily nourished with food. If heat be stronger then moisture, it ingendreth
thirst.

Of Thirst.
Q. What is Thirst?
A. Thirst, is an appetite or desire of that which is cold, and moist. If heat
and moistare have mutually consumed each other that they faint, it ingendreth
hunger.

Of Hunger.
Q. What is Hunger?
A. It is an appetite or desire of that which is hot and moist.

The humidity required in thirst, is more thin, and less earthy, then that
which is required in Hunger.

If moisture be increased overmuch, so that heat decreaseth and consequently
the appetite to meat decays, it must be restored by Physic: All nourishment
is Physic, but this is the difference: Food repaireth the whole body, whereas
Physic repaireth only the instruments of the body.

Doctrine from the Taste.
Q. What Doctrine receive we from the Sense of Taste?
A. As the body cannot live without the Taste of material food: so the soul
cannot live without the Taste of Gods word. As natural heat preserves the
body, so the heat of Love and Charity preserves the Soul.

Every living Creature has a desire to preserve himself, which consists in
the equality of heat, and moisture: Of which there may be an inequality, so
that it be such as may be reduced to an equality.

Excess may be repaired by food or Physic, but if by neither, then the
estate is desperate. It is necessary that there should be an inequality of heat
and moisture in the body, otherwise we should never hunger, nor thirst, nor
have any Taste, or pleasure by Taste: and so consequently not be put in mind
of Gods bounty in providing to sustain us.

All meats are not nourishing, but such as are agreeable to the nature of the
thing that is to be nourished.

The difference of the parts of a man's body comes of this only, that some
participate more of some Elements, and others of other: as the bones are more
earthy then the flesh, and the flesh then the blood.

Our food must not be liquide and moist only, but earthy and solid. God has
so tempered things in their creation, as that which retains the nature of
earth is not always earthy, nor that which retains the nature of fire, is
nothing else but fire. Reason is as a spring, and speech the River that flows
from it. He that is sparing to speak to God, and remembers not to give him
thanks at meat, is like to a Hog, that eats Acornes on the ground and
never looks up, nor considers from whence they come. Some men do not only
not praise God at their meat, but profane his name, as Gluttons, Drunkards,
Swearers, etc.

As the brain gives motion to all the Senses: so it is compassed about of
them, as with seruitors and men of guard.

* Whatsoever agrees with the Taste, agrees with the Sent, but whatsoever
has a good savor, has not presently a good Taste.

Smelling and Taste are joined together, the one to help the other.

Our Savior Christ himself did not reject or condemn precious ointments and
sweet odours, but sometime permitted the use of them upon his own person.

The animal Spirits are releiued with sweet savors, and annoyed with the
contrary.

Of the Nose.
Q. Why was the Nose made?
A. The Nose is not created only for smelling, but also for respiration, that
it should be the principal pipe or passage by which the brain and lungs might
draw in, and let out breath, as seems needful.

Q. Why is not the Nose made all of bone, but of gristle?
1. A. For Three reasons, First, for fear of breaking when it hits against any
thing.

2. Secondly, that it might enlarge and restrain it self, according to the
proportion of air that is to be received, or to be expelled.

3. Thirdly, that it might be strained (being as it were a sincke to purge the
brain) to get out thick and clammy humors, which will sometimes stick in it.

Q. Why is the Nose made wide at the entry?
A. It is wide at the entry, and narrow and subtle afterward, that the air
might not rush into the brain too suddenly, nor too cold, but by means of
tarriance and slow passage be heated and better tempered.

Whensoeuor we smell a stinking infectious savor, it ought to put us in mind
how odious and stinking sin is in the nostrils of God.

Why should we esteem of our bodies as we do, seeing the noblest and neatest
parts thereof are but sinckes and draught to disburthen it of excrements, and
superfluities, as the eyes, ears, and mouth.

The Instruments of the external Senses receive, from without, that which
belongs to their nature, and not by sending forth any thing of their own:
for if they send forth any thing, it rather hinders then helps: as we see
in the eyes when men weep, or when any humor runs out of them.

Of the Face.
Q. What is the description of an angry visage?
A. The eyes will sparckle like fire, and the breath smoke as if it came from a
furnace.

It is to be wondered that in so great similitude of Faces there is so great
dissimilitude: for there are hardly two seen so like, but some difference will
appear: There is great difference to be seen in one and the same man's face,
according as he is either merry, or sad, angry or pacified, humble and modest,
or lofty and proud.

Q. What be the faculties?
A. Three,

Animal Vital Natural


Q. What the Animal faculty?
A. Threefold,

Principal Sensitive Motive


Q. What the Principal faculty?
A. The Principal is fiuefold,

Common sense Fantasy Imagination Reason Memory


Common Sense, Imagination, and Fantasy, are by some not distinguished, but
taken all for one.

The Sensitive faculty comprehends the five corporal Senses.

The motive, the moving of all the outward parts of the body from place to
place. Motion is caused by the Sinews, Muscles, and Filaments.

Q. What be the Animal virtues?
1. A. Thought. 2. Understanding. 3. Knowledge of numbers and order. 4. Reason.
5. Judgment. 6. Memory. 7. Election.


Q. How many kinds of Knowledge?
1. A. Three; The first apprehends things corporal that are present before
it, whereunto belong the five external Senses.

2. The Second takes notice of things absent; as when the external Senses are
retired, the remembrance yet of that was seen, heard, tasted, smelt, or
touched, remains still with us.

3. The third has relation to things spiritual, and supernatural: which
knowledge is proper to man only.

Q. What is the Natural power?
A. The Naturallpower is three fold:

Nourishing Augmenting Ingendring.


And these have 6. other virtues. viz.

Attractiue Retentiue Digestive Distributive Incorporatiue Expulsive.


Q. What be the Animal powers in the internal Senses?
1. A. Imagination, Common Sense, or fantasy, which apprehends the Images of
things offered unto them by the outward Senses.

2. Memory, which retayneth them, that they may be brought forth when need
requires.

3. Reason, which examineth them, what is to the purpose, and what not.

4. Judgment, which makes choice, allows or disalloweth.

The Soul cannot be known as it is, but by the Creator that made it, for that
in us there is no nature more high, or excellent to comprehend it. The vital
power remains in the heart; The natural or Nutritive in the Liuor.

Of the Brain.
Q. What is the Brain?
A. It is the lodging of the Internal Senses. As the head has a certain
agreement with the heavens, and the Eyes with the celestial lights: so the
Brain approaches nearer to the divine Nature, then any other part of the whole
body.

Q How many parts are attributed to Man's body?
1. A. Three; The first, and highest is in the Brain, where the Animal
virtues do abide.

2. The second in the breast, for the vital powers.

3. The third, from the Midriffe to the Sharebone, for the natural Powers.

Q. What Membranes belong to the Brain?
1. A. Two: The first is called Duramater, being hard and thick.

2. The Second Membrane, or skin, is called Piamater, which is very fine, and
slender, wouen of veins, and arteries, compassing the brain, and entering into
the windings, and Bowels thereof.

Q. What is the use of the skin called Piamater?
1. A. To defend the Brain from the skull.

2. To serve for a passage to the veins and arteries, for the nourishing
thereof.

3. To distinguish the Brain into that before, and that behind.

Q. What is the office of the Brain?
1. A. To give Sense, and Motion.

2. To fine the Animal Spirit.

3. To be an instrument to the faculty of Reason, which is the chiefest power
of the Soul.

Q. How many ventricles are in the head?
1. 2. A. Four: The first two are before in fashion like two half moons,
meeting together in one pipe like the Bellows of a Smith.

3. The third, is in the midst of the Brain.

4. The fourth, behind toward the nape of the Neck.

Q. What is the difference of a moist and dry Brain?
A. The one receaueth more easily into the memory that which is offered unto
it, and soonest lets it slip again. The other receaueth more slowly, and
retayneth better.

Of the Fantasy.
Q. What is the Fantasy?
A. It is a faculty which comprehends the shapes, forms, and Images of
things, brought unto it by the common Sense, under which are comprehended the
visions of the head.

All the knowledge that is in the mind of man, proceeds not from the outward
Senses: The outward Senses are the messengers of the mind, and witnesses of
experience: The external Senses have no judgment of the objects, and
impressions, which they outwardly receive, but by means of the common Sense.

Q. Has not the Fantasy very various effects?
A. Yes, The faculty of the Fantasy is sudden, and so far from stayednes,
that even in the time of sleep it hardly takes any rest, but is always
occupied in dreaming and doting; yea, even about those things which never have
been, can, or shall be: For it stays it not in that which it receaueth from
the Senses, but adds, or diminishes, changes, or rechangeth as it lists.

The Fantasye can counterfeit nothing, except it first have some ground in
nature, and the works of God, which when it once has obtained, It is a wonder
what strange inventions it forgeth.

Q. What motions is the Fantasy subject unto?
A. By reason of the agreement that is between Spiritual natures, the
Fantasy is very subject to the Motions of good or ill Spirits: for as Angels
do represent unto our minds good, and heavenly things, whether we be waking
or sleeping: even so evil spirits trouble us with diverse bad illusions,
according as they find us apt, or disposed thereunto.

Q. What is the force of Imagination?
A. It is such as oftentimes it printeth in the body the Images of those things
it apprehends, as in the longings of women with child,

Many times also, we see some as can hardly go over a bridge, by reason of
the apprehension of the danger, which they have conceived in their Fantasy or
Imagination.

It is not without Reason also, where it is said, Fantasy breeds the fact:
for we see many fall into those mishaps which they have forged, and imprinted
in their own Imagination.

Of Reason.
Q. What is Reason?
A. It is a faculty of the Soul, able to judge of things imagined, and
perceived by the other Senses, to know whether they be good, or bad, and what
is to be embraced or eschewed.

Q. Where is the seat of Reason?
A. It is placed in the midst of the brain, as in the safest fortress of
the whole frame of man, to reign amidst all the other Senses, as a Prince, and
Lord over them all.

Q. What is the Memory?
A. It serves in place of a Secretary, or as a Register-booke, in which is
entered whatsoever is ordained, or decreed by Reason.

Q. Where is the seat of Memory?
A. It is placed in the hinder parts of the brain.

Q. What is the difference of the Senses?
1. A. The knowledge that we have by outward Sense, is as if we beheld the
shadow of a thing.

2. By Imagination and Fantasy, as if we did look upon the Image, which has
a more clear and lively representation, then the shadow has.

3. By Understanding, as if we vewed not only the shadows or Images, but also
the very bodies.

4. By Reason, as if beside the shadow, Image, and body, we saw also the
effects and virtues.

Q. What is the agreement of the Senses?
1. A. The outward Sense ferueth the Imagination and Fantasy. 2. Fantasy,
Understanding. 3. Understanding, Consideration. 4. Consideration, Recordation.
5. Recordation, Conference. 6. Conference, Reason. 7. Reason, Memory; and
Memory serves them all.


Q. What be the effects of Reason?
1. A. It discerns falsehood from truth, and good from bad.

2. It considers the quality and quantity of things presented unto it by the
Common Sense.

Q. What is Contemplation?
A. It is a settled and assured view of all those things that have been culled
out by Reason and Judgment.

Q. Is there not a double discourse of Reason in man?
1. A. Yes: The one consists in Speculation, whose end is Faith.

2. The other in Practice, whose end is Well doing.

As the outward, so the internal Senses, some of them may be perished and
impaired, and yet the rest remain sound and perfect. As the Imagination may be
perished, when we conceive and think that to be which is not: as they that have
persuaded themselves to have horns or Serpents in their bodies, or to be made
of glass, and so imagined, that whosoever pusht against them would strike them
in pieces.

Q. When is Reason troubled?
A. When we cannot conceive, judge, nor examine things aright, according as
they ought to be considered of: as in those that wil-fully kill, or do commit
other mischievous deeds without Sense or Consideration of what they do.

Q. Does not Memory sometime fail us.
A. Yes; Memory has been in many so decayed, as some have been seen who not
only have forgot whatsoever was past, but have also lost the remembrance of
their own names, their friends, their parents, and places, where they had
been borne and bred.

Q. Wherein does the good of beasts consist?
A. The proper and natural good of beasts consists in corporal things
belonging to the body.

The good whereunto man is inclined, and ought to direct his thoughts,
cogitations and actions, is spiritual and Eternal.

Q. What do the internal and external Senses in man serve for?
A. Not only for the good of his body and for this life, as they do in
beasts: but also for the good of the soul, and a better life then can here be
found.

Of the Spirit and Fantasy.
Q. What is the contention between the Spirit and Fantasy.
A. Fantasy and Imagination, being near to the corporal Senses, draw the
soul to those things that are bodily: but Reason and the Spirit prick it
forward, and cause it to lift up it self to more excellent things.

Q What is meant by a reasonable Soul?
A. We understand by a reasonable soul, or life, such a soul and life, as
has Counsel, Judgment, and Discretion.

As there is nothing more excellent then Reason, so there is nothing that more
be seems Reason, then to know, love, and honor God.

Man of all other creatures is capable of Religion, the fruit whereof
consists not in this mortal life, but in the life to come, which may be an
argument to prove the Soul of man immortal. The Soul of man is given unto
him, more to use then to know, for the knowledge thereof belongs to God.

Reason has proper actions, virtues and motions, which it can and does
exercise without the help of bodily instruments, as it happens in holy men,
who have been ravished in Spirit in the contemplation of celestial and divine
things.

Q. What be the faculties of Reason?
A. Reason, the sovereign part of the Understanding and Will. Soul, has two
faculties

For it being so, that man is created to eternal happiness; therefore God has
given him the power and virtue to wish for it, to the end he might desire to
apply and join himself unto it. This power and virtue is called The Will.

And for that he cannot will and desire any good, unless he first understand
and know the same, he has therefore also given him Understanding.

Of Consideration.
Q. What is Consideration?
A. It is (as it were) a Repetition, or after-Examination, of things committed
to Memory, that at length it may determine and judge what is true, what false,
what good, and what evil:

Q. What degrees are there between Judgment and Will?
A. Will does follow after, or refuse nothing, but that which Judgment has
first determined to be good or evil: and Judgment decrees nothing before it
be advised by Reason.

Reason advises not before she have conferred things one with another, and
thoroughly examined them, which property she takes from Consideration:
Consideration has nothing without requiring it of Memory; and Memory will keep
nothing but what is committed unto it by Knowledge and Understanding?

Of things infinite there can be no certain knowledge, as in particular things,
which are infinite in regard of our capacity.

Of generals, albeit they are also variable, yet some rules may be given of
them, of which the Art follows after, and yet no such certain rules, but
often it falls out otherwise: as we see in many Arts and sundry experiences.
For though it be ordinary for women to love their children, yet there are some
that murder them cruelly: so that this argument follows not, She is a mother,
therefore she loves her child: But she is a mother, Therefore she ought to
love her child.

Of Discourses.
Q. How many kinds are there of Discourses?
1. A. Two; the one wherein Reason goes on by degrees in continual order,
examining whatsoever pertayneth to the matter in hand, that so a sound Judgment
may be rendered afterward.

2. The other, wherein Reason does not only run amain, but withal skippeth
hither, and thither, as though it took here a little, and there a little,
tasting only of things very slightly, and by the way; As Bees that fly from
one flower to another, and leave others between untouched: which kind of
Discourse is often times fayleable, and erroneous.

There is also great variety of Discourses, according to the variety of men's
understandings,

Q. What is the end of all Discourses?
A. Either the Invention or Conclusion of the thing that a Man seeks for.

A. What if he attain it not?
1. A. It is either, because he takes not the right way.

2. By the darkness of understanding:

3. By perturbation of the affections.

4. By variety of Cogitations, which trouble and hinder one another.

5. Or because of too much have, or swiftnes, in the Imagination, which runs
beyond the place, where he might find the thing he looks for.

The seeds of all the operations of the Soul are in every one from their
creation; yet as the body has his degrees of grouth in every part thereof, so
the Soul has some agreement therewith in this respect, touching the
manifestation of powers, and virtues.

Q. What is the office of Judgment?
A. To judge, whether Reason discourse and conclude as it ought to do.

A sound Judgment is an excellent gift of God. If Judgment approve the
Conclusion made by Reason, this approbation is called Consent: But if it judge
it to be false, it turns aside, and rejects it; and this refusal is
called Dissent.

Q. How many kinds are there of Consent?
1. A. Two: The one is firm and steadfast, certain, and thoroughly resolved,
which is called Belief.

2. The other, an inclination rather to one part, then to another, but yet such
as we are not fully resolved therein: And this is called Opinion.

Of Belief.
Q. What agreement is there between Belief, and Science?
A. Science is a kind of knowledge, wherein the demonstration made unto us
compels to approve that is spoken, because we see the reasons so certain
that we cannot gaynesaye them.

Belief is a kind of knowledge that causes us (without doubting) to give
creditto that which is told.

Q. What is Doubting?
A. It is a Neuter Judgment, hanging between Consent and his contrary, and
inclining neither to the one side, nor the other.

Q. What is the difference between Belief in humane matters, and Belief in
religion, and divine matters?
A. In humane matters our Belief is grounded upon evident reasons, and
undoubted testimonies, and so is Belief in Religion likewise.

But in Religion we do not only believe that to be true which we hear, but
we trust that God will perform the same, without any further authority or
reason, other then that he has said it; and therefore we believe undoubtedly
it will be so.

Q. What be the diverse acceptions of the word Faith, or Belief?
A. In the Hebrew it is taken for Verity or Truth.

In the Greek, wherein the Evangelists and Apostles writ, for Persuasion.

Amongst the Latins, it signifies Constancy, and Truth, which Men keep in
their words, and promises: whereupon they call it the foundation of Justice.

Q. What is Christian Faith?
A. It is a certain, and undoubted confidence of heavenly things, and an
assured persuasion of the acknowledgement of Gods promises toward us.

Q. How many means are there to know those things that are to be believed?
1. A. Four; The first is Common Experience, which is a Judgment that men
have by their corporal Senses, which they give all after one sort, as who
knows not fire is hot, water moist, and such like,

2. The second is knowledge of principles, which is borne with us, and is the
seed of all arts, and a beam of the light of God in us, to the end that by
this means, all arts necessary for life should be invented, and put in use,
As for example: Every one by Nature knows that the whole is more then the
half, Three more then Two; In a word, we may refer to these Principles
whatsoever God has imprinted in our hearts, and minds, of the Law of Nature.

3. The Third kind of knowledge is natural Judgment whereby men are able to
censure of the agreement, and disagreement of things, in so much as every one
seems to have a Natural Logic in himself.

4. The fourth mean of knowledge is divine Revelation, set down in the Books
of the Prophets, and Apostles, with a true understanding of them, by the holy
Spirit.

Q. What is the law of God?
1. A. It is twofolde: Natural, bred in Men's hearts from their creation: for
there is no Nation or people, but have some religion, either true or false.

2. Written, which is comprehended in the Books of God.

The greatest likeness, and resemblance that Man can have with God, consists
in the agreement with him in wisdom, and Justice.

If man had continued in his first integrity, the light which is now
supernatural in him, would have been natural, in all that knowledge of God,
which is necessary for him, to the end whereunto he was created.

Of Opinion.
Q. Are not Opinions diverse?
A. Yes: Opinions, and Suspicions are not grounded upon firm arguments, nor
certain and evident reasons, because in them there is only a show of Truth,
and nothing very certain.

Things, albeit they be mutable, yet if they always keep one tenor and
course, there may be a certain knowledge had of them, and that is called
Science: as in mankind for example. It is a perpetual and natural order and
course, for man to beget man: the same may be said of other living creatures.
But in things immutable and supernatural, we have need of another kind of
light: as the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation.

Q. Why are Arts and Sciences dark and obscure?
A. They are not obscure in respect of themselves, but in respect of our dull
capacity and ignorance.

As every one has more light of mind, so does he behold obscure things more
clearly, because his understanding is better.

Q. How comes that to pass?
A. It happens either by The benefit of nature By study and exercise, or by a
special gift of God.

Natural and Supernatural


Q. What light is in man?
A. There is in man a twofold light.

By Natural light, we know a man as he is compounded of flesh and blood.

By Supernatural light: as he is compounded of body and Soul, to the service
of God, and an inheritor of heaven.

Some there are that want light of mind, even in things that are clear and
manifest.

Q. How happens that?
1. A. It befalls them three ways; either through blockishnesse of
Understanding.

2. Negligence and want of Exercise, or

3. By the just judgment of God: who for their sins has blinded their
minds, as wordly, carnal and unfaithful men.

As things put between our eyes and light are either thick and foggy, thin
and transparent, so do our eyes receive more or less light: in like manner
the light of Understanding is wonderful variable, by reason of the diversity
of things set before it in this life, to hinder it sundry ways, In some more,
in some less.

The manners of men follow the disposition of their bodies: for God has so
tempered the nature thereof with that of the Soul to make them agree well
together, as the one takes much of the other, either to good or bad purpose,
as they are either well or ill affected.

Of the Soul and Spirit.
Q. What is the Difference between the Soul and the Spirit.
A. By the Soul is understood Man, as he is borne, having the use of the
Animal, natural, and vital powers.

2. By the Spirit, whatsoever grace and knowledge is given unto man by God. So
that by Soul is understood Man, as he is in the corruption of his nature: and
by Spirit, as he is regenerate and borne anew.

There are degrees appointed, by which the body ascends to his perfection,
and descends again to his dissolution; but the Soul has no such degrees,
by reason it is neither Corporal nor mortal, but remains in the substance
and nature which first it had, which is celestial and divine; but if the
question be of the powers and virtues thereof, the Soul may be thought to
increase or diminish according to the growth and decay of the body: but it is
not so; for the reason is, because she is manifested more in one age then
another.

God does not bestow his gifts at once, but by little and little, as be judges
expedient.

Q. Is not the Soul corrupt?
A. No: the Soul is so far from corruption, that it keeps the body from
corrupting, as long as it is therein.

The Soul is compared to a cunning workman, who without his works is
notwithstanding a workman, and to a Musition, who without his instruments is
not withstanding a Musition: so the Soul, removed from the members of the
body, remains notwithstanding perfect in her own nature, and of no less
hability and power then she was before.

As God is in a manner made visible unto us by his works, so is the Soul by
her effects and faculties, proceeding from the body.

God works in the world, as the Soul does in the body of man.

As there is but one Soul in one body, sufficient for all the parts thereof,
so there is but one God in the world, sufficient for all the creatures:

Q. What is the principal effect of the Soul?
A. It is to give life: The Soul being a spiritual nature is known by her
effects: The Understanding cannot attain to an entire and perfect knowledge of
the Soul: from the Soul proceeds the Invention of all Arts and Sciences.

The Soul is a more excellent creature then either Firmament, Sun, Moon, or
Stars, or any thing created under the cope of heaven, for that it is endued
with Reason and Immortality, which they are not.

Q. How are the creatures of God distinguished?
A. All creatures are either

Spiritual or bodily.


Spiritual creatures are they, which wanting bodies are not subject to bodily
Sense, and such are Angels, and the Spirits of men.

Bodily creatures are those which are visible, and may befelt and perceived by
the external Senses, whereof there are two sorts.

1. Some having life. 2. And some none.


Q. What are those that have no life?
A. They differ in two respects; some of them have no natural motion: as
Stars, Metals and Minerals; other have: as Fire, Air, Winds.

Of those that have motion, some are corruptible, and subject to change, as
Fire, Water, Air.

Others incorruptible, continuing always firm in their state, during the
course of this world; as the Sun, Moon, and Stars: For the change that is
amongst them, is not in their own substance, Nature, and quality, but in
regard of us, and of our sight.

Q. How many sorts are there of Creatures that have life?
A. Four. viz.

Vegetative Sensitive Cogitatiue Rational.


Q. Wherein do they consist?
1. A. Vegetative, consists in herbs, Trees, and plants.

2. Sensitive, in Sea sponges, Cockles and Oisters.

3. Cogitatiue, in brute beasts, having the virtue of Cogitation, knowledge,
and Memory, how to preserve their lives, guide, and govern themselves,
according to natural inclination.

4. Rational, endued with Reason, and Understanding, and containing (besides)
all the other three.

Q. How many kinds of appetites are there?
A. Three: that is

Natural Sensitive Voluntary.


Q. How is the Natural appetite divided?
1. A. Into two sorts, common to all creatures, whether they have life or no
life,, which is an inclination without action: as when we say: Heavy things go
downward, and light things upward.

2. And another kind which has an action joined with inclination, and yet
proceeds not of any Sense, which property is proper to plants: for we see by
experience, that they have an appetite to draw unto them, and to retain that
which is meet for their nature and food: as if a Tree wax dry, it draws
moisture.

And this appetite is also of two sorts: the one without Sense, as before, and
the other with Sense, and feeling: as in the parts of man's body, and in hunger,
thirst: and the Seat of this appetite is properly in the liuor.

Some members of the body serve themselves: and their appetite is without
Sense: and some serve the whole body, and their appetite is with Sense, as in
the stomach, hunger.

Q. How is the Sensitive appetite divided?
A. Into two sorts likewise: Either with touching, as heat, Cold, Dryness, or
moisture; or without touching, and follow the thought, and Imagination of Man,
which are properly called affections, and have their seat in the heart.

By affections are meant properly those motions of the heart, which follow
knowledge, and either seek after, or reject, that which is offered unto them.

Q. What is the end of knowledge?
A. To desire that good which it knows, and in desiring to follow the same,
until it has joined and knit it self unto it, as near as is possible.

As all rivers have their beginning from the sea, and thither do return
again: so all good comes from God, and to him must he referred. The love of
God is twofold toward Man; the one general, as we are the Sons of Adam,
and the Images of himself: and the other more special toward his Flect, as
they are regenerate, and borne anew in Christ Jesus.

Q. To whom is the Third kind of appetite proper?
A. The Third kind of appetite (called voluntary) is proper to Man only, and
is that faculty and virtue of the Soul, whereby we desire that which is good,
and eschew evil; commonly called the Will: which faculty is guided, and
directed by Reason.

That which is called Will in man, is in beasts called Sensual appetite.
Sensual knowledge is given for Sensual goods, and Spiritual knowledge for
those goods that are Spiritual.

Of Reason, and Will.
Q. What be the acceptions of these words Reason, and Will?
A. They be diverse: Reason is sometimes taken for the Mind that gives
Direction, and Counsel; and for the Will that obayeth and restrains the
affections.

Reason is also taken for the arguments, and discourses of Reason: So that
Reason is first taken for the power of the Soul, and next for the Act that
proceeds from that power.

The like may be said of the word Will: for it is commonly taken not so much
for the power and virtue which the Soul has to Will, as for the act, and
effect of willing?

Q. How many are the actions of the Will?
1. A. Two: The one, an inclination to good.

2. The other an eschewing of evil.

Though Reason rule as a Prince or Magistrate over the other parts, and
virtues of the Soul, yet to Will she is as the Councellor, or director to
admonish, or conduct: So that the Will desires, or refuses, nothing which
Reason has not first showed that it is either to be desired, or disdained.

The Will has no light of it self, but is lightened by the mind, that is to
say, by reason and understanding.

Q. What is the natural disposition of the Will?
A. It is always inclined to good, or to that which seems to be good, and to
shun that which is evil, or has a show of evil: when the Will follows
any other object but that which is good, it proceeds from Sin, which
reigns in us through the corruption of nature.

As the Image of God does shine in us by understanding, so does it also by the
will, which is without constraint or violence: for as God works what it
pleases him with all liberty: even so he has appointed the Will to do, which
he has given to Men and Angels.

If the Will were not created of God, to follow that which is good, there would
be no cause, why it should love or desire virtue more then vice, or love God
rather then hate him.

Q. What is the difference between Reason, Judgment and Contemplation?
1. A. Reason is (as it were) the inquisition of the truth that is sought for.

2. Judgment is (as the election) that makes choice of the truth.

3. Contemplation, a quiet, and settled be holding of all those things that were
gathered together by Reason, and approved by Judgment.

We ought to join action with Contemplation.

As the nature of man is more noble and excellent, so will he delight in
heavenly and celestial things; and the more abject, earthly, and vile it is,
the more pleasure will he take in things base, and contemptible.

As God has given us understanding to know him and his law, so has he given
us a Will to follow him, and his law, so far forth as our Nature is capable
thereof: But by reason of natural corruption, which remains in us, our
understanding is darkened by Ignorance, and our Will searches after other
things and leaves the knowledge of God.

As beasts have a kind of Knowledge agreeable to their Nature, and to the
quality of that good, which being fit for them, is the greatest they can
attain unto: So also has man a knowledge according to his nature, and the end
for which he was created.

Q. What is the difference between the Natural man, and the man Regenerate?
A. The one is guided by the light of nature, and the other by the Spirit of
God.

The one propounds God unto it self, as the sovereign good, in whom alone
it is satisfied.

The other seeks after no other good, then that which consists in this
temporal life, and the commodities thereof: As moral virtues, riches, honor
and such like.

When understanding is blinded, the will is turned out of the way.

Q. What is the power of the Will?
1. A. It is in the choice of the Will, whether she will propound a thing to
the mind to be consulted of, or not.

2. Upon deliberation, she may command to prosecute the same, or to defer
it.

3. If consultation be finished, and judgment given, yet may the Will stay her
self from following after that which is judged to be good by Reason.

Q. What is the difference of man's obedience toward God, and of other
creatures?
A. Men, and Angels obey God according to judgment, and knowledge. But other
creatures, Beasts, plants and stones, obey God, not of any knowledge that
they have of his will, nor of any Judgment to discern good from evil, but
only so far forth as they are drawn by natural inclination to those things
that concern their Nature.

Of the Heart, and of the affections of the Soul.
Q. What is the difference between Understanding and the Will and affections?
A. Understanding is placed in the brain.

The will, and affections in the heart: whereby it comes to pass that we
see many endued with great knowledge of honest, and virtuous things, but they
have no good affection to follow after them, and to put them in practice;
because their heart and their brain, their understanding, and their will,
agrees not. Besides, weesee many have a will to do well, yet for want of
understanding do fail therein, because they know not what is just.

Or the difference is thus; Understanding goes before the affections, and they
follow: as we cannot hate nor love before we know the thing to be hated or
loved.

The affections of the heart resemble a fiery furnace, or a thick smoke
ascending out of a fire, which blinds, whereby the mind, reason, and memory
are darkened.

Q. What is the Heart?
A. It is the first that receives life, and the last that leaves it.

Besides, it is the shop of the vital Spirits, without which no member of
the body is able to live, or perform his duty, and therefore not without cause
taken in the Scripture not only for the seat of affections, but also of Reason
and Understanding: God has made the heart like a Piramide or flame offire, to
signify, that it is the place of that natural fire which is in the body,
appointed to give it so much natural heat as is necessary for the life
thereof.

The air that cooles the heart is first prepared in the lungs, that it may not
enter in, too hot, or too cold. Sense and Motion are carried by the animal
power in the Sinews from the brain: Life from the heart in the arteries,
which is the Vitallpower; and blood from the Liuor in the veins, which is the
naturallpower. Although the heart gives life unto the whole body, yet can it
not live alone without the necessary help of other members.

Q. Where is the situation of the Heart?
A. It is in the breast, the form there of is Piramicall' the matter and
substance hard and thick flesh.

There are two hollow places in the heart: the one on the right, containing the
blood that comes from the liuor, the other on the left side, where the vital
Spirits are engendered, and is conveyed by the great artery, which a little from
the heart divides it self into two branches, the one whereof ascends
upward, the other descends downward.

Q. What is the vital Spirit?
A. It is a certain bright and lively flame, like to the celestial nature,
which gives life and heat to the whole body.

Q. What are the Affections?
A. We call them the motions of the Soul, which consist in the following
after good and eschewing of evil.

Man was not onelyereated to be, but to be well, for God has not only given
man aninclination to preserve himself in life, but an appetite also and desire
of that which is good, to the intent he might be well. In the pursuit of
good, evil (which is the contrary) must be flied from.

Some affections go before judgment, as those that are engendered of the
disposition of the body, as hunger, thirst, sorrow, in time of sickness, joy
proceeding of purebloud. And some follow after judgment, as those that have
their original from the disposition of the mind, as faith, hope, charity and
such like.

Q. What agreement is there between the qualities and temperature of the
body, and the affections of the Soul?
A. There is great agreement: insomuch that as the bodies of men are compounded
of the qualities of heat, cold, moisture and dryness: so are the affections
either hot, cold, dry, or moist, or mingled of their diverse qualities, so that
every one is most subject to those affections that come nearest to the nature,
temperature, and complexion of the body.

As for Example.

Joy is hot and moist; therefore children, young men, and healthful persons,
are inclined most to that affection, which are hot and moist.

Sorrow is cold and dry, therefore it is most incident to old folks and
melancholy persons, which are cold and dry.

As the affections follow the temperature of the body, so have they great power
and sway over the body.

Q. What are we taught by the agreement between the affections of the Soul,
and the temperature of the body?
A. We may learn to be moderate in eating, and drinking: for as we are either
temperate or intemperate, so the affections of the Soul will be more moderate,
or immoderate, and the perturbations which they shall bring with them, will be
greater or lesser, more easy or uneasy to be provoked, or appeased.

We ought to be careful to live soberly, since the temperance or intemperance
of the body extends to the help or maintenance, or to the hurt or trouble of
the Soul.

The affections breed the health or sickness of the Soul, according as they
are either temperate or intemperate. Virtue is the health of the Soul, Vice
the sickness, sin the cause of all disorders, diseases, and death.

Q. How many things are to be required in knowledge?
1. A. Three: The first is natural principles, which are marks and notes of
nature, as to know fire is hot, water is cold, etc.

2. The second is actions, which compare one thing with another, separate,
discourse, judge, approve, or refuse, and besides are sudden, and pass
lightly without stay:

3. The third, Habites, which are an often musing, or meditating upon things,
until they are imprinted so in the mind, as they can hardly or never be
forgotten.

Q. How many things are to be considered in the Soul?
A. Four, viz.

Natural inclinations Actions Habits and Affections.


We are naturally inclined to love our wives, children, and kinsfolk; which
natural inclination well ordered is the Fountain of virtue, but disordered,
The original of vice.

Love toward our selves, and all other creatures ought to be guided by Faith,
and inkindled by the holy Ghost, that is to say, it must be in God, and for
God, as the love of Abraham to Isaac.

Virtues used in excess turn into vices, as Severity into Cruelty, Love into
fond dotage. As diseases engender in the body of the humors that are in it,
according to their change, mingling, or corruption, so it falls out in the
nature of the Soul, and the affections thereof.

Of the actions of the Soul, four are at the first perfect and absolute, as
sight, or hearing; others want use, and exercise, to make them perfect, as Art,
Science, Prudence, and such like.

Use breeds custom, and custom grows into a habit, which is a constant
desiring of a thing, or eschewing of the same.

Q. How far extends the Habit?
A. Not only to those things which we do, but to those things which we
suffer, and are displeasing, and contrary to our nature: for Custom by a
little and little diminishes the Sense of grief, and pain, as appears in
diseases, which commonly seem not so grievous, and intolerable unto us, after
we have been long accustomed unto them, as in the beginning of them. The like
may be said of poverty and affliction.

Q. Why is it more easy to follow vice then virtue?
A. The reason is, because the one is more agreeable to our corrupt nature: But
how hard soever it be to our flesh to follow virtue, yet Custom will make it
easy,

Therefore it is good to be accustomed to good things. There is nothing of
greater force either to good or evil then custom, which seems to be
another nature. To do is not sufficient, but to do well.

Unless we attain to a Habit in goodness, two Inconveniences do follow: our
Soul either works in vain, or, like a new Apprentise, unskillfully.

Habit is nothing else but a perfection, or expertnes in any thing confirmed by
Time, use, and custom. When the actions of an affection are grown to be
habites, then are they called either virtues, or vices, according as they are
either well, or ill done.

Q. Why has God given affections to the Soul?
A. That it might be wakened and stirred up, as it were with pricks, thereby
to be kept from idleness, and from being lulled a sleep, and oppressed with the
heaviness of the body, and so neglect the care of good things, and of that which
is very expedient, and profitable for it self.

Q. Of what sort are the affections of the Soul?
A. The affections of the soul are twofold; Some are as Spurs to prick her
forward.

Others as a bridle to hold her back. The pricks that move the Soul forward
are sometimes too sharp, as in Covetousness, or the Care which we take for
things necessary for this life.

Q. Why are the affections of the Soul compared to the waves of the Sea?
A. Some winds are very small, and move the water but a little.

Others are more vehement and raise up certain waves; and some again are so
tempestuous, and make such horrible storms and gulfes, as Sea, Sand, and Fish,
seem to be turned topsy-turuy. Even so the affections of the Soul, some are
so light as they seem to be nothing else but small beginnings of moving.

There are other stronger, which move it somewhat more.

Some also are so violent, that they trouble it, and drive the soul out from
her Seat of Judgment, which are properly called Perturbations and Commotions:
but the other two kinds of motions, are called Affections. Perturbations are
also called Passions, because when we see any one violently carried away with
any affection, either of anger, grief, joy, or such like, we say, he is
Passionate.

Q. What is the original of violent motions in the Soul?
A. They proceed of Ignorance and Inconsiderateness, or through a false
persuasion, which makes us think that the good or evil is greater then
indeed it is.

If we see any affection to begin to move by the means of natural
inclination, we ought presently to stay it, compelling it to obey and give
place to right judgment.

Q. How many kinds are there of good?
1. A. Two: The one in Nature. 2. The other in Opinion.


The more the judgment is infected and plunged in the flesh, the more carnal
are the affections, the more violent, and the more in number.

Contrariwise, the more pure the judgment is, and the higher lifted from the
flesh and the earth, the fewer and lighter are the affections that trouble it.

Q. What is the number and variety of Affections?
A. The number of the affections is infinite, not in respect of their nature,
but in regard of us that cannot comprehend it.

Q. What is the cause of all motions in the Soul?
A. They are in regard of some good we seek, or of some evil we would avoid:
therefore every motion tends to good, or withdraws it self from evil,
which is either present, past, or to come,

Q. How many kinds are there of Punishment?
1. A. Two: The Punishment by loss.

1. And the punishment in Sense and feeling.

The wicked are not only deprived of a blessed life, but, besides that, are
detained in perpetual torment.

The motion of that present good, which we have already gotten, is called Joy.

The motion of some good to come, is called Desire.

If the matter be of some evil, it is called Offense, because the Soul is
offended and displeased therewith.

This displeasure (confirmed) is turned into hatred.

Grief, is for some present evil.

Fear, of some evil to come.

Q What is the motion against a present evil?
1. A. Anger. 2. Envy. 3. Indignation.


Q. What against an evil to come?
1. A. Confidence. 2. Boldness.


Q. How are the Affections comprehended?
Favor A. One under another, as Reverence under Delight, under Joy. Mercy.
Love. Hope, under Desire. Desire, under grief. Envy Spring of Love: As I love
my wife, therefore I hate him that hurts her. Hatred Anger Pride is a monster
compounded of Joy Desire Boldness.

As in a sedition, or civil dissension, few or none consider who is the
worthier person to obey and follow, but who is the stronger and most mighty: so
in the fight of the affections there is no respect had to that which is most
just, but to that only which is strongest, and most violent, and which has
gotten such power over the Soul, that it has wholly subdued her unto it.

What soever affections are in us, there is always some joy, or some grief,
joined with them.

Q. How many are the motions of the heart?
1. A. Two: The first serves for the refreshing, maintenance, and preservation
of the same.

2. The second is in the embracing, or refusing, of such affections as are
wholesome, or hurtful, both for the body and Soul.

Joy does open and enlarge the heart.

Griese causes it to retire, and close vpit self.

The face is as a glass, or Image, wherein joy and gladness is represented.

Of Joy, and Sorrow.
Q. What is Joy?
A. It is a motion of the Soul, proceeding from the judgment of some good,
which is already present, or certainly near at hand.

Q. Why do the effects of Joy appear more in the face, then in any other part?
A. The reason is, because Joy disperseth much natural heat with the blood,
beside great abundance of spirit throughout the whole body, the greatest
portion whereof is carried to the face.

Q. What is Sorrow?
A. It is an affection of the Soul, where by the heart is restrained and
pressed, either with some evil present, or that is to come.

As there is Pleasure and Rest in Joy, so there is in Sorrow, Dolor, and
Torment.

Melancholy men are sad although no harm have befallen, yet can they not yield
areason for their heaviness. Melancholy makes the Spirit and Mind darkish,
whereby it becomes full of stupiditie, and blockishnes, and the heart loses
all his cherefulnes: It cools the brain, and makes a man heavy and drowsy.

Q. What be the effects of Sorrow?
1. A. It makes a man weary of all things, to refuse all joy and consolation,
to hate himself, and to despair.

2. It depriuerh the face of color.

3. It impaireth all health.

4. It makes the body lean.

Q. What be the companions of Sorrow?
A. They are

Sighs Plaintes Groans Tears.


Yet by groaning, sighing, and weeping, the heart does in some sort open it
self, as if it would come forth to breath, least being wholly shut up with
Sorrow, it should be stifled.

Q. What is the use of Tears?
1. A. They are given to testify, and manifest our grief to others, thereby
to procure us pity and compassion from them.

2. They serve us further to declare what compassion we have of other Men's
sorrows.

When we can no otherwise comfort a friend, yet to be sorry for his heautnes
is some consolation, which cannot be shown unless we have Love in our
hearts.

Of Hope and Fear.
Q. What is Hope?
A. It is an assurance of some good to come, and a preparation to receive the
same: Hope is a desire, joined with confidence, that the good which we wish for
will come to pass: Or thus; It is a certain expectation of future blessedness,
proceeding only from the grace of God.

Hope (according to the Scriptures) is as sure of that which it expects, as
if it did already possess it.

Q. What is assurance?
A. It is a certain persuasion, and trust, whereby we are confirmed in danger
against evils that threaten us.

As Sorrow is a grief for some present evil, which a Man feels, shutting up
the heart as unwilling to receive it: So Fear is a Sorrow, which the heart
conceiueth of some looked-for evil, closing up the heart as willing to avoid
it.

So that this is the difference between Sorrow, and Fear.

Sorrow, is in respect of evil present.

Fear, in respect of evil to come.

Q. Why do many dye for Fear?
A. Because the abundance of blood, that retyres to the heart in time of fear
e to comfort it, confounds it, yea and choakes, and stifles it.

Palenes in the face is a sign of courage, and rednes of Cowardlynes.

As it is impudency in a child not to blush: so it is cowardice in a man of
war to look red in time of danger: by reason that the more blood is in the
face, the less is about the heart to comfort, and strengthen it: so that it
waxes faint, and weak.

Q. What is boldness?
A. It is a confidence, which pricketh forward the courage either to repel
evils, or to follow after good things, which are excellent, and hard to
obtain.

When the heart has once fruition of that goodwhich it desires, it is still,
and quiet, and rests it self in the same.

Q. Why are sundry affections placed by God in the Nature of Man?
A. In regard of sundry good things, which are meet for his will to long
after, and desire: As for example; Joy and Hope are given to seek after God
his Sovereign good, in whom alone he may find all delight, rest, and
pleasure; Sorrow and Fear are as Testimonies of the judgment of God, and
executioners of his vengeance.

Fear, to keep us in awe of evils to come, and Sorrow, to afflict us for
evils past.

Q. What is delight and pleasure?
A. It is the rest of the Spirit, with the perfect knowledge of that is sought.

There is no delight or pleasure in any thing except there be some agreement
between the part and power that receaueth pleasure, and that which brings
the same unto it.

The pleasure must not be too great, or too small, but aequally proportioned
to the parts that receive it.

Therefore as God is incomprehensible and infinite, so is he received with
delight of that part of the Soul, which comes nearest unto his Nature, which
is most incomprehensible, most ample, and most infinite in respect of their
parts; and that is the spirit, and understanding.

The Soul receives God in such sort as he may be comprehended of her, and
she in a sort made capable of him.

The rude and ignorant sort are more moved with corporal and earthly things,
then with things spiritual and heavenly, because by nature they are more led
by the outward, then by the inward Senses.

Q. What are the delights taken by the outward Senses?
1. A. By Touching, which is most earthy, and therefore the pleasures which
come thereof are most abject and vile.

2. Delight, taken by the Sense of Tasting, is less contemptible, yet brutish
enough.

3. By Smelling, somewhat more noble, but more sharp in some kinds of beasts
then Man.

4. By hearing, of more beauty and excellency then the rest, because more
ayrie.

5. By Sight, most excellent, because the eyes are of the nature of fire, which
comes nearest to the caelestiall nature.

The like order may be observed in the internal Senses.

The baser and more vile the pleasures are, the sooner do they loath a man.

The more earthy and brutish the pleasure is, the greater labor is to be had
about it.

Q. Why is a little grief stronger in us, then a great deal of pleasure?
A. Because of the corruption of our nature, and the declining course of our
age and life.

The pleasures of the fancy are more stable and firm, then those of the
corporal Senses.

As for Example.

We are sooner cloyed with the pleasures of meats, smelles, Music, and the
beholding of such like things, then by the pleasure of riches, power, and
honor, which are the goods of fancy:

But the pleasures of Reason, and of the Spirit, continue longest.

The pleasures of the Soul need no intermission of Time, for the Soul is
never wearied with contemplation.

The Spirit is in continual motion, unless the power, from whence the motion
proceeds, be by some impediment let or hindered. As we see in drunkards, or
the Apoplexy. It is as possible to take heat from fire, as action from the
Soul.

Those things which we receive of natural things, are of more force, and
purer, and continue longer then artificial pleasures. For let a man show us
the goodliest works that may be, of silver, gold, pictures, garments or
houses, and after we have beheld them four or five times, we begin to be
full of them and to be weary: but who is ever weary in beholding (I will not
say the Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars) but Earth, Sea, Rivers, Mountains,
Valleys, Gardens, Trees, Herbs and Flowers? The cause thereof is the agreement
of nature, for we being natural, natural things are more agreeable unto us,
then artificial.

Of Love.
Q. What is Love?
A. It is an affection of the Heart, which lusts after that which is good
indeed, or which seems unto it to be so, desiring to draw that good to it
self, that it may enjoy it.

Q. How is Love engendered?
A. When Judgment has censured a thing to be good, Will goes out as it were
to meet it, and to conduct it to the heart whereunto it is united.

Q. What be the branches of this Love?
1. A. Desire which by reason of the corruption of our Nature are commonly
taken more in the evil then in the good part. 2. Cupidity or Coveting

Q. What is true Love?
A. It is, to love a thing because it is good in it self, for it self, and
not in respect of any profit that may come unto us thereby. With this Love we
ought to love God, our neighbors, and friends.

An Image of this Love is the Love of parents toward their children. When Love
is reciprocal and mutual, so that he which is loved does also love, then is
friendship bred of Love.

Similitude and likeness is the cause of Love.

We are the Similitude and Image of God.

Therefore God loves us.

Beauty also procures Love, which is as a flower of goodness: for as there is
an agreement between the body and the soul, so bodily beauty is (as it were)
an Image of the beauty of the soul.

Q. How is Beauty defined?
A. It is a grace of God, that proceeds of the apt proportion and agreement
of parts.

Q. Wherein does it consist?
A. In four things, that is

Figure Number Greatness Situation.


Q. How many kinds are there of good?
1. A. Three: The first is pleasant, which delight our Senses, being properly
called the Goods of the body.

2. The second, profitable, as Riches, Honor and Promotion, being called the
Goods of Fortune.

3. The third, honest, as Wisdom, Prudence, and Virtue, which are the Goods of
the Soul.

To these three kinds of Goods are annexed three kinds of Love; the two first
may be well called, the perturbations of the Soul: the last to good and honest
things, is the Love, that truly makes a man famous.

As all beauty is as a beam of that beauty which is in God, so all love is
likewise a beam of that love which is in him.

Of Tribulation.
Q. Why does God send Tribulation is his?
1. A. First that our glory might be the greater in the world to come, whereby
it is said: Happy are they, which suffer persecution, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven.

2. Secondly, to draw us from the love of the world: For as a Nurse, to weane
her child from the liking of her milk, does annoint her Teat with Alloes, or
some bitter thing: Even so our merciful Father, to retire us from the love of
worldly delights (by which infinite men perish daily) sends Tribulation.

3. Thirdly, as a Medicine, to cure the diseases, and imperfections of the
Soul, as Pride, vainglory, sloth, Choler, and such like: Example, in
Nabuchadonozor, Saul, Antiochus, and Manasses. All which came to see their own
faults by Tribulation.

4. Fourthly, as a preservative against sin, to make us wary and watchful
how we offend.

5. Fifthly, to prevent punishment to come, as by the Prophet Nabum does
appear. I have afflicted thee once, and I will not afflict thee again, There
shall not come from me a double Tribulation.

6. Sixthly, to prove whether we be faithful and constant, or no.

7. Seauenthly, to make us run unto God for help and refuge, as Esaias says.
They sought thee out, oh Lord, in their affliction.

8. Eighthly, to manifest Gods power and love, in delivering us. As he brought
the three children into the burning Furnace, Daniel into the Lions den,
Susanna to the point of death, Job into extreme poverty, Joseph into prison,
Toby unto blindenes; there by to show his power and love in their deliverance.

9. Ninthly, to the end our joy may be the geater after our deliverance.

10. Tenthly, to create in our hearts a thanks giving for our deliverance: Such
as was the Song of the children of Israel, after they had past the red Sea, and
of Anna, Debora, and Iadith, moved thereunto by the remembrance of their
affliction.

11. Eleuenthly, by suffering persecution we become at length so hardy, bold,
and constant, as nothing can dismay us.

12. Twelfthly, by Tribulation we are exercised in such virtues, as belong to
a Christian Man, as Patience, Faith, Hope and Charity.

13. Last of all, by afflictions we are made like unto Christ.

Q. What inconveniences do we run into, for lack of affliction?
A. The vanities of this world cast the soul into such a delight-some
Frenzy, and lull it so dangerously asleep, that many in a frantic fit of
licentiousnes run headlong to perdition: Therefore God holds over his
children the rod of Tribulation, both to temper, and stay, the raging mood of
the frantic, and to rowse the dead sleepers out of their Letargie; And as it
can of no reasonable man be construed, but in good part, to bind and keep in
awe, yea to whippe and beat the mad man when he falls into his rage:
Likewise to pinch, nippe, and wring, yea, and with red hot yrons to burn, the
sick of a Letargie when he enters into his dead sleep: So for God to
correct our former, and to prevent our future infirmities, by the scourges, or
hot yrons of afflictions, cannot but be thought the part of a merciful and
provident Father.

Q. What comfort is received by Persecution?
A. Many be in a few things vexed, but they shall be well considered for it in
many. Many are tried like gold in the furnace, but at their time regard shall
be had unto them. If God begin with afflixite I have afflicted thee, he will
(doubtless) end with non affligamte vltra, I will afflict thee no more. He sent
Jonas to Niniue to threaten them an overthrow, but his intent was to bring them
to repentance, that he might continue his favor toward them. He sent to
Ezechias to tell him of his last day, but his meaning was to make him sorry for
his offense, that he might adiourne his life. He suffered Daniel to be thrown
into the Den of Lions, but it was to advance him to great credit. He that
had seen Joseph (undeservedly) in prison, Judith in her enemies Camp,
Mardocheus in sacke-cloath with his gibbet before his eyes, and innocent
Susanna going to be stoned, would have lamented their case, and feared their
further misfortune: but had he known that Joseph's prison should end in a
Princedome, Iudiths hazard with a most happy victory, Mardocheus peril with
Royal preferrement, and Susanna's stoning, with glory and triumph; he would
rather have thought them beholding to God for the ensuing felicity, then great
ly have pitied them for their present distress. The Fig Tree has bitter and
rugged leaves, bears no flowers, yet brings forth most dainty and sweet
fruit. The Devil, because indeed he has no fruit, is feign to feed his
followers with leaves that soon wither, and flowers that soon fade, and all
that he gives is blown away with a blast. But God, because he loves us
sincerely and not in show only, but in verity gives us the fruit without
flower or leaf, (that is) his gifts, and graces without external and vain
solaces: yea and sometimes he besetteth his fruits, not only with rugged, and
bitter leaves, but also with sharp and pricking thorns, that the hardness to
attain them might make them the more prized, and the remembrance of former
adversity, make the comforts following more delightsome.

Q. Will not God leave us when we are in affliction?
A. No: For although he afford his final reward only to those that have
passed through many tribulations, yet when they are in trouble, or anguish, he
does not abandon or leave them desolate, but waters their miseries with
sundry comforts.

There shall flow a fountain out of the house of our Lord (says Joel) and
water the torrent of thorns. And David to the same effect: According to the
number of the Sorrows of my heart, have thy solaces rejoiced my mind. Stephen
when he was stoned, saw heaven open, and Christ standing at the right hand of
his Father. When Elizeus was beset with the Assirians, he saw a hill of fiery
chariots standing in his defense. And when Elias was like to dye for hunger, he
was fed and comforted by an Angel.

And it always falls out true, That as the passions of Christ abound in us,
so also by Christ abounds our consolation.

As the Musician neither straineth the string of his Instrument too high, for
fear of breaking, nor lets it too low for fear of distuning: so God will
keep a mean, neither suffering us to be carelessly secure, nor driving us,
for want of comfort, to despair.

Of Virtue, and Vice.
Q. What is Virtue?
A. It is a proportion and uprightness of life, in points agreeable to Reason:
and it is twofold, first, Contemplative and Moral.

Q. Wherein does Virtue consist?
A. In a Mediocrity, as Vice does in Excess or Defect.

Q. What is the effect of Virtue?
A. Being a stable and sure possession, it makes the possessor happy: because
whatsoever happens unto him Virtue turns it into good, and her reward is
eternal life.

Q. What has power over Virtue?
A. Nothing: Neither Fortune, Slander, Sickness, Old age, Adversity, nor
Tyranny.

Q. Who is only happy?
A. The virtuous man: although he be plunged in all the miseries this world can
afford.

Q. Who is only unhappy?
A. The vicious man: although he have the wealth of Craesus, the Empire of
Cyrus, and the glory of Alexander.

Q. What is Vice?
A. It is an inequality and iarring of manners, proceeding from man's natural
inclination to pleasures and naughty desires, or, it is an infection of the
soul, whereby it reuolteth from good Nature and the law of man.

Q. When begin we to hate Vice?
A. When we understand what harm and shame comes by it.

Q. What are the effects of Vice?
A. It is the proper essence of unhappiness: the perfect worke-maister of
wretchedness.

It causes Voluptuousness, Rancour, Revenge, Enmity, Murder, Fear,
Fruitless repentance, Ambition, Covetousness, Lust, etc.

As virtue is the health and vigor of the soul, so vice is the sickness and
imbecility thereof; and is like the Dropsy, making a man desire that most
which breeds his greatest bane: So as, not he that lies in yrons, but he
which is compassed about with vice, may be said to be a captive.

Of Reprehension, and Admonition.
Q. What is Reprehension?
A. Areprouing of a friend for some vice.

Q. What Admonition?
A. A counselling of him for his profit, and credit.

Q. How must we admonish a friend?
A. We must admonish, and speak to him mildly, lovingly, and secretly,
guiltles our selves of what we blame another: freely, and without fear, upon
truth, and at a fit time.

We must not stiare up fire with a sword, for honny laid on an Vleer will
smart.

Q. What must the ground of our Speech and admonition be?
A. Reason.

Q. What the scope, or end?
A. The love of our friend, or our Neighbor Short and pithie speech commends
best: Prolixe, and impertinent is odious. Philip of Macedon, when he wrote to
them of Lyconia, that if he entered their Country, he would overthrow them
topsie turuie, had only this answer back again, If.

Phocion compared unprofitable talk to Cypres Trees, which are great, and
tall, but bear no fruit.

Aristotle's answer to a great Pleader of causes, who at the rehersing of every
sentence would say; Is not this a strange thing? Not that (replied he) but
this; That any man having two legs can abide thy babbling.

Q. When are we appointed to speak?
A. First, when we want anything.

2. Secondly, when our speech may profit any body.

3. Thirdly, when we would mollify and ease the troubles of our own
affairs, or our friends, with some honest discourse, or pleasant conference.

Q. What be the properties of our speech or admonition?
A. To be free, breife, pleasant, profitable, void of perturbations, and
without falsehood.

He that speaks much, cannot but offend much. The less we speak, the less
occasion of Repentance. We must then, first learn to be silent, afterward to
speak.

Q. What is friendship?
A. A communion of a perpetual will, framed by the perfect habit of a
long-continued love: or, it is the making of two Souls, one, in will and
affection.

Q. What is the end of it?
A. The fellowship of life, having relation to Charity.

Q. Cannot friendship be amongst wicked men?
A. No: Because they are at discord among themselves, therefore they cannot
have agreement with others.

Q. May a man have many friends?
A. No, because it is impossible for him to fashion himself to diverse natures.

Q. What friend must we choose?
A. One that is honest, faithful, prudent, and zealous: we must make all men
our well-willers, but only good men our friends.

Q. What is the property of a friend?
A. To be sparing in speech, and prodigal in deeds.

Q. How must we try a friend?
A. In an honest, and not in a wicked matter: in that which is just, and
reasonable: for friendship diminishes grief in adversity, and adds grace
and pleasure to prosperity.

Q. How many ways do we owe duty to our friend?
A. Four ways.

With our Persons With our Purses With Comfort With Counsel.


And three things are fit for the ground and assurance of friendship, (that is.)

1. Virtue, as that which is honest. 2. Conversation, as that which is
pleasant, and agreeable. 3. Profit, as that which is helpefull.


Of Nouelty and Curiosity.
Q. What is Nouelsy?
A. An error of judgment, to esteem those things that are strange, and rare,
better then those that are familiar and common, although they be worse.

Q. How many sorts are there of Curiosity?
A. Two: Curiosity in knowledge, and Curiosity in manners.

Q. What is Curiosity in knowledge?
A. To desire to know that which we ought not, which concerns our selves.

Q. Curiosity in manners, what?
A. To do, or to desire to do that which we ought not, which concerns
others.

Five things brought out of Asia by the Romans. To make glorious Sepulchers.
To wearerings of gold. To use spice in meats. To carryeperfumes, and sweet
smells To allay wine with snow.

Of nature and education.
Q. What is nature?
A. It is that spirit or divine reason, which is the efficient cause of
natural works, and the preserving cause of those things that have being.

Or thus: Nature is the order and continuance of the works of God, obeying the
Deity, and his word, and commandments, and borrowing her force and strength
from thence, as from her fountain and original.

Q. What is the nature of man?
A. The instinct and inclination of every ones Spirit.

Q. What is Education?
A. A reformation of nature by discipline.

Q. How become we perfect?
A. Three ways, by

Nature Precepts Use and exercise


Q. What was the law Falcidia amongst the Romans for education of youth?
A. That the child should be first admonished for the first offense, chastised
for the second, and for the third hanged, and his father punished, as if he
had been partaker in the fault, for want of good education and instruction of
his son. Youth must be taught as it were in sport, and not by compulsion,
because no Science, forced upon a man, will continue steadfast with him.

It as is necessary to consider what teachers children have, as what Parents.

Of Temperance, Intemperance, and Stupiditie.
Q What is Temperance?
A. A virtue, that contains the desires and inclinations of the soul within
the compass of Mediocritie, and moderateth all actions whatsoever.

Or thus: It is a steadfast and moderate rule of Reason over concupiscence, and
over other vehement motions of the soul: as unbridled desire, and immoderate
joy.

A temperate man, that is not courageous, easily is a coward, and
faint-hearted: and a noble heart, not temperate, becomes rash and
presumptuous.

Q. How many parts are there of Temperance?
A: Four: viz. Continency, Clemency, Modesty, and Order.

Q. What is Continency?
A. That, whereby Concupiscence and Desire are governed by Counsel and Reason.

Q. What is Clemency?
A. That, whereby the minds of men, rashly carried away with the hatred of any
one, and with desire to do him hurt, are kept back by gentleness.

Q. What is Modesty?
A. That, whereby honest shame and bashfulnesse purchases good and deserved
Renown.

Q. What is Order?
A. A disposition of all things in their convenient place.

Q. What be the effects of Temperance?
1. A. It is the pillar of Fortitude? 2. The Helmet against luxuriousnes. 3.
The Guide of the eyes. 4. It preserves good will. 5. It represseth ill
thoughts. 6. It tameth desires. 7. It hinders dishonest actions. 8. It
mollifies men's hearts, And gives reason for a rule.


Q. What is Intemperance?
A. It is a desire to enjoy unlawful pleasures: or it is an ouer-flowing of
Voluptuousnes against Reason, and the health of the soul, seeking no other
contentation, then in that which brings delight and pleasure to the Senses.

Q. What be the effects of Intemperance?
A. It inflameth, provoke, and troubles the tranquillity of the soul. It
has for her companions, Disorder, Impudency, Vnseemelines, Luxuriousnes,
Sloth, Negligence, and Dissolutenes.

Q. What is the difference between Intemperance, and Incontinence?
A. The Incontinent man sins, overcome with perturbations, not knowing that
to be evil which he commits.

The other sins upon Election, and settled purpose.

The incontinent man repents him presently of his sin.

The other, having got a habit of vice through custom, never repents.

Q. What is Stupidity?
A. To have no feeling of pleasure, nor to be moved with any desires: a thing
hardly or never seen amongst men.

It does not belong to Temperance to be deprived of pleasures, or desires, but
to master them.

Of Sohriety, and Frugality.
Q. What is Sobriety?
A. It is a moderation in diet.

Q. What Frugality?
A. Thrift, or good husbandry, moderating expenses.

Q. Is not less content in superfluity then in Sobriety?
A. Yes: Superfluity has no feeling of hunger, thirst, or any pleasures of the
body, for that it preuenteth them through Intemperance; but Sobriety,
forbearing the fruition of pleasures a long time, has a far more perfect
taste of them.

Satiety makes pleasant things become unpleasant.

Q. What moderation is to be used in drinking of wine?
1. A. The first draft for thirst. 2. The second for nourishment. 3. The third
of pleasure. 4. The fourth of madness.


Of Superfluity.
Q. What is Superfluity?
A. To desire any thing more then necessary, for the life of Man.

Q. What is the end of it?
A. Pleasure, or the fruition of worldly honor. Vitellius the Emperor had
served in at one supper two thousand several kinds of Fishes, and seven
thousand feathered Fowls: Philoxenus wished he had a neck like a Crane:
Agesilaus King of Lacedaemon wore but one kind of garment, winter, and Summer.

Of Ambition.
Q. What is Ambition?
A. An unreasonable desire to enjoy honors, estates and great places: There
were in Rome within an hundredth years 73. Emperors, whereof but 3. died in
their beds. And it is of two sorts, Ambition in Princes; mbit ion in private
men.

Her fruits are

Avarice Envy Sedition Selfe-praise Disdain Cruelty Lack of faith.


Hugo Victorinus (an ancient latin Christian Divine) Lib. 2. de Anima has
written, that Pride has her Coach drawn with four horses, the foremost of
which is Ambition. It may well be defined to be a most vehement, strong,
disordered, and unreasonable desire of glory, an unsatiable, and an unbridled
greedines to rule.

Q. Who is Ambitious?
A. A Modest man (as Aristotle says) desires honor as he ought, and as
becomes him; but he that desires otherwise than he ought, and by unlawful
means, is ambitious, and carried away with a perturbation of Intemperance.

Q. What falls and overthrows have been brought by Ambition?
A. Consider and look into either ancient, or later Chronicles and histories,
and see where there ever was any great plagues, any subversion, and
overthrows, of either flourishing Monarchies, commonwealths, or Cities, but
they were wrought by ambitious men, refusing dutiful submission to higher
power, and desirous to command, and to be preferred before others. Who but
ambitious men are wont to kindle, and stir up the fire of domestical
divisions, civil wars, and dissensions, making no reckoning of their
damnable enterprises, so they might but make a way to effect their own devised
platformes? what but ambition procured the ruin of Graecia, flourishing in
Arms and Sciences? what but ambition wrought the decay and confusion of the
commonwealths of the Lacedaemonians and Athenians; the one being masters of
the Sea, and the other of the land? what but ambition stirred up Caesar and
Pompey, Marius, and Silla, Octauius, Antonius, and Lepidus, by force of Arms
to put their country to sword and fire, and so unnaturally to impair the large
and great scope of the Roman Empire? what but ambition has drawn some men
to such desperate minds, so far to abandon both God, and all goodness, as to
give themselves over to Necromancie, and to contract, and enter into covenants
with the devil, that they might come to foueraigne power and authority? what
but ambition caused Henry the fifth, the Emperor, by force to deprive his
father from the Empire, and to keep him in prison till he died? what but
ambition moved Maufroy, the Prince of Tarentum, to strangle his own father
Frederick the Emperor, and to poison Conradus his own brother? what but
ambition forced Antonius, Son to the Emperor Seuerus to stabbe his brother
Geta with a dagger? what caused Solomon king of the Turks to strangle his own
Son Sultan Mustapha? what moves many to put innocents to death, that stand
in States expectant of kingdoms, that themselves may take surer footing (as
they think) to grow up, and continue in royal places? what (I say) is and
has been the cause of these, and many other such sathanicall, and impious
actions, but ambition; This vile Monster, and pestiferous humor of Ambition?

Of Uoluptuousnes, and Lechery.
Q. What is Voluptuousnes?
A. That delight which tickleth our Senses, quickly slideth away, and for the
most part leaves behind it occasions of Repentance.

Q. What be the fruits of it?
1. A. It brings griefs. 2. It mortifieth the Spirits. 3. It weakeneth the
body. 4. It breeds diseases.


Q. What is Lechery?
A. A furious passion, or a burning fire, that consumes man.

Q. What are the effects of it?
A. It shortneth the life, decays understanding, darkeneth the memory, takes
away the heart, spoileth beauty, defiles the body, causes an ill color,
weakeneth the joints, ingendreth Sciaticaes, gowtes, colicke-passions, grief
of stomach, gidines of the head, dimnes of sight, the leprosy, and the pox.

Q. What is Adultery?
A. When the sacred knot of marriage is violated.

Q. What be the effects of Adultery?
1. A. It breeds violence, wrong, murder, poisoning, etc. 2. It breaks the
peace of a house. 3. It causes the loss of ones soul.


Q. What examples of punishment for whoredom, and Adultery?
1. A. Among the Locrians, to have their eyes pulled out.

2. Amongst the Romans, death ipso facto: A father might kill his daughter, or
a son his mother.

3. Amongst the Egyptians, to cut off the woman's nose, and the man's privy parts.

Of Honor, Dishonor, and Pride.
Q. What be the signs of an honorable mind?
A. Not to aspire to Honor, Riches, or Dignity, but to Virtue.

Q. How must we ascend to true Honor?
A. The Romans built two Temples, the one to Honor, the other to Virtue: but
in such sort, as no man could enter into the Temple of Honor before he had
passed through the Temple of Virtue. Whereby it appears that Virtue is the way
to Honor.

Q. Wherein do worldlings place Honor?
1. A. In doing some thing to be liked of great men.

2. In making good penny-worthes of their courtesies.

3. In racking the conscience to execute their commandments.

4. In growing great in the opinion of the multitude.

* But it is better for a man to abide unknown in his simplicity, then with
the hurt and detriment of his soul, to intrude him self among the mighty.

prudent man rather fears the judgment and opinion of a few wise men, then
of an ignorant multitude.

Q. How has Pride been plagued?
A. Herod, for his Pride was eaten to death with lice. Dioclesian died mad.

Q. How many kinds be there of Shame and Dishonor?
A. Two: The one good, The other bad.

Q. What is goood shame?
A. To be ashamed of evil.

Q. What dishonor, or bad shame?
A. To be ashamed to displease the multitude, or mighty, against right and
equity.

Q. What be the effects of good shame?
1. A. It is the mother of good Counsel. 2. The guardian of duty. 3. The
mistress of Innocence. 4. The sister to Continency. and 5. The companion to
Chastity. 6. It procures Love. 7. It lesseneth a fault. 8. It mollifieth the
heart of a Judge.


Q. What are the rules of good shame?
1. A. If at a feast thou be invited to drink more then reason or thirst
requires, be not ashamed to refuse it.

2. If a babbler, or ignorant fellow, seek to stay thee by discoursing of vain
and tedious matters, be not ashamed to shake him off.

3. If thy friend, or any man, in cunning or purpose offend, be not ashamed to
reprove him.

4. If any man make a request unto thee for that which thou can not perform,
be not ashamed to deny him.

5. If any man ask thee a question, wherein thou art ignorant, shame not to
confess thy ignorance, that thou may be instructed.

6. If any man withold thy due, shame not to challendge it.

Q. What be the effects of Dishonor or bad shame?
A. Cowardlinesse, Impudency, Liberty to sin, base flattery, Oppression,
Neglect of ones benefit, Neglect of safety, Betraying of ones life, Hate of
the world, and prostitution of the Senses.

Of Fortitude, Fear Cowardlines, and Rashness.
Q. What is Fortitude?
A. It is the cause, that neither for fear nor danger we turn aside from the
way of Justice, and Virtue: or thus; It is the excellency, greatness, and
dignity of the heart, which after advised counsel makes a man undertake
virtuous matters, without apprehension of peril, and constantly to endure all
manner of travails, and distresses, to the end which it almeth at.

Q. What be the properties of a valiant Man?
1. A. To be free from all fear of death. 2. To be constant in adversity. 3.
To be void of dread in dangers. 4. Rather to die honestly, then save his life
dishonorably.


Q. How many parts are there of Fortitude?
A. Four, viz.

Magnificence Confidence Patience Perseverance.


Q. Wherein consists Magnificence.
A. In doing great and excellent things.

Q. Wherein Confidence?
A. In conceiving good hope of the event of things.

Q. Wherein Patience?
A. In voluntary and continual suffering for the love of virtue and honesty.

Q. Wherein Perseverance?
A. In a firm and steadfast abiding in his purposes, and resolutions,
undertaken with good consideration, following reason.

Q. What be the extremes of Fortitude?
A. Cowardlines, and Rashness; for Fortitude is a virtue that fights for
equity, and Justice: Therefore neither they that suffer for unjust matters,
nor they that fight for their private commodities, are to be accounted valiant.

Q. How many marks are there to know a coward?
1. A. To fight for fear of Reprehension. 2. By Constraint. 3. Prouok't by
other Men's speeches. 4. Of choler, or 5. Through ignorance of danger.


Q. What is the difference between Hardiness, and Fortitude?
1. A. The one comes by Art, Anger, or Policy.

2 The other is bred in the soul by nature, and good education.

Q. What is the end of Fortitude?
A. To refer our life and death to the only exercise of duty and honesty.

A Temperate man, not endued with Fortitude, may easily fall into Cowardice,
and baseness of mind; and a valiant man, without the direction of Wisdom, and
Temperance, is soon carried away with temeritie and boldness.

Q. How many kinds are there of Fear?
A. Two: the one good, the other bad.

Q. What is good fear?
A. To stand more in awe of blame, reproach and dishonor, then of death, or any
grief.

Q. How many sorts are there of bad fear?
1. A. Two: The one is called Cowardlines, making the Soul idle, dead, and
void of every good effect, which testifies a vile, contemptible, and abject
nature.

2. The other is that, which works in the wicked a horror of pain and
punishment, whereby they are bridled, and restrained from their villainies; and
this argues a wicked, and corrupt disposition.

Q. What be the effects of bad fear?
A. Madness, and Despair.

Q. What the ground of bad fear?
A. A false opinion of evil.

Q. What be the fruits of Cowardlines?
A. Cruelty, Treason, Breach of promise, Impatience, Idleness, Sloth,
Covetousness, Envy, Backbiting, injustice. etc.

Q. What is Rashness?
A. For a vain and frivolous matter to cast ones self into undoubted danger,
and to undertake all things unadvisedly.

A Philosopher compared an Army to man's body; the Scoutes to hands, the
horsemen to the foete, the battailc of footmen to the stomach and breast, and
the Captain to the head.

Of Magnanimity, Generositie, and Hope.
Q. What is the difference between Magnanimity and Fortitude?
A. Fortitude is a mediocrity in fearing and enterprizing.

Magnanimity consists in the bringing to pass of great and excellent matters.

Q. What is Magnanimity?
A. Generosity, or Nobleness of heart: and it consists in three things.

1. First, in desperate matters, when a man is past all hope of life, to find
aconuenient remedy, or wise consolation, not suffering himself to be vexed
therewithal.

2. Secondly, in duty toward an anemy, not suffering or allowing any treason,
under what pretense or advantage soever.

3. Thirdly, it contemns (as things unworthy the care of his soul) the goods
of the body and of Fortune, which others admire, and labor to obtain.

Q. What be the effects of Magnanimity?
1. A. Not to fear Death, but with constancy and cheerfulness of Spirit to
meditate the joys of heaven.

2. To be so far from doing evil, that we study to do good, even unto our
enemies.

3. To contemn terrestrial, and to contemplate celestial things.

Q. Who hops well?
A. He that groundeth his expectation upon the grace of God.

Q. Who hops in vain?
A. He that makes not God his Anchor.

Q. How many kinds are there of hope?
1. A. Two: The one certain and infallible, grounded upon the promises of God.

2. The other doubtful, respecting earthly matters.

Q. What be the fruits of Hope.
1. A. It steals away our labors. 2. It causes fear of peril to cease. 3.
It gives comfort in adversity. 4. Being in ill case it promises us better. 5.
It abides with them that have no other goods. 6. It preserves man's life.


Of Patience, and Wrath.
Q. What is Patience?
A. A habit, that consists in sustayning stoutly all labors and griefs for
the love of honesty. Or thus, it is a moderation and tolerance of our evils,
which, albeit we sigh under the heavy burden of them, cloth us in the mean
time with a spiritual joy: Or otherwise; it is avoluntary and long suffering
of labors, calamities, trauells, and difficult matters, for the love of
honesty and virtue.

* For it skilleth not what we endure, but how we endure.

Q. What is Impatience or Choler?
A. It is a weakness of a base, vile, and contemptible nature, wherein
Choler, and in the end Wrath, are easily engendered.

Q. What is Anger?
A. It is a short fury, or an inflammation of the blood, and an alteration of
the heart.

Q. Who are most given to Choler?
A. Effeminate persons, Sickefolkes, Oldfolkes, Vicious, Gluttons, Jealous,
Vainglorious, and Ambitious men.

Q. What be the remedies of Choler?
A. To lay the Offense upon Necessity, Negligence, Chance, untowardness,
lack of Discretion, Ignorance, Want of Experience, etc.

Q. Whereof is Choler bred?
A. Of a custom to be angry for small matters, which after becomes a fire of
sudden wrath, a revenging bitterness, an intractable sharpness, making a
man froward and furious, disliking every thing.

Q. What be the effects of Choler?
1. A. Tyranny. 2. Hatred. 3. Blasphency. 4. Repentance. 5. Sudden Death.


Of Meekenes, and Charity.
Q. What is Meekness?
A. A virtue that belongs to the courageous part of the soul, where by we
are hardly moved to anger.

Q. What be the effects of Meekness?
1. A. Not hastily to be carried to Wrath, nor easily stirred to anger. 2. To
be of a quiet and settled mind. 3. It appeaseth the motions of the soul. 4.
It brings in Beneficence, Justice, and Fidelity. 5. It decketh with Courtesy,
Gratiousnesse, and Charity.


Q. What is Charity?
A. It is the indissoluble band of God with us, whereby we are inflamed with
the love of him, and thereby also induced to love our neighbors for the love
of him.

Of Good, and Jll hap.
Q. What is good Hap?
A. When things fall out as we desire.

Q. What ill Hap?
A. When things fall out frowardly, and otherwise then we expect.

Q. Who only is happy?
A. He that has a clear soul, and a conscience defiled with nothing: he
that knows how to moderate fear, anger, excessive joy, and unbridled desire.

Q. Who is unhappy?
A: The wicked man, although he abound in riches, pleasure, delight, honor,
and glory.

Q. Wherein does happiness consist?
A. In the possession of some firm, steadfast, and permanent good, as the goods
of the soul.

The sick are in better estate then the healthful, because the sick look
for health, but such as are in health must look to be sick: and so of
poverty, and wealth.

Nothing is evil that is necessary.

Nothing is good that may be made evil.

Of Poverty, and Prosperity.
Q. Does Poverty alter the disposition of a wise man?
A. No: but as gold wrought into diverse fashions, and transformed into sundry
kinds of ornaments, remains still the same in substance: so a wise man
continues always the same, in things that are contrary and diverse, without
alteration, or change of his constancy and virtue.

The best and driest Honny is gathered of Time, although it be a bitter herb:
and a wise man out of most trouble some accidents knows how to reap benefit
and commodity.

Q. What is the difference between Prosperity and Adversity?
A. The one is proud and contemptuous, followed of Envy: a man may not freely
admonish it, nor will it give ear to good counsel.

The other is plain and simple, followed of Compassion, and ready to receive
counsel, awaketh a Christian, and stirs him up to humble himself before
the majesty of God, to call upon him, and to trust wholly to his grace and
virtue.

For we ought neither to lift up our selves above measure, for any temporal
felicity, nor be too much discouraged because we are visited with
adversity.

Socrates in all his lifetime was never seen to alter his countenance for any
thing that happened to him in this life. Clouds fly over the Sun, The Sea
ebbes, and flows, The earth has his spring and fall, light ensues darkness,
darkness light, nothing under heaven continues at one stay, save the
resolution of a virtuous mind.

Q. Is not prosperity more hurtful then adversity?
A. Yes: for few are found that have not forgot themselves in Prosperity, but
many have behau'd themselves wisely, and taken occasion to be better by their
adversity.

Q. Are not the wicked to be advanced?
A. No: for as a worm that is bred at the foot of a Tree, grows with it, and
in the end destroys it: So a wicked man, advanced to prosperity by the
favor of one greater then himself, becomes afterward unthankful and
treacherous unto him.

Of Riches.
Q. Are Riches good?
A. No: because they stir us up to superfluity, and pull us back from
Temperance.

Q. What be the fruits of Riches?
1. A. Pride in possessing them. 2. Excessive desire in gathering them. 3.
Covetousness in keeping them. 4. Grief in loosing them.


Q. What evils are in Riches?
A. Sloth, Arrogance, Care, Ignorance, Covetousness, Flatterye, Contempt of the
Soul, Slaughter, Gluttony, Diseases, Sedition, lack of duty in the child
to the father, lack of love in the father to the child, and suspicion between
friends. For riches are the good gifts of God, but the evils, wrought by
them, proceed from the corrupt nature of man: as it is not apparel that
gives heat to a man, but only stays in natural heat, which proceeds from
the man himself, by hindering it from dispersing in the air. So no man lives
more happily or contentedly, because he is compassed about with much wealth, if
joy and rest proceed not from within his soul.

Q. What riches are we to treasure up?
A. The riches of Wisdom, Piety, and Justice: for the condition of poor and
rich are alike; they have both one beginning and one end; and whilst they live,
the rich man does but feed and cloth himself, and so does the poor man but
the difference is; the rich man feeds and clothes himself with greater
delicacy then the poor man, and has more for extraordinary expenses.

As the Sun is better seen in clear water, then in a dirty puddle: So the
brightness of God shines more in minds not subjected to worldly goods, then
in them that are troubled with the earthly affections which riches bring with
them.

Q. What fruits has true Poverty?
1. A. It is the School of Virtue. 2. The mistress of Knowledge: and 3. The
Bridle to Lust.


Q. What Poverty is odious?
A. That which proceeds of Sloth, Idleness, Ignorance, foolish expenses,
riot, and superfluity.

The life of a poor man is like a navigations made by the Seacoast, where in
any storm he may easily cast anchor, come a shore and save himself: but the
life of a rich man, to that which is in the maine Sea, where there is no
shelter, but to trust to the mercy of the wind and waves.

As it is better to lie down in a little bed with health, then in a great and
large bed being sick: so it is a great deal better to live in rest with a
little wealth, then in travel and care with abundance.

For he that is not covetous after worldly matters, in some sort resembles
God.

Of Idleness, and Gaming.
Q. What evils come of Idleness?
1 A. It opens a gate to all Injustice. 2 It kindles the fire of Sedition. 3 It
sets a-floate all Impiety. 4 It causes many pernicious inventions for the
avoiding of poverty. 5 It corrupts the goodness of nature. 6 It loses that,
which has been well gotten. 7 It is the plague of the soul: and 8 It
impaires the health of the body.


As water standing still soon putrifieth, so does the Idle person.

Q. What is the daughter of Idleness.
A. Gaming, and it is grounded upon Lucre, and Covetousness.

Q. What be the effects of Gaming?
A. Quarrels, Cursing, Murders, Blasphemies, Cogging, Swearing, loss of Time,
and overthrow of Houses and Families

Of an Enemy, of Injury, and of Revenge.
Q. Is not an Enemy necessary?
A. Yes: for if any imperfection reign in us, who will more freely give us to
understand thereof? whereby these benefits follow: we are made more fearful,
and restrained from offending, more diligent to order our behavior, to direct
our doings, and correct our imperfections.

Q What is the best revenge upon our Enemies?
A. To surpass them in all diligence, bounty, magnanimity, good turns, and
other virtuous actions.

These be three good rules 1. Not to hurt him of whom thou art misused. 2. To
pardon him whom thou might hurt. 3. And to let him go in peace that is
overcome.

Q. How many ways is Injury received?
A. Three ways.

By spoiling of our goods By hurting our good name By violence offered to our
person.


Seneca's counsel is, that if he that wronged thee be weaker then thy self,
forgive him, if he be mightier spare thy self.

As Physicians know how to draw medicines apt for the preservation of life,
our of Serpents, weeds, and other venomous things: So we ought to draw from
our Enemies not their lives, which ought to be in the power and justice of God,
but profit and commodity by their backe-bitings, reproaches and injuries.

* If it be unseemly for a man to be mocked, it is as indecent for him to
mock another.

Of Justice.
A. What is Justice?
Q. An equal distribution of right and Law.

A. How many kinds be there of Justice?
Q Two,

Divine Humane


1 Divine, whereby we are joined to God by Good will, and Devotion.

2 Humane, whereby we are knit one to another by Mercy and Humanity.

Q. How is Humane Justice divided?
1 A. Into Distributive, which consists in giving every one according to his
desert.

2 Into Commutatiue, which keeps fidelity in contractes and promises.

Q. What belonges to Justice?
A. To preserve humane society, to defend, sustain, and deliver the Innocent.

Q. What to Judgment?
A. To resist the boldness of the wicked, to repress their violence, and to
punish their offenses.

For two things preserve a Commonwealth. Reward of the good, and Punishment of
the evil.

Q. What do they then that sell benefices?
1 A. They sell Justice.

2 Sell the Common wealth.

3 Sell the blood of subjects.

4 Sell the Laws.

5 They take away reward of Honor, of Virtue, of Knowledge, of Godliness, of
Religion etc.

6 They open a gate to Thieves, to Bribes, to Covetousness, to Ignorance, and
to all kind of vice and Impiety.

Q. What is the ground of Justice?
A. The honor and service which we owe unto God.

He that is perfectly just, has all the other virtues.

1 First, he has Prudence, in that he discerns between good and evil.

2 Secondly, he has Temperance, in that he knows how to moderate his
affections.

3 Thirdly, he has Fortitude, in that he fears not to help the wronged,
though with hazard of his own life.

Q. What is the perfect use of Justice?
A To make no difference of men, either in regard of their wealth, kindred,
friendship, poverty, or dignity.

Q. What names are attributed to Justice?
1 A. In Cities and Towns, it is called Equity and Peace.

2 In particular houses, between man and wife, Unity, and Concord.

3 In respect of servants toward their masters, Goodwill.

4 In respect of masters toward their servants, Humanity and Gentleness.

5 In men's bodies, Health, and perfection of the members.

Of Injustice, and Severity.
Q. What is Injustice?
A. Not to give every man that belongs unto him.

Q. How many kinds are there of Injustice?
A. Two: The one in respect of God, which is called Impiety.

The other in regard of Men, which is a denial of right and Law.

The defect and contrary vice to Justice, is Injustice: the excess, and
counterfeit follower is Severity.

Q. How many ways are we unjust?
A. So many ways as we deny unto our neighbors those duties which we owe
unto them: as also when we seek to enrich our selves by their hinderance.

Q. What be the effects of Injustice?
1 A. It causes a wicked man to be at variance with himself.

2 It plungeth him in the gulf of all vices.

3 It is the ground of all disorder and confusion.

4 It gives authority to murders, robberies, and other violent dealings.

5 It oppresses widows and orphans, whereby it hasteneth vengeance from
above.

Q. What follows Injustice?
A. Shame, Danger, Distrust, and Terror of the just Judgment of God.

As there is but one only way to hit the white, and many to miss it: so
fares it with our actions, which cannot be good but after one sort, but evil
many ways.

Although a corrupt and naughty man, during the sway of his vicious passion,
persuades himself, that by committing a wicked and execrable deed he shall
enjoy some great and assured contentation: yet the heat, fury, and thirst of
his passion being ouer-past, nothing remains but vile and perrillous
perturbations of Injustice: nothing that is either profitable, necessary, or
delectable.

The punishment of sin is equal with it, both for Age, and Time.

Of Fidelity, Forswearing, and Treason,
Q. What is Fidelity?
A. A Constancy in word and deed.

A good man ought to promise nothing upon necessity, no, not for death it
self, if it be contrary to duty.

Q. What inconveniences follow the breach of promise in a Prince?
A. Two: The first, is that equity is there by violated.

The second, that an evil example is given by the same.

Q. What is Perjury?
A. It is a calling of God to witness, that a thing is true, when it is false:
or a protesting to do something that we mean not to do.

Q. What is Treason?
A. It is a falsehood of heart, covered with a fair face, and a smooth tongue.

If a man be slothful, he may become diligent, if talkatiue he may hold his
peace, If a glutton, he may temperate himself, if an adulterer, refrain, if
furious, dissemble, if ambitious, stay himself, if a sinner, he may amend: but
he that is once a Traitor, there is no water to make him clean.

Whosoever lays his faith to pawn, binds his safety, his honor, and his
soul to him, to whom he gives it.

Of Ingratitude.
Q. What is Ingratitude?
A. To suffer the remembrance of greatest benefits to slide away suddenly.

Q. What be the effects of Ingratitude?
1 A. It sows dissension between kindreds.

2 It is full of Ignorance, Unquietness and uncertain desires.

3 It causes us never to be contented with out own estates, but to complain
and murmr in stead of giving praise.

4 Upon the least touch of affliction, for a million of graces received before
it causes us to cry out, that we never had any thing but mishappe.

Q. What is the means to shun Ingratitude?
A. If we esteem the benefit received of another, greater then it is, and,
contrariwise, repute that less then it is which we give.

That is true Virtue, which sets it self a work in respect of it self for
Virtue is always a sufficient recompense unto it self.

Q. How does a grateful mind appear?
A. In two things,

In thanksgiving toward God, and In good deeds toward his creatures.


Reward nourishes Virtue, Ingratitude overthrows it, and Impudency is
Ingratitudes companion.

Q. What is Impudency?
A. A contempt of glory, wrought in man through a desire of vile and filthy
Lucre.

Q. What is the difference between Duty and Lucre?
A. Duty causes men liberally to employ their goods, travel, industry, and
whatsoever else is in their power, that they may profit every one; and that
without hope of recompense.

Lucre makes men void of fear to break a sunder, and to dissolve, whatsoever
was ordained and joined together by the Law of God and man, so that they may
thereby purchase gain.

Of Liberality.
Q. What is Liberality?
A. To give of that which God has sent us to the succouring of others.

For riches are well used, if they be joined with the knowledge of true
honesty.

Q. May a poor man be Liberal?
A. I: for Liberality consists not in wasting much wealth, but in succouring
the afflicted willingly, and helping every one according to ability.

Q. What observations are there in being Liberal?
A. Four, viz.

Where When To what end, and as much as is requisite.


Therefore the widows mite was esteemed of God for a greater gift, then were
all the presents of the rich. They gave of their abundance, she of little that
she had.

Q. How do Princes pass the bounds of Liberality?
1 A. By bestowing estates, offices, or money upon unworthy persons.

2 By giving to Dancers Flatterers, and ministers of their pleasures, in time
of war, or calamity of their people.

3 By consuming much upon Feasts, Plays, Turneyes, and Maskes, for so they
spend when and where they should not.

The true use of riches is to employ all we have, over and above our
necessities, in the service of the Commonwealth.

Q. What be the effects of Liberality.
A. It preserves friends.

It mollifieth enemies.

Q. Is not Liberality most necessary for Princes, and great men?
A. Yes; because therein consists the chief strength and stay of their
greatness.

Hermes Trismegistus, whom some for his divine precepts have thought to be the
son of Mercury, made such account of this virtue of Liberality, that he
doubted not to call it the divine influence, that the Gods had infused it into
the minds of men; this resembling their Deities, that they grudged not to
impart what fortune franckly had bestowed upon them.

For the Philosopher that coueteth in his Ethickes to pen down a plat-forme
for the perfecting of humane life, amongst other virtues places this as
forerunner of them all: inferring his argument for proof a contrarijs. If
(says he) Covetousness be the root of all ill, from whence proceeds, as from
a fountain of mishap, the ruin of Commonwealths, the subversion of Estates,
and the wrack of Oeconomicall societies: If from thence does issue Injustice,
Bribery, the stain of Conscience, Slaughters, Treasons, breach of amity,
Confusion of mind, and a million of other mischievous enormities; How precious
a Jewel, how divine a motion, how sweet a virtue is Liberality, that
preserves all these in a true and peaceable concord?

Of Covetousness, and Prodigality.
Q. What is Covetousness?
A. It is a vice of the Soul, whereby a man desires to have from all parts
without reason, and unjustly withholdeth that which belongs to another.

Q. How is Covetousness compared?
1. A. First, to the Dropsy: the more it has the more it desires.

2. Secondly, to Tantalus in hell, that between water and meat dies for
hunger.

3. Thirdly, to Mules, that carry great burdens of gold and silver on their
backs, and yet eat but hay.

4 Fourthly, to hogs that are good for nothing till their death.

5. Fifthly, to conduite-pipes that convey water into a Cesterne, leaving
themselves empty.

As in quicksilver all things swim, except gold, for this only it draws
to it: So nothing sinketh into the mind of a Covetous man, but gain:
Charity, Piety, and honesty, swim on the top, they descend not into the
heart. But we ought to provide such wealth, which (the ship being broken) may
swim out together with their master.

The fish Polipus, being otherwise a blockish creature, uses incredible skill
in catching the Oyster: So some men are very wise only in gayning, in other
things they are mere beasts. But such are to be excluded from every office
of the Common wealth.

Q. How many properties are there of Covetousness.
A. Two: The first to make a man poor all his lifetime, that he may find
himself rich only at his death.

The Second, to resist, and refuse to be satisfied, whereas all other desires
seek to content them that serve them.

Q. What effects be of Covetousness?
1. A. It neither regards Equity, nor Justice.

2. It contemnes all laws, both Divine and Human.

3. It enioyes neither rest, nor liberty.

4. It regardes neither friendship, nor Charity.

5. It condemns the Innocent.

6. It iustifies the guilty.

7. It finds always some means to excuse Corruption, and Briberie.

8. It breeds quarrels, strife, hatred, suites, envy, thefts, pollings,
sackings, wars, murders, poisoning, etc. And followed with Prodigality, it is
most pernicious.

Of Envy, Hatred, and Backbiting.
Q. What is Enui^e?
A. A grief, arising from another Prosperity.

Q. What is Malignitie?
A. A delight taken in another man's harm.

Q What Hatred?
A. An Imagination which we have, that he whom we hate, behaved himself
wickedly, either generally toward all, or particularly toward us.

Q. What is Backbiting?
A. An illing of a man behind his back.

Q. What is most envied?
1. A. Power. 2. Honor. 3. Strength. 4. Riches. 5. Virtue.


Q. How may we be revenged upon Envious persons,
A. By studying so much the more earnestly to do well; as we see them labor
to envy, and condemn our doings.

The best punishment for Envy, is their own vexation of Spirit that follows
them.

Q. From whencc did Envy first spring?
A. The root thereof is fetched out of the devils own garden: for from him
came and sprung the original and beginning thereof, who so envied the welfare,
and prosperous estate of man, that he sought not only to separate him from
that pleasant aboade in Eden, the pleasantest place on the earth, but also to
alienate him from Gods favor, and by that means to expel him from all
happiness, and to plunge both him, and all his offspring into eternal misery.

Q. What are the fruits of Envy?
A. Through Envy it is, that one man greeueth at another man's well-doing and
prosperity: whosoever is once attached with Envy, he straightway murmureth,
and grudgeth, he fretteth, and fumeth that any man should be advanced to any
dignity, office, or authority besides himself, and deuiseth ways to
disgrace, and remove him that is so preferred.

The Envious man languisheth, and pineth, to see his neighbor promoted and
prosper, according to that of Horace.

Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimts.

The man whom envy does possess, does pine and fall away, At others wealth,
and good success, increasing every day.

Q. How is Envy compared?
A. Envy is such a waster, and consumer, that for the correspondencie thereof
with these things, ancient writers have compared, and likened it to the Worm
that consumes old soft timber.

Moathes, that eat, and waste woollen cloth.

Rust that corrupts, and cankereth Iron: and

Vipers young ones, that eat out their dammes bellyes, before they be brought
forth into the light.

Q. What is Envy further compared unto?
A. To Cantharides: for that as they alight always upon the fairest wheat,
and most blown Roses: So Envy commonly sets it self against the honestest
men, and such as have most glory and virtue.

Of Marriage.
Q. What is Marriage?
A. It is the communion of life between the Man and the wife, extending it
self to all the parts that belong to the house.

Q. What is the end of Marriage?
1 A. For Comfort.

2 For Propagation.

3 For avoiding of sin; yet great care is to be had in choosing: Because
wealth makes a woman proud, beauty suspected, and hardness of favor,
loathsome.

Q. What are Women compared to?
A. To Ships, which although they be never so well rig'd and tackled, yet
some thing still will be found wanting.

Q. What Inconveniences follow Marriage?
1 A. Charges in housekeeping. 2 Care for children. 3 Imperfections of
servants. 4 Insolency of wives. 5 Want, that some time is in the house.


Q. What merry days are in Marriage?
A. Two: The wedding day, and the day of the wives death.

Alphonsus opinion of a perfect Marriage was; that the man must be deaf, and not
hear his wives brawling, and the wife blind, and not see her husbands
faults; Otherwise impossible they should agree.

Q. What reasons in defense of Marriage?
1 A. It was instituted of God himself in Paradise, since, honored by the
first miracle that Christ did: it is the fountain of Humanity.

2 It is Ingratitude to deny that to those which are to come, which we hold of
them that are past.

3 By means of our succession, we live when we are dead.

4 By Marriage a man increases his friends, allies, and kinsfolks, which is a
great benefit, and invincible strength,

Q. What is Society?
A. An assembly and agreement of many in one, seeking after some good thing
that is profitable, pleasant and honest, or at least seems so; or else
laboring to fly from, and to eschew some evil.

Q. What is the end of Society?
A. The preservation of Monarchies, Kingdoms and Common wealths.

Of House, and Family.
Q. What is an house and Family?
A. An assembly framed by nature to communicate together.

Thine and mine, are the cause of all disorder in Commonwealths, and these
words Plato studied to banish.

Q. How many kinds are there of House and Family?
1 A. Four: The first, Matrimonial betwixt the husband and the wife.

2 The second, Parentall, betwixt the father, mother, and children.

3 The Third Lordly, between master and servants.

4 The fourth, Possessory, between the owner and his goods.

Q. How many kinds are there of Marriage?
1 A. Four, the first, Marriage of Honor. 2 The second, Marriage of Love. 3 The
third, Marriage of Labor. 4 The fourth, Marriage of Grief.


Q. What is Marriage of Honor?
1 A. It is threefold: The first, between God and man's nature.

2 The second, when God and man's soul are joined by grace and glory.

3 The third, when God and his Church are coupled together, and made one
mystical body.

These three kinds of Marriage are supernatural, and appointed of God after an
unspeakable manner.

Q What is the Marriage of Love?
A. That which is between a good man, and a virtuous woman: or the
conjunction, unity, and society of them that are good, being made by grace,
peace, and concord.

Q. What the Marriage of Labor?
A. When men marry for Covetousness, not for virtue, chastity, or good report;
or where there is disparity of age and manners.

Q. What the Marriage of Grief?
A. The conjunction of the wicked and reprobate, whereof still ensues
wretchedness and misery.

Q. What is Marriage grounded upon?
A. Three things, viz.

Love Conformity of manners Good discretion.


The husband must divide his authority with his wife, especially in matters
that concern her sex.

Of a House-holder.
Q. Where must a House-holder begin to rule his house well?
A. Athimselfe, by letting his household see that he is prudent, chaste, sober,
peaceable, and religious; as also by bringing* forth plentiful fruits of his
duty toward those that are under his charge.

Q. What is the duty of a House-holder?
1 A. To provide for his Family.

2 To preserve that for his, which his predecessors left him.

3 To increase his patrimony by travel, care, and good husbandry.

4 To get his goods by just, and civil means.

Q. How many sorts are there of getting goods?
A. Two: The one natural, which consists in pasturing, feeding of cattle,
tillage, hunting, fishing, etc.

The other artificial, which consists in works, arts, handi-crafts,
traficke, merchandise, exercised for gain.

Q. What is it to possess goods?
A. To have a multitude of instruments serving that action, wherein life
consists.

Q. Of what sort are these goods?
A. Of two sorts, the one coming from the father to the son, which we call
Patrimony.

The other, gotten by labor and good husbandry?

Q. What is good husbandry?
A. It is an industry in getting of goods, and a discreet government in
spending them to good purposes.

Power and authority are easily turned into intolerable arrogance, if the
bridle of Reason restrain them not.

Q. Why was money first invented?
A. That exchange might be made of such things as are ^^easie to be
transported, and that the commodity of traficke might be continued for public
profit.

Of Policy.
Q. What is Policy?
A. It is the regiment of a City or Commonwealth: the bond of all society.

There is a show of commanding and obeying in all things.

Q. How many manners of government are there in Man?
A. Two: The one respects the soul, and acknowledges no temporal King or
master.

The other, Civil Justice, and reformeth outward manners, whereunto the body
during this life is wholly subject.

The end of commanding and obeying is public benefit, and Civil Justice:
Civil policies are not the works of man only, but proceed from the
Providence of God: It is necessary that laws should be appointed, that men
may live honestly and justly one with another.

Q. What be the effects and ends of Policy?
1 A. To frame and unite us to the company of men. 2 To conform our manners to
Civil Justice. 3 To set us at agreement one with another. 4 To maintain and
preserve common peace and tranquillity. 5 To cause us communicate together
without fraud. 6 To bridle and punish the insolency of the wicked. 7 To
repress blasphemies against the divine Nature.


Q. What signifies Policy?
1 A: A burgessey, that is to say, the participation of the rightes and
privileges of a Town.

2 The manner of life used by some political person.

3 A worthy deed.

4 The order, and estate, whereby one or many towns are governed.

Q. How is a Commonwealth divided?
A. Into good, which respects the public profit of the Citizens.

Into bad, which seeks only the increase of private commodity.

Q. How many kinds are there of good government?
1. A. Three: Monarchia, or princely government, as it is with us at this time,
laudable and most blessed.

2. Aristocratia, or the government of the Nobility, as was the government of
the first, and former Roman Consuls, that is to say, Iunius Brutus,
Tarquinius, Collatinus, Seruius Sulpitius, Manlius, Tullius, who ruled 301.
years. After them Furius Camillus Paulus Aemilius, Fabij, Metelli, Scipiones,
Catones, Cicero etc. all mighty in war and peace.

3. Politia, or the Policy of the civil Magistrate, who expelled the
Decem-viri, because one of them (that is to say) Appius Claudius ravished
Virginia, the daughter of a Noble Citizen of Rome.

Q. How many kinds are there of bad government.
1. A. Three likewise: Tyrannis, that is to say, of Tyrants, as of Tarquinius,
Silla, Caesar etc. Or where the king obtruding his commandments for all
reason, undeservedly afflicts the commonwealth.

2. Oligarchia, or the usurping of a few, such as were some Senators, made by
the common people at Rome, inclining unto the wandering affections of the
multitude, that they might merit the peoples favor: The discommoditics of this
government Rome felt in that dangerous office called Trium-viratus, (that is)
the office of three men in like authority, and appeared most pernitiously in
that ambitious Protectorship, and Triumuiracie, of Caesar, Crassus, and Pompey,
and last of all, in the Triumuiracy of Antonius, Octautus, and Lepidus.

3. Anarchia, or the authority of the raging and audacious Commons: who, when
Antonius was moved, and provoked with anger, most villanously murdered Cicero,
and many States, because the Senate created Octautus Caesar Consul, and passing
by, ambitiously put back Antonius, desiring the government.

This popular State is vnstai'd, and very quickly goes to ruin, and easily
degenerateth into another Tirannie: Not the Romans only, but the Thebanes,
Spartans, and Athenians (flourishing with great Soueraignties) have known all
these kinds of government.

Q. How are these kinds of governments disposed?
A. It is to be noted that a commonwealth, and the good, and most perfect
kinds of government, are very seldom found absolutely simple, but fitly
composed amongst themselves: For a certain mixture is voluntarily admitted
amongst them, yet so mixed and tempered, that in a triple form (as in a sweet
harmony) one counsel signifies as it were one mind; Yet the Commonwealth
keeps her name of the worthier part, ruling the rest.

It is also to be noted, that a Commonwealth very seldom is long found firm,
and strong, if God protect it not: for it is compared to the frail nature and
inconstant mind of men (the said Politic body being compact of them) which
are often tossed hither and thither with variable occurrences.

An excellent sharpnes of the wit, and an admirable quicknes, and Wisdom, are
requisite in inuenting the best Policies.

Q. What is most profitable to a Commonwealth?
A. There is no treasure more commodious to a Prince or Commonwealth, then
Councillors excelling in virtue, wisdom, fidelity and valor.

The grave Council of Kings makes every thing known, which he would have
searched out.

Q. How many sorts of Men are necessary in a Commonwealth?
1. A. Three: Magistrates, who may rule justly; and these Plato calls golden
men.

2. Captains, and Soldiers, who may valiantly and faithfully defend; and
these are called Silver men.

3. Artificers, who may help by disciplines, and profitable Arts, and these
are called Brazen men.

A well-ordered Commonwealth consists of religion, and Politic Laws.

Of Laws.
Q. What is a Law?
A. Cicero, de lege, defines a Law, to be a certain rule proceeding from the
will of God, persuading that which is just, and good, and prohibiting evil.

Q. What is to be observed in making of Laws?
1 A. To establish them. 2 To disanull them again. 3 To interpret them. 4 To
execute them.


Q. What is to be considered in establishing of Laws?
1 A. First, what things are most convenient in every Common wealth, and do
bring forth Commodity or Preservation, Loss or Destruction.

Architas wills, that in establishing Laws those things be first confirmed
which belong to God, next, those things which are honest and commendable,
after, tihngs profitable.

2 Secondly, what things in times past have brought commodity or discommodity
either to our, or foreign government.

Q. What in disanulling Laws?
A. They must be disanulled wholly, when they are repugnant to Religion and
Policy, and in part, when some things are to be changed.

If any thing must be changed, it must be by little and little, which by little
and little has increased.

Q. What is to be observed in interpreting the Laws?
A. Sanctity, and Equity, least they make white of black, and black of white.

Q. What in executing them?
A. The care thereof does properly belong to Princes, Counselors, Judges and
Magistrates. In whom are requisite, Understanding, to know what is just, and
to be done, what is evil, and to be repressed, and who are worthy reward or
punishment:

And Authority.

To punish the wicked To defend the Godly To make famous the worthy by titles
and promotions.


Heraelitus tells us, that we ought to fight no less for our Laws, then for
our Citty-walles; because without walls our country may be safe, without
Laws it cannot.

As a body without a soul, so a City without Laws, cannot use her parts, and
Sinews, blood and members. The Law is as a looking-glass to the life of man:
that he which is beautiful and fair may take occasion thereby to avoid all
kind of deformity in manners and conversation: And he that is deformed may
labor so much the more seriously, by the help of virtue, and inward graces of
the mind, to recompense the outward wants and imperfections of the body.

Of Philosophy.
Q. What is Philosophy?
A. It is a profession, study, and exercise of that wisdom, which is the
knowledge of divine and humane things.

Q. What is the end of Philosophy?
1 A. To glorify God in the knowledge of his wonderful works; which is
called Natural Philosophy.

2 To teach a man to live well, and to help his neighbor; which is called
Moral Philosophy.

Q. What are the benefits of Philosophy.
A. God being the original and fountain thereof, it teaches the doctrine of
good life: represseth the perturbations of the soul: appeaseth insatiable
desires; delivers from all fear; teaches us to despise misery; purges the
soul of Pride, Envy, and other vices; and shows our duty to all sorts of
people.

Q. What is the foundation of Philosophy?
A. A perpetual and fervent love of the truth: and to the obtaining thereof
are necessary, a good, ready and prompt wit, the knowledge of God, and
continual study: or a spirit or mind, ready, and apt to conceive, and a
memory, firm to retain.

Q. How do we appear Philosophers?
A. By qualifying the perturbations of the soul, and by the actions of Virtue
and Prudence.

Q. What is Prudence?
A. It is the knowledge of that which ought to be done, or ought not to be
done: or thus: In as much as it is a politic virtue, it is called the rule of
Reason, enlightening our minds: she considers what she does: she determines
without error; she wills or does no unseemly thing: whereupon this saying
comes.

Amend what is past, rule what is present, see what is to come.

For a wise man is accustomed to observe these things.

Prudence, as it is a virtue of a well-instructed mind, is to know only
divine things.

Prudence Exemplare, is the divine understanding, whereunto all things are
uncovered and open.

Q. How many parts are there of Prudence?
A. Three

Understanding Providence, Memory.


Understanding, is that by which the mind perceives the things that be.

Providence, is a virtue (as Cicero says) by which some future thing is seen
before it be done.

Memory, is that by which any one remembers the things which have been.

Q. What is the effect of Prudence?
A. To discern good from bad, and that which is profitable from the contrary:
It causes a man to direct al his actions both private and public to the best
end, which is, To serve God, and to profit his neighbor.

Q. What is the office of Prudence?
A. To direct the actions of other virtues, and to esteem and ordain every
thing according to virtue: or thus, the office of Prudence is to sustain other
virtues in their actions, according to all the parts of man.

Moral Ethick Orders the manners as touching man Philosophy Oeconomick
Sets a Family in order which are. Politic. Rules Cities and Kingdoms.

Q. How is Prudence distinguished?
A. It is threefold.

1. The first of the Heart: and this is, in disposing things present in
remembering things past, and in foreseeing things to come.

Deuteronomy. 32. Would God man would be wise: that is to say, by things past: and
would understand, that is to say, things present: and would foresee the last
things, that is to say, things to come.

2 The second is of the Mouth, and this is in government of our speeches.

Prou. 10. He is most wise, that can rule his lips.

3. The third is of work, and this consists in eschewing the evil, and
choosing of good.

We must note that there is worldly, humane, and heavenly Wisdom. The first in
getting temporal things The second, in commodity of the flesh The third in
divine service.

Q. What is the difference between Science, and Prudence?
A. Science is, when men know much good, and follow it not.

Prudence, when knowledge and practice go together.

Q. How appears Prudence.
A. Either inwardly by a Man's manners, and conditions, or outwardly in things
belonging to the body: As in Sobriety of diet, comely behavior, good
hous-keeping, and such like.

Q. What is Ignorance?
A. An unskillfulness of that which ought to be done, or ought not to be done.

Q. What be the effects of Ignorance?
1 A. It takes away the sight of the Mind, as blindness does the sight of the
body.

2 It makes a Man prodigal, when he would be liberal.

3 It brings forth covetousness, when a man thinks to avoid superfluity.

4 If a man be mean, it makes him fearful, superstitious, unprofitable,
needy, uncivil, slothful, and unfit for any good thing.

5 If he be mighty, it makes him arrogant, rash, cruel, talkatiue,
covetous, inconstant, given to voluptuousnes, unjust. etc.

6 It makes him despise good counsel, because of the presumption of his own
opinion.

7 If he possess any benefit, he feels not the goodness of it, till it be
lost.

8 It is the spring of errors, absurd behavior, foolish opinions, and of all
impieties.

9 Every virtue holds the mind between two vices, which are called
extremes, as Ignorance, being the defect of Prudence: and Malice, or Subtilty,
being the excess.

Q. What is Malice, or Subtlety?
A. It is wilfully to oppose a Man's self against that which he knows to be
dutiful, and honest, seeking under the counterfeit name of Prudence to deceive
those that will believe him.

All cunning, and knowledge, severed from Justice, may be accounted Malice, or
Subtilty.

To conclude; As an empty ship is to be senced, and furnished with convenient
tackling: So is a Man's life with the effect of Prudence.

FINIS.

