A PENSIVE souls delight.

The Contents whereof, is shown in these Verses following.

1.
The Pensive soul recounteth in this place,
Elizaes troubles, and Elizaes grace.
2.
Here are expressed the stratagems of foes,
Elizaes conquests, and their falls that rose.
3.
Here is set forth Elizaes lenity,
And Locust-Catholickes superbitie.
By John Norden.

LONDON Printed by T.C. for William Lugger, and are to be sold at the sign of
the blind Knight, over against S. Andrews Church in Holborne. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and virtuous Lady the Countess of Warwick.
IF I were demanded (Right Honorable) I could yield a reason why I give your
Lady-ship this little plain Poem, under the title of a Pensive Souls
delight, but that your Ladyship is not altogether unacquainted with some causes
that may right well work me pensive. The cause is noted and observed of many,
but felt of my self and mine only. The cause of my delight is public,
common, and known to all, but felt (with effect) of the faithful and loyal
only. Can any faithful soul but sigh (my good Lady,) to see and consider,
the sundry dangers, that have been, and are daily plotted and practiced,
against her highness most innocent person, and Royal state? And again, can
any, but rejoice and delight to see her still blessed and defended, and the
practizers still found out, censured and condemned? And who sees without
pensiveness and sorrow, her Majesty's native subjects, our own countrymen,
brethren and kindred, to become Traitors, to their, and our most gracious
Queen, and treacherous to us their countrymen and allies? And again,
rejoices not to see and observe, how all their devises come to naught, her
Majesty preserved, and our selves delivered? And again, who greeueth not to
consider from whom these practices and the grounds of these treasons proceed?
From a man pretending to be the high and sole Vicar of Christ in earth, who
cannot err in his purposes and proceedings, because they are all covered,
(even murders of innocent men, yea Princes, raising war within, and between
kingdoms,) with the pretense of religion and glorifying God, the highest point
of blasphemy. But who rejoices not to see him discovered Antichrist, the man
of sin? and his undermining and treasonable messengers, Locustes? And who
rejoices not to see them in some measure abandoned, since they will not be
reclaimed? But more, who rejoices not to see and consider her Majesty's
immovable constancy, in loving, in embracing, and in maintaining the
infallable truth? and our selves under her, and by her, to enjoy the same? A
subject worthy of a more serious labor. But because many worthy works are
exta^t of their discovery, some too great of price for poor men, and some too
learned for the simple. And such serious Treatises often neglected, because
they delight not all humors, I thought it not unfit to put the inferior
multitude in mind, in this kind of writing, what causes they have to sighe
and to sing, to grieve and rejoice: And that with me they may have all will,
as they have cause, to pray for the continuance of the true causes of our
rejoicing, the maintenance of Religion, and preservation of her highness. The
length of days, vouchsafe her length of days: the Lion of Judah rent her
enemies in pieces: And high Jehovah, grant that under her we may all live in
true love, toward her, that loves him, who in his love gave her to us. That
we in her might rather sorrow to see the falls of traitors in charity, then
traitors to triumph in the success of their attempts in insolency.

Your Ladyships in all service, John Norden.

A Pensive Souls delight, 1.
The Pensive Soul recounteth in this place,
Elizaes troubles, and Elizaes grace.
MY Pensive Soul recounting heavenly love,
which did bestow that sacred hidden treasure,
Truths light to shine, to us here, from above:
Cannot but joy, to see Jove's mercies measure,
Passing in greatness all this earthly frame,
It fills our hearts with science of his name,
Which is we love, we live as he requires:
He sends his word, to work in us inspires
of his true light. Look up from whence it came.
Came it from man? came it from wisdoms skill?
Came it by art? came it from multitude?
No, no: it came from his all sacred will,
That willed our wealth and true beatitude.
Long, long shut up in dark obliuions den,
And fettered long, through ignorance of men.
Dark Ignorance, sire of Devotion,
Blind zeal, blind love, both malediction,
As is discovered by Truths sacred pen.
How so the pens of men not lightened write,
Bewitched with false inspires, inspirde in those
That follow fancy, all deprived of light:
Despightfull hearts, that kill and seem no foes,
Like friends, in fawnes, foes under faithless smiles,
Whose graceless guise seems graceful, yet but wiles
That win affection to perdition,
And seem yet sacred, and of foul condition,
Without all-haile: within mortal reuiles.
I wayle these wightes that wander in the dark,
Led by the beast, that traynes great troops to hell,
And seeks to sink sacred Religions Bark,
By his inchantes, charmed in his hidious cell:
But he foul feend, and faithless to great Jove,
Has long breathd bannings against Messiahs love,
Eliza Queen, the prop of verity,
That still stands up, a Queen of victory,
Whom all his wiles and curses cannot move.
They cannot move the mountains of our Peace,
Elizaes truth, whose sacred hearts desire,
Desirde and wrought, that heavenly Truths release,
That lay forlorn, long languishing in briers:
She brought to light the load star of our light,
And loosde the bands of Envy by her might,
Her might made mighty, by Jove's mighty hand,
That heau'd her up triumphant in this land:
Fearful to foes, rejoicing to the right.
Rejoice ye righteous and resound her praise,
Praise great Jehovah for her Majesty,
He, he received her, in her pensive days,
Not far from death, held in captivity:
A captive Lady of a free-full mind
Free, and in favor naught can true love bind.
Her Love was Truth, her truth and love were right,
Jove rightly saw her, and her loves delight.
Truth and Loves light were sacredly combinde.
All sacred Virtues, did combine in one,
One Grace divine was guide unto them all:
In her all working when she was alone,
(Alone in company Angelical)
Heavens Angels spread their still protecting tent,
And guard her sacred person innocent.
Graces divine administered true joy
In her deemd ioylesse state, naught could annoy
Her blessed patience in imprisonment.
But oh true Lady, how could griefs retire?
When she recounted why she was restraind?
And eke by whom? by her sole sisters ire:
What heart could hold (so innocent) disdaynd?
Disdaynd to live, her life obscurde in hate:
Was hateful to unhappy hearts where Envy sat.
But sacred Love gave life and light to her,
And brought her life to light, and did transfer
Deaths dreadful sting unto the obstinate.
And on their Queen, whom our Eliza loved
Her life as love, her love assurance set
On high Iehouah's love: he her approved,
And gave her light to miss foul enuies net,
That was displaid to catch Eliza in.
Suggests were, as if she pretended sin
Against anointed Mary and her crown:
From which Eliza would bring Mary down,
And set her self by force usurped therein.
Fie on this gloss, that paynts this false suggest,
A forged surmise, that fell before her eyes,
That still attended high Iehouah's hest:
She saw it fall, none saw it yet arise.
It might arise, but could not erst prevail,
Though Enuies hearts and hands gave often assail:
In hope to see her sacred life dissolved,
She not dismayed, assured stood resolved
High Jove would free her, and would be her bail.
He bayld her in the action of their hate,
Where they suggest, her hate unto the Queen,
And that she covertly enuide the state,
Her foes made show, as if this had been seen:
And daz'd the eyes of silly peoples minds
With false reports: like error often blindes
The vulgar multitude, who think all true
That Statesmen speak, as if it were in view.
High policy of purpose blows such winds.
Such winds, as blow content, or bring dismay,
Sometimes are raisde, and do dispearse a thing
Throughout a kingdom: So they made their way
To cause Elizaes ill's suggested ring:
Yet she true Lady, sat and smilde to see
Despite displaide, and axe laid to the tree
To cut her down for providence divine,
Who swayes the axe, reuerted spites repine
From her to them, and set her Lady free.
Her foes repinde at her, not for her crime,
But saw her light that would bewray their sin:
The sire of sin then egged them on, in time
To cut her off, if they the game would win.
But sire and sons, sons of perdition,
Wrought not Elizaes, but their own perdition.
And she not seeking found the way, and rose
Unto the Crown, a gall unto her foes,
She bound, Jove gave her manumission.
And sealed it with the death and quick confusion
Of greatest foes within Realm and without:
Poole Cardinal, sent from Romish Babylon,
Arch-Atheist Gardener, and an ugly rout
Of bloody Tyrants that had sword in hand,
And cut truths throat, with their foul Enuies band,
Where soon cut off, with their own bloody knife
Which they had whet to reave Elizaes life,
As they did all religious in the land.
Oh deepest wisdom of the powers divine!
Oh highest power, of high Jehovah seen
In so preserving powrefull Henry's line,
Well near untwisted in the Mary Queen:
By whom some sought as much as in them lay,
Elizaes ruin, had not God said nay,
And yea to her preserving, when authority
Consented to dispatch her Majesty
Of Truth and true Religion, counter-stay.
Her famous Father to the worlds admire,
First foiled Romish Pharoh in the feelde:
When Pharohs troops were near him, and in Ire
A miracle to make proud Pharoh yield.
Yet lo perforce he lost his golden fame
Within this Realm, thrice happy, if his name
Had did likewise, drownde in, oblivion
And not have liude here, father of sedition,
The nurse of Envy, and the gulf of shame.
Then hopeful Edward did succeed to reign,
Truths proppe, and seeks to keep Romes Septer down
High Jove him saw, but lo, he did not daigne
To leave him long, but took him from the crown,
And from us thanklesse, for the Truth he sent
By Henry's hand: wherein, we negligent
Were reft of him, and of the lively light,
And then came darkness and a dismal night
Wherein we saw not where Religion went.
But by the blood of Martyrs that was shed
Throughout the land, to put out Truths true light
That then did shine as Sun eclipsed red:
Yet cast clear beams, upon each faithful wight:
Whose truth was tried, their trialls did express
Their lively Love; though many made recesse
And fell again into that ougly den
Of dark deceit, devouring souls of men
In filthy puddle, of frail humane guess.
Poor souls bewitched, with inchaunted zeal
Fell back, and banished their true saving guide,
That guides by grace, and not by fond reveal
Of giddie heads, that live and lead.
And Mary Queen, alas my soul bewailes
That her high virtues had so strong assailes
That she was won, to kill the silly sheep
That were committed to her charge to keep,
Her Clergy rent them with their woluish nails.
These ugly beasts attired yet like lambs,
Lay fawning like the Fox, that plays, and prays,
They plaide and praide, on young ones and their dambes:
If fawnes could not, they add fierce fiery rays.
To race through Rage and Rigor of the sword,
Men's true desires of Loves light and Truths word.
This Love, this Light, this Truth Jehovah sent
By Henry's hand and Edwards, while he lent
Him life, and while he was fair Englands Lord.
But happy Henry, and truths Edward gone,
The graceful guides, and pillars that vp-staid
Religions frame, a third arose anon,
That brake the building that these graceful laid,
She pulled it down, and did erect the stage
Whereon was played the tragedy of rage:
It stood not long, the Actors parts were done,
And they went out, Elizaes part begun,
And all applaud her, and her equipage.
Began it now? a part she played before,
Not of an Agent, but a patient*
She silent sat, and heard the Lions rore,
Like captived Daniel in a dreadful tent.
Her part was not like daughter of a King,
To whom All hayle, the truest subjects bring.
Curtains were drawn to sit in all men's view,
Prince like attended: She with bloody crew
Guarded as guilty. covered with loves wing.
She foundes her faith not on the sons of men,
Not on frail flesh, not on the multitude,
Not on the sword not on great wisdoms pen:
But on Jehovah Prince of Fortitude.
Fore him she falls, to him in faith she cries,
On him she hopes, he on her cast his eyes.
He spread the beams of his releeuing love,
On her distressed, but elected Dove:
On her he made his saving Sun to rise.
His heavenly dove, divinely soared from hie
With his swift sacred wings, and did inspire
True trust in her, unseen of humane eye:
His sacred Dove once come, did not retire,
But did possess her, made his bower her breast,
With sacred virtues there he built his nest:
And there begat all graces heavenly,
That branch and bear true fruits of sanctity,
Presaging first, now show Eliza blessed.
The more her virtues seemed to fit the crown,
The more did Envy seek to blemish it,
There want no hearts, but hands to pull her down:
Yet aymd their malice, but it could not hit,
Her guard was sure, her Armor enuy-proofe,
Her friends yet fear, and fearful stand aloof
Sad, gave but aim at th'arrowes of despite,
Which flew abroad, not any on her light.
Her light did shine and shrouded her reproof.
And powers divine, divinely made the way,
Cut down the tree that hindered her to pass,
The tree cut down, the branches broken lay,
Dispersed, forlorn; and all foul Enuies Mass
Became a Chaos and a limblesse lump,
Naught stood to stop her, but foul Enuies stump,
That sprowted still and bare the leaves of spite:
Truths Sun then shone and withred their delight.
And they discovered, lay as in a dumpe.
When Mary Queen, deprived of life was gone,
Then busy heads breathed scruples into men:
For Princes dead, then wakes Ambition,
And ugly strife starts out of hidious den,
And sowes sedition among the multitude.
Suggesting in success sad servitude:
Though our Eliza heir apparent stood,
There wanted not of that inchaunted brood:
That argue in her sex small fortitude.
Among all other doubts, the difference
Then in Religion, seemed greatest let:
And had it not been heavens providence
That swayes men's minds, and concord set,
It might have raisde in Realm sad mutiny,
But great Elizaes magnanimity
Conioynd with love, made all applaude her reign:
And Mary dead, they all do show them feign
To see Eliza in her dignity.
Self day of Mary's death (...)Nouem. 1558.
she was proclaimed
With greatest joy fair Englands Queen:
Although to let it, still foul Envy aimed
Without prevail, the gall of hearts were seen.
The Trumpet sounded, men for joy did smile,
And gave true signs of joy for Romes exile.
That held Truth captive, by Eliza freede,
Who brought in sowers of that sacred seed:
That soon grew great, and branched in a while.
And she true Lady lifted to the crown,
Joys not so much in her high honors throne,
As in the bringing of foul Envy down,
That then aloft, imposed cause of moan
On men then moved, and did retain the light
That shone as stars in that dark ugly night:
Which had eclipsed all the Realm throughout,
That none could see Truths sun (dark round about)
Yet some in darkness, did continue bright.
Though when their beams, were brightly seen to shine,
The wolves that wandered for their pray them found
And them devoured, or clapped in dismal shrine,
Fast tide, until Eliza them unbound,
And brought them forth unto the light of Sun,
And opened truths book. A world to see men run
To hear and learn the truth long kept from view,
Forlorn, forsaken, of that dreadful crew:
Now all embrace Elizaes work begun.
And then begun her fruits of faith be seen,
And publicly she made her loves protest:
Ere she assumed the Scepter of a Queen,
She would through Jove, give church distressed rest,
And rest her self on his all sacred power,
Which well she witnest coming from the Tower:
Before she did set forward, lifts her eyes,
Gives praise to him in whom all safety lies:
Her strong pauilion, and her saving bower.
To him with heart and humble voice she gave
All laud for love, wherein he had preserved
Her self from death, her person from the grave,
To see that joyful day, yet not deserved
She did confess, his mercies only raised
Her from her dangers. And as David praised,
She praised his name: This argument of grace,
Gave graceful tokens, to adorn the place,
The regal throne. Her foes saw it and gays'd.
They gays'd and grieved to see the splending rays
Of great Elizaes fame spread far and near:
Their eyes of spite gave aim unto her ways.
She wauered not, her virtues shined clear,
The Sunny beam, of high Iehouahes love,
Led her aright. All her delight above,
Not in earthes glory, which might lead awrye,
She had Truths touch and Image in her eye,
Which no delight or fancy could remove.
In this Truths constant state Eliza stood,
A lively mirror set before our eyes:
And still she stands, Nurse and gives the food
To Jacobs line, in whom life's promise lies.
Oh great Eliza whom the powers divine
Divinely held, from falling, by loves line
She holds the line, whereon depends peace,
Truths peace and plenty, and sad wars decease,
Or else preserues when foes in force combine.
As has appeared in her Royal days,
When troops of troubles have presented fear
By force in field, by secret spights essays
By Magic Art. and poisons: who did bear
Preserving stroke, but high Iehouah's hand,
He will preserve, were troubles as the sand,
As will the sequel of this work declare,
Wherein some practices described are
As were prepared her, though they could not stand.
A Pensive souls delight.
Here are expressed the startagems of foes,
Elizaes conquests, and their falls that rose.
TAke off the veil, and open your dimmed eyes,
All ye seduced, by the man of sin:
Conceive aright, consider whence do rise,
And where the dangers of this Realm begin.
Look into Rome, the pillar of your pride,
And flatter not the things should be enuide:
As treasons, murders, and conspiracies,
Dreadful Invasions, and sad miseries.
These are her fruit, they cannot be denide.
Can thirst for blood, stand with Religion?
Can hateful murder, crave a recompense?
Then holy writ is but a fiction:
Tweene sin and sanctity no difference,
To murder Princes, meritorious:
A work, that makes the worker glorious.
Is It faith by works, or works by faith they show
In sheading blood? and seeking overthrow
Of Prince and people? a thing most odious.
How did Pope Paul the fourth, fawn on the French,
And fed their second Francis with desire
By force, to mount fair Englands Regal bench,
Who was with ease invited to aspire
In Mary's name, his Queen, and Queen of Scots?
He did pretend with sword to solue the knots
That rightly knit Eliza to the Crown.
But right by force, is sildome seen pulled down,
Nor for her right Eliza would cast lots.
As Paul pretends in sentencing our Queen,
No Queen, French Francis in conceit was King:
And stylde him King, as if he King had been:
And Francis soaring by ambicious wing,
Eggd by the Guise, did send his force with speed
To Scotland, (English Papists first were feed
To aid the French) and thence the Realm t'inuade,
A match but half, not by both parties made.
Though strong conceit might think it won indeed.
But when Eliza saw French Francis rise,
And fetch his run to leap into her Land:
She knew the practice of seditious Guise,
On whose aspiring wyles the King did stand.
The Pope, the King, and Papists stood
Combinde in one, in hot aspiring mood.
And our Eliza lately raisde, beheld
This play begun, Ensigns displayde in field,
She not dismayed, nor fearing Enuies brood.
But soon consulted with Nobility,
Resolved, and sent her warlike forces hence:
They paste the Tweede in magnanimity,
As eger of their Queens and Realms defense.
The French were to the Scots unwelcome guests,
Therefore the Scots made English high protests,
To join their forces to the English bands,
A Realm with Realm, in love combined stands,
Far more secure, then it disiuncted rests.
But when the French had view of English force,
And saw Elizaes love had won the Scots,
The French dismay, and sue for quick divorce,
Wishing Pope Paul were present at the lots,
Where he with his unwonted warlike train,
Had seen sad sorrow, sequel of disdain,
That erst disdaynd Elizaes Diadem,
To take it off, and rob her of her Realm:
And expedition plotted by his brain.
The French saw ruin right before their eyes,
If they should buckle by the dint of sword,
A dreadful mist of fear on them did rise,
And they sought peace by plain submissiue word,
And yielded rather to return with shame,
Then enter combat for the cause they came.
So Solon-Cecill and grave Wotton went
And gave them parlie, and the consequent
Did wholly tend to great Elizaes fame.
The King and Queen of Scots and France should leave
The arms and titles of Elizaes Realms,
By them usurped, to which Pope Paul did heave
With English gems to deck their diadeames,
And further yielded their submission,
As did Eliza set condition.
What greater honor could succeed then this?
What greater victory then yielding is?
A regal guise to have compassion.
Here were three virtues in Eliza found,
Her true and constant Magnanimity,
Her frank Compassion, and her Wisdom sound,
All pressed at once, confirmd her dignity.
From whom have sprung the dangers of our Queen?
From whence have all foul Enuies working been?
But from the fountain of that poysond well,
Of Romish Bushops, and their cursed cell?
Where are fell Furies and foul Monsters seen.
Did not Pope Pius quartus who succeedes
The former Paul, appear like venomous?
And did he not sow here seditious seeds?
And did not again Pope Pius quintus,
Succeeding him gave tokens of despite?
Who did her sacred Majesty indue
With his foul Bull, that came with ougly roar,
Into this land, her Highness to vnmoare,
And to bereave this Kingdom of her light.
And did he not dispense with fealty,
That English Nobles and her subjects swore,
And plainly plighted to her Majesty?
And stirred he not the Northern Lords, to gore
Her Highness liege-men with his filthy Bull?
Though he prevailed not, his horns were dull,
Yet did his accomplices obey his hest,
And raised their force, the Pope to reinuest
Whence he was driven, their hearts of gall were full.
Full of despite, breathed on them by that beast,
That bellowed horror to the silly sheep,
Whose blood they sought to make their Enuies feast.
But he that gave these silly ones to keep,
To great Eliza gave, Eliza will
And power, she suffered not the Wolves to kill
Her lambs, but sent her saving heardsmen hence.
Sussex and Warwick, who were their defense.
At whose aduent, the Bull failde of his skill.
And failing fled: An ugly sight to see
A beast dismembered, not by butchers knife:
The head amazed did fly: the horns too free,
Brake off. The members do despair of life.
Head hastes to Scotland, left the bulk behind,
The body, arms, and legs were discombinde.
And suddenly captiu'de, subdude or yield,
Deprived of hope, (as men disarmde in field.
See now their error, led before as blind.
Some of the train had justly doom to dye,
Most did implore, and got Elizaes grace,
And yet not one could reason justify,
As sit to live, of this rebellious race:
All virtues do attend Elizaes train,
Valor, and Mercy, Justice with these twain,
Approve her absolute heroicke Queen:
No former worthy, more divine has been.
Nor won more honor, never touch of stayne.
But how could Pius Pope excuse his spite,
In seeking true Elizaes life by sword?
How could he void just sentence of his pride,
Her to depose, by his ambitious word?
How could he clear himself of subtilty,
Pretending to dispense with fealty?
Spite, pride, and fraud, a trine aspect of hell,
Presaging ill event out of that cell.
From whence proceeds naught but impiety.
This impius Bull of Pius baited thus,
Came led to London in false Feltons hand,
He tide the beast, and left it furious;
At the Bishops palace in a leaden band
The Bulheard left the game for others play,
His service done, despair egd him away:
The Bull grew meeker, was with ease untied.
The gamester gone, the game was not reuide,
But left vnplaid until another day.
Francke gamester Felton lay aloof awhile,
To hear and note, success of this fierce beast,
At last found out, and brought from dark exile,
And saw the game all done, become a jest:
Himself came forth to play his part on stage
In public view (Pope Pius trusty Page.)
He acted all, as traitors use to do,
That after doom to execution go.
Mean while the Bull was curbed of his rage.
The powers divine, that ever shelter make
To shield Eliza from foul Enuies hand,
Stood up and stopped the current of this lake,
That threatened danger to her self and land:
And leaves her not deprived of reveal
Of all complots, that would subvert her weal.
He Madders and Barlowes conspiracies
Bewraide: ere they brought forth their villainies
They did: Justice admitted no appeal.
My pensive soul (recomforted to see
Elizaes freedom, and her constant love:
How Truth and Mercy, in her linked be,
And how her virtues her spread fame approve)
Cannot but lift in love her worthy praise,
And laud his name, who her for us did raise:
And in her set Religion (aptiuate)
Free for Religious to participate
Iehouah's bounty in Elizaes days.
Iehouah's bounty and his loves defense,
Defends her and us in her from foes:
Praise him, he seeks no other recompense.
He heau'd her up, and we in her arose,
We did arise, by tyranny cast down,
She, she, (our Moses,) lifted to the crown,
Saw Corah, Dathan, and Abiram rise,
(Rebellious troops) and sink before her eyes.
Despair them swallow at Elizaes frown.
Confusion swallows Rebels, none can stand
When they conspire in public, or conceald,
For who so takes a traitors task in hand
To work Elizaes wrecke, is soon reueald.
Their treasons seen, whence is original?
Sot Someruiles, and that proud Parries gall,
That swore her death with resolution,
Covertly contrived by Romes elusion:
What issue came? their own infernal fall.
And yet was Parry by the Pope assurde
His fact was worthy merit of heavens bliss:
What hellish vipers has these Popes procurde,
To aim at her whose glory makes them miss?
Her glory graced with Iehouahs grace,
Disgraceth them with her great glories face:
What could the fourteen great heroykes do,
Whom eke the Pope to murder her did woo?
Did they prevail in that they had in chase?
Were they not found by high Iehouahs eye,
That winkes not at foul Enuies lifted fist?
He sees and swayes their foul malignitie:
And smites them down within self Enuies list.
Yea though they do contriue their spite
In fortaigne parts, far off (they think) from sight,
Justice bewrays them where so they hide,
And self conceit leaves not them vndescride:
Themselves discover in dispairing night.
Yea though they practice darkness in the dark,
As devilish witchcraft, and the Magic arts:
The devil deceiues them, and they miss the mark,
Yet he not his, their play is of two parts.
They aim to hit, high Jove's anointed Queen,
And miss, he aims at them, (his wiles unseen,)
And hits. The Pope yet holiest of the rest,
Chief actor, finding former shifts not blessed:
He will have execrable arts be seen.
And for his Nigromantiall practices,
Pickes out infernal instruments for fact:
As Prestall, Phayer, and their accomplices,
Hotheaded Story, master of the act,
This work commenced, dark and deep as hell,
Yet brought to light, and lifted from that rell.
The devil assured them Elizaes death,
(He loves to lie) believe not what he says,
Though traitors do, so did Achitophell.
Achitophel bewitched, did bewitch
Fair Absalom, a son unto a king:
Mou'de him to mount, to hit (but did not hiche)
His fathers crown, high Justice clipped his wing.
So are the wings of these foul traitors cut,
That want not will, their flight in practice put:
But fall in seas of deep dispairing shame,
And Story styled led with great Sophies fame,
Armed with foul Envy, mist the aimed but.
The white, (Eliza) daz'd their devilish eyes,
They could not see, nor make their art to prove:
Arts master could not make that devil rise
That was of power to hurt Iehouahs Dove.
Yet Story striving to accomplish that
Which in his high aspiring fancy sat,
Was sent a present by Iehouah's hand,
From Flaunders, where he most secure did stand:
All men well know the guerdon that he gat.
Yet Phayer and Prestall found a fayrer day,
Elizaes mercy, her revenge exceedes:
Though mercy in this case might well say nay,
And Justice cut down these infernal weeds.
But Justice left them not excused herein,
For Phayer fell after to high treasons sin:
Di'de for the last, a guerdon for the first,
High traitors have no doubt a dropsy thirst,
Which sildome quenches when it does begin.
What souls keep silence, but rejoice to see
The speedy falls of all Elizaes foes?
Whose foes, are foes to all that faithful be,
Her faith, firm faith, their faithless works disclose,
And none sit sad to see it, but the crew
Of Enuies covert workers out of view,
Whose hearts are hidden for a while in dark,
They will be seen by some external mark,
And show the poysond fruit that therein grew.
For none so walk, invisible in Spite,
But word, or work, or guise, or garment will
At last bewray them, and bring all to light,
The fume will breath and show what they distill:
Throgmorton in hearts closet long conceild
His Enuies fire, at last brake forth reueild,
A flame to light the bringing in of Spain,
To pull Eliza down, a painful strain,
A deep fetched note, words to make Princes yield.
Nay, weapons were preparde, the Kingdom given,
Our lives were sold, all offices disposde,
And in conceit, they had deposde our Queen,
All up but one; but when it was disclosde,
The game did turn. Throgmorton came to light,
Then, Pope, was pensive, Spaniards in sad plight,
Their hope a dream: when they awakt, they saw
That shadows bring not substances in awe.
Nor words like swords, to arm a man to fight.
This mystie morning cleared with the Sun,
Bewrayed Throgmorton with her splendant beams:
He leaves his closet when his dream was done,
And finds Eliza rooted in her Realms
Which he had sold to them that could not buy,
He could not sell Elizaes dignity:
Yet naught did want but sure possession,
And that was hoped by his confession.
Here was presumption, and credulity.
Seller presumes to sell what was not his,
Buyers believe, yet had not Quid pro quo:
What man of law can rightly censure this,
Pactum or nudum pactum, yea or no?
The buyers sue not seller for the same,
Nor then required, or for bargain came:
And yet Throgmorton was attached therefore,
And paid his head, for recompense: and More,
And his consorts went not without their shame.
Who sees these fruits, that grow upon that stock
Of Romes despite, that spread into this land,
And loathes them not? and would not move the block
Laid in the way to weak Elizaes hand?
Who does not joy to see their ill success?
Who does not wish in heart a sound redress?
The banishment of all that hateful crew,
That lurk unseen, and some in public view?
Or wish their love, and their despights release.
Oh how would our Eliza them embrace?
How would she guard their lives in truths desires?
How happy they, if they were in her grace
Cut from that tree, of bloody Romes aspires?
That still aspires, and still her branches fall,
They rot, consume, infected with her gall:
A wonder that they will not shun the snare,
When they their own with others lots compare:
They see the mirror, yet not moved withal.
What are their lives unto the Papacy?
As are base Turks to their ground Seignior
Who ways ten thousand lives in policy,
As flies; So Catholic Superior,
Oh silly souls, that dream of dignity
And high advance for hateful treachery,
To bring their native land, to foreign spoil,
Their friends, and kinsmen, guiltless to their foil.
Self guerdon death, hell for their sallary.
What recompense had Romes chief champion
Sent to this land from that great Bishops side?
Their Alpha and Omega Campion
And his consorts, concealed yet espide,
They came in color to win souls to bliss,
Of all the Locustes sent, the gloss is this:
When to draw subject, duties, and their love,
From true Eliza, and high treasons move.
Against their Queen, their true pretending is.
For can a subject stand, liege to his Lord,
And yet give sentence with his mortal foe?
Or can a man serve two with good accord,
When in desire they wish each others woe?
Its hard to wade in mean, between two friends,
In equal service Jealousy depends.
Therefore who works to win a subjects love
From her that has it warranted above,
T'anothers love, all know what he pretends.
They may pretend, and be igniferent,
Zealous in show, to win a man from sin,
When all they work, is to make malecontent,
And draw the doubtful to diue deeper in.
For if their works were of right Wisdoms skill,
They would in public, practice to instill
Their right advise, that all might be advised,
As Paul did preach in public, not disguished:
Who fear the light (no doubt) their deeds are ill.
Did Campion that famous Doctor show
In public school, or in the open view?
Or did he preach? or his high gifts bestow
On all? as well he might, if they were true.
Nay, came he not in covert, fearing light,
And kept in dark, and salyed in the night?
As one that would surprise the silly sheep,
Fled from the fold, and from their shepherds keep.
And do not all the Locusts thus by flight?
Have they the habit coresponding gift?
As they pretend their gift is to forgive?
If that their gift, and color not a drift,
To lay their poison in Religious hiue.
Then let them come, but not in Ruffins weed,
That come to kill, when they pretend to feed:
Some come like Ruffins, some like men of war,
The blind, the lame, they know not what they are,
How can they ask them then the things they need?
They fear the sword (they say) therefore they lie
As Leopards; white, and black, and green, and gray,
Attired thus to act divinity:
Beseemes it them? It fits a stage array:
But if these colors be to cloak their guile,
As they assume unto themselves exile,
Then sure they fear the light, and walk in dark,
Pretending one, and aim another mark:
Denominate by one, and have another style.
What need they fear the Magistrate, or sword?
If they do well, no peril can befall,
No peril falls on them of true accord,
That do accord with Truth, not gorgd with gall,
They gorgd, vngorge, and with the fume infect
Elizaes Liege-men: who again reflect
The same on those that truly loyal be,
And wrest the wills, of many by degree,
To cover Treason, which they should detect.
Who then believes, these monsters come to save?
Or can forgive? If they seduce from love,
Though they have titles as the Angels have,
And be in show as is the Turtle Dove:
They are but spies, or Spiders to compact
The web of mischief, which some else must act:
In eighty eight, the year of greatest hope
Of Englands overthrow, advance of Pope,
The Spaniard hoped to be English backed.
But was kept back, Jehovah curbd his rage,
Reuerts his matter to another end,
He by his power, his fury did assuage,
And his Armado, did both break and bend:
It brake by force, it bended with desire,
To turn again, they saw it best retire,
Some did retire; Against their wills, some saw
And felt Elizae forces and Jove's Law:
Who still inhabites wrongers to aspire.
Yet sure Romes Locusts had enuenomed
Some gyddie heads, hot, weary of their weal,
And won them to consent (but blindly led)
To their inchants, and gave their vows for seal,
To join their forces to Elizaes foes,
Yet would they have Eliza to suppose
These Romish witches to be tolerable.
In her Kingdoms indeed most execrable,
Covertly contriuing Elizaes woes.
Elizaes woes, woe worth their trecheries,
Oh high Jehovah blind their hateful eyes,
Confound their wits, drive them to extacies,
Daunt their desires, draw them to obliquies,
And leave them not, till thou have thrown them down
That aim at thee, and at Elizaes crown,
At thee Jehovah, to put out thy light:
At her, Truths prop, the foe to dismal night
Wherein they walk, as deadly Wolves unknown.
Unknown to her, her innocence bears,
No dread of ill; they yet creep covertly
Into men's hearts, with counterfaited tears,
Persuade, dissuade, conjure, and hold it piety
To wrest poor souls from true obedience,
Unto Eliza under false pretense,
Of liberty and true religion,
When all their wiles tend to confusion,
Of Queen, and Realm, this, Romes beneficence.
Woe worth these Wolves, that dally with the sheep,
As Cat with Mouse, till they work heards-man gone.
Eliza gone, these Wolves will have the keep
Of all the flock in false suggestion:
Oh live Eliza, great Jove let her live,
And lead her swarm to thy all sacred hiue,
Where thy poor Bees, may shelter have from those,
That suck truths honey, from theit hearts with gloss,
That thy truths, life, and light, do fanckly give,
Where lo they give the fruit of poisoned tree,
That eaten, please as honey does the taste
In first, but second and in third degree,
Infects and killes, though it first a sweet repast,
But when digested, and the Conscience
Pertakes at full their confluence,
Then are the workings of this potion found,
Deadly devouring, and all parts confound:
These Vipers, yet pretend great recompense.
They have their recompense, but far from bliss,
No Traitors, or Seducers can expect
Reward above (where sacred duty is)
That yield no duty to high Jove's elect,
(Anointed here). They blinded, seek to blind,
And draw from duty: bound, do seek to bind
The silly souls that sue and seek for light,
Their Duties love, they bind by their dispight,
And yet pretend they have a sacred mind.
A sacrilegious mind; for lo they steal
Men's hearts, and rob them of obedience:
They breed sedition in the public weal,
And work the weak to stand on Conscience,
Conscience must not perunt the silly flies,
Fallen in their web, to seek the means to rise,
To open their eyes, to move their foot or hand,
To shun their snares, to hear or understand.
They must not doubt or reason of their lies.
Oh silly souls bewitched with this crew,
Why will you follow their enchaunted ways?
Wayle, and unwrap you of this deadly clew,
Wherein these Spiders do entrap their prays:
Hear and believe, truth will this snare untie,
And set your Consciences at liberty:
And free you from these miscrean Cananites,
Infernal dogs, that vomit out despights
Against Messiahs truth and sanctity,
Come out from them ye captived souls, and fly
Their deadly charms, and let Elizaes grace
Prevail with you, and do no longer lie
In that dark den, whence issues all that race.
That raunge the mountains of traditions,
Full they pretend of true devotions.
Believe them not, truth is not in their ken:
A mystie cloud hangs on them witched men,
Deprived of grace, guides to seditions.
Ye see the fruits of all the Locusts, sent
From that proud beast, that fits a God in show:
Have they not drawn you to be discontent
With your sweet liberty, and love you owe?
Have they not wrought you to be obstinate,
To kick against Eliza and her state?
Have they not wood you to betray the land
Wherein you live, wherein your comforts stand?
Do you not see their loves pretense is hate?
Hate them that hale you to that dismal way,
Love her that lends you true protection:
Your selves detect, these covert wolves bewray,
And bring to light, these Locusts of infection,
That lurk with you, and leave their sting in you,
Come you to light, learn truth, and live anew.
Live as good subjects, love as Christians,
Embrace the faithful, leave these Miscreans,
And you shall see great blessings will ensue.
A Pensuiue souls delight
Here is set forth Elizaes lenity,
And Locust-Catholiques superbitie.
THe world throughou admires Elizaes love,
Her mercy, patience, and great lenity:
Her Princely virtues do at full approve,
Her sacred, loving, free from tyranny,
Her hearts affections spring of clemency.
Dispearse the Rivers of her flowing grace,
Throughout the valleys of true Duties soil,
Her subjects dutiful she does embrace,
Her foes she favors, whom her laws might spoil.
Her sacred heart possessed with desire
That all might live, and living, love express:
Does show her mercy, yet restraines her Ire,
In hope her love might win her foes redress:
And spares their blood, deserving nothing less:
When Justice wills, and Policy finds fit,
The quick dispatch and cutting off of those
That aim her ruin, though they never hit,
Her laws severe, are not severe to foes.
Her Princely heart still bent to Amity,
Aims all her acts, to quallifie the rage
Of undeserved foes by lenity:
She does forbear them, hoping to assuage
Their hearts despite, and to pull down the stage
Whereon they act their enuies stratagemes:
And that the prompter of their practices
Might see the firmness of her diademes:
Not moved by weapons or by policies.
Yet he that steres the helm of Enmity
And would address his bark unto her strand,
Linnes not to send his Pylots to epsy
What way he might securely make the land:
They sound men's hearts, and heave their enuies hand
To hit the best, but high Jehovah swayes
Their hateful powers, and wythers their desires:
Elizaes watchmen, wink not at their ways,
But lets them run on, breathless in aspires.
But in midway when they are near the mark
Whereat they aim, unseen they do surmise:
(For all their soundings and devises are in the dark)
The powers divine do open Elizaes eyes,
And she their soundings and devises spies:
And well considers that her lenity
Works not effects of reformation
Of their attempts, but their superbitie
Increasing still their cursed faction.
They have forgotten laws inflictions
Formerly imposde; the rod now laid aside,
(They think) and fear not interdictions,
Laws letter cannot countercheck their pride.
The sword put up, it must be erst redide.
The weather calm, they think no storm can rise
To beat them back in their strong impudence
Ambitious thoughts, bemysteth so their eyes
To see Elizaes grace, they have no sense.
They have no sense, or make no use of eyes,
They may of both, by both they wrong the state:
By plots and complots of conspiracies:
Perverting subjects, stirring them to hate
Their own sweet peace. And then to perpetrate
High treasons, ougly spite, and deadly Ire,
Against Eliza, for a recompense
Of her loves favors: where indeed, their hire
By law is death, grace works no penitence.
Penitence? nay pride, props up their hope,
And hope to have the glory of a day:
Past fear, they flourish in pretense of scope
Freely to work, they dream of no say nay,
Their hearts of gall, they deem can have no stay
Till Peace consume in their infernal flame,
And Truth devoured in that combustion:
Till they confound their native countries name,
Fair Englands glory by sedition.
But lo, while my sad Muse recounts the things
I did bewail, (the dangers imminent)
A happy herald, constituted brings,
And does proclaim, a sweet infraunchesment
Of doubtful thoughts, the Locusts banishment.
My pensive thoughts revived yields praise
For our Eliza, whose divine respects,
And whose true watch, their enuies fruits bewraies,
Yield her regards (great Jove) their true affects.
And drive their Droanes and Spiders from her hiue,
That suck the honey, and do feed with gall
Her subjects hearts, and loyal love deprive:
High Jove deprive their power and sting withal,
Cut down the tree, let all the branches fall,
That spread their venim to her prejudice,
Prolong her days, and maltiply her joys,
In earth with peace, and sacred benedice,
Be her pauilion, shield her from annoyes.
FINIS.

