The ways of the Lord (...) (...) (...) is Pleasure for evermo^^.

A GOOD Companion For A CHRISTIAN Derecting him in the way to God: being
Meditations and Prayers for every day in the Week: and Graces before and after
meat

London Printed by G.P. for Rich: Collins (...) his Shop in Paul's Churchyard
at ye 3 King^ 1634



A GOOD COMPANION FOR A CHRISTIAN, Directing him in the way to God, being
Meditations and Prayers for every day in the week: and Graces before and after
meat.

Call upon me in the day of Trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall
praise me.

Psalm. 50. LONDON: Printed by G. P. for Richard Collins, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Three Kings. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD LORD GORGE Baron of Dondaulk.
MOST noble my good Lord:
My deceased Father very often suruaied the Kings Lands, but now by me he
humbly tenders himself to be suruaied by you. This small Treatise (the issue
not of his body, but his brain) he left with us his children, to assure us,
and al men that himself chiefly studied and shaped his courses so to dye that
he might never dye, and that he prepared himself so to depart from the earth,
that when he did leave the Earth he had no other business but to leave the
Earth, for his actions were but an example of his precepts.

Now my very noble Lord, my poor self being a dependant upon your honored
House, having nothing in me to express my obliged duty; no not so much as
advise or wishes, (since your being good and performance of goodness makes all
my wishes vain) I beseech you but to read and suruay not what you should do,
but what you have done, that your sanctified discreetnesse may be a mirror to
others, and an inforcement to me ever to remain,

Your virtuous honor^ humbly devoted servant, I. NORDEN.

To the Reader.
IT is the word of the Word, One thing is necessary; many are troubled about
many things but did any ever repent that he had set his house in order? Did
ever any live the worse, in that they were ever prepared to dye? Indeed in our
Age desperate Security makes many foole-hardy: but those which are so much men
that they know they have a Soul; and so far Christian men that they believe
they must give an account of their steward-ship, will entertain this Treatise
as right useful. The world knows my Father in his life time wrote many
Meditations, but God only knows that this he composed at his end for his
death time: for before he could bring it into the world, himself went out of
the world* In natural duty therefore to the memory of my deceased Father, and
in a Christian Charity to the common good, J have set forth this Book, with my
hearty prayers to God that we may so set our house in order, that whenever
the Bridegroom shall call, we may not only have lamps in our hands, but oil in
our Lamps, and Lights in our oil, that is, not only a profession but a
perseuering expression of true Christianity.

I. NORDEN.

A COMPANION FOR A CHRISTIAN, to guide him in the way to God.
Set thy house in order for thou shall dye.

Isay 38.1.
No difference in the natural substance of poor and rich.
HEZECHIAH, that good King of Judah, being sick (supposed) of a plague sore,
was commanded by God, To set his house in order, for he should die: whereby it
appears, that, as all men are borne to dye, so are they subject, to that
pestilent infirmity: To show that there is no difference of men, in respect of
their natural bodies; Kings, Princes and Poorest people, are all made of one,
and the same substance, and subject to all like and the same infirmities; and
therefore, none but such as forget whereof they are made, will scorn (as many
do,) such as are (in respect of themselves) basely attired, or poor in
substance: as the rich man in the Gospel did poor Lazarus.

No cause why the rich should disdain the poor.
ANd as the rich and proud amongst us at this day, do foolishly, conceiving an
opinion of themselves, that in regard of their riches, and revenues, their
outward attire, and vain bravery, they are made of a more delicate matter,
than the poor; and that the meanly attired, are not fit to come near them,
much less to touch them: But let the richest, and the brauest robed, be rest
of his riches, and the poor man enjoy it, and let the poor man be attired
with his glorious garments, and then it will appear that the difference is
only, in riches and poverty, not in the beauty, or baseness of either.

Poor and rich incident to equal infirmities.
AND as touching their infirmities: what sickness is it, that befalls the poor,
that is not incident to the rich? And what privilege has the rich to prevent
death more than the poor man has? Only the means of physic, which
prevails not, when the time (set by the almighty) is come. And the like set
time has the poor, before which time though he take no physic (though
necessary) he shall not dye.

Rich and poor must dye and come to judgment.
But it is appointed equally to rich and poor, that they shall dye and come to
judgment. And therefore, it is a duty required by God: (And fit in Christian
discretion and policy) not only, that Kings, and men of great estates, the
rich and wealthy.

Men are to set their house in order while they are in health.
But that all men of what estate, condition, or degree soever they be, not only
in the time of my common plague, or infectious disease, (yet then especially)
and when they be sick, but rather in their best health and strength, should
not only have continually in their minds, that they must dye, but at all times
to set, keep, and continue their houses, hearts and senses and members of their
bodies in order, knowing they must dye* yet not knowing the time: that when the
time comes, be it never so sudden, they may dye in peace with God, and with
all men in a good conscience.

Men of means are so to settle their possessions and goods as may reserve
peace after their deaths.
ANd as much as in them is, so to dispose and settle their worldly possessions,
and goods, as peace may be preserved and continued, amongst such, as they
intend, shall enjoy them when they are dead, for although all men know, that it
is appointed that they must dye; yet are not all men of like watchfulnes, or
preparation against the time of death.

Many are slack in setting their houses in order.
SOme live long, and many years, and become not bodily sick at all, and
therefore, it seldom or never comes into their minds, that they must dye;
and so put off the setting of their houses in order, and to reform their lives
until many of them be prevented. And when they would, they cannot (either for
want of time, or of memory, or of sense) perform it. Some have long and
lingering sickness, looking (as it were) every day to dye; and yet can hardly
find time, to set their house and lives in order.

Sudden death preuents men of setting their houses in order.
SOme also are taken suddenly, not only in the time of common infection
(wherein all sorts are in most, and equal danger) but in time of seeming
greatest safety, and of least cause of fear; which we have seen by the
sudden death of many, which have taken no time at all, to settle their
estates: but have been enforced, to leave their houses, in the same order, they
were in, when they lived clean out of order. And few there be that
prouidently, and timely set, and wisely keep and continue their houses and
lives in such order, as by Gods command they ought to do, by reason of their
worldly cares. And that is the reason, that many go disorderly to their
graves, how pompously soever they be attended on, at their funeral solemnities.

Many inconveniences grow by the neglect of setting men's houses in order before
they dye.
THe neglect of this commanded duty, of setting their worldly estates in order
(a duty in humane discretion, and Christian policy, fit to be remembered, and
performed of all men,) is also the cause that many quarrels, contentions,
suits in law, enmities, sinister, ungodly and malicious practices, (sometimes
tending to blood) do arise, not only between strangers; but between
brethren, between brethren and sisters, wife and children, and dearest and
nearest kinsfolks and friends, contending especially for lands and goods, of
such as dye, without orderly disposing of that they are constrained to leave
behind them, when they dye.

All men are bound to this duty of setting their houses in order.
ALL men therefore, are bound to this duty, but especially such as have great
possessions, to dispose, and much goods to be queath, and to set in order above
other times, when any common plague, or sickness reigns, to set their houses
in order, for there is no man or woman privileged, at such a time. And there
is commonly no man, but has either issue, or some near of blood, lawfully to
inherit his lands, and friends to enjoy his goods: yet if he dispose them not
in his lifetime, but leaves them to catch that catch may: it cannot be, but
suits and quarrels will arise, between such as will contend for the right of
inheritance left doubtful. The like about Administrations of goods, of an
intestate dead party, causing many times, more money to be spent in law, than
the lands or goods are worth they contend for thus uncertainly left: And
therefore, better it were, for a man, to dye, not seized of a foot of land,
nor possessed of more goods, than will bring him decently to his grave; than by
the greatness of his possessions, and his much wealth, undisposed, and not duly
ordered, to breed uncharitable, and unchristian quarrels among kindred and
friends, to the offense of God, for the pelf he leaves behind him when he
dies. And perhaps sinisterly and corruptly gotten, which seldom prosper long to
them that shall enjoy them.

Aduertisements to the rich men.
RIch men therefore, above all other have need to remember to set their houses
and estates in order in time; knowing their time is short, and uncertain: and
the greater possessions, and the more abundance of wealth they have, the more
circumspect ought they to be, to live in the fear of God and to set their
houses in order, before they dye: for, the more they have, the greater will be
their account, and the more have they to answer for, when they are dead: for,
howsoever, men, either borne to inherit; or have gotten and purchased (as they
will say) with their own moneys, and have heaped up great abundance of riches
and possessions by their own industries, policies, and worldly wisdom. They
must not yet think (as many do) that these possessions, and goods are so
there is, as to use them at their own pleasures, to the fulfilling of their own
carnal delight or to hoord them up, and as it were, to wrap them in a napkin,
that none may be the better for them, until they be enforced to leave them,
whether they will or not: assuming unto themselves that lawless liberty, and
abusing that speech, Js it not lawful for me to do with mine own what I
list? no, they are not so simply thine, that thou should abuse them, but to
use them to his glory that gave them, or rather lent them unto thee. Though
peradventure to thine own vexation thou gettest them, to thy more care thou
keep them, and to thy most grief thou must leave them (which last approves
that they are not thine as thou reputest them thine; for, thou must leave them,
and they will leave thee, whether thou will or not) yet if in the mean time
thou use not thy possessions and wealth, to the good of Gods children
(howsoever thou dispose them to be inioyed after thy death) it will not profit
thee, give them to whom, or to what use thou will; for, if thou labor not in
thy life time, to be assured, that thy name is written in the book of life,
good deeds to be done by a deputy after thy death cannot avail thee: while
therefore thou have time, do good; and while thou have power over the lands
and goods that God has lent thee, to be used by thee, to Gods glory, and
comfort of his needy members. Leave not that duty (required even of thy self)
to be performed thou know not by whom after thy death.

Rich men must answer according as they have received and bestowed.
Have thou many talents? put them to good use, and thou shall have a good
reward; for, if he that received but one talent, was cast into utter darkness,
for not applying it to the good of Gods children, what will become of them,
that have great possessions, and many talents of silver and gold, laid up in
their chests, doing no good with them to the poor children of God, when they
shall suddenly be called, before the high and severe Judge? Will their answer
be sufficient to say, I have appointed mine heir to give such and such lands;
and mine executor such and such Legacies, to good and pious uses? But, may it
not to be said rather unto him, Thou fool, could not thou thy self have
done it better in thy life time, and not to have left the doing of it in trust
to an uncertain Attorney after thy death, who is as mortal as thy self?

The cause why rich men will not part with any their wealth before they dye.
THou may say (as many men think) if I should give, or dispose my lands or
goods, while I am in perfect headth, how could I maintain mine estate,
according to my rank? I was the Son of a worshipful or honorable Father,
whose lands descended unto me, (...) I not to make the best of it, and increase
it if I can? Why should I give away that, that my father left me? Says
another, I have possessions, indeed, which I have purchased, as mine own
proper inheritance; wherein who can pretend interest but my self? Should I
forgot that which I have dearly paid for to them that I know not?

Men ought not to be prodigal in giving away their goods.
IT is not meant that any man should be prodigal, and consume the inheritance
of a Father (though many have wantonly consumed honorable and inferior estats,
to their dishonor, and shame, without doing that which God requires of all
men to be done, to his glory, and their own future assured comfort.) Neither
is it unlawful for any man to purchase, so it be by his money lawfully gotten.
But neither he that has it by descent, nor he that does purchase possessions,
but is bound both to lend, and to give, especially, to the needy members of
Christ. But thou will say, who are they? how shall I know them? Surely they
that bear but the outward image of Christ's humanity, must be supposed to be of
the number of them, to whom thou ought to do good, for if thou give to any
poor man, whose heart thou know not, if thou do it in the name of one of
the members of Christ (though he be not) thy work is accepted of God, as done
to himself. And thou shall not thereby diminish but procure a blessing, upon
the rest of thy lands, and goods; for, God has promised it.

Every man is but a steward under God of his lands and goods.
ANd deceive not thy self, but know, that though thy possessions came by
descent or purchase, and thy goods by gift, or by thine own industry; thou
art but steward of them under God, to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to
lend unto, and to relieve the poor. And not to convert them, totally (as most
men do) to thine own private pleasures, or worldly profits. Say not with
Nabal, what is David, or who is the Son of Ishai? who are the children of
God, that I should give, or lend them my silver, and gold, my bread or my
victuals, that J have provided for mine own children, my servants and friends?
Shall I give it to beggars, or lend my money to poor snakes, that will never
pay me again?

Some rich men seem to loath the Poor.
IT grieueth such Nabals indeed to look upon the poor, but with disdain, much
less to give or lend unto them, wherewith to relieve and comfort them: And yet
they think God loves them dearly, because, he heaps upon them daily, more
and more, this worlds Mammon, yet care not for the poor, like Judas that bare
the bag. Therefore cry the poor unto the Lord, against such hard, stony, and
covetous hearted miserable rich men: And the Lord hears in heaven, and will
reward them as they reward the poor; for, as the poor cry, and the rich will
not hear them; so shall the rich cry and the Lord will not answer them; and
hence it comes, that Christ himself affirms it to be as hard a thing for a
rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, as for a Camel to go through the
eye of a needle: this is no skarre-crow?

Why there are poor and rich in the world.
HOw can these men set their houses in order before they dye, when their hearts
are hardened and out of order while they live, nothing regarding Christ, in his
members? There shall be ever some poor in the land, says Moses: And Christ
says, the poor shall you always have with you. And why? only to try the
charity of the rich: If you relieve them, you relieve Christ in them; If you
afflict them, Christ is afflicted by you in them.

What reward they shall have that help the poor members of Christ.
GOd will repay, whatsoever man gives, or lends unto his distressed members:
Give, therefore, to him that asks, and from him that would borrow turn not
away; And, your reward shall be great, And ye shall be called the children of the
most high. Yet, notwithstanding this assured reward, and this most glorious
title. What say the rich to the poor, that beg or would borrow? This is no
giving age, and worse of lending. The time indeed, is in every string out of
tune; harp where a man will, or can, he shall find a most harsh discord, and
all out of order in poor and rich, the poor will not work, and the rich will
not give. And now, begins the Lord to see whether it will be brought into better
order by his favorable chastisements, the body is sick and the members
droope, and drop away, and yet are men slack to set their houses, much less
their souls in order before they dye.

Men seek to run from death, but carry the infection of sin with them.
MEn that are afraid to stand the adventure of the dissolution or their bodies
at home are fled, to hide themselves from Gods correcting rod. Let them bewa^e,
that they carry not with them, a more pestilent infection, in their souls,
than they seek to escape in their bodies.

Some adventure their souls where they dare not adventure their bodies.
IT is strange that many men, that are valorous and aduenturous, that for the
getting of a little much of the world, will adventure their souls; and yet of
so faithless, fearful and cowardly hearts, as they will not adventure their
bodies, in the place where they have laid their souls already to pawn.

Death finds men every where.
DIscretion, indeed, it is to avoid infection of the body. But, he that seeks
to save his life may lose it; and he that flies farthest off may find death as
near him, as at his own house when he returns; for he that flies, in a
desperate distrust of Gods power, providence, and protection, may prevent the
danger, but assuredly as great a danger attends him yet, if he seek to avoid it
in the faith and fear of God, in hearty prayer, referring himself to the will
of God, for his dissolution, or preservation; whether he live or die he is
safe, and more happy in his death (being the Lords) than ten thousand that
remain (out of order) alive, abroad, or at home.

The love of this world make men fear death.
But what makes men chiefly to fly death? only, the love of the world, and
the glory and riches thereof, because these in the vain conceit of themselves
are most happy of all men, and so they are reputed, (but only of the worldly
minded) because, God suffers them to grow great, and rich, and glorious, and
full of the means, to make them to think themselves the dear children of
God: blessing themselves in the increase of their riches, and therefore, is the
very name of death bitter unto them. Who then dares say unto such a great man
in these days as Esaias did to Hezekiah; Set thy house in order for thou shall
dye? would he not spew such a plain dealing friend, for ever, out of his good
conceit?

Riches make the better man.
TAke heed whosoever thou art that trustest too much to thy riches, and think
not thy self the better man, because thou carriest a heavier burden of wealth
than thy neighbor does, an honest poor man: who has that simple title only.

Why rich men are called good men.
But thou that art rich indeed, have the reputation of a Good man. Why a good
man? because thou art a rich man; and a man will take thy band, for a hundred
pounds, before thy neighbors for a hundred pence. Why? because thou art a good
man? no but of great estate? and that is thy goodness: thy neighbor, an honest
poor man, and that is his greatness and goodness, whose word to his power may be
as good as thy band.

A good man will do good with his goodness.
But if thou be so good a man do good with thy goodness, which is thy riches,
while thou art alive, and leave not thy goodness, behind thee, and to carry
none with thee: for if thy goodness consist in riches only, thou must leave
it, and it thee; and will such a good man, think to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven hardly?

A rich man be he never so wicked has the title of a good man.
IT is a strange attribute given to every rich man; O he is a good man, if he
have wealth in abundance, let him be Usurer, Extortioner, Briber, Jew, or
Atheist, he is a good man, every man will lend upon his band, and trust him
upon his word, though he be never so very an infidel. And indeed, it is but in
show (for the most part) that one man does trust another, does any man trust
another in these days, because he is an honest man? some worthy rich and
honorable men I acknowledge do good to honest men, thinking them honest men,
and true members of Christ. But that man that has a purse to repay, and to
lend to him again, that has lent him, is the worlds good man. And thus goes
the current of worldly good men. And these are the men that as they have the
glory of the world, so they seek again to glorifye the world, by their
glorious posterities, for whose advancement, and to purchase unto themselves,
the reputation of being very (but worldly) wise men in outstripping others, in
getting (let the means be right or wrong) applying all their wits, studies,
and endeavors, to become rich in the superlatiue degree, to make their names,
their houses, their heirs, great and greater then the greatest of their
neighbors, forgetting themselves, what they were, what they are, and what they
shall be without repentance, and setting their houses, souls and bodies in godly
order, before they dye miserable in the highest degree.

Pride and covetousness, roots of many vices.
THou art famous for thy wealth, and glorious in thy great possessions, but be
neither the more proud, nor the more covetous, two rank roots, whence do
spring all the vices, that disorder both the houses, of thy soul, and body.
Look rather a little back, to the place from whence thou came, and consider
what thou broughtest into the world with thee. Broughtest thou either silver or
gold, lands or goods? In what garments came thou into the world?

Considerations fit for all men.
IF thou had brought any of these things into the world with thee, and
could carry them again out of the world with thee, thou might indeed,
then, in some sort repute them thine; yet but in a sort, for as thy body is
subject to death, to corruption, and rottenesse, so are thy lands and goods,
thy silver, thy gold, and goodliest garments subject to the like consumption:
But remember thou came out of the place of darkness; clothed in blood, which
was also thy food, wherewith thou were sustained in life, before thou came
into the light. Thou had no other garment, though thou be since washed and
outwardly purified and become neat, and clad with costly attire, whereof thou
need not boast, nor wax proud, be thy raiments never so rich in cost, or
color, they are but the fragments of the rags of Adams fig leaves, to cover
thy nakedness, as he did. And if thou consider well thine own nakedness; thou
may rather be ashamed, than to be proud of thine apparel, be whatsoever thou
art man or woman: For if it were not a shame, to have thy nakedness seen,
there needed no such costly attire to cover it; and yet such is the boldness
of some (impudent) women, that they are not ashamed to lay out their
nakedness, in an unseemly manner, as if they should say (as they do in
silence) here is ware to be sold, come and buy for your lust, or borrow for
your love.

Men and women, be they now, never so proud and vaineglorious, of their dainty
feature and beauty, they came but out of a den of darkness; and to a place of
darkness they must return, and have no certainty, how long they shall live
here be they never so lusty and strong, never so fair and amiable. And yet
do not only not seek to set their bodies and souls in order, but disorder
them every day.

Few come to their inheritance under twenty one years.
IT was many years after thou came into the world before thou did enjoy
thy freedom, near a third part of the time of man's life limited by David,
which few attain unto. And therefore thou know not, how soon thou shall be
taken from thy possessions, thy goods and dearest worldly delights, whilst thou
have time, therefore; set thy self, thy soul and thy body, lands and goods,
(which are meant by thy house) in order, knowing that thou must dye, and
know not when, where, nor how.

We must remember that we must dye and come to judgment.
Look before thee, to the place whither thou go, and forget it not, let not
thy glory, and greatness cause thee to forget, that thou shall dye and come to
judgment. And although thou came into the world with the breath of life; thou
shall return without it, yet not actiuely, for thou shall become, as a mere
lump of earth without power or vigor in thy self to move; but be moved at the
pleasure of others. And here must thou cast off thy glorious garments, not as
the Eagle casts his bill, or the Serpent his skin, to be reuested with them,
but in stead of them, thou must be content, and be beholden to thy friends to
afford thee a silly sheet, to put thy naked carcass in.

Men must fors^ke all, when death comes.
THen must thou leave behind thee thy loving wife, thy dearest children, and
best friends, thy rich possessions, thy gold and silver, and what thou
esteemedst most precious: And then a little length and breadth of land (which
may be cast up by inches, will serve thee in stead of many honors, manors,
forests, parkes, etc. which could hardly be numbered by acres) will serve thee
for thy fairest chamber. And instead of thy silver and gold, wherewith thou
could never be satisfied, thou shall have earth thy mouth and belly full: and
in stead of thine atte^dants, men servants, maid servants, etc. thou shall have
for thine attendants, Jobs sisters and brothers, worms to attend and affect
thee (even as friends affect friends, as long as they can be each to other
friendly) So as long as the worms can find in thy dead flesh, whereon to feed,
they will be thy companions: But when the substance of thy body is spent, they
will leave thy bare bones, to thy mother, Rottenesse; the end of all flesh. And
therefore set thine house in order: for this must be the certain end of thine
uncertain mortal life.

Many perplexe themselves to make them they know not rich.
MAke not thy self more miserable, (then) by striving to advance thy posterity
to greatness, and so expose thy self to the loss of heaven. And flatter not
thy self, with a vain conceit; that it is thy glory to get riches and
possessions for thy children, with the loss of an eternal inheritance to thy
self*

Who are chiefly to be cared for, and how far.
THou art no further bound, than to have a fatherly care of thy family; Among
the rest, thy wife and children, are most to be respected, for whom thou
ought to provide things necessary, to maintain, and to sustain them
otherwise indeed thou art to be condemned as an unbeliever: But to covet and to
use forbidden, nay, too solicitous means to make thy children great, or thy
friends after thee rich, is not commanded but forbidden.

Many seek to secure their posterities in their possession, more than their
own assurance of heaven.
MAny seek to purchase, and to set and settle lands, as surely as can be
devised, by grauest counsel, for the more security of their children after
their death, to the end they should remain, in their names, from one
generation to another, (and lawful) yet not laudable retaining least
assurance, or security (in the mean time) unto themselves, of an inheritance
immortal, after their deaths): Notwithstanding their great and spacious
possessions here, which were a good mean, to enable a man to do the works of
charity commanded by God, lawfully gotten, which the poor have not.

Evil gotten goods seldom continue to many generations.
IF they have been ill gotten, or ill kept, they seldom continue to the third
generation, sometimes not to the second: And yet many men covet in their
worldly wisdom, to pre^ent (if it were possible) the very counsel of God
himself, by limiting and entailing, their lands and possessions sometimes, to
ten s^cceeding generations; intending to perpetualize their names and estates,
to the end of the world: And yet it is seen and daily observed, that as humane
policy has found out this uncertain device of limiting their possessions, to
such as perchance may be unborn a hundred years after such a device is made:
So like policy has found out a mean to frustrate the same, even by the same
Law by which it was (in conceit) made strong and irreuocable: And sometimes,
God in his wisdom and secret judgment, alters and turns the devices of men
clean contrary to their intentions.

God disposes of all earthly inheritance.
WHen Ioseph^, intended to have preferred Manasses his first borne, (to whom
(by course of inheritance) the first place belonged) before Ephraim his second
son: God so directed the heart* and the hand of Iaakob in blessing* them
(which then had great force, working with the will of God) he preferred Ephraim
his second before Manasses the first borne. So God gave Isaaks inheritance, to
Iaakob the younger before Esau the the elder, showing how uncertain, the issue
is, of the purpose of man, touching the making of his heir, though it be a
part of the setting of thy house in order before thou dye.

No counsel against the Lord.
THere is no counsel, against o^ without the Lord; man may purpose this or
that child shall be his heir, and inherit his Land: or this or that friend
shall enjoy his goods; but the disposition is in God* who alters the purpose of
man even as he will: to show that the wisdom of man is indeed but
foolishness, without God.

How men ought to guide their affections in preferring their children or
friends.
IT is not yet unlawful for men to respect one son, or one child, or one
friend, before and above another; and to have a desire to prefer one before
another, to enjoy their Lands, and goods after them: So they respect the
preferring the glory of God (and that with prayer) before their own natural
affection: Namely where they find one more inclinable to virtue, to the fear
and service of God, than another: to prefer such before them that have only
natural endowme^ts as feature, as beauty, priority of birth, wit, and
comeliness (like Absalom;) and mere carnal inclinations: for the more favor,
fathers show, and the more means, they heap upon such in making them great or
rich, the more they will run into riot (as is observed in too many, in this
corrupt age) which breeds sca^dal, to the father in so disposing his wealth
(when he is in his grave:) And the more dishonor unto God, that lent the
means, and argues no direct setting of his house in a Christian order before
he dyed.

Many rather covet to advance their posterities to wealth here, than themselves
to glory hereafter.
MANY men plainly show, that they love the world, their uncertain posterity,
and their own vain glory, more dearly, than they love their own souls: By
so abundantly providing, to make their posterity great and themselves famous
(some rather infamous) after their deaths.

Can a man be thought to love his own soul, when he adventures it in getting
superfluous, and forbidden means, to enrich, and to make them great, whom he
knows not whether, they will be good, or evil? And to that uncertain end, to
hoord up, and to keep riches, doing good to none, until they must needs leave
them?

Esau more to be excused than some miserable rich men.
ESau sold his birth right, indeed for a mess of potage, only to refresh the
necessity of his fainting spirit, and is more to be excused, than they that
sell their souls (more precious, than all the Kingdoms, that Satan tempted
Christ withal) for the superfluous adua^cement of them, whom they truly know
not: And yet when they have gotten much, and disposed it to whom they list,
before they dye, they are far from the setting of their houses, much less of
their souls in good order before they die.

It is lawful to possess lands and goods.
IT is not denied, neither does any scripture inhibite men to have and enjoy
possessions, lands and goods, be they by descent, gift or purchase, and to
leave them to their children: For God has from the beginning, lent these
inferior things of the earth, to the sons of men: and allows the use of
them lawfully gotten, so they be godly used and rightly disposed: for he that
disposes them without good warrant, runs before the counsel of of God: as (in
worldly wisdom, or vaineglorious desires) many do, to impious and ungodly
uses while they live, setting neither house, nor heart, nor soul, nor body in
order before they dye.

Many never think of Death till they be sick.
AND when the summons of death, begin to seize upon them, then they begin
to bestirre them saying, (as some have done) and must I dye? making an
unwilling will, giving and bequeathing, what they could no longer keep. Yet
when a man's will is made, and all things disposed, if he can get but a little
breathing time, a year, or two, ten or more; they to whom he has assigned his
lands and bequeathed his goods, shall be never the better for his gifts until he
die, and that (were it possible) not till doomes day. And they that would have
seemed to have mourned at his funeral, for the loss of so good a benefactor,
will turn their mourning (which should have been for his death) into sorrow
and sadness, for the recovery of his health; and will be even sick to think,
they shall be longer prevented (by his recovery) of that they were in hope
presently to have enjoyed.

Jf men could see the fruits of their gifts in their posterities, in their
graves they would repent that ever they were rich.
HE that flatters not himself, in the greatness of his means to (...) what
fame will fly of him, when he is dead for his bounty, distributed (not to the
needy members of Christ) when he was alive; if he could but look out of his
grave and see the gallants that he has made to ruffle in their riot, and
lasciuiously (commonly) to consume what he so long and laboriously scraped
together, he would wish himself, rather to have been a man of far inferior
means, than to have been the means to increase the sin of them whom he
seemed to love, and would no doubt have been more careful in setting his
house, his soul, his body, conscience and affections, in better order, than he
had done, by giving it rather to the poor.

Delay not to set thy life, lands and goods, in order.
BE wise therefore thou that have houses, lands, possessions, and much goods to
dispose; Set them in order in time, and observe well how, and to whom, and to
what uses, thou meanest to dispose them, and delay not, till thou be sick: For
thou know not, when, nor where, nor how, thou shall end thy life; and think
not that the abrupt making of thy will, can bring a disordered house suddenly
into such order, as God requires: while thou art therefore in thy perfect
health, set thy house in order, against the time of thine uncertain death; and
see thou have well gotten, that which thou have heaped together: and if thy
conscience (strictly examined) tell thee, that thou have gotten any part of it
by wrong, show thy self a good Zacheus, restore it fourefold, before thou dye,
that thou may dye in the favor of God in Christ, otherwise it had been
better for thee to have dyed a beggar.

Fit every man to make their wills.
IT is a very religious and Christian duty, in every man possessing any lands
or goods in the world, to make his will: and to settle his estate in good order
(be it never so mean;) before he dye: which is in part meant by Gods command,
to set thy house in order, namely thy household, lands, and goods: but that is
not all the orderly settling of thy house before thou dye.

Whereof a family consists.
A Household or family consists of husband and wife, parents and children,
master and servants; among whom, if a godly order be not set, continued, and
kept before thou be constrained, through sickness, to make thy will, thou will
hardly set it in order before thou dye.

How a family ought to be ordered.
IF love and amity have not been, and maintained in the fear of God, between
man and wife: If parents have not instructed their children, in the knowledge
of and exercised them in the true service of God, if children have not obeyed
their parents; if masters have not wisely governed their servants, giving them
their salaries and necessaries; if servants have not done their duties,
faithfully, to their masters; and all mutually together; and sometimes man and
wife in private, served the Lord in faithful prayer, during their perfect
healths, that house is out of order, head and members, and cannot in a moment,
by a will, written in an hour or two be brought into order. Therefore deceive
not thy self, by delaying to set thy house in order, and every part and person
thereof; and think it not sufficient, to settle thy worldly goods and lands,
by thy last will, (as thou do imagine thou have made thy will) for whether
thou dispose thy lands, or give thy goods while thou art alive; neither shall
thy lands, nor goods want owners, when thou art dead.

Parents ought to provide for their children, the chief hope of children.
IT is a duty also joined with a care in parents, to lay up, and provide for
their children: and a fatherly duty it is, and a duty that children (for the
most part) take greater hold of, than of care to perform their duties to their
parents. And therefore it is hard to judge, whether he that lays up little,
and gives only education unto his children, to live futurely by some lawful
calling; or he that is solicitous, and ouer-carefull to provide, for the
present maintenance of his children in idleness, before, and in wantonness
(through the hope of great portions) after his death, be most to be condemned:
if the (...) be not more blameable, he is more superstitious than the former:
too much care argues least faith.

He that cares not for his family, i^ an infidel, and he that is too solicitous
for them is no less.
HE shows not himself a Christian in deed, that cares not for his family, but
spends his time in idleness, and his means in unthriftiness, but rather an
infidel: But he that exceeds in coveting, (which in it self is sin) and
strives against the stream of Gods direction, getting by right or wrong,
spending superfluously, upon his family, or hoording and laying up for his
posterity, (as is said before) having little, or no regard, to help, relieve
and comfort the poor; that have an interest in the superfluity of his
abundance; as if the Lord could not provide for his children, (if they fear
and serve God) as well, as he has done for himself; this man shows himself,
as near an infidel, as the former.

Parents should leave behind them good examples, for their children to imitate.
THE best portion thou can leave behind thee, is a manifest example, and
pattern of a godly life for thy children and friends to imitate; and to give
them (if conveniently nothing else) some necessary manual trade or lawful
profession, to live by when thou art dead.

Great patrimonies oftentimes soon spent.
IF thou have lands and possessions, and great stocks of money, to leave to thy
children, thou think them richly provided for, and thy house in good order:
and yet we see, many times, that the great patrimonies, and portions left by
careful Fathers to their children; consumed and riotously spent before their
parents be half consumed in their graves: which might be some cause, to
restrain fathers from being too solicitous, superfluously to enrich their
children; seeing so many examples of the evil success of other men's care.

The best portions fathers can leave their children.
IF thou therefore have possessions, lands or goods, to leave to thy children,
season them while thou live, as much as is in thee, both by pains, practice
and prayer, in the true knowledge of faith and obedience to God in Christ, and
then if they abuse what thou leauest them; thou have discharged the part of a
religious, and careful father: And so shall the disorderly consuming or
abusing of them, light upon their own heads, poverty and misery, fit rewards
for the riotous.

Possessions and wealth without wisdom hurt posterities.
RIches and revenues, are indeed the good blessings of God, and necessary
means to show bounty and liberality to them that have need; but if wisdom be
not joined with the riches and possessions, thou leauest behind thee, if the
fear of God guide them not, in the godly use, and prevent the ungodly abuse of
them, it had been better for thee, to have died without being owner of them;
and better for thy children, that they had none of them at all, for when
children, destitute of understanding, smell the savor of rich possessions, or
great portions, assured them after their parents death, it infects their minds,
as the pestilence (which shows it self by the tokens:) so this infection
does by the apparent marks of insolency, pride and a very noisome swarm of
impious vices whereby God is dishonored; the simple seduced, the godly abused,
and the vulgar likewise infected.

Fit for parents to conceal what they mean to leave their children.
ANd therefore discreet parents will conceal their purpose of disposing their
lands, and giving their goods, and keep the knowledge of what they have from
their children, as they will keep gunpowder from the fire; for as a a spark
will set the whole into a flame suddenly, so let a father once inkindle hope
in a disorderly son, and it shall set all his ungodly desires on fire, which
will hardly be extinguished, till (coming to his hands) all be speedily
consumed.

Not so to respect posterities, as to neglect the members of Christ.
ANd therefore it behooves thee not so to respect thy posterity, as by their
greatness expected, to make them more proud and wicked in present: Nor so to
regard to benefit thy friends, as to neglect the poor children of God: For (as
has been said before) thou art but a steward of that thou have; and therefore,
if thou give the childrens bread, (which are the distressed members of Christ)
and bestowest it to superfluous uses; remember the unjust steward, being called
to an account, as thou must be thou know not how soon, and think
beforehand how thou can answer it.

As all men are stewards, so they must think of their account.
IT will be required of thee, how thou have bestowed thy masters goods, the goods
that God, (the great master of the family) has put into thy hands to give
every of his servants his due portion out of it: If thou say (as he knows
thou have done) I have maintained my wife with some part of the goods thou
gave me, according to the best fashions the time afforded; I have according
to my calling, furnished my table; inuiting my friends to be partakers with me
with part; I attired my children, and brought them up, as became the children
of a father of my reputation; I built me a fair and chargeable house, with
complete furniture within and without; I have purchased lands, for my children,
after me; Some gold and silver, plate, etc. I have disposed, and given to my
friends before I dyed.

Many idle expenses will be disallowed at the great Audite.
HEre is a large bil and of diverse particulars, too great (it is to be feared,)
to be allowed, at that great and general audit: for the Auditor is just, he
will allow only necessaries, but as for superfluous charges, he will disallow,
so will thou be found, charged to answer, what thou have unnecessarily spent.

Duties required of every man, to have always, his house, his soul and body
in order of most men omitted.
HE gave thee in charge indeed, (as before is remembered) that thou should
provide for thy family, thy wife, children and servants; but remember withal
thou were commanded, to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, and distressed
widows, whom thou have neglected, for the pride of thy wife* whom thou
might have comely and decently attired, and yet clothed the desolate widows
also: Thou might have plentifully furnished thy Table, and used thy meats,
and drinks with thy friends, in the fear of God with thanks, yet not to eat
thy m^rsells alone, with thy friends, that would require thee with the like;
but that the poor; the fatherless, the widow, and the hungry, should have
been partakers with thee: Thou might have competently clothed thy children,
and yet have covered the naked too, though but with the cast rags of thy
children, if thou would bestow no better on them: Thou might have builded
thee a competent house for thy self and family, to have lived and lodged in*
and have reserved one poor houell for the harbounlesse members of Christ, to
have had shelter in; and not to pass by and see them lie without doors, like
forlorn beasts.

The poor members of Christ have right to a part of every rich man's goods.
THou might lawfully have purchased land for thy children; yet might thou
have allowed some part (with Ananias and Saphira) to have relieved the needy,
that have no earthly portion: Thou might have given and bequeathed thy
silver and gold, which thou keptst in thy chests, to thy children and friends,
and not have forgotten, that thou have given that, whereunto (as touching a
part) Christ in his members had right.

A house disordered in a man's life can hardly be left in order when he dies.
HOw will thou answer the omission, of all these precisely required duties,
and thy superfluous expense, bestowed upon thy self and thine: Is it possible
that a house, thus d^sorderly guided, even to the last can be set in order
before a man dye? though the law, can find no fault, or flaw in the orderly
conueyance of thy lands, nor with thy last will: yet there is a law that
requires charity and mercy, that will condemn thee, to be a steward to be
bound hand and foot, and to be cast into utter darkness.

Redeem the time.
Redeem thou therefore the time, whosoever thou art that live* set thy house
in order, it is yet time, if thou have but the will though prevented of the
deed, do thine endeavor and it shall be accepted never too late to amend.

How to set thy house in order.
SET thy house in the true fear and service of God, from thy self the head to
thy meanest servant, be moderate in attiring thy wife, she will accept it, if
she be modest: educate thy children in obedience to God, so shall they not
offend thee: cover the naked.

The poor are the bests guests a rich man can entertain.
LEt the poorest children of God be some times as the fruitful vines about thy
house, and as olive branches round about thy table: Thou shall find them in the
end most beneficial guests, that thou shall entertain either to meat, or
^arbor: for thou do not so much feed and clothe, and lodge them, as Christ
himself in them, who is here amongst us, poor, naked, sick, hungry, in
prison, thirsty, harborlesse and miserable, and woe be to the rich, that see
him and show him no compassion.

The rich ought to have respect to the poor.
HOw can they that have riches in abundance, food plentiful, apparel
superfluous, gold and silver, and all that their hearts can desire (and more,
if religious reason were ruler) pass by, and see a poor, naked, hungry, and
(as it were) a starued Christian: and not to be moved with compassion,
especially young forsaken children, and old and impotent men and women? As for
the sturdy counterfeits, and idle striplings able for service, let their reward
be the whip. And until thou begin to savor of this righteous course, to guide
thy house aright, do else what thou will in giving and bequeathing, thy house
will not be set in order when thou dyest, which will be a fearful end.

Thus much concerning the setting of thy domestike estate in order, it may not
be unnecessary to examine the house of thy soul, the body and the members
thereof.

Touching thy body, the house of thy soul.
I Have before spoken of thy setting of thy worldly estate and domestike
family, lands and goods, in order before thou dye.

The chief care ought to be to set and keep the house of the soul the body in
order.
IT is fit to consider* how to set thy corporal house, which is the habitatio^
of thy s^u^e, the senses and members of the s^m^, in order: And that above and
before the disposing of thy worldly estate: For, as the bo^^ is m^re worth th^n
raiment, of more value than possessions, silver or gold; so is the well
ordering of the same to be preferred before all that thou enioyest, or can
enjoy in the world.

Wherein the well-being of the soul consists.
THe well-being of the soul, which is the principal part of thee, consists
in the right government of thy body, and bodily members* for if thy carnal
members and corporal senses, have been or are defiled with the vanities,
whereunto they are particularly inclined, thy soul which lodges in it, cannot
be but also infected and polluted; and therefore, ought thou to have an
especial regard, to the well-ordering of thy corporal parts.

Many dwell in fair houses that have foul bodies and souls.
THou dwell, it may be, in a house of ingenious architect, adorned within
and without, with sundry varieties, to delight thine eye thine ear, and all
the senses of thy body, as many* (in deed, or in desire, it may be) as Solomon
had; superfluous to name, more superfluous to covet, when yet (it may be) the
house wherein thy soul lives, (and without whom thou can not live) though
it be outwardly adorned with most costly attire, like a painted sepulcher, is
of it self, and through thine abusing it, and the members of it, a poor
weak, and tottering building, seeming outwardly beautiful, yet (alas) under
most glorious and rich couerings, most ragged, rent and rotten, wether beaten
and deformed through the tempests of thy blusterous tongue, the extrauagancy of
thy polluted eyes, and the unruliness of the rest of thy senses, beating upon
thy poor soul, that dwells in this frail body of thine, with restles
ungodly storms of forbidden vaulties, that bring the whole house out of order.

We must examine how we have used or abused our senses and members of our
bodies.
ANd for as much as the head, the principal part of this weak building, is
the place wherein the chief organs, and instruments of speaking, hearing,
seeing, smelling, tasting and eating, do consist; examine first how thou have
kept these in order; and whether thou have formerly given them the reins of
licentious liberty, to follow the vanities, whereunto naturally they are
severally inclined: If so, then is this thy whole house utterly out of order:
and merely deformed, being by creation, free from any actual pollution, or
corporal blemish or defect, a most comely, and beautiful building, complete
and uniform in every part, from the meanest to the most eminent member.

Our bodies are complete and beautiful houses.
Observe from the sole of thy foot, to the very hair of thy head, and see
whether thou could imagine, to place any member in better order than God
has placed them, for in a perfect body there is no defect in any part, though
many times blemished by abuse of the members and senses.

How our bodies are blemished.
THe head it self, the guide and governor of all the rest, is oftentimes
disordered and even infatuated by drunkenesse, the face disfigured, the eyes
bleared and blinded, the feet gouted, and many times the whole body dropsied
through the abuse of the senses, and brought all out of order, being the very
temple of God, and wherein the soul dwells, thy most precious part bought
with no less a price than the very blood of the Son of God Jesus Christ.

A man can never dye in hope, that has to the end defiled his body.
HOw then can a man, whose body and members are thus defiled, and made as it
were a den of detestable uncleanness, grieuing the spirit that dwells in it,
without reformation, dye in any hope of future happiness? though he do set a
fair formal face, upon the setting of his domestike estate in some order by a
silly will, before he dies; and to leave the body, the house of his soul, and
his soul it self, in so manifest a danger? For the superficial disposing and
bequeathing of his domesticke estate, and to leave his better part out of
order, is but as a pharisaicall washing of the outside of the cup, leaving it
filthy and foul within.

It is a manifest argument, that the party who has the sore breaking out in
his body, as Hezekiah had, and the tokens appear, as they commonly do, has
the plague, and is unlike to escape death.

Signs that a man's house, body and soul are out of order.
SO manifest it is, that he that abounds in corruption and the filth of his
heart, breaks forth and shows it self, by his disorderly and dissolute
conversation; by his inordinate walking; by the profaneness of his speech; by
the wantonness of his eyes; by lending his ears with delight to ungodly
discourses; by the pollution of his hands; and by the swiftness of his feet
to follow vanities; that he is full of spiritual pestilence, and carnal
contagion; Altogether unfit and unable, to set either his domesticke, or the
house of his soul in order before he dye, without speedy reformation. A
fearful farewell, when he shall be enforced to forsake all his possessions,
lands and goods, and his soul to leave his body, and all out of order when he
dies.

It is a special duty for a man to have all the parts and powers of his soul
and body always in order.
IS it not therefore a chief part of thy duty, for the setting of thy house in
order, according to Gods command, seriously to examine, how thou have used or
abused, thy body, the organs instruments and members of the same; and speedily
to use all possible holy art, and industry to reform all thy defects? That
thou may with the more comfortable alacrity prepare thee, to that which thou
can not avoid, namely to dye, and to set all things in order against the time.

And because the tongue in commonly, a most forward instrument to be a party
in every action, it is fit, first of all, to call it to account.

The examination of the Tongue.
A hard task to govern the tongue aright.
OF all other members, the tongue has most need, to be kept in order, though
it be a hard task, being a member even from the cradle accustomed, commonly,
to offend both God and man.

The tongue (a wild beast) needs to be kept from raunging.
EXamine therefore, how and in what order, thou have used* or abused thy
tongue, a member of godly use, yet often ungodly used: God in his providence,
when he created man, foresaw that the tongue would be unruly: and therefore
(even as wild beasts are kept in, by hedges, pales, and strong fences lest
they raunge abroad, so) has God fenced the tongue with a pale of teeth, and
has left as it were a gate, to be opened and shut, at the pleasure of man, the
mouth or lips, which as long as they are kept close and shut, the tongue is
enforced to silence; but open but that gap, the tongue has liberty to walk.

The tongue cannot speak except the lips open.
IT is the tongue alone that speaks, but the tongue and lips together, if the
lips open not and shut, the tongue may move, but can make no distinct sound: so
the lips may open if the tongue will not move, there proceeds no perfect voice:
when they both agree, there proceeds speech, good or evil, as the heart within
is prepared for, of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

If the heart be good the words cannot be evil.
IF the heart be good, the words of the mouth are seldom evil; if the heart
be wicked, the words will savor of evil: Cursing, swearing, lying,
blaspheming, backbiting, slandering, and all words that may offend, proceed out
of a profane mouth; which if thou by examination find (as thou can not be
ignorant,) thou have great cause, and (if thou be not partial in flattering
thy self) thou will use all possible speedy means to reform it.

The tongue cannot offend unless thy lips consent.
SEt therefore a watch before thy mouth, and keep the door of thy lips for as
long as thou have a care to keep thy lips shut, thy tongue cannot offend: if
thou open them, let it be to gl^rify God, for if thou long after life and to
see good days, refrain thy tongue from evil* and thy lips that they utter
no deceit.

The tongue often and many ways abused.
ALas, what will become then of too many, that in buying and selling, think
that what they get by lying, swearing, and forswearing is well gotten? And
(though dangerous to speak) what may be thought of some Lawyers, that will
strive with all their wit and eloquence, and use their tongues, to maintain
and defend a cause which they know, in their own consciences to be false, and
against truth, equity and justice; and that for a fee, justifying the wicked
for a reward, condemning the innocent in his righteous cause? do not such as
men c^ll Knights of the post, forswear themselves for a fee? God forbid, that
men of that rank and calling, as are eminent Lawyers (worthy members of the
commonwealth) should debase themselves, and face out a falsehood for truth for
another man, for a little vanishing pelf? though it be your profession to
advocate for other men, and may lawfully take reward, beware, take no fee
against the innocent, namely against him, that you know has truth on his side;
for you condemn thereby the righteous, and justify the wicked.

The tongue is an excellent instrument in the mouth of a wise and just man.
THe tongue is a most excellent instrument in the mouth of a perfect, wise and
just man, and is as a pestilent member, in the mouth of a Tertullus, which
signifies a liar and one declaring false things: as was that excellent Orator,
that falsely accused Paul, before Felix. It is not an excellent wit nor fluencie
of the tongue (though they be excellent gifts of God) that shall excuse that
man, that by his wit and eloquence, overthrows a cause against equity, yet I
wish the practice were not so common to offend the God of truth, for which
as well the guitlesse as the guilty are oftentimes punished.

The tongue is a little member but most unruly.
THe tongue is indeed a most unruly member (but a little one) yet boasts in
great things, and speaks oftentimes against the greatest, uttering a world of
wickedness, defiling the whole body, through the wickedness and filthy words
proceeding from it, hardest of all other members to be tamed, harder than the
fiercest beast, that lives; which is tamed by the discretion and the wit of
man; but the tongue can no man tame.

He is a wise and perfect man that can rule his own tongue.
NO man indeed can tame the tongue of another, but a man of understanding,
guides his own tongue, and adds knowledge unto his lips: He pondereth his
words before he speaks, and bridleth his tongue, and he is indeed, a perfect
man that off^nds not with his tongue, though many unseemly words may slip the
lips (unawares) of a right religious man: But a man whose tongue he has
accustomed to speak evil, to cursing, swearing, and filthy talking, cannot
with the same tongue honor God, neither praise him, nor pray unto him.

The tongues of the wicked are weapons of offenses.
WHen power to do open violence to another, is taken from the wicked, they
have no other weapon to offend their enemy, than the tongue; and that they
sharpen like a serpent: and by it, like venomous Adders, they spew out the
poison that lurkes in their envious hearts, lying in wait with their tongues,
to backbite and slander the innocent: Iniquity has so covered their mouths,
as they cannot but speak wickedly.

How to avoid a slanderous tongue.
IF thou will prevent the danger of an evil tongue in thy self, meditate good
things, seek to plenish thy heart, with holy thoughts, by hearing the word
preached, and reading of it with understanding and practice; so shall thy
tongue savor of the same, and if thou will avoid the slanderous tongue of
another, walk innocently: if yet it follow thee, sit down by it, and take it
as a cross sent of God, for thy patience.

How to use the tongue to profit.
Speak therefore at all times, and in all companies, as in the presence and
hearing of the great God of heaven and earth; speak as becomes a sober man,
a civil man, as a religious and faithful Christian man, that thy words being
seasoned with the salt of grace, may be profitable also to others, for by thy
words thou may disorder, and by thy words thou may well order thy house.

The example of an evil tongue i^ parents, dangerous for their children and
servants.
IF thou leave an evil and contagious sent behind thee by breathing out
ungodliness cursing and bitterness, whereby thine own house, thy wife,
children, and family may be infected, and retain thy filthy disease when thou
art dead; do what otherwise thou can do, in settling thy lands and disposing
thy goods, they may profit them, to whom thou leauest them, as touching their
temporal estate: but as touching their well ordering in godliness, it shall
hinder and prejudice them more than their patrimonies can advance them.

An evil tongue is infectious.
AN evil tongue infecteth all that are near it, if it have its na^^ all
course of talking: wherefore avoid such as delight their tongues in scur^ility
and filthy communica^ion; and exhort thy children, servants and familiars, to
use their tongues, in praises of, and prayers to God, for to this end has God
given thee, and them tongues to speak; and be not like them that honor God
with their lips, and dishonor him with their conuersatio^s: It were better
thou had no tongue at all, than to use it to Gods dishonor, and to the hurt
and ^^ander of his innocent children.

Froward language breeds strife.
BEware that thou stir not up quarrels and contentions, among thy neighbors
by a perverse tongue: froward language breeds strife in a family, between
husband and wife, parents and children, etc. And especially grief and sorrow,
many time^ punishments, and sometimes death for capital slanders to them that
offend in their tongues.

Slander and flattery two vices of the tongue.
AS slander is an abuse of the tongue, so is flattery, and of the two, flattery
is the most dangerous: If thou flatter, thou use thy tongue to deceive, if
thou delight to be flattered, thou longest to be deceived: Therefore neither
flatter, nor hearken unto flatterers; for if they come under color of
friendship to see thee, they will speak fair, when yet their hearts are full
of malice (...) deceit; As the disciples of the Pharisees and the Herodians
came in flattery to entangle Christ: flattery makes some men proud; as the
people showting at Herod's oration, crying, the voice of God and not of man;
Absalom stale the hearts of the people from David by flattery.

Flattery is deceitful and dangerous.
SO deeply does the tongue of a flatterer pierce that his words go down, as
it were, into the bottom of the belly of the flattered; for he will so
subtly insinuate by protestations of love, and colored zeal of true
affection, as unless a man be the better armed with divine discretion, he
cannot avoid the snare: A flatterer may be suspected by too glorious, and
ouer-painted words, for he that means plainly, seeks no such glosing and
far-fetch terms: A^ plain meaning man is soonest deceived by flattery; and
therefore, better are bitter reproves of a friend, than the fawnes of a secret
enemy: Abandon flattery, and take heed to the fair words of a flatterer.

How to use the tongue to Gods glory.
USE thy tongue in the setting forth of Gods glory, in prayer unto and praising
of him, exhorting thy household and family, in the knowledge, fear, and
obedience to God; And when thou speak unto God use not many words, no^ much
babbling; for few words proceeding from a feeling and faithful heart, are more
acceptable to God, than many words without inward zeal, and zeal can continue
no longer than the heart is fervent through the spirit of God: And when it
waxes cold and dull, it seems the heart becomes faint, and the hands feeble,
as appeared even by faithful Moses, who at the first was fervent, yet at
length became feeble. Exodus 17.

Fit to meditate before we speak especially to God in prayer.
BE not therefore rash, to offer the sacrifice of prayer in a faint and
unfeeling heart, but meditate before thou open thy mouth, and utter not
unadvisedly whatsoever comes into thy mouth: Let not thy tongue go before thine
understanding, especially in thy prayers to God: speak not to, nor of God but
with highest humility and reverence; and take not his name into thy mouth in
vain: speak well or speak nothing, for, even a fool when he holds his
peace, is accounted a wise man among men.

The tongue well governed is a^ necessary instrument.
IF then thou govern this member aright unto the end, it shall prove a
necessary instrument, toward the settling of all the rest of thy house in order
before thou dye; If it continue contaminate and polluted, it well be such a
blemish unto thy Christian profession, and such a hindrance to the establishing
of the house of thy soul, and consequently of thy soul it self, in order, as
thou can not but die, suspected either of Atheism, or Infidelity.

Fit to try thy senses.
Having thus examined thy tongue, it behooves likewise to make trial of thy
five senses, which have their imperfections also. And first of the eyes.

The examination of the Eyes, the first of the five senses.
IF thou can now, temper thy tongue, and so discreetly order thy speech as
becomes a man of understanding fearing God, thou shall the better learn, how
to carry thine eyes, which are the organs and instruments of seeing, and by
which do enter into the heart many objects and motives, tending more commonly
to the disorder, than to the well-ordering of the affections.

By the eye enter diverse dangerous motives to the heart.
THe eye moves the heart to many va^ities; as to the lust of flesh, to the
pride of life, and to the delights and pleasures of the world; All which fight
against the Soul: By this organ entered Eues desire, to taste of that
beautiful forbidden fruit, that purchased her own, her husbands, and the
death of all their posterity.

The Eye indeed is the light of the body, but many times and by many means
brings darkness unto the soul, which being deluded and betrayed by the
inticements of the eye, and the rest of the outward senses, cannot but be much
oppressed, and even groan under the burden of the infirmities and sins of
the body, which although it be mortal, and shall perish, yet for as much as it
shall rise again and become immortal with the soul;

The soul grieves at the sins of the body.
THe Soul cannot but grieve, to feel the corruption of that part, that must
futurely together with it, either suffer torment, or receive glory: And
therefore cannot but mislike the misleading eye, which moves the corrupt heart
to covet only carnal and perishing things, when the soul it self, thirsts
for spiritual tending to the salvation of both.

The bodily members and senses bring the soul most out of order.
Nothing brings the soul out of order so much as the disorder of the body (the
house wherein it dwells) the unruly eye, and the other untamed senses, and
the inordinate members of the body; seduced through the perverseness of the
unstable will, carry the senses and all the parts of the body, into forbidden
things: And therefore David prayed, Turn away mine eyes from regarding vanity.
Endeavor therefore to subject thy corrupted will to thy regenerate will, that
being guided by the prescribed will of God, the eye and every part of thy soul
and body, may together work, to the well setting, and settling of thy whole
house in order.

The unruly eye is to be restrained.
Look well to thine eyes, for they are unruly, lest they draw thee to
transgress Christ's commands to pluck out the eye that offends: at least make
a covenant with them* as Job did, never to suffer them to wander after their
lusts, nor to be seduced or allured by the beauty of any whatsoever forbidden
fruit.

The eye the original instrument of our woe.
REmember what Satan presented to the eye of our mother Eve, and she to our
father Adam, the first mortal fruit that ever the eye saw, or the mouth
tasted: since which time, we have been forbidden to behold with carnal
delight, the beauty of infinite fruits which before were good: but since become
likewise mortal, by the tasting of the first, for as the first had not been
mortal, if not forbidden; so nothing makes things unlawful but forbidding.

Not to delight our eyes with worldly things.
BE not therefore delighted with the beholding of the glittering and forbidden
things of the world, lest thou be snared, as David was, with the nakedness of
Bersheba: And as Ahab was, with Naboths vineyard; for such was the force of
their concupiscences, as to obtain their lusts they made way by blood.

Let not, therefore, thine heart, walk after thine eye, nor thine eye after
the things delightful (forbidden.) As upon a woman to lust after her, as David
did; nor, after thy neighbors lands, as Ahab did; nor, after the wedge of
gold, as Achan did; nor, after goodly garments, as Gehezi did; who all received
their several punishments.

The nature of the eye.
IT is the nature of the eye, to pry here and there, like a privy thief after
delightful, pleasing and profitable things (though forbidden) never satisfied
with seeing, being ravished with so many pleasing objects, that pervert the
heart; as the heart being brought out of order by the senses, brings all the
house of the soul (the body) out of order with it.

Pray for spiritual sight.
SEt not then thine affection with delight, upon all the things thy carnal eye
sees; but pray that thine inward and spiritual eye, may be once so
enlightened, that thou may take thy true pleasure, in the contemplation of
that most glorious inheritance, which God has prepared for his elect in
heaven, which is eternal; and bring thy carnal eye in subjection to thy
spiritual: And pray as Paul teaches, for the illumination of thine inward
eyes.

Satan works more evil by the eye than by all other the senses.
THe things thou here beholdest, be they never so beautiful and pleasing to
thy carnal sense, they are but vanishing and betraying shadows, wherewith
Satan practices to tempt thee, as he did Eve, David, Ahab, etc. For he
works more mischief by alluring the eye, than by working upon all other of
the senses of the body, he makes the eye envious, and scornful to look upon
the poor and needy: And therefore had thou need, to have a most special
care, to keep it single from wandering after wickedness, for if thou did well
consider what thou losest, by the greedy desires, which thine insatiable eye,
does administer unto thy corrupt and covetous heart, thou would turn thine
affections clean from this flattering worlds vanities, and shun the
allurements of Satan, and only cast thy spiritual eye upon, and seek after
the things that are above, where Christ our Redeemer is gone before to draw the
eyes of all true believers after him, and them unto him, to be partakers of the
joys, that are with him unspeakable and glorious: which thou can never see,
nor truly covet to see, unless thou cast off thy superfluous delight, in
beholding these inferior, deceitful, and flattering things below, and be fed
(even here) with a fervent desire, to clear thy spiritual eyes daily with
that precious eye-salue, the word and spirit of God; which sets before the
eyes of thy soul (though, but as in a glass obscurely) all the glory that the
children of God only and none other after this life, shall fully and clearly
see, and that even with these our eyes (kept here clean and undefiled) as
becomes saints.

We must look upon worldly things as if we saw them not.
TAke heed therefore, love not the world, nor the things in the world so, as to
set thine eyes upon them as things worthy to be loved, but use them, as if thou
use them not: Look upon them, as if thou saw them not, without any
carnal affection or delight: For as Satan promised to our parents, to make
them as Gods;

Earthly Gods dye like other men.
SO does he covet to make thee believe that if thou will embrace the world,
thou shall become rich and glorious in the world, even to be numbered and
reputed among such as are called Gods in the world: And when thou shall be thus
falsely deified, thou shall go to thy grave, and consume like other men.

The world a harlot and Satan her pandor.
THe world (as a harlot) flat^^rs men with a beautiful and strumpetlike
forehead, alluring the^ through the broakage of her pandor Satan, to cast
their eyes upon her, to woo her: And she (as the Devil did to Christ) shows
them her great possessions, promising to make them great, and rich in silver
and gold; and some she persuades not to go like drudges, and base fellows in
the world, for then they are no fit Cor-riualls for her entertainment: if the
peasant become not in the habit of a gentleman, the gentleman to equalize a
Knight, and the Knight to exceed a Lord, she will not look upon them: nay, if
men and women embrace not every new fashion garments, that they see that she
either frames at home in her shop of pride, or brings from foreign
phantastikes, she will cast the eye of disdain at them, and hold them bastards
and none of her legitimate children.

When men think themselves most beholden to the world then she rifles them and
sends them to their home naked.
SOme again she persuades to go^ basely, and neither to spend nor give; and
when her lovers have (as they think) been much beholden to her for her bounty
in fulfilling their corrupt desires; then she begins to show herself in her
likeness; picking their pockets, and rifles them of all that she gave them,
dispossessing the^ of their great revenues, disrobes them and deplumes them of
their peacocks attire; and brings not a few of them to poverty and shame, and
casts them off as the harlots did the prodigal son: And if she be so kind to
some, as to suffer them to be seen to ruffle and flourish, long dandling them
in her lap of lasciviousness, yet at last she sends them to their graves,
stripped of all, and turns them away (as poor men) naked as they came to her
only with a silly sheet to cover their nakedness, unseemly to be seen of men.

O, shut thine eyes therefore, make scorn to bestow the time of casting one
look (with delight) upon the best things she offers thee, (necessaries
excepted) being so uncertain, and so certainly dangerous.

How to employ our inward sight.
BEtter it is for thee, and to thy more solid comfort and true content through
faith, to be assured, to see thy Redeemer in his glory, hereafter for ever,
than to be here (as it were) bewitched with the enchantments of the deceiving
things, thine eyes do here see: which do so fasten carnal affections to
earthly things, that thou can have no time to look up, from whence thy
redemption (if thou be one chosen of God) comes, and where are hid the
unspeakable treasures, that the Lord reserueth (purchased by Christ) for them
that have their eyes fixed on him by faith.

The carnal eye a hinderance to the spiritual.
CLose up then thy greedy eye, that is so pragmaticke a promotor of all
deceiuable objects, to the heart that ingrosseth all that is offered unto it,
that delights it: And commonly shuts out the most excellent invisible
things; because the natural eye, sees only things visible in the world, and
hinders the spiritual eye from beholding the things of heaven.

Mischiefs proceeding from the carnal eye.
THis carnal eye makes the heart an Idolater by coveting a murderer by
envying: a thief by desiring: an adulterer by lusting: a glutton, by longing.
And this by the abuse of the eye and consent of the heart; abusing and
disordering the whole body (the house of the soul) and the soul it self.

Above all seek the illumination of the inward eye.
Leave then the fulfilling of the lusts of thy corporal eye, which only sees
by the light of nature: and seek by faithful prayer the illumination of thine
inward eye, whereby thou may apprehend spiritual and heavenly things.

The sight of the spiritual eye.
THis internal eye is enlightened, through the spirit by the word, preached
and understood: whereby we see God our Creator (as we see his works by our
natural eye) we see Christ Jesus his Son, proceeded from God the Father, we
see him suffering, not only many grievous abuses and injuries (lying in his
humanity among the Jews) but, his bitter and ignominious death upon the
Cross: But also, our Redemption, and Salvation in and by him: By the same eye
of a lively faith we see and apprehend his merits: we see him stand a mediator
for us at the right hand of his Father, interceding between us sinners, and
our offended God, and in whom we are imputed righteous.

Things only seen by a spiritual eye, through faith.
LAbor to see and apprehend this great mystery of our Redemption and Salvation,
which none can see, by his quickest eye of natural wisdom; no, it is
foolishness to the natural man, to think that God could have a Son, made
flesh to be conceived in the womb of a Virgin without man, to be borne into
the world, according to the course of men, to dye and within three days to
rise again by his own power (being God,) and immediately after to appear in
the same humane shape, and to eat bread: and in the same body to ascend into
the heavens, and there to remain a glorified body; and that in the same body
he shall come again, accompanied with Millions of Angels, to judge, as well
them that remain alive at his coming, as them that are already turned into
dust in their graves, burned to ashes, perished in the seas, and devoured by
beasts: And that their bodies that have dyed five thousand years since, even
Abel and all that have dyed since, being utterly consumed, that even their
bodies (now dust) shall rise again and be reunited to the souls of the
righteous, to be eternally glorified with Christ and his Elect: And of the
wicked to be eternally tormented with the Devil and his angels.

The cause why men covet not that spiritual illumination.
THese things are hid from the eye of nature and natural reason and
apprehension: and that is the cause that many wanting that spiritual eye of
heavenly illumination, do apply their carnal eyes to the things here below,
that do not only not profit them, but grievously endanger him. They have
neither the will, nor the knowledge how to seek (as they are commanded) The
Kingdom of Christ and the righteousness thereof; wherein consists the
assurance of all them that shall be partakers of that Heavenly Kingdom with
Christ, found of them that seek it in the word of truth, and apprehended by
the eye of a lively faith, which is (...) of the same Ie^us Christ.

Hearing of the Word the means of spiritual illumination.
Use therefore the means to attain unto this celestial illumination, hear
the Word attentively, pray fervently, lifting up thine eyes to heaven, seek
holiness and purity: for, the pure in heart have only the promise to see God,
here by the eye of faith; and hereafter, even with these eyes, by which we now
behold his creatures.

Strive with a continual holy violence, to be enlightened from heaven. Then
shall thou see to set not only this outward sense of seeing in order, and thy
domestic family and goods, but the rest of thy senses, thy whole body and
soul in order perfectly and religiously before thou dye.

Touching the examination and ordering of thine ears.
Having considered briefly the reformation and ordering of thy tongue and eyes,
it behooves thee likewise to examine, how thou have formerly used or abused
thine ears, Organs and instruments of hearing, likewise placed near the
intellectiue part of thy head, the chief outward part of thy body.

The ear is not so apt to hear as the eye to see.
ANd although the ear be not so active in motion to hear, as the eye is to
see, that can in a moment turn it self to many and several objects, nor so
fluent as the tongue that moves it self, in what, and in what diverse
discourses the mind moves it unto: yet the ears, through their passive and
penetrable quality, are apt to entertain things which may move the heart to
conceive, and stir up the will to affect, as evil things as the eye or
tongue.

The ear a door whereat many evils enter.
BY the ear of our first Parents (as at a door) entered the first (...)
allurements, and deceitful promises, that moved them to rebel against their
Maker; and therefore thou may not think that Satan will be less industrious
in using like flattering, and falsely obsequious ministers, to sound like
delightful deceiving songs in thine ears, both of pleasure and profit, as may
seduce thee, and poison thy affections, and so infect the whole house of thy
soul, as will bring all that appertains unto thee out of order.

The ear a necessary member to convey words to the understanding.
YEt is thine ear an excellent and necessary Organ, it tries words (as thy
taste tries meat, and thy palate Wine) whether good or evil, and
distinguishes the voices it hears, conveying also the matter to the
understanding: As when Josiah the King, heard the Book of the Law read, his
ear conuey'd the words to his intellectiue sense, which his heart conceiving,
wrought such compunction in him, as he rent his clothes, for that he thereby
found, that the Lord was angry, because the people had not obeyed the words of
the Book. The godly Jews likewise were pricked in their hearts, when their
sins were reproved by Peter: So, we being reproved of our sins by the Word
preached (if we have ears to hear) may be moved to amendment of life.

The words of the mouth of no use without the ear.
WIthout the ear the tongue were of no use, but as the tongue of a brute beast
only for feeding, not for speaking; for what avails speech to a man that
hears not at all? no more than to show colors to a blind man. Without the
ear, the mind of one man cannot be conuey'd (ordinarily) to the understanding
of another; neither could man be partaker of the Word of GOD by preaching;
neither were the most excellent Art of Music of any use. Seeing therefore it
has pleased God to give thee this so useful an Organ, apply it to the hearing
his voice: As Mary did, sitting at Christ's feet to hear him preach.

Apply not thine ears to flatterers nor ungodly discourses.
TAke heed that this instrument of hearing be not abused and deceived by the
frailty of the mind, in harkening unto flatterers, that only use their tongues
to deceive. And open not thine ear, nor listen thou to ungodly and profane
relations, and unseemly discourses, they breed but wickedness in thy mind,
and corrupt thy heart with vanities and forbidden thoughts; neither spend thou
precious time in hearing or reading fabulous and lascivious books, rimes of
ribawdry, foolish and offensive libels; hearken not to ungodly songs, nor to
old wives tales; whereby many times the holy Name of GOD is not only taken in
vain, but blasphemed, which ungodly men hear with a kind or devilish
delight, and think they sin not.

Avoid the listening to things moving to sin.
But know thou, that whosoever lends his ear to hear things tending to move
unto sin, delights in the means to make him more sinful, and shows
himself willing to add fuel to the fire of his carnal concupiscence, as if
corrupt nature it self were not prone and ready enough to offend GOD; but it
must have Sathanicall prompters, and outward motives to make it more guilty.

Profane ears listen to unholy things.
THese men have ears to hear, but apply them to that which is evil,
uncircumcised ears, such as Jeremy the Prophet reproves; saying, They are not
ashamed to open their ears, and listen with attention to whatsoever may tend
to Gods dishonor. And such ears have they, that in their wanton feasts, and
banquetings (even while they are partaking of the good blessings of God) even
among their superfluous cups and cates (which were sin enough) cannot be godly
merry, in receiving Gods creatures with thankfulness and prayer for a blessing
upon that they receive to refresh their bodies (which for forms sakes (as
appears) peradventure one in the company well disposed may seem to perform)
forget yet all holy reverence to God, and desire to have their ears filled
with variety of musical instruments (which may be used without offense.)

Wanton songs at feasts wicked.
ANd (which is most wicked) their meats and wines must be sawced, and seasoned
with lascivious, wanton, and most hellish songs of ribawdry and filthiness,
the more to stir them up to lust, and rejoice and laugh at their own shame,
and will not stick to control any that shall reprove it; ready to abandon
him out of their societies, as a Precise Puritan for interrupting their ungodly
mirth, with some godly communication, which they hold motives to melancholy.
There is no sweet or pleasing feast to some, but where the Devil is one of the
Musitinsa (or Fool in the Play) and they to dance after his Pipe: If an
Infidel should hear some of their delightful songs, he would surely think
they were either of none, or of some Ethnike religion.

Why not Psalms rather than wanton songs at Banquets.
AShame it is to Magistrates, especially to such, as will admit of such
infernal melody, who ought to suppress it* if they will be merry, why can
they not as well recreate themselves with instruments of music (if they desire
it) and Psalms to the praise of God, as to please the Devil with songs of
iniquity? Fit it is to abandon the songs, or banish the singers, for the very
breath of them infecteth, not only the Tauernes, where they are commonly
received, but the very streets, where they are permitted to seek company to
corrupt.

Stop thine ears from filthy songs.
THou therefore that intendest godly order in thine own house, and wishest the
welfare of thine own soul, stop thine ears from hearing such vile and
vicious forbidden vanities.

To what to apply thine ears.
Learn and accustom thine ears to hear wisdom, and hearken to
understanding, delight thine ear only to hearken and to attend unto the Words
of GOD preached, whereby God speaks unto thee, and calls thee from these
ungodly vanities, To make thee holy, as he is holy: And hearken not unto the
voice of Satan, that speaks by his infernal Ministers, to make thee more
and more sinful. God has given (and opened unto thee) ears to hear him,
and will thou apply them to hear his holy Name profaned and blasphemed? to
please the Devil.

Wherefore God has given men ears.
HE has given thee ears to hearken unto, and to learn understanding in
heavenly things, and to discern his voice, from the voice of strangers;
namely, of Satan, and of such as delight to speak, but not as becomes perfect
Christians, their word tendings to offend God and good men.

It is a like evil to talk or to delight to hear evil talk.
Evil words corrupt good manners; and therefore think not, that it is no
sin, to hear profane and ungodly discourses, though thou thy self
discourse not; for, to lend an ear, with delight, unto ungodly talk, is as
evil, as if thou did use thy tongue therein, for there is no difference
between a filthy tongue, and an ear attentive, with delight, to hear it.

It is no indifferent thing to hear or not to hear the Word of God.
AND think it not indifferent, whether thou desire to hear, or not to hear
the Word of God; for, if thou turn away thine ear from hearing the Law of the
Lord, even thine own prayers shall be abominable. If thou therefore, have
ears to hear, hearken to the voice of the Lord, who daily opens his mouth
to teach them that lend their ears to hear him. And if thine ear be as ready
to hear, as he is to speak, happy then art thou in hearing; for practice
cannot but follow: Therefore, says David, I will hearken what the Lord will
say. He opened his ears and spiritually heard the counsel of the Lord;
namely, what the Spirit of the Lord spoke unto the ears of his soul: for if
the Spirit of God dwell in thee, he speaks in thee, and thou hear him
(even in silence) yea though thy corporal ears were deaf, yet thine inward
ears being sanctified to the hearing of the spirit within, Thou art clean,
faith Christ, through the word that he has spoken unto thee.

The inward ears of the soul are opened by hearing with the outward.
THerefore art thou not to withdraw thy corporal ears from the outward
hearing of the Word preached: for as the sound of the voice pierces the
outward; So by virtue and operation of that Word, the inward ears of the soul
are opened, to apprehend and apply the same word to the spiritual working of
righteousness, faith and obedience, in the enabling thee to speak unto thy
self (as it were in secret) in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual songs,
singing and making melody to the LORD in thine heart, giving him thanks for
all things, worshipping him in spirit and truth: for as God is a Spirit, so
they that worship him, are to worship him in spirit and truth. So that by the
ear comes hearing of the Word preached: And by the Word comes faith; and
by faith we apprehend all the mercies and blessings of God in Jesus Christ.

Many lend more diligent ear to hear of earthly than the heavenly purchase.
THou art required to set thy house in order before thou dye; consider with thy
self, whether it concerns more thine own good, or the benefit of them that
shall enjoy the Lands and goods thou shall leave behind thee. This
consideration may befit such as have in their life time, showed a greater care
to make their posterity great, than themselves good: as has appeared in many,
by lending their ears more eagerly to hear of purchases, bargains, and
worldly profits, than by hearing the promises of that heavenly inheritance, by
applying the promises of GOD by faith unto themselves: And therefore the
setting of their houses in order, as touching giving and disposing of their
Lands and goods, benefits themselves little, for whether they dispose them or
not, they must leave them, and others will have them, the ordering of them
indeed is necessary for the continuance of peace, between them that may
pretend any succeeding interest in their goods when they are dead: While thou
art then living, and in health, apply thine ear to that purchase, that may
make thee a Freeman of heaven.

Hearken what thy conscience will tell thee.
IN setting of thy house in order, begin at thy self, at home, in thine own
conscience, examine it and hearken what that will tell thee, for that is the
witness that must excuse, or accuse thee, justify thee or condemn thee. If it
approve that thou have been attentive to hear, and to follow the counsel of
God, declared in his Word, and have walked before him, as he has commanded, if
thou have used no sinister means, unlawful or forbidden practices for the
getting of that which thou meanest to dispose and set in order before thou dye;
then in happy case art thou, and happy shall thou be in setting thy house in
order before thou dye. If thou have neglected, these holy duties make speedy
reformation, make conscience thy friend by thy new obedience, and a more
sanctified conversation; and be not so friendly to thy children as to prove
foe unto thy self. Apply not thine ear to hear their forged flatteries,
only to gain what thou have when thou art dead: but hear the counsel of
thine heavenly Father, who wills thee above all things, to address thine
ears to hear his promises, to make thee great in his Kingdom, if thou will
hear his voice and follow it: Let it be to day, delay not the time to seek
that Kingdom of Heaven and the righteousness of it: which being obtained,
then give, bequeath, dispose in the fear of GOD, and make thy will; for if
thou thy self be in order, it is easy for thee rightly to dispose of the
rest. It follows to speak of the Taste, another of the senses.

The examination of the TASTE.
THE Taste is conceived (commonly) little offensive, and neither much to abuse,
nor easily to be abused, to the offense of any; needing not any great business
to keep it in order.

The Taste has devoured many.
But take heed thou please not thy taste too much, for if thou give way unto
it, it will ouermaster thee, and exact from thee, that will make thee a poor
man, be thy to feed it never so great: Be what thou art rich or poor, if thou
flatter it, and give it what it will require, thou shall find it in the end
like a fawning Lion, which thou have long fed from a whelpe, without danger,
but at length it will grow strong and ouermatch thee, and make thee servile and
slavish unto it, and in the end devour thee.

Great disorder in eating and drinking.
IF thou please thy taste, or satisfy thy unruly appetite, and give way to
thine insatiable desire of eating and drinking, thou can not but fall into
all disorder, as is daily observed, not only in the rich and men of greatest
means, but in many (yea) meanest Mechaniks, Tradesmen, and very Rusticks,
that (according and beyond their abilities) rise up early to drink Wine and
strong drink, exceeding in surfeiting and drunkenness, like the Glutton in
the Gospel; two vices of equal intemperance, and equally embraced of poor
and rich, and so excessiuely common, as the stincke even of their vomits do
infect the very air, not only of the principal Cities and Towns, but (in
manner) every Village, and many private houses in the Kingdom.

The lawful and necessary use of eating and drinking often turned into sin
by excess.
TO eat and to drink is lawful, especially with thanksgiving, for without
the good creatures of God, the body cannot subsist. The use of the Taste is
also to distinguish good from unsavory food: And the pallat for drinks; yet,
both for nourishment, not for gluttony and drunkenness. But to the common
shame of men it is observed, that there be more that eat for gluttony, and
drink for delight, than do moderatly eat to sustain the body, or drink to
quench their thirst, whereby they do not only grievously offend God, in
abusing the good creatures which he has made, and more plentifully given unto
us, than to many other Nations, not only bread in abundance, to strengthen us
wine and other drinks to comfort us, and oil to cheer us, but al other things
necessary for the use of man, which many buse, through the inordinate desire of
the Taste unto gluttony and drunkenness, trampling as it were under their feet
the good gifts of God, to the shame and overthrow of many.

Death often follows the excess of eating and drinking.
WE have seen fearful examples of the sudden death of many, not only by
over eating, but far more, and far more fearful of such as have not only
drunk themselves (drunk) but even drowned themselves in wine and strong
drink, and all to please this (seeming harmless) sense, the Taste.

Take heed therefore, please not thy Taste too much, nor follow the desire of
thy Palate, for the one surfetteth the body, the other infatuateth the head;
Wine is a mocker, says the Wise man, and strong drink is raging: And
therefore, he that uses much wine cannot be sober: And he that delights in
strong drink, cannot be but intemperate, furious and out of order.

Dangerous to be in company of Drunkards.
DAngerous it is to be in the company of Drunkards (though a man himself be
never so sober and temperate) for they are many times in the nature of
franticks, and know not what they do, as has not been seldom seen, that
men have gone, seeming sober and friendly into Tauernes and like places, and
yet when drink has overcome them, one has slain the other ere they came
forth.

Drunkenness and Gluttony works of darkness and their reward.
Drunkenness and Gluttony, are worthily numbered among the manifold wicked
works of darkness; and whosoever disordereth himself in them, is as far
from inheriting the Kingdom of God, as are Adulterers, Jdolaters, Murderers,
Thieves, and as far as even witches, the very Agents of the Devil, and shall
with these impenitent miscreants be turned over to be tormented with the prince
of darkness his angels and ministers for ever, as they served and obeyed
Satan in their life in those gross sins, and dye therein unrepented, and
without setting their souls and affections in order before they dye: So shall
they be fellow partakers of his and their torments. And this shall be the
reward of them, that thus abuse this necessary sense of Taste, and yield too
much to please their inordinate Appetites.

The Devil has drunkards his ministers to make others drunk.
THere is yet a sort of Drunkards, by whom the Devil uses to make others
drunk, who can devour much wine and strong drink, and bear it far beyond
others, who can and will boast to out-drink twenty companions and not be
drunk, and drink them all drunk: But woe to them that are mighty to drink
wine, and unto them that are strong to power in strong drink; and this is a
man fit for the devils service, for where it is the devils practice to provoke
to sin, whosoever takes that office upon him, is really the devils minister;
and whosoever enforces a man to drink more than is sufficient is a
master-Drunkard, and the more he can tumble under the Table, or send reeling
into the streets, the more does his master the Devil hug and approve him a
serviceable minister: And such instruments of Satan are to be found in many
civil companies; but woe will be unto them for their own drunkenness
(howsoever they bear it) how much more for procuring others so hainously, ^o
offend so mighty a God, as can (and has said he will) cast such impious
wretches, with their master the Devil, into the Lake of fire and brimstone,
their to drink of the vyall of his heavy wrath their uttermost fill for ever.

Avoid the society of Gluttons and Drunkards.
Keep not company with Gluttons no^ Drunkards: for as Solomon says, The
Glutton and the Drunkard shall be ever poor; yea, though he be rich in purse,
he cannot but be poor in piety. Saint Paul wills thee, neither to eat nor
drink with Gluttons and Drunkards, nor be partakers with them in any excess,
for poverty is not all the punishment, threatened for these sins, for they
shall not enter into Kingdom of heaven, but shall be kept out as vomiting dogs
and filthy swine, and partake of the torments prepared for the Devil and his
Angels.

Woe against Drunkards.
THis is the woe which the Prophet Jeremy pronounces against them that rise up
early to follow drunkenness (especially to them that with their own delight
do make others drunk) And to them that continue until night (many night and
day) till wine do inflame and enrage them; And to make them the more merry
(which ^ill men may do) They have the Harp, the Violl, Timbrell and Pipe,
(noyses of finest music) and (which is most shameful and offensive) wanton
and lascivious songs, with drunkenness in their feasts, to the dishonor of
God, and corrupting (if it were possible) the godly that are in their companies.

A fearful thing to dye in Drunkenness.
IT is a fearful thing to be drunk, but a more fearful thing to dye or be
slain in drunkenness, As Ammon was by his Brother Absalom, Elah by Zimri,
Olophernes by Judith, and not a few before our own eyes have been.

If thou love thy self, temper thy Taste, and bridle thine Appetite, refrain
the company of drunkards, and partake not with the Gluttons, lest thou be
either corrupted by them, or be punished with them.

Moderation in diet to be used.
USE temperance and moderation in thy diet, fulfill not thy lustful
affections, nor thine inordinate appetite in overmuch eating or drinking,
offensive to thy health, and displeasing to GOD; and when thou have glutted thy
self, with overmuch feeding, and swallowed up too much wine and strong
drink, even enforcing thee to vomiting of it up again, is it not loathsome as
well as painful unto thee? And think thou thy soul also feels not a
heavy burden of thy bodies surfeiting.

The true use of the Taste.
USE thy Taste to that end that God has given it thee, namely, only to
distinguish and judge between sweet and sour, wholesome and unwholesome meats
and drinks Honey from Gall, for without the Taste, thou should find no
difference of the relish of edible things, the most tainted and contagious
would be as pleasing unto thee, as the most salutary.

How the appetite may be used or abused.
AND as this sense (to this end) is of most necessary use; so is thy appetite a
quality of thy body, expedient, working a desire in the stomach, to receive
nourishment for the relief of the whole body, which may be also abused by the
ouer-satisfying of the Taste, in that wherein it most delights, oppressing
the Appetite, which in it self is content with competent. But being ouer-fed
it begins to loath the best food, which by this means seems unpleasant, and
so at length refuses necessary nourishment, to sustain and maintain the
body; as is seen in sick folks, when their Appetite decays the Taste is out
of order, best meats and drinks seem unto them of unsavory relish. And this
distemperature commonly proceeds by overmuch oppressing the body, by pleasing
the Taste, and ouer-charging the Appetite with surfeiting and drunkenness,
whence do spring all the infirmities and diseases of the body, (numberless)
as a punishment inflicted upon such as abuse the good creatures of GOD to
please their inordinate Tastes and Appetites.

Gods good creatures are abused by surfeiting and drunkenness.
MANY are the varieties of Gods good creatures of both kinds, both of meats
and drinks, which he has provided for our use (not to be abused) but to be
received with thanksgiving, as we are commanded, that whether we eat or
drink (if we receive but a morsel of bread to sustain us, or a cup of cold
water to refresh us) we ought to receive it and use it to the honor and glory
of God that gives it: But how can he eat to GODS glory, or his own good that
eats to surfeit? And how can he drink to the praise of God, that drinks
himself or others drunk? He eats and drinks to his own shame, beyond the
measure of beasts, which cannot be compelled to eat or drink more than is
sufficient, unless it be the Dog, the Wolf, and such unclean creatures, as
eat to vomit, and presently return to their feeding, and the swine that will
drink drunk and wallow in the unclean puddle: To which Beasts, Gluttons, and
Drunkards are fitly resembled.

Not to oppress thy heart with ouer-eating and drinking.
TAke heed therefore, lest at any time thy heart (which is the principal part
and life of thy body) be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, and so
death seize upon thee through thine excess, and thou dye suddenly (as many
have done) before thou can either set thy domesticke estate, thy soul or thy
body again in order, and so be reputed author of thine own death, and descend
suddenly to the pit of eternal perdition, a fearful farewell from thy
friends and family.

Eat not the bread of oppression.
BEware also thou eat not the bread of oppression, nor drink the wine of
extortion, rather let thy poor oppressed brother and sister be partakers with
thee of thy bread and other the good creatures that God has plentifully lent
thee; for to eat and drink alone of thine abundance, when Lazarus lies lies
crying at thy gates for meat, is dangerous as appears by the example of the
rich Glutton in the Gospel, being in hell cried for, but could not get the
drop of a finger of water to refresh him.

It is not ouer-feeding preserues life but brings diseases and shortens life.
Think not that it is the fullness of delicate meats, and most delitious
wines and strongest drinks that continues thy life, or makes thee lusty and
strong, for the fattest and fullest fed bodies, neither live longest, nor prove
strongest, but are more subject to sicknesses and infirmities, and to many
kinds of Maladies, than are they that feed sparingly and temperately, even of
meanest food and weakest drinks received with thankfulness; As Daniel, who
refused the daintiest fare that came from the Kings Table, and chose rather in
faith and the fear of God, to feed on pulse (or pease) and became of better
liking, more fat and fair than his fellows that fared and fed on the Kings
dainties dilitiously every day.

Thankfulness to God the sauce that seasons our meats and drinks.
THe sweetest sauce that savors and seasons all sorts of our meats and
drinks is thankfulness to GOD, for giving them faithful prayer for a
blessing upon them: And then let them be never so mean (be it pulse, pease,
roots, or herbs) instead of daintiest foul or fish, and a dish of cold water
instead of wine, shall sustain poor men, women and children, and make them as
fat fair and strong, as such as fare far more daintily, as appears by many
that have very mean fare, and yet live by the blessing of God; but if God send
his creatures in a more ample manner, they may not be abused, nor the meanest
contemned.

Mean fare through prayer, sustaines the poor, as well as dainty fair the
rich.
THey that eat and drink more for delight, than they do for their necessity
of hunger and thirst, may live and look as lean and meagre, as the poorest;
and the poorest that eat and drink with prayer and thanks, shall be
sufficiently satisfied. The rich many times turn the good gifts of God into
wantonness through excess; and the poor do often turn their penury and
want of corporal food into the fullness of spiritual satiety, and are
sufficiently releiued, their bodies well ordered and their health preserved.

Daintiest and meanest fare turn to like excrement.
THere is great difference indeed of the furniture of Tables, all but for
nutriment, and did such as feed of the fairest and finest cates, consider
whether their delicate food turn not to like loathsome excreme^t as does
meanest fare, they might rather seem to be ashamed to think upon the matter*
whereon they so much delight to feed (that so soon turns to that, which
lotheth them to look upon when it comes from them again.) Then in regard of
their dainties to despise meaner fare and such as feed on it.

Every creature has its proper food and appetite.
TASTE is common to man and beasts, as are hearing, seeing, and the rest, but
are diverse in appetite; every creature has it is proper food, and can by it is
taste distinguish the proper from the improper nourishment, and seldom exceeds
in the use; so the temperate man, the man knowing and fearing God, finds in
himself a taste of another and of a more high nature a spiritual appetite,
and hungreth and thristeth as much for heavenly and permanent, as does the
corporal appetite, for vanishing and perishing food.

Spiritual taste and appetite.
BY this spiritual Taste he sauoureth the sweetness of the Lord; how
comfortable his mercies are, and how operative his graces; working in him an
heavenly appetite: Longing (as Solomon did for Wisdom, and Knowledge, to
govern his kingdom;) for spiritual and heavenly understanding, to govern
his house* the house of his soul, and above all his soul it self; which
being out of order, none of the rest can be in good order. But when he has by
this inward and spiritual taste discerned the bitterness of Sin, and the
sweetness of Sanctity, and brought his Affection^* his Mind and Will to
effect, mind, and desire heavenly things; then his Appetite begins to hunger
and thirst for the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof; distasting
all such Carnal* Corporal, and Worldly things, as savor not his renewed
taste. Then is faithful prayer his only exercise, and the Word of Truth his
only delight. What food pleases the spiritual taste; His food is holy
Meditation, his practice H^militie, Meekness, Temperance and Sobriety: He
nourish^^h his soul by Faith and Obedience to the Word of God, he ^^^deth on
the sincere milk thereof, and becomes strong thereby, and at last a Perfect
man in Christ Jesus.

The difference between the Corporal and Spiritual taste.
Corporal food, be it never so sweet and pleasing to the Taste, yet it
loatheth at length, even that which a little before it delighted in with
greediness: But this food, the sweet milk of the Word, has the virtue to
season the inward taste, and to prepare the spiritual Appetite, to feed the
soul unto salvation; and the more he tastes of it, the more his appetite
(through Faith) inflamed is to hunger for more, he cannot be satisfied with
little, for the more he tastes, the sweeter he finds it, and the more he
hungers for it.

The several operations of corporal and spiritual food.
O Taste how sweet this food of thy soul, this heavenly Manna is: It is a
food of a contrary nature to the food of thy body; bodily nourishment enters
into the mouth, this by the ear; the first descends into the belley, and is
euacuated and turns to dust: the second descends into a prepared heart, by the
word preached, and nourishes thy soul, and retains it only to work thereby
righteousness, showing it self in godly meditations, and faithful prayers.
And the more thou feedest on this Celestial food, the more will thou seek as
it were by violence to have it: Thou may surfeit by the deceit of thy
corporal taste, by feeding too much: but, on this (that comes from heaven)
the more thou feedest, the more hungry will thou be to feed.

How to increase spiritual Appetite
OMit not the continual use of it, increase it by hearing, and confirm it by
receiving the Sacraments, by faithful prayer, and continual practice of a
godly life. So shall thou be always fit and well prepared to dye: And be
always able and ready to set thine house in order before thou dye: And being
departed out of this mortal life, thou shall taste and be satisfied with the
food of Angels, in that heavenly city New Jerusalem; where God shall give thee
to drink of the rivers of his pleasures, and shall euermor^ taste and find how
gracious the Lord (...).

The Examimation of the sense of Smelling.
Want of smelling hinders the tasting.
THe sense of smelling may be conceived to be of least use of all the bodily
five senses, and may be better wanting* than any of the rest. The greatest
impediment that the want of smelling brings, is to the taste: for he that has
lost his smelling, has much impaired his tasting? He that smells not well,
cannot taste well: So that for want of the perfection of these two senses
tasting and smelling, the body may receive unwholesome food in stead of good
and salutary.

Sweet ordours in garments used to move to sin euilly.
MAny yet abuse this sense of smelling (having it in perfection) especially in
the superfluous desire and custom of odoriferous fumes, commonly bestowed in
and upon men's and women's garments most offensive to God, when they are used to
allure to sin.

Sweet odors necessary and of sundry uses.
YEt are sweet odours a great blessing of God, and of holy use, wherewith the
bodies of the dead Patriarcks and Christ were imbalmed, and Kings anointed;
odors infused as well into simples, herbs, flowers, gums, and very excrements
of some creatures: as compounded by Art; as Incense, etc. are of necessary use
(with moderation) for the comfort of the brain, and other salutary ends, as in
time of any common contagion, or infectious disease: Physical smells, and
wholesome perfumes, are necessarily to be used, to fill up the pores and
penetrable parts of the head, by which commonly al infectious diseases enter:
as do also all offensive and hurtful, corrupt and vnsavourie, vapors and
stinkes, which putrify the brain and blood, and consequently the whole body,
which physical fumes and odours (by Gods blessing) may prevent.

How sweet odours, are abused, and how to be used.
But if these necessaries for health, be used to stir up lust, or allure to
sin, then is this sense made an occasion, to bring other parts of the house
of thy soul (thy body) out of order. The use of them for health, and to
prevent sickness is lawful, and prevailing by faithful prayer to God for a
blessing: But delight not too much in pleasing this sense with sweet odours, to
the offense of God; for the excess in satisfying any of thy senses, is sin;
beware therefore that thou make not that an instrument of evil, which God has
given thee to be used to his glory and thine own comfort.

Many beasts excel man in the perfection of many of the senses.
GOD to show (as in all other his works) his omnipotent Power, Wisdom and
Goodness has created, in man and beast five senses; wherein (as touching the
perfection of, some of them) diverse other creatures excel man; as the Eagle,
in seeing; the Heart, in hearing; the Spaniell and Heund, in smelling; the
Spider, in touching; and the Be, in Tasting: only has he given man reason
above all the rest, yet many creatures come near unto reasonable
understanding, and exceed man in exquisite Art: As what man is he that can
contriue the manner, and compose the matter of the Spiders net, or form the
Honey comb? Who can gather honey and wax out of flowers, herbs, and stinking
weeds? Nay who can make the nest of a silly Wren?

If then, man comes short in the performance of many things that silly
creatures can do* why should he boast of any rare quality of his members or
senses; when in every outward faculty; silly bruit creatures e^cell him?

Unreasonable creatures use their senses less offensive to God than reasonable
men.
ANd since God has endued man as well with reason as with his senses, and given
the inferior creatures, like senses without reason: what shame is it for man
more to abuse his senses, tha^ unreasonable creatures? for every creature but
man, uses it is senses to serve for necessity; when man turns them through
carnal delight into wantonness and sin.

All creatures (man only excepted) glorify God in their kinds, not exceeding
their bounds, first limited and appointed unto them, in their senses or
qualities: and man keeps no measure in any of hem.

The necessity of the sense of Smelling.
THis seeming silly organ of smelling, placed in the head, by the nosthrils
does convey unto the brain wholesome odours, and the air whereby we aspire
and respire the breath of life: And by it we can judge between good and
healthful, evil and unsavory sents: And without this sense of smelling, a
man might receive into his body and brains noisome vapors and mortal
stinkes, and not perceive them.

Sweet odours to be used moderately.
APply not yet this necessary instrument of thy body, to bring the rest out of
order; as by delighting too much, in the superfluous use of sweet and
ouer-pleasing odours and perfumes, for as a little Wine comfort the heart,
so too much oppresses the whole body: And as some light perfume passing by
this sense may comfort the brain: So too much will infect the same and turn
the swetnesse into putrefaction, to the hurt of the body and offense to God.

Dangers incident to the sense of Smelling.
IF this sense had or were capable of as many offensive objects as the eye, it
would be as unruly, and soon bring bane unto the body. But though it have not
so many means of provocation as the ta^^^, yet in as great danger; for, as
poisonous meats descending into the stomach, may kill the body: So may
infected fumes putrify the brain, to the like confusion of the body.

The abuse of sweets perfumes.
AS this sense has (as other senses have) a virtue to comfort, so has it a
vice to offend, in the too much wanton delight in pleasing it self; for, many
have a pride, not only to perfume their garments, to sweeten or to be smelt
sweet in the streets, but their very hair, to perfume their Ladies lips in
their chambers; that they may seem amiable, or rather more amorous (indeed too
effeminate) for becomes it a man, that is (or would seem) valorous, to change
his virtues (which should appear in his Wisdom, Magnanimity, and Judgment)
for the vices, that only are embraced by Curtesans, Light-women, and Fools.

If we well considered what we are, we would not perfume us.
IF thou will be womanlike, thou may as well paint thy face to make thee
fair, as to use perfumes to make thee sweet: Consider what thou art, and
whereof thou art made; Thou art but dust, and did thou well observe, what
comes of thy perfumed carcass, thou would be ashamed (be thou man or
woman) either to paint or perfume so vile a piece of flesh, that will putrify
and stink within four days that thy breath is out of thy body.

These are they that savor of the flesh, fleshly, of vanity and pleasure,
even of death unto death. Seeming fair without, but filthy within; sweet in
show, indeed stinking and corrupt.

How a man ought truly to perfume himself.
IF thou will smell well indeed, and desire thy self to be a good savor to
God, consider, that as there is a corporal and carnal, so is there a
spiritual and heavenly sense of smelling; with which the soul of the
Regenerate man, smells with inward delight, the sweet odours wherewith the
garments of the spouse of Christ are perfumed with Myrrh, Alo's, and Cassia, of
Mercy, Wisdom, and Truth. Endeavor then to smell of Faith, Hope, of the
Love of God, and of like Love to thy Neighbor as to thy self.

How to become sweet to God.
SMell thou of a holy and godly life; of heavenly Meditations and godly
Prayers: Then shall thou be unto God a sweet savor in Christ; and of Christ,
who shall smell in thee, a sacrifice acceptable, and shall have pleasure in thy
beauty and sweetness. And thou shall smell the savor of life unto life
eternal. And in the mean time, thou shall learn and be able to set, not
only thy worldly goods, but also the house of thy soul, thy body, and the
members, and all the senses thereof, (and above all) thy soul in perfect order
before thou dye. Thus of the sense of Smelling: follows the sense of Touching.

The Examination of the sense of Touching.
IT may be thought merely superfluous, indeed, to speak any thing against
the sense of Touching or Feeling, because it is only most sensible of hurt,
and least hurtful.

The sense of touching, or feeling is dispersed through the whole body.
IT is a sense not set in one local place of the body alone, as the rest of
the senses are, as Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, and Smelling, all placed in the
head, the Eye to see, the Ear to hear, the Tongue to taste, and the Nose to
smell, and neither partakes of the others office: But this sense of touching or
feeling, is distributed through the whole, and every part of the body: And
every part is sensible of others hurt, from the sole of the foot to the Crown
of the head: And cannot be conceived to rest, more in the head than in the
foot: nor more in the Foot than in the Finger. Though the Head and Heart are
the most apprehensiue parts. And the Hand, the common instrument, and most
employed in the aid and defense of this sense; as if any part or member of the
body be stricken or hurt, though all parts feel it, yet is the hand most ready
to help it: And the hand is most commonly the most offensive member (by
touching) to hurt: And the most useful for the choice of many necessary
commodities, the goodness, substance, softness, and supplenes whereof are best
known by the sense of Feeling, neither the Ear nor the Eye, are used therein.

If one member be hurt all the body feels it.
IF the head, or the most inferior part (be it the finger, or the little toe)
suffer injury, this sense suddenly informs the head, the head the heart: which
summons all the members instantly to yield commiseration, or aid unto the
offended part, and all consult how to ease and relieve that one grieved member.

The abuse of the taste procures most hurt to the body.
THis sense is most abused, and feels greatest hurts by the abuse of the taste
which (engrossing al delicate meats and drinks, to pamper the body with
replention) procures the gout, whereof one cries out of his Feet, another of
his Hands; it fills another with the Dropsy, whereby one cries out of his body
filled with water, another of the swelling of his legs; another cries out of
the Stone, and many other maladies, when either of these seize upon the body,
it is felt painful and grievous, even to the heart: As touch but the Gout,
and the party will be ready to rore; oppress or dress but a wound or sore in
any part of the body; or let the tooth but ache, the sense thereof goes from the
place grieved to all other parts of the body.

The abuse of this Sense of Feeling or Touching.
THis sense of Touching, is likewise abused, by too much niceness in apparel;
observed in those that think their garments never delicate and fine enough to
be felt: Cloth of the wool of sheep is too base, they must have them as it
were of the dainty and thin Spiders web, of the very excrements of filthy
worms, soft, supple, and delightful to be felt; unlike to holy John Baptists
attire, who had his garments of Camels Hair, unpleasant to be felt: yet is not
soft raiment and fine linen, unfit for Kings and their followers, and great
men and women. But now a Lord can hardly be distinguished, from a man of no
means: A Courtier from a Countryman, etc.

Let us be sensible of the feeling of the wrath of God for our sins.
IF we well considered the present times of danger wherein we live, and did
but consider how God shows his displeasure for our sins, and did take it to
heart, and did apply our inward sense of feeling of his wrath by the
punishments already (and without repentance) like to be more heavily laid upon
us, we should find it more behooved us, to turn our silks into sackclothes,
and our fine linen into lamentation, our rich raiment into repentance, our
feasts into fastes; then should we feel in our hearts, by the sense and
feeling of the Holy Ghost, the free forgiveness, and pardon of our sins. The
King of Nineveh, (upon the preaching of Jonah, pronouncing from God the
destruction of the City, for the sins of the same) felt such remorse and
compunction in ^is heart, as he rose from his Throne, and laid his Royal,
rich and soft robes from him; and instead of them arayd himself, in sackcloth
and ashes, (though he felt them harsh upon his tender body) in token of hi^
and (for example) of true repentance, to his people for their sins; and
caused man and beasts, to be clothed in sackcloth, and to abstain from food
in token of sincere repentance, And the Lord spared the City.

And do not many Ionasses, sent from God preach like destruction to us for our
sins, if we become so hardened in our hearts, as to be past the sense of the
feeling of his displeasure, shall we not perish?

The Ninevites repented at the preaching of one Jonas, we have had ten
thousand Sermons to that purpose and repent not.
WEre the Ninevites (who repented upon the preaching of one Jonas) spared? And
did they feel their hearts pricked, and their consciences touched, at the
preaching of one Sermon, and that so short, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall
be destroyed? Did a people, that had scarsly heard of the true God, so suddenly
and soundly repent, and that in three days warning in sackcloth and ashes? And
we that have had, above threescore years, the Law and the Gospel, the
absolute, clear and free knowledge of the living God and his Christ, by above
ten thousand Ionasses, beating obedience into our ears, and shall we never
feel it effectual in our hearts, working repentance for our sins, and
amendment of life?

We feel the heavy hand of God and repent not.
ARe our hearts so hardened, and our consciences so seared, that we be so
far past feeling, as the very severe scourge of God cannot awake us? Has he
put his sickle into his harvest, not in the City only but in the whole land,
having already cut down many silly innocents, with many most guilty? Has he
spared such as knew not the right hand from their lest, Even such as never
actually offended him, more than such as have committed grievous sins, and
that of knowledge and with a high hand? And has he not taken also many sincere
men and women, (though not perfect) among the rest, and feel we not yet his
wrath, and that his displeasure continues, and his hand stretched out still
against us?

Tokens of the hardness of our hearts.
Does any man or woman yet feel in their hearts, that God is angry? Does any
repentance appear, by any outward marks of sorrow for their sins? Do they
lay aside their wanton apparel? Do they any whit abate their pride? Does the
usurer abate his use and lend to the poor for naught? Is Bribery, extortion,
and in Justice banished? Is drunkenness abated? Is whoredom abandoned? Or any
vice reformed? Do not rather all forbidden things increase? And every sin
multiply daily? And neither of our senses apprehends this? The eye of the
Magistrate sees not the drunkard punished, our ears hear not the cries of the
poor, and of the oppressed to pity them, cursing and blasphemies are in our
mouths. And our sense of spiritual feeling, is merely mortified, that it is
to be feared, he will change his Rod of visitation by sickness, into fearful
famine, or make us feel the sword.

If we feel not Gods favorable correction, he will send that we shall feel.
LEt us leave off to dally with God, as we have done many years, he will not
always be mocked. If we have not the sense to feel his hand of this most
favorable visitation, he will send that, which we shall feel, if we be no^
altogether dead and mortified in sin, we have seemed, but to trifle like
trewants (in our duties commanded) too long; God has fed us most plentifully
with bread from heaven, more abundantly, and more freely, then he has done
any nation or people in the world, as if we were his peculiar people most
worthy to be beloved, above all other he has sowed good seed in our ears; but
it seems to have taken little root in our hearts, which instead of good
fruits of godliness and obedience, bring forth the weeds of wickedness and all
sorts of sins. And we have been long admonished of the danger, by Gods many
zealous ministers, and we feel no pricking in our consciences, for our
transgressions, nor feel, or fear, Gods threats denounced against us.

All men feel their own wants and wrongs but none regard the members of
Christ.
EVery man feels the want of the carnal things he desires; and few there be
that feel the want of grace. When they are hungry, or thirsty, or poor, or
injured they feel it, But who feels a sorrow in heart for their sins, to
amendment of their lives? Who feels or takes to heart, the misery of Joseph?
who feels a true desire in himself, to relieve the poor, or to defend the
oppressed? Are we not all the members of one body, whereof Christ is the head?
And if any of the members suffer, think we the head feels it not? And shall
any member be afflicted and the rest refuse to help it? Shall we be so
careful of our own bodily members, that if one of them suffer pain, to apply
all the rest to relieve it? And shall so many members of the mystical body of
Christ suffer, not only the sickness of the body, but poverty want of things
necessary, deprived of all comfortable attendance perish, and so many able men
look awry on them? Nay, to cast sick servants most uncharitably out of their
houses, enforcing many of the^ to die in the fields, like beasts? Will God
suffer these unfeeling and senseless hearts go without a more heavy
punishment then yet they have felt?

We ought to have a feeling of the necessity of the poor.
Have thou a feeling of thy brother or sisters miseries, and let thy heart be
sensible, of thine own danger: and set thy house in order against the time of
thy visitation, for the time is coming and at hand, when thou must feel the
force of thy final dissolution. And therefore set thy body, thy senses, and
members of it in good order before the time, and as thou have examined thy
tongue and senses: So examine thine hands and thy feet, which must be also
set in order before thou dye, if thou think to dye in the Lord.

And first examine thine hands.
The hands of greatest use hindered for want of sight and feeling.
THy hands are of greatest use (under thy five senses) of all the other members
of thy body yet much and often hindered, by the defect of the senses of saying,
and touching; By the first they are guided aright, and by the other, they feel
and use those instruments, required in whatsoever manual and mechanicke
action, and without either of these, the hands seem lame and defective; and
above the other two the understanding guides them, for be a man's sight never so
perfect, and his hands never so nimble and artificial, yet if the
understanding fail, they can perform no action aright.

How the body is guided.
THe hands, indeed, are the workmen, artificers, and principal laborers for
all the rest of the members of the little commonwealth of thy body, and the
eyes are as the overseers, and the understanding, the guide, director, and
judge of the work: and the feet, the messengers, and porters to carry the
body whither the will directs them.

As God created the hands to labor, so has he appointed many means to employ
them.
AS God created the hands in thy body to labor, so has he ordained many
means, (yea infinite) to set them on work, dressing and tilling the earth was
the first labor appointed to man: which has begotten numberless other trades
and callings among the sons of men, as a badge of the curse traduced to all
mankind, by the disobedience of the first man: whose rebellion procured labor,
travail, toil and vexation, to all his posterity, and he tasted first of the
servile labor of his hands. And now, are all things full of labor, Man cannot
utter the varieties of them: labor and sorrow are now, every man's portion
during his life. For, when a man thinks he has done all, and that he may
live at rest: Then one occasion or another, offers it self, to set him to
work anew; his hands must return again to labor. And this is the portion of
every man borne into the world. With the labor of his hands to eat his bread.
Though some assume privilege, through their greatness and wealth, and free
themselves from servile handy labors: yet even in their greatest pleasures and
pastimes, there is labor, and weariness.

Husbandry no base calling.
IN whatsoever profession, trade or faculty, thou be placed to labor, thy
hands are the chiefest instruments of thy body, to perform it: And therefore
let thy hands be diligent in thy calling, and hate no laborious work: No, not
(basely esteemed) Husbandry, which the most high has created. But labor
therein if it be thy lot, and thou shall be satisfied with bread.

It is no disgrace to labor in the fields, to plow, sow, reap, etc. for even
the king, and all his subjects live by the field that is tilled, and therefore
a Calling: so far from being worthy of scorn, as it deserves especially to
be cherished.

Labor with prayer, prospers.
IN every honest labor, wherein the hands are not idle, there is gain and
sufficient, to sustain the laborer, especially, where, as the hands work, the
heart prays, for the work of the body is no hindra^ce to a well prepared
heart, to entertain heavenly and godly motions, and meditations: As godly
Jacob did, who joined prayers with his pains, under Laban his unkind Uncle,
confessing that except the God of his father Abraham, And the fear of that
God, that was the God whom Jsaac his father feared and served, had been with
him, His uncle had sent him away empty: But God beheld his tribulation, and
the labor of his hands: And blessed both it and him.

Labor is sweet with profit, and there is no lawful labor unprofitable,
joined with prayer to God for a blessing for the labor of the faithful is
never in vain.

Jdlenesse and ungodly exercises never blessed.
THere be many that have hands to labor and yet will loyter and be idle,
neither counsel or constraint can provoke them to laudable labor: yet, in
pleasure, idle and ungodly pastimes, in bowling, hunting, And many other
unlawful exercises, they will stretch their legs and strain their hands, and
toil their bodies until they sweat, though they lose, not only precious time,
that might be spent in good exercises, consuming their portions and patrimonies
and never complain of their ungodly ^earines. But if they should work with
less pain, in some lawful employment, they would cry out, as the Jsraelites
did under Pharaohs taske-masters.

The idle ought not to eat.
But Saint Paul exhorts the Thessalonians, that they should not suffer an
idle person to live among them: If there were any that refused to labor with
their hands, in some lawful and laudible work^, they should not permit them to
eat.

Idleness draws with it many dangers.
Idleness is not to be tolerated in any house, much less in a town, least of
all in a populous city, for, it draws so many inconveniences with it, as it
may further the ruin of the place wherein it is permitted: for it was one of
the maine firebrands, that inkindled the fire and brimstone that consumed the
cities of Sodom and Gomorah, etc.

Where Idleness is not, the land flourishes.
THe idle in good, will not be idle in evil; they will be in action
procuring public or private mischiefs. Take away the idle from among the
laudable industrious, and the land will flourish, For where idle persons are
(though alone) their heads or hands will be working, and as one cock crows
after another, and as one deep calls another. So one idle person calls
another. And then consult they of some wickedness; and wait opportunity to
perpetrate it. They devise iniq^itie and practice it, because it is in the
power of the hand.

Mischiefs proceeding of idleness.
A Pest they are to a commonwealth, good people and industrious are often
corrupted by them, and infected with their vices poisoning whole multitudes
that associate them, and partake with them. It increases the number of
vagabonds, the greatest blemish of a religious commonwealth.

Jnconueniences growing by idleness and the causes.
THis sin has made many a rich man poor, many wisemen fools; it brings
many to beggary, many also to filthiness of life, some to robbing and
stealing, sometimes to murder the innocent; and consequently brings themselves
to untimely and fearful ends: wherein many parents of children, masters of
servants, but especially magistrates within their liberties, are guilty:
Parents in not bringing up their children in some lawful trade or calling,
leaving the^ to their own wills: Masters being often idle themselves, leaving
their wares, shops and trades to their servants, who in absence of their
masters, take not only liberty to be idle, and to gad abroad, but acquaint
themselves with the more idle: and become so seasoned in sin, that at length
they run from one sin unto another: That when many of them come (as they
call it) to be their own men, they become professed servants of
unrighteousness, and slaves to Satan: Magistrates also and inferior
governors, by their lenity and conniuency, increase the boldness of many poor
Merchants and Tradesmen, that should employ their hands, to their labors, for
their wives and children, and apply their hands, some in the Bowling allies,
some at tables, and other unfit exercises, spending what (and more than) they
get, in tauernes and drunck-houses, sometimes in worse places. And this is the
reason of so many idle people in the land: and of so many innocent, and
forlorn children, left desolate, in many places. To the admiration of some,
and the comisseration of others that wish reformation.

Every man is diligently to apply his lawful calling.
Seeing then that the neglect of lawful handy labor, brings with it many
inconueniencies, endeavor to work with thine own hands in that trade of life
whereunto God has called thee: If thy vocation require not the labor of thy
hands, But have any plaee of authority in Church or commonwealth, beware thou
be not idle therein, but having an office, wait on thine office, execute it
with Justice, and diligence; praying for a blessing, upon whatsoever thou do,
lifting up thine hands, in a pure heart unto God.

God has left the poor here to try the charity of the rich.
IF thou find there be any iniquity in thine hands or have defiled them either
with bribery, extortion, or any uncleanness, wash them with the tears of
sincere repentance, and open them to the relief of the poor and needy: for
therefore has God made some poor, and some rich, that the charity of the rich
may be approved by relieuing the poor; And then be assured, that whatsoever
thou do, in thy lawful vocation, with faithful prayer, it shall prosper.
Pray when thou beginnest thy work, or to execute thine office; pray in the
doing of it, and give God thanks when thou have done it: So shall thou ever
keep thine house in order, and be able rightly to dispose what thou shall
leave behind thee when thou dyest.

Now, as touching thy feet and how thou have walked, fit also to be considered.
The feet are necessary member: yet often used to sin.
IF thou can reform thy hands, and use them in thy vocation according to thy
duty, thou have well settled the principal working members of thy body.
Endeavor then, likewise rightly to order thy feet, which as they are of great
use and service of thy body, So are they many times made the ministers, and (as
it were) porter^ to evil: For, as God has given wings to the fowls of the
air, to fly too and fro, to seek their prey and food; So has he given man
feet to walk: and as some ravening foul use their wings to devour; so man
often times uses his feet to carry the body to forbidden things, even to
mischief, according as the corrupt will directs them.

The feet without understanding, are lead by the Will.
THe will of man by nature is corrupt, and by the direction of that corrupt
will, the feet are often led to wickedness, Though of themselves they have
only mo^ion, and the sense of feeling (if they be wrung or wronged) but they
cannot complain; They see not, neither know they about what business they
carry the body, they are both dumb, deaf and blind, and are altogether
subject to the mind, to go this way or that way: If the mind be sanctified,
they are always employed to carry the body to the performance of godly
actions; if the mind tend to evil, they are used as the Rider does his horse,
whom he inforceth to run into any danger.

Examine in what thou have used thy feet.
Examine therefore, how and whether thou have led thy feet: whether thou have
not made them, or used them rather to run after vanity and sin, than to good
and godly exercises, whether they have not been enforced to follow the wicked
and their ways, haunting places of sin rather than of sanctity, rather to
hurt, than to help thy neighbor.

Two ways in the general, wherein men walk.
IF thou have formerly thus poluted thy feet, withdraw them now at the last
from every evil way: for although there are but two ways in the general,
wherein men walk, A way broad and pleasant, and a way narrow, and ^rkesome to
flesh and blood to pass, yet are there many by-pathes, and turnings in the^
both, but especialy in the broad, plain, and pleasant way, every of them
leading to what the passenger delights in, one takes the way that turns to
drunkenness, another to gluttony, another to pride, another to covetousness,
another to deceit, another to whoredom, another to envy and revenge; and so as
men are infinite, so are their ways infinitely and diversely taken; using their
feet, not only to go and to run, but as it were to fly, in that way that
every man in his private conceit thinks most pleasant: All tending in the end
unto death. And far more travel in this broad way and by-pathes of it, than
do in the narrow and unpleasant way, which of, or in it self has no
turnings, neither to the right or to the left hand, it leads only forward,
and yet in the way are many stumbling-blockes, briars and thorns, irksome and
unpleasant to the passengers, but when they come to the end of their journey,
they find rest, plasant and unspeakable.

Many are weary of the narrow way.
But by reason of the unpleasantness of it, many that have gone far in it,
have been weary, and have turned back, and betaken them to the broad way
again, though it be written in the narrow way in capital letters, that ^uery
man may read, This is the way walk in it. This is the way that leads to
Bethel, the house of God: and the broad way leads to ^ethauen, the house of
vanity, and to Betheden, the house of pleasure.

The broad and pleasant way, leads to the house of death.
THis is the way that multitudes travel in, full of company and companions,
which makes the way the more delightful to the carnal minded, and so journey
on in seeming cheerfulness, until they come to their last and final Inn
and perpetual lodging place, Beth-azmaueth, the house of deaths strength,
where they shall be kept as in a close prison, where all disorder, grief,
sorrow, mourning and lamentation shall for ever afflict them.

God will guide them that endeavor to walk in the narrow way, though therein
be many le^s.
Choose thou therefore, and keep on this narrow and unpleasant way, look not
back like Lots wife: and so be turned into a stony heart, go on, be not
afraid of stumbling, thou shall have the light of the supercelestiall Sun to
shine upon thee, and the holy Ghost to guide thee: and therefore resolve thy
self to keep on thy journey, although thou shall meet with diverse dangerous
wild beasts of the world, ready to devour, or flatering Syrenes to allure thee
as thou go, either to turn thee back for fear, or to reclaim thee by
flattery, drunckards, whoremongers, Idolaters, adulterers, bribers, covetous
persons, wanton and profane beasts, whom thou shall find by this highways
side, as harlots to allure thee to follow them and the multitude to the pit of
perdition.

Follow not the multitude though they scorn thee.
BEware thou be not seduced and drawn back by them, let not thy feet follow
their steps, though they flourish and wax rich, and great, and glorious, and
thou be scorned, derided and scoffed at, for being so austere and earnest in
the good way, regard it not: for, it will not be long ere thou shall come to
thy iournies end, the city of the living God, new Jerusalem, where, after thy
tedious journey, thou shall have rest, glory and peace for ever more.

Nothing ought to move us out of the narrow way.
IN the mean time be of good comfort, ponder all thy paths, and order thy
ways aright, and let not the prosperity of them that walk the broad way,
there pleasures, or delights, any whit move thee, to turn thy feet out of the
way of righteousness, truth and obedience.

The right guiding of the feet.
REsort often to the temple of God, be a diligent and an attentive hearer of
the word of God, it shall be a Lantern to thy feet, and a light unto thy
paths, so that thou shall not slide: The lord will keep thy feet from
falling, and guide thee in the way of peace, and happiness, to the works of
mercy, to go to the sick to visit them, to the prisoners to relieve and
comfort them, he will make thee to be, as it were feet to the lame, and eyes
to the blind, as was holy Job.

Seeing we are of our selves corrupt we must seek to be guided by the
Spirit of God.
TO this end, has God especially given thee thy feet to carry thy body, not
to places of iniquity, but where thou may either do good, or receive good.
But trust not thine own wit, or thine own will, for the direction of thy feet
aright, for they are corrupt, and will misguide thee; But ^raue daily the
assistance of the holy Ghost to lead thee: for, as a blind man, though he
have legs and feet to bear him, can he avoid danger in his going without a
guide? And what is every man but blind? And therefore without that spiritual
guide, cannot man but go in danger: pray therefore the Father in his Son to
send that holy Spirit which proceeds from them both (all three persons, but
one God) to teach thee how to guide thy feet in the way of a godly, and holy
conversation, that thou may say with holy Job, My feet have followed the
steps of the Lord, and not declined. And lincke not thy self with those
profane and lewd wretches, that do not only not refrain, but apply their feet
to every evil and licentious way, whom God in the end will bind hand and
foot, and cast into utter darnesse for ever.

The feet of the wicked are fettered with sin.
PRay therefore continually unto the Lord, that he will keep thy feet from
the snares of Satan, and sin, the common high way that such men walk in, as
fear not the Lord. Their feet are fettered, they can go no further than the
chain of their natural inclination will permit them, and that is only to
evil evermore, running as it were with greediness to their own ruin, and
fall at length head and foot into the pit of eternal darkness, whereunto
they were led in the broad way (from whence no counsel could reclaim) by the
Prince of that infernal kingdom, with whom shall be only and evermore
tormented all such as have abused their bodies, their senses, and members, the
house of their souls, in all ungodliness, without repentance, or care to set
and keep them in order, as becomes the elect of God, here in this life.

He that governs his senses, and members of his body rightly is well
prepared, to dye.
COntrariwise, if thou can now so order thy senses, thy hands and feet, and
all the members of thy body, as thou art bound to do, and abuse them not to
the hinderance of a godly life, thou needst not to fear, but that thou art
well prepared to set thy house in order before thou dye: for, the outward good
government of the body, is a good argument that thy heart within thee is in
good order, and thy will and affections not much out of order: and therefore
not amiss in few words to examine the inward estate of thy soul, as thou have
done thine outward body, namely how thy heart stands.

An examination of the heart.
No man knows truly his own heart.
WHen a man goes about to examine even his own heart, he enters into a
Laberinth of difficulties, into a bottomless deep of subtilties, deceites,
and frauds. It is indeed unsearchable; and no man can truly find what is in
his own heart, although a man may think he knows the thoughts, purposes,
and desires, which he concealeth in his heart, and may determine in himself
to put them in execution: And yet when it comes even to the very doing of what
he intended, another conceit crosses it, and turns the first determination
out of doors; and so one thought thrusts out another infinitely: for, the
heart is a store house of variable imaginations, and unstable purposes, for
when a man is most privy to the thoughts of his own heart, (as he thinks)
he is commonly deceived; he may purpose this or that, and deliberate upon the
manner of the performance, and, as it were, assure himself of a happy and
wished end, and yet succeed clean contrary to his intention.

The heart is a closet full of deceitfulness.
THe heart is as a secret closset locked up as it were, and every man thinks
he has his own true key to unlock it, and so no doubt every man seems to
do, when he delivers his mind to another, by word, or writing: But such is
the deceitfulness of the heart that either it ouer-ruleth the tongue that
speaks, or the pen that writes from the meaning of the heart, that he
utters and writes false-hood for truth, or some truth mixed with deceit. The
door of his heart are the lips, and so subtle is the heart, that it cannot
open it self, (by nature) but to evil; for, the heart of it self is corrupt,
above all things: and corrupts every action, both of the body and mind, and
whatsoever proceeds from it, is either evil, or mixed with evil: And
therefore is the wisest natural man ignorant of the evils of his own heart.

The heart pondereth all kinds of wickednesses.
IF a man duly, and thoroughly examine the wickedness of his own heart, and
be not partial, he shall find it inclinable to the most egregious evils that
the most wicked reprobate, that ever lived, committed: yea he shall find
among infinite other grievous sins, motions tending even to murder, nay to
reason, as it were, within himself against the very essence of God, and
against the deity of Christ. There is no thing so wicked and impious, but man's
heart by nature is, or one time or other has been inclined to perpetrate.

Wisdom suspects the thoughts of the heart.
ANd therefore do many (though well grounded in Christianity) suspect every
motion that proceeds from their hearts, fearing to be deceived by the
deceitfulness of them: And therefore endeavor to try them, by the touchstone
of the word, whether they be sound or sinful, which is an argument of a
good heart.

The most godly think other men's hearts, words and works better than their
own.
THe best man is so far from iustifing his own heart to be clean, as
(although other commend his words (which should be the true messengers of the
heart,) and praise his works, that seem worthy of praise) yet he thinks
every man's heart, words and works, better, more clean and more upright than
his, Yet, such is the natural pride and security of many, that they dream
(through the gross corruption that lurkes in their hearts,) that they are very
excellent and innocent creatures, of sound and unpolluted hearts, despising
others in respect of themselves, as the Pharisee did the Publican, and yet in
heart profane and wicked.

Many men deceive themselves, by flattering their own hearts.
THere is no man that can rightly judge his own heart, though he may (as many
do) make a fair outward show, as if his heart were according to his outward
behavior, when yet it is full of hypocrisy, spiteful, Ambitious, full of
vices and unclean desires.

This man persuades himself, that as long as the world does hold him holy and
innocent, how corrupt soever his heart be within, he stands with God as he
does with men. If men justify him, God cannot (nor will) condemn him, a note
of a corrupt heart.

As no man knows his own heart, so much less another man's by his outward
conversation.
BE not deceived, thou that can not truly judge of thine own heart, do
thou think that other men can? Thou will say, by the fruits the tree is
known, thy heart is the tree, and thy outward works the fruit: if then men
see thy good works, they cannot but approve thy heart to be seasoned
accordingly. But think that man sees and judges according to the outward
show only, and that there is one alone that sees and judges the very heart
and reins: and therefore, whether thou judge thine own or other men's hearts,
by thine or their works, think of others, as (of necessity (if thou deal
impartially with thy self) thou shall find in thy self a heart corrupt,
filthy, and inclinable to things thou art ashamed to reueile, and afraid to
commit, and were it not for the shame of the world or for fear of punishment,
thou could find in thy heart to commit them, and think thou that all men
are not of like condition with thee, as touching the natural corruption of
their hearts? Who then can say his heart is clean, though he may seem upright
before men?

Self-love a vice of vices.
IF therefore, thou diligently consider that Vice of all vices, Self-loue,
wherewith every man by nature is infected, and consequently thy self, thou will confess thy heart to be unclean, and that it is far more inclinable
to think and conceive evil than good, and more prone to produce sin than to
embrace sanctity. And yet to think thy self through self-love holy, and thy
heart clean.

Many men covet to cover the filthiness of their hearts by a disguised
conversation.
IT is the common fault of most men, to please themselves, with a conceit, that
if they can speak well, if they can conceal their hidden inclinations and
walk disguised, so as men cannot see, nor perceive the filthy thoughts and
desires that lurcke in their hearts, by their outward actions, they are as
sincere men as any are, though (for the gaining of a little pe^fe in the world)
they will lie, swear and forswear, when the heart (if it could speak) would
accuse them to be liars, to their faces. As if their hearts were truly seen
and their consciences strictly examined they could not but confess.

How then can other men know us according to our inward hearts, when we our
selves suspect them, and for shame seek to cover and conceal the filthiness
of them with the cloak of hypocrisy, to make them seem full of integrity,
being indeed full of impiety?

Our thoughts and purposes of heart ought to be tried by the word, and
commandments of God.
NAy, It may be indeed, that a man may simply think his heart clean, walking
honestly and ciuilly before men, and find no cause of suspicion in himself,
why he should not be thought to be the same (indeed) that he seems to be:
and thus no doubt, do many men flatter themselves, for want, either of true
search of their hearts, or for not trying their thoughts, purposes,
imaginations, and desires, by the word of God. For, there is no man so
senselsse, but he can conceive the most apparent thoughts and purposes of his
own heart, though concealed to others (were he an Atheist) And therefore, if
there be in him any spark of the knowledge of the Word of God (especially, of
the ten Commandments) he may be able, as soon as any purpose of heart
arriseth, to examine the equity or iniquity of it, by the same Word. And as he
finds it allowable, to put it in execution; or forbidden, to abandon it.

The most righteous man has corruption in his heart.
IT is impossible, but that the best man, upon serious examination of the
inclination of his heart, shall find it corrupt, though many through a slender
and slight search, seem to find nothing amiss: Paul knew nothing by
himself, yet did he not (as most men do) justify himself, for, in another
place he cries out against the corruption of his heart ( being an elect vessel
of Christ) saying, That which I should do, I do not: but that I should not
do, that I do.

Many unfelt sins lurcke in the best heart.
WHereby it appears that the best men have many faults, which they themselves
can take no knowledge off, neither observe they them in themselves: And
therefore had all men need to pray as David did Cleanse my heart oh God from my
secret faults. Many sins lie hid in the heart, not observed by him that
harbors them: yet many men flatter (as it were) their hearts, omitting to rip
them up and to try them to the quick: And therefore their hearts flatter them,
and forbear (as they think) to condemn them: But these are sick and feel
it not, their hearts are hardened against the time of a more serious
examination, when their consciences shall witness against them (to their
final condemnation) the corruption of their hearts.

We ought not to be partial in the examination of our hearts.
BE not partial therefore but search thy heart in time, search it to the
bottom, call all things (as near as thou can) what thou have thought,
spoken, or determined, and if thou find by the strict rule of the Law, that it
has bin inclinable to evil, and that thou have committed sin through the
corruption thereof, think that there is more evil lurcking in the same: for,
the taste of one cup of wine, shows what the whole vessel is. And, although
thou know not thoroughly, what is in thy heart, yet by thy thoughts, purposes
and desires* thou shall find whether it be ouer-ruled by nature, or seasoned
with grace: for, if thy heart be inclined to do thine own corrupt will, it
will appear, if thou go on in thy purposes and determinations, without any
stop, or reluctation, thou may justly suspect thy heart to be totally evil.
But if thy purposes, be good and holy, then they will be crossed, for though the
heart be (or ought to be) the seat of the Spirit of God, yet there is a
spiritual infernal power that will covet to possess a part: And he will
oppose every good thought and inclination either to overthrow it altogether, or
to pervert it.

Desire of the heart to keep Gods Laws is an argument of a heart something
well prepared.
But, if thy heart do earnestly desire to keep and observe the Law and
Commandments of God, thou may take it as an assured sign that thy heart
(though it harbor some wandering thoughts) is not altogether so corrupt, as
that no good desires are in it. But think that Christ has begun to
circumcise thi^^ heart to purify and renew it* It is he that mollifieth our
vnrepenting, and hard hearts, by his Spirit; if thy heart be sick and heavy,
through sin, he will ease and comfort it. Moses commands us to circumcise
the foreskinne of our hearts: namely, to cut off all evil thoughts,
concupiscences, fleshly and ungodly desires.

It is God that circumciseth our hearts.
But alas, can nature suppress nature? can corruption subdue corruption? How
then can we circumcise our own hearts? Here is thy comfort, the Lord thy God
will do it for thee, so thou with his grace, add thine endeavor, He will
circumcise thine heart, that thou may love the Lord thy God, with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live.

Christ works after a better and a more sure manner in purifying and
cleansing thine heart, than thy self can do; Thou can not make an hair
black that is white, much less make thine heart clean that is filthy: It is
he only that can change thine heart from evil to good, which when he has
once cleansed, there follows holiness, integrity of heart, and outward
godly couersation, by godly endeavor.

The heart emptied of sin (as we think) to day becomes full again to
morrow, unless God purify it.
But if thou without the help of this blessed Spirit, go about (as it were)
to euacuate and cast out thy known concupiscences and desires of thine own
heart (as many profane men many times endeavor to do) Thou can not but
observe, that what thou do cast out to day, begins again to defile thee to
morrow, for such is the nature of the heart unregenerate, that like a spring of
water now emptied forthwith fills again*

The heart a spring of corruption and sin.
THe heart is a continual spring of corruption, whereout we draw sin: and
if we repent it to day, and seem to feel a kind of release, and pardon of
it, if we continue not constant in keeping it out of our affections and
desires, by faithful prayer (which by nature we cannot do) It will be as
full of impieties to morrow as yesterday it was.

Sin once entertained into the heart hardly cast out again.
IF thou give thine heart but a little to sin, and give sin but the head,
in one seeming small desire, It well afterward make way for it self, and then,
when thou would, thou shall not be able to withstand it, for thy heart by
nature without grace (though it be never so much admonished and instructed, by
the Word of God, to entertain godliness and virtue, though never so much
moved and pricked forward unto piety and obedience toward God) it will be
like Lots wife, look back again to her wonted desires, until it be turned
(as it were) into a stone, that no fear of punishments, nor threats of
torments, shall at last be able to pierce it, to the right reformation of it;
for, as the heart is totally corrupt by nature, so every motion of the heart in
it self tends to corruption. Take heed therefore, lest, at any time, there
be in you an evil heart and unfaithful, to depart from the living God, and
hardened through the des^itfulnesse of sin.

The best heart has some feelings of evil motions*
Sin proceeds from a subtle prompter, and deceives the heart not well
instructed, the heart not regenerate: But the heart whom the Spirit of God has
sanctified, feels in it self, a mere dislike of sundry motions which intrude
themselves as it were, by stealth into it, striving to have the mastry, against
which the regenerate part sets it self, as the Bees against the droanes, to
hurl them out of the hyue of the heart, Nature and Grace can no more mutually
agree and embrace one the other, than Fire and Water, and that is the reason,
that the unregenerate is at more peace than the regenerate heart: for as the
heart by nature ingrosseth all carnal things that may delight it, and is at
peace in it self, having no cross motion to trouble it; So a spiritual and
sanctified heart harbors, or at least endeavors to entertain every good and
godly motion* And therefore as the best heart is in part spiritual and in part
carnal, there arises a spiritual war as it were in a truly regenerate
heart, between the Flesh and the Spirit, which argues the heart to be indeed
more spiritual than carnal: for, if it were totally carnal, there would be
no striving: But in that heart wherein the holy Spirit of God has place there
through the malice of Satan and through natural corruption, will fleshly and
carnal motions, often intrude, either of them striving to be chief Lord of
the heart: for, either of them couets to have all or none. The spirit will
admit no participation with the flesh, But the Flesh yet will be content like
the falsely pretending mother of the child, to have the heart divided, so she
may have her share for her pleasur^s she could afford a share to the Spirit,
but it should be but a small share by the will of the flesh.

Nature and Grace strive in the best heart which of them should rule therein.
FOr, let Grace be never so strong in us, yet will Nature show it self
oftentimes, yea, and seem to be mistress, and commandresse in the heart:
Otherwise how could a righteous man be said to sinn^ seven times a day? in
whom it cannot be denied, but there is Grace above Nature; and that Grace
keeps Nature in some measure under, though with much striving: for sin is of
so imperious a condition, being the daughter of Satan, the prince of pride,
that if it were possible, would bear the whole rule and sway of the heart; and
so it does where Grace is absent; and, though Grace have the mastery, yet there
will rest so many, and so strong rebellions desires in the corrupt part of the
heart as will break forth be it never so strongly guarded with faith and the
fear of God, though they prevail not so much to hurt, as to exercise, even
the most righteous man in resisting them.

An Hypocrite may show himself in outward behavior a good Christian.
HAppy is the man that has a perfect heart, renewed and purged from that
original corruption, which it has by nature, for it makes that true and
essential difference, which distinguishes a sincere Christian from a
counterfeit. An Hypocrite may seem by outward exercise of Religion, and holy
duties, to be a very righteous man; as Cain, who was as forward in his
sacrifice as Abel was. The Pharesee, in his prayer seemed to abound in the
outward practice of fasting, in almes-giuing and paying tithes, yet an
Hypocrite.

An hypocrite may look like a true Christian, have the habit of a Christian,
speak like a Christian, verbally pray like a Christian, and in outward
holiness make show to be a christian, and yet harbor within him, a false,
filthy, and a heart full of corruption and iniquity, which he learneth of his
master the Devil, who can transform himself into an Angel of light.

God loves a clean heart.
BEware therefore, whosoever thou art, that thou show not more forged holiness
without, than thou have sincerity in thy heart, for, God cannot allow of a
counterfeit conversation, He loves a pure and clean heart; if that be well
seasoned, and in good order, the actions will appear by a truly sincere, not
by a counterfeit course of life.

The marks of a pure heart,
IF thou covet to hear the Word preached, if thou hunger and thirst for
righteousness, if thou pray often faithfully and fervently, if thou love the
godly unfeignedly, and desire to do good unto all cheerfully, Surely, thy
heart is well prepared to keep all thy thoughts, imaginations, desires, thy
tongue, and all the senses of thy body in good order, and to set all other
things in order before thou dye. Lastly examine the Affections of thy heart.

To examine how the heart stands principally affected.
AFfection is the highest degree of love, lust, and hatred; and one of these
does commonly possess every heart; which, whosoever does dilligently examine, he
shall be able to judge, whether his heart be right with God, or ouerruled by
Satan. Although the Prophet Jeremy, says that the heart is deceitful and
wicked above all things, who can know it? None, indeed, can know the heart of
another man, nor how it stands affected, but by his outward behavior and
conversation, which he may dissemble to men; but God will examine, and find
out his most inward, evil and ungodly affections, how cunningly soever they be
dissembled, for, he sees not as man sees, man looks upon the outward
appearance, but the Lord beholds the most secret affections of the heart. But
a man that is not partial, and loves not to deceive himself in his own vain
imaginations, by little search may find how and whereunto his own heart is
most affected. And happy is he that finds his heart affected, as were the
Jews at the preaching of John Baptist; By whose eager love and desire of the
Word, even the Kingdom of God suffered violence; And through their violent
affections, they seemed to take it by force: there was such forwardness and
zeal in them to hear the Word, as they used a godly striving to get it, which
godly and violent affection God himself approves.

There is nothing in the world that we ought so to affect and desire as to
hear the word, the Gospel of Christ our Savior preached, whereby we
apprehend such love in him toward us, as cannot but draw our uttermost love
and affection again toward him, in whom we have assurance that our souls
shall be saved in the day of judgment, the end of all happiness.

Every man commonly affects his own Country best, and they are but two,
Heaven and Earth; and as we stand affected to either of these, we shall find
and feel how we are again affected of them. To affect them both no man can,
and to be affected of both is impossible. He that hates the light cannot but
affect darkness, and he that imbraceth this world and the things in it
cannot truly affect heaven, and heavenly things, no man can serve two masters,
God and Mammon.

The men affecting this world, are in part known by the things they are
observed to love and seek in this world. They that set their affections upon
this worlds honors, and seek ambitiosly (as Absalom did to the dethroning of
his father) to reign as king, They that affect and hunt after pleasures to
fulfill their beastly lusts, the drunkard, that rises early to follow strong
drink, the whoremaster, the covetous person, the envious, the proud, cannot
these know themselves, and be known of others, to affect the world and the
lusts of the flesh, more then heaven and the salvation of their own souls?

Such are the infinite vanities that lurk in men's hearts, that steal away
their affections from God and godliness, As where one truly affects the best
things, many affect those things, wherein there is not only no profit, but
deadly danger: as some their neighbors wives, as David; some their neighbors
lands, as Achab; some the beauty of women, as Sichem; some pride, popularitie
and vain glory, as Herod; some gurmondy, as the Glutton in the Gospel; some
the increase of riches and revenues, as the rich man mentioned by Christ, and
common usurers; some through the force of their irresistable affection, to have
their lust of Women, being prevented, have not only become distracted, and
crased in their brains, but (pricked on by the instigation of Satan (have
been their own hangmen and executioners; unfit to name any, though many such
have been of late memory, Nay, some (which is strange to consider, both men
and women) have fallen so far in love, with the beauty and feature of their
own Persons, as they have diued so deep into conceit of their own
excellency, as has carried them to more frenzy, wherein many have been
known to have perished desperately.

Some again are partial in their affections toward their children, seeming
to affect one entirely, and to disrespect another merely, wherein there may
be cause in regard of Virtue or Vice, but if it proceed only of carnal
respects, it is reprouable: Jsaac loved Esau, more than he loved Jacob; Joseph
affected Manasses, above Ephraim; Abraham affected his son Jsmael, so
entirely, as he would have preferred him before his promised seed Isaac, O
that Ismael might live in thy sight.

Thus does blind affection often encounter the light, even of divine reason.
And yet we see strongest carnal affections variable: what a man affects to
day, he loatheth tomorrow; what he tenderly embraces now, he rejects within
a while. The affection of Ammon toward his sister Thamer, was most hot and
violent, And yet when his filthy lust was fulfilled he hated her far more than
he seemed to love her before.

It is the nature of the corrupt affections of the heart, to alter and turn as
the wind. How many proud men and women have we seen, observed, or heard off,
that have set their affections so egerly upon new fashions, garments, women
especially, who have been stricken either, by the suggestions of Satan, laying
their pride before the eyes of their weak consciences, to drive them to
despair, or in the mercy of God, who has called them to reformation, have to
day worn their, proudest attire, and that in great conceited glory, that the
next day have espec^ally, cast them all into the fire and consumed them?

The like change and alteration of affections falls out often between dearest
affectionate friends, sworn brothers (but) in evil, of whom one has been the
butcher of the other. How dearly do many times men and their wives affect one
the other? one seems the better to see the other, their loves seem so
mutually entire as there were no possibility that ever a word should pass
amiss, or in displeasure between them, and yet within a while, they have
fallen together like wool-cards, tongues* fists and nails have walked, where
before sweetest words seemed not sweet enough.

The like inconstancy may be observed daily amongst our selves in men so hot
in religion, and following the word, as they seem to affect nothing else, and
sorrow much if they hear but one Sermon in a day, were it possible they would
hear ten, such appearance has their zeal: yet when the world offers them
some extraordinary commodity or advancement, they will with Demas, relinquish
Paul's preaching and embrace the world. The seed of the word sown in their
hearts, falls among thorns that choke it.

There is no affection truly constant, that has its beginning from any of the
outward senses, because, their objects be in themselves inconstant; What sees
the eye? What hears the ear? What pleases the taste? What outward thing
affects the mind, But things vanishing and variable? And therefore as the
object begins to alter, so does the affection.

But he that affects Christ, he that above all things, truly desires the
sincere milk of the Word, He that thinks nothing so dear, nothing so
precious, nothing so delightful, nothing so commodious, as the assurance of
his glory to come, He will affect nothing in comparison of it. He will
disaffect Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Lands and Life it self, in regard of
it. On this he thinks and meditates day and night, here is his treasury, and
upon it he sets his whole affection. He longs to enjoy it, as a bride her
bridegroom: He never thinks his affection perfect enough, he strives by
hearing, reading, meditating on the Word, to inflame his affection more and
more; and stands in continual fear, lest some inferior delight should work
the least extenuation of it. And therefore when he finds any thing delighting
any of his outward senses, he presently suspects it, checks it, and casts it
off, as an infected garment; knowing, that as long as that hangs about him, it
presses down his dear affection of things above (namely of Christ, the
anchor, and finisher of his faith) to unprofitable things below.

The heart thus affected, is even here ravished as it were with the love of
Heaven and heavenly things; rejecting all transitory vanities. The purchase of
lands, the trial of Oxen, nor the marrying of a wife, shall not hinder or
diminish this his heavenly affection.

What may be the reason then, why most men affect the inferior, fickle, and
vanishing things that lead to destruction, and seek not nor delight in
heavenly, the end whereof is glory? Surely no other reason, but that which lead
Eve to affect the Apple, because it was fair and beautiful to her eye, and
pleasing to her taste, which made her quite forget the happy estate wherein she
was before she tasted it.

The hearts of carnal men are carried away, and moved (for want of the
knowledge of the Word of Grace) to affect as Eve did, things fair to the eye,
sweet to the taste, pleasing to the ^are, and profitable to the purse, and all
but for vainglory among worldly men, which makes them to forget, not only
what they were but (which is more dangerous) what they shall be; and yet
rather than they will give over these worldly trifles, yea, (in respect of good
things indeed,) which are heavenly) being more base than dung) they will
adventure the loss of heaven, and run headlong to hell.

Some may say, if it be not lawful for men here to affect earthy things but to
the indangering of the loss of heaven, men's cases are hard. It is not denied,
but, as it is permitted to men, to enjoy the necessary use of many earthly
things, so it is lawful also moderately to affect one pleasing or profitable
thing above or before another; provided, that they carry not the whole heart
with them, as the word affection may import, which belongs only to GOD, whom
we ought to love with our whole hearts, which is that uttermost extent of
affection, due to none in the highest degree but to God and his Christ.

What profit can thou reap, by thy so loving and affecting things here
below? which above all other ought to be thy wife, that lies in thy bosom*
thy children who are of thine own flesh and blood, thy neighbors as thou art
commanded, and thy fellow members of Christ: These are thy nearest and dearest,
yet ought not these so far possess thy heart, as if thou lose any of them,
thou should grudge at him that gave them, as many weak men and women do,
as though their children, husband, or wife, were given either to other in
perpetuity: And when they dye, to show their affection through immoderate
grief and sorrow, to be more strongly knit unto these mortal creatures (that
are not theirs but lent them) then to God himself.

This is no virtue but a vice of the heart, neither can it be truly called
natural affection, though it proceed of nature, not of grace, for even
natural affection, ought to have this limitation, namely to extend no further
than natural life, for when the life of him we do affect is ended, natural
affection should cease.

David, no doubt, did entirely affect his son, whom he had by Barsheba, and
showed the same affection toward him while he was sick and alive, but as
soon as the child was dead, he cast off his affection and sorrow, and left
mourning for him that he so entirely loved when he was alive.

Such affections therefore, as are set upon the transitory and uncertain
things of this life, may be truly termed foolish if they pass the bounds of
divine reason, for they only savor of the corruption of nature, and cannot
return any sollid comfort to the heart of the affectionate.

Where affection is grounded only upon carnal opinion without true and
illuminate judgment it is like fire in flax, soon inkindled, and soon
extinct, soon hot, and as soon cold: And no other foundation have those
affections that are set upon carnal and vanishing things.

A man may (as is often observed) affect, and hate (as it were in one breath)
things variable and interchangeable, for as all natural things are inconstant,
so is man's heart. Saul seemed so highly to affect David, as he was content to
give him his daughter in marriage; yet how soon was his love turned to deadly
hatred? It was not grounded upon that love that proceeds from the Spirit of
God. But Ionathans love and affection to David was grounded upon a more divine
and settled opinion, he saw that God was with David; And upon this ground,
whosoever foundeth his affection toward any man, namely as he finds him to
be a man beloved of God, his affection is approved of God.

O that we could rectify our love in this point, and learn to affect the
best things; and not to set our affections on things of the world, which when
we have them they steed us nothing beyond necessity, how superfluous soever
they be. And when we seem to have them in best assurance either they leave
us, before the time, or we must leave them* in time.

Let us make choice therefore as Mary did, of the better part, namely to affect
things permanent which are above, and they most excellent. Then need we not to
fear; be we poor, or rich, high or low, noble or base, we shall be able to
set our houses both domestic, and of our souls, in such complete order, as
shall witness our godly care (in our lives) when we are dead.

A preparatiue to Prayer.
LEt the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be now and always
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my redeemer.

Let my prayer come before thee as Incense, and let the lifting up of my hands
be as an Evening sacrifice, and like a morning obligation, a sweet smelling
savor in thy nostrils. Hear my prayers and answer me graciously for Jesus
Christ his sake, Amen.

A Prayer for Sunday Morning.
O Lord God Almighty, everliving and euer-louing Father in thy well-beloued
son Jesus Christ; who art father of all, and rich unto all that call upon thy
name in truth and sincerity, to thee I call and cry, together with thy form,
and holy spirit, three distinct persons, in the unity of essence: who having
made all things of nothing, sustainest them in thy good providence, by the word
of thy power, that thy name by all men, and by all means might be glorified.
Lord I acknowledge this day to be thine, as consecrated and set a part for thy
worship and service, and to be observed not only as a holy day, but a glorious
day unto thee, wherein I ought to pay my vows unto thee, present my person and
my prayers before thee, hear thy word, and meditate upon the same, to thy
glory and mine own good. To this end remove far from me all wandering
thoughts, and worldly affections, and work in me a desire of studying thy Law
and of walking in the truth, that thy word may not be unto me the savor of
death unto death, but of life unto life.

I present not these my supplications trusting to my own righteousness, but
in thy manifold mercies, grant me therefore I beseech thee gracious audience,
and merciful accepta^ce, even for my redeemers and sanctifiers sake; And (as
duty obliges me) principally, and above all other things, and primarily, in
the first place, and before all other things, I extol thine infinite
goodness, together with thine eternal wisdom and truth, that thou have
protected me all this night past, and made me to rest and sleep so quietly
under the shadow of thy wings. And I beseech thee, from the bottom of mine
heart to protect me this day with thy mighty hand from all dangers both of body
and soul: give thine holy Angels charge over me, to guide me in all my ways,
to keep me from evils both bodily and ghostly, that keeping my faith and a
good conscience, I may have thy witness and testimony within my self, that
thou have not ordained me to wrath, but to obtain eternal life and salvation.
To this end, remove far from me the offenses of this present evil world;
mortify and kill in me the concupiscense of the flesh, and crucify all carnal
lusts and affections, that vice being supplanted, virtue and grace may be
established, live and grow in me. Let not since have dominion over me, reign
and bear rule in my mortal body, to ouer-sway my soul and incline it unto
evils, but let thy love possess my soul, that grace may incite and stir up
the same unto all holy duties which may be so pleasing unto thy majesty, as
may procure thy favorable kindness, blessing, and protection. Give me a
contrite heart, to bewail my former life, and let me find comfort in thy
mercy for the remission of my sins. Sanctify me O blessed and holy trinity
this holy day with thine especial grace, that I may honor thee, as a Creator;
love thee, as a redeemer; and expect thee as a Savior; that I may have a
modest carriage in my behavior, true devotion in my prayers, and reverent
attention in thy presence, to hear thy word. Unlock the cares of my body that
I may hear those things which thou shall teach me, that hearing, I may
understand them; understanding, I may remember them; remembering, I may practice
them, to adorn that profession which I have made in thy name, and confirm me
in the faith of thy son Jesus Christ, whereto I was baptized. Raise me O
Father by the power of my saviors resurrection from sin and iniquity, and
give me spiritual rest, peace of conscience, joy in the holy ghost, and
fellowship in the communion of Saints, that when I shall leave this world, I
may keep an everlasting Sabbath with thee in the kingdom of heaven. Behold O
Lord I knock at the door of thy mercy withal the power of my soul, and
strength of my mind, for all these graces and favors, beseeching thee to
continue unto me the right use of the same, that thy spirit may witness unto
my spirit that I am thy son, and shall be heir of thy kingdom of glory,
and that I may be partaker of the inheritance with thy Saints in light, where
are pleasures that last for evermore. Grant this O Father for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Sunday Noone.
O Lord my God, great in majesty, and infinite in mercy; wonderful in thy
goodness unto thy Church and children, who have commanded me to make prayers
and supplications for those that shall enter into the ministry, and stand
before thee to wait at thine Altar; the har^est being great and the painful
and conscionable laborers but few; I beseech thee that thou would be
pleased to send able ministers into thy Church, and set such over particular
congregati^ns as like John the Baptist, may be burning lights, burning, as
being zealous in feruency; and lights also as being conspicuous and eminent for
charity, sanctity, and all holy graces of thy spirit. Thy Vrim and Thummim
being on them as upon thy holy ones, let them be sound for doctrine, and holy
for life and conversation; preaching, let them practice, and by practice let
them preach and teach the things which concern thy kingdom. Open and let open
unto them the door of utterance, that they may teach thy word freely and
boldly. Take away all differences and contentions from amongst them, make them
examples to those that believe, in soundness of doctrine, and integrity of
conversation. And because the rule of my life depends upon thy word in their
mouths, bless them with all graces fit for their calling, that I may give
thanks unto thee for them, finding thy blessing upon me through their labors,
and may praise thy name for evermore, Amen.

A Prayer for Sunday Night.
O Everlasting and euerlouing Father, merciful Lord God, creator, guider and
preserver of all men and all things, who creating man after th^ne Image, in
wisdom, knowledge, and understanding, enriching him with all gracious
abilities, helps, and f^rtherances, for the working out of his own salvation
with fear and trembling; give me a reverence of thy majesty, and a fear of
thy most holy name which is so dreadful and terrible, that being by thy grace
forewarned, I may fly from thy wrath to come, and at this present come before
thee in all confidence of thy goodness, to implore thy grace, and the
manifestation of thy favor. Look down from heaven, thine holy habitation,
and behold with the eye of thy love and tender compassion, me, poor soul,
that distrusting mine own righteousness, go out of my self, calling upon
thee in the words of the Publican, and saying: O God be merciful to me a
sinner. Write not bitter things against me, neither suffer me to possess the
sins of my youth. Forgive and forget all my transgressions, and cast mine
iniquities as far from thy presence, as is the east from the west. And pardon
good Lord, I humbly beseech thee, the faults and frailties which have escaped
this day in the sanctifying of thy Sabbath, whether they be sins of
omission, or commission; wash them all away in the blood of thy Son,
sanctify me by the Word thy word of truth, that this day has sounded in my
ears; grant that like good seed sown in good ground, it may take root
downward, and bring forth fruit upwards to the glory of thy great name, the
praise of thy grace, and credit of the Gospel. O let thy word be ever in my
mind, to meditate of it; in my mouth, to speak of it; and in my life and
conversation, to practice it. By it work in my heart Faith, Hope, Charity, and
al other supernatural graces, which accompany salvation: open mine eyes, that
I may see thy Law; and incline mine heart, that I may love the truth; and
loving the same, may yield obe^ience unto it; doing thy will on earth, or at
least endeavoring to do it, as the Angels in heaven; willingly, without
murmuring; speedily, without delaying; constantly, without ceas^ng; and
universally, without omitting what thou command and commendest in thy word.
So shall I not be distracted with foolish fears, nor despair of thy mercy,
but ever hope and trust in thee, and find grace to help me at a time of
need. Grant this, O Father, for thy Christ, my Jesus, thy Son, my Saviors
sake, who ever lives and reigns with thee, one true, immortal, and
everlasting God: to whom with thy blessed Spirit, and thee, O holy and heavenly
Father, be ascribed of me and all thine, all honor, and glory, world without
end. Amen.

Monday A morning Prayer.
O God, my God, and Father of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, whom no man
knows but by thine especial gift; grant, that to the rest of thine exceeding
benefits toward me, this which is the greatest that can be bestowed upon
mankind, may be added also; namely, that as thou have raised up my body from
sound and sweet sleep, the image of a corporal death; so also thou would
deliver my mind and affections from the sleep of sin, and from the
darkness of this world, and after death restore the same body to life, as
well as thou have called it from natural sleep. And seeing thou have brought
me to the beginning of this day, which is the first day of the week be thou
(as this night past, and ever heretofore) present with me, and president in me.
Let thy holy Spirit be my counselor and instructor, my God and my guide to
lead me into all truth. Help me by the assistance of the same Spirit to watch
over my thoughts, words, and works, that I may neither think, speak, nor do any
thing which is not warranted by thy word, but that setting thee and thy law
before my eyes, I may come to the knowledge of thy will, in all reverence and
humility of soul submit my self thereunto, that ordering my life and
conversation thereby, and walking according to this rule, peace may be upon me
as upon the Israel of God. Let me neither oppress, nor defraud my brother in
bargaining, buying, and selling, false weights, and balances, or the like
dishonest means, but guide me so by thy grace, that my conscience may ever
cheer me up through a delightful apprehension of thy blessefull favor. To
this end order thou my paths, and establish my goings in the way of peace,
grace and salvation. Cause thou me to walk before thee and be upright; make
me to provide things honest before thee and men, behave my self as in thy
sight, and do unto others, as I would be dealt withal my self. Let no sin,
inordinate lust, or unruly passion have dominion over me, but help thou me to
lead captivity captive, to kill and crucify my lusts and sinful affections,
and wage war with my corruptions, until through Christ, which strengthens
me, I shall prove more then conqueror. Grant this unto me for Jesus Christ
his sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Monday night.
O Lord my God, and gracious Father in Jesus Christ, I do here in all humility
prostrate and cast down my self before the footstool of thy throne of
grace, to offer unto thee this mine evening sacrifice of prayer, praise, and
thanksgiving, who did offer up thy Son upon the cross to be a
propitiation and meritorious sacrifice for the sins of the world. Lord hear
me, and help me, and be merciful unto me: my sins are great, but thy
mercies are greater: my trespasses finite, but thy compassions infinite, and
never fail; though I fail of my duty toward thee, yet thou art good and
gracious unto such as seek thy face and favor, humbling themselves, and
pouring out their souls before thee. Wherefore I humbly beseech thee that as
the heavens are higher then the earth, so thou would extend thy mercy beyond
my deserts. Indue me with faith, sanctify me with all other graces of thy
Spirit, that appearing in thine Image, thou may know me and acknowledge me
for thine owne-Lord hear my prayers, and let my praises be acceptable in thine
eyes. For unto thee, O Lord, upon the altar of mine heart do I offer up all
possible praise, and thanksgiving for all thy blessings both spiritual and
temporal, heavenly and earthly, in great abundance co^fer^ed upon me: and
above all, for Jesus Christ the fountain of them all, by whom I have
redemption through his blood, and access through his life. I thank thee
likewise for the sweet influence of thy gracious and well guiding holy Spirit,
for the manifestation of thy self and sacred will, by thy word read and
preached, for the confirmation and strengthening of my faith, by those sacred
signs, and pledges of thy love which thou exhibitest and give to me, and
unto every believing soul in the Sacraments. I thank thee for my life,
liberty, food, and raiment, health, wealth, peace, and plenty, which thou in
much mercy have afforded unto me from time to time; for keeping me now and
ever from sudden death, and sundry dangers whereinto I might have fallen, by
reason of my manifold sins. And I beseech thee to continue this thy
providence over me, (and mine, and thy whole church) as thou have hitherto
been a S^nne to comfort me, so be thou now a shield to protect me: keep me
in soul and body, goods and good name: vouchsafe me this night peace unto my
soul, rest and quietness to my body, that therein being refreshed, I may be
cheared up in my mind, and made the more prompt and ready to do thee laudable
service the day following, and all the days of my life, and that for Christ
Jesus sake, the Son of thy love, Amen.

Tuesday A Morning Prayer.
MOst gracious God and merciful Father, thou that art glorious in power and
holiness, I thy poor and miserable creature being but dust and ashes, do
here humbly present my self, soul, and body before the throne of thy majesty*
confessing and acknowledging from the bottom of my heart that I am a most vile
sinner, conceived in sin and borne in iniquity, and am by nature backward
unto that which is good, and prone unto all manner of evil. By means of this
origina^l corruption, drawn from the loins of my first parents, mine
understanding is full of all blindness and darkness, my memory of
forgetfulness, my will of perverseness, mine affections of disorderlinesse, my
heart of hardness: yea there is within me a distemperature of all parts, so
that from the crown of the head unto the soul of the foot there is no
soundness within me; wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me
from my sins: enrich my barren heart with the sanctifying graces of thy
spirit, that growing in knowledge, fructifying in faith, love, charity, and
abounding with all other holy virtues and heavenly qualities, I may be washed,
justified, and sanctified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of
my God; and have the witness and evidence within my self, that there remains
no condemnation to me, being in Christ Jesus, walking not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit. Lord I confess, I am utterly lost, and have no hope of
salvation left unto me, having walked after the vanity of my mind, and lived in all lust and lewdnes, riot and reuelling, uncleanness and sinfulnes; so that if
thou should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide
it? Enter not therefore into Judgment with (...) servant, for in thy sight
shall no flesh living be iustistified. Though my sins have magnified
themselves in infinite length, breadth, depth, and height, yet let thy mercy
(which passes all understanding) far exceed them. And howsoever, by reason
of my sins, I have justly deserved to be not only deprived of thy blessings,
but for ever deserted, and forsaken, yet for his sake in whom thou art well
pleased, cast me not away from thy presence of grace here, or glory hereafter,
but by the one lead me to the other, by holiness bring me to happiness.
Behold, O Lord, how I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid, O grant
me grace, that I may live with thee for ever. Thou have redeemed me, oh let me
not fall into captivity and bondage unto sin and Satan, because I wear thy
cognizance and livery, but so confirm and strengthen me, that both in life and
death, I may continue thine, that I may never draw back unto perdition, or
forsake thee the everliving God, or renounce my Christ, who has the words of
eternal life, yea who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; but that both in
prosperity and adversity abiding by thee, I may live in thy fear, dye in thy
favor, rest in thy peace, rise in thy power, and reign with thee in thy
glory. Amen.

Tuesday An Evening Prayer.
O Lord God everlasting, and full of pity, I am a sinner, yet thy servant, not
having transgressed through wickedness, but much weakness and infirmity; spare
me therefore (good Lord) according to thy usual dealing with those which in
prayer have had recourse unto thee, and according to thine old unchangeable
nature of thy kindness and long suffering. Thou might have taken me away in
my sins, but thou have given me space of amendment, and grace to return unto
thee, to seek thee whilst thou may be found, and call upon thee whilst thou
art near. O Lord, be not far from me, but draw near unto my soul, make
haste to deliver me and help me. Nay Lord, thou art ever with, and never
failest those who seek after thee, and call upon thee with words of devotion
and contrition; to such thou art a present help in trouble, their shield and
buckler, their rock and strong hold, their castle and fortress, the horn
also of their salvation. Instantly do I knock at the gate of thy mercy, Lord
open unto me and receive me to thy protection this night, as thou have
safe-garded and guided me this day past, so keep me now and ever, because I
trust in thee. Lord preserve me in health, wealth, and godliness (if it be
thy gracious pleasure) vo^chsafe me peace of conscience and joy in the holy
Ghost, guide me here by thy counsel, and after that receive me to glory. And
now seeing thou have brought the night upon me wherein thou have ordained man
to take his rest, keep me, O Lord, as the apple of thine eye, save and defend
me from all annoyances, fond dreams, strong fantasies, and delusions: Cause
thine Angels to pitch their tents round about me, and keep watch over my
soul and body, that I may not (if it be possible) sin in either word or
deed, but may persist and go forward in mine innocence and integrity, until
the appearing of my Lord and Savior unto judgment.

Good Lord deliver me from sudden death, fears and affrightments,
casualties by fire, water, or tempestuous weather, disturbance by thieves, or
any other danger whatsoever. Let my lying down in the bed, put me in mind of
my resting in the grave, and my rising from thence, of my resurrection, that
both in life and death I may continue thine, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Wednesday A Morning Prayer.
O Eternal and all-seeing God, who art of infinite majesty, look down from
heaven, the habitation of thy holiness, upon me thy poor and unworthy
servant, lying groueling, and groaning under my sinful misery. Thou art a God
of power, and can relieve me; of goodness, and wilt in thy good time
mercifully help me. Unto thee therefore, upon the bended knee of my soul do
I come, humbly beseeching thee to cure my sinful corruptions, and by that
blood which my blessed Savior (out of his gashy wounds) did shed for me, to
wash away my sinful staynes. O Lord, the fountain of thy mercy, can never be
drawn dry, nor the merits of my blessed Savior emptied: O therefore bathe my
soul in them, that being sanctified and justified, I may appear in thy sight
more pure and white then the snow in Salmon.

And because it is a pleasant thing unto thee to give thanks, I bless thy name
for keeping me this night past, and bringing of me to the beginning of this
day. Defend me gracious father in the same: let thy eyes always attend upon
me, prosper, preserve, cheer up and cherish, guide and govern, instruct and
direct me in all my studies, labors, actions, employments, and duties of my
calling, that I may spend and employ this day, and the remainder of my life
according to thy blessed will, setting thee always before mine eyes, and living
in thy fear, ever working that which may be found acceptable in thy sight, to
the glory of thy most holy name, the peace of my conscience, and the salvation
of my own soul, and the edification (by my good example) of all those that
attend and depend upon me. To this end be thou (O Lord) my God and my guide,
my protector, and defender: keep me unspotted of the world, teach me to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, toward my self;
righteously toward my neighbor, and piously toward thee my God; repenting me
of my sins, and serving thee in holiness and righteousness all my days,
that in life thou may be my God, in death my deliverer, after death my
eternal rewarder. Amen.

Wednesday An Evening Prayer.
O Most glorious and gracious God, who ouerflowest in thy bountiful goodness
unto the sons and daughters of men, that endeavor to serve thee and glorify
thy name. I do here at this time with that good Samaritane return to give
thee thanks for all thy merciful blessings bestowed upon my soul and body, in
things spiritual and temporal; for mine election, before all time; my
creation, in the beginning of time; my redemption, in the fullness of time; my
justification, by faith in Christ; for my sanctification begun, and hope of
eternal glory to be revealed. I praise and glorify thee most holy father,
for preserving me hitherto, for prospering me this day past in my vocation and
calling, and for that thou have yet spared me, and given me liberty and a
gracious opportunity once more to invoke thy holy name. O Lord I acknowledge
and confess that thou might have taken me away in the midst of my
sins, and in the very act of committing of them, but thou have dealt more
mercifully with me; continue good Lord, this thy mercy and gracious favor
toward me this night, and let thy blessing rest upon me, keep me from fear
and danger, and from all noisome dreams, and from all other hindrances of
sweet repose, and comfortable rest, which thou have appointed for the
recreating and refreshing of mankind. But because sin is that which may
withold good things from me, and deny thy gracious blessing of protection,
therefore I most humbly and heartily entreat thee for Jesus Christ his sake to
seal unto me a free pardon of all my sins, of what nature or quality so ever
they be, whether they be sins of omission, or commission, of knowledge, or
ignorance, of weakness, or wilfulness; O Lord deal not with me according
to the magnitude and multitude of them, but for thine infinite mercies, and
sons merits speak peace unto my soul, assuring me of thy gracious pardon and
reconciliation in Jesus Christ. Add them not unto my account, but blot them
out of thy book of remembrance, and cast them out of thy sight into the
bottom of the sea, that they may never rise in this life to shame me, nor in
the life to come to condemn me; work in me an unfeigned sorrow for sin,
which may occasion my repentance unto salvation, never to be repented of.

Make me to bewail my sins committed, and give me grace never again to
commit my sins bewailed, but proceed from one degree of holiness unto
another, from faith to faith, grace to grace, until I appear before thee, the
God of Gods in Sion. Amen.

Thursday A Morning Prayer.
O Lord God, great and glorious, which inhabitest in the highest heavens, and
dwell in that light which no mortal man can approach unto, yet beholdest in
much mercy and compassion the sons and daughters of men, not only lightning
every one that comes into the world, but making the outgoings of the morning
to be full of glory, causing the sun to shine upon the just and unjust,
mercifully driving away the darkness of the night and shadow of death, I
praise thy holy Name, and thank thee most humbly that thou have vouchsafed me
to pass this night in comfortable sleep, and to be brought again safe and
sound unto this morning light. Now I beseech thee by the holy incarnation and
blessed nativity of thy Son Jesus Christ, the thrice happy day star that
appeared to the world, let thy mercy this day rest upon me, and let the bright
beams of thy light shine into mine heart, that I be not transported either
through the corruption of my nature, or power of darkness, to spend this day
after mine own mind and pleasure, but that I may carefully follow the
heavenly light of thy word, to perform thy holy will, willingly, without
murmuring; speedily, without delaying; constantly, without ceasing; and
universally without omitting of that which thou commendest unto me in thy word.
Increase in me, O Lord, the gift of Faith and Hope, that I may believe in thee,
and trust to thy merciful promises made unto me in Jesus Christ, and labor to
find in my soul those graces to which thou have annexed the promises; and
grant that neither by mine own negligence, nor the infirmity of the flesh, nor
the grieuousnesse of temptation, I be drawn or driven away from a sure
confidence of thy gracious acceptance with thee; in the merit of his sacred
blood dispell these mists and clouds of my sinful life, which blemish my soul
and darken mine understanding; wash away all my pollutions and stains in the
blood of his passion, that I may be acknowledged for one of thine when I come
unto thee in my need: give me a will to work truly and daily in my vocation,
and to order my skill by the rule of thy wisdom that I be not unfruitful.

Bless my body and soul that no evil or harm come unto them, and keep my
memory and senses that they pass not the limits of reason and understanding
wherewith thou have endewed me. O Lord, lighten my mind to look upon good
things only, inflame my heart with the love of them, and conduct me with thy
grace, that as thou have awaked my body from sleep, so my soul may daily be
raised from sin and soul, and body, and spirit may be renewed in righteousness
to serve thee the living God, to the praise and glory of thy great Name, the
credit of the Gospel of grace, and finally to the salvation of my poor soul
in the day of the glorious appearing of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Thursday An Evening Prayer.
O Lord God, my most loving and merciful Father, great in mercy, and constant
in truth, I do acknowledge my bounden duty of thankefullnes unto thee, for thy
manifold graces and benefits imparted unto me; and although I be unable to
recount them, and far more unworthy to be partaker of them, nevertheless in
full assurance and confidence of thy love to me in Jesus Christ, I presume to
come unto thee, and now again commit into thy hands this night my soul and
body, withal my senses and faculties, thoughts and affections, words and
deeds, my heart and soul, and all that is within me and without me, my Faith
and the continuance of the same, beseeching thee to keep me and them day and
night blameles and undefiled against the day of thy coming. O Lord, pardon and
forgive me all the sins which I have either wretchedly effected, o^ wickedly
imagined against thine honor, and the good of my neighbor. Lay not the faults
and frailties of my younger years unto my charge, forget them Lord, and
forgive them, and for the better confirmation of thy gracious pardon, I humbly
entreat thee, O Lord, to annex unto thy grant the power of thy grace to attend
upon me, that I may not do mine own will but thine; and eschewing evil and
doing good, strike mine heart with thy fear, O Lord, that in fearing thee, I
may labor to escape those things which thou threatnest, and give me the
comfort of thy saluatition, that in loving thee I may be thought worthy to
obtain those things which thou promisest. Be favorable unto me, O Lord, that
I may this night quietly take my rest under the shadow of thy wings void of
all fear, spiritual darkness, dangers, bodily or ghostly, final despair
and the like; and when the dark end of this mortal life (like the shutting in
of this day) shall come, grant me, O Lord, a watchful heart willingly
disposed, and thereby enabled with thy grace, to abandon these transitory
nights and days, and depart hence in the peace of a good conscience into thine
everlasting rest through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior; In whose name and
words I conclude these my imperfect prayers, saying as he himself has taught
me in the Lords prayer, Our Father, etc.

Friday A Morning Prayer.
O Holy Lord God, maker and governor of all things both in heaven above, and
the earth beneath, unto thee do I come with a broken and contrite heart,
sorrowing for my sins, seeking to find comfort at thy hands. Thou, O Lord, my
God, know my grief, mine anxiety and care, oh let me feel and find thy
comforts to refresh my soul, and rejoice my heart. Be with me this day in all
my worldly business and affairs, and let thy grace and holy Spirit, evermore
defend me and preserve my innocence and integrity, that I may be known, and
acknowledged for thine own at the last day.

I thank thee gracious Father for keeping me this night past, and for that
thou have safely brought me to see the glistering light of the day, O Lord,
stir me up, that I may express my thankfulness by my serviceable obedience:
preserve and keep me from sin, and all annoyances of both soul and body.
Make me this day as abstinent from flesh prohibited and forbidden by the
Church, so from all filthiness of both soul and Spirit, that perfecting my
beginnings of holiness in the fear of God, I may be assured of an
inheritance with the Saints in light.

Strengthen me against the vanities of the world, the lusts of the flesh, and
the pride of life, and renew whatsoever is decayed in me through the malice of
Satan, or mine own corruptions, and that approving what is thy good and
acceptable will, I may endeavor to do the same, and so work out my own
salvation with fear and trembling.

Give me grace to spend this day, and the remainder of my days in all peace
and purity, sanctity and sobriety, to thy glory, the good example of others,
and finally the salvation of my own soul, for Jesus Christ his sake, the Son
of thy love, to whom with thee O Father, and thy holy Spirit, one God in unity,
and three persons in trinity, be ascribed of me and thy whole Church, all
honor and glory, world without end, Amen.

Friday An Evening Prayer.
Merciful Lord God, and my gracious Father in Jesus Christ, I am thy servant
and the son of thy handmaid, O leave me not nor forsake me, but ever be
thou my God and my guide, lead me into all truth, and in the end let me see
thy salvation. Wash away all my sins in the blood of thy Son, sanctify my
nature, abolish my corruptions, guide me here by thy council, and after that
receive me to glory. Keep me now and ever, send me this night quiet rest,
and grant that lying down to sleep, I may rise again in thy peace, walk in
thy fear, the day following, and for ever glorify thee. Infuse into me O
Lord, the Spirit of sweet consolation, and although my sleep be a death, and
my bed as the grave, yet suffer me not to perish suddenly or unprepared, but
watch over me for good, guide me now and evermore, let no affrightments fall
upon me, keep me from fire, storms, tempests, thieves, sudden death, and
danger, and be unto me a gracious protector and director. Cause thine Angels to
pitch their tents round about me, my house and habitation. Remember thy Church,
and every member thereof, to preserve and keep it, especially the poor
afflicted protestants in all parts beyond the seas and at home in our own
land; send them help from thy holy place, and evermore mightily defend them;
Be unto them a sun and a shield, a sun to comfort, and a shield to safeguard
and protect them in all assaults, dangers and difficulties, trialls,
temptations, and tribulations; Put an end and period unto all their griefs and
afflictions, and in thy good time vouchsafe them a happy deliverance out of all
their troubles, for thou never failest in thy compassions toward such as are
thine, as fear thy name, walking before thee and laboring to be upright. Lord
send comfort unto them, and lift up the light of thy gracious countenance upon
them. And Lord receive them and me, and all that belong unto me this night and
ever, unto thy gracious protection through the mediation of Jesus Christ: In
whose name and words I finish these my imperfect prayers, and meditations
saying, as he himself has taught me in the Gospel, etc. Our Father which
art, etc.

Saturday A Morning Prayer.
O Lord most great and gracious loving Father in Jesus Christ, sanctify I
humbly beseech thee this day unto me, and my self now and ever unto thy
service. And here, O Lord, I give thee thanks for that thou have kept me this
night past, unto this present hour and moment, and have brought me unto the
last day of the week: grant that I may spend the same soberly, righteously,
and holily. Bring me to the knowledge of thy righteous will in all things, that
knowing it, I may endeavor to do the same, to thy glory, the peace of mine
own conscience, and the safety of my soul. Purge my soul from sinful lusts
and affections, and cleanse my conscience from all pollutions and defilements
thereof, that I may ever with boldness of Spirit, and affiance in thy mercy,
behold thy face, and grace in Jesus Christ. Root out of my mind all covetous,
malicious, and lustful thoughts, keep me from sin and from uncleanness,
be thou my guide in all my ways, my stay and succor in all my necessities.
Put an end and period unto the motions of the flesh, enlarge mine heart for all
holy duties and habitual graces of thy Spirit, that I may nourish them as my
life. In these my prayers I am not mindful of my self alone, but of thy whole
Church, howsoever distressed, or wheresoever dispersed over the face of the
earth. I pray unto thee likewise for thy servant and our dread sovereign
Charles, our king and governor: O Lord, as thou have graced him with a crown,
so crown him with thy grace, and as thou have given him a glorious kingdom
here, so give him heareafter part of thy kingdom of glory. Be merciful unto
our most gracious Queen Mary, the young Prince Charles, and the Lady Mary, the
Lady Elizabeth and her royal issue. Bless, preserve, and prosper, all those
that travail in an honest way, whether by sea or land; and likewise all women
in travail with child, and sick persons, troubled both in body or mind, or
howsoever diseased, O Lord, speak peace unto their consciences, and as thou
have laid them down with the one hand, so raise them up with the other, if not
to this life, to life eternal, and that not for any merits of mine (Lord, I
disclaim them all) but for the precious merits of thy Son our Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Saturday An Evening Prayer.
O Lord God, Almighty, merciful Father, maker and preserver of all things,
look down I beseech thee with the eye of pity and compassion upon me
miserable and sinful wretch, prostrating my self, soul and body, upon my
benknees, before thy divine majesty, humbly beseeching thee to look upon me in
much mercy pardon my sins, enrich me with thy graces, sanctify me with thy
grace, and bring me to thy glory, and there refresh my soul with such things
as eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither has entered into the heart
of man to conceive. Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight
shall no flesh living be justified. Examine not my ways this week past, by
the strict rule of thy Law, neither reward me in the rigor of thy justice, but
for Jesus Christ his sake have mercy upon me miserable sinner, that have
deserved the seuerest of thy punishments. As the heavens are higher then the
earth, so extend thy mercy beyond my deserts. Satisfy my soul with thy mercy,
and that right soon, so shall I rejoice, and be glad in thee, and learn to
praise thee evermore. And now, O Lord, as this week is at an end, so let my
sins have end, and never be reiterated or done any more. Lord call me not to
an exact account for them, for (Lord) I confess I am worthy of death, and
eternal damnation, yet seeing there is mercy with thee, that thou might be
feared, and loved for evermore, spare me I humbly beseech, and have mercy upon
me according to the multitude of thy mercies. And being graciously reconciled
unto thee, be thou pleased to be my merciful protector and preserver from all
perils and dangers this night, bless me with quiet rest, that being refreshed
in my body, I may be cheered up in my mind, and made the more fit to serve
thee in the duties of my calling, and sanctify thy Sabbath, and keep it as a
glorious day unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer before Sermon.
VOuchsafe O most merciful God, to open the closet of my dark understanding,
that thy word may enter thereinto, and be so received of me, as that Ignorance
(the mother of disobedience) being excluded, heavenly knowledge may enter in,
and that growing daily in knowledge, I may be more and more renewed in the
spirit of my mind, and do all such good works as thou command and
commendest unto me in thy word. Give me grace that the seed of thy word being
sown in my heart, it may take deep root downward, and bring forth fruit
upward to the credit of the Gospel, the comfort of my poor soul, and above
all to the glory of thy most holy name. So let thy Spirit rule and guide the
lips of thy servant and minister, as that he utter nothing but the word of
Truth, with such boldness that neither fear nor affection stop not the
passage of the same. Make me to attend and wait upon thine ordinance,
desiring to be satisfied with the crumbs that fall from this thy table.

And because the harvest is great, the faithful laborers but a few, I pray
thee who art Lord of the harvest, to send forth such as may be industrious. And
conscionable in the discharge of their ministerial duties. Let thy Vrim and
Thummim be upon them, as upon thine holy ones, that sincerity of doctrine and
integrity of conversation, may adorn their persons, and beautify their
function and calling. Banish from this sacred work al such as are not sent from
thee, let them have no exhibition from thy church, running without commission,
from thee. Lord guide the heart and tongue of him whom I shall hear this day,
that he may speak home unto my conscience, and leave no corruption vnbowelled,
but that his words may separate all sinful affections from me, and stir me up
to be a follower of it in all holy virtues and gracious acts. Bless all the
hearers of thy word, make them doers of the same, not deceiving of their own
souls. Grant that thy messengers dividing the word aright, and thy people
keeping it carefully, and practicing it conscionably, they may at thy hands
through Christ Jesus, obtain the remission of their sins past, and receive
from thy divine Majesty, confirming and comforting grace for the time to come,
power to preseuer and continue thy servants unto their dying days. Give them
light, instead of darkness; peace, for trouble; and eternal happiness,
instead of worldly felicity; that tasting the sweetness of celestial
comfort, they may despise terrestrial, and after this life ended in joy, enjoy
the perfect joys of eternal glory, through Jesus Christ my Lord and blessed
Savior. Amen.

A Prayer after the Word heard.
O Gracious Lord, of thy bountiful goodness, thou have through thy Son
Jesus Christ, sent for my learning and unspeakable comfort, thy word of truth
the Gospel, which none can learn but by hearing; and none can hear but by
preaching; and none can preach except they be sent; I humbly beseech thee
therefore to give me thy grace, that as I have heard thy word at this time by
thy minister and messenger, so I and all that have heard, may know and
understand the same, retain, and practice it, according to thy heavenly will,
that I may thereby grow in knowledge, increase in grace, and be a lively
instrument of thy glory unto my lives end. Amen.

A short prayer for willingness to dye, and a preparation unto Death.
O God in whose hands consists the life of all mankind, for thy Son Jesus
Christ his sake, vouchsafe to give me grace, to set before mine eyes as a most
certain mark whereto this frail body of mine must tend by death; this being
to the faithful, the end of pain, and the beginning of pleasure; but to the
secure and graceless, the ending of temporal bliss and felicity, and the
inlet or entrance unto eternal torments, weeping, wayling, and gnashing of
teeth. Give me therefore, good Lord, an earnest desire of serving thee, and
leading my life agreeable to thy will, that whenever it shall please thee to
call for me by death, I be not (through fear) stricken with any horror of
damnation, and doubt of salvation; that at my last gasp I may never cast away
my confidence, nor my hope of rejoicing, but through a lively faith in Jesus
Christ I may rest upon him the corner stone, and sure rock of my salvation,
and so depart this life in peace, and in a joyful expectation of a blessed
resurrection, and be content to lay down this mortality of mine, to receive it
in the day of Christ, a spiritual and glorified body, that then being ever
with my Lord, I may with all thy saints sing a continual Alleluiah, to the
praise and glory of my redeemer and Savior. Amen.

A short prayer for competency of maintenance.
O Lord my God, the maker and preserver of Angels, men, and all creatures,
infinite in thy power, and wonderful in thy love unto all the sons of men,
Thou have promised never to fail those that attend, and depend upon thee; Thou
openest thine hands and fillest all things living with plenteousnesse, never
suffering any of thine to perish for want, that carefully seek relief and
comfort from the disposition of thy most gracious bounty, and beneficent
goodness, suffer me not to want necessaries for this present life, nor those
things without the which I cannot comfortably serve thee in the duties of
christian calling; enable me to live without distracting cares; to this end
bless my labors and endeauours, that I may have sufficient for me and mine,
and not be chargable unto any, but rather able to do good unto others that may
stand in need of refreshing from me. Give me neither poverty, nor riches: feed
me with food convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who is
the Lord; or lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.
Afford me that portion of temporal blessings, health, wealth, maintenance, as
thou in thy wisdom shall think convenient and behoofefull for me, not so much
for delectation, and satisfying of the flesh with the concupiscences thereof,
as for sustentation of this mortal life of mine, and consolation of my heart
and spirits, and making of them more joyous and cheerful in thy worship and
service. Let neither overmuch poverty oppress me, that I be driven to use
means contrary to thy Law, nor too great a saturity, fullness and plenty so
p^ste me up, that I forget the goodness of thee my God, or fall into any the
least riotous excess* as if thou hadest hired me by thine abundant blessing,
to grow the more wanton and vicious. O God, as thou art of ability, and power,
so thou art willing to succor such as be in want, to relieve the oppressed,
to comfort the afflicted, to raise the lowly, and to aid the needy: and
therefore, sweet Lord, I humbly crave thy favorable assistance toward me to
bless my store, and replenish my basket with thy blessings, that I may be able
to live in thy Faith, Fear, and Love, and out of the depth of misery, and
danger of all men, through Jesus Christ Amen.

A short prayer to use wealth as we ought.
O God almighty, the giver of all good things, thou art my stay, my comfort,
and only guide, direct me, I pray thee, to employ that talent which thou have
bestowd upon me, for the advantage, and advancement of thine own glory. Lord
thou have been abundantly gracious, and bountiful unto me, and have blessed my
store and increase with wealth, insomuch that I have not only that which
suffices mine own necessity, but have also sufficient to relieve others in
time of their need. Give me therefore a will to disperse a broad and give
unto the poor according to the abundance of my wealth, to feed the hungry,
to clothe the naked, and minister unto thy distressed Saints, that I may not
live unto my self, but for the help of all those that want my furtherance,
that I may lay up in store a good foundation against the time to come, and be
found of thee in peace, inioying life and salvation through Jesus Christ, Amen.

A prayer for a woman with child.
O Merciful God and omnipotent Father, and creator of all things, who in the
beginning did place mankind in most unspeakeable happiness, where they
should have continued, had not our first parents broke thy divine precept and
charge given them in paradise, and thereby procured most justly thy wrath and
indignation against themselves, and their posterity for ever, so that the earth
for their sakes was accursed, denying things necessary for their use, without
great labor, pains, and industry. And unto us the daughters of Eve, for our
transgression, thou have adjudged most grievous pains and torments of body in
the travail of childbirth, saying that in sorrow and great pains we shall
bring forth our fruit. A heavy sentence thou know it is, O Lord, and we
feel it to take sharp effect in us, but sweet Lord, for as much as thou art
merciful and bring all things to pass according to thy good pleasure, and
show thy self in nothing more omnipotent then in the conceiving, forming,
and bringing forth of mankind into this world, which al^^ough it was in the
beginning ordained most easily, yet by the subtilty of our continual enemy
Satan in causing our first parents to transgress thy commandment, and break
thy will by tasting the forbidden fruit, it is now most painful and
dangerous, grievous and perilous, insomuch, O sweet Lord, as without thine
especial grace and assistance, favor and mercy, it is altogether impossible
for us (frail women a weak sex) to bear and abide the same, our imperfection
and feebleness is such, as of our selves we are not able to endure the least
of all the sorrows and sufferings that accompany this kind of travail:
wherefore sweet Lord, and loving Father, my humble desire unto thy majesty is,
for Jesus Christ his sake, that thou would vouchsafe to extend unto me and
to all women thy mercy and loving favor, to mitigate the pains thereof, that
we may be able patiently to endure the pains of our travail at the hour
appointed, and make that easy and light unto us, which our defects have made
heavy and burdensome: and sweeten that which our deserts have made sour, that
the burden wherewith I am now laden, may graciously be delivered from my weak
body. Send us all good Lord happy and gracious deliverance, that we may be
made joyful and happy mothers. And vouchsafe unto me and to all that have
conceued, and be with child, strength to bring forth that which thine
omnipotency has so wonderfully wrought within us. In our troubles, O Lord,
help us, thou most mighty and merciful God, mightily deliver us. Let thy
power, might, and love, be no less manifest in the delivery, then in the
forming of thy creature, that being through thy goodness made a joyful mother
I may obtain my perfect strength again, and live to praise and please thee
for evermore. Amen.

Another short and most necessary prayer to be said of one with Child.
O Lord whose goodness we have offended, and by our sins deserved infinite
pains, look with the eye of pity and compassion upon me, lay aside thy
Justice, and show me thy merciful favor and loving kindness. Let me enjoy
the benefit of thy helping hand, and not feel the weight of thy heavy
displeasure; favorably lighten me of this heavy burden in thy good and
gracious time, and in the hour and instant of my delivery, be present with me
(O Lord) and tender my safety through Jesus Christ. Amen.

A thanksgiving after the woman is delivered of the Child.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased thee Almighty God of thy gracious goodness, to
ease me of my pains, and deliver me of my burden, and from the pangs and
throws of Childbearing, I do here humbly prostrate my soul and body before
thy sacred majesty, to be unto thee a reasonable, lively and living sacrifice,
holy and acceptable in thy sight, giving thine omnipotent majesty infinite, and
unfeigned thanks for this thy gracious preservation of me, and delivering me out
of this great danger of death wherein I was, and under which I might soon have
perished, had not thy mercy sustained me, and thy goodness embraced me on
every side. To thee therefore O holy and heavenly Father, be given and ascribed
all possible praise and thanksgiving, from this time forth for evermore. As
thou have been gracious unto me in giving me a child, so Lord give me grace
to deuote and consecrate it unto thee and thy service. To this end work
mightily in it by thy holy Spirit, sanctify it from the womb that it may be
thine not only whilst it hangs upon the mothers breasts, but so long as it
shall breath in the land of the living, and until thou translate it hence to
reign with thee in glory. Amen.

A short Prayer for Wisdom.
O Lord, most great and glorious, I confess that whilst I bear about with me
this body of sin, imprisoning the soul, my nature corrupted and depraved
with sins, original and actual, seeks by all means possible to oppose the
spirit, and do those things which are dissonant and contrary to the motions,
inspirations, and gracious influence and working thereof. My flesh lusts
against the spirit: so that the things which I would do I cannot, and the
things which I suppose to be done in much knowledge and wisdom, will be found
not only ignorances and errors, but sinful wickedness in thy fight.
Wherefore I humbly beseech thee, O Holy Father, to send out thy light and
truth, thy Spirit of wisdom and revelation, to teach and instruct me, to be
my God, and guide, to lead me into all truth. Lord send down that wisdom
which waits about thy throne, and plant the same in my heart, that all my
sayings, doings, and devises, being always ordered by this wisdom from on
high, I may intend and do that which is pleasing in thy sight, and profitable
for mine own salvation, and shun the contrary in all things, through Jesus
Christ, my Lord, and Savior. Amen.

A short Prayer for defense against our Enemies.
O Lord my God, be not far from me in trouble; and in all dangers bodily, or
ghostly, draw near and make haste to help me. I am I confess, a most sinful
creature, and have justly deserved thy wrath and indignation against me. the
sorest and seuerest of thy punishments, yea that all thy blessings should
become curses unto me, and that I should either be destroyed by thine and the
churches enemies, or that I should be ruinated by mine own prosperity. Yet
Lord, for thy mercy sake, turn thee unto me, and have compassion on me, let
not mine enemies prevail in their mischievous devises, lest they be to proud;
in thy mercy convert them, or in thy justice confound them, make them as the
stubble before the wind, and thine Angel scattering of them. Lord, I am in
thine hand, and they are within the compass of thy power, stay and allay their
fury, let them not take effect in their mischievous Imaginations and attempts
against me, but put them to confusion, rid me, and deliver me in thy
righteousness. Be thou a son and a shield unto me to comfort and protect me.
To this end cause thine Angels to pitch their tents round about me, that being
defended under the shadow of thy wings, and armed with the power of thy might,
I may not fear what man can do unto me. Lord regard me with the eye of thy
grace, and guard me with the hand of thy power, that being preserved in both
soul and body, I may live in piety, peace, and godliness, unto my lives end.
Amen.

A Prayer to be said before the receiving of the Lords Supper.
O Lord Jesus, the Son of the living God, who freely, and of thine own
accord, offeredst thy most sacred Body to be broken, and thy blood to be shed
for my sins, that thou might ransom me from hell, and deliver me from
wrath and eternal condemnation; O sweet Jesus, my sins, original and actual,
of weakness and wickedness, have deserved thy wrath and frowning ire, yea that
thou should withold the eye of thy grace far from me, and punish me with
everlasting destruction from the presence of thy glory. Yet Lord, seeing thou
have shed thy blood for me, O Lord I beseech thee to wash away all my sins in
the streams that issued from thy precious wounds. As thou have loved me in
laying down thy life for me, and have left unto thy Church this holy Sacrament
as a pledge and assurance, that through thy death all that truly partake of
this sacred and heavenly institution, apprehending the mysteries therein
contained, and applying the merits of Christ Jesus crucified, they may have
comfort and peace in believing those merciful promises, which thou have made
unto us in thy Word, and be partakers of the benefits of thy Sons Passion,
and have fruition of thy saving virtue here, and life and glory hereafter.

Accept me, good Lord in Jesus Christ, as washed, justified, and sanctified,
and by thy Spirit, O my God, cleanse and purify my heart daily more and more*
sanctify mine affections, and enlarge my heart for holy and heavenly things,
that mortifying the deeds of the flesh, I may grow and increase in grace,
perfecting my holiness in the fear of God. At this time I entreat thee of thy
gracious goodness, O most holy and heavenly Father, by thy Spirit of
confirmation to help and strengthen me against my weakness, and grant that
through a steadfast, lively, and constant faith, I may receive and eat this
sanctified bread, and hallowed Cup or blessed drink, in a holy and reverend
remembrance, that thy body (O Lord Jesus) was crucified, and thy blood was shed
for the remission of my sins, and grant that it may so effectually work in
my soul, that I may ever hereafter live in all holy obedience according to thy
heavenly will, through Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

At the receiving of the Bread, say thus.
O Sweet Jesus, as thou have given thy flesh to be the bread of eternal
salvation, so vouchsafe to work in me by a lively faith, that I (receiving
the same) may evermore continue in thee, and thou in me. Amen.

At the receiving of the Cup, say thus.
O Lord vouchsafe that as thy blood was shed to wash me (a sinner) from the
corruption of old Adam, so grant that it may through a lively faith take effect
in me, washing me from the filth of Sin, and renew in me the fruits of
righteousness, that I may become a fit member of thine, live in thee, and
dye in thee. Amen*

A prayer after the receiving of the most holy Communion of the body and blood
of Christ.
O God, Father everlasting, great, and glorious, I thy poor and unworthy
Creature, being not able to yield thee thanks sufficiently, praise the for
thine unspeakable favor and loving kindnesses, in feeding me at this time,
with the spiritual food of the body and blood of thy Son Jesus Christ, whom
thou vouchsafest to send for our redemption into this miserable world, and to
give him even unto the death for me, In remembrance whereof he has willed me,
to eat his body and drink his blood, to the end that by Faith I should be
knit and united unto him, and made a lively member of his mystical body, and
being washed from all my sins in his blood I should lead a new life, in all
obedience, holiness, and righteousness.

Vouchsafe, I humbly entreat thee for his sake, to indue me with thy holy
Spirit, whereby hereafter casting away the works of darkness, I may walk in
the true light of thy holy Spirit, and ever remain in the number of thy holy
and elect children, waiting faithfully when he shall come again for my
deliverance out of this mortal life* and whilst I live here, vouchsafe me an
unfeigned desire to partake of that his holy Institution, and (through thy holy
Spirit) to lead my life according to thy holy will in all things, keeping my
body and soul unspotted and undefiled as fit receptacles of so heavenly food,
that my soul may be pertaker of the mysteries thereof by faith in Jesus
Christ. Amen.

A prayer to be used by the tempted, against the assaults of Satan's temptations.
MOst gracious, merciful, and loving Father, which exercisest thy children
with sundry and manifold trialls* temptations, and tribulations, leaving hem
unto themselves, as thou d^d^st Hezekiah, to the end he might discover and see
in himself his own vaineglory, imbecility, and much frailty. Some, like
Peter, thou exposest to the boisterous winds of Satan, winnowings; and others,
like Paul, to the blows of the adversaries vehement buffetings. Thine own and
only Son thou did not exempt from Satan's sharpest and stoutest trials,
when thou did conduct him into the wilderness to be tempted of the
devil. If thou, O Lord, lead me in like manner to be tried and tempted,
suffer me not at any time to be overcome: hold thou me up by thy mighty hand
and power, animate me by the presence of thy Spirit, and holy Angels, and let
thy grace be ever sufficient for me, that I may give mine adversary the foil,
and in the end get the victory. In his departure from me for a season, let not
Satan be aduantaged or get strength; but detect his policies, discover his
subtilties unto me, and defeat his doings and dealings which are against m^*
To this end work such wisdom in me, as may make me to foresee his stratagems,
such vigilance, as that I may beware his pitfalls which he prepares for our
souls destruction. Let no temptation take me, but such as is common to man. In
thy faithfulness (O Father) try me not above my strength and ability, but with
the temptation make a way to escape, that I may be able to bear it. Let me
never yield to the devilish motions of Satan, suggesting unto me death, or
desperation; but grant me patience to expect the hour of my departure, my
souls separation, and the dissolution of my body, and deliverance from the
misery of this wretched world* My trouble, let it be without distress; my
perplexity, without despair; my persecution, without forsaking; my casting
down without destruction. If tear befall me, in thy good time wipe them from
mine eyes, preserve them in thy bottle, make them precious in thy sight, and my
self with thee. Leaving me for a little while draw nigh again unto me in
great compassion, and gather me unto thy self, that I may ever rejoice in thee
and with thee. Cover my head in the days of my spiritual conflicts, let thy
love be my bannor, thy faithfulness and truth my shield and buckler. Give me
faith and a sure confidence in thee, make me perfectly to trust in thy grace,
looking for Justification, and salvation through thy mercy, and my blessed
Saviors merits. Let not any kind of trial be irksome and grievous unto me,
but give me a right judgment (as in all other things, so in this one thing)
that I may count it all joy when I fall into diverse temptations. Let not my
heart be hardened by them, as were the Israelites provoking thee in the
wilderness; but sanctify all thy visitations unto me, that I may be bettered
and reformed by them that my faith being tried, patience may be wrought in
me, and that patience having her perfect work, I may be perfect and entire
lacking nothing.

Lord I know that in all thy temptations thou ever have one end and Satan
another: thou triest me to the end that I being found faithful, thou might
give unto me the Crown of Life. Satan searches to seduce, and sifteth to
dispoyle and bereave me of that which is virtuous and good in me; Wherefore, O
Holy Ghost (thou preserver of men) keep me by thy grace, and strengthen me
by thy mighty power and outstretched arm. O blessed Jesus, be not far from
me, but present with me, and president in me: as thy sufferings abound in me;
so let thy consolation much more abound. In the midst of all mine agonies and
terrors of mind, let thy comforts rejoice my soul, that I being made glad by
thee, I may be confirmed unto the end, and always, in all dangers of life or
death, in all tribulations, and temptations abide by thee, that thou may
appoint unto me a kingdom, as thy Father has appointed unto thee. Grant this
not for any worth of mine, but thine own merit and goodness sake. Amen.

O Lord, let thy mighty hand and outstretched arm be now and always my
defense, thy mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear Son my
salvation, thy true and holy word my instruction thy grace and holy Spirit my
comfort and consolation. Amen.

The peace of God which passes all understanding, keep my heart and mind in
the Love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: and the blessing of
God almighty the Father Son and holy Ghost, be with me, and remain with me
and mine, and with the whole church of God, from this time forth and for
evermore, Amen.

God be merciful unto me and bless me. The Lord lift up the light of his
gracious countenance upon me, be merciful unto me, and grant me his
everlasting peace. Amen.

A Prayer for the troubled in mind, afflicted in conscience, groaning under
the insupportable burden of a wounded Spirit.
O Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, vouchsafe, I beseech thee,
succor and relief unto me that am troubled in mind, and afflicted in
conscience for fear of thy Judgments, and the terrible things which thou
writest against me by reason of my sins. Lord break not the bruised reed,
nor quench the smoking flax, wound not mine humble and contrite heart, but
revive the spirit of me that go mourning all the day long. Though Satan
presume that thou have smitten and forsaken me, yet frustrate his hopes and
expectations, leave me not destitute of thy grace as a prey unto him, the
enemy of my soul; but mightily preserve and defend me, that I may never be
lost, but that in life and death I may be always thine. And albeit my
conscience accuse me, my memory gives evidence against me, my reason condemn
me; though I be deeply plunged in discomfort, and have lost the voice of joy
and gladness, and have neither worth to appease thy wrath, nor patience to
endure thy trial, yet send me (dear Father) the comfort of thine holy Spirit
again into my heart, that I may not be swallowed up of overmuch heaviness,
but may rejoice in thee with joy glorious and unspeakable. Open, and set open
the gate of thy mercy to the greatness of my misery; for my dejected
countenance witnesses my distressed and distracted mind, my mind is
sorrowful, mine heart heavy, my Spirit is oppressed; my words are stopped with
sighs, and my complaints watered with tears. In execution of thy judgments,
Lord, remember mercy, try not the Law with me, lest I come into judgment, and
be condemned; weigh not my merits, but pardon mine offenses. Sanctify unto me
all these good means wherein I seek relief, as prayer, conference,
meditation, reading, and hearing of thy word, receiving the Sacrament of the
body and blood of thy Son and my most blessed Savior, Jesus Christ.
Mittigate mine extremities, abate my fears, moderate mi^e afflictions, and
remove far from me the vexatious of the night, dreams, and fantasies, let
not the visions of mine head, like Nebuchadnezzars make me afraid: when I
awake, stay me with flagons, and comfort me with apples, thy most sweet and
delightsome promises, which are pleasing to the palate of my soul.

Rectify my judgment and understanding as in the days of old, and drink no
longer unto me in the Cup of affliction, but in the chalice, of refreshing
that I may pledge thee a saving health, pay my vows unto thee, and call upon
thy name with thanksgiving in the sight of all thy congregation. If it be thy
good pleasure to try me, and not take away this Cup from me; confirm my
faith, continuing unto me that hope of glory, which is to be revealed. To this
end cause me with the eye of faith to look up unto thee, who smitest me, and
wait for the appointed time of my recovery, and delivery out of all my
troubles. Lord suffer me not to be swallowed up of fearef^ll despair, but
vouchsafe me a full persuasion of thy mercy, that thou will never leave me,
nor forsake me, but wilt be in life my God, in death my deliverer, after death
mine eternal rewarder. Lord hearken, and incline thine ear unto these my
requests, and grant me not my deserts, but my desires, and that for Jesus
Christ his sake, Amen. Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and the most
comfortable fellowship of God the Holy Ghost, be with me, bless, preserve and
keep me* both in soul, and body, in goods and good name, in life, health,
wealth, peace, and godliness, together with the whole church, and all that
pertain unto me, now and for evermore, Amen.

A prayer to be said by the sick.
O God my creator and preserver, thou made me in thine own image, in
knowledge, holiness, and righteousness, but, dear Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
child, for I have defaced this Image and superscription of thine in me; and
hereby mine understanding is filled with ignorance, my will with
stubbornenesse, mine affections with perverseness, mine heart with
sinnefullnesse, and my whole life with disobedience and disorderlinesse; ever
since I drew in my breath, I have drunk in iniquity like water, so that I can
look for nothing but death (which reigns over all) to arraigne me at the
bar of thy Justice, to receive an irreuocable doom. I have no worth to
appease thy wrath, yet for thy Sons sake do away all my sin, and be thou
pleased to be reconciled unto me. And now (dear Father) I confess my
weakness is such that I want patience to endure thy trial, take from me thy
heavy hand, or lay no more upon me then I can bear, give an issue unto all
temptations, and make a way for me to escape, and in the end grant me a final
deliverance. As thou made me of dust, so thou can take from me my breath,
again and cause me soon to return unto my original earth again: yet spare
me a little, that I may recover my health and strength, before I go hence,
and be no more seen. There is I confess no soundness in my flesh, because of
thine anger, nor rest in my bones, because of my sins, my heart pants, my
strength fails, my beauty and liuely-hood consumes like a
moth-eater-garment, O Lord, if it be thy will, remove thy stroke away from
me, and consume me not by the blow of thy hand. Ease mine agonies, mittigate
mine extremities, be mindful of my sorrows and merciful unto my sins,
redeem my life from destruction, strengthen my weakness, heal my disease, and
cause me again to walk before thee in the land of the living. But if thou
have otherwise determined of me to translate me hence, thy will be done, grant
me patience under thy correcting hand, and a lively faith in the all sufficient
and efficacious merit of Christ my Savior If thou will not heal my disease,
yet forgive me mine iniquity, seal unto me a free pardon of all my sins in
the blood of thy Son, say unto my soul that thou will be my salvation. In
affiance of thy merciful absolution, cause me to declare mine iniquities, and
be filled with godly sorrow which may work repentance unto salvation never to
be repented of. Sprinkle me with the blood of Christ, and puri^^e me from my
daily pollutions, that being washed, justified and sanctified, I may be
presented unto thee without spot or wrinkle. Let nothing separate me from thy
love, but give me perseveing grace to hold out unto the end, that dying, thine
Angels may convey my soul into Abraham's bosom, there to reign with thee,
world without end. Amen.

A Prayer to be used by the friends of the sick, etc.
O Lord, our God and most gracious Creator, thou made us immortal creatures,
but by sin we have brought death and destruction upon our selves, for we have
profaned thy Sabbaths, contemned thine ordinances, cast thy word behind our
backs, lived in all sin and sensuality, spiritual slumber and security; so
that thou might justly cut us off from the land of the living, and give us
our portion which hypocrites, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. But
Lord, for thy mercy sake, and for the merits of thy Son spare us a little,
and give us space of amendment, before we go hence, and be no more seen, and
grace whereby we may draw near unto thee to seek thy favor in Jesus Christ.
Correct us in thy mercy, and not in thy Justice, lest we should be consumed,
and brought to nothing. If thou give over our bodies unto sickness, let it be
to the destruction of the body of sin, that being alive unto God, through Jesus
Christ, we may grow in grace, and be more fruitful in all good works. And
whilst we live, teach us to dye daily, mortifying the deeds of the flesh,
contemning the world, with the vanities thereof. Weane us from inordinate
self-love, that we may not endeare our selves too much to these transitory
lives of ours, but may be ready to depart when it shall please thee to call
for us, knowing that we cannot live ever with thee, unless we be willing to
dye and be with thee. Wherefore we pray thee take away the bitterness of
death, and sweeten by the wood of Christ's Cross these waters of Marah, that we
may sigh and groan in our selves, desiring to be deliue-from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

Work in us a willingness to depart but yet we humbly entreat thee let our
lives and the life of this thy sick servant be now and ever precious in thy
sight, look mercifully upon him that is grieved with sickness: Lord if thou will thou can make him whole. Send him therefore help and health from thy
holy place, and evermore mightily defend him. Let the enemy have no advantage
against him, nor the wicked approach to hurt him, but be thou present with
him, and strengthen his faith, increase his patience under thy correcting hand.
Lift up by the hand of thy mercy and Fatherly indulgence, this thy servant from
the bed of his sorrows. If thou will longer exercise him, lend him strength
to endure thy trial; and in the end be bettered by it. If thou have
determined to take him hence, certify him how long he has to live, make him to
know his end and the measure of his days, that by prayer and repentance, of
faith he may provide wisely for his last end, and be found of thee in peace
and enjoy everlasting happiness: dispose his ^editations aright for death, and
in the hour of death, and always, make him to deny himself in renouncing
justification by any inherent worth or righteousness. In all sorrows and
sufferings, let thy comforts rejoice his soul. To this end mortify in him the
corruption of nature quicken him with the soul of new life, and establish him
with thy free Spirit; purge his heart from worldly thoughts, and his mind from
carnal desires, motions and affections. Wash his soul and body with the blood
of Christ, and sanctify him throughout, both in Spirit, soul, and body, with
the grace of thy Holy Spirit, that departing in the true faith not casting away
his confidence, nor hope of rejoicing, in full assurance of a blessed
resurrection, he may have boldness in the day of Christ, and pass from death
to life, and be ever with thee to behold thy glory; grant this for Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

Another Prayer to be used by those that are about the sick.
O Lord our God, great and glorious, thou that art the Judge of all the earth,
we dust and ashes, vile and miserable sinners, do here most humbly cast down
our selves before thee for our sins, which are the causers of all the evils
of punishment which thou inflictest on the sons and daughters of men. Dear
Father hear us, and forgive whatsoever is past, and grant that we may ever
hereafter serve and please thee through newness of life; walking before thee
in holiness and righteousness all our days. And because the days are evil,
give us grace to redeem the time, and numbering our days aright, apply our
hearts unto wisdom. Cause us constantly to eschew evil, and do good, to
seek peace, and ensue it.

Look mercifully on this thy servant grieved with sickness, and sanctify
this visitation unto him, that those graces which thou have begun to work in
him may be strengthened, increased, and by degrees perfected. Restore unto him
the voice of joy and health, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice:
and seeing we have need of patience, send this our brother (or sister) such
competency of patience and constancy, that he may continue thy faithful
soldier and servant unto his lives end, work in him a sense and feeling of
sin, and true sorrow for the same, which may cause repentance unto salvation
never to be repented of. If it be not thy good pleasure to raise him from his
bed of languishing and set him upon his feet again, prepare his heart for
death, and his soul for heaven washing away his sins in the blood of Christ
and imputing unto him the righteousness of Christ, that he (appearing before
thee without either spot or wrinkle) may have confidence of seeing his
everliving and euer-louing redeemer, not with other but with ^hese his eyes:
weane his affections from the love of this world, and set them on those things
which are above, that being absent from the body, he may enjoy thy presence of
glory for ever. Repair in this thy servant thine own Image, and renew it in
knowledge, holiness, and righteousness, that thou may know and acknowledge
him for thine own, and raise him up from the grave unto the resurrection of
life, and for ever satisfy him with thine Image, and change him into the same
from glory to glory. Amen.

A thanksgiving for recovery from sickness.
OMnipotent Lord God the author of life, who bring down unto the grave, and
raisest up again, I do here confess to the glory of thine infinite mercy,
that if thou had not blessed and sustained me in my sickness, I should
have gone the way of all flesh, but it was thy goodness to spare me and
deliver me from dangers: thy name be glorified for this thine invaluable
favor and merciful kindness. And I humbly beseech thee to give me grace to
express my real thankfulness, by my sincere obedience, and to serve thee
more carefully and conscionably then heretofore I have done: and the shorter my
days are, the more ^o redeem the time, that by repenting me truly of my
sins, and calling on thee for grace, by eschewing evil, and doing good, more
especially unto the household of faith, I may have the testimony within my
self, that thou have not ordained me unto wrath, but to obtain eternal life
and salvation, through Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior, Amen.

A morning prayer for a family.
O Eternal and all-seeing God, who art just in thy judgments true in thy
promises, wonderful in thy majesty, and infinite in thy mercy; who have the
heavens for thy throne, and the earth for thy footstool, and the creatures of
both at thy beck; The heavens are full of the majesty of thy glory, and cannot
contain the same: look down therefore from thence upon us thy servants who
now prostrate our selves before the footstool of thy throne of grace; humbly
beseeching thee for Jesus Christ his sake to be merciful unto us miserable
sinners. One deep calls unto another, the depth of misery unto the depth of
mercy: have mercy therefore upon us, O Lord, and in the multitude of thy
mercies do away all our offenses. We confess that we are not worthy to
speak of thee, much less to speak unto thee, we being so vile and
miserable, thou so glorious and admirable; yet being assured that in forgiving
sins and helping poor afflicted souls, the never drawn dry fountain of
thy mercy does appear, we thine unprofitable servants are emboldened to
present our selves this morning before thee, to offer up unto thee a lively
sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving, who did offer up thy Son upon the
Cross to be a propitiation for our sins. O let this lifting up of our hearts
and hands be a morning sacrifice, pure, and acceptable in thy sight. Let not
the greatness of our sins withold thy implored mercy, but wash us from all
uncleanness, and remove thy judgments due unto us for them, as far from thy
presence as is the East from the West. Bury them in the grave with Christ,
raise us up by the power of thy Spirit unto newness of life, that we may walk
in all holy obedience before thee this day, and that endeavoring to keep our
faith, and a good conscience void of offense, we may now* and in the hour of
death be, and remain always thine. Defend us from all evil and sense us
against the assaults of Satan, watch over us by the eye of thy good providence,
and cause thy Angels, to pitch their tents about us, for our safety and
continual preservation. Into thy hands, we here commit our souls and bodies,
our cogitations and actions, to be guided by thee; forgetting thee at any time,
do thou in mercy remember us, and forgive our trespasses, make us to see our
sins, in the glass of thy Law, to mourn for them in the closets of our
hearts, and confess them in the bitterness of our souls. Teach us to cast
off the rags of iniquity, and by faith to put on the robes of righteousness:
help us to manage the sword of the Spirit, the shield of faith, the helmet of
salvation, that we may be able to fight against the wiles of the devil, the
vanities of the world, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life.

Be favorable to Sion, build up the walls of Jerusalem, more particularly,
preserve and enlarge these Churches of great Britain, France, and Ireland,
feed them as thy flock, foster them as thy family, dress them as thy
vineyard, and deck them as thy spouse. Defend the Kings majesty from all
enemies, preserve his body in health, his soul in soundness, his heart in
truth, his life in honor, his honor from underminers. Bless our gracious
Queen Mary, and grant that with Mary she may choose the better part which can
never be taken from her. Let thy good Spirit be with our hopeful Prince
Charles, and the Lady Mary, sanctify and season them with grace, and make them
thy darlings and beloved ones. Bless the Lady Elizabeth and her children: and
for the days wherein they have suffered adversity, send them abundance of
peace and prosperity. Bless the counselors of state, all schools of good
Learning, all thy ministers, and maiestrates, with all our kindsfolke in the
flesh, and friends in the Spirit, to whom thou have any ways made us bounden:
O Lord, enable us to requite them, or lay it on thine own account to restore
it unto them and their posterities.

And here we yield thee from the Altar of our hearts all possible thanks for
that thou have created us, when we were nothing, predestined us unto the
Adoption, and chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, and have
called us by the working of thy spirit in the preaching of the Gospel, and have
freely justified us by Faith in Christ; we thank thee likewise for our
preservation this night past, and for bringing of us this day to see the light.
Now Lord, awake our souls from sin and carnal security, that we may be
prepared (like wise virgins) with oil in our lamps, to meet the sweet
bridegroom of our souls, whether at the day of our death or Judgment. These
and all other graces (which for blindness we cannot, and for our unworthiness
we dare not ask) we beseech thee to give unto us for the worthiness of thy
dear Sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Our Father* etc.

An Evening Prayer for a Family.
O God the God of the spirits of all flesh, the high and lofty one that
inhabitest eternity, who have made the earth by thy power, established the
world by thy wisdom, and stretched out the heavens by thy discretion: the
Father of eternity, and fountain of mercy, the giver of all good things, the
forgiuer of all sins, and the comforter of all such as fly unto thee. Seeing
we are here present before thee, be thou present with us, and president in us:
and appealing from the seat of thy justice, to the throne of thy mercy, we
pray thee give us a sense of our own miseries, and an assurance of thy
mercies, that we may not be daunted with overmuch fear, but confident of thy
goodness, may with joy appear in thy presence, in an humble acknowledgement
of our sins. To this end we conf^sse that we have sinned against heaven and
before thee, and are no more worthy to be called thy children, for we have
transgressed thy holy laws and commandments, not only by our thoughts and
words* but by our deeds and continual actions, our iniquities are more then
the hairs of our heads, and do make us seem vile in our own eyes, how much
more in thy sight.

Lord unto thee do we confess our sins, O grant us pardon and absolution
for the same, open unto us (penitents) that ever streaming fountain of thy
Sons blood, that my sins being bathed therein, we may appear without
blemish in thy fight, by his death mortify our sinful corruptions, hide them
in his wounds, and bury them in his grave, that they may neither rise in this
life to shame us nor in the world to come to condemn us. Give us thy holy
Spirit, let him purge our consciences, heal our corruptions, illuminate our
understandings, confirm our memories, consecrate our souls and bodies that
they may be the temples of the holy Ghost to dwell in. Be merciful to thy
Church, enlarge the borders thereof. Bless our gracious Sovereign Lord King
Charles, with long life and abundance of grace here, and his royal consort
Queen Mary, with a zealous and religious affection, that she may follow after
that which will bring her to everlasting joy and peace hereafter. Be with our
hopeful Prince Charles, and the Lady Mary, put thy fear into their hearts
that they may never depart from thee. Prosper the most illustrious Princess
the Lady Elizabeth with her hopeful issue. Bless the Nobility, Gentry,
Ministry, Magistracy, and Commonalty, our kind folks in the flesh, and friends
in the Spirit. Protect all those that stand up for thy truth, but as for thy
foes let them be ashamed and confounded. And now seeing thou have brought the
night upon us wherein thou had ordained man to take his rest, we humbly
beseech thee (who art the keeper of thy Israel, who never slumbrest nor
sleep) to watch over us by thy good providence. Cause thine holy Angels to
pitch their tents round about us, that being freed from the terrors of the
night, and refreshed with moderate rest and sleep, we may the better be
enabled to praise thy name and to walk before thee in all good works, and
holiness of conversation all the days of our lives. Let our bed, O Lord, put
us in mind of our grave and our rising from thence of our resurrection, that
whether we wake or sleep we may be always thine. And knowing that thy name, O
Lord, is a strong tower of defense, we here commend our selves this night unto
thy most holy protection; If it be thy will to call for any of us in our
sleep, O Lord, for Christ his sake have mercy upon us, and receive our souls
into thy most blessed kingdom: but if it be thy heavenly pleasure to add more
days unto our lives, add more amendment unto our days, that living we may
live in thy fear, and dying may dye in thy favor, and in the end reign with
thee in Glory, Amen.

A form of Thanksgiving.
WE bless and magnify thy great and glorious name for all thy mercies both
spiritual and temporal, concerning this life, and that which is to come: for
our creation, after thine Image; redemption, by thy Son; sanctifitation by
thy Spirit; for our preservation by thy providence; for our life, health,
wealth, peace, and prosperity; for sparing us so long, and gi^ing us so large a
time of repentance, for delivering our King and state from that horrible plot
of the gunne-powder treason: we thank thee for that thou have given us thy
messengers to be admonishers, thy word to be our instructor, thy Spirit to be
our counselor, our God, and guide to lead us into all truth. Blessed be God
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of merci^s, and God of all
consolation, who when we were sometimes alienes, and enemies in our minds by
wicked works, and were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others, out
of his rich mercy, for the great love where with he loved us, even when we
were dead in trespasses, and sins, and the uncircumcision of our flesh, has
quickened us, together with Christ, having forgiven us all our trespasses,
blotting out the hand writing of ordinances that was against us, taking it out
of the way, nailing it unto the Cross. We thank and praise thy glorious
Name, for blessing us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ, for delivering us from the power of darkness, and translating us into
the kingdom of thy dear Son, making us meet to be pertakers of the
inheritance with thy Saints in light. Thy hands have made and fashioned us.
Thou have delivered our souls from death, our eyes from tears, and our feet
from falling. Thou have delivered us from dangers, extended peace unto us like
a river, and prosperity like a flowing stream, we drink waters out of our own
wels Thou have strengthened the bars of our gates, and blessed our children
within us. Thou have given us bread to eat, and raiment to put on, yea our
bread (like Ashurs) is fat, and we have pleasures which even kings do want.
Thou have not dealt so with any nation, oh that men would therefore praise the
Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he has done for the
children of men. Wherefore, blessing, honor, glory, and power, be unto him
that sits upon the throne, and unto the lamb for ever and ever. Amen.

A Collect for the Day.
LOrd bless us, and make thy face to shine upon us: keep us from sin and
Satan, and from sickness and sorrow, shame and servitude, loss of goods and
good names, or of ought more near and dear unto us, if it may stand with thy
good pleasure: preserve us evermore in thy faith and holy fear, guide us
constantly by thy counsel, and after that receive us to glory.

A Collect for the Night.
O Lord our God, which art the keeper of Israel, which never slumbrest nor
sleep, into thy hands O Father, we commend our spirits, for thou have
redeemed us. O thou God of truth, Into thy most merciful tuition and gracious
preservation do we commend our selves, our souls and bodies, our kinsfolks
in the flesh, and friends in the spirit, our goods, our good names, all ours,
and all that call upon thy name from this time forth and foreuermore, Amen.

Lord we pray thee, be thou present with them and us, and about our beds, unto
our lives end^ Let not our fantasies be troubled with vain imaginations, nor
the dreams and visions of our heads, like Nebuchadnezzars, make us afraid. But
give us quiet and comfortable rest, that our souls being cheered up and our
bodies refreshed, (...) may when we awake, laud and ^^aise thee, and go and
pray unto thee, and joyfully set our selves about the business of the next
day, and perform the duties of our particular callings. Let our whole life be
a serving and glorifying of thee, that we may live in thy fear, die in thy
favor, and rest from all our labors, and be blessed with thy glorious vision,
inioying the presence of our blessed Savior, and the comfort of thy holy
Spirit, and the communion of thy most holy Saints and Angels, that we, together
with them may ascribe unto thee the glory of our redemption from sin, Satan,
hell, and death, and the Devil, world without end, Amen.

A Grace before mea^^
O God, who art the giu^r of every good and perfect gift, sanctify we beseech
thee these thy Creatures now prepared for us, make them wholesome for our
bodies: and our souls and bodies serviceable unto thee for them, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Grace after meat.
THe Lords most holy Name be now and ever blessed and praised, for all his
mercies, and for his blessings at this time bestowed upon us: Lord as thou have
fed our bodies with corporal food; so feed our souls likewise with spiritual
food unto life eternal* Save thy Church, the Kings majesty, Queen, Princes,
and the Realms, prosper the word, bless thine ordinances unto us, increase
our faith* send us grace and truth prosperity and peace, with life everlasting,
Amen.

A Grace before meat.
Merciful Father, which openest thy hands, and fillest all things living with
plenteousnesse, we pray thee sanctify these thy good creatures unto us, that
we may eat to live, and ^iuing serve thee our Lord, God, through thine only
Son, our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Grace after meat.
THe God of all grace and goodness, who at this time has fed and plenteously
refreshed us, his most holy name be blessed and praised, from this time forth
and for evermore. Amen.

A Grace before meat.
O Lord our God, by whose providence it is that we live, move, and have our
being; send thy blessing upon us and our meats, and grant that whether we eat,
or drink, or whatsoever else we do, we may do all to the glory of thy name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Grace before meat.
WE laud and praise thy Name for all thy blessings and favors, and for feeding
us so plentifully at this time, desiring thee of thy grace, that our
thankefulnes may not be in word and in tongue, but expressed by our careful
study to glorify thee our God, in all our words and works through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

