THE PLEA OF THE INNOCENT: Wherein is auerred; That the Ministers and people
falsely termed Puritanes, are injuriously slaundered for enemies or troublers
of the State. Published for the common good of the Church and common wealth of
this Realm of England AS A COVNTERMVRE Against all Sycophantising Papsts,
Statising Priests, Neutralising Atheistes, and Satanising scorners of all
godliness, truth and honesty. Written: By Josias Nichols, a faithful
Minister of the Gospel of Christ: and an humble servant, of the English
Church.

Micah. 7. verse. 8.9. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, though I fall I
shall rise: when I shall sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. I
will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him: until he
plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the
light, and I shall see his righteousness.

1602.

The contents of this Book.
Chapter. 1. Wherein is showed 1 They be not Puritanes in deed who now in
England are so called Page 1. 2 That name is very fit and proper for all
Papists page 4. 3 What are the causes that some of her Majesty's most
faithful and obedient subjects, are termed Puritanes page 5. etc. 4 The true
state of their cause page 12.
Capit. 2. Wherein is declared 1 That the Ministers and people, which have
des^^d and sought reformation of some thing in the Ecclesiastical state of
this land, are warranted in their do^ings by the principal rule and Canon of
our Church, namely the holy scriptures. page 13. 14. etc. 2 Martine
Marprelate, the Brownistes, and Hacket stirred up by Satan to hinder their good
cause page 32. 33. 34. 3 Preaching against Non residentes and the unpreaching
ministry, and all the exercises of the people, aggree to holy Scrip. Page 35.
Cap. 3. That the Ministers and people who have desired reformation in some
church matters, have therein followed the Christian laws and godly
proceedings of the ecclesiastical state Page 38. 39. etc. Chapter 4. Wherein
is proved 1 That it can not be, that the Ministers and people desiring
reformation, should be enemies to the state page 58. 2 They can not but
unfeignedly love the Queens most gracious Majesty Page 60. 3 They do
heartily reverence, and thankefullie observe the Lords of her most honorable
privy Counsel Page 65. 4 They rejoice to live under the common laws and
civil co^munitie of this Realm Page 69. 5 And in all their doing maintain
the faith, and promote the good proceedinge of the state of the Church Page 71.
72. etc.
Chap. 5. This teaches, that the Reverend Bishops and other Prelates of the
Church of England, standing for conformity (such as indeed unfeignedly do
favor the present state of the Church, and do faithfully hold and believe the
true religion and faith of Christ, maintained by public authority among us:)
are one and the same, with the godly Ministers and people which desire
reformation of some things in the Ecclesiastical state. 1 Beeause they do
disagree in some things and yet be faithful brethren Page 83. 2 This life
affoordeth not absolute and unchangeable unity Page 85. 3 They agree in all
substantial points of our Church, as it aggreeth with holy Scripture. Page
90. 4 God by persecution can make them, in deed to appear to be one. Page 95.
Cap: 6. Wherein is plainly opened, That there can no good reason be showed,
that the godly Ministers seekeing reformation, are enemies to the present
state: 1 Because their consciences is clear in Gods sight Page 99. 2 They
defend no evil actions in them selves Page 100. 3 They can not be charged
with the faults of strangers, Anabaptists, foolish Martine, or of frantic
Hacket Page 102. 4 Nor with unthankful obscuring of Gods mercy for their
fancies, etc. Nor with innovation or schism Page 113. etc. 5 They can not be
charged with any thing against her Majesty's Person, Crown, or Dignity
Page 132. 6 Or that they are against all Superiority in Ministers, or the
true power and honor of the ministry Page 140,
Cap. 7. Wherein is proved, that the Ministers seeking reformation, (falsely
called Puritanes) are not in any sort to be compared to Papists in evil,
much less to be equalized with traitors, Seminary priests or Jesuits. 1 By
their contradictorie doctrine. Page 145. 2 By their contrary acts and
doeings. Page 149.
Cap. 8. The Ministers which desire reformation in some things of our Church
matters, can not fear but ever love her Majesty and all the godly wise
Magistrates under her. But the Papists clean contrary. Page 151.152. etc.
Cap. 9. Wherein is plainly showed, 1 That it is most profitable, to the
present state and government, and greatly for her Majesty's safety, to hear
the petitions of the godly Ministers seeking reformation, and to tolerate them
in their ministry. Page 162. etc. 2 To harken to Papists and to tolerate
them, is most exceeding dangerous and pernicious Page 170.171. etc.
Cap. 10. Wherein is demonstrated, 1 That the unpreaching Ministry,
Non-residencie and subscription are troublers of the state Page 184.185. etc. 2
They are breeders of Atheism and Popery, and so ouerthrowers of the whole
land, if their be no remedy in time. Page 212. etc. 3 At which the Atheistes
laugh to their own confusion. Page 208. etc.
Cap. 11. Wherein is discried, that neither the reverend Fathers and learned
Prelates, standing for conformity, neither the godly Ministers desiring
reformation, are the only and proper causes of these troublesome dissensions
and evils following the same. But their are some other things, more specially
to be looked into, which may and ought to induce both parties unto peace, and
to join lovingly, in the building of Gods house: and that all English people
do humble themselves by prayer unto God, and carefully conform them selves
to the Gospel of Christ. Page 224.225. etc.
God save our most gracious and Christian Queen ELIZABETH.
To all the Reverend Fathers, the Bishops of this land, and to all the godly
learned Ministers of Jesus Christ, and to all the true and faithful favorers
of the holy faith and religion, now publikelie professed and maintained in
England: JOSIAS NICHOLS the least of the least of all Gods Saints, wishes
all grace, peace and joy in believing.
A Good name (says Solomon) is to be chosen above great riches, Prou. 22.1.
and loving favor is above silver, and above gold. Which then is most
excellent, when it is found in the fear of God, A good report and namely of a
minister, is a precius thing.
and our light shines to the glory and praise of God. But the name of a
Minister is yet of more regard, by whose standing and falling many are drawn,
and the reproach of such men reaches nerest to the heavens, and God is most
dishonored by their dishonor: for he has said, I will be sanctified in the^
that come near me: Leuit. 10.3.
and before all the people I will be glorified. Howbeit, the Gospel
proclaims all them blessed, who for Christ's sake are reviled, and against
whom, men do falsely say all manner of evil. For wicked men and infidels
speak evil of them, which run not with them to the same excess of riotte:
and beastly men will utter lewd words, against those things they know not.
Hereof it comes, that many men fall away, being not able to be are the
reproach: yet he which believes as he speaks, and knows what he believes:
he suffers as a Christian, and is not ashamed, but glorifieth God in this
behalf. Notwithstanding when a brother shall reproach his brother, Christians
to reproach one the other, hurtful to the Church.
and one Christian ill an other, and the house of God shall be divided: then is
it most dangerous. For there will the enemy of mankind, cast in many burning
fire brandes and heap on much dry wood, that we might be all consumed one of
another. And such (my most reverend and beloved brethren) has been our case
and condition: The state of many godly Ministers
because we have desired and sought after the good proceeding and perfection of
our Church, in the service and worship of Christ, and withholden our hands from
doing and allowing of some things, in our judgment, hurtful to the same,
and contrariant to the Gospel of truth: We have suffered and endured much
reproach and contempt: which we have patiently borne, and with great silence,
for diverse years sustained: that on our part, the sacred word of
righteousness, might not be ill spoken of and as much as in us lies, we might
cut of all occasions to the common adversary, to prevail against the holy
church of Christ, which is among us. But now it seems to me, that
notwithstanding all this, The causes of this treatise.
the state of things is worse then ever before: and I can not tell whether our
conniuence in suffering all evil speeches against us, has done the Church
harm. For now the Papist begin to comfort themselves, yea they challeng
unto them the name of honest and true men and good subjects: and by the
reproachfullname of Puritan, al godly Protestants are most cunningly
depraved. To have been called precisian, Puritan hoatheaded, proud,
contentious, schismatickes and troublers of the Church, we have borne it
patiently (God knowing our innocence) and could yet be are it more; so as by
our suffering of contempt, the Church of England, might receive honor, and Gods
people rejoice under good guiding pastoures. But when it is grown so far, that
we are called and accounted worse then Papists, enemies to the state, worse
then Seminary priests, like Jesuits, subuerters of the common wealth and
enemies to her Majesty's most royal Crown and dignity (for whose safety we
do continually and instantly pray) and that this is so far grown, that
the traitorous priests do brag of extraordinary favor, and under the name
of Puritans most frandulentlie and with most gross and palpable lying and
slaundring, traduce all Christian Churches: so that we verily think that if
such things go forward, they will in a short time cause a most woeful
overthrow of the whole state and of the Christian Church among us: we cannot
now forbear any longer, but that we must needs show unto all the world our
innocence: that the wrong which by ill and false report has been done unto
us, through our negligence and want of honest defense, be not made a strong
forge and a close mighty engine, to destroy all the happy and godly
proceedinges of her Majesty, turning up side down the joyful flourishing of
the Christian religion and Gospel. And we cannot now heal this soar by any
private doing; for it is spread abroad so universal, and men's minds are so
universally possessed therewith, that we have no way to do good but to come
into the open theater of the world to plead for our selves and to make
manifest the vprightnes of our cause, against all these most false, unjust and
slanderous imputations. Let me therefore entreat you all (Reverend Fathers and
Brethren) in godly charity to receive this our most just apology and with
Christian equity to consider of it, and with heavenly wisdom waying the
estate of the Church, and the present necessity, take every thing in that
meaning as it is written. And I do not doubt, but allthough the known and
professed enemy of all goodness the popish faction, (which now these three and
forty years have used all cunning treachery and treasonable platformes, to
bereave her Majesty (whom God almighty preserve still among us of this
present light and life of this world, and all this Realm by that means, of
the heavenly light and life of the world to come) though I say, these vowed
enemies of the Gospel and of this land, do freat, chafe and fume; yet shall
not you my de are brethren, neither any honest Christian and faithful subject,
have any just cause, to mislike this manner of writing: but rather (through the
hand of my God upon me) find and think it necessary at this time to be
published to al Christian people of this English nation. For I do herein
declare and show, what has been our cause and manner of proceeding, and that
as plainly without concealment, The contents of this book.
and as faithfully, without partiality to our selves, as I may boldly auoutch
every thing, to any man's conscience, which will be content with truth and all
the truth: and secondly how agreing al our cause and doings from time to
time, has been to the present estate, and her Majesty's proceedings in the
Gospel: Thirdly in clearing our cause and doings of the greatest accusations
and imputations, I make it plain how unequal and unjust the comparison is,
between us and the Papist: and lastly I do a little tourch, some other
things necessaritie appertaining to the premises. Now it may be that herein
I shall not satisfy all men: Hard satisfy all men.
paraduenture I shall offend some of the reverend Bishops and some other
learned Prelates standing for conformity: and it may be I shall not
perfectly answer the expectatation of the godly Ministers, who desire
reformation, or of some other wise and learned Christians. Herein doubtless I
have cause to suspect mine own insufficiency. For who can tell how to walk
perfectly with the Lord, and yet avoid all occasions of offense, where both the
parties have been at so hot war, and where there are men of so many
contrary judgments and affections? much less a man of so little helps and
so small gifts as I have. How be it I crave the patience and charitable taking
of this my writing of them both; and I hope they will accept my good will. For
in an especial love toward both parties I have taken this in hand: and have
set God before mine eyes before them both, that so near as I could and as far
as I know and am able, I utter that which is right in his sight, not seeking
to please ame man of either side: but endeavoring to do a work pleasing to
God, and good for his Church, I might minister occasion of profit to them both.
Knowing that now is the time that either side should cast of the love of
themselves, and turning their eyes from the sweet reflex of their own praise,
join in one heart against the common enemies, for the peace, increase,
perfection and honor of the Church of God in this land. Which my good and
honest meaning, if I have not so fully accomplished as I desire, I humble my
self unto God, and travel herein under his mercy: and I am ready, upon
good demonstration of my fault, to make a mends and to satisfy eather par^ie.
But if their be any of the reverend Fa^hers, or of the learned Prelates (which
God forbid) that be proud, I appeal from the proud.
froward or malicious, and will stand stiff upon their conceived purpose,
seeking them selves and their own things, and not the glory of God, and the
things which are Christ's: I esteem them no further then they deserve; I pray
GOD amend them, and turn their hearts. So on the other side, and renounce
all hypocrites.
if their be any man who seems to like reformation, who yet being an
hypocrite and false hearted, has any hidden poison in him (for it is no rare
thing to have a Judas among twelve, and false creeping brethren, who would
bring the Church into bondage, and make a pray of the same) as I know none
such, so I do renounce them in this Apology, and all other what so ever, that
do not love her M. with all their heart, and are not true and upright favorers
of the Gospel, as it is taught in England by public authority, or have in
him any treacherous or wicked purpose against the same, any manner of way. And
I pray God to make them to be known: yea if any man be guilty in his
conscience of any evil, let him be ashamed, and let him hide him self and
seek the shifts of wicked men in darkness.

But as for us, our cause is just before God, and we have done no hurt to her
Majesty, and we know and believe, that when the appointed time of God shall
come, and his counsel has sufficiently tried us: he will bring forth our
righteousness as the light, and our judgment as the noone day. Therefore I
think it my duty without all fear, to open to all the world, what manner of
trespassers we are, and to commend to the conscience of all wise, learned, and
godly Christians (when they shall thoroughly understand rightly weigh every
thing as it is) the righteousness of our cause, and the vprightnes of our
meaning. O God and heavenly Father, thou judge of all flesh and searcher of
the heart and raines, send forth thy light and thy truth, judge thou the cause
of thy servants, and take it into thy thine own hands: And cause thy people
to return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him
that serves God and him that serves him not. And let thy gracious countenance
shine always upon this land and upon thine anointed handmaide, our Sovereign
Queen Elizabeth: defend, protect and guide her, establish thy covenant of peace
with her and this English nation for ever, even the sure mercies of David. For
thy holy Sons sake Jesus Christ, Amen,

At Eastwell in Kent this 4. of June. 1602.
Cap. 1.
Wherein is showed, 1. That they be not Puritans in deed who now in England are
so called: 2. That name is very fit and proper for all Papists. 3 What are the
causes that some of her Majesty's most faithful and obedient subjects are
termed Puritans. 4 The true state of their cause.

WE read in the story of the primative church of diverse sorts of heretics,
What be ^ritans.
who for their opinions of their own Pureness contrary to the truth of holy
Sicripure, might very well be called Puritans. As namely such as very
proudly and odiouslie (as Saint Augustine writes) called themselves Cathari,
De haeres, (...) 3.8.
(which may well, out of the original word, be translated by the name of
Puritan) for their purity or cleanes: and these he says followed Nouatus,
and were therefore called Nouatians. The Pelagians also were Puritanes, 88
holding (as he says) that the life of a just man in this world, has no
sin at all, and that of them the Church is made up in this mortal life, that
it might be altogether without spote or wrinckle: Of this latter sort were
the Donatistes. 82
There were also Puritanes called Iouinianistes, affirming that a man can not
sin after he has received the lauacre of regeneration. Ebion also and
diverse others, Eus. Pamph. hist. lib. 3. cap 27.
thought so well of them selves, that they claue to the law, as the Pharisees,
looking to be justified by their works and not by faith only. All these and
many others having opinion of their own purity, and despising others, might
justly and truly be called Puritanes. But such ministers and other good
christian men and weomen, Godly Ministers and people in England no Puritans.
who in this Land, under her Majesty's most happy reign (whom God continue
in safety with the longest liver) have embraced the Gospel, and by it
abandoned all these and all other heresies and falshoodes, and endeavor to
follow the same Gospel, with all their souls, and in simplicity and
humblenes of mind, have been desirous that themselves should draw nearer and
nearer unto God, and that the Church of England (as it is very well, and very
much reformed out of popish idolatry and superstition) might more and more
grow forward unto such perfection, as in this frail life might be attained:
be very uncharitably and unjustly called by that odious and heretical name
of Puritan. For if we would search all England from the tenth year of her
Majesty's most gracious reign (about which time this wicked slander did first
begin) unto this present time: there can not be brought forth any one, out
of those, who faithfully and in the fear of God have sought reformation
(how so ever for that cause they have been and are untruly so called) that
ever did arrogate any such thing to themselves, We account not our selus pure.
as to be thought purer then other men: but always they have acknowledged
themselves to be great and grievous sinners, as well as other men: accounting
their own righteousness to be as a stained cloth: and rejoicing of no other
pureness, but that which is by the blood of Christ, when for his sakes our
sins are forgiven, and thorough faith in him our souls are purified, and his
righteousness imputed unto us, by the free mercy and grace of God. Therefore
except we would call black, white: and bitter sweet, there is no reason in
the world to call any such by the odious name of Puritanes.

2. But the Papists indeed being the true followers and scholars of the
Cathari, Nouatus, Papists are in deed Puritanes.
Pelagius, and of the Ebionites, Donatistes and of all such like Puritan
heretics, may justly and very fitly be called Puritanes. For they hold
that in their regenerate men after Baptism, Council. Trid. less. 6. and ses. 5
there is nothing that may be said to have the reason of sin, and that
they are able to fulfill all the commandments of God: and they affirm that
they have an inherent righteousness which they keep as a pure and immaculate
robe, to the obtaining of salvation: and that they are righteous, justified,
and deserve salvation by their works: that they have among them devout and
holy men, (whom they call religious) Moncks, Test. Rhem upon Luc. 10.
Friars, Nuns, Jesuits and Seminaries, Ven. 42. and 2 cor 2. verse 10. and ca.
8. verse. 14. Will. Allen of pardons. cap. 11. and 1^.
who in their religious order live (as they say) a Seraphicall and angelical
life, and being virgins, void of all seculare affairs, as pure and chaste
votaries, in contemplation serving God day and night, are able to merit not
only for them selves, but also for others: and of the superaboundancie of their
works of Supererogation they may communicate to others, and the Pope may by
indulgence, apply their merits for the relief of others out of purgatory,
and such like. These undoubtedly may and are properly to be called Puritanes,
because they indeed arrogate unto them selves purity and holiness, and despise
all others: which the true children of God (though thus belyed and slaundered)
dare not in any case to do; but contrarily they cry out with the Psalmist
unto God: Enter not into judgment. Psalm. 143, 2. Luc. 18.13.
And with the Publicane: Have mercy upon me a sinner.

3 But the cause original and order, whereby these reproachful terms were
given to good Christians, How the name of putitanes came up in England
I find to be this: In the beginning of her Majesty's most happy reign
(whom I humbly pray our God to prolong as long as Sun and Moon endure) the
Gospel being published, and Preachers ordained to teach the people: Many
people within a while feeling some taste of the heavenly comfort, began to
delight in hearing of Sermons, singing of Psalms, in reading and godly talk
of holy Scriptures which they were taught. And therevvithal did somewhat
refrain profane and unprofitable customs, and sometime they admonished their
neighbors, if they did swear, and pray them to go with them to the Sermon.
The greater sort of the people, being old barrels which could hold no new
wine, addicted partly to Popery and partly to licentiousness, having many
of them no other God, but their belly, vvoulde deride and scoff at them, and
called them holy brethren and holy sisterne: saying, He is one of the pure
and unspotted brethren. Godly exercise scorned by the wicked.
Diverse Ministers also entering upon that weighty charge, when they (being
learned) came to the practice of the communion book, found them selves
troubled in some things, and some certain ceremonies were a scruple unto the^.
And as it is said in the preface of the said book, it was not thought fit at
the first to take away all those things, which seemed to be superstitious, but
to take the middle way to abandon some and to retain some: So by this
occasion the Papists and other people not well affected to religion and
godliness, after a while began to find holes in the Ministers coats, Papists
and Atheists pick quarrels with good men.
and devised diverse ways of molestation and troubled them, not a little. They
open their cause to the reverend Bishopes of those times, and found great
kindness at their hands at the first, and they were a good and comfortable
shadow unto them for a season. But about the tenth year of her Majesty's
reign, the Papists as men which began to shake of the fear, wherewith the
mighty God, protecting and blessing her Majesty's most godly and Christian
proceedings, had strocken them, the Papists (I say) began to come forth of
their dens, and as it is well known to the state, practiced diverse
treacherous attemptes; but among other, they preferred such grievous
accusations against the godly and faithful Ministers; that then and from
thence forth, they were left naked, and a great storm fell upon them; and so
it continued now and then sharper, and some time their was a calm, and men
breathed and returned to the Lords work. About anno 1571. Subscription came
forth first Anno 1571.
(as I take it) Subscription was first enforced upon the ministry, for which
cause in that time certain men wrote and admonition to the parliament, opening
diverse things worthy reformation. Whereupon arose great volumes of proving,
and defending, which are famouslie known to all men, that understand of these
cause. But how flesh and blood did in these writings ouer-sway the Christian
moderation and mildnes, which brethren should have been very careful of, in
contending for truth, by the hot pursuit of either side, I rejoice not to
rehearse, and I am sorry as often as I think upon the lamentable effects and
hurt of the Church in those times: How be it, our merciful God, whose
unchangeable love, does swallow up many of our infirmities and follies,
granted unto us in the midst of these fiery contentions, a goodly space of
quietness about the time that the reverend father Master Grindall was
Archbishop of Canturburie. In which time in all the south parts of England,
there was great concord among the Ministers, and they joined in great love
and joy one with another in the Lords work. So that in the space of 4. or 5.
years (as I remember) there were infinite souls brought to the knowledge of
Christ: and the people reioysed for the consolation, seeing and beholding how
greatly they were bound to praise God, for her Majesty's most christian
government, under whose most godly proceedings, they had sucked and tasted
the sweet and vndeceaueble milk of Gods truth, even the holy faith of Gods
elect, the doctrine of salvation. It was a golden time, full of godly fruit,
great honor to the Gospel, great love and kind fellowship among all the
Ministers, preaching the faith, and the people united in the true fear of God
and cheerful reverence to her Majesty. But this life not affoording constant
prosperity to heavenly love and growth of godliness.

After the said Archbishops decease, there came forth a new and fresh assault
of subscription, universally imposed, Anno Dom. 1584. the woeful year of
subscription.
and again enforced upon all the Ministers in three articles.

First of the Queens Majesty's Sovereign authority over all persons, etc.
Second, that the book of common prayer and of or dayninge Bishops, Priests
and Deacons, contain in it nothing contrary to the word of God, etc.
Third, to allow and approve all the articles of religion agreed upon by the
Archbishops and Bishops, etc. 1562. and to believe all therein contained to be
agreeable to God. When in the visitations and public meetinges the Ministers
were called to subscribe: they offered very freely and willingly to subscribe
the first article of her Majesty's most lawful authority. And for the other
two they refused to do any further, the^ by law they were bound, and name lie
according to the statute made for that purpose anno 13. Hereupon many in
diverse Shires were suspended from the execution of their Ministry, and some
deprived. And great division arose in the Church, the one suing for reformation
and to be eased of such burdens, and the other urging very straightly the
former things, and punishing such as would not be conformable. Then came there
forth a new cloud of writing and men's affections waxing vvhote and drawing
to the worse, it was a very common name to all these Ministers to be called
Puritanes: As men which made conscience of many things, which the reverend
Fathers, and many learned men affirmed to be lawful.

In all this time there was much preaching in the Universities, about
nonresidents and unpreaching ministers: and there should you see a plain
division, one sort called youths, and the other sort which took not such
liberty, were called Precisians. And this is grown both in the University
and in the country town and city, that who so fears an oath, or is an
ordinary resorter to sermons, earnest against excess, riot, popery, or any
disorder, they are called in the university precisians, and in other places
Puritans.

4 And thus as faithfully as I can, I have showed how this name came up, and
whereupon honest and godly men have been and ar called puritans or precisians:
here it follows to be considered out these things, what is their offense,
and the state of their cause: For four things men are called puritanes.
which may be referred to four heads: 1 scruple in the use of certain
ceremonies: 2 scruple in subscribing beyond the state: 3 seeking for
reformation of some ceremonies and of some part of the ecclesiastical
discipline. 4 the people do hear sermons, talk of the Scriptures, singe
Psalms together in private houses, etc. Now whether for these causes they be
justly called puritans and troublers of the state, etc. it remains to be
examined and discussed. For the plain opening whereof, I will first show such
honest reasons as make for their lawful excuse, proouing manifestly that they
are to be holden as good and faithful subjects, honest Christians, and godly
ministers. Secondly I will open the vanity of the principal imputations
which are urged against them; and thirdly, propound some other such
considerations, as are necessarily annexed to both.

Cap. 2.
Wherein is declared: 1. That the ministers and people, which have desired and
sought for reformation of some things in the ecclesiastical state of this land,
are warranted in their doings, by the principal rule and Canon of our Church,
namely the holy Scriptures. 2. Martin Marprelate, the Brownistes, and Hacket
stirred up by Satan to hinder their good cause 3. Preaching against
nonresidence, and unpreaching ministers; and all the Christian exercises of the
people, agrees to the holy Scriptures.

THe greatest glory of the militant church is the presence of God: Gods
presence the glory of the Church.
and if GOD forsake them, their glory is departed: therefore when he
honors his Church, he says: This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell.
Psalm. 132.14.
And this is the glorious renown of Gods people: The Lord his God is with
him, and the joyful shout of a King is among them. Number. 24.21. Cap. 52.7.
For which cause, as says the Prophet Esaias: The feet of his messen gers be
beautiful upon the mountains when they preach these glade tyding, saying to
the Church. Thy God reigns. And there indeed God reigns where his word
bears the pre-eminence. For his word is his Scepter, and the rod of his
mouth.

And this is the great privilege of his Church, Romans 3.2. Psalm. 147, 19.
that to them be committed the oracles of God: He shows his word unto Jacob,
his statutes and his judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt so with every
nation, etc. Here is my joy and the precious comfort of all Gods children in
this land, Queen Elizabeth the joy of the godly.
that the Lord, our merciful and loving God, of his rich grace and free
favor, has given us such a virtuous and religious Princes, who being stirred
up by his spirit and guided by his holy hand, in the midst of so many
enemies, and through so many and wonderful daugers, has cheerefullie, bouldly,
and with the Majesty of the Lords anointed, proclaimed Gods truth: and
aduauncing Gods holy Testament, has banished the beggarlie rudiments of this
world, the traditions and unwritten falshoodes of men: and as a true and
faithful Noursemother, has fostered his Church now these three and forty
years, in great plenty and peace, under his blessed presence and glorious
protection. So that, our enemies being Judges, it must needs be confessed
that God is with us of a truth. Therefore as it becomes the true people and
Congregation of GOD, the Church of England humbly submitting it self to his
law, does meekelie and constantly confess that: It is not lawful for the
Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods written word. Artic. 20.
And for this cause they describe the visible Church of Christ to be A
Congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure word of God is preached,
and dutifully and truly affirm, Artic. 19.
that: In our doings, that the will of God is to be followed, which we have
expreslie declared unto us in the word of God. Artic. 17.
Now my dear brethren and fathers, if I shall show that the things we have
done, do answer to his holy Canon of Gods written word: The godly Ministers
guided by the Canon of holy scripture
I hope it shall appear that we have not been against the Church, but for the
Church. And first for the ceremonies: they are reputed very small things, and
therefore we ought not to trouble the church about them. Consider therefore
with me, Of ceremonies.
I beseech you, that as a very small thing troubles the eye of a man's body:
so is the conscience and faith of a true Christian, and especially of a
faithful Minister. Exodus 10.26.
Therefore Moses when he was in greatest danger of life, would not yield that
one hoof should be left behind, of that which God had commanded to go out of
Egypt. Dan. 6 10.
And Daniel when he knew that there was a law sealed against him of present
death, yet would he not shut his window, or leave of praying to God, any one
time of thrice in the day, to save his life. Gal. 2.3.4.5.
And the Apostle Paul, in a matter of Christian liberty, would not give
place by subjection for the space of one hour. And of this precisenes god
himself is the author. Deuteronomy. 12.2.3
First where he says: Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the
nations, which ye shall possess, served their Gods, upon the hie mountains
and upon the hills, and under every green tree. Also ye shall overthrow their
altars, and break down their pillars, and burn their groves with fire, and
ye shall hew down the graven images of their Gods and abolish their names out
of that place, ye shall not so do unto the Lord your God. According to this
precept we freely and thankfully acknowledge and praise God, that her Majesty
has abolished the very face of idolatry, and very few Kings of Judah came so
far in reformation of Religion. Yet do we entreat our reverend Fathers we be
not held for rebels, and unthankful persons and troublers of the state: if
finding some few things in our ministry, that we are afeard to do, for
displeasing God; we humbly crave either reformation or toleration. For
verelie we are enforced so to do by this Scripture, for if here we be
commanded to abolish the very names of the idols, and not to do so to the
Lord (that is to say, not to worship God insuch manner) when we find that
the surplice is part of the character of the popish Priesthood, Act: monumentes
page 853. and 501.
by which and in which they worship their idols as in which they worship their
manner of degrading. And that the cross in Baptism, has ascribed unto it by
man's authority, 1. Cor. 14.40.
the sacramental signification of Baptism as the confessing of of the faith
of Christ crucified, etc. which is more then the Church has authority to do,
whose limitation is set, to make laws no further then order and comelines. And
that in reading of Apocrypha Scriptures we should read untruths and errors
for instruction of manners contrariant to his holy canon. We are very much
afeard that we retain the name and memorial of idol service, and that we do
so to God in his worship, as idolaters have done to his dishonor unto their
idols. And therefore we dare not do these things for displeasing of God,
although we desire heartily, in all things to satisfy and content our
superiors. And here unto we find our selves (as we verily think) greatly
pressed and urged: because God says unto us, Esaias. 30.22.
Ye shall pollute the covering of the images of silver, and the rich ornament
of thine images of gold, and cast them away as a menstruous cloth, and thou
shall say unto it, get thee hence. And again: 1. These. 5.12. Iud. verse. 23.
Marc. 11.16. Math. 21.
Abstain from all appearance of evil. And again: Hate even the garment
spotted by the flesh. And Christ himself was so precise, that he would not
suffer that any man should carry a vessel through the Temple. Therefore we are
touched in conscience, that in our ministry we should not do any thing
resembling the idolatrous sinagogue, or to have the least fellowship or mark of
their ungodly ways. How be it we have not preached nor inueighed against,
neither in any sort depraved the book: yea if we had not been to neerlie
pressed upon, for the doing of them, so as our suffering and wincking at them,
would have sufficed, to declare our love of the Churches peace, I verily
think, they would not have come into so open question.

The next thing we seem to falt in is the refusal to subscribe absolutely, Of
subscription.
to the two last articles. Our innocence before God, our obedience to her
Majesty, and upright following of his holy Canon; can not appear: unless I
open somewhat more plainly, what these two articles contain. The first of the
two, which is the second of the subscription, comprehends the whole book
of common prayer and of ordering of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, so that we
must by our hand writing auoutch that every rubric, clause and sentence in
these books are wholly and perfectly agreeing to holy Scripture, and in no
one rubric or clause contrary to the same: and secondly to promise to use
the form and none other. Then in the third article, we are bound to approve,
all the articles made by the Bishops in the co^uocation holden Anno 1562.
which contain not only matters of doctrine, but also of order and discipline,
wherein there be 22 homilies appointed to be red in the Church, that by our
hand we should acknowledge, that these and every of these be agreeable to
God. How far the godly Ministers are conformable.
The difference between the reverend Fathers and us herein is this: First
that we do willingly use the book of common prayer and no other form,
unless sometime upon extraordinary occasion, by public authority some
other prayer be assigned us: only we leave out some few things, or
perauenture explain some one clause. Secondly we profess our selves to enjoy
our ministry by no other order, but by order of that book, which is the book
of ordering Bishops, etc. Thirdly we subscribe willingly to the book of
Articles according to the statute 13 in that behalf provided: namely to those
Articles which only concern the confession of the true faith and ye doctrine
of sacraments, as that statute expressly commands and limiteth. Now finding
(in examining of these books) many things doubtful in our consciences, we
dare not promise or subscribe further the^ according to these words. And
therefore for this cause we exhibited an humble petition to the reverend
assembly of the Co^uocation, holden Anno 1585. with our reasons why we refused
to subscribe, in such ample manner as they required.

This being that which we have done and stood in: it remains to be
examined, whether herein we have broken this holy Canon of our Church. If we
subscribe we break the Canon of holy scripture.
I will therefore show some two or three instances, whereby it shall appear,
that if we had subscribed, we had done contrary to this holy Canon of Gods
written word, wherein I will be as sparing as I can, because I would by no
means utter any thing, which might tend to the deprauing of the said books,
but only as necessity constrains, to make it appear, that by this
subscription we are compelled to do that, which is contrary to the Scripture
of God: and which we find not to be the meaning of the Law, in commanding the
use of these books, neither of the authors of the books in penning of the
same. And first we should subscribe that it is not contrary to the word of
God, to read in the Church under the name of holy Scripture, such books (as
namely the Apocrypha) which are not holy Scripture, and such chapters as
contain matter, directly contrary to the holy Scripture. For in the book of
common prayer, in the rubric next after the order for the reading of the
Psalms, there be these words. The order how the rest of holy Scripture,
beside the Psalter, is appointed to be red. Which being the direction for all
lessons and chapters, upon all days in the year, which are to be red in the
Church by that book: does appoint diverse Apocrypha books, as Tobith, Judith,
Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus etc. In the 26 of August, the story of Susanna and of
Bell and the Dragon are appointed to be red, under the name of the thirteen
and fourteen chapters of Daniell, In prolog. in Daniel.
which Hierom thursteth through with a spit, as no part of Daniels writings, and
calls Bell and the Dragon fables. We think it greatly against this holy
Canon, that fables should be red under the name of holy Scriptures, which
says, Cast away profane and old wives fables: 1. Tim. 4.7. Math 28.20
and teach them to observe whatsoever I command. In the 4 of October there is
appointed to be red, the 12 of Tobie, wherein the 15 verse the Angel says, I
am Raphaelone of the seven holy Angels, which present the prayers of the
Saints, which we take to be contrary to the Canon, which says, We have an
advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the just. And again, There is one God
and one Mediator between God and man, 1. Ioh. 2.1. 1. Tim. 2.5.
the man Jesus Christ. In the 17 and 18 days of November, are appointed to be
red the 46 and 48 of Ecclus, where the one makes Samuel to prophecy after
his death, contrary to Reuclat. 14.13. which says that the Dead rest from
their labors: and the other interpret the Prophet Malachie cap. 4. ver. 5. of
Eliah himself, contrary to the Scripture which expounds of John Baptist, as
Math. 11.14. and Luke. 1.17. Secondly this Canon of holy scripture shows us,
that it is proper to the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, to be
signs certifying of the favor of God and instruments whereby we receive
power and strength against Satan, Sin, etc. And to represent the spiritual
union betwixt Christ and his Church: for it says, By one spirit all we are
baptized into one body, 1. Cor. 12.13. Gal. 3 27. 1. Cor. 10.16
etc. All ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. The cupe of
blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ,
etc. Whereby it appears that these two are seals of the covenant, which is
in Christ, wherein all those things are contained. Again, he that ordained
them for this purpose is God, who only can give signs of his own good will
and covenant, as it is written: 1. Cor. 2.11.
The things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God. Therefore the
Apostle when there was disorder about the Lords supper, did reduce them to Gods
institution, 1. Cor. 11 23.
showing that he delivered to the^ no other, but that which he received.
Thereby inferring that the institution of the Sacrament was of God, therefore
he durst not add unto it, neither yet have imposed it upon them, but that he
received it of the Lord. Therefore when the book of common prayer does
affirm, That confirmation is ministered to them that be Baptized, In the Rubrik
before confirmation.
that by imposition of hands and prayer, they may receive strength and defense
against all temptations to sin, etc. And that after the example of the holy
Apostles, In the later prayer of confirmation.
they lay their hands upon them, to certify them (by this sign) of Gods
favor and gracious goodness toward them. And that Matrimony signifies unto us
the mystical union, that is bee^wixt Christ and his Church. Seeing that by
these terms, In the first ex hortatiou of matrimony.
there is ascribed to imposition of hands and matrimony, to be signs and
seals of the covenant, which is proper to the Sacraments, and that no man can
make any sign of such a mystical and Sacramental nature, to signify Gods
good will, unless he have authority from God: we therefore conclude that if
we should subscribe, we should allow that which is contrary to Gods word.
Unless they can show that the Church or any man, has power to make such
signs, or that God has ordained these to that end, and that the Apostles
showed such example; which we verily think they will never do. Again the
Canon of holy scripture teaches that there are diversities of ministeries but
one Lord. 1. Cor. 12.5.
And that, God has set in his Church, first Apostles then Prophets etc. 28
Teaching thereby that as Christ only is head of the Church: so is he Lord
over all the Ministeries thereof, and that all kind of Ministeries are by his
institution, even ordained of God, and so consequently have their description
in Gods word. Wherefore it is said else where: He gave some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.11.12.
some Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints, for
the work of the ministry, etc. Now in the book of orders, there is an
office of ministry called the Deacon: whose description is not to be found
in Gods book, namely consisting in helping the Priest in divine service,
especially when he ministers the holy communiion, in reading holy Scriptures
and homilies in the congregation, instructing the youth in the Catechism, in
Baptising and Preaching, if he be admitted thereunto by the Bishop: but he must
not administer the Lords supper or Discipline, but after a year he is admitted
to ye order of priesthood. Seeing that this kind of ministry, has no
resemblance with the office of the Deacon, Act. 6. or 1. Tim. 3. neither any
other office described or instituted by God, in all the new Testament, namely
that he should do all things, saving ministering the Lords Supper and
Discipline, or that he might Preach and Baptize, and not be of the order of
Priesthood (as they call it.) We therefore think that in subscribing
hearevnto, we should offend the holy Canon of Scripture, and allow that which
is contrary to the same, by our subscription. There be many other which some
of us Ministeers of Kent, delivered to the Reverend Archbishop of Canturburie
as our doubts, which for breuities sake I omit: because my purpose is not
herein to dispute, or to open other men's faults, but only by two or three
instances to make manifest that we did not break this holy canon of our
Church. For if (as they say) In our doeings, that will of God is to be
followed, which we have expressie declared unto us, in the word of God: the^
may we not subscribe to these two articles: wherein many things by our
subscription, should be allowed, not to be contrary to the word of God, which
are indeed contrary to the same.

Now our third fault is, that we did seek by supplication, to the reverend
assembly of the convocation house, Of suiug for reformation.
by petition of the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable privy counsel and
to the high Court of Parliament: and by diverse public writings, partly
apologeticall, partly supplicatorie, that we might have reformation in these
things, or at the least such toleration, as we might not be burdened with
subscription, or the strict observation of ceremonies, but behauing our selves
otherwise peaceable, and as good subjects and discreet ministers, we might not
be troubled nor molested about these things. And for this cause we did meet in
the Parliament time, and at other times while our trouble did last, to consult
and devise what way we might take, to obtain favor and reconciliation or
reformation; or releasment of our suspensions or other troubles. In all which,
as I must needs confess, that I was among the Ministers of Kent, not one of
the hindemost (being suspended, only for not subscribing, from the last day
of January, until the third day before the nativity of Christ:) So do I
profess to all the world that I know not any thing, which we did in our
meeting, or in our supplications, or apologeticallwritings, but that which was
comely for men of our sort: and as our forefathers the faithful Ministers of
Christ, in the primitive Church, did in like case before us. For the Ministers
of Christ, finding themselves, in the testimony of their consciences, to be
heavily burdened with the ordinances of the Church we live in: humbly to
declare their grieuances to the Magistrates in authority, in times and places
which may relieve them: to show by public writings the vprightnes of their
cause and by petition to crave some Christian and godly remedy, is doubtless
agreeing to all law of God and man, and therefore I hope I shall not need to
use any arguments to prove the same: which we know our adversaries, being in
our case, would think themselves to have great wrong to be denied. Our fault
is that we did not commend our cause to the Queen.
But if any thing be our fault, I take it to be this: That we did not
present our cause to the Queens most excellent M. being a Prince of rare
clemency, wisdom and justice. Whom when we did know to be so equal,
favorable, mild, and of such incredible long animitie, and that to her
greatest adversaries and deadly enemies the Papists, who always have sought
mischief against her person, Crown and dignity: we were doubtless much
ouerseene, that we commended not our cause to her most gracious and Princely
consideration. For the goodness of our cause, and the innocence of our
persons, being manifested before her Princely eyes; it could not have been
possible, but that so prudent and Christian a Magistrate vvoulde speedily have
eased all our sorrovves, and ended these woeful troubles of the Church.

2 But while we partly fearing, and partly hoping as though the reverend
Fathers themselves, to whom we used, beside our supplications diverse
means, would at the length have joined with us, to the ending of these
vnvvholsome strifes: and that we trusted that our merciful God pitying his
Church, vvoulde have raised up some means, to further his own cause: while
the time slipped away, and men's minds vvauered, this way and that way, three
most grievous accidents, did greatly astonish us, and very much darken the
righteousness of our cause. The first was a foolish iester, who termed
himself Martin Marprelate and his sons, Martin Marprelate a filthy
Sycophant.
which under counterfeit and apish scoffing, did play the Sycophant: and
slanderously abused many persons of reverend place and note. And such was the
wisdom of the time, that many filthy and lewd pamphletes, came forth against
him casting forth much stinking doung and beastly filth, into the faces of
honest men: to the great contempt of Christ's holy Gospel, and the very
apparent disparagement of the faithful labors of all godly Ministers, on
both sides. This kindled a marvelous great fire, even that, which S. James
says is set on fire of hell, and is a world of wickedness. Cap, 3.6
It beewraied the weakness of many a man: and showed, how hard it is for flesh
and blood to hold in the raines of his own aspiring affections, rather to
endure reproach then to endamage the Church of God; or wisely to forethinke
that we ought rather to suffer wrong, then that the glorious Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, should be evil spoken of How so ever it was, the blame
lighted upon us, and we by it obtained a new name, in many pulpites (how justly
God knows) we are called Martinistes. Then did our troubles increase, and
the persuite was hardly followed against us: the enemy of the Gospel for
slowed not the occasion, to make our good, just, honest and godly cause, to be
ill thought of and very much condemned: as if the very state had taken
knowledge, that we were wicked men, our cause unjust, and we no longer to be
suffered. So great hurt is it, when an honest and lawful course is begun, for
foolish and hairbraine men to thrust in themselves and to hazard such means as
God never sanctified. For God needs not our folly: 1. Cro. 15.13.
but will make a breach among us if we seek him not in order. Howbeit when our
cause was left naked, and many of us in great hazard: God him self gave witness
to his truth, manifested his judgments, and delivered his innocent servants:
so that it plainly appeared, to the wiser and discreter sort, that the Devil
was the author of this disgrace. In this time also, happened the second and
third evil: the Brownistes took offense against both sides, The Brownists and
Hacket of an evil spirit.
and made a temerarious and wicked separation: and some two or three men, being
beewitched with some proud honor; by a certain man and frantic spirit, lifted
up themselves with hie words of blasphemy, whose working this was, all wise
men know, who know the wiles of Satan. How be it these also were drawn upon
us, and made a notable matter, to aggrauate our cause. But God who sees in
secret, and beholds the bitter gaul of Simon Magus, Act. 8.23.
the filthy dissolutenes of Nicholas, the freating canker of Hyminaeus and
Philetus: the dogs, the evil workers, concision, and all false Apostles,
which transform them selves into Apostles of Christ, namely that these did
much mischief and brought great trouble to the first beginning and planting of
the primitive Church: he, even he knows, that these things were cunningly
wrought, by these deep sleightes and suggestions of that old serpent; too
hinder our good cause, and to hurt the prosperous and godly proceedings of the
Church of England. For by this means, we finding the mighty winds and strong
stream against us, were feign to humble our selves under Gods mercy, and
commending our selves and our cause to him, who judges righteously: we
reserved ourselves to a better time, when it should please his gracious
wisdom, to make his own truth to appear, and to move the minds of our
superiors to be more favorable.

3 Then took the idle and unpreaching Ministers comfort at the heart,
supposing their standing to be good: and the non-residents had their mouths
enlarged: it became dangerous both in the University and country to reprove
either of these, and the people were become conuenticlers, if they met together
to sing a Psalm, or to talk of Gods word. And there was not a better way to
maintain an evil cause, or to bring any honest man out of favor, then to
show thy self an enemy to Puritances; and to entitle him, whom thou would
disgrace with the name of a Puritan. Yet let us see whether this holy Canon
of Scripture, will not bear us out, to preach and speak against these kinds
of Prelates, or to use such kind of exercises. First the Prophets call them
blind watchmen, Esa. 56.10.11.
dumb dogs and greedy dogs, which can never have enough. They cry out
upon them and say: O idol sheapheard that leaves the flock, Zac. 11.17.
the sweard shall be upon his right arm, and upon his right eye. Woe unto the
sheapheardes which feed themselves, should not the sheapheardes feed the
flocks? Ezech. 34.2.
And Christ says of them: Math. 15.14.
They be the blind leaders of the blind And the Apostles call upon them
earnestly, saying, Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock whereof
the holy Ghost has made you overseers, Act. 20.28.
to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. And
again: Feed the flock of God which depends upon you, 1. Pet. 5.2.
etc.: If we speak after this Canon, of the Prophets, Christ and the
Apostles, are we troublers of the state? or are not they, who in their actions
do contrary to the reueiled will of God in his word? And when the same holy
Scripture, exhorts men and weomen, and commands them, to talk of Gods
word in their houses, and when they walk in the way: and that the same
should dwell plentifully in us, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Colos. 3.16.
in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing our selves in Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual songs: shall honest men and weome^ be therefore called Puritans, and
their godly and Christian meetings be termed conuenticles? And if Gods
spirit say unto us: Heb, 10, 20.
Consider one another, and provoke unto love and good works not for saking the
fellowship we have among our selves, as the manner of some is, but let us exhort
one another, etc. Shall honest Christians be reproached for endeavoring the
same? And if they admonish any neighbor for swearing, or any other disorder,
or call them to hear a Sermon, are they by and by vile Puritanes? I hope all
wise and godly Christians, examining these things aright, and waying them,
with the equal ballaunce of Gods sanctuary: will conclude with me; that in all
these things, especially in regard of the matter of our cause (howsoever
perauenture, we cannot be or have not been, all of us, at all times, perfectly
wise in the manner of doing, we have not broken the principal Canon of our
Church, but faithfully labored to square our actiones, after the express
rule of Gods holy word, and therefore falsely and injuriously called Puritanes,
Precisians, and troublers of the state.

Cap. III.
That the Ministers and people who have disired reformation in some Church
matters, have therein followed the Christian laws, and godly proceedinges of
the Ecclesiastical estate.

THAT some fevv should differ from so many reverend learned and godly Fathers
of the Church, it is and has been alvvaies in the opinion of natural men, Men
judge by the outward show.
a very great prejudice. and the authority of the greater part, ouersvvaieth
the lesser, and sometime the better. For men most commonly judge by outward
appearance. And therefore Christ him self being void of outward beauty and
form, Isai. 5.3.2.
was despised and rejected of men: and it was thought a goodly mighty reason
against his doctrine, when they could say: Does any of the Rulers, or of the
Pharisees believe in him? How be it in our Ecclesiastical state, there is
matter of great consideration: that the one side should conster all things
that were done at the first, with great charity and Christian piety: and the
other not to be so straight as to justify every particular. The Queens
Majesty, (God save her and bless her) coming to her Crown, The most
Christian magnanimity of Queen Elizabeth.
in a troublesome and dangerous time, when fear seemed to be on all sides; her
own subjects for the most part male contents, and the mighty Potentates all
enemies round about her: it showed doubtless the wonderful work of God, and
most Christian and royal magnanimity in her Majesty, especially being a
tender branch and a maiden Queen: that she adventured to go so far in
reformation of religion, and in setting forth of the purity of the Gospel.
We must think also that those few godly learned men, who considered,
examined and penned the books, not to have been alone, without some men of
great learning and countenance, which would sway against truth as much as
might be: therefore no doubt very wislie for the time, they did so carry the
matter, that the most weighty part of that they did is without all exception,
some things may have a very good interpretation, and that which is otherwise,
perauenture was not espied: as in a more peaceable time, at more leisure, and
with greater advise might have been. And verelie to speak my conscience, It is
the singular mercy of God that our Church is so well reformed.
I take it to be the singular mercy of God, that it happened so well, and
that the books be so pure as they are, the doctrine of faith so fully and so
sincerely declared; the order of Gods worshipe so free from idolatry, and the
ministry so neerelie framed to the Apostolical times, so that every good
Christian, and honest subject has very great cause highly to praise God, for
such exceeding good liberty, and to pray continually for her Majesty's most
happy preservation; and to be thankful to those reverend men, who did so
wisely and faithfully discharge their duty. These things being thus at the
beginning, the Apologetical writings of very faithful and learned men, in
explaning the Christian purpose of our Church: and the statutes, articles,
Canons, and iniunctio^s seemed to aim at this mark: That in peace and
quietness, we might not only enjoy that which was first established, but also
come the nearest that might be, to the pure fountain of Gods word. It does
seem unto me, that either all these things, which we desire, or the most
needful to be reformed, had been long ere this amended: if the common enemy
of mankind, (who enuieth that we should have any thing so well as we have) had
not cast in a block of civil debate amongst us. And I marvel not at it: seeing
so many Papists and profane persons did use all stratagematicall insinuations,
to kindle the fire, and to nourish it being kindled: that if God had not
moderated the hot fury and immoderate stiffenes of some men to maintain that
they had begun, doubtless it would have been far worse then it is, His
holy name be praised.

And this very thing you shall not obscurelie perceive, if you mark and
consider well that which I am in hand to speak of: The laws and proceedings of
the ecclesiastical state, much favor reformation.
and weigh it well without partiality: namely that the laws and proceeding
of the Ecclesiastical state do very much favor and agree unto those things
which we desire: And that the learneder sort of the Clergy be of your
judgment for the most part: although the earnest maintenance of the former
controversies have made a very great rent in our agreement, which especially
you shall perceive, if you mark what contradiction one book has with
another, yea and the same sometime with it self: and how our learned Writers in
defense of our religion, do faithfully acknowledge and defend against the
adversary, those things which we do. And herein I will allege nothing, but
that which is either of some statute or iniunction, or Canon of the Bishops,
or of such writers against the Papists, as are least to be suspected, to
favor the part of them who seek for reformation. Book of Canons 1571. Vt
ipsorum famulis and aduenis vsui esse possent.
And among the rest the book of Martyrs, which of al others is most
authentical, being appointed for Bishops, Deanes, and Archdeacons, to have
in their houses for the use of servant and strangers. And first concerning
ceremonies: In the Queens Injunctions we find that Shrines, covering of
Shrines, Tables, Candlestickes, Trindales, Artic. 23.
and Rolls of wax, Pictures, Paintings, and al other monuments of fained
miracles, pilgrimages, idolatry and superstition should be taken away. This
shows a very godly purpose, for abolishing of all things tending unto or
helping the remembrance of idolatry or superstition. Such do we take the
surplice to be; not only because it is part of the character of the Popish
priesthood, Act. mon^. Page 857. and 501.
as may manifestly appear by their degradation: but also because our reverend
Synod holden at London anno 1571. forbids the wearing of the Gray Amice, or
any other garment defiled with like superstition. Here let the indifferent
Reader judge, if these three books compared together, do not favor our
opinion of refusing the surplice, showing no reason why the one should be a
monument of superstition or defiled, then the other: as namely, a table, a
role of wax, a gray Amice, a surplice, what difference? I see it not.

Secondly, whereas we refufe the cross in Baptism, for the symbolicall
signification, and would have that reformed in Matrimony which says: God
has consecrated Matrimony to such an excellent mystery, that in it is
signified and represented the spiritual marriage beetwixt Christ and his
Church. And also in confirmation it is said: They lay their hands upon them,
to certify them by this sign of Gods favor and gracious goodness toward
them, and such like. Because by this means there is attributed to these three
things, sacramental signs of the covenant, Artic. 52. De Sacramentis.
like Baptism and the Lords supper. Here the book of Articles favors our
judgment. First making it to be the nature of sacraments, to be certain
sure witnesses and effectual signs of grace and Gods good will toward us,
etc. Then that there are but two Sacraments, Bapt. and the Lords supper: and
thirdly that those which the Papists call Sacraments, as confirmation,
penance, orders, matrimony, and extreme anoyling, are not to be counted for
Sacraments, etc. And that they have no visible signs or ceremony ordained of
God. Let wise men judge whether this article do not instruct us to do and
believe as we do. To the which we may join May. Calfils judgment, of the
sign of the cross, where he says: Ans. to the treat. of the Cross. Artic. 2.
Page 49.
Whereas you couple the belief in Christ and his sign, printed in our
foreheads together: what sign is that? the Cross with a finger? If ye mean
it so, ye make an unmeet comparison the one being necessary, and the other
idle and unlawful to. Artic. 4.
And of imposition of hands, he also says: Laying on of hands served to good
use then, when it pleased God at the instance of the Apostles prayers, to
confer the visible graces of his spirit; but now there is no such ministry
in the Church now that miracles be ceased, to what end should we have this
imposition of hands, the sign without the thing? etc,

Thirdly, whereas we doubt whether we may read the Apocrypha under the name
of holy Scripture, especially because of the untruths in the same; we are
taught this in the said articles, which say: Artic. 6.
by the name of holy Scripture, we understand, the canonical books of the
old and new Testament: to which agrees conference in the Tower with Campion,
and all other English writings, which allege the errors of those books to
prove them not Canonical, or holy Scripture.

Fourthlie, whereas we doubt, that it is contrary to the word of God: that
private persons utter the public prayers of the Church, or administer the
Sacraments: as namely that the common prayer book appoints not only the
Minister, but also some one of the people, to make the general confession, at
the Communion: and also if any child in extreme necessity be baptized at
home, the Minister is commanded to say, they have done well and according to
order. The first we are taught by the articles to be contrary to Gods word;
because they say: Artic. 23.
No man may minister in the congregation except he be called. And the second
we learn of that reverend Father B. Babington, boldly affirming: Upon Genel.
Cap. 17.12.
God has not thus enthralled his grace, that there is such necessity, that
either weomen, or all sorts of people, should dispense the holy mysteries,

Fiftlie as touching discipline, the book of common prayer favors our
doctrine, where it says: In the commination.
There was a godly discipline in the primitive Church, which now is to be
wished for. And for the government of the Church by the Elders and Pastor: let
us hear that reverend Father and faithful Teacher Master Noell in his Cate
chisme. Immediately after the Sacraments Page 7^. Math 18. c. 15 16. Act. 14,
d. 23. and 15.4.4.6. d. 22.24. and 20 d. 17. f 28. 2. Cor. 6. a. 5. and 12. d
28. and 14 c. 26. g. 40. 1. Tim. 5.17. Tit. 1. b. 5.
In the Church well ordered (says he) and well manered, there was (as I said
before) ordained and kept a certain form and order of governance. There were
chosen Elders, that is to say, Ecclesiastical Magistrates, to hold and keept
the discipline of the Church: to these belonged the authority, looking and
correction like censors; 1 Cor. 5.1.4 5 and 11. c. 16. d. 11.
these calling to the^ also the Pastor, if they knew any that either with false
opinions, or trouble some errors, or vain superstitions, or with corrupt and
wicked life, brought publicly any great offense to the Church of God, and
which might not come without profaning the Lords supper, did put back such
from the communion and rejected them, and did not admit them again, till
they had with public penance satisfied the Church. And these words he does
ground upon the same Scriptures, which we allege, placing them in his
margin. And that ye may perceive, that his judgment was directly as ours
is, he says a little after thus, But when by the judgment of the Elders, and
of the Pastor, both the punishment of him that sinned, and the example of
other is satisfied: the^ he that had been excommunicate, was wont to be received
again to the communion of the Church. And that there were such Elders, Page
638.
the reverend Father answering the admonition, and in his reply to M.
Carthwright does seem to confess, saying: I know that in the primitive
Church, they had in every Church certain Seniors, to whom the government of
the congregation was committed* but that was before there was any Christian
Magistrate, etc. Of the Presbytery and of the preaching ministry, thus
speaks that worthy writer and defender of the English Church M. D. Fulke,
Defense of English trans. Cap. ^5. Page ^00.
But it is out of doubt, that to an office none was chosen or admitted, by the
Apostle and the rest of the Presbytery of Ephesus, but such as had sufficient
gifts to answer that office. And Mr. D. Suttlife, although he deny Elders,
calling the^ Aldermen: yet against the Chauncellers, Commissaries and
officiales, being lay men, to administer excommunication, is very earnest,
saying: Nothing can be more unreasonable, Eccles. discipline. Cap. 4 sect. 7.
then to give the power of the ministry of the word, into the hands of those,
that are no Ministers: and to make them judges, whose lipes preserve no
knowledge, and to give them power, to shut all out of the Church, that call
none into the Church, Anno. 1591. Cap. Cane. comisc. offie.
etc. And I can not judge but that it is the conscience of this matter, that
causes the Bishops in their Canons, to reserve the sentence of excommunication
to the Bishop only, to be renounced by him or some Minister. A confut. of W.
Allen, power of Popish Priest Cap. 9 Page 29
Of the Lordship of Ministers the same Master D. Fulke, to my understanding
speaks as we do, where he says: It is a ministry and not a Lordship,
that we must exercise, not as a temporal Princes, who although they may be
said after a sort to serve the common wealth; yet they are so servants as
they are also Lords. But the Ministers in the Church, in the spiritual
government are servants and not Lords, as Saint Peter testifies etc. And the
equal power of every Minister, with the Bishop in the administration of the
Keys of discipline, he has these plain words: For the Keys of the Kingdom
of heaven, whatsoever they are, The second part of the treatise of Popes pard.
Cap. 3. Page 381.
be committed to the whole Church, and not to one person only, as Cyprian,
August. Chrysostom. Ierom, and all the ancient Doctors, agreeablie to the Scriptures
do confess. And God has made all the Pastors of the Church, stewards of his
household, and dispensers of his mysteries. And if every Pastor over his charge
be a steward, and a dispe^ser of Gods mysteries, as you seem to grant, why
has he not authority to release the penance by him self enjoined, or the
punishment due for sin remitted as well as the Bishop or the Pope? why has
be not the Keye of jurisdiction over his parish in as ample manner, as the
Bishop has over his Dioces, or the Pope over all men. Seeing the Keys are not
given to one, but to the unity, as the ancient Fathers teach? Why should the
Bishop and the Pope have two Keys, and they but one? resolve us these matters
out of holy Scripture, and you shall come somewhat near to your purpose of
pardons. The third demand.
Agreeing hereunto, in the book of orders, the priest is made to promise, That
he will give faithful diligence always so to minister the doctrine and
Sacraments and the discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded. Of which
matter also the reverend Father Master Doctor Bilson affirms constantly, The
true difference beetweene Christian subjects etc. Part, 2, Page, 233.
That the title and authority of Archbishop and Patriarks, was not erected by
Christ, but by consent of Bishops. And out of Hierom he adds, That
Bishops be greater then Ministers and Elders, rather by custom then by any
truth of the Lords appointment, and that they ought to govern the Church in
common. So the reverend Bishop Master Jewel alleges diverse Fathers with
Saint Paul to that very purpose. Defense of Apol, part, 2, Page, 198,
Of civil authority in Bishops says the said reverend Father Master D.
Bilson: The soldiers of Christ must not entangell themselves with secular
affairs, The true difference beetween Christian subjects Part. 2. Page 253.
much less make themselves Lords and Judges of earthly matters; which office
properly belongs to the sweard, and must be sustained of all those which
bear the sweard. And that it is a sin to tolerate the vn-preaching
ministry, hear the same Doctor Fulke: Experience shows, that he which is
void of gifts, Defense of trans. Cap. 15 page 401.
before he was ordered Priest, is as very an ass and dogbolt, as he was
before, for any increase of grace or gracious gifts: although he have
authority committed to him, if he be ordained in the Church though unworthy
and with great sin both of him that ordains, and of him that is ordained.
Therefore says Master Calfill: Ans to the treat* of the cross in the
preface.
I lament that there are not as many good Preachers as parishes: I am sorry that
some to unskillful be preferred. Of non-reside^ce our English Canons speak
thus: Absentia Pasteris a dominico grege, etc. The absence of the Pastor from
the Lords flock and that careless negligence which we se in many, Anno 1571.
Cap. resid. Pastoris.
and the leaving of the ministry, is a thing both in it self dishonest, and
hateful to the people, and pernicious to the Church of God. And therefore in
the ordination, he takes authority to preach to this congregation of
pluralities, aduowsons and election of people, says good Master Fox,
speakeing of the time of 830 years after christ: Act. and mon. print. 1576.
page 5.
Likewise advowsons and pluralities of benefices, were things then as much
unknown as now they are pernicious to the Church, taking away all true
elections from the flock of Christ. And it were no hard matter out of him, to
show all the points we hold: partly to be his judgment in the traced
steps of the primitive Church: and partly in showing the worthiness of
other men holdeing the same mind. And many others also could we bring forth of
our reverend writers, but of purpose I conceal very much. For I delighte not
in these oppositions of godly learned men; neither would I once have bewrayed
them; but that the innocence of our cause does constrain us to run under
the shadow of the same good men and good books, by which we are tossed and
turmoyled, as men besett with a mighty storm and tempest. And I hope the
plain appearance of this contradictorie writing, does show, what men's
consciences do deem of the truth we call for: so that we are not to be
condemned as men singular, and deuisers of new platformes of discipline. And
that in duty to the very books them selves, to the Canons, and proceedings
of the good and learned defendours of our Church, we ought not to subscribe:
but rather use all dutiful means by petition or otherwise as we have done,
that these things may be reformed. Only this one word is to be added; that we
can not tell, Subscription doubted to be against the laws of this Realm.
whether we might the laws and order of the Realm subscribe: although it
were otherwise lavvfull by Gods wonde^ Because the Queens most excellent
Majesty, with the whole state of this Realm, have appointed a precise order
of subscription for Ministers in that statute made Anno 13. giving authority
to Bishops, or ordinaries or commissaries, to deprive such persons as offend
that statute, or not admit them to any spiritual promotion. For we fear
that by so doing, we do impeach the honor of her Majesty, of the Parliament
and states of this Realm, to submitt our selves to every thing that is
imposed upon us, beside or without law, especially being a matter of so great
importance: which concerns the whole state advisedly to consider, that the
holy Ministers of God be not oppressed with an unjust subscription. And so
the Church and common wealth damnified by the want of such necessary and
faithful service: as by men of upright conscience, which should be kept out
by such a subscription, might be performed. And seeing her Royal Majesty and
the whole state; waying all things with great and stayed wisdom, have
thought that by this subscription (as in the preface of the statute appears)
sufficient provision vvoulde be made, that the Queens Majesty's dominions, may
be served with Pastors of sound religion: we as free borne subjects, and
Ministers and servants of Christ, may think it strange, that we should be
pressed upon, with further or harder conditions, then other her Majesty's
loving and faithful subjects be.

The Judges Justices of peace, and Counselors of law, do follow practice and
execute the laws and statutes of this Realm: yet if they should be pressed
to subscribe that every law were directly agreeing to the holy written
word of God: I believe many a good gentleman, would stay his hand, and stand
upon the liberty of a dutiful and obedient subject. And if the honor which
is due to Christ's servants, were but indifferently attributed unto us, as
Christian people ought to do: we do not see but that we should have as
great freedom as any other subjects who so ever: unless our calling make
us to be less esteemed then other men. There may be parauenture a good
meaning in it, yet verelie mine heart is greatly grieved, to se what a great
hinderance this is to the Church, and state of the Gospel and ministry
among us, and thereby to her Majesty and the common wealth of this land no
small damage.

Lastly whereas men exhort one another to hear sermons, Book of common
prayer in the end of Bapt.
is it not the same which is laid upon the godfathers, and godmothers, for the
calling upon every child so to do, when they come to discretion? And as
touching conference the iniunction gives them leave, to talk or reason of the
holy Scriptures, when occasions is given, reverently and in the fear of God
for their comfort and better understanding. Artic. 37.
And the singing of Psalms in private, is taught by the order of that book
which is thus entitled: The whole book of Psalms etc. Set forth and allowed
to be song in all Churches, etc. And more over in private houses for their
godly solace and comfort, laying aparte all ungodly songs and ballads, which
tend only to the nourishing of vice, and corrupting of youth. Then are they
no conuenticlers, which humbly and in the fear of God, follow and use the
good and laudable exercises so appointed by the good order of this Realm, Now
therefore upon all the premises, I may bodily conclude, that the Ministers and
people desiring reformation in some Church matters, have therein follovved the
Christian laws and godly proceedings of the ecclesiastical state: and so
consequently, are unworthily and falsely termed Puritans, or disturbers, or
enemies to the state.

Cap. 4.
Wherein is proved. 1. that it cannot be that the Ministers and people desiring
reformation should be enemies to the state. 2. They cannot but unfeignedly love
the Queens most gracious Majesty. 3. They heartily reverence and thankfully
observe the Lords of her most honorable privy council. 4. They rejoice to
live under the common laws and civil co^munitie of this Realm. 5. And in all
their doings, maintain the faith and promote the good proceeding of the state
of the church 6. Their cariadge peaceable.

Hieremie the Prophet, Hierem. Cap. 29. verse. 1.2.3.
writed to the people of Judah and Jerusalem, which were carried captive unto
Babylon, under the heathenish king Nebuchadnezar, this commandment of the
lord: Seek the prosperity of the Cietie, whether I have caused you to be
carried captives, and pray unto the Lord for it: for in the peace thereof shall
you have peace. And the Apostle Paul exhorts the christians which were
converted by his ministry, under Kings and gouerners which were infidels, that
Supplications, prayers, 1, Tim. 2.1.2*
intercessions, and giving of thanks should be made for Kings and for all that
are in authority, that they might lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. How much more must it needs follow, that the godly
faithful Minister and zealous Christian man, It is contrary to all reason,
that the godly Ministers and people, should be enemies to the state;
dwelling in a Christian common wealth and under a most virtuous and religious
Prince: having for a civil life, such liberty as no nation under heaven has
greater: and For a Christian life and freedom of conscience, in the service
and worship of God, such peace and protection, as hardly will be found in
any other Christian kingdom: how much more (I say) must it needs be, that
such men most carefully and zelously, use all prayer and supplication, for her
most excellent Majesty, and all godly Magistrates under her, and the whole
state of this Realm: and to seek the prosperity and peace of the same. For
seeing the chiefest cause of their trouble and reproach, is their careful and
zealous following of Gods holy word and their tender conscience in offending
of God: how strange and contrary to reason, should it be, that they could
but think any one evil thought against the holy ordinance of God, and the
higher powers ordained of him, to whom they ought to submit themselves for
conscience sake. And when the blind man, who can not see a far of, if he
have any the least discretion, must needs perceive: that in the peace and
prosperity of her Majesty and of this Realm, every way, consists their
peace, their joy and happienes. How far should they be without all grace
and fear of God, how contrary to them selves, and enemies to their own
apparent good, if they should be enemies to the present state of her Majesty's
most Christian and godly government.

2 And here I thank God I can speak boldly, and with the cheerful testimony
of a good conscience, even in the sight of God. For God knovveth, and we
humbly acknowledge with thanksgiving to his holy and divine Majesty: that
our gracious Lady and dear Sovereign Elizabeth, in the time of her sister
the late Queen Marie, Queen Elizabeth persecuted for the Gospel.
suffered and endured great trobles and reproach: and endeavoring to preserve a
good conscience, and to keep her self a chaste and pure Virgin unto the
Lord Jesus Christ, her blessed Savior, she was in great danger. And this
not so much in regard of her own person, as much more, as that she was the
only hope under God, which all honest and good Christians had: by whose
prayers it pleased his heavenly goodness, in compassion to his poor distressed
Church to preserve her sacred person, and in his due time to set her at
liberty; and to raise her up, and to establish her Kingdom: to be an haven of
rest, and an heaven of joy, to the dear children of God: who every day were
in a great affliction, and counted as sheep ready for the slaughter. And this
all ye world knows to be so, and that god has made his name glorious by her
deliverance. He has chosen his servant Elizabeth, and taken her out of the
jaws of the Lions, and made her a joyful and blessed noursemother, to seed
the people of his Church, and to foster his inheritance. By her we enjoy our
country, our lives, our wives, our children, our goods, our peace and
prosperity: by her we are guarded against enemies a broad, invasions and cruel
war, and against all domestical injuries and wrongs at home, which evil
and ungodly men would bring upon us. We sit quietly every man under his vine,
and joyfully reap the fruits of a plentiful land, under the happy, and
assured protection of her most blessed government. Merueilous great blessings
by her Majesty's reign.
By her we are delivered, out of the spiritual thraldom and bondage of that
proud Prelate of Rome, from all Antichristian slavery of ignorance,
superstition and idolatry; and our shoulders are eased from that most
grievous burden and importable. By her we have the holy food of our souls
and the life of our life, the sacred word of God. By her we enjoy the pleasures
of Gods house, and enter into his tabernacles with joy, beholding the beauty
of God, and the glory of hi^ power. By her our minds and our bodies are made
secure, and our mouth are filled with laughter, and we cheerfullie sing the
new song of all Gods Saints, Halelu-Iah. Salvation and glory, and honor,
and power to the Lord our God, God even our God, the mighty and holy one,
has loved her: and in the love and honor, wherewithal he has made her name
renoumed, amongst the mighty nations of the earth; he has made his great
love and rich mercy, to us his poor people, to be known and admired. He
has established her throne in righteousness, and made her mountain most
strong, against all her and our enemies. So that she has been now these 40
and 3 years, an hiding place for the wind, and a refuge for the tempest, as
rivers of waters in a dry land, and as the shadow of a great rock in a weary
land. The remembrance of her is our comfort, her joy, health and honor, our
glory: her faithfulness and constancy in religion and godliness, our exceeding
treasure. In one word she is the light of eyes and the breath of our nostrels,
the very marrow of our bones, and the assured pledge of our rejoicing. For who
knows not, but that, as by her most Christian and godly reign, we enjoy
that which is more of price unto us, then all that we have yea, then our own
lives. So when so ever God shall take her from us unto his heavenly and
glorious kingdom (which we pray may not be, till she has had that fulness of
days, which may make her Crown perfect in the world to come, and the joy of
Christ's Church firm and stable in this world) who shall then lament, weep and
wail and who shall have cause to grieve, sigh and mourn, their mother, their
nourse and faithful comforter? but even all those Ministers and Christian
people, who now desire, that those honorable and holy works which God has
begun, and brought to a great perfection by her ministry, might by her also be
made absolute, entire, and fully complete. Therefore we are so far from
thinking the least evil, unto her sacred person, that we pray heartily, and
wish unfeignedly: Confounded be all they, which desire her hurt, and God even
the mighty God, strike through the loins of al them that rise up against her:
and bind thou up (o merciful God) her soul in the bundell of life, with the
Lord our God and cast out the soul of all her enemies, as out of he middle of a
slinge, and let all faithful subjects say, Amen.

3 Next unto and under her most royal Majesty, The Lords of counsel greatly
to be respected.
we think upon the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable counsel. Here we
have also great matter to move us unto all joyful thankfulness. First that they
have wisely and Christianlie, managed the general state and sway of the
common wealth: principally for their careful and prudent watch, over her
Majesty's most sacred person, in all these most deuilish treacheries and wicked
designements of all traitorous Papists, and Popish Seminary Priests,
Jesuits, and desperate murdering wretches: and in all the hidden plottes and
shameless villenies devised and contrived by our mortal enemies abroad, and by
all factious Espaniolized and Italianized heads at home. That God has been
with them and prospered them in all their godly counsel and foresight Secondly
we can not but praise God, that their honorable table, is and always has
been, a place of refuge, and a seat of great justice, equity and clemency,
to all men, howsoever otherwise wrongfullie oppressed: And tha^ which we most
of all rejoice of, vv^ bless our Lord Christ for their constant perseuering in
the maintenance of Gods true religion and Gospel. In so much as beside all
other times and occasions, when now a little before the last Paliame^t, the
pert bragging of popish recusants and their favorers (here and there
straglinglie scattered through the land) did somewhat amase and trouble the
minds of infinite her Majesty's, most godly, loving, obedient and faithful
subjects: we yet se by firm experience the holy constancy of her Majesty's
unchangeable faith, and the honorable cariadge of their wisdoms, to the
confusion of such vain persons in their undutiful and wicked hope: and to
the exceeding joy and contentation of millions of godly Christians, who depend
upon her Majesty's most gracious present government: and whose life is not
dear unto them, so as they may se her, in health, joy, comfort and honor:
being ready to bestow the best blood in their hearts, to do her true and
faithful service, and every day, night and hour to adventure all they have
for her safety, and to curb and beat down all wicked Priests, Papists,
and treasonable persons, what so ever.

The unchangeable love of Queen Elizabeth and her godly subjects.
And this I thank God, I may to the honor and joy of her Majesty boast and
glory (with an humble and grateful mind and reverence to the divine
magnificent bounty of oureternall Father) that never Prince, King nor Queen,
since the foundation of the world, had more faithful love, obedience and
cheerful duty of their subjects: then all the Protestants of England, have
most gladly, constantly and vnchangeablie performed and continued to their
most loving and kind-mother Queen Elizabeth, and that so many years with so
little coffeehouse and disturbance: and her love and holy affection and
constancy in religion has bound them most neerlie unto her. And therefore I
am verily persuaded, that if ever any Prince, might esteem the love of their
subjects, a strong wall and bulwark and guard to their person: then certes
Queen Elizabeth both may and (...) make high account of the Protestant in
England, as the most faithful and loyal people; which will not suffer her
Majesty, to have the least indignity if it lie in them, by spending very many
thousands of their lives, to do her good. And that shall the Papists, Priests,
and Seminaries well know if ever they go about, to put in execution, their
hoped butchery, and bloody obedience, to the Popes cruel bulls. And this is not
all that binds us to their honors: The Lords of the counsel a great stay to
godly Ministers.
for in our private troubles about the ceremonies and subscription, we the
poor and faithful Ministers of Christ, when so ever we have opened our cause
and humbled our selves unto them, we have found great justice and equity, and
diverse times great relief and ease from our troubles. No doubt they seeing our
innocence, that of mere conscience, without any the least inclination to
disloyalty to our Sovereign, we did forbear to do those things: they have
tendered our cause and lovingly effected, that we might not be to to much
ouerburdened. Yea my L. G. of Cantur. himself (though he seem to be the
greatest opposite to our cause) by wise experience finding the same thing: has
many times and unto diverse men (whereof I must confess my self to be one)
moderated the extremity, which by other men was hotly and uncharitably
persued. God be thanked. And I humbly pray almighty God, evermore to bless
them that they may be always, the faithful eyes, ears and hands of her
Majesty to the continual safety of her sacred person, the unchangeable
upholding of religion, and the joy of all faithful and dutiful subjects, the
terror and keeping under of all wickedness, superstition and idolatry, to the
salvation of their own souls, and the bright shining glory of God, in this
land, for ever and ever.

The civil and politic state of this land very good.
4. Now if any man understand by the state; the constitution of the common laws
and statutes of this land, now presently in force: whereby we are combined
into one body of a civil politic common wealth, under one head and
Monarchical government, in all privileges, duties, offices and works of Prince
and people, and of the whole, and repulse and repressing of all domestical and
private evil in the whole or any member: and for defense against all foreign
power or Potentate whatsoever, who shall claim any title, jurisdiction or
interest within these her Majesty's Dominions of England or Irelande, or else
make invasion against our Noble country or Sovereign, or offer violence or
any wrong to her Majesty's person, Crown, or dignity. In all these things
we the Ministers and people aforesaid, do profess ourselves as happy
people as any under the Sun, to be under so just, equal and free laws,
government and jurisdiction, and right ordered common wealth. And we protest
before God, that we, and all we, are bound, both by the law of God and of
nature, to spend our goods, strength, life, and all we have, for the
maintenance, preservation, and quiet proceeding, execution, and flourishing
prosperity of the same common wealth and monarchical government, and for the
maintenance of her Majesty's supreme authority, over all persons in these her
dominions, either ecclesiastical or civil, and in all causes what so ever,
next and immediately under God, and his holy son Jesus Christ the King of
glory. And I have that assurance of our vprightnes in this matter, that I
trust, no man ever did or could, neither yet at this time either will or can
(except it be some popish Priest, or seditious person, that maligneth our
happiness in this common wealth) challenge, accuse, charge or suspect us, or
any of us, that we are not for our places, as obedient, faithful and glad of
present state, as any other English men, subjects in this land (without
inparagement be it spoken, and with reverence to our superiors) what so ever.

5 Here upon it seems to me that the question is truly and naturally about
the Ecclesiastical state, constitutions, orders and manner of government that
if it may appear that herein we be not enemies, then are we no way to be
touched; of which point the 2 and 3 chapters do in some sort entreat, and do
thus far justify us: that we seeming in some sort, to go against the
present government, for not observing some ceremonies and for not subscribing,
etc. are yet very much warranted, by the same constitutions, articles and
proceedings of the same Ecclesiastical state. But we have many more honest and
just reasons, for the approving of our doings: which I doubt not but that the
reverend Fathers themselves, and all other Christians; waying with the balance
of truth and equity; will afoord to be of better acceptance, then in the
common account of our cause many do esteem or affirm. The ecclesiastical
state. What.
First therefore, the ecclesiastical state, is the constitution of our churches
reformation, as we are departed from the apostaticall synagogue of Rome:
wherein we have established an order of Ecclesiastical ministry and of
liturgy, and a confession of faith in articles, as near as we could for the
time, to the Canon of holy Scripture. Which thing is confirmed and ratified by
laws and acts of Parliament Anno 1 and 13 of the Queen Ordered, executed,
expounded, explained, and defended by injunctions, Canons and apologeticall
writings. Wherein and whereby we have justly separated our selves, from the
erring sea of Rome: because they are fallen from the true faith and doctrine of
the primitive Church: as it was taught and planted, by Christ and his Apostles,
according to the Scriptures of the old and new Testament. And we are united
into the fellowship of the true Church of God, whereof Christ only is the
head, and his word and holy writings, the only law, Canon and rule. Now
concerning all these things, The Minister and people desiring reformation, be
lovers of the Ecclesiastical state.
the Ministers and people which desire reformation, do glorify God on our
behalf. And with all godly quietness are glade, to enjoy the benefit and
comfort of these things and labor to make the most profit to their souls they
can, by the use of the same, desiring and laboring only for the perfection
thereof: namely that such remnants of popery that remain (though in
comparison of the other they be not so great altogether) might also be
abolished. The Ministers, they do enjoy and execute their ministry, according
to the order hereof: they accept and acknowledge no other faith and doctrine,
and use in their ministry no other liturgy. And that which they do (in
requiring reformation in some things) is not opposite to any of these things in
general: but only tends to the further building up and beautifying of our
Ecclesiastical state in particular. According to that which is says: let us
follow the truth in love, Ephesians. 4 15.
and in all things grow up into him which is the head, that is Christ. In times
of reformation, especially when ignorance, apostasy, and superstition has
reigned so many hundred years; It is hard to reform all things at the first.
it is hard and rare that every thing should be reformed at the first
instant, and he that commends that which is well done at the first and
wishes that men should go forward to do more and more in like sort, is he
an enemy to the first doeings, or a friend? Doubtless an upright man, void
of a cauilling mind, will say, he is a friend. When the inhabitants of Judah
and Jerusalem, Ezra. 3^
first came out of Babylon, in the first year of Cyria King of Persia, and
built the Altar of God for burnt offeringes, they were in state of salvation,
being entered again into the covenant of God: yet are not they to be called
enemies to the state, which in the second year after, laid the foundation of
the Temple. And in the very laying of the foundations* whereas many shouted
for joy, many of the Priests and Levites, and the chief Fathers, ancient men,
which had seen the first house: when the foundation of this house was laid
before their eyes, wept with a loud voice: no doubt because it appeared not
unto them so glorious as the other: shall they therefore be reputed enemies to
this last house, Cap. 47.24.
because they desire it were better? Which being hindered in the time of
Artabshaste, by malicious men, until the second year of Darius, King of
Persia, Cap. 3^
at which time Zachariah the Prophet and Haggai, called upon the people and
encouraged them to go forward in the building of the Temple: and after Ezrah
came and taught them the law yea even the Priests, Cap. 7. and 9.
and caused them to put a way their strange wives: shall we say that these
latter coming many years after, were enemies to the state, because they
endeavored, to bring them to further perfection, according to Gods word?
Lastly Nehemiah, Nehem. 1. and 2. and 3.
when they had the Temple, and as it should seem the full and whole worship
of God: yet is he not content; but mourned when he hard that the walls of
Jerusalem and the gates thereof were not built. Although he came after, and
went a bout a thing not done before, not only in building the wales of
Jerusalem, but also in taking order for the careful observation of the
Sabbath and diverse other things: yet is he not called a Puritan, which was not
content when things were well; but his story is commended to the Church, and
his example to be imitated of the people of God according to every man's
calling and place throughout all ages. And if we with the Prophet Haggai do
reprove the people which say: Hag. 1.2.3.
The time is not yet come that the Lords house should be builded: are we by and
by enemies and troublers of the state? God forbid. If we subscribe that the
preaching of the pure word of God is a mark of the true Church of God: and here
upon desire that all things in the Church, even all our actions should be
squared according to the same pure word, and nothing left contrary to the
same, are we by and by enemies? If we be sworn to her Majesty's most lawful
supremacy over all persons, and epsy in our Church a Lordelie prelacie (a
thing brought into the Church by humane invention) by means whereof, it is
apparent, that the Pope of Rome, has climed above all estates both
Ecclesiastical and civil: and so the Crown and royal dignity of this
Realm has in time past, been in bondage to a foreign Potentate, even a proud
and usurping Prelate: If now our desire extend it self so far; that our
Lordly dignities and power of our Bishops, might be examined by holy
Scripture and brought back, a degree or twain nearer to the Apostolical
practice and Christ's institution, that so all occasions might be cut of
hereafter, that this climing usurpation, might never take hold upon England
any more: are we troublers of the state? I protest unto you before God, it has
been a grief unto me, when in a simple mind, I have according to the Queens
injunctions preached and declared, the right of her Majesty's authority and
against the usurped presumption of the Pope of Rome, using verily such
arguments, as the Apologeticall writings of our learned men have done, agreeing
to holy Scriptures: I have been reproved as preaching against law, and
against the reverend Fathers and Bishopes of our Church. Surely if I were an
Archbishop or a Lord Bishop, I would cast my self down at her Majesty's feet,
and crave and humbly beg of her Highness; that by her Christian wisdom and
godly moderation, some meane-way might be found profitable for the Church,
that might in no manner hinder the free course of the preaching of her
Majesty's most lawful authority: neither ever hereafter leave such a power in
the Ecclesiastical state, as might be made prejudicial, to the royal
prehemine^ce and supreme dignity of the. Prince. If our state in the
orderinge of Ministers, ordain them to preach: are we enemies, if we would
have none tolerated but such as can and will preach? if our state say, the
absence of the Pastor from his flock is a pernicious thing in it self: are we
disturbers of the peace if we desire such pernicious things to be abolished
altogether? And if we find that the power to command Ministers, and to
direct orders of the Church, comes from the statutes of the land, made in her
Majesty's gracious reign, namely that they command a kind of subscription,
giving authority to the Bishops and Ordinaries, to deprive and keep out men
from Ecclesiastical promotions, who will not so subscribe: shall we be
enemies to the state, if offering so subscribe according to the statute, we
humbly crave to be free so far as the laws and statutes do free us? And
that the reverend Bishops content themselves with that power, which her
Majesty and the laws of the Realm do give unto them? If we submit our
selves to that subscription which the law commands, are we disobedient and
enemies? If we meeklie beseech them not to be molested, for such a
subscription as the law and statute does not command. And if the
Ecclesiastical state call us unto sermons, to sing Psalms, and reverently
and in the fear of God to common about the word of God: alas are we Puritanes,
and vile Precisians, conuenticlers, schismatikes and wicked people if we do
the same? I desire therefore all the reverend Fathers, and all other good
Christian subjects, to consider of our cause as it is, and to take pity upon
us, and to use us as the truth of our cause requires: and let them not spare,
if in deed they find any of us truly schismatic, a trobler of the church
and an enemy to the state.

6 Lastly, let it be examined what has bin our doings and proceedings from
the first great storm that rose against us, The carriage of the Ministers and
people very dutiful and peaceable.
which was about the 10 year of her Majesty's reign, when the Papists begann
to advance themselves in their treacherous platformes: and ever since that
time, we have had, more or less at one time or another, some tryales: and
namely very great was that of subscription, and since that time a great while
together, was there ever any of us that went about any treacherous practice;
had we intelligence with any other nation against her Majesty or the state?
Was not all our doings, by humble supplications, honest and Christian
Apologeticall writing, and by lowly and earnest suing and entreating by our
friends? Never did we justify any man, neither yet do: if either by word or
writing he pas the bonds of comely modesty, and not with a meek and quiet
spirit, constantly persevere in following of this good cause. And I my self
should be right sorry, if unwittingly I should in this treatise let fall any
thing, which might be an unjust and uncharitable disgrace to any man's person,
which unfeignedly favor the present state and government. And that I may end
this chapt. with words of peace, I meeklie and humbly desire the reverend
Fathers and all other good men to judge, whether we have not done as good
Ministers and Christian subjects ought to do: when we have quietly borne
such punishments, as have been inflicted upon us; till by great sure and tract
of time we have respit or deliverance. And diverse honest men have changed
their dwellings, from under unable and unpreaching Ministers (because they and
their families found not that comfort which they did in other places) that by
this means with great loss they might cut a way occasion from them which
desired to count them disquiet persons and troublers of the Church. And if we
be called Puritans for suing to the honorable house of Parliament, or the
Lords of her Majesty's Council, for any case of our greeuances: then may all
men of all sorts, be so accounted. Let them yield us the liberty of
Christians, and grant us that freedom which other subjects have: and there
will be but little matter left, to make any good ground, whereby we should be
called or reputed troublers or enemies to the State.

Cap. 5.
This teaches that the renowned Fathers and other Prelates of the Church of
England, standing for conformity (such as unfeignedly do favor the present
estate of the Church, and do faithfully hold and believe the true religion
and faith of Christ, maintained by public authority among us) are one and the
same, with the godly Ministers and people, who desire reformation of some
things in the Ecclesiastical state. 1. Because they may disagree in some
things and yet be faithful brethren. 2. This life afoordeth not absolute and
unchangeable unity. 3. They agree in all substantial points of our Church,
as it agrees with holy Scripture. 4. God by persecution can make them indeed
to appear to be one.

THIS argument seems to be a strange paradoxe, a matter not to be believed,
or hoped for; if we remember how greatly men's affections have been alienated,
and their countenances estranged, and now more then ever.

1. How be it; it is also a false position, to say: Faithful brethren may
disagree.
that hot discord should not light sometime between friends. Who more neerlie
joined in christian faith and love, then* Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15.37.3^
and I think no man will adventure to say that they were not always of one
faith and love in Christ Jesus, and in their joint labors to further the
Gospel: yet fell there out an hot contention between them, where neither
yielding to other, they separated one from another. Yet to declare their
inseperable unity, Saint Paul does give honorable testimony of Barnabas,
2. Cor. 9 6. Gal. 2.9.
concerning their united office and labor in the Gospel. So do I find
that all our best learned writers, do prove the union of all the reformed
Churches; although in some things there be happily some difference between
them. And namely in this present cause I remember Master D. Fulk has these
words: Also the contention of those whom he calls Puritanes in England is
not so great, nor about so great matters, that any such division is to be
feared which might cause disolation of the kingdom: In his reten. again.
Bristow. mot. 47 in 50. deman. Page 129.
Add hereunto that Bristow said in the 40. motive, that the Protestants in
England, be in a manner in heart, al Puritans; whereby he confesses against
himself, that there can be no deadly contention between them that in heart
are all one. Therefore I hope, as that reverend Father Bb. Jewel calls
Luther and Zuinglius worthy members and learned Fathers of Christ's church:
Reply to Harding, Artic. 8. of adoring, deuis. 17. page 396.
who disagreeing of the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament: He
affirms that, otherwise their whole he arts were joined and bent together to
the disclosing of falsehood and hypocrisy, and to the aduauncing of Gods glory
so the contention between us, being only about ceremonies and manner of
government, we are all of one faith, one Baptism, one body, one spirit; have
alone Father and Lord: and be al of one heart, against all wickedness,
superstition, idolatry, heresy: and we seek with one Christian desire, the
advancement so the pure religion, worship and honor of God* We are Ministers
of the word by one order, we administer prayers and Sacraments by one form:
we preach one faith and substance of doctrine: we rejoice both of her
Majesty's happy government and the freedom of the Gospel, and are professed
enemies, to all her enemies, and to the enemies of Gods truth and Gospel. In
writing against errors, and disputing against Papists, we have been all one. I
preaching her M. supremacy and confuting Popish primacie and in calling men
from sin and disobedience, to serve God and her M. we have been all one: And
shall men think that this unhappy division, shall sever us for ever? God
forbid.

This life with out constant unity.
2 And here, me thinks, I cannot but murne, to think upon man's frailty: our
ignorance, self-loue and desire to pre-eminence, many times, casts us
headlong into bitter dissension. While men are lofty to acknowledge their
ouersights, and therefore labor to keep their estimation, by maintayning an
error: they cause much disturbance to themselves, with little credit among
wise and faithful men: and by ouerstrayning them selves, to shadow over men's
upright cause, they stir up much gar-boile and confusion in the Church of
God. And it is not so easily stayed, as it is unadvisedly begun. Therefore it
is very wisely said of Solomon: The beginning of strife is as one that
opens the waters, therefore ere the contention be meddled with* leave of.
Prou. 17.14.
Such do we read to be the civil war of the primitive Church, about Arius,
which is well known to have continued many years, and to be the death of many
a faithful Christian. Of which Socrates Scholasticus writes, that in the very
beginning it grew so hott, Eccles. Histor. lib. 1. Cap. 6.
with such division among the Bishops and also among the people; inveying
with such spiteful and opprobrius terms one against another, that it became
so heinous and shameful, and into so lamentable a plight: that the Christian
Religion was openly derided of all men, even in the public theaters and
solemn spectacles. And such was the contention of Epiphanius and John
Chrysostom, both worthy Bishops. Lib. 6. Cap. 12.13 14.
Yea even in the very infansie of the church, that no man should stumble at our
contention, as if it were a new thing, when the blessed Apostles by a most
excellent and perfect spirit, planted the ghospel: this human fraltie did
show it self very greatly. For what think you was the cause of that solemn
council at Jerusalem Act. 15. and what was the occasion of the Epist. of
Paul to the Romans, Corinthians, Galathians, Philippians, Colossians, etc:
do they not bewraye merueilous great weakness, exceeding great contention?
some holding of Paul and some of Cephas, some going to Law, and some contending
about meat and holy days: some striving for circumcision and the Law of
Moses; other denying the resurrection of the body; others justification by
faith only; others brought in the worshipping of Angels and other will
worshipp and volutarie religion of men: in so much that it cost great labor
and sweat unto the Apostles and faithful Ministers, to hold up the Church, and
to keep it alive in the very birth thereof. So great were the waters of
contention, coming out of the dragons mouth by the abuse of man's weakness. And
this I observe both in writings and disputations of our forefathers of the
primitive ages of the Church, and also in these latter days: that it is a very
rare thing, to find any writer, though he be learned, wise, and sober: who in
his apologeticall writting, can keep himself pure from al gaul and
bitterness. Few writers without bitterness.
For the vehement desire to defend that he undertakes, many times makes him
to sway beyond the mark, and his penn to breath out filthy smoke and
unsavory. There are many pretty and witty things, which are found in the
studdie of humane learning: and in these men of great learning, have many
times delight: so that when they are in writing of an argument or answer, there
falls in some fine ironie, or close quib by allusion, and sometime a bitter
sarcasme, before they be aware: which when it is red of the adverse part, it
raises many hott humors and unseemly retaliatio^s; which not only hinder the
light, oftentimes of a good cause; but also makes such a breach as will
hardly be repaired again in many years. And here (me seems) I am taken
prisoner, and locked up in a dark and dolesome place, to weep and mourn, to
cry and howl, for the miserable estate of mankind thorough sin. How many
stumbling blocks are cast in the way of foolish, This contention a plague for
Atheists,
ignorant, and peevish Atheists, who refusing the way of truth, have strong
delusions of Satan to make them believe lies. Yet does God turn all these
contentions too good, God turns it to the good of his elect.
and his divine providence makes them profitable to his Church, and namely
for the elect: as it is written, There must be heresies, even among you, that
they which are approved among you, 1. Cor. 11.29.
may be known. And this profit has the Church by the primitive contentions,
that in clear and plain Scripture we se many things taught, as namely, The
Christian liberty, The doctrine of justification, and the rising of the dead,
and diverse other weighty points: which I can not tell, if they would have
been, otherwise so fully, largely and so plainly written, that we may know
the love, and power and wisdom of our merciful father, to ouersway the mighty
labors of Satan which are against the Church, to the good of Gods faithful
people. Therefore the Apostle is bold to say in the like case: I know that
this shall turn to my salvation. And again: We know that all things work
together for the best unto them, that love God. The consideration of this might
teach some men, to look upon themselves, and watch over their own corruption,
to keep it under, that they give no offense: other might learn not to stumble
at the truth for such a cause which cannot be altogether avoided. And we of
our time and country, might understand, that we are not by and by severed into
two religions, or broken of from being Christian brethren, because some hot
contention has been kindled among us. For then we might say, that Friars,
Monks, Seminary Priests and Jesuits, are not Papists; yea that Popes,
Cardinals, and other their great Prelates are no Papists, because those have
stirred up among themselus most deadly war, and other manner of division,
schism, slaughter, and misery then ever (by the grace of God) is likely to
be a mong us.

3 And to deal plainly, I can not see that the matter between us is such that
either they do or can make a through breach, No matters to separate Gods
children for ever.
between the children of God. For what so ever is (agreeing to holy
scripture) properly and essentially of our religion and profession of the
Church of England, and what so ever is properly and naturally belonging to
the ministry, by the rule and description of holy Scripture, maintained by
the reverend Fathers and other Prelates of our Church standing for conformity:
we the Ministers and people, who seek reformation, do hold and profess the
same. As namely the doctrine of faith and of the Sacraments, and that the book
of common prayer may be used in the chief substance thereof, and that the
Minister of the word ought to preach. etc. Therefore in regard of the maine
grounds of religion and of the ministry and service of God we are all one.
Now the things which we desire to be reformed, and they stand earnestly to
maintain, are but accessorie additamentes, brought into the Church by humane
constitution: as the reading of Apocripha, Priestly garments, the cross in
Baptism, Sacramental signification to Matrimony and Confirmation, Lordship
and civil jurisdiction in Bishops, execution of Discipline by chauncellors,
co^missaries, and officialls: then in other chief Prelates, Deanes, Prebends,
Archdeacons, non-residence, pluralities, totquotts, and the bare reading
ministry, and such like. If all these or any of these be the holy plants,
which God has planted in his Church, then have we done ill to speak or write
against them. But if they be such, as being clean taken away (as we verily
think) the religion, The things in controversy taken a way: the Church is
whole and entire: and no hurt to the Church or Bishops to depart from them.
faith, administration of Christ and the true worship of God, as it is now in
the Church of England, might and would remain whole and entiere without
them: then doubtless are we all one, according to Christ Jesus, in those
things, which in duty and conscience toward God, we ought of necessity to
salvation to agree in one: although the outward appendants make us seem to
differ one from another. There be two brethren, one vveareth a Babylonitish
garment, and is attired in all things like unto them which inhabit the
Eastern climate; and the other goes in the good and wholesome clothes, that a
Yeomen or citizen of England usually does: both these being borne of one father
and in one country, being of one language and house, shall men say that they
are not brethren, if they agree in all natural things, saving that one of
them has gotten some new fashions? And if the other desire his brother to go
after his own cuntrie fashion, are they straight ways enemies? Consider I
humbly beseech you most dear and reverend fathers and brethren the foundation
of these things, for which you stand, and weigh with your selves, that the
departing from these things will be no hinderance to you nor to the church of
God. First you know that the holy Scriptures are sufficient to make the man of
God perfect and absolute unto all good works: 2. Tim. 3.
if we grant you, whatsoever the Lord Christ has granted in his holy written
word, what injury do we offer to the church or to your ministry? This you
know that necessity is laid upon us to preach the Gospel, 2. Cor. 9.
and vvoe is unto us if we preach not the gospel: if we be suitors that all
the ministers should do this and so avoid Gods curse, do we desire their
hurt? 2. Cor. 10.
you know that Christ's kingdom is spiritual, if then these things (which we
desire were removed) be carnal, and the weapons of the carnal man, you
shall leefe nothing to put off the earthly and carnal and to keep only that
which is spiritual. You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 8.9.
Philip. 2.
that he being rich for your sakes, became poor that ye through his poverty
might be made rich, yea he made himself (for our salvation) of no
reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, etc. He humbled himself
and became obedient to the death, even to the death of the cross: what hurt I
beseech you, would it be unto you or to the Church if for his sake, you did in
some sort follow his example, and having the same mind which he had to let
go some of these outward things to maintain peace and to feed the flock of
God, for which he gave his own blood? Math. 2.
Christ by humbling himself became one with us, and our Emmanuell: And why
should these human accessories divide us his servants and members, that we
should not be one among our selves, which so manifestly are one in him, in
faith in him, in professing of his word, and in the worship of his name: The
Apostles forsook all to follow Christ, Mat. 9.27.28.
and they followed him in the regeneration; and namely S. Paul made this
choice, with his own hands to minister to his necessities, and to make himfelf
a servant to all men, Act. 20. 1. Cor. 9.
though he were free from al men, and so to leefe some part of his right, that
he might make the Gospel free. I beseech you consider whether you have done
so, and that if you did in some part follow him herein as he followed Christ,
whether their would not be a most blessed and joyful unity amongst Gods
laborers, and a more excellent and merueilous freedom of the preaching of
heavenly peace.

4 If these arguments may not yet make it manifest, that we are one, or ought
to strive to be one: there is yet one other argument which is very
demonstratiue, and cannot be denied, but that is not in man to frame.
Persecution, persecution: when it has stripped us out of all those humane
devises and outward things, and Gods rod has made us equal and taught us to
be spiritual: then will it be known that we are all one (I mean such as are
not hypocrites nor false brethren) that we are brethren and members one of
another, and Christ only the head: Then shall we learn to say one to another,
Act and monuments. page 1431. print. 1576.
* Now my dear brother, for as much as I understand, that we thoroughly agree
and wholly consent together in those things, which are the grounds and
substantial points of our religion, against the which the world so furiously
rages, in these our days: howsoever in times past in certain by-matters and
circumstances of religion, your wisdom and my simplicity (I grant has a
little iarred, each of us following the abundance of his own sense and
judgment: now I say, be you assured, that even with my whole heart (God is my
witness) in the bowelles of Christ, I love you in the truth, and for the
truths sake, which abides in us; and as I am persuaded, shall by the grace of
God, abide in us for evermore. And because the world, as I perceive, brother,
cease not to play his pageant, and busily conspireth against Christ our
Savior with all possible force and power, exalting hie things against the
knowledge of God: let us join hands together in Christ: and if we can not
overthrow, yet to our power, and as much as in us lies, let us shake those hie
altitudes, not with carnal, but with spiritual weapons, etc. I pray God open
our eyes to see and consider in time, of this matter, and to frame our hearts
unto those things, which concern peace, that we may walk as spiritual men,
and not as carnal: and casting away all desire of vain glory, we may cease
to provoke one another, and never to envy one another.

Cap. 6.
Wherein is plainly opened, that there can no good reason be showed, that the
godly Ministers seeking reformation, are enemies to the present state because
1. their conscience is clear in Gods sight 2. They desend no evil actions in
them selves. 3. They cannot be charged with the faults of strangers,
Anabaptists, foolish Martin, or frantic Hacket. 4. Nor with unthankful
obscuring of Gods mercies for their fancies, nor with innovation or schism. 5.
They cannot be charged with any thing against her Majesty's person, Crown or
Dignity. 6. Or that they are against all superiority in Ministers, or the
true power and honor of the ministry etc.

IT is an easy matter to find a bate to beat a dog: and when men's minds
are incensed, the wit of man will and does seek out all advantages. As where
the hedge is low, every one will tread it down: so the natural man can
easily deprave him which is in affliction. And all men will harken to them
which are in outward credit, and praise the rich. But the wisdom of the
poor is despised, and his words are not barde. Therefore it comes to pass
sometime, that men of countenance and place think it a sufficient proof
against the innocent, to say: If he were not an evil doer, we would not have
delivered him unto thee. Ioh. 18.30.
For this cause Solomon says: That he is foolish that will believe every
thing, Prou. 14.15.
and that the prudent man will consider his stepps. But as touching our cause
me thinks it fares with us, as the same Solomon says in an other place:
Cap. 18.17.
He that is first in his cause is just: then comes his neighbor and makes
inquiry of him. So verily there are many things preiudiciallie passed against
us, in the mouths and pens of diverse men: which we could easily have
borne, so as our reproache might have been to the good of the Church, referring
our selves to Gods protection and that our deeds should try us. But now we
find it far otherwise, and that the false and unjust imputation laid upon
us, is made a kind of shooinghorne, to bring on all wickedness, and a crafty
color for the favor of Papists: so that not only we, but also the whole
Church, is in some forte endammaged, and our reverend Fathers and Christian
brethren, which stand for conformity, are in as great danger as we: of which
thing the reason that stirred them up so zealouslie to preach, at the beginning
of the Parliament last, might easily inform them. Therefore and for other no
small inconveniences, grown through our silence; I have written this book, as to
make inquiry of our neighbors and brethrens information: And in this chapter
to examine those heavy objections, which do principally seem to bear down
our cause, and make us poor innocent men to be very odious and contemptible:
persuading my self, that if these be fully answered, there can be no reason
brought against us to any purpose.

1 And although we can boldly and in the sight of God, protest our innocence,
and say unto God, as the Psalmist: O Lord my God, if I have done this thing, or
if there be any wickedness in mine hand, Psalm 7.3.
if I have rewarded evil unto him that had peace with me, Then let the enemy
persecute my soul and take it: yea let him tread my life down upon the
earth, and lay mine honor in the dust. Although, I say, our conscience does
not accuse us: yet is it expedient to declare our justice, and to answer what
is said against us.

What we defend.
2 There are two things for which I must needs in this chapter crave pardon,
being such as I can not, neither dare take upon me: First I will not defend all
the words spoken or written of every man, who has seemed to favor our
cause: neither will I justify the very best writings, as though their were no
escape, nor any clause sauouring of human folly and weakness. For who so ever
is best and greatest among us, we do acknowledge to be sinful men as
others, and that our knowledge is imperfect, and we are subject to the like
passions which other men are. Therefore we desire (as other men) to be
charitablie understood, Phil. 3.13.14.
as men not perfect ne pure: but only endeavoring toward the mark of the
price of the hie calling of God. And it is not unknown that many ignorant and
rash headed persons have thurst in themselves, whose indiscretion and uncivil
usage, we can no way commend. And some have been among us (as we have
thought) of sober and stayed minds, who notwithstanding great words and
protestations (such as other were afraid to use) have presently turned the
heel, and gone clean another way. If these were set to spy out our
liberty, or to add more to our affliction, or otherwise: we leave it to
Gods righteous judgments: only this I dare not defend all that have seemed to
favor our cause. But this is my purpose: for the cause it self and for such
Ministers, as have soberly and vvisely sought, by honest supplication and
learned apologeticall writings, to give witness to the truth, and to
declare their own innocence, and to obtain favor or liberty or
reformation, by y^ orderly manner and custom of this land: as al other subjects
do and may do, in their several causes and troubles that do and may-befall
them. Thus far I hope I may presume to defend, (and I trust it does already
partly and hereafter shall more plainly appear) that such arguments as are
laid against us, are disagreeing to our cause and to our doings, and we and
our honest and just cause, are wickedly slaundered, and can not be touched by
them. The second thing ^s that I can not answer all objections, that are made
against us, for then I must make a very great book and handle all
controversies at large, which is not the purpose of this short treatise. And
in truth I find it needless. For I verily think that there are 500, which
any man but meanly acquainted with our cause and manner of life, will easily
perceive of him self, to be rather heaped up, to make a terrible show: then
indeed for any substance of truth in them. But these objections I will make
special choice of which are of most weight, sounding out very loud against
us, the alarm of schismatickes, troublers of the Church, and enemies to the
stay, rebels, traitors, worse then Papists. And these I find to be of two
sorts; either they are of things without us, wherein we have not had any
intelligence or meddling: or else they are directlye aiming at our doings and
the cause we suffer for. The first slander touching strangers.


3. In the first they carry us into Geneua, France, the Low countries, and
Scotland* and make us to be Frenchmen, Hollanders, and Scotts, that what so
ever in the actions of the Protestants, or their vvritings, may seem to carry
color of any disloyalty to their several Princes or Magistrates, all that is
dravvn^ with cartropes and laid open our shoulders. This stratageme, you shall
find in Quaerimonia eccle. in the book of Scotising and Genevatising, and in
these late statising counterfeit Seminarian and Iesuatising Priests: which I
join together, because the two first being without their Fathers name,
prosecute their cause like as these latter. For as the one pretending pursuit
against Jesuits, labors by the name of Puritanes, to cut the throat of
all Protestants: so the other do dravv in all Protestants: under the name of
Puritanes, pretending to prove the Ministers, falsely called Puritanes,
dangerous to the state, by that wherewith they accuse other men of other
countries; and so bring a reproach upon all Protestant Churches. But surely in
my judgment they speak as much against the state of the present government,
as almost possible may be. And therefore in this argument we have cause to
rejoice, that they ioyn us to all the Protestants and godly learned Divines of
this age: Our best writters defend the protestants of other cuntries.
whom our reverend Fathers and writers, for the maintenance of this our
English Church, do defend and maintain against all manner of Popish writers and
Antichristian heretics: as well men which know the books, set forth since her
Majesty's most happy reign must needs understand: whereof something I will
touch. And first let us hear M. Calfill who says: Because the providence and
mercy of our God, Ans. to the trear. of the cross in the preface.
has frustrate their hope in their opinion to long, they have thought it best
to make open war against God and all honesty: to send for their friends and
sommon their diet in the Low Countries. Thence have proceeded the Popish
practices, the smokie stirs that were blown in Scotland; the fiery
factions inflamed in France; the Popish treason condemned in England; the
Popish conspiracy attempted in Ireland, etc. And the reverend Father M. D.
Bilson does particularly defend M. Calum, Difference between true Christ.
subjection-part. 3. page 502. 510. 511.
M. Beza and the Nobles of France, to have wrought and done nothing against
the civil Magistrates lawful authority. There is a special treatise of M.
D. Fulk against the railing declamation of Peter Frarine; wherein Beza, Calvin,
and Geneua, are cleared of all wicked and disloyal actions: and the
Protestants of France in all their war by the Kings edictes and many other
reasons, out of their true stories. So for the low Countries you shall find
that the States as well Papists as Protestants, In^r. and 2^ book of A. E.
Meteranus. Hist. Belgic.
stood for their privileges as well as for religion. And the Guises of France
the principal troublers as well of Scotland as of France: and that with such
pretense of religion, as they did entitle their Niece the Queen of Scotts,
with those royal dignities and arms of England and Ireland, which were and
are proper to our gracious Soueraign Queen Elizabeth: and this they did as
Buchanan says, as soon as Queen Marie was dead. Re. Scot. lib. 16.
Therefore I can not tell what men should mean, by wrapping within our cause
al other Protestant Churches (unto whom her Majesty, unto her immortal fame,
has been a very great stay and as it were a nours-mother) but that they have
some hidden stratageme, that in the common slander of Puritanes, either they
might make civil war between all reformed churches, or else prepare a way
for the Popish superstition, Queen Elizabeth a nurs to strangers to her
immortal fams.
by the dishonor and overthrow of her Majesty's sacred person, primacie, and
government and of all Protestants Estates, throughout Christendom. At the
least they bring her Majesty's name in question, and after a sort challenge all
her Princely and Christian enterprises: in regard whereof, all the Christian
Churches of Europe, as namely Geneua, France, The Low Countries, and
Scotland, do and ought to acknowledge themselves debtours to her highness: and
for which al ages to come shall find them selves bound to praise God, and to
remember her name, as a most precious thing, and a most singular gift of the
Highest Lord, for the comfort of his elect people. And that I may speak as M.
Beza is forced with great joy to confess: She has so well and faithfully purged
the true worship of God, In his preface before the new Testament with his large
notes.
from the most filthy pollutions of Antichristianisme in England; She has
made such peace in Scotland; and so happily succored the afflicted both there
and in France and God has so blessed her therein, and by her example the
noble Princes o^ Germany: that we may justly say, that God has advanced her
above all the Kings of this our age: so that the very Angels out of heaven do
seem to give their assent, of her most noble and Kinglye deeds, for the
protection of the Churches of Jesus Christ. And verilye they do her Majesty
great wrong, to impute all these things unto us, who a^as were never able to
do the smallest action; which to her eternal praise, she has most wisely,
most justly, and most equally, with a most constant and royal magnanimity
performed, as Buchanan, Meteranus, and other histories of our time do most
truly and deservedly report: and her renowm in this respect, will never be
forgotten as long as the world does stand.

The Priests and libellers do cunningly traduce the reverend Fathers. Seventh
Genesis quod. l. Artic. 3.
But there is another thing, which grieueth me not a little: that these books
seem to insinuate that some of our reverend Fathers, should be in some sort
favorers and abettoures, of their most malicious imputations of all Protestant
Churches and godly writers; As namely this wicked William Watson, ^n his most
treacherous and childish quodlibets, rehearses the names of some of them, as
if they were fit persons ^o be sued unto by Priests and Jesuits to obtain
favor. God forbid that these ^euerend Fathers should give them the ^east show
of cause, to think or say so wickedly of them: as though there were any
likelihood that such men would favor the enemies of God and of the Queen.
Libelling Priests like rogues.
They are like unto rogues, who in time past, would recite all the Justices of
peace in the shire; by mustering of whose names they would fortify themselves
against all gainsaiers: So these vagabund and roguing Priests abuse the names
of worthy men, to shadow their devilish and traitorous designements. For I have
great reason to judge, that their malicious Machiauellian drift is no
otherwise, but to bring them in hatred with all her Majesty's good and
faithful subjects. And they care not what they say, so as they might kindle a
fiery faction among us, and they accomplish their most wicked complottes. Can
they make us believe that these reverend men do favor such Popish traitors;
or that they do not by such gross and palpable flattery prepare a net for
their feet. Do they not know, how these reverend fathers do maintain and
allow, all learned and godly preachers, which enueigh against all such wicked
and seditious persons: and all books and writings, which bewray, confute, and
destroy their abominable minable heresies? Do they not know that they stand
for defense and promoting of the Ghospel, and the execution of all
Ecclesiastical laws of this land, for the upholding of the same, as Fathers
and Pastors of the Church of England: upon whom the eyes of all men are bent,
expecting and looking that they above all other, should show them selves zealous
for the truth, and enemies to Antichrist. What? Does he think them so unwise,
that they know not where they are, or how they are? or so childish that they
will revolt from the truth, which they have sucked in even from their cradle?
or so unthankful that they will take part with Gods adversaries? Does he
think them so blind that they will go contrary to all the reverend Bishops
and learned men, which have written ever since her Majesty's reign, against
the Romish heresy, that now they would take a new course, to sever from all
Christian Churches, and be content, to hear the most excellent lights of the
world to be so vilie and maliciously traduced; Does he think them so void of
all conscience and honesty, that they would take the greatest and chiefest
promotions of our Church, and so far abuse the trust committed to them by her
Majesty that they would vnder-hande, deal clean contrary to the same? What
sudden toy is come into this man's dreaming brains, to think that the learned
men of other nations and Churches, having now above fifty years, been all one
with the English Bishops and Protestants: English Bishopes ready to help
the strangers.
and always ready not only by word and writing, but also with money,
armor and life to help one another, should now after so many years
friendship and love, in our religion and true worship of God, without any
breach or alteration, be likely suddenly to be drawn one against another? so
that it should be a pleasure to our reverend Fathers, to hear such godly
learned men and Christian Churches, (our dear friends and brethren in Christ)
to be ill spoken of, traduced and slaundered? None else (a man would think) but
such as brain madd, would imagine such a thing. A man that had in him no more
but mere reason and policy, might easily see further into this matter (but
only that Papists desire nothing but hurly burly and confusion) that if they
had no fear of God before their eyes: yet they might well think with them
selves. that if by their favor showed to Priests, Seminaries or Jesuits,
they should have access to such places, or come so near her Majesty, that
any hurt should happen to her sacred person (which God for Christ's sake
keep far from her) that the oath of association would stir up some, and the
love wherewith her Majesty has bound thousands and thousands of her faithful
subjects unto her, would constrain both Noble men, Knights, Gentillmen and
all sorts of the commons, to be revenged upon them that have been means of
such evil. And they can not be ignorant, that if there be such a thing, and
that it may be now for some consideration, wincked at: yet there may come a
time, when such things may be ripped up, and called to accountes; and then, I
dare say, they would not be willing to take upon them such Popish treasonable
and irreligious writings. No meruell therefore if they care not what they say
against us poor Ministers: when they dare make it (by a question and answer)
lawful to sue for favor, at the hands of so reverend, wise and iuditious men;
whose place is so directlye opposite to such wicked hypocrites; and they stand
as watchmen to discover them, and as Judges to punish them.

But if among all the Protestant writers there be some one that has put forth
some private opinion of his own concerning the authority of Princes: are we
to be blamed with that where with we were never acquainted? But this is a
stale slander against all Protestants, Of the difference between Christ. sub.
part. 3. page 3.6. Auns. to P. Frarine page 35.
ansvvered by M. D. Bilson and Doctor Fulk; and comes to late to be laid upon
us. But here we may see their beggarly poverty, or else some secret secular
Popish malice, that they must be feign to thrust into the balance of their
false accusation against us, what so ever color may be devised against all
foreign Protestants, to way down the good estimation of a fevve poor
Ministers of England. Such is the actions of the Anabaptists and of Martin
Marprelat, Harding. auns. Artic. 25. diuis. 12.
and frantic Hacket: even as just as the furious disobedience of these very
Anabaptists is laid to the charge of all other Protestants by the malicious
and wicked Papists. It is now at the least 33. year, since our troubles began
to be very heavy upon us, let the^ show how we have moved the least finger
against our dread Sovereign? The present toleration of some of the chief who
have written in this cause, in the conscience of those reverend and
honorable and wise persons, who either have caused their liberty or effected
it themselves, may testify our innoce^cie. And surely I would not desire any
favor, if I might be convicted of the evil carriage of the best of those three.
Neither do I fear that any honest mind, not blinded with hatred, will
impute any of their wicked dealing to any godly Minister, which desires
the good of our Church.

The second great sla^der touching Gods mercy upon this land.
4 Therefore will I come to the second sort of objections which seem more
nearly to touch us and our cause. The most principal objection comes within
this circle: That we acknowledging not this singular benefit, proceeding from
the mercy of God; namely, that all heresies, corrupt doctrines, all
superstitions and papisticall opinions have been banished by the Prince and
Realm, etc: and all points of doctrine necessary to salvation, and touching
the mystery of our redemption, or the right use of the Sacraments and true
manner of worshipping of God, are purely and perfectly taught, and by public
authority established in the Church of England at this day, etc: we are so
far from being thankeful for the same from desiring the continuance of it by
hearty prayer: that by all means possible we seek rather to obscure it and
deface it; because in certain accident all points we have not our fancies and
proper devises. So that by this we are judged to set our selves against God,
and frowardlie disquiet the peace of the Church for external things (which is
schismatic) trouble the happy peace of the common wealth, and hazard the
whole state of religion, with no small rejoicing of the wicked; great offense
of the weak Ghospellers; merueilous grief of the Queens Majesty and other
that have care of government. If this objection were as true as it is of
great importance; and as fitly applied unto us, as it lays upon us a most
heavy imputation: then had we great cause to wish our tongues to cleave to
the roof of our mouths, and our hands for ever to forget to write. If we
have not both by word and writing, publicly and priuatlie, acknowledged the
great mercy of God for her M.: in the banishing of al heresies, superstitions,
and namely Popery, and for planting the true Gospel of faith among us: if we
have not and do not daily pray, both at Church and at home for the continuance
of the same, and for the joy and comfort of her M. and al our godly Governors
and Superiors: if al men that know us, do not also every day see and
behold, that this is our care and study, and that we do stir up others both
publicly and privately to do the same: then let the Lord reward every man
according to his righteousness and faithfulness, and let the wicked feel his
judgments. We can boldly commend our selves to the testimony of al our
neighbors, friends and enemies whatsoever: whom hardened malice has not so
far overcome and blinded, that they can not and will not say and confess,
that which in the eyes and ears of al men appears plainly: even as the
shining of the Sun in the firmament, and the sound of many waters to them which
travel by sea and by land. But the force and power of this accusation is in
two things: first they say That by all means possible we seek rather to
obscure this mercy of God and to deface it. 2. The reason which is made of
this our so doing: Because in certain accidental points, we have not our
fancies and proper devises. If in deed these two things might be proved against
us, The cheifest force of this accusation.
then all the other branches of this surmised slander, vvoulde shrewdly wring
us: otherwise they fall all to pieces, as loose members without joints and
ligamentes. Therefore let these be examined. First, what means at all have
we used to obscure Gods mercy? We have, in the knowledge of all men that know
and hear us, praised God and prayed for her M. and the state, in regard of
this mercy of God: we have in our Sermons and in all our talk (as occasion
is offered) ever defended the doctrine of faith and of the Sacraments, and the
abolishing of al heresy, superstition and popery. We have written very much
for the maintenance thereof, against ye papists, Anabaptists family of love,
and Brownists: some of us have been used in conference with other godly learned
men to dispute with the challengers and chieftaines of popery: and more would
have done in that behalf, if they might have been permitted, And this to be true
we refer our selves to the judgment of all the world, and we hope so well of
our brethren (that write against us) that they will not deny it unto us: what
should the^ be all those possible means which we have used to deface or obscure
Gods mercies? But it may be, it is meant, because we have not used some
certain ceremonies of the church nor subscribed to the books of orders and
common prayer, etc. and have made petition to the Parliament and after by
apologetical writings defended these our doings. Other things we know not, and
for these I hope we need not be ashamed. First it is apparent, that in all
these things we have not meddled against the doctrine aforsaide, nor against
the chief substance of any the said books: and therefore in regard of the
matter it can not be said, that we ha^^ ^^irectlie done any thing tending to
o^^cure or deface this mercy of God. Secondly, if it be said, that by these
things (which I confess) we have indirectly used means, etc. I answer, that
in this we have done no otherwise, then all Christian Ministers both may and
ought to do. For in not using the ceremonies, when we found our selves
doubtful and troubled. What could we do less or better, then to repair to
the reverend Bishops for counsel and comfort? Which for the space of ten
years, (or the most part thereof) they did in some good measure afoorde unto
us: till as I take it, by the relation of such as were in the same broiles, the
Papists had cunningly wrested our good Fathers from us. that they could and
would do no further for us. Then yet complaining of our case and opening our
doubts unto them, we did as the law affoordeth, that the cause should be
brought before the Ordinary, in all doubts about ceremonies of the church
established by law: and finding not our selves resolved by our ordinaries, alas
what could we do less, then quietly to suffer our selves, (with great grief
bewailing our flocks) to be suspended, imprisoned and deprived. And this has
been the cause of all them which have not used the ceremonies so fully as some
other of their brethren. Secondly, for the petition or admonition to the
Parliament, wherein are laid open such imperfections as are found in all these
books, and for all other writtinges which have come forth in defense of the
same, if it be meant, that the same is the means of obscuring and defacing the
mercy of God. We answer (as partly the admonition does) we have always
borne with that we could not amend, and have used the book of common prayer
in our ministry, so far forth as we might, reuerencing those times and
those persons in which, and by whom it was first authorized. But now being
compelled by subscription to allow the same, and to confess it, not to be
against the word of God in any point: we could not but show a reason of our
refusal: and it was meet that we should tender to the Parliament our griefs,
as all other subjects do in all other cases. Because that is the place which
by ancient custom of this, Realm serves for the redress of all things to
be reformed, and the establishing of all matters in the state of this kingdom.
If in the style and manner of doing, they or any other writing in defense of
them, Curious and bitter words not justifiable
have been over curious, bitter, or sharp: by which they have incensed the^,
whom they should have won by mild and meek usage: I for my part do not
rejoice in it, and I dare not defend any the least unseemly word. Howsoever I
know the hard pursuit upon them, and that being (as they verily thought)
further and beeyonde the law of this Realm: did give them great cause to be
grieved and offended: that their consciences should be so straightly pressed
and their labors so little regarded, and being Ministers of the Gospel they
should be so smallie esteemed: and that the Reverend Fathers, accounting
those things (for which they contend) but mere trifles; would yet prefer
them before the ministry of so many worthy Preachers, and provoke their
breethren more and further then they need. This doubtless vexed their spirit;
and such is our weakness and imperfection in this life, that it is an hard
thing to keep measure at all times. And when men are persuaded in conscienee,
that their cause is good; their grief is the more, and they are the more
confident to speak. And it were almost a wonder, that in such perplexity,
every thing should be perfect and without blemish. Do we not know that Moses
being by the spirit of God, Number. 12.3.
called a very meek man above all men that ever were upon the earth: yet God
punished him, Because his spirit being vexed by the people, Ps. 106.72.73
he spoke unadvisedly with his lips. So no merueill though (we poor weak
souls, far inferior to that most rare man) have felt the smart of our
grief and zeal. I would to God, that our brethren and fathers could be
justified in this matter, and that they had not their part of just punishment
with us; for that wherein they have been ouerseene in their dealing toward us,
and toward the Church of England in these causes. And I hartly pray God, that
they do not one day confess and say: We have verelye sinned against our
brethren, Genesis 42.41.
in that we saw the anguish of their souls, when they besought us, and we
would not hear them, therefore is this trouble come upon us. The Lord our
God even our merciful Father be judge between us. Touching subscription I
have sufficiently spoken before, and there will be occasion after, therefore I
need not in this place to say any thing. Now I come to the second point, the
cause of our doing: it is said, Because in certain accidental points they
have not their fancies and proper devises. If it may appear that this is an
Elench. No cause, set for A cause: and that a good, just, and weighty cause
founded in Gods word, is injuriously reputed and termed accidental, fancy
and devise: then I hope godly and wise Christians will pity our estate, and
be more favorable judges of our cause. To read books Apocryphal and
chapters containing errors and untruths, under the name of holy scripture, is
no accidental point: unless we will say, that our conference with papists
and our apologeticall writtings proving errors to be in those books, and
therefore to be no Canonical Scriptures, be accidental points The desire that
every Minister be a Preacher of Gods word and to administer discipline is no
accidental point unless the chiefest point of the Minister office, as they
are ordained by the ^ooke of orders, be but an accidental ^ointe. To desire
that Chauncelers, Officialls and Commissaries, should ^ot administer
discipline, and name^e, excommunication, which D. Sut^ef says is against all
reason for a lay ^an to do; and that the Pastor should ^ot be a non-resident,
which the reue^end Fathers say is a pernicious thing: ^r to say that God has
consecrated natrimonie to such an excellent my^erie that in it is signified and
repre^ented the spiritual marriage betwixt Christ and his Church, which is not
^o to be found in holy Scripture, but (...) a belying of his glorious
Majesty: ^o say that these and many such like, ^e accidental points, I
hope no aduied man, that looks thoroughly into ^ur cause, will adventure. And
where (...) is said that we would herein have ^ur fancies and proper
devises: let the ^oste reverend Father determine for ^s, where he has these
words: D. Whitg. in the preface of the defens. of the auns. to the admonition.
The ^ontrouersie is not, whether many of the ^hinges mentioned by the
platformers, were ^tlie used in the Apostles time, or may ^ee well used in some
places, yea or he conveniently used in sundry reformed Churches at this day.
For none of these branches at denied, etc. Now if (as this reverend Father
says) many of the things we desire, were fitly used in the Apostle^
times, etc. How can they be our fancies and proper devises: which were used by
the Apostles some a thousand five hundredth years before we were borne. And let
it be considered, whether the Apostles using such things have deserved to be
reproached with our fancies and proper devises, who are living so many hundred
years after them, and have our selves learned those things out of their holy
writings: if this be well looked into, and advisedly judged of, by an equal
and just line, I hope the ground of this great and terrible accusation, being
void and empty, all the other grievous inferences, will fall and vanish away:
and that the contrary will be evident and apparent to the conscience of all
men. Namely, That for so much as we faithfully preach the doctrine of faith
and sacraments, and humbly and quietly use our ministry according to the
book of orders, and administer Prayer and Sacraments by no other form, but
that of the book of common prayer, and that in our public preaching and
private talk, in all accasions we do praise God and acknowledge his mercy
and pray for the continuance thereof, and stir up others so to do: and
thereupon do humbly present to the reverend Fathers and the whole state, very
good and weighty points agreeing to holy Scripture, needful to be
considered, for the further perfection of our Church and the glory of God:
being no fancies of ours, or devises, but such as the holy Apostles did use in
the first and purest Churches: we ca^ not be said to set our selves against
god; frowardly to disquiet the church; trouble the common wealth; hazard the
whole state of religion; rejoice the wicked, or grieve any godly person
whatsoever: but rather to promote the glory of God; further the present good,
and increase of our Church, to the great benefit, comfort and joy of Gods
people. And I can not think so vndutifullie of her Majesty, or of any other
that have care of government: that they would be marvelously grieved, to se
any subject in humble and dutiful manner, sue to be eased of any grieuance,
according to the ancient custom and usual order of this Realm: and that the
Ministers of Christ should reverently admonish the state of some points
needful to be reformed, by the holy Scriptures and usage of the blessed
Apostles. But above all other Imeruaill how this can be to hazard the whole
state of Religion, except a man would say, that to go about in honest sort, to
make perfect, that which is very well and excellently begun, is the high way
to destroy all.

But it may be the mystery of this point of this objection, is contained in
the second, The objection of innovation
which is also a matter of great consequence. Namely, that being a settled
government of all things, it is a dangerous thing to go about to alter the
same. For all innouationes are dangerous to the state. Which as it is an
argument not to be despised, so is it urged by some in the hiest degree. And
we our selves do freely acknowledge, that it is worthy due consideration.
How be it, we verily think, that it is not on our part, or in cause so
heinous as it is made. First because as is before showed, we desire not the new
forming of the Church, but only the rectifying and perfecting of diverse things
in the Church: and that every thing might agree and be according to the
doctrine of our Church, To make perfect is not to innouate.
and namely that holy Canon which says: All our actions should be
squared, after the will of GOD reueiled in his word. In the time of King
David, by uniform consent of all estates, the ark of God was sought after, ^.
Cor. 13.
and to be brought unto Jerusalem: but they bringing it in a carte God made a
breach, so as they durst not, for that time carry it further then the house of
Obed Edom the Gittite, yet after upon more and better examination of Gods
word, they brought it by the Priests and Levites, Cap. 15.
and found that God made a breach among them, for not seeking him in order.
Here shall it be said, that this latter was an innovation, or not a
perfecting of that which of a good and honest mind was begun before, but
wanted some part of Gods order. So if we crave no alteration in religion but
only that the things which are (standing as they do) may be brought to the
order of the Apostles use and to the canon of Gods holy word in those
circumstances which remain yet unreformed, I hope it will not be an
innovation. Josiah one of the most excellent Kings of Judah and Jerusalem, 2.
Cron. 34. and 35.
being young; in the eight year of his reign, began to seek after the God of
his Father, and in the twelfth he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from
the high places and the groves, and the carved and molten images: then in the
eightenth year of his reign, he repaired the house of the Lord, and finding
the book of the Law, caused all estates to covenant with God, to follow his
law and keep his testimonies and statutes; and lastly solemnized the feast of
the passover. Here you see are many and great alterations, such as I may
boldly say, there would not be so great, if we had all the things we desire:
and yet it proved to be no dangerous innovation. And is not God as well able
to bless us, if we go forward in his Gospel, as he was in prospering them?
Is it more dangerous to add a little, now religion is settled in men's hearts,
then it was at the first to make an whole in nouation and change of all, when
men had little or no taste of religion? I am persuaded, that if the stream did
not so mightily and violently run against us, but that our Reverend Fathers
and others were as willing to come a degree nearer to the Apostles use: If
things were reformed, the show of innovation would be small.
that by the very laws and orders already established, we might have the most
part brought into good order, as partly may appear by the 2. and 3. chapters
of this book, partly by a book called the Abstract, and partly by the
authority which is given to Ministers touching communicants: and diverse other
things; which I know wise and godly men would find out, that in show there
would be no great odds, though so much were reformed, as might make up the
breach, which is between us, because we have not sought God altogether in
perfect order. If Subscription were kept within the compass of law according
to the meaning of the statute Anno 13. and the ceremonies made indifferent to
use or not to use: excommunication and execution of Ecclesiastical censurers
restored and reserved to the Bishops and Pastors of our Church: and if the
unpreaching Minister were tied to perform his promise in his ordination, and
the not resident sent to their flocks: the wound would be by and by healed,
and we should be alone and joyful brethren together. Which thing I would not
have touched, but that it might appear, that the objection of innovation is
not so material and of such weight, as it seems. And I am persuaded, there
be of the Reverend Fathers and others in this land (being as notable men as
ever were in all Europe) that if it would please God to incline our hearts
to agree in this point, to take a brotherly order for cutting of all
contention, and for the more straight curbing of the undermining enemy: who
would and could, by their wisdom and learning do a great deal more
excellently that way, then I poor weak man am able: who well knowing mine
own wants and imperfection, can willingly set mine hands under their
feet.

In the next place it is to be considered, whether that because the things in
controversy are called external, we may be called schismatics. Saint Paul
(me thinks) does help us in this case, where he says: Rom, 16.17.
I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently, which cause division and
offenses, contrary (or as the Greek word signified: beside) the doctrine
which ye have learned, and avoid them. Now when it is before declared,
that the things we desire and stand for, are according to the doctrine we
have received, and as our reverend Fathers and Brethren confess used in the
Apostles time: we humbly suing for and teaching these things by the word of
God (whatsoever term you give the things themselves) we can not in any sort
be called schismatickes. And if I being called into question for one of the
least ceremonies, to the use whereof I can not frame my conscience, yet if,
being in mine own judgment weak in comparison of other learned men whose
judgment I reverence; or in the opnion of some other I be accounted foolish,
or, as some will say, peevish) I be afeard to offend mine own conscience, and
do choose rather to be suspended or deprived, and quietly submit my self to
the punishment of law, and abide peaceably in the unity and fellowship of the
Church, I hope I am no schismaticke, nor a froward disquieter of the Church.
And such has been our manner of doing, patiently suffering that which is
imposed upon us.

5 The next rank of objections, is concerning her Majesty's person, Crown and
Dignity: The third great slander concerning her M. person Crown and Dignity.
which are no triflinge matters, if we might be justly convicted. First
touching her Royal person, I heard it objected in a Sermon, by a reverend
man, who now is a Bishop, that by refusing to subscribe, we make the Queens
Majesty to be an Atheist, worse the^ papists, and namely of no religion. And
first touching herrelion.
For (faieth he) you refuse to subscribe to the book of orders, then do you
make that we have no good ministry: you refuse to subscribe to the book of
common prayer, then make you that we have no good liturgy and service of God;
you refuse to subscribe to the book of articles which contain the sum of
our faith and doctrine: then do you make that we have no sound doctrine. But
these be the books, which her Majesty, by her authority does set forth, and
by them shows what religion she is of, and what she holds and maintains:
there fore if their be no good liturgy, no good doctrine, no good ministry,
then it follows that you make the Queen to be of no religion. God forbid,
say we, that we should so much as think so wickedly of her sacred Majesty;
Who has endured so many dangers, and so many years so constantly maintained
Gods pure and unchangeable truth and holy religion. We therefore answer freely
in this behalf. First, that we believe, that neither that reverend man so
preaching, nor any other man whatsoever, that knows us and our cause, and the
manner how we do refuse subscription, either does or can so think in his
conscience, to determine of us in his secret thoughts before God (taking God
to be judge of the simplicity of his soul) that we do esteem, or make her
Majesty to be of no religion. Secondly their color so to reason against us,
because we refuse to subscribe, with a very little breath may be blown away.
For first touching the doctrine of the Church of England, we hold it
steadfastly and have willingly offered to subscribe to the same according to the
statute, for that cause provided: praising God hartelie that the true faith by
which men may be saved, and the true doctrine of the Sacraments, and of the
pure worshipe of God, is truly taught, and that by public authority, and
contained in the book of articles: so that we can not be blamed concerning
that book. Secondly we do not disallow the book of common prayer, but do
use it and non other in our ministry: but if further then the statute lays
upon us for that book, we be required to subscribe; and we pray that our
doubts might be first answered in some particulers: we do no thing against the
law of the Realm nor against the said book especially seeing that they the
said law and book (so far as we can learn) do not require our subscription
to the same. Thirdly for the book of orders, we enjoy our ministry by the
same book, and do allow the preaching Ministry ordained by the same: but if
with out law, we be required to subscribe, and that thereby some things be
found questionable and doubtful: let all men judge, whether we which meddled
not with that book or any of the other books, to bewray or utter any thing
against any of the said books, or they which by a forced subscription
constrain us there unto: be most worthy of blame. Therefore seeing we are not
against any of the said books, but commend well of the doctrine, ministry and
liturgy, and in not subscribing have only labored to keep a good conscience
without any purpose to deprave any of the said books; I hope this objection
will return empty and without use. The second objection in this rank is:
That seeking to erect discipline we abridge her Majesty's authority: Secondly
touching he authority and prerogative.
by Elders, we diminish her royal prerogative: and by our Pastor and
equalizing Ministers, we set up a Pope in every Parish. These things verily
have an odious sound: but it griueth not us to answer. We do therefore
confidentlie say; that in all these things we give unto to her Majesty, as
much as she her self either by law or by practice (so far as I can see) does
callenge. Which is comprehended in two things.

In the Injunctions and admonitioni to simple men.
1. That she challenges not authority or power of ministry of divine offices
in the Church.

2. She challenges, under God, to have the soueraignitie and rule over all
manner of persons, borne within these her Realms, Dominions, and Countries, of
what estate, either Ecclesiastical or Temporal, so ever they be: so as no
other foreign power shall or ought to have any superiority over them. And
such is also the 37 article of the book of articles. All which we do as
fully hold and believe, preach and maintain as any other what so ever:
acknowledging with all our hearts, the same prerogative, Eam tantum
prerogatiuam quam in sacris Scripturis a Deo ipso, etc.
which in the sacred Scriptures, we see always to have been given of God him
self unto all godly Princes. So in all and every of these things we do seek
after, as Discipline, Elders and Pastor: we abhor and detest that any person
or persons what so ever, should usurp authority over her M. or that any
state or order committed of God to her protection, whether they be
ecclesiastical or civil, should not be under her government and to be
punished by her civil sweard. Now if we verily believe that some thing in the
Ecclesiastical discipline of our Church in the book of common prayer, might
be reduced some what nearer to the Canon of holy Scriptures, do we any whit
abridge her authority? Solomon received a pattern of the Temple with the
things therein contained at the hands of his Father David: 1. Cron. 28.15 19.
which he says was all sent by vvriting to him by the hand of the Lord,
which made him understand all the workmanshipe of the pattern: 2. Cron. 3.1.
And Solomon builded it in no other place but in mount Moriah, which had been
declared to David his Father. Did this any whit diminish his authority,
because he was directed by the word of the Lord. And such has been the
gracious and Christian practice of her Majesty, in setting forth the doctrine
of faith, Sacraments, of the vvorshipe of God, etc: by direction of holy
Scripture: and in her own person hearing the word of God, receiving of the
Sacraments, and joining with the Church is prayers. In which most notable is
that Anno 1588. she publicly came to Paul's cross, and then and there
acknowledged the Lords great goodness in his protection over this Realm, and
delivering us out of the hands of the bloody Spaniards. In all which she is
as vvorthie and renoomed a Prince, as any this day in Europe: shevving her
self to be a true worshipper of God, and a careful obseruer of his word. If
we should offer any further matter, then that is hear shevved to be her
meaning and doing, we might justly have this accusation laid against us: but
that you see, has as easy a denial, as it is a most manifest slander. But
as for the diminishing of her prerogative by Elders, or that the Pastor should
be a Pope: I vvonder at the skantling they take, should either of these take
upon him any thing diverse from the Scriptures, and which he might dare to do,
being not authorized thereunto, by public order of the Church and confirmed
by her Majesty's authority. And how can a poor Minister be a Pop^ when his
authority should reach butte^ one parish? and that therein he should not do
his own mind, but be measured by a law and superior authority. This they know
well or may know, that object these things against us, I merueill they dare
hazard their credit, to publish such kind of uncharitable inventions. But we
are not to good to come under such unjust imputations, seeing our Savior
Christ drank of the same cupp: but our grief is the more, to have such measure
from our reverend Fathers and dear brethren. The next besitting this kind is
that we affect popularitie: and to bring al to a popular state. Thirdly
touching popul^ritie.
This slander seems to me to have two forckes. First in regairde of the
peoples choosing of their Pastor: and second that we should be enemies to
Magistrates or Monarchical government. I answer, in the first we leave not
all to the people, but only we vvoulde not have the people left out, but as
Act. 6. and 14.23. The Bishopes and Ministers should order and guide the
people: and both joining together the choice might be free and most for the
benefit of the Church. Now when the Bishops of our Church in England, before
they ordain a Minister, will have him to nominate a place, and (as I have
seen in practice) send their letters to that place, to see if any could
except against him, and lastly ordain him with these words: Take authority to
preach to this congregation: meaning as I take it, the Parish which had chosen
him: alas what popularitie is this? This objection Master D. Fulke answers
against the Papists, by those words: And as for the popular election, if you
have red those books you make mention of, Defen. of English transl. cap 15.
page 797.
you might perceive, that neither of both parts, allow a mere popular
election. And that Master Whitgift does not so much contend, what form of
election was used in the time of the Apostles, etc. The other forcke is a mere
devise, a deuilish quarrel, and calumniation against all Protestants (for
Bristow says: Motive. 40,
Protestants be malignoures of the hier powers,) and has no color in the
world, in any of our doeings, writings or practice whatsoever: therefore I
think it not worthy to be answered.

6 The other arguments and objections are not of so great a praise, Objections
of more equity.
yet will I answer some few of them: that if it be possible, the chief heads
(unto which all other may be referred) being found light and vain: all the
rest might be accounted no better then they are. First our friends say unto
us, if their be no superior, how can there be any good order? We answer that we
meruil they understand not, that we mean, that the law and authority of the
Prince shall be superior to all the Magistrates and Commissioners as signed by
her, to see all her good laws executed. And as Master Fulke says, we
grant among the Ministers themselves, An ouerthrewe' of the answ. to M. Chark.
prefa^ page 112.
a primacie of order, as it was among the Apostles, namely according to which
James was president of the council at Jerusalem Act. 15. But it is further
urged that the honor of Bd. is more for the protection of the Ministers and
for their reputation. I will not here for reverence sake answer all that I
can, and which miserable experience afordeth, only I would such to consider,
that our armor is spiritual; and that the Apostles subdued all the world,
without this earthly honor, which this objection pretends. But a Christian
Magistrate being friend, we have now less cause to fear our reputation if we
do well, then they (being base and poor fishermen and of low estate) at that
time had, when all the power and glory of the world was against them.
Therefore the Psalm speaks another manner of conquest: Namely that, Christ
should prosper with his glory, Psalm. 45.4^
and ride upon (no other pompeous chariot but) that of Gods word, all laid over
with gold of truth, and drawn with no other horses, but meeknes and
righteousness. So am I persuaded that although this great dignity of our
Prelates were taken a way; yet if we did diligently and faithfully, in humble
and upright manner teach the people Gods word of truth and salvation, it would
procure us honor and reputation, sufficientlye beseeming Gods Ministers;
finding that ielous word of God true: Them that honor me, 1. Sam. 2.30.
I will honor, etc. And lastly, Of sufficient Ministers and maintenance for
them.
it is demanded, where we will find sufficient Ministers to be preachers,
and living for such worthy men. This objection with many other might be left
out, for there be (God be thanked) enough worthy men, if they were sought
after, both in the Universities and other where: but while men are suffered to
run and ride, and ketch before they fall, many worthy men are passed over
and not known; some are feign to be scholemaisters, and some (because of these
troubles) change their studies. Many are afearde to set their sons to
school, seeing Ministers so little regarded. Littleton, Galen, and the godly
houses of Noble men and Gentlemen, would help to make up the number. And this
we see daily, that there can not be a place void, but there be many scholars
of reasonable competent gifts to fulfill the same. As for maintenance, God
be praised, this Realm above all other, is to be commended: only the joining
of smaler livings and Parishes into one, with redeeming of impropriations
would quickly fill up that gappe: that no man of a moderate government and
desire (if every one be placed after his gifts) should have just cause to
complain.

These things being considered, I hope it will appear to all reasonable men,
that it can be proved by any good reason; that the godly Ministers desiring
reformation, are enemies to the state, or causes of these troubles which are
among us. But yet there remains one imputation, which I can not pass over.
Because although it have not so much as a shadow of truth: The last great
flaunder touching Papists and Ieusites,
yet is it above all other usually hitt in our teeth: Namely, they say we are
like Papists, enemies to the Church, and sometime they say we are worse: and
it pleases the packing Priest to make us factious and underminers of States
and Magistrates, as the Jesuits, comparing us with them in five and twenty
lies in one place: which although in the conscience of all honest men knowing
us, and of the reverend Fathers them selves, it be most manifestly false: yet
because of the present state of things I will bestow a little time in the
opening of the same And this I will do (by Gods grace) by three arguments.
First, by a simple comparison between us and al Papists. Secondly, by the
affection which is in them and us. And thirdly, by the likely effects: If we
should both have favor and toleration alike. And this I will handle in three
several chapters, as briefly as I can: Not so much for the defense of our
innocence (which by that which is already written, is sufficiently
maintained and approved) but for the common good of the whole Church, and
namely of our reverend Fathers and dear brethren, which stand so earnestly
for conformity. For I can not but think that this calumniation, has his
first devise from some glosing Papists, taking advantage by our to hott and
eager persuite of each other, to prepare a way by pulling down and raising
the one side, utterly to turn over and to destroy the whole Church of God:
which I hope and am persuaded, our merciful God, will neuersuffer him to do.

Cap. 7.
Wherein is proved, that the Ministers seeking reformation, falsely called
Puritanes, are not in any sort to be compared to Papists in evil: much less
to be equalized with traitorous seminary priests or Jesuits. 1. By their
contradictorie doctrine. 2. By their contrary acts and doings.

ONe part of the sufferinges of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, was this,
that he was counted with the the transgressors, Esai. 53.12.
and therefore, as Saint Mark says, He was crucified between two thieves.
We are not then to think it strange to be matched, Mare. 15.27.28.
with Anabaptists, Donatistes, Papists, rebels, and I can not tell what: For
the servant is not greater then the Master. Ioh. 15.20.
And I hope that if we suffer with him in righteousness, we shall rejoice with
him in glory. Let us then examine this calumniation. If we be like or worse
then Papists in evil to the Church of England: it is either in our doctrine
or in our doeings. First I will prove not in our doctrine, We hold all the
doctrine of faith with the Church of England: the Papists deny it.
and that by two arguments the former is this: we hold, believe and teach all
the articles of the Christian faith according to the holy Scriptures, even as
the Church of England does; a thing so apparent as the Sun at noon days. And
the Papists are herein directly contrary, to the faith and doctrine of the
Church of England and to the word of God approouing the same. Therefore if
sound doctrine and faith, be the chief mark to know a good man and that the
doctrine and faith of England be good and true: and that the doctrine of the
papists, be naught, wicked and abominable: then are we, who follovv the good
and true doctrine of the Church of England, not to be compared to the Papists
in evil, who are deadly enemies to the same. Secondly that part of doctrine,
wherein we seem to differ from the reverend Fathers of our Church: being such
(as is before declared) as agrees to the principal Canon of our Church in
general, and in particulars with the usage of the Apostles, and with the
laws, injunctions, Canons, and apologeticall writings of our Church: against
all which, the Papists most constantly do war and cavil: therefore in
this also we be not to be compared unto them. My latter argument touching our
doctrine, We hold the Queens supremacy and the Papists deny it.
is concerning the civil Magistrate. We the Ministers a foresaid, desiring the
abolishing of all Popish remnants, do hold, believe and confess, that all
obedience is to be performed to the civil Magistrate although they were
evil and infidels, as the Scripture teaches. And that no Bishop, Romans 13.1.
1. Pet. 2.13.
Priest or Minister can deprive a King or discharge the subjects of the oath of
allegiance. And that our Queen Elizabeth (God bless her) is supreme
governor over all persons, borne in her dominions, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or civil; and that no foreign Potentate, as namelye the Pope of
Rome, has any jurisdiction within her dominions and countries, but is a
wicked usurper over Kings, and Princes. But all Papists, if they be true
catholics (as they term themselves) and namely all Priests, secular,
Seminary and Jesuit, do hold clean contradictorie, even manifest treason
and rebellion against the civil power ordained of God. Therefore there is no
comparison to be made in regard of doctrine, between us and the Papists.
And that you may perceive, This slander is laid upon all Protestants.
that this concerns all Protestants, as well as the Ministers falsely called
Puritanes: do but consider these words of Bristow: Of Catholics thorowlie
discharged of their fealty, yet for common humanity, for their accustomed use,
Motive. 40.
for their continual, and, as it were, natural institution, the Prince is
better obeyed and served, the^ of Protestants, which in heart ar in a manner all
Puritanes. Note here (that I may use M. D. Fulks words) that Papists profess
them selves to be subjects, Ren^^.
of curteousie and not of duty, of custom and not of conscience, of natural
institution, and not of the law of God. O Lord and Savior, send her M. few
such subjects and servants. The currish obedience of Papists.
Now this courteous or rather currish obedience is expounded, what it is, by
that beastly bull of Pius the fifth, against our noble Sovereign, with the
faculty granted to Campion and Persons, Read. D. Fulk Auns. to P. Frarin de:
clam. page 35.
by which the Pope licenseth the Papists to dissemble their obedience until
public execution of that Bull may be had: that is, to be privy traitors,
till with hope of success, they may be open rebels.

We are obedient and quiet the Papists seditious and rebellious.
2 Now for our doings, which it has been, ever since our troubles, we need
not to be ashamed to confess: and we refer our selves to all men. If we have
committed any indignity against her M. person, Crown, or Sovereignty, or had
intelligence with any of her enemies, or gone about to draw away the people
from their obedience, or any such like. But we have done (in the knowledge of
al men) altogether clean con trarie, both by word and deed, in our preaching
openly, and exhortations and example privately. And in our troubles we have
willingly and patiently submitted our selves to the punishments which have
been inflicted upon us: only craving favor and ease, so far as agrees to
holy scripture and the peace of the church: and in all that we have gone about,
we have labored for the good, for the beauty and perfection of our Church:
that it might increase and flourish more and more, to the glory of God and to
the honor and comfort of her M. These me^ the papists have done clean
contrary, especially since the 10. year of her M. happy reign: never being
without one cruel treason or another; sometime by desperate bluddie murderers:
sometime by open rebellion, forraineinuasion and procuring of Bulls from Rome:
sometime by Priests, sometime by Jesuits, and sometime by other means, as is
plainly set forth in the book called the execution of justice, in the writings
of Sir Frauncis Hastings, D. Sutliefe, D. Fulke, and diverse others. The things
on both sides are so not oriouslie known, that I need not here to repeat
them in particular. I pray God that for our sins, he do not give us over to
blindness, that in such palpable and manifest experience of the traitorous
hearts of Papists, we suffer not our selves to be taken by their wily
flatteries, and forsaking our trusty and faithful friends, we yield
ourselves to the bloody slaughter of enemies.

CHAP. 8.
The Ministers which desire reformation in some things of our Church matters.
can never fear but ever love her M. and all the godly wise Magistrates under
her: but the Papists clean contrary.

PRinces (says the Apostle) are not to be feared for good works but for
evil. Romans 13.3.
And the evil life of the wicked me^ is the cause that Princes make many good
laws. Because he is the Minister of God to take vengeance on him that does
evil. Therefore evil men are a fraid of the higher power: and an evil
conscience makes them desire there were none such to bridle their wickedness:
Even as it is said by the wisdom of God; Every man that does evil, hates
the light: John. 3.20.
neither comes to the light, least his deeds be reproved. No marvel then
though it be a principle among traitorous Papists: That every man of any
faction, A traitorous Popish principle.
desires the remoouing of the Prince, whose laws are contrary to his
faction. For their conscience being evil and defiled with most filthy
superstition and abominable idolatry; they can not love any godly Prince
(such as is our most dear and gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth) because a
wise King scatters the wicked and causes the wheel to go over them. And
verily there are two things which do manifest their inward affection. prou.
20.26.
First their doctrine: not only, because it is in most of the substantial
points, opposite to that, which her Majesty, (as the true defender of the
faith) maintains: and that which her laws and government commands: but
also because they place another Sovereign authority above hers: The Papists
have given their hearts to the Queens deadly enemies.
to whom, as unto an higher Lord and Ruler, they prefer their chief
obedience. And looking and hoping for ghostly comfort and remission of sins
at the hands of that man of sin: they can not love the righteous and godly
Prince who has banished his power and abominable forgeries. Neither in truth
is it possible. For how can they love her, who have given their heart to a
stranger, even her most deadly enemy. And not only that: but all men know,
that as light and darkness, Christ and Beliall, the Temple of God and idols,
They are as contrary to her as darkness to light.
can not agree: So her Majesty, being a lover of righteousness, and they of
unrighteousness: She a believer and they infidells: She a worshipper of the true
and living God, and they of images and diverse sorts of creatures: She of the
faith of Christ, and they of Antechrist: (seeing God has put enimitie between
the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent) it is not possible that
they can love her. And they have cause for their wicked lives, treason,
superstition and idolatry, to fear her righteous laws, and upright
judgments. And she has great cause to rejoice and glorify God in this
behalf: She may rejoice Gods enemies are hers.
that the enemies of God be her enemies, and the mighty God of hoastes is her
protector, who with his favor compasses her as with a shield. Secondly, their
deeds declare no less. For if a true man be known by his fruit: and as our
Savior Christ says: Math 7.18.
A good tree can not bring forth evil fruit: The fruits of Papists show
their hatred to her Majesty.
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Then if lying,
dissimulation, treachery, treason: if false doctrine, and drawing away the
hearts of subjects from the Prince: if procuring of open rebellion, and
foreign invasion: if many cruel and secret conspiracies and murtherous
attempts, may be justly called evil fruits, and certain true marks of
disloyal subjects, hateing the Prince and desiring her destruction: then may
we boldly pronounce, that the affection of the Papists can not be good, nor
their love upright toward her Majesty. What calling or state have they not
caused and made to work in hostile manner against her? First for Popes, you
have Pope Pius the fifth, and Gregory the 13. and their successors: then for
Monarchs and Princes; The King of Spain, and the Queen of Scotts: after,
for Dukes and Noble men: The Duke of Northfolke, the Duke of Guise, the Duke of
Alba, the Duke of Medina, The Earl of Northumberland, and I can not tell how
many Earls, and Lords in Ireland, from time to time have taken arms against
her. Moreover for Gentilmen, there has been M. Arden and Someruill,
Throckmorto^, Sir William Stanlie, Anthony Babington, and his accomplices,
Doctor Parrie, a ciuilian, Doctor Lopez a Physicion: for Priests and Jesuits,
no man can tell how many, and of rascal, ruffian, murdering verletts, not one
or two. Therefore how is it possible to show more plain evidence of most can
kered hatred, They pro^^^ her mild nature to do them justice.
and inueterate malice? And yet her Majesty is a most mild Christian Prince,
given to peace, mercy and long suffering, never used any the least hard
dealing toward any of them: save only as conscience and duty to god did bind
her, by public law she put down all idolatry, superstition, and
Antichristian primacie: otherwise they had all liberty, peace, and quiet
freedom, as any subject could desire under any Prince whatsoever: until
that by their unnatural and ungodly conspiracies, and most wicked desighements,
she was forced to stand upon her guard: and to provide such remedy, ^s was
fit for such as unjustly provoked their lawful and gracious Soueaigne. But
they have so bestirred them selves, and prepared so many mischiefs ^o often and
so manifold and continu^ll: that there are few years, wherein ^^e has not
been driven, to seek one ^ay or another for her necessary de^ence. How many
times has she been ^^rced to make laws and statutes, to curb and bridle
them? How many times has she been forced to send soldiers and money to
prevent them? How many times has her Navy and ships been drawn out into
the seas to meet them? How continually almost has she been vexed with Irish
insurrections and rebellions? How many times has she been constrained (against
her own most gentle and merciful disposition) for treason and rebellion to
cut of rotten members with the just revenging swearde? Yea how often have we
been driven to watch and ward, either to resist domestical rebels or to wait
for foreign inuaders? So that to declare a most viperous spiteful and
ungracious generation, and an heretical and apostaticall malice, there can be
nothing added. And here both she and all her loving and Christian subjects
have very great matter of rejoicing and praising God. For if ever God from
heaven, God shows his Jove from heaven in the defense of our Queen.
testified his love to a^^^ Prince, or caused his Angels to watch and guard
them: if ever there were Princ^ made glorious for deliverance, hono^rable for
constancy in truth, and famo^^ for continual prosperous success: (...) the
great admiration of all men, and wonderful happy quietness and joy of Gods
people: if ever God sought against wicked rebels, mischievous traitors, bloody
usurpers and unjust inuaders, to defend the innocent, just and upright in his
cause: then surely may we boldly and joyfully both say and sing, that God
has openly and in the sight of all the world done all these things for his
anointed hand-maide Elizabeth our Queen. So that she may with the Psalmist
confess unto the Lord They have often times afflicted me from my youth, but they
could not prevail against me: Psalm. 129.^^ 124.
praised be the Lord which has not given us as a pray unto their teeth. Our
help is in the name of the Lord who has made both heaven and earth. So let
all thine enemies perish O Lord: but upon thy servant Elizabeth and upon her
throne be peace for ever more: and let her and all that love thy name, be as
the Sun when he rises in his might, and say all way, The Lord be praised.
But as for the Ministers and people desiring reformation in some things: they
always carefully following the word of God, and delighting in the reading,
preaching, and meditation of holy Scripture; have all their joy and comfort in
that faith and religion, which her most Christian Majesty professes, sets
forth and defends. And having liberty of conscience, freedom to worshipe God
aright, and protection in well doing with health, wealth, peace, and pleasure
of body and soul: they feel the pleasant, sweet and comfortable milk, with
a most joyful refreshing of a tender noursemother, under the shadow of her
most faithful and constant proceedinges in the Gospel. If ever there were
love between Prince and people, it is between us. For what Christian subject
can not love a Christian Ruler? What godly child cannot love a godly mother?
What afflicted soul can not love a sweet and faithful comforter? And what man
being in misery loves not him, that has delivered him? She is our most
Christian Prince; she is our godly mother; she is our sweet and faithful
comforter, our deliverer; and under God our assured defense against all our
enemies. Her joy is our life; her law our safety; her safetye, our castle;
her swearde our shield; her peace, our wealth: her death (which God forbid)
our misery. Therefore we have counted our selves happy to do any service to
her May. either in our goods, or in our persons, or in spending our lives. We
have willinglye gone in her service into France, into the Low Countries and
Irelande, and into the furthest Seas. We have written, disputed and adventured
our lives in diverse places to testify our unfeigned love, and faithful
obedience unto her. And what is there, that we could not go under? if occasion
be offered to do her any service, which godly Christians ought to do, to
their dread Sovereign. If at any time the traitorous papists advance
themselves, and dare presume to attempt their most wicked and ungodly desire
and wishing: it shall (by Gods grace) very well appear, that her M. has many
thousand Protestants, sufficiently able through Gods help, to beat them down
and to tame them: Our ministri^ has brought forth many good subjects Witness*
Anno. 88.
whom it has pleased God by our ministry to bring unto the knowledge of the
truth. And this I am the bolder to affirm, because I saw in our country in
Anno 88. such bands of honest men, so many, so well furnished so cheerful to
fight for her M. and their Country, so resolute and valiant, so forward and
vnfearfull: that it rejoiced mine heart to think how fruitful our ministry
had been, in these her golden days: and how happy and honorable her M. is,
who has by her godly and Christian government bread and brought forth,
nourished and brought up, so many, so worthy, so godly Gentill-men and Yeomen;
that of mere conscience and love, so willingly and resolutely could and
would fight for her safety and preservation. So that if the Papists would
regard no more but natural reason (though they did forget the mighty hand of
God, which has continually fought for us) they would quiet themselves: and be
thankful for her Majesty's great clemency and patience toward them, and not
once dare to broach such treacherous devises: seeing they are not able to stand
before the mighty forces and resolute bands of her Majesty's most loving and
faithful subjects, true and undoubted Christians: which rejoice in her present
government, and desire that it may more and more be perfected after Gods
word, and prosper to Gods glory. Alace then how should we fear, in whose
hearts is fixed and grounded such perfect love, We can not fear her, whom we
love perfect lie.
that casts out all fear? We appeal unto the god of heaven, who sees all
secrets, and commend our doings, sayings and writtings to the conscience of
all good honest and wise hearted christians: that if there be a false heart in
any of us, and not a faithful love and reverence to her Majesty, from the
very bottom of our soul: that every such man or woman, should be made an
ensample and a reproach, and a byeword, for the terror of all wicked hipocrits
and unthankful miscrea^ts. But we are not able to give sufficient thanks to
our good God: who has hitherto, so mercifully watched over us, that he has
not suffered any such wretchedness to sease upon us, or to prevail over us,
to the dishonor of his Gospel, or just discredit of our ministry and godly
cause. His name be glorified for ever, Amen.

Cap. 9.
Wherein is plainly showed 1. That it is most profitable to the present state
and government, and greatly for her Majesty's safety, to hear the petitions
of the godly Ministers, and to tolerate them in their ministry. 2. That to
harken unto Papists and to tolerate them, is most exceeding dangerous and
pernicious.

A Minister being suspended for omitting a ceremony, made suit to a learned
Archdeacon, to speak for him to the Bishop of the diocese, that he might be
released and tolerated: alleging for himself that their godly wisdom, (he
hoped) would consider, that the thing in their opinion being but a trifle
(although to him it were a grievous burden) they would not for it silence or
displace a Minister of the Gospel; which might do greater good in the
Church, then the observing of a trifling ceremony: but if I be (said he) a
dishonest man, and live not as becomes a Minister of Christ, if I preach not
sound doctrine, if I do not boeth in word and example, teach the people
obedience to God and her Majesty, and maintain all peace and quietness in the
place where I have: then I crave no favor. It was answered by the same learned
Archdeacon, you may be bonus vir, but not bonus ciuis, that is, a good man, but
not a good cietizen. It was replied again by ye Minister, that if he could not
prove he were a good Cietizen, the^ he was not to open his mouth in his own
cause, therefore he said he would refer the matter to that issue. And thus he
pleaded for himself. Some laws and statutes of the city, are such as
concern the state, All statutes not a like necessary.
safety and benefit of the common wealth, and preserve the peace and welfare
thereof: who so ever breaks such laws and will not be reformed, may be said
to be an evil Citizen; because of the hurt which comes to the cietie by his
deed. But there are some things which are enacted in a city for the profitte
or pleasure of some private men, and some things which are but dependances, as
for ornament or outward show: which being taken away or broken, the common
wealth receaueth no damage: as if we should make an act touching cappes, or
for preserving of phesants or partriges. If a man do observe the former order
of laws, which concern the safety and good of the common wealth, and break
the latter, shall he by and by, be an evil cietizen? then verily there be
few Archdeacons or Bishops, which can be reputed good cietizens; who admit
unpreaching Ministers into orders and cures; when as their ordination is that
they should preach. If every one, that breaks a penal statute; should by
and by, be a rebel, and an evil subject, then I pray you, whom would not the
statute for fish and the statutes for apparel, convince to be wicked subjects
and rebels to her Majesty. And diverse other statutes there be, as the act for
artillery and matters of great importance, that might touch men of good place,
if they were pressed upon as we Ministers be: yet they are not at all reputed
for evil subjects. What should be the reason then, that seeing we break not
the law in any point domegable, either to the Church or common wealth, we should
be so heynouslie prosecuted and impeached, we break the law in no point
hurtful to Church or common wealth.
as rebels and troublers of the state, more then other men? What good can the
surplice, the cross in baptism, the reading of erroneous books, the giving
of symbolicall signification to Matrimony or confirmation, or any such like,
do to the Church or common wealth? or what harm if they were taken away?
surely none at all; But clean contrary. For the nearer we approach in our
actions, to the rule of holy Scripture, the more we please God: and the
further we depart from evil or the appearance of evil, the more blessed is
our estate under the promised, and assured favor and grace of almighty God.
Therefore for as much as we break the law, only in that which can do no
good, but hurt to the Church or common wealth, if we do them: which if they
were altogether taken away, would be more acceptable to God, and so more
likely of a further increase of Gods mercies (for being contrariant to Gods
word, they must needs offend God, and hinder many good things from us) we can
not be rightlye deemed evil citizens for not doing of them. And seeing it is
apparent that these things are an offense (and that justly) to many of her
Ma. good, To discourage wise and faithful subjects, dangerous, and therefore
good to take away the offense.
wise and faithful subjects; and that it is very hurtful, to discontent and
discourage the good and godly citizens: and that in long experience these
things have been a great block of stumbling and matter of offense, how much
would it be beneficial to the whole state, if they were removed, and Gods
faithful servants, set at liberty from them? For we have had sufficient
proof from the first shining and appearing of the Ghospel in King Edwards
days in this land; Queen Mary's days in Franckford: and now in her M. reign
these 43. years, that the offense of these things by tract of time can not be
blotted out: and that thereby many a worthy preacher, has been imprisoned,
silensed and deprived, to the great dishonor of almighty God, (whose
servants they were) and to the great damage of the Church and common wealth;
which in this great scarsitie of good and learned Ministers, did much want
their service: and therefore it must needs follow, that it would have been
great benefit both to the Church and common wealth if their petitions had been
hard and a remedy provided, that such necessary service had not been
withholden and kept back by these unnecessary ceremonies.

Many benefits by the godly Ministers.
Moreover, beside that, it can not but offend God, to see his holy servants
so lightly regarded, and that every beggarly trifle of man's devise, should
be preferred before his holy commandments. Experience shows, that neither
learning nor religion is of such estimation, as otherwise doubtless it would
have been, if these occasions of evil had not been maintained. Also it is well
known, that where such Ministers have or do dwell, how many thousands of
people, have been instructed and made very faithful subjects in their
hearts and conscience: what might this have wrought, if by the troubles about
ceremonies, such fruitful teachers had not been removed, discouraged and
disgraced. Doubtless, doubtless; there could not possibly have been so great
increase of Papists nor any show of that bravery, which now they are grown
unto: if the happy course of diligent preaching and teaching, had not been
greatly stopped by troubling of these men. For this I can avow, that no
Papist, Atheist, or wicked man, has any joy, to live where there is a good
teacher: but that eather they are brought home by repentance, and become
notable Christians, or else they shifte from such places as men with soar eyes
do fly the light of the bright shining sun. For if in every parish there
were a faithful preacher, teaching both publikelie the true justifying faith of
Christ, and repentance toward God: and also did ever and anon make plain
demonstration of the Queens Majesty's lawful authority, and of the Popes
most wicked and abominable vsurpatio^, without all question, the chiefest
enemies to our peace, and to her Majesty's safety, would be so diminished,
dispersed and put down, that we could not hear of so many practices and
wicked treacheries as we do: and in every corner the people would cry out
upon them, Ministers hated for doing good.
bewray them, and scorn them. And this is the cause that the Papists and
Popish abetoures, do make so many grievous accusations against us, and procure
so many troublers; and all under color of favoring the Queens proceedinges
(whith they hate) that so the faith of Christ being but little hard of, and her
Majesty's supremacy but little spoken of: both the glory of Christ, and our
Queens honor might be forgotten: and the devil and Antichrist, steal into
the hearts of her M. poor seduced people. I would it were considered, how
little her Majesty's authority and the justification of Christ, by a great
many has been taught these 17. or 18. years. Therefore by just and plain
experience I may boldly say, that great benefit to the common wealth, and
many good things for her Majesty's safety, would come to pas by favor showed
unto these godly teachers, and faithful Ministere of Jesus Christ. But because
perauenture some will say, that herein I proudly praise our selves and like
Pharisees despise others; I do here humbly desire that all men would but
indifferently way; What has been our doeings, and the labors of our ministry
and the fruit of the same: and (esteeming us as baselie as they can) do only
set before their eyes Gods glory, the good of this Realm, and her Ma.
happiness: Diligent preaching, cause of very great good.
let them but consider, that where there is diligent preaching, how wise, how
honest, how just the people be; how dutiful to her Majesty, and ready to all
services, and how loving among them selves: then shall he easily conclude,
that if these ceremonies and subscription were abolished, or the Ministers not
tied to them nor troubled for them: what increase there woule be of all
faithful laborers; how all godliness and virtue would flourish among us: and
lastly, how happy, how quiet, how free from all danger, the estate would be.

2. Leaving this therefore to the conscience of all honest men and good
subjects, who love God and our most gracious Queen: I will now enter to speak
a little of the great mischiefs and manifold evils, which come by toleration
or favor showed to the Papists. These evils come under two heads, either
such as God afflicts for bearing with or favoring such persons: God will
punish favorers of Papists.
or such as they them selves do bring always with them. In the first kind
we are to consider, whether the religion of Popery, be within the compass of
those things which God hates. I find in Israel two kinds of idolatry: one
in Ahabs time, the worshppping of Baall. 1. King. 18.23.
Which beats against the first commandment, which says: thou shall have
no other Gods but me. Another brought in by Hieroboam the Son of Nebat, 1.
King. 123
wherefore he is said to make Israel to sin, this was the making of images
to worshipe God by, as the two calves in Dan and Bethell, 28
and this beats against the second commandment, which says: thou shall
not make to thy self any graven images. Of the former kind I would willingly
free the Papists if they would not honor the Pope as God; to bind where God
opens, and to open where God shuteth, The Papista most gross idolaters.
giving power to forgive sins and to give dispensation contrary to Gods word,
dwelling in their hearts as if he were God: if they did not worship the
Sacrament as very God; and make the image of the Trinity, turning the glory
of the incorruptible God into the image of a corruptible man: and if they did
not ascribe to the Virgin Marie, to Peter and Paul that which is proper to God
alone. But the latter kind is without out all expectation one and the same with
the Papists, for they have images to worship God by; even as Hieroboams
calves, Exoe 32.
and as the children of Israel in the Wilderness. Now if it be the voice of God
which says: Confounded be all they that serve graven images, Psalm. 97.7.
and that glory in idols: and again: I am the Lord this is my name, my
glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images. Esai.
42.8.
And if he have commanded to put to death, every man that intiseth to
idolatry, and to spare neither brother, Deuteronomy. 13.
Son, daughter, wife, nor the dearest friend: and if any cietie be found
guilty of this crime to put all the inhabitants to the sweard, with their
cattle, and utterly to raze the same, and to make it in an heap for ever. If
God set such a mark upon Hieroboam, that he did not only utterly root out
his seed; but also made his name a reproach to all generations, as the author
of Isreal's sin. If the children of Israel, after they fell into this great
sin of worshipping images, did never prosper, or be without civil or foreign
wars, till they were utterly made desolate: and if all the greatest plagues
that ever Judah had, came principally by this sin: then may wise men
quickly judge, how good it will be for England to tolerate Papists and
Popery: which has not only this most grievous trespass, but also innumerable
more of most horrible blasphemies (most intolerable) both against God and
against his Christ, and also derogatorie to his holy spirit and testament. And
this is so well known, to all the Queens Christian subjects, and especially
to the learned sort and holy Ministers of the Gospel, that I need not to
dispute further of it. But if we look upon that which they bring with them:
what is it? Papists bring most horrible evils.
Even the direct contradictorie learning unto truth; overthrowing all the
religion, faith and order of Gods worship; and does abandon her Majesty's
royalty and supreme dignity: and such as will quickly bring low the very
state of the common wealth and civil power, and (as Master Trauers has very
faithfully and plainly declared) all their religion, Answ. to the supplication
to the Lords of the couns.
in their several branches, is every way an enemy, and a means to turn up
side down, the whole state of the Queens Majesty's most happy government.

Moreover it will bring great occasion of civil war and bloodshed (a thing
which her M. always abhorred) which being once kindled and inflamed: it will
trouble the wisest men in this Realm to quench suddenly or hastily. For it
is well known, that there is an inueterate hatred between these two
religions, and the opposition is impossible to be reconciled. How these two
may dwell together in peace, let them judge that dare put an adder into their
bosoms, and pull not out the stinge, or that will place foxes among the tender
vines, or woolues among sheep. If you bid me cast mine eyes upon France and
the low Countries, Miserable experience in France.
I answer: that miserable experience shows in France, sufficient to terrify
us from this counsel. How many thousands have perished by the sweard, and by
all kind of beastly butcherie, before they could have any quiet, it would
make a man's heart to bleed to read or to think. And if the very we arines of
civil war, and spilling of man's blood, and the fear of rooting out their
nation, and the special providence of God, for the case of his Church, had not
wrought contrary to reason and the nature of things, it could not have so
fallen out. And how long it will hold, no man can promise. But if God have
constrained the idolater to tolerate his Gospel: shall that be a president
to the worshipper of God, to wincke at idolatry, contrary to his expres
commandment. In the low Countries at the very first, diverse cieties for their
safety (as namely Antwerpe,) Hist. Belgic. A.E. Meteran, lib. 10.1581.
were forced to banish the Popish Priests, and to suspend the Mass, and there
only to wincke at it where they could not master it. And being their quarrel
of their privileges and liberties, and thereby many Papists joining in the
quarrel with them, they could not wade so fare as otherwise they would, till
God by the preaching has brought them to be of one religion and settled: as I
have very credible report, that all places under the States are at this time
of one professed religion: But now our state in England has continued in one
religion (God be therefore highly praised) full three and forty years. Our
state has been long settled in one religion.
It would make a shrewde breach to tolerate a thing after so long time: when so
many thousands be grown up to be men of years, nourished in all their life
long in one religion: it will be dainty for them, to see the glory of God
dishonored daily before their eyes. Yea I verily think that many rude and
idle fellows, which never feared God, or cared for religion, will be greedy to
see such a new thing, and finding it to be such apretie pageant, fit for
reasonable men to laugh and to make a game of, they will doubtless be playing
with them: and these zealous and superstitious idolaters can abide no disgrace,
to their holy misshapen fooleries: And what will follow, every simple man may
easily guess. But imagine it were possible for men because of quietness to
winck at it a while. Mark then what must needs be the fruit and effect
thereof: Namely that the Seminary and secular Priests, The fruit of
tolerating popery.
with their fained enemies the Jesuits (being quickly reconciled) attending
buselie upon their harvest, will speedily sound out the depth of their
strength, augment it and combine it most surely. And when they have fitted
their longed preparation, and safely contrived their sacred coniuration: they
will eftsoons open the port to their roaring bull, and on a sudden surprise
boeth Prince and people, and turn all up side down. And then tell me (by the
example of the Guises in France, taking into their power the Queen Mother and
her son,) what may be our hope, or rather how many vnfpeakeable evils and
calamities, are like to swallow up the peace, wealth and joy of our land: which
by and with the Gospel, we have thus many years enjoyed, under her Ma. most
happy and godly present government. But now perhaps (as they say) they have
learned by long experience, to reurence her Majesty: and that it is not their
way by treason and rebellion, by murder and invasion, now they will be loving,
peaceable and faithful, if they be tolerated. Surely, No trust in Papists.
surely who sees not? that if having so many laws against them, they have
labored so diligently to set up the Popes kingdom: much more will they do
it if they have liberty: and if when all places vvatch over them, they dare
venture as they have done; much more will they presume when they have
opportunity. Did King Henry the eight (of noble memory) escape without
manifold traitors, though he maintained only Popery, when he did put down
no more but the Popes primacie? and did any bridle themselves, but only
because they found them selves not able to make their party good. Think you,
that they, who have persecuted her royal person, Act. and mon. page 1056. and
1982. The Papists enemies to her Majesty from her cradle.
from her cradle, seeking in her fathers time to disinherit her; and in her
sisters days, not only imprisoned her, and tossed her to and fro, but also
labored not a little to take away her life: and ever since she came to y^
Crown, have never ceased one way or other, and so many ways as possible could
be devised, and by all kinds and states of people, have sought to deprive her
M. of her royal Crown and righteous Scepter: and have gone about, with all
malicious and monstrous imputations, in diverse sorts to bring her to utter
hatred and contempt among all nations and countries: if now they seem to offer
fair words and glorious promises; if now they seem to fall out, and one part
offer them selves as friends to the state, and enemies each to other: think you
(I say) that these be not Crocodili lachryma, flase alarmes, and as thieves
sometime do fight one with another, till they may enclose the true man and
take his purse. If an enemy after he has followed all hostile manner he can:
labor by fair means to enter into friendly terms yt, he might have more
easily access, where before he could not, does ever any story show, that
they are faithful whom mere necessity constrains to run unto flattery?
By such means was the building of the Temple hindered in the time of
Zerubbabell, Esra. 4. Neh. 4. and. 6
and such was the friendlines of Sanballat and Geshem unto that worthy Prince
Nehemiah. Such was the Popes Legates practice at Auenion, when the French King
had fought in vain against it, Math. Paris, in the life of Hen 3. page 447.
the plague and famine consumed his host, yea and his life, so that there was
no hope by force to get it; then they pretended a parley of peace, and at
length by swearing that he drew out the siege, for no cause but that he might
seek the salvation of their souls: when the citizens trusting his promise,
upon condition, The popish fidelitier.
that he should come in all one with his Clergy, and not give their Town to
the French, opened the gates to let him in and his Prelates: he so came in that
at his very heels the French soldiers rushed in, and contemning their oath,
took the citizens, bound them with bonds, spoiled the city, slew many,
and obtaining a subtle victory, they brake down the Towers and walls, Cron.
Carrion. lib. 4. in the life of Hen 4. Albert Krants Saxon. lib. 5. cap. 7.
and the city was committed to the keeping of the French. The like packing
they used against the Emperor Henry the 4. who having displeased the Pope for
bestovving of Bishoprics in his own kingdom, being cited came to Rome; and
while there he humbled him self in his appointed penance, prostrating him
self at the doors and entry of the Temple; at home, by the conspiracy of the
Pope and Saxons, they raised up another Emperor in his stead Rodolphus Duke of
Sueuia: and when this vvoulde not prevail, they never cease prosecuting of
him, till they had made his own son to deprive him of all Imperial
dignity. In which kind of doubling, that the Papists are no changelings, it
does in these very flatterers at this time appear very plainly. In the 8.
Genesis quodlib. Arti. 8.
For in answering whether it be expedient in these days to excommunicate
Kings, and whether it be a godly act of those which persuaded Pope Pius
Bulls: Trust the papiste so long as he is fast bound.
the sum of their answer is only this: that because they have felt the
smart, therefore it is inconvenient in these ungodly and unfortunate days:
which I take it can not have any but a treasonable meaning: namely, that if
they had Papists enough at command, (as they had against King John) and that
they could make their party good, and God would suffer them: the Queen should
know that we Papists were as honest as Jesuits; that is to say, they flatter
for necessity, but if there were power in their hand, we shall all see,
whom they took for their Prince. And therefore William Watson vvriting these
godly appeals of peace, Quodlib. page 342.343.
wishes himself burnt, heart, head, hands and all, if in his swiftest thought
or word falling out of his lips, or letter of his pen, he should in all his
glosing books, prejudice Saint Peter's chair, the sea Apostolic, etc. By
which and many other things, in their Popish Seminarian libells and traitorous
factions, it is to be seen as clear as the noone day; that their is no
trust to their words, and that the comparison made between them and our godly
Ministers (being the Queens most loyal and obedient subjects) is if two
contrary nations, as far disagreeing in nature and qualities, as light unto
darkness, and treuth unto falshoode. For we the godly Ministers, are tied in
doctirne and conscience to all subjection and obedience, even to evil
Magistrates, how much more are we to be faithful to our religious, The
Papists profess falsehood for advantage.
godly and Christian Queen Elizabeth. But they (the false hearted Papists) have
a Nonobstante, that although there be safe conduite made by an Emperor, it must
not stand, if they mislike it: they have a maxim of the Devils own forging:
Promise is not to be kept with heretics. They have a Satanizing Pope, who
can dispense, and discharge the^ at all times, of all promises, oaths,
allegiance and duties what so ever, that they might trust them, which love
their own destruction. The smart of whose falshoode diverse noble Emperoures,
Kings and States being Papists, have many times felt, and that for smaller
matters then they have against our Queen: and think we that they will be more
favorable unto her, (who has by many degrees exasperated the^ much more) for
the spoil of whose life they have labored very eagerly, they have fought
against God, they have toyled them selves many years, devised and contrived
many a plotte, spent very much cost and spilt exceeding much blood. Harken
what God says of them and to them: Can the black More change his skin, Hier
13.23.
or the Leopard his spots; then may ye also do good, which are accustomed
to do evil? And Solomon says: Prou. 26.24.
He that hates will counterfeit with his lips, but in his heart he lays
up deceit, though he speak favor ablie, believe him not. If these men may be
equalized in honesty and trust, to our godly and approved Ministers; I know
not any fable so foolish, any lie so notorious, any falsehood so manifest; but
that it may be esteemed, true, just and full of equity and justice.

Cap. 10.
Wherein is demostrated, 1. That the unpreaching ministry, non-residencie, and
Subscription, are troublers of the state. 2. They are breeders of Atheistes and
Papists, and so ouerthrowers of the whole land, if there be not remedy in
time 3. At which the Atheists laugh to their own confusion.

NOw could I wish that I had the wisdom of Nathan when he was sent of God, 2.
Sam. 11.
to admonish David: or that I had that power in my words, which the Angel
had, who spoke unto the children of Israel in Bochim: Judge. 2.2.
or that my speech might be found worthy of that authority which Esaie had
with Ezekiah when he told him, Esai. 39.8.
that all in his house etc. should be carried to Babell. Or at the least that
they would be taken in good part, 1. Sam. 3.18.
as that of the child Samuel: when he told a most heavy doom upon Elie
the priest. Which I speak not, because I distrust the truth of that I am
presentlye to utter: or that I feared the fatherly vvisdome and godly charity,
and sinceere conscience of the reverend Fathers of our Church: but that the
common adversary and enemy to all goodness, in the depth of his policy, can
suggest many plausible things, to deceive godly and wise men: And suborne
transformed A postles to bear down the truth. As he did suggest against
Athanasius (for his constancy against Arianisme) that he cut of a man's hand,
and used Magic: Socrat. scho^ lib. 1. cap. 27.28.29.35,
and when that was disclosed they inform the Emperor that Athanasius
threatened he would cause that no corn should be conveyed from Alexandria
(as they used) to Constantinople; and named four Bishopps to have hard him.
And so that good Emperor being abused, exiled that worthy Bishop, and sent
him into France. And that good and godly King David, was so greatly deceived
and misled by the false information of wicked Ziba, that he condemned innocent
Mephibosheth. 2. Sam. 16. Cap. 19.24.
And surely who is able to stand before envy? But I rest upon God alone, who
knows the counsel of mine heart: and he can make the men of my strife to see
and accept my good meaning and honest purpose. Before him therefore I protest,
as before the righteous judge of all flesh, which without respect of person
rewards every man according to his works: that if I were not thorowlie
persuaded, that he was the author, moouer and helper of me in this book: and
that it is behoofull, for all the reverend Fathers and Ministers of this land,
and for all faithful Protestants, to be admonished of these things; and that
the wise and godly taking, using, and applying thereof (which I hope I shall
find at their hands) may be for the good of her Majesty and the State: I
would never have adventured in this sort to meddle, or to set forth one word at
this time in this cause. For how foolish were I to procure my self trouble,
without a warrant from God and his word: and having quietly enjoyed my place
ever since the forlorn year of subscription (except that I was at two times
suspended some two year) in peace and quietness: under the wise and fatherly
oversight of the most reverend Father our Diocesan of Cauntorburie, not having
subscribed in any sort, neither used all the ceremonies so preciselie as
peradventure some other do. If the love of the whole Church, the necessity
and goodness of the cause, the glory of God and the good of the whole land;
did not in me way down all reasoning and disputes; I could easily fore cast
500. cautions, which would mightelie draw me back and make me afeard of such an
enterprise; which protestation I make choice of, rather in this place,
because! doubt this chapter will not be altogether defensive (as I suppose the
rest be) but rather offensive and displeasing: but I will frame my self as
near as I can, to give ye least cause; that any man should take occasion. I
will meddle with no man's person, only I propound such reason for the
reforming of these things, as I hope shall become a Minister of Christ.

1. These three things; The unpreaching ministry; the absence of the Pastor
from his flock: and subscription; I take to be sin in the sight of God: and if
that be true, then they may rightly be called troublers of the state: because
it is written: Hier. 5.25. Esai. 50.2.1. King. 18.
that, Sin hinders good things from Gods people, and iniquity makes a
separation between God and them. And to forsake the commandment of the Lord,
is the cause of trouble to Gods Church. The unpreaching ministry, sin.
Let us first examine the unpreaching Minister, whether it be not sin. Gods
commandment is: that every Minister should be apt to teach, no nouice in
knowledge; 1. Tim. 3.2.6.
one that holds fast the faithful word according to doctrine, that he also
may be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, Tit, 1.9.
and improve them that say against it. If then the breach of Gods commandment
be sin (as Saint John says.) Seeing our ministry which does not and can
not preach, ^. Ioh. 3.4.
is contrary to this commandment, it must needs follow, that the standing
thereof in our Church, is sin; and so a troubler of the state. That which
causes the people to perish, is sin; but the unpreaching ministry causes
the people to perish, therefore it is sin. This argument is testified by
many vvitnesses. First Solomon says: Where there is no vision, Prou. 29.18.
the people decay. And Christ adds further: If the blind lead the blind,
they shall both fall into the ditch. And Oseah the Prophet applies the same to
every unpreaching Minister saying: Mat. 15.14.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: Oseah. 4.6.
because thou have refused knowledge, I will also refuse thee; that thou shall
be no Priest to me: and seeing thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I will
also forget thy children. Look the book of orders in the ordayning of
Priests.
If the unpreaching ministry be no sin, why are they ordained to preach the
word of God; why are they made to promise to give faithful diligence; to
minister the doctrine and Sacraments and the discipline of Christ, as the Lord
has commanded, and to use both public and private monitions and exhortations?
And why are they at that time exhorted, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to have in remembrance, to how hie a dignity, and to how chargeable an office
they be called, that is to say to be the messengers, the watchmen the Pastors
and stewards of the Lord to teach, to premonish, to feed and provide for the
Lords family, etc. And why is it there also said unto them: Seeing that you
can not by any other means compass so weighty a work, pertaining to the
salvation of man, but with doctrine and exhortation, taken out of holy
Scripture, and with a life agreeable to the same, ye perceive how studious you
ought to be in reading and learning ye holy Scriptures, etc. And why are we
taught in the book of common prayer, to pray, that all Bishops, Pastors and
Curates, should set forth Gods true and lively word, and rightly and duly
administer the holy Sacraments: if an unpreaching ministry were no sin; The
conscience hereof no doubt caused that reverend Father M. D. Fulke to write,
that he would not excuse any insufficient Minister nor their ordainers:
Overthrow of Stapletons fort. cap 8. page 113. Defens, of trans. of Engl. lib.
cap. 15, pa. 401.
And that he which is void of gifts, is ordained unworthily and with great
sin, both of him that ordains, and of him that is ordained. Now if these
things be true let wise men consider, what danger it is to suffer or
maintain a known sin forty three year in the Church of Christ: and so,
whether this be not a just cause of the troubles of the state, by the
righteous judgments of God.

In the next place let us look upon the learned non-resident, Non-reside^ce
sin.
and examine whether the absence of the Pastor from his flock and negligence
(as it is used among us) be not sin. For a man may be called by the Church as
Epaphroditus was, to some special work for a time, Philip. 2.25.
for the common good of the whole. But our question is whether a man may lie in
a cathedral Church or in the University, or dwell in some town like a
Gentilman, and join benefice to benefice, and living to living, passing his
time in wealth and pleasure and his flock 20.30.40. or 100. miles of, more or
less, coming very rarely or seldom amongst them. Here I will not dispute,
but only I humblye beeseech, and adjure all those my reverend and learned
brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the great and fearful
day of his coming, (when all dispensation of men shall be void, and we shall
give a straight accounts of all our works, which we have done in our bodies)
that (how so ever I am a very mean and simple man, not worthy to carry your
books) you would look into your own consciences, and see how you can answer
to God: where he says, Ezech. 34.2.
We be unto the sheapheards of Israel that feed them selves, should not the
sheapheardes feed the flocks? etc. Take heed unto your selves and to all the
flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers, Act. 20.28.
to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood. I
charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Tim. 4.1.
which shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing and in his kingdom:
preach the word, be instant, in season and out of season, improoue, rebuke,
exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine. Feed the flock of God which
depends upon you, 1. Pet, 5.^.
careing for it, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but
of a ready mind. Now if you, my brethren, live from your charge, and seldom
see the same, and enrich your selves with the Church livings: can you answer
God, that you feed not your selves but the flock, and that you have a ready
mind to feed the flock and not desirous of filthy lucre? Can you say in Gods
sight that you are instant, in season and out of season, in teaching and
preaching the word, by improouing, rebuking, exhorting, and that you care and
take heed to all the flock of God, over which you are ouer-seers, and which
depends upon you; when you so seldom see them, and so rarely teach them?
If these Scriptures do prove a dispensation to be committed unto you, and a
necessity laid upon, to feed those people which you have undertaken for your
flock: consider whether you come not under that woe: which says, Woebec unto
me, if I preach not the Gospel: 1. Cor. 9.^.
And whether that be not a general judgment reaching even unto you, which the
Prophet denounces: Cursed be he which does the work of the Lord
negligentlie. Hier. 48.10.
And say unto your souls, whether you can auow unto God, that you, Study to
show your selves approved unto God, workmen that needs not to be ashamed. 2.
Tim. 12.15.
Consider also how the example of S. Paul may try your conscience; who
admonishes the Elders of Ephesus to watch over their flocks, Act. 20.31.271 20.
remembering that for three years space, he ceased, not to warn every one,
both night and day, with tears, and that he kept nothing back that was
profitable but showed them all the counsel of God, and taught them not only
openly, but through every house. Weigh with yourselues whether this partaineth
not to you, and remember the great instance of Christ unto Peter, three times
saying, If he loved him, he should feed his sheep. Add hereunto your
promise made unto your ordination, Ioh. 21.^5.
and that your authority is given you by these words: Take thou authority to
preach in this Congregation. Your presentation, institution, and induction tie
you to one certain Congregation, and that Congregation pays you tithes,
because you are their Pastor to feed them with doctrine: and therefore you
are called Rector or Vicarius of such a Parish. Last of all think with your
selves, whether it be aiest or a true saying of the reverend Fathers:
Absentia Pastoris a Dominico grege, Canon. Residen. Anno. 1571.
and secura illa negligentia, quam videmus in multis, and distitutio ministerij
est res and inse foeda and odiosa invulgus, and perniciosa Ecclesiae Dei. Where
they affirm, Non residencie to be an dishonest thing in it self, odious to
the people, and pernicious to the Church of God. If you can not answer these
things, with a good conscience in the fight of God (as I verilye think you can
not) then weigh with your selves whether your sins be not great: and then
being obstinately and with an high hand maintained, whether you do not cause
the wrath of God against us. And so non-residence is a troubler of the state,

Concerning subscription: I will endeavor to be somewhat brief, forreuerence
to their Fatherhoodes, Subscription is sin.
which (I am persuaded) would not so vehemently urge it upon us, if they
thought it to be sin. I will therefore show only some two or three
arguments for this purpose. And I humbly pray them and all men, to weigh my
reasons with patience, equity and truth, and show me no favor, but as the
honesty of my cause deserves. First therefore I say: Every action, which
makes a man a false witness of God, is sin. 1. Cor. 15.15.
For if to bear false witness against a man be sin, Job. 13.7.8. 1. Ioh.
3.9. Hier. 23.
as precept. 9. much more to report untruths concerning God. For God is
greater then man. And he has said: that he will be against th^se Prophets,
which speak unto his people out of their own heart, that which he commanded
not. But subscription causes a man to testify of God that he has done yt,
which he never did. As namely, in the book of common pr^yer, That by the
Baptism of his well-beloved son God did sanctify the flood Iordane and all
other waters, In the first prayer of Baptism.
to the mystical washing away of sin. And that, Imposition of hands, (in
confirmation of children,) is a sign of the favor and gracious goodness of
God toward them. And that: In the last prayer in confirmation. In the last
prayer save one in matrimony.
God has consecrated the state of Matrimony to such an excellent mystery,
that in it is signified and represented the spiritual marriage and un tie
between Christ and his Church. Now these three testimonies concerning God,
are not to be found in his holy word: therefore if we should subscribe unto
them, we should be false witnesses of God. Again: Every action by which a
man does approve and allow such a speech, which no man has authority to
speak, and such affirmations as he does not know, or such promises as thou
can not perform, or regardest not, every such action is sin, for we must
keep the commandments of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 4.2. 1. Pet. 4.11.
without adding or diminishing: and Peter bids the^ which speak in the
Church to speak the words of God, and therefore Paul avouches the authority
of his sayings, affirming, that the things he wrote, 1. Cor, 14.37.
were the commandments of the Lord. And the wise Preacher charge us in the
case of speaking and promising: saying, Suffer not thy mouth to make thy flesh
to sin. Eccle: 5.5.
And they are reproved by Gods spirit, Colos, 2.18.
which advance them selves in those things which they have not seen. But by
subscriptio^ we allow such speech etc. For in the book of orders the Bishop,
without any authority from God does say to the Priest, receive the holy
Ghost. And the book of common prayer the Godfathers and Godmothers do say and
affirm in the childs name that he believes all the articles of the
Christian faith, and they know not that the child does so believe: and they
do there also promise, that the child shall forsake the Devil and all his
works and constantly belecue Gods holy word, etc. Which promise they can not
perform. And the unpreaching Minister does promise in their ordination, to
preach and administer discipline: which promise they can not and regard not to
do; and the non-resident does promise to preach to this congregation, which he
never looks after, but preaches wh re he sees good. Therefore seeing that
these things are so appara^tlie to be allowed by subscriptio^, it must needs
be sin.

Moreover every action, which makes the Minister of God in one and the same
particular thing to say: 2. Cor, 1.17. Math. 5.37.
Yea and nay. So that his yea is not yea only, or his nay, nay: but his yea is
nay: and his nay yea. Doubtless every such action is sin. For we are commanded
To speak the truth, Zach. 8.16.
every man to his neighbor. Which we can not do, if we say, I and no, in one
and the same particular. Therefore Saint Paul acknowledges him self an
offender, if he should so do; where he says. Gal. 2.18. Artic. 6. de
diuinisscrip* in the rubric showing how the text of holy scripture should be
red, Artic. 19.
If I build again the things I have destroyed: I make my self a trespasser.
So by our subscription, we build in the book of articles; that the canonical
books of the old and new testament, are to be named the holy Scripture. And
we destroy it again in the book of common prayer, calling the Apocrypha holy
Scripture. In the said book of articles we build, That the visible church of
Christ, is a company of faithful people, among whom the pure word of God is
preached. Then in the book of common prayer, we destroy that again. Because
we preach (if some say truly that reading is preaching) some chapters which
contain untruths and absurdities, as is before showed. Again in the same
book of articles we build, Cap. 2. Artic. 2
that the Sacraments of the Lords Supper and Baptism, are certain sure
testimonies and effectual signs of grace and of the good will of God: and we
exclude confirmation and Matrimony, and all other things from having any such
nature. But in the book of common prayer we destroy ye same again. When we
give such symbolicall signification to the cross in Baptism, and affirm that
by imposition of hands and prayer, men may have strength and defense against
all temptation to sin: and that, In the rubric before confir. In the
exhortation before matrimony.
Matrimony signifies unto us, the mystical union that is betwixt Christ and
his Church. In the book of orders, we build that a Priest should preach, and
he is there exhorted, ordained and made to promise so to do. But in the book
of common prayer this is destroyed, for there is provided exhortations,
sentences of Scripture and homilies to be red upon all occasions: so that he
need not preach except he could or would. Therefore I can not see, but that
this subscription, as it is urged by the reverend Fathers in the two last
articles, is sin, and a great offense to God. For which cause I quake and
tremble as often as I think upon it, that so many worthy Pastors as are in our
Church, can not enter to serve in Gods house, but by doing so fearful a sin.
Most humbly entreating the reverend Fathers of our Church, to consider wisely
and in the fear of God, what evil they bring upon this land and the Church.
If they have not compassion upon their brethren, but suffer the holy ones of
God, which come near unto him, so greatly to sin. Now whether this be not
one of the troublers of the state, and a great offense to God, to provoke him,
to power down his plagues upon us, I refer it to the conscience of all men;
which can and do look into this cause with a single eye.

Now these three troublers of the state, A ring of three enemies to the state.
are like a band of men, cast into a ring. The first making way for the second;
the second supplying the first, and the last, supporting them both. For the
unpreaching ministry gives occasion, that the learned men should have the
greater promotions and preferment, that they might preach, here and there as
they see cause, where there is need, and the non-resident is willing or driven
to have such an unpreaching Minister under him, that he may live as he list:
Subscription warranteth them both because they are conformable to the law and
order. The unpreaching Minister gives honor to the non-resident calling him a
good gentilman and a learned divine; and the non-resident does give credit to
the other, saying, he is a very honest quiet man, living orderly with his
neighbors. And subscription does ratify their sayings by keeping out, many
painful and learned men, which preach against them both. The unpreaching
Minister rejoices because the learned non-resident, accountes of him as
worthy of the holy ministry, though he be simple and have no learning: the
non-resident is made the more worshipful; when he can have such to serve him,
and croutch unto him: and subscription making all other men disobedient and
troublers of the state and such, as the Church has need of (which if they
could come in without subscription, would be diligent to feed Gods flock)
does comfort them both, as honest men, orderly and peceably, and lovers of the
state, while these three do take hands and are lincked one with in another,
they are a threefold cord which can not be broken: And having always a fair
shining reflex one upon the other, their eyes are dazeled that they see no
further and so they do not perceive that, they measure them selves with them
selves, 2. Cor. 10.12.81.
and compare them selves with them selves. And that: He which prayseth him
self is not allowed, but he whom the Lord praises.

The string which holds up the unpreaching ministry is; The stringe whereon
the unpreaching minister does hang.
that he is persuaded, that God requires of him no more then he is able: and
he thinks the reverend Fathers would not suffer him, if this standing were
sin. And therefore it is now come to this pass, that if some men find
fault with their course, they are said to bring the ministry into contempt,
which ought not to be suffered, So is the poor man bolstered in his sin, and
the Church is damnified for lack of a good teacher. To whom in the fear of
God and love I have to his soul, I answer thus. First that he is to consider,
whether God allows any man to enter into the ministry, that is unable to
preach which if it be not to be found (as verily it can not be, as I have
showed before) then is it sin for him to enter in, and it is the heaping up
of sin to continue (for living sake) in that calling. God has joined the
preaching of the word and the administation of the sacraments in one office,
Math. 18.19. and he that gives him self to the prayers, gives him self to
the ministration of the word, Act. 6.4. consider then, O thou unpreaching
Minister, if man can put asunder that which God has joined. God says not,
that he which does what he can, shall live by the Gospel; but that he which
preaches the Gospel, should live by the Gospel: 1. Cor. 9.
even as he which feeds the flock should eat of the milk of the flock: and
he tells thee, that the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, Malach.
2.^.
and they should seek the law at his mouth. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked. It will be terrible one day to hear Christ say: How came thou he
are? Give accounts of thy stewardshipp.

But at the non-resident, I marvel much more: Reply to Hard. Au^s. to the
reader.
(for alas as the reverend Father Master B. Jewel says: This is the
misery of the simple, for neither are they able to teach them selves, neither
have they wherewith, to discern their teachers: there was never, neither
error so horrible, but the simple have received it, no poison so deadly, but
the^ simple have drunken it,) because all excuse is taken away from the learned
divine if he do not his office and duty: as it is written, He that knows
how to do well and does it not, Jacob. 4.17.
to him it is sin. This sin of non-residencie, has three goodly
vndersetters, which are also broad figgeleaues to cover the nakedness of these
learned men. Which because I find many to be much comforted withal, and as
it were vpholden in their sin, I will a little try their power: First they
call and account their livings, rewards of learning. Three fig leaves cover
the learned non resident.
Secondlye it is in the Queens power and of the State, to order and dispose
the liuinges of the Church, as they think good. Thirdly: so they preach, they
are not to be charged, although they preach not in their own Parish. For the
first, I would desire them to remember, how they be rewards of learning:
namely either, because men have learning; 1. Rewards of learning.
or because they use their learning, to the service of the Church, or common
wealth. There be rewards for Captains and soldiers, for Lawyers, Judges, and
Recorders: But it is given to such as may go, whether they will, and not
execute the charge and service, for which they have such rewards? Even so I
must needs highly commend her Majesty and the state, for the good and
laudable provision, which is for the ministry of this land, being such as if
it were well used of us, it might be greatly to the glory of God, and the
enlargement and honor of his Church: yet I cannot think so meanly of her
Majesty's princely discretion, or of the wise care of the state: that they
would cause or suffer, the people of the land, to pay the tenth part of their
profits or rentes; to mayntaine a company of idle men in their silks and
veluetts, and to fare delitiouslie: and not to take pains by their learning to
edifye Gods people; of whom they have so great living for that purpose. They
would rather convert it to the comfort of maimed soldiers and old Captains,
who have hazarded their lives, and spent their estate, for the defense of their
Prince and country. If the Bees do not love the droane, nor the Gardener the
caterpiller, nor the Kowheard the headghogge nor the common wealth the idle
vagrant: then surely the state will not reward idle men, though they be
learned if they do not employ their gifts to the use, wherefore and of whom
they have their living and maintenance. Alas what am I the better, upon great
charges, to keep a great horse, and never to ride? to nourish many servants
and not to use them, and to have a great garden, and to gather no fruit? Will
not the Master of the Vineyard say of the figg tree which bears not? Cut it
down: ^uc. 13, 7.
why keeps it also the ground barran. And Christ says to such as keep
their talent in a napkinne: Math. 26.26.
Thou evil servant and slowfull, cast that unprofitable servant into utter
darkness, 29.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Cap. 24.45.
Who then is a faithful servant and wise? whom his Master has made ruler
over his household, to give them meat in season; blessed is that servant,
whom his Master, Math. 5.
when he comes, shall find fo doing. A Minister is a light: shall we put it
under a bushel? Cor. 4.
He is the disposer of the secrets of God, ought he not to be faithful? Cor.
4.6.
The heavenly treasure and riches is in the cheast of their breast: shall it be
kept fast locked from Gods people? And the name of Christ is an oynement powered
out; Cantic. 1.2.
and will they stop it up in silence and not by preaching sprinkle it abroad
to the sweetning of Gods Church?

In the second vnder-setter wherein they build upon the Queens power, 2 The
Queens power in disposing of livings for ministers.
and of the state, I suppose that if the Queen and the state, because of their
pride, idleness, and living in pleasure, should take the livings from them, and
convert them to other uses of the common wealth: they will quickly call it
sacrilege. But for my part, I confess that it is in the liberty of every
common wealth to provide liuinges for every state and service, as they find
themselves best able, and fittest for their courtrie or City. For it is not
said in the Gospel, Thus and thus, God would have his Ministers provided
for, as it was in the law of Moses: but only thus. 1. Cor. 9.14.
So has also the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel; And again: The labourer is worthy of his hyer: and such
like. 1. Tim. 5.8.
But though it be in the liberty of the Magistrate, to appoint livings in such
sort as he thinks good shall that excuse the idle and him that lives in
pleasure; because he can say the law gives me this! the Queen bestows this
upon me! did the law or the Queen give it thee to be idle? or if they did:
can thou be excused in heaven, which have a charge, from the Lord to feed
his flock which is committed unto thee? But the handsomest of all these
figg-leaues is the third: for say they, we do preach, although not to our
own flocks, and we have curates in them: (...). Preaching ^^t Random and
having ^f curates.
and how can you prove, that we are bound to any one particular charge, to
teach and attend upon one Congregation? This last clause, is (I hope)
sufficiently proved before, and I will add one thing more, namely, that the
Apostles having their charge over the whole world: in all places where they
converted any people, ^ct. 14.23. ^it. 1.5.
they placed by election ministers church by Church, and City by City,
whom they called Bishops or Elders: ^ct. ^0.
and to these they committed, the several Congregations. They are called the
Elders of Ephesus; the Angel of Smyrna; the Angel of Philadelphia, ^^u. 2,
and 3.
or of Laodicea. Here I demand, whether these so assigned to their several
churches in several places had charge to preach every where and whether the
Angel of Smyrna had not his proper charge at Smyrna, and that he could please
God, if he went to an other Church, and receiving living of them of Smyrna, he
might lawfully continue to preach at Laodicea and seldom at Smyrna: Ephesians. 4.11.
For this cause I suppose they are called Pastoures, because they had their
several Congregations, to look unto as their special flock. And therefore
the Apostle wills the Colossians to say to Archippus, Take heed to the
ministry, that thou have received in the Lord, Colos. 4.17.
that thou fulfill it. And if they read the tract of the primitive ages, they
may trace a good many years, before that ever, these aduousons, pluralities
and dispensations for non-residentes, were once heard of in the Church of
Christ. Now as touching the having of Curats, they will hardly find any
foundation thereof in Christ's Gospel. Having of curates against all reason.
And it stands much against all reason. For if her Ma. appointe a Lieftennant
in any place of her dominions: If she should take the fine or stipend she
gives him, and live as he sees good in some hail place pleasantly, keeping
hospitality among his friends: and in his room and place set some ignorant
fellow: would she not disdain that such men should take her money and living
she gives them and skorne to do her service? and would she not be highly
displeased, if she saw the service not performed, for want of a sufficient man,
and so damage grown to the common wealth? How much more, will God be
offended, with such careless, delicious and proud Prelates, as make dainty in
their own persons to feed the flock, for which Christ in his own person
died, and shed his own precious blood. Will not God vpbraid them with this:
that he spared not his only begotten Son for their sakes, but gave him to
the death, and will they think much, having good maintenance for the same
purpose; to take a little pains to teach Gods heritage? But say they, many
have good and learned Preachers in their cures. True. Then let them tell it God
in their consciences, and answer him so; And see if he ask them not again in
their own hearts: If the Curate be good and a sufficient teacher, what
reason is there that the labourer, should not have the wages for that labor?
What privilege have thou to show, why thou should have the living, and
another take the pains? if he be worthy to feed the flock, let him be
clothed with the wool, and fed with the milk: why should thou live by
the sweat of another man's labor? What have thou done, what holiness or
righteousness is in thee above other men; Yea why do thou keep out other
good and learned men, by multiplying of livings, and see kest thine own and
not that which is Christ Jesus? What warrant have thou, to make as good or
rather better man then thy self, to be as thy servant? And where have thou
learned to make one Minister inferior and enthralled to another? For my part
I envy no man's wealth, but I fight in my soul, to see men of wisdom and
learning, to be so ouershot. Think not my dear brethren, that although we be
disgraced by subscription, and some other things and doings of men, that it
shall be a warrant for you: (to do as you do) in the sight of almighty God,
who gave so dear a price for the peoples souls, as his own and only Sons
blood, and has laid so heavy a charge upon every Minister; that if any soul
perish for want of his admonition, his blood should be required at his hand.
Ezee. 33.7.8.


2 Let us now see, how these two breed Atheists and Papists. Experience
shows that the want of preaching makes Atheistes and Papists.
First we find by great experience (and I have now five and twenty years
observed it) that in those places where there is not preaching and private
conferring of the Minister and the people, the most part, have as little
knowledge of God and of Christ, as Turks and Pagans. One would not think it
so: seeing they have the holy Scriptures red in a know en tongue, and now and
then sermons quarterlie, yet surely it is true in very many places. For I
have been in a Parish of four hundred communicants, and marueiling that my
preaching was so little regarded, I took upon me to confer with every man
and woman, before they received the communion. And I asked them of Christ, what
he was in his person: what his office: how sin came into the world: what
punishment for sin: what becomes of our bodies being rotten in the graves:
and lastly, whether it were possible for a man to live so vprightlie, that by
well doing he might win heaven. In all the former questions, I skarse found
ten in the hundred, to have any knowledge, but in the last question skarse
one, but did affirm, that a man might be saved by his own weldoing: and that
he trusted he did so live, that by Gods grace, he should obtain everlasting
life by serving of God and good prayers, etc. Where I am, I have been twelve
years, I have every year communed with such strangers as have come into this
Parish, either hous-keepers or servants; and being small, there comes some
year not passing six, some ten, and some years more. And truly God is my
witness, that I lie not, I have found some that have comd from Parishes, where
there has been diligent teaching, to answer me very handsomely, in all
these things: but I can hardly remember any one, which had continued under a
Non-resident and unpreaching ministry, that had any knowledge, especially to
tell what Christ is, or that we are saved by faith in him, and not by works.
Therefore I have asked the like of others, which have took the same pains as
I did, and they have affirmed to me the very same. Now then, this being so,
tell me I pray you: First for Atheism, whether these be any better then
Atheists which know not Christ. Such then being born bred and fostered under
these non-residents and unpreaching Ministers, what is the conclusion? Every
man may see most lamentable.

Moreover the Papist or any heretic may easily pervert them, who have no
better knowledge or judgment, yea they may be taught any thing. A rich
Papist or Atheist will lead a simple unpreaching Minister as they list, and in
some places, for to prefer pastime and good cheer, I have known such an one
to say morning and evening prayer together. As for non-residents, the cunning
Papist can tell how to fit his humor, if he inueigh against Puritans, and cry
out against the spoils of the Church, etc. and diverse other like devises have
they to delude them, that they may be said to be wise in their generation.
The common wealth endomaned by non residents and dum ministers.


Now tell me whether the common wealth do not receive damage and be not in
danger by this means. For when the people be so ignorant; may not every
Seminary entise them as they list? and if ever the Papist should set one
foot their longed hope: Alas how could the state trust them that vere
ignorant, that no conscience nor honesty could move them but rather the
belly, and that part that would use them best and were most liklie to
prevail. Where as the Protestant, that has knowledge of his duty, and faith
in Christ, he stands immovable: though all the world would forsake his Prince,
yet would he never. A mirror of this had you in Queen Mary's days: when
the learned Protestante knowing his duty, did patiently and constantly suffer
for the truth, but the ignorant multitude were quickly turned from God.
Furthermore the vviser sort of Papists and Atheistes, when they see that we
speak against the hedge-Priestes of Popery, and the pride, idleness and
pleasure of their great and glorious Prelates: and that we our selves fall
into the same scandal, do they not despise us and count us at the least as
bad as they, yea and very hypocrites and time-seruers, taking the ministry
upon us, for wealth and pleasure, and not for the fear of God, or the love of
his people. And so their hearts are hardened, and they fall away more and more:
whereby the Queen is robbed of her faithful subjects, and the strength of
her estate is effeebled. Whereas if we could be content with a measure, and
that every Parish had a godly learned teacher, we should see a merueilous
increase of good Christian people, and an invincible power of the great King of
heaven among us.

Subscription, a bar against good preacher^, and so hurts the common wealth*
Then commeuh in subscription, and does as much harm an other way, namely, it
makes a bar against many good and painful learned Ministers, and some it
thrustes out. And so for want of good lights, much people of this land
walk in darkness unto this hour Little do men think what damage this is to
the common wealth. For let the neutrall Politician say what they will, this
I dare adventure upon my ^^fe to auoutch: that if the whole people of this
land, vve^e in every Parish furnished with learned and godly teachers: the
power of the Queen which consists in the multitud of faithful people would
have been augmented by vere many degrees: and the enemies exceeding much
abated, even in the eyes and knowledge of all men. For if the Southern parts
of the Realm, and the city of London, be compared to the other parts,
where they have had little or no teaching, men shall easily discern that
which I say to be true: namely if they weigh well the number of Papists and
Recusantes, and the manifold dotages of the common people in such places where
the godly Preacher has not continued. Therefore in regard of my love to my
most gracious Sovereign, and native country, I can not pass this over so
slightly. The subscription being urged and the ceremonies, they cause an honest
godly painful Preacher to be suspended, imprisoned, and deprived; What then?
The multitude, reuerencing (as it is meet) their superiors, presently judge
the godly Preacher to be a naughty man. Again: when they look upon the
simplicity of the unpreaching Minister, and the pride and coueteousnes of the
non-resident, what follows? They esteem of no Ministers at all; they stumble
and fall and continue very Atheistes, ready to be carried away after every
deceauer, which makes a show of godliness, and to be drawn away by these
pestilent Seminaries and wicked Priests and I esuites, from their allegiance.
Whereas if the one of these were reformed after the rule of holy Scripture: and
the other (Subscription being taken away, etc.) had the favor, that their
labors do deserve, you should see an other manner of working, namely, that
reverence to the Gospel, and love to the Magistrate; that no deceauer could
possible enter into them. The fruit of preaching before Subscription was last
urged.
Some five years to gether, before that unhappy time that Subscription was so
generallye offered, (which is now some 18. years past) there was such unity
between the Ministers, and they joined in all places so lovingly and
diligently in labor: that not only did the unpreaching Minister and
non-resident quake, and prepare them selves in measure to take pains in the
Church: but also many thousands were converted from Atheism and popery, and
became notable Christians. And I am persuaded that the fruit of that time,
will be able (through Gods blessing) when so ever the Queen shall have need
(which I pray God may never be) to Master and calm all the storming Papists
and traitoures what soever. But when Subscription came abroad: how did it shake
the heavens and darken the skies! (O Lord mine heart trembles to think upon it)
how many godly and worthy learned Preachers were silenced, deprived, and
greatly disgraced! How were the holy Ministers divided and distracted! How
were the Christian subjects grieved and offended, and the Papists and wicked
men encouraged and emboldened! What a dampe brought it to all godliness and
religion: and since that time what horrible wickedness, whoordome,
drunkenesse, and al shameless filthienes: and what grievous plagues of God, one
succeeding an other, have followed, eueriegood Christian subject must needs see
and lament. And the last degree of these evils showed it self about the time
of the last Parliament, so far and apparent: as I think many of the
reverend Fathers were not a little touched with the grief thereof: as their
zealous preaching did most plainly testify: to the no small rejoicing of many
good gentilmen and others, who loving her Majesty's honor and present
government, did bless them in their hearts, and with their mouths praised
God, for their zeal and faithful dealing. Now what will follow all this, when
God has so long called unto us, and admonished us of these three capital
enemies, beside all other our sins, and we still remain in them and
maintain them, and make so little regard of his faithful servants; they
which know the holy Scriptures may easilye judge. I will say no more, but
the Lord be merciful unto us, and keep far away his deserved wrath and
displeasure from us.

3 Now here, me thinks, I see the scorning Atheist to laugh in his sleeue
thinking that all men are fools but him self. Atheistes do think them
selves the only wise men,
And some begin to say, that the wiser and greater sort of men, make no
account of religion, but think baselie of it; namely, that it serves but to
keep the simple people in awe. Some cause I must confess they have this their
stumbling, when they see the better sort of Christians, so divided. But yet by
this very thing they confute them selves, and show their naked shame; by
proouing, and fulfilling in th^mselues the truth of holy Scripture. First they
show the want of faith, according to the saying of Christ saying: When the
Son of man comes, shall he find faith upon the earth? Luc. 18.8.
Which does argue the great increase of Atheistes in these last days. And
Saint Peter foretelling of such mockers: they do fulfill his words by their
so deriding of religion. 2. Pet. 3.
And when they leave the hearing of godly sermons, and take unto them skillful
Philosophers and wife Naturalistes, do not they fulfill the Scripture which
says, The time will com, when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but
having their ears itching, 2. Tim. 4.3.
shall after their own lusts get them an heap of teachers, and shall turn
their ears from truth, and begiuen to fables. Because they are Atheists, 2.
These. 2.10.
and God has given them over to a reprobate mind, for not believing a manifest
truth; that by believing lies, they might fulfill the Scriptures and be
damned. Therefore they care not and do not understand, that God has
foreshewed all these things should so come to pass. They perceive not, that
God has decreed for men's punishment, Genesis 3.13.
continual war between wicked and good men; between Christ and Satan.
They can not see that by the coming of Christ, and preaching of his Gospel,
God has persuaded Iapheth to come into the tents of Sem. Genesis 9.27.
That is the Gentills are ingrafted into the Church of God among the Jews.
They cannot consider, that this teligion which we now profess in England, is
the same that God preached and taught Abraham, Genesis 12.2. with Gal. 3.8.
and that the power of his word unto Abraham, has effected that no tract of
time, no inundation or change of states, could overthrow that religion; And
that when Christ and his Apostles (at the time by God appointed) did encounter
with the Prince of this world; then was fulfiled the Scriptures which say,
Esai. 45.25.
Every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall swear by me. Confounded
be they that worship graven images, etc. Psalm. 97.7.
Then all religions in the world (which were nothing but Atheism) though they
fought againt God and his Christ, and killed his servants; were crushed with the
iron Scepter of his word, Psalm. 2.
and broken in pieces like a potters vessel, and all the Monarchs of the
world fled before him, Dan. 2.35.44.
and vanished as the summer flowers. And they mark not, that the same which
the Scripture has told us of Antichrist to be reueiled, 2. These. 2.
and of the Apostasy of the whole world, and of the manifold false Prophets
and deceauers, Mat. 24.
is now truly come to pass. Lastly they do not regard, that the virtue of
the same word, in these last days has prevailed, above all reason, against
the Emperor and Pope, and that by the simple preaching thereof: and that it is
so mighty, 2. Pet. 1.24.25.
that it changes the nature of a man to be an other then he was before,
namely to turn from dumme idols to serve the living God. 1. These. 1.1.
And this I dare prouounce in the behalf of Gods word preached, that if the
Atheist, would hear but such a mean preacher as I am, diligently and
atte^tiuely but one half year, he should find the power of the mighty King to
pearce his heart and to make him to tremble, (like to Felix and Agrippa.) And
though he believe not yet should he wonder as Simon Magus. These and a great
many things more the Atheist not seeing nor considering, he stumbleth at the
stumbling stone: Esai. 28.16. with ca. ^.14.
And so to my comfort and souls health, he proves Gods word to be true, the
name of the most high and everlasting God, be blessed and magnified for ever,

Cap. 11.
Wherein is discried, that neither the reverend Fathers and learned Prelates,
standing for conformity: neither the godly Ministers desiring reformation, are
the only or proper causes of these troublesome dissentions and evils following
the same: but there are some other things more specially to be looked into,
which may and ought to induce both parties unto peace, and to join lovingly in
the building of Gods house: and that all English people humbling them selves by
prayer unto God, do carefully conform them selves to the Gospel of Christ.

AS a dog runs too the stone which is cast at him, or leapeth at the
arrowe, which is shot on high, The people reregard not their punishments.
and has no wit to mark from whence it comes. So the most part of the
people do behold the troubles of our church, as if it pertayneth not to them:
and make it as a stage-playe and common talk, delighting in the rehersing the
faults of the ministry: and being void of that discretion, which pertains
to good and wise Christians, they do not know nor regard, that the smiting of
the sheepheards is the scattering of the sheep, Zach. 13.7. Heb. 13.17.
and the more damage that befalls to the ministry, the greater is the loss
and punishment of the people. And as a drunken man perceaueth not when he is
stricken, Prou. 23.35.
and he that sleeps in darkness, 1. These. 5.3.4.
thinks not that the thief steals upon him: Ephesians. 4.18.19.
so men by ignorance and custom of sin, are made past feeling, that they do
not consider when God by his plagues and punishments calls them to
repentance. Therefore God complains of his people, Esai. 9.13.
that they turn not to him that smites, neither do they seek the Lord of
hosts.

Little do any think or weigh with them selves, Romans 10* 2. Cor. 3.
that the Ministers preaching the Gospel, are the means ordained of God, to
bring men to salvation; having the ministry of the spirit and of righteousness;
Math. 5. 1. Cor. 4.1.
and therefore they are called the light of the world; the stewards of Gods
secrets; the Ambassadors of Christ, to whom is committd the ministry of
reconciliation between God and man: 2. Cor. 5. cap. 2.15.
and so they are the sweet savor of life unto them which shall be saved. If
then their mouths be stopped, their light ouer-cast, and by troublous
contention, the free and prosperous course of their labors hindered,
diminished, or cut of: is not all this the great hurt and spiritual plague of
the people: who leese so great and so proper means which God has ordained for
man's salvation. If God shutt the heavens, that there be no rain, men can
quickly epsy that there is a plague. So is it great pity that men see not,
that in regard of our souls, the ministry is as necessary as the rain: and
therefore when the same is hindered or taken away, it is a very great and
damnable punishment. In so much as the holy spirit of God, calls it by the
name of a famine. And when the Ministers do not teach the people, Amos. 8.11.
it is also said: The people perish for lack of knowledge. Hoshea, 4.6.
And if it might be truly said, that the children of Israel, commit a
trespass in the excommunicate thing, when this was done secretly by one man
called Achan: Joshua. 7.
and if for that one man's fault, the wrath of God was justly kindled against
all Israel, so that they could not stand before their enemies: How much more
may we think, The sin of one man may defile the whole land,
that the sins of our land, have caused the Lords wrath against us, when we
see so many of our worthy Fathers and godly Ministers to be greatly smitten
by this civil division?

When Job lost his goods by diverse means; his oxen taken by the Sabeans; Job.
1.
his sheep burnt by fire from heaven; his camells carried away by the
Chaldeans, and his sonns and daughters slain by the falling of an house: he
cast his eyes upon God, saying: The Lord gives and the Lord takes. So if we
could have seen the hand of God, and that thereby we had been humbled, I
verily think, that this grievous soar, had not run so long, nor increased
so much as it has. Sometime the counsel of the Lord by such a thing, is to
try the people, Deuteronomy, 13.
whether they love God with all their hearts: Ezech. 14.
sometime when the people set up idols in their hearts, God sends them false
Prophets to deceive them: and sometime there must be heresies in the Church,
1. Cor. 11.19. The true causes of our Church troubles.
that they which be approved, may be known. Therefore there is a further thing
to be looked into, then either the persons, or the things which has happened
in our Church. Who knows not how much blood of Gods Saints was spilte in
former ages, and how many houses were guilty of blood. And when did this land
seriously and sincerely humble it self, and by open repentance make
reconciliation for the same? Nay rather, how many thousands repined at the
happy reign of her Majesty for the casting out of the idolatrous and
superstitious worshipp of God, and for the establishing of the true service of
his holy name, and the liberty of the preaching of the Gospel? And who were
they that picked quarrelles, against the godly learned Ministers, and caused
this division, but the ignorant and malicious Papist, Atheist, and Libertines?
Therefore it is the just judgment of God, that as we do but slightlie regard
the sins of our forefathers, and contend mightelie for idolatry and
wickedness; and light being offered we love darkness more then light: so God
should give us over to our own foolishnes, by withholding his blessing and
peace among his Ministers. For the wicked Papists and ungodly sinners, are
glad and take pleasure in the troubles and reproaches of the ministry.
Therefore in them is fulfilled that which is written: As they regarded not to
know God: so God gave them over too a reprobate mind. Romans 1.2^*
And may it not be justly said, that because we have not been more zealous in
Gods cause, but have made Marriages with Papists and Atheistes, and done many
other things after the course of this world, showing a very cold love unto
the Gospel: the Papists and Atheistes have been made by this means a snare
unto us, a whip unto our sides, and thorns unto our eyes? And I assuredly
believe, that had it not been the wonderful goodness and mercy of God to his
poor afflicted Saints, and his love to his elect, and that he would make
his anointed hande-maide Elizabeth our Queen, a most gra^ious instrument of
his salvation and glory in the midst of his church and glorify him self in,
and by her, in the eyes of all nations: we had felt more grievous and palpable
darkness, and cruel bitterness, then we have done; and we had not now come
half so far in the knowledge and practice of his most blessed Gospel:
idolatry and superstition should not have been so well purged out of this
land, nor the pure doctrine of Christ so rightlye taught. Therefore we must
think that our sins and unthankfulness is the cause of our wantes, and Gods
righteous judgments have brought these things to pass. Even as it came of
the Lord, 1. King. 12.
that Rehoboam followed the counsel of the young men, that for the sins of
the people, and idolatry in Salomons days, the kingdom might be divided.
Give me here a spiritual eye, and behold with me, Look upon the Bishops with
a spiritual eye.
and sorrow with me, that the Lord our God for our sins, should so hold the
eyes of the reverend fathers, on the one side, that although in their
judgment, they were persuaded, that the things they urged their brethren
unto, were but very trifles, and therefor not worthy, that any one Parish
should be so greatly punished for them, as to leese their faithful, learned
and painful Pastor; yet did not only enforce the ceremonies upon them; but
also (not considering the difference of good men's judgments about such things)
pressed upon them to subscribe; and for not yielding to their minds,
suspended, deprived, and imprisoned their learned and godly brethren, and in
the mean time preferred the triflyng ceremonies before the weighty work of
preaching. So that as Master Calfill says: Auns to the treatis. of ^he
cross, artic. 5.
The people of God be sometime oppressed with traditions and ceremonies; and
for outward solemnities the inward true service of God is neglected. Let the
spiritual eye judge (I say,) whether it was not a merueilous judgment of God,
that they could not see all this this while any one thing amiss, no, not so
much as the unlearned ministry, or non-residencie: but defend all, and
maintain all, to the utmost. And although they had every Parliament,
complaints of all the Realm, and humble supplications diverse times made unto
them by their brethren, and so many years experience of the inconueniencie (if
not of the unlawfulness) of these things; that neither the peace of the
Church, nor the pity of the congregations, nor the love of so many learned
and godly brethren, could move them: but that even now forty three year,
they hold out not reforming any one point. On the other side let the
spiritual man judge, Look upon the Ministers with a spiritual eye.
what a judgment of God it was, upon the godly Ministers, that they so
fearcelie with so hard and bitter terms, in their first admonitions, and in
many phrases of their apologeticall writtings, did incense and move unto wrath
the reverend Fathers; that they esteemed them as wayward, froward and peevish
persons, joint enemies (of the Church) with Papists: and that when that most
wicked and blasphemous libeller Martin, did most scornfullie abuse many
worthy persons, and thrust in him self by an ungodly insinuation: that there
was no public instrument on our side (so far as ever I could hear) to show
our dislike but that both sides did wink and suffer most filthy and lewd
calumniations and slanders. O how were our eyes blinded that we saw not how
uncomely these things were for us, and what offense these things might be to
Papists, Atheistes, and all wicked enemies of the Gospel. Let the spiritual
eye here judge, that God has blinded us exceedingly, that we could not
contain, till the strife did reach, even almost to the spilling of innocent
blood. And had not God of a singular mercy, taken away some persons, in the
ruff of their pride; and had not her Majesty by the special blessing of God,
with a most wise and religious care, moderate the extreemitie: I can not tell,
how many of us, by this time, had lost our lives, in giving testimony to the
government and Kingdom of Christ: as our breethren in times past did unto his
sacrifice and Priesthood.

And yet is there a more chari^able consideration of the reverend Bishops and
godly Ministers contention. A charitable consideration of the Bishops and
Ministers doings.
First the reverend Fathers might be induced to think how greatly we are
bound to God and to her Majesty, that we had obtained so much as we have, and
so great and excellent liberty in Christ: whereof our forefathers would have
counted them selves happy, if they could have come near unto it. And the
state being settled, they might think it was wisdom and behoofull to maintain
all, least they should offend her Majesty and the state: and judge it better
to leese some few Ministers, then to fall into greater inconueniencie. And
being them selves persuaded that there was no impious thing, they might suppose
it their duty and a godly policy, by Subscription to bring all men to
conformity. And when they had some hard and bitter words in the admonitions,
they might deem the Ministers not so wise, nor so godly, as they pretended:
and having been enueighed by continual complaints, and suggestions of wicked
Papists and Atheistes, they might conceive an ill opinion of their breethren,
and so be forestalled in judgment. And lastly, being provoked by wicked
Martin, they might conclude their cause to be absolutely good, for so much as
they were persued by unlawful and wicked means and so by a very strong
seeming color of God, they might easily fall into a self weening, and
despise their good and godly brethren. So on the other side the godly
Ministers, no doubt having the testimony of their conscience, that the things
they stood against, were worthy to be reformed: and that for no other cause
but mere conscience, they refused to observe the ceremonies: and when they had
diverse years kept themselves close and sile^t, to be nothing regarded, nor
pitied, but pressed so earnestly to subscribe and allow against Gods word, all
manner of things, and as they thought a great deal more then the law did
require. Then to be suspended, deprived, imprisoned, and diverse ways in
terms most uncharitably provoked, they might guess that these reverend
Fathers were not Gods Bishops, and in their anger they might suppose it
lawful, to entertain them with such sharp and bitter terms, as in the
admonitions and other writtinges perauenture is to be found. And as
concerning Martin, it may be at the first they were amassed, to think what it
should mean, that God had stirred up such a thing to disgrace them which
stood against the good proceedings of the Gospel, and the kingdom of Christ
they could not tell whether it were in their part to meddle in that matter; and
seeing and feeling the hot pursuit of that time, to ly heavy upon them,
they might easily forgett something, that had been necessary for them to
have prevented. And for them both, I hope, I may truly say, that if there were
not some secret matter (which God knows and not I) if there were some man of
authority and reverence, The Bishopps and Ministers may be reconciled.
who could lay his hand upon them both, they might very well be reconciled.
For both the reverend Fathers for their part, have and do bear with many of
the godly Ministers, and the Ministers for their parts do use all reverence
and good carriage toward them. Only the cause of ceremonies and discipline is
reserved on both sides, and stands under further trial. Therefore in my
judgment, the whole and principal fault is not to be laid upon the one or
the other: but that if the people of this land, who by this means were very
greatly punished, have humbled them selves to God by prayer, fasting, and
amendment of life, and thankfully embraced, and carefully practiced the holy
Gospel: no doubt God would soon have eased all this grief, and quickly
found out a sweet remedy of brotherly reconciliation.

But if I may speak according to holy Scripture, I think it an exceeding
mercy of God, that he has suffered us to have so many good Preachers and so
many days of the Gospel, as we have. For if we look upon the people, we
shall see the ground of all these things. How little have they esteemed the
godly and learned Ministers! How content they be with simple and ignorant men!
How hardly are they drawn to pay duties, which law has appointed. How many
quarrels they pick against painful Ministers: and how little reverence they
give to any that are faithful! How they follow their covetousness and
pleasures! How they fill all sorts of Courts with brawles, foolish and wilful
strifes and suits and demures in law, with murders, whoordomes, dronkennes, and
all disorder. For brave buildinges, costly apparel, and dainty diet, they
have great plenty: but every little thing which is bestowed upon the Church,
is thought to much: nay, I would they did not use devises, to diminish the
liuinges of the Church, and to oppress poor men, when they enter into their
charges. If the Lord having placed his word among us, beholding their little
thankfulness to him self, and great unkindness to his servants. If he looking
for fruit at their hands, find nothing but a leaper soar. If he find that
they be in friendshipe with Papists and Atheistes for worldly wealth: and
give more countenance to dronkards and whoormaisters, then to the frithfull
Ministers of Christ: what man iudgeing with a spiritual eye according to the
holy Scripture, can otherwise deem, but that God has laid these things
iustlye upon us for our sins, and for the ungratefulness of the people. So
that I may boldly say, that although we have seen great tentations, and God
has outwardly shaken his rod, in the heavens by blasing stars and tempests,
winds and unseasonable weather; in the earth by earthquaks and great dearth;
in our bodies with pestilence and many strange sicknesses. And beside all this
the enemies abroad has offered to invade us. We have sent out thousands and
there has come home but hundredes; we have had almost continual stir in
Ireland: yea we have had the sweard of sedition displaying it self in our
streets, and sometime rebellion; and now the Papists lifting up their beardes
to out face us: and yet our swearing, lying dronkennes, usury, oppression and
whoordomes are without measure: may it not be said that yet these forty three
years, the Lord has not given us, an heart to perceive, and eyes to see and
ears to hear unto this day. May we not look every day to have it worse,
if we continue thus in our wickedness, without true repentance? O that it
would please God, to open our eyes, that even now at the length, even in this
day, we could know the things, which belong unto our peace! A prayer for
concord and conformity to the Gospel.
Seeing then we are thus wrapped and entangled in the nett of Gods heavy
judgments, I do therefore humbly pray and desire heartily almighty God,
that he would convert us unto him self boeth Ministers and people: and that
we the Ministers of the word, would seriously remember that we are brethren:
and howsoever we differ in judgment we would be careful that nothing be done
among us, through contention and vain glory, or desire of pre-eminence, for
revenge of a malicious froward or vvayward mind: but that in meeknes of mind,
every man esteem other better then him self: that where unto we are come, we
may proceed by one rule, minding one thing, forbearing one an other, and
forgiuinge one an other, even as he forgave us. And that the reverend Fathers
and learned Prelates for their part, following the example of our great Father
Abraham, would rather yield their right, then that there should be continued
such civil dissension, so pernicious to the Church and common wealth, and that
the godly Ministers would be very careful to give no offense, by word or
deed, which justly might provoke their displeasure against them, and that they
would join lovingly together in the careful feeding of Gods people. And that
he would incline the peoples heart to consider that these things are Gods
heavy correctiones: and by true humiliation and prayer instantly to God; for
the forgiveness of our sins; for the prosperity and long life of her
Majesty; for unity and increase of the faithful Ministers; for the
advancement of the Gospel; for the spirit of holy and godly wisdom in the
whole state; and for Gods protection against all our enemies, both bodelie and
ghostelie: And by there cheerful obedience to God, and thankful declaration
of their love unto their Prince, and dutiful practice of justice, equity,
truth, mercy and concord, one with an other: show themselves, the true and
faithful professors of Christ's most blessed Gospel. Not sufferinge
themselves to be carried away with the love of this world; but to labor
chiefly for those things which concern the kingdom of God. That so his
gracious goodness and holy favor may alwaie shine upon us; his mighty arm be
our defense; his holy spirit our guide and directour; his blessed Son, our
Lord and Savior; his covenant of grace be established and confirmed toward us
and our children for ever and ever, Amen.

The Lords name be praised.


