A THEATER wherein be represented as well the miseries and calamities that
follow the voluptuous Worldlings, As also the great joys and plesures which
the faithful do enjoy.

An Argument both profitable and delectable, to all that sincerely love the
word of God.

Devised by S. John vander Noodt.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman.

Anno Domini. 1569.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


In commendationem operis ab Nobiliss. and virtutis Studiosissimo Domino,
Ioanne vander Noodt Patricio Antuerpiensi aediti, Carmen. M^RABILAE. Poetae
Brabant.
HAEc Babylon legate, and discat sustollere coel^
Hactenus addictum terrae caput, hic rata vitae
Semita, quam specimen Nothoeae nobile gentis
Dat legere, ille domo patria, certisque triumphis
Contemptis, and quae poterant spondere Curules,
Conscius haud vllo virtutem sanguine condi,
Ad maiora animum tulit, and dat noscere mundo,
Hoc opere insignem luctum, tristesque labores
Vitae huius: legate haec Babylon, legate, imbuat aures
Illius hoc opus, and si cui calligine coeca
Men's cooperata iacet, qui deuia saxa pererrat
Rectum oblitus iter: lic^t illi hic nube redusta
Summum vestigare bonum: doctrina Sophorum
Ven^ilat, and falso verum confundit inani.
O stolidas hominum mentes! non iste Deorum
Cultus: and quando hos crudeli fune flagellans
Conscia men's corruptum animu^ ad meliora reducet!
Vt iaceant idola! suus, quo cuncta mou^ntur,
Restituatur honos! aliquando benignior astris,
Deciderit fortuna tamen, nostrosque labores,
Terrarum vt fremitent furiata mente Tyranni,
Respiciet miserans summi regnat or Olympi.
At verae quicunque viae dincscere Syd^^
Ard^scisue ducem, doctos euolue labores,
Quos doctus tibi Nothaeus vigilauit ad vnguem,
Eque vaporato fumo, qui corda senebat,
Cultor agri tristes nebulas, vti sole fugari
Aspicit, and campos risum renouare iacentes,
Lucem ita conspicies tibi diluxisse serenam.
DOCTOR GERARDVS GOOSSENIVS Meditus, Physicus, and Poeta Brabant. mode^. in
Zoilum Octastichon.
ZOile cur palles? cur vultus s^mper amarus?
Triste supercilium f^onsque caprata tibi?
Displicet vt video luci datus iste libellus:
Sed rogo cur oculis displicet iste tuis?
An quia papicolum ritus and sacra reuelli^
Idolis, viduam nec Babylona dole^?
Zoile, non curat morsus, nam sufficit illi^
Perplacuisse bonis, displicuisse malis^
Inoffensibilis Goossenij.
TO THE MOST high, puissant, noble, virtuous, and right Christian Princess
Elizabeth, by the grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland. etc.
AFTER my departure out of Brabante, (mine own natural Country) into your
Majesty's Realm of England (most gracious Lady) as well for that I would not
behold the abominations of the Romyshe Antechrist, as to escape the hands of
the bloodthirsty: In the mean space for the avoiding of idleness (the very
mother and nourice of all vices) I have among other my trauayles been occupied
about this little Treatise, wherein is set forth the vileness and baseness
of worldely things, which commonly withdraw us from heavenly and spiritual
matters. To the end that understanding the vanity and baseness of the same,
and therewithal considering the miserable calamities that ensue thereupon, we
might be moved the rather to forsake them, and give our selves to the
knowledge of Heavenly and eternal things, whence all true happiness and
felicity does proceed. And for as much as the matter of it self is very good
(deseruyng in deed to be handeled by men of far better skill tha^ I) I could
not devise how any things whatsoever, of likeness and conueniencie might more
properly be resembled one to the other, than this book for the aptness and
conueniencie of the argument might be dedicated to your Majesty, a most
blessed and happy prince. Happy I say, not so much for that your grace is
lineally descended by the most high, puissaunt, mighty and victorious prince
Henry the eight of famous memory, from so many myghtie and puissant princes of
this Realm, your Majesty's most noble progenitors: which have long agone,
most valiantly and victoriously conquered al France, and by dint of sword
daunted their enemies, so that your highness bears in Arms as right
inheritour thereunto, the royal scepter and Croune imperial, most
triu^phantly, and the titles of England, France, and Irelande ioyntely in
your majesty's style. Neither for, that your highness as a rare Phoenix of
your time, are singular and peerless in honor and renoune, in princely
majesty, wisdom, skill, beauty, favor, mildness, courtesy and
gentleness: to be short, excellent in all kind of virtue. Nor in respect of
your learning, knowledge, counsel, judgment, and eloquence, as well in the
Greek, Latin, Italian, French, Dutch, as in your own natural English, and
other languages, wherein your grace may be resembled not only to Tullie, and
Demosthenes, but to Mercury, the God of eloquence, as is apparent by your
Majesty's most apt and wise aunswers given in your own person to al
Ambassadors, and to every of them in their own natural language with a
singular dexterity and princely majesty, and with marvelous sweetness of
tongue. Nor because your grace is expert in song, and in the art of Music,
skilful in all kinds of musical instruments, and according to the exact
proportio^s of geometry exquisite in the measures of the dance: and besides
al these, embraced of Apollo, and his nine sisters, by whom your grace is so
instructed in the divine Art of Poetry, that you may woorthily be called the
second Sappho. Neither for your great skill and judgment in painting and
imagerie, both for the cunnyng of the workmanshyp and the devise and story.
In sum, perfect in all good exercises of the wit, namely the arts and
liberal sciences. Finally, not alonly for that nature of her bou^tie and
goodness has showed such grace and special favor toward you, by enduing
your grace most plentyfully with infinite graces and virtues more abundantly
than any other Prince or Princess in the world, so that it might serve me for
a sufficient argument to fill large volumes, only to stand in commendation of
your majesty, not annexing thereto any devise of mine own, of fained Emblemes
or Poetical fables, and that without using flattery or glosing, as they do
most commonly, that ambitiously seeking after prefermentes and honor, disguise
rather than describe noble and honorable personages, whom they set out many
times beyond al truth, yea sometime above measure, and with as great
inconueniencie as if they should paynt an Ass tuning of a harp. For I do not
account your grace happy for these alonely (though many and singular) gifts
and graces, which your grace enjoys in great plenty and abundance,
considering they be transitory, and can not make any man or woman happy
(albeit they seem divine and supernatural,) except they be accompanied with
the love and fear of God, according to the saying of King Lamuell, in the
third of the Proverbs: Favor is deceiuable, and Beauty a mere vanity, but
the woman that fears the Lord, is to be beloved. But chiefly and principally
when I consider that God intendyng to bestow an excellent benefit peculiarly
upon your Majesty more than upon any other Prince or Princess in the world,
has besides all the other forenamed his manifold gifts and graces, lightened
your understanding with his holy spirit, and has vouchesafed (by enclinyng
your graces heart, spirit and mind to humility, peace, mildness, and all
kind of louablenesse) to chose your majesty, especially to be his champion to
defend his beloved church. And in this respect, (like as all faithful and true
Christian princes throughout all Europe do esteem and repute you) do I also,
and that of good right call your grace a most happy and blessed Prince.
Consider I beseech you, how God has blessed your majesty in this world more
than he has done any of your progenitors. For never was it seen in any age
or time heretofore, that this your realm of England has flourished as it
does at this present under your Majesty's most happy government. First in
all kind of liberal Arts and sciences. Secondarily in the abundance of
treasure, as well gold and silver, as all sorts of rich and precious jewels
and ornaments. Thirdely, in the free passage and trafike of all kind of
merchandise: Besides this, in good and politic laws and ordinances, namely in
the due execution of justice, according to law and equity. The word of God is
purely preached here in six or seven languages. The Sacraments of Baptism, and
the holy Supper, sincerely ministered according to Christ's institution.
Christian discipline in due force in many places. Finally every country and
nation that will live here according to his holy word, is received, and
finds good entertainment. O how happy and blessed is that King or kingdom,
where these things are in force Contrariwise most unhappy are those princes,
that banishyng and rejecting Christ, receive that Antechrist, the son of the
Devil, and forsakyng the truth, embrace error: To be short, that do al things
ouerthwartly and clean against the hair For it is most certain and sure, that
sudden ruin and destruction shall fall upon all wicked and ungodly persons,
as well now as in time paste, as experience has well proved heretofore:
Namely upon Pharao, and his kingdom of Egypt, upon Jeroboam, Achab, Iezabell,
and infinite other mo. Where on the other part, the good kings and princes which
fear the Lord, shall have peace and comfort both in this world, and in the
world to come: Like as had Joshua, Judah, Gedeon, David and diverse other in
those days, and is also to be seen at this day most evidently in the realms
and countries under your Majesty's dominion, which God has blessed in such
sort, that it may truly be said, that the kingdom of Saturn, and the Golden
world is come again, and the Virgin Astrea is desscended from heaven to
build her a seat in this your most happy country of England. For here is
peace and quietness, where as the most part of foraine countries are full
of great tumultes, and that (more is the pity) with the sheding of much
christian blood. And where as many myghtie kings and potentates of the earth
have banded and conspired together, and fight every where against God his
anointed, and his holy church, bendyng their force utterly to deface his name,
his glory, and his Church: Almighty God of his divine providence has now
also in these days (like as he has in all ages heretofore) raised up diverse
good and godly princes and states, and provided certain places, whereto the
elect and faithful have resorted and been preserved, during the time of
persetion, to the end that his holy name might there be glorified, his word
purely and sincerely preached, and his Church dispersed, in a manner restored.
As it is also come to pass in these our most miserable days, in the which
such as syncerely love and esteem more derely the honor and glory of God
than they do their own commodities, ease, and welfare, (after the counsel of
Christ, saying in this wise: If they persecute you in one city, fly ye unto
an other) have been content to depart their own natural country, wholly to
forsake their lands, inheritances, possessions, and dwelling places, yea and
some also, to ^urre^der their offices, dignities, and worldly preferments. An
other sort with their wives children and parents are departed into Germany,
namely into the territory and dominion of Frederike prince Elector and cou^tie
Palatine, the flower of all Christian Princes in these days (that I know) in
the fervent zeal and true fear of God, a man worthy to be compared with
David, or Josias. Others are fled into other places elsewhere, some to one
country, some to an other, every one according to his ability, estate,
condition, and faculty. But we a number of us are arrived in saftie in this
your majesty's realm of England, as into a most safe and sure harborough,
where we live (God be thanked) under your Majesty's protection and safegarde in
great liberty to serve God in either language, the French or the Dutche,
without al fear of tyrants, or danger of the gapyng throats of greedy
ravening wolves. After the same manner has God in time past preserved and
delivered his elect out of the hands of their enemies and persecute^s by the
ministry of diverse virtuous women. As is to be seen in the.4. chapt. of the
book of Judges. How God delivered his people of Israel out of the hands of
Iabin king of Chanaan, by Debora the prophetess, by selling Sizara chief
captain of his army into the hand of a woman called Iahel. As he also
preserved David from the fury of Saul, by Mich^l Saul's own daughter. As he
delivered the citizens of Bethulia, from the tyranny of Holo^ernes, by the hand
of that most virtuous Lady Iudith^ And as the children of Israel, were saved
by the counsel of Mardocheus, at the insta^ce and request of the most gracious
and humble Hester^ where they were lately before in peril of death and present
destruction by the conspiracy of wicked Haman. The like has been brought to
pass by diverse other renoumed Ladies, whose fame shall endure for ever. And
surely the graces and mercies that God has showed to his afflicted church in
these later days by your majesty's means, ar no less tha^ those he has showed
tofore by the late rehearsed ladies: so that your grace deserves equal praise
and co^me^datio^ with them, considering with what ge^tlenesse and with how
loving and charitable affection you have received the poor scattered flock of
Christ. Is not your Majesty then to be esteemed infinitely more happy and
blessed that are so specially elect of god to serve him for such an instrument,
and in such a quarrel, and that maugre the beards of the enemies, being enraged
through the malice and obstinacy of their hearts do persecute the church of
God? Yes assuredly, most happy, christian, and virtuous princess, even in the
highest degree. How shall I be able then to express with tongue, or to endite
with pen your praises sufficiently? verily I am confounded and put to silence,
and do confess my self to be altogether insufficient. Wherefore (most gracious
Lady) I rest with my hearty and continual prayer unto God for your majesty,
that he turn not his face from you, but that it would please him to continue
and daily to increase his grace and favor toward you, and his holy spirit
within you, as also in and toward those that be of your Majesty's counsel,
and all other Magistrates and officers whatsoever having authority under your
highness within your majesty's realms and dominio^^^ that walking in the fear
and love of him they may do al their endeavor through the preaching of his holy
word to advance his holy name, and above al things especially to seek the
safety and weal of his church. And therefore for the great benefit and good
that God has don unto his church by means of your majesty (most gracious
prince) al true faithful whatsoever they be, as well strangers as your natural
subjects seek to do unto your majesty most faithful and honorable service,
according to their power. Besides, in all their asse^blies and in every
congregation they make their hearty and fervent prayers unto almighty God for
the health of your soul, the safeguard of your most royal person, and the
prosperous estate of your realm long to continue. And I especially for mine own
part, because I would not be unthankful for the great benefits I enjoy by your
grace, abiding under your majesty's protection (forasmuch as ingratitude is a a
most horrible and detestable vice) in consideration thereof (most gracious
Lady) I present your highness with this small Treatise of mine, as the best
Jewel that I have in store at this present, in signification of my good will,
and for declaration of my duty in this behalf, beseeching your highness
most humbly to accept it in good part as (considering your majesty's natural
bounty and your accustomed goodness) my trust is you will vouchsafe to do.
For I am persuaded (albeit the style be rude) that the matter shall be fit
for your Majesty to read, and that the same shall not be unpleasant unto you,
but minister unto your grace great occasion of much joy, peace, and
contentation of mind and conscience. And these be the causes and respects for
the which I presume to present the same to your majesty, in most humble manner
beseching your highness to accept the same, and praying to almighty God to
grant unto your Majesty a most happy reign in this world: and after this
life to reign with him for ever, for his only son our Lord Jesus Christ's
sake.

At London your Majesty's City and seat royal. The.25. of May.1569. Your
Majesty's most humble seruan^^ Iean vander Noodt.

BEing one day at my window all alone,
So many strange things happened me to see,
As much it grieueth me to think thereon.
At my right hand, a Hind appearde to me,
So fair as might the greatest God delight:
Two egre Dogs did her pursue in chase,
Of which the one was black, the other white.
With deadly force^ so in their cruel race
They pinchte the haunches of this gentle beast,
That at the last, and in short time, I spied,
Under a rock, where she (alas) oppressed,
Fell to the ground, and there untimely did.
Cruel death vanquishing so noble beauty,
Often makes me wail so hard a destiny.


AFter at Sea a tall Ship did appear,
Made all of Heben and white Iuorie,
The sails of Gold, of Silk the tackle were:
Mild was the wind, calm seemed the sea to be:
The Sky each where did show full bright and fair.
With rich treasures this gay ship fraighted was.
But sudden storm did so turmoyle the air,
And tombled up the sea, that she, alas,
Struck on a rock that under water lay.
O great misfortune, O great grief, I say,
Thus in one moment to see lost and drownde
So great riches, as like can not be found.


TH^n heavenly branches did I see arise,
Out of a fresh and lusty Laurel tree
Amidde the young grene wood. Of Paradise
Some noble plant I thought my self to see,
Such store of birds therein yshrouded were,
Chaunting in shade their sundry melody.
My sprites were ravished with these pleasures there^
While on this Laurel fixed was mine eye,
The Sky began every where to ouercast,
And darkened was the welkin all about,
When sudden flash of heavens fire outbrast,
And rent this royal tree quite by the root.
Which makes me much and ever to complain.
For no such shadow shall be had again.


WIthin this wood, out of the rock did rise
A Spring of water mildely romblyng down,
Whereto approached not in any wise
The homely Shepherde, nor the ruder cloune,
But many M^ses, and the Nymphs withal,
That sweetly in accord did tune their voice
Unto the g^ntle sounding of the waters fall.
The sight whereof did make my heart rejoice.
But while I took herein my chief delight,
I saw (alas) the gaping ^arth devour
The Spring, the place, and all clean out of sight.
Which yet agreues my heart even to this hour.


I Saw a Phoenix in the wood alone,
With purple wings and crest of golden hew,
Strange bird he was, whereby I thought anon,
That of some heavenly wight I had the view:
Until he came unto the broken tree
And to the spring that late devoured was.
What say I more? Each thing at length we see
Does pass away: the Phoenix there, alas,
Spying the tree destroyde, the water dride,
Himself smote with his beak, as in disdain,
And so forthwith in great despite he did.
For pity and love my heart yet burns in paine^


AT last so fair a Lady did I spy,
That in thinking on her I burn and quake,
On herbs and flowers she walked pensiuely.
Mild, but yet love she proudely did forsake.
White seemed her robes, yet wouen so they were,
As snow and gold together had been wrought.
Above the waste a dark cloud shrouded her,
A stinging Serpent by the heel her caught,
Wherewith she languisht as the gathered flower:
And well assurde she mounted up to joy.
Alas in earth so nothing does endure
But bitter grief that does our hearts anoy.


MY Song thus now in thy Conclusions.
Say boldly that these same six visions
Do yield unto thy lord a sweet request,
Ere it be long within the earth to rest.
IT was the time when rest the gift of God^
Sweetly sliding into the eyes of men,
Does drown in the forgetfulness of slepe^
The careful travails of the painful day:
Then did a ghost appear before mine eyes
On that great rivers bank that runs by Rome^
And calling me then by my propre name,
He bade me upward unto heaven look.
He cride to me, and lo (quod he) behold,
What under this great Temple is containde,
Lo all is naught but flying vanity.
So I knowing the worlds unsteadfastness,
Since only God surmountes the forc^ of time,
In God alone do stay my confidence.
ON hill, a frame an hundred cubits hie
I saw, an hundred pillars eke about,
All of fine Diamant decking the front,
And fashiond were they all in Dorike wi^e.
Of brick, ne yet of marble was the wall,
But shining Crystal, which from top to base
Out of deep vaute threw forth a thousand rays
Upon an hundred steps of purest gold.
Gold was the parget: and the sielyng eke
Did shine all scaly with fine golden plates.
The floor was laspis, and of Emeraude.
O worlds vainenesse. A sodein earthquake lo,
Shaking the hill even from the bottom deep,
Threw down this building to the lowest stone.


THen did appear to me a sharped spire
Of diamant, ten feet each way in square,
Justly proportionde up unto his height,
So hie as might an Archer reach with sight.
Upon the top thereof was set a pot
Made of the metal that we honor most.
And in this golden vess^ll couched were
The ashes of a mighty Emperor.
Upon four corners of the base there lay
To bear the frame, four great Lions of golden
A worthy tomb for such a worthy corpse.
Alas, naught in this world but grief endures.
A sudden tempest from the heaven, I saw,
With flushe stroke down this noble monument.


I Saw raisde up on pillars of Iuorie,
Whereof the bases were of richest gold,
The chapters Alabaster, Crystal frises,
The double front of a triumphall arc.
On each side portraide was a victory.
With golden wings in habit of a Nymph.
And set on hie upon triumphing chair,
The ancient glory of the Roman lords.
The work did show it self not wrought by man
But rather made by his own skillful hand
That forgeth thunder darts for Jove his sire.
Let me no more see fair thing under heaven,
Since I have seen so fair a thing as this,
With sudden falling broken all to dust.


THen I beheld the fair Dodonian tree,
Upon seven hills throw forth his gladsome shad^,
And Conquer^rs bede^ked with his leaves
Along the banks of the Italian stream.
There many ancient Trophies were erect,
Many a spoil, and many goodly signs.
To show the greatn^sse of the stately race^
That erst descended from the Trojan blo^d.
Ravished I was to see so rare a thing,
When barbarous villains in disordred heap.
Outraged the honor of these noble bows.
I heard the tronke to groan under the wedge.
And since I saw the root in hie disdain
Send forth again a twinne of forked trees.


I Saw the bird^ that dares behold the Sun,
With feeble flight venture to mount to heaven,
By more and more she began to trust her wings,
Still following the example of her damme:
I saw her rise, and with a larger flight
Surmount the tops even of the hiest hills,
And pierce the clouds, and with her wings to reach
The place where is the temple of the Gods,
There was she lost, and suddenly I saw
Where tombling through the air in lompe of fire,
All flaming down she fell upon the plain.
I saw her body turned all to dust,
And saw the foul that shunnes the cherefull light
Out of her ashes as a worm arise.


THen all astonned with this nightly ghost,
I saw an hideous body big and strong,
Long was his beard, and side did hang his hair^
A grisly forehed and Saturnelike face.
Leaning against the belly of a pot
He shed a water, whose outgushing stream
Ran flowing all along the creekie sh^are
Where once the Troyan Duke with Turnus fought.
And at his f^ete a bitch Wol^e did give suck
To two young babes. In his right hand he bare
The tree of peace, in left the conquering Palme^
His head was garnisht with the Laurel bow.
Then suddenly the Palm^ and Olive fell,
And fair green Laurel witherd up and did^.


Hand by a rivers side, a wailing Nimph^,
Folding her arms with thousand sighs to heaven
Did tune her plaint to falling rivers sound,
Renting her fair visage and golden hair,
Where is (quod she) this whilome honored face?
Where is thy glory and the ancient praise,
Where all worlds hap was reposed,
When erst of Gods and man I worshipped was?
Alas, suffisde it not that civil bate
Made me the spoil and booty of the world,
But this new Hydra mete to be assailde
Even by an hundred such as Hercules,
With seven springing heds of monstrous crimes,
So many Neroes and Caligula^s
Must still bring ^orth to rule this crooked shore.


Upon a hill I saw a kindled flame,
Mounting like waves with triple point to heaven
Which of incense of precious Ceder tree
With Balm^like odor did perfume the air.
A bird all white, well fetherd on her wings
Hereout did sly up to the throne of Gods,
And singing with most pleasant melodi^
She climbed up to heaven in the smoke.
Of this fair fire the fair di^persed rays
Threw forth abroad a thousand shining leames,
When sudden dropping of a golden shoure
Began quench the glystering flame. O grievous change!
That which erstwhile so pleasant scent did ^elde,
Of Sulphur now did breathe corrupted smell.


I Saw a fresh spring rise out of a rock,
Clear as Crystal against the Sunny beams,
The bottom yellow like the sh^ning land,
That golden Pactol drives upon the plain.
It seemed that art and nature striued to join
There in one place all pleasures of the eye.
There was to hear a noise alluring sleep
Of many accordes more sweet than Mermaids song,
The seats and benches shone as Iuorie,
An hundred Nymphs sat side by side about,
When from nie hills a naked rout of Faunes
With hideous cry assembled on the place,
Which with their feet unclean the water fouled,
Threw down the seats, and drove the Nimphs to flight^


AT length, even at the time when Morpheu^
Most truly does appear unto our eyes,
Weary to see th'inconstance of the heavens:
I saw the great Typhaeus sister come,
Her head full bravely with a morian armed,
In majesty she seemde to match the Gods.
And on the shore, hard by a violent stream,
She raisde a Trophee over all the world.
An hundred vanquished kings gronde at her feet,
Their arms in shameful wise bound at their backs.
While I was with so dreadful sight afraid,
I saw the heavens war against her tho,
And seeing her stricken fall with clap of thunder,
With so great noise I start in sudden wonder.


I Saw an ugly beast come from the sea,
That seven heads, ten crounes, ten horns did beare^
Having thereon the vile blaspheming name.
The cruel Leopard she resembled much:
Feet of a bear, a Lions throat she had.
The mighty Dragon gave to her his power.
One of her heads yet there I did epsy,
Still freshly bleeding of a grievous wound.
One cride aloude. What one is like (quod he)
This honored Dragon, or may him withstand?
And then came from the sea a savage beast,
With Dragons speech, and shewde his force by fire^
With wondrous signs to make all wights adore
The beast, in setting of her image up.


I Saw a Woman sitting on a beast
Before mine eyes, of Orange color hew:
Horror and dreadful name of blasphemy
Filde her with pride. And seven heads I saw^
Ten horns also the stately beast did bear.
She seemde with glory of the s^arlet fair,
And with fine perle and gold puffed up in heart.
The wine of hooredome in a cup she bare.
The name of Mystery writ in her face.
The blood of Martyrs dear were her delight.
Most fierce and f^ll this woman seemde to me.
An Angel then des^ending down from Heaven.
With thondring voice cride out aloude, and said,
Now for a truth great Babylon is fallen.


THen might I see upon a white horse set
The faithful man with flaming countenance,
His head did shine with crounes set thereupon.
The word of God made him a noble name.
His precious robe I saw embrued with blood.
Then saw I from the heaven on horses white,
A puissant army come the self same way.
Then cried a shining Angel as me thought,
That birds from air descending down on earth
Should war upon the kings, and eat their flesh.
Then did I see the beast and Kings also
Ioinyng their force to slay the faithful man.
But this fierce hateful beast and all her train.
Is pitilesse thrown down in pit of fire.


I Saw new Earth, new Heaven, said Saint John.
And lo, the sea (quod he) is now no more.
The holy City of the Lord, from hye
Descends garnisht as a loved spouse.
A voice then said, behold the bright abode
Of God and men. For he shall be their God.
And all their tears he shall wipe clean away.
Her brightness greater was than can be found.
Square was this City, and twelve gates it had.
Each gate was of an orient perfect pearl,
The houses gold, the pauement precious stone.
A lively stream, more clear than Christ all is,
Ran through the mid, sprung from triumphant s^^^.
T^ere grows life's fruit unto the Churches good.


A BRIEF DEclaration of the Author upon his visions, taken out of the holy
scriptures, and diverse Orators, Poets, Philosophers, and true histories.
Translated out of French into English by Theodore Roest.
WAying and considering that many which are grieved and sore vexed in their
minds, grudgyng, and leding an unquiet life, do not only for the most part,
mislike of their own estate and calling, but enuiously (such is our frailty)
go about to enter into other men^ lyuings, so that now a days the fewest number
of men are contented with their vocation and calling, whereof we have daily too
too much experience. As for example: Many soldiers desire to be merchants:
again many merchants love warfare, for all that they (...) what inconveniences
follow oftentimes^ Lawyers would be husba^dmen: agayn^ men of the country
commend the voca^tion of Judges. Many married folks would be unmarried, other not
married, and single persons travail to be. Poor men covet to be rich, the
rich desires more and more, and every man labors to advance him self. A
knight or a gentleman would gladly be some great Lord, or Earl. An Earl
looks to be a Duke, or prince, a Duke or prince seeks to become King. A King
(contentyng himself yet least) studieth by what means he may amplify his
realm, and join unto it towns, cities, and countries, so to increase his
dominions daily, that at length he might attain to the Monarchy of all
Europe, and then to become Lord of the whole world. Briefly, the hearts of
carnal and voluptuous men are never at rest, have never enough, but be driven
by the means of concupiscence, which reigns in them, always to be careful,
to watch, to toil and moyle, to wish, to mistrust, to sue and busily to be
occupied. For an ambitious and covetous carnal person is never contented with
that he has: for if he have been busy but ten days for that he has, he will
not refuse to work ten times ten other to attain to that which he desires
and gapeth for^ although it be not pro^^table, either for body or soul. This
time of our pilgrimage is granted of God to learn to know him, to serve and
honor him, to laud and magnify his name, to put our whole confidence in him,
to lead our life according to his blessed will, and to seek our whole
felicity and blessedness only in him. Finally, to acknowledge (without the
which also the condition of man is worse tha^ is of brute beasts) with heart
and tongue al goodness to proceed of him. This time (I say) for this purpose
given unto us, those me^ aforesaid, consume and spend in unquietness, to the
service of wicked Mammon, and other unlawful and greedy desires of earthly
and transitory riches, losing and forgoing thereby the joy and quietness of
the spirit and conscience, and most of al, true christian liberty. Wherefore
with all right they may be compared to the Dog, whereof Esope speaks, which
going over a bridge with bread in his mouth, and spying his shadow in the
water, thought to have seen some other Dog with a greater piece of bread in
his mouth: wherefore, enticed by glutt^ny and envy, he let fall that that he
had, and snatchyng after his shadow, was fowly deceived of al. In like manner I
say, happens to those that are so wholly given and addicted unto those worldly
and transitory riches, that notwithstanding they see them to be but vain and
idle, yet do they prefer them above the perpetual and heavenly. I put case
there were an image made of clay, outwardly decked and laid over with gold
very finely, but thinly, that it might seem to be altogether of the fynest and
purest gold that can be, so that every man would travail and end^uor to get
it to him self: one coming, breaks a little piece of it, and so by that
means the^ hidden deceipte being known, I doubt whether any would be so
foolish as to make much a do about a thing so vile and unprofitable, but that
he would bestow^ his time to a far better use. Therefore (hopyng to move
such as do understand a right how deceitful worldly things be, to avoid them
the rather, and to couete after the eternal and everlasting) I have thought it
good, so compendiously as possibly I may, to show how vain, transitory,
deceitful, unprofitable, and uncertain worldly things be, and that heavenly
things only are everlasting, immortal, excellent, good, and most to be desired,
even as God him self is the fountain of all goodness, and perfect in all
things which can be desired, yea more a great deal than our understanding is
able to utter or to comprehend: to this end and purpose, that men conuertyng
unto the Lord, in him only seeking their whole salvation and perfect bliss,
might lead their life patiently with a good conscience in all quietness of
mind and spirit, and so to enjoy the true christian liberty and spiritual
gladness here in this world, that in the world to come they might be
inheritours (by grace) of the everlasting joys in eternal glory, purchased
thorough the blood of our Savior Jesus Christ. But before we enter any
farther to speak of the vanities of worldly and transitory Richesse, I will
warn thee (gentle Reader) that when I speak of substance, riches, estates,
bodily health, of wife and children, and other like, which all are the good
gifts of God, I mean not in respect of the thing it self, nor yet the good
use of the same, (for in it is no such default,) but only I mean the great
abuse which commonly is seen in the unnatural and unbridled desire, whereunto
rich and worldly men ar inclined. Saint Augustine speaking of the nature of the
thing, affirms, that health, strength, riches, grace, nobleness, a fair
and good wife, propre children, friends, power, and other like, they are
things naturally indifferent, whereof a man may reap good or evil. Even so
says S. Ambrose, that then they are good and profitable when they are well
used, otherwise hurtful, yea dampnable, when the use of them exc^edeth the
lymits of reason and equity, and rules of Gods holy word. Neither mean I to
touch those that are rich, or have great possessions: but those only which are
possessed of their goods, whose money is their master, them (I say) which
are of the propretie and nature of one named Gallio, which as Seneca reherseth,
Seneca in the treatise of the happ^ life. 22. Ch^^
was not master of his goods, but he him self was subject unto them, that
is to say, he was a bond slave, and did serve unto the occasions of evil,
which came unto him by his own goods. Also I will speak of the love,
confidence and inordinat lust, and of the chasyng and puttyng away of virtue
and godliness, and the going astray from God, dependyng upon his creatures,
yea upon vanity it self. Which most of all comes to pass by the means of
worldely substance, and the greedy desire of the same, the very r^ote of all
evil: For they reduce men from true liberty to thraldom, and turn freedom
into slavery, pleasures into miseries, honor, and promotion into subjection
and perpetual shame and confusion. This if we considered, it should not give us
occasion to set by them as we do, but rather to abhor and hate them, and be
moved to follow the counsel of David: ^salm. 62.
When riches abound set not thy heart upon them. Considering then the nature
and condition of wor^dly things, which if they we^e not of them selves most
miserable, yet is there not any thing in them that justly might be called ours,
unless it be vain and idle. For though riches or authority ill gotten and
unjustly possessed, make the possessor as it were happy: yet (as Plato says)
vain and idle things can not give any felicity or happiness. Lib. 5. de
leg^bus.
They seem well to be riches, but even as po^ertie consists not either in
small possessions, or lackyng of any thing, otherwise than in the greedy
desire or insatiable covetousness, even so riches consyst not in having of
goods or great possessions, but in the co^tentation of the mind. Whereunto
Seneca agrees very well, saying: Epist. 20.
He is great, who of riches makes none other account, than if he possessed
none at all. But (says he) he that has none, is of a more assurance, and more
free from all danger. For it is impossible (as the common proverb goth) that
the mouse touching the pitche or other glue, should escape, without he be
either caught, or at the least defiled with it. Homel. 21, super Mar^
To this end and purpose Chrysostom aduouched, that temporal and worldly
honor and dignity convey men into diverse and sundry kinds of wantonness and
other inconveniences. It is requisite therefore, that such as are enriched and
come to great estate, be endued with singular virtues and great constancy, if
they will not be overcome or defiled with them. For authority ingendreth
arrogancy, temeritie and contempt^ of other, and commonly enticeth men to
hastiness and ire, yea and drowneth them in a whole mass of iniquity, even
as a great tempest ouerwhelmeth a little bote. It makes them proud, and their
minds to wander so far, that they can not consider their way, but go quite
otherwise than they be aware of: And thynking to avoid troubles and miseries,
they entangle themselves the more in it, much like unto the Hare, who being
caught in the net, the more he struggleth, the faster he makes him self, and
procures his own death, and as the small bird caught on the lime twig, the
more it flyttereth, the faster it makes it self. They seem to seek in none
other thing any felicity or blessedness than in worldly prosperity, which
consists in good fortune of riches, honors, and great estimations,
voluptuousness and other like, esteemyng themselves most happy, and as to
have found the right way unto Salvation. But like as a droncken man is not
able to find the way homewarde, nor yet to go vprighte, even so they wander
and err here and there, being overcome of many and diverse kinds of l^stes and
desires of worldly and transitory goods, and can not once come to the way of
true riches, of everlasting goods and felicity. This is that, which Plato
speaks of, ^ib. 10. de ^^ipub.
when he says: How can a man be rich that occupies nothing else than vile
and corruptible trashe? Or how can he be happy by transytorie goods? What
salvation is there in unprofitable and vain worldely Riches? Seeing there is
neither good honor nor estymation but in GOD only, and without him being
neither life, felicity or Salvation, he then that will be happy indeed,
continually must search after that, which is only everlasting and perfect,
and avoid and ^lee al superfluity and abundance of temporal riches.
Therefore says Christ unto Martha: Luke.1
Thou carest and are troubled about many things, but one thing is necessary
(to have quietness) Mary has chosen the best part (which is that one)
which shall not be taken from her. Hereby shows Christ unto us, that it is
not good to be musyng and studying upon worldely affairs, wherein is nothing
else but trouble and unquietness of mind, but that we should lay up our
treasure in Heaven, which is the surest way: for true and heavenly riches do
rejoice and comfort the spirits without any carfulness or distress: but
goods and riches of this world bring with them great pains and troubles, as
well in the getting as in keepyng of the^, as Tullie reherseth in his Paradoxes,
saying: Riches and great estimation with great pain and travail gotten, are
with much more and greater care maintained and kept. Therefore says Iuuenal,
^ty. 14.
that the keeping of tresure and much goods is but misery and wretchedness.
When the rustical mouse (as Esope reherseth) did understand the perils and
dangers, wherein the Town mouse was daily, he said (as they were in bankettyng)
that such abundance or superfluity was more lyker poison or gall than
dayntinesse. So we might say of riches and great possessions, wherabout are so
many and great dangers, that it is not possible for a rich and worldely man
to escape any one of them. For as our Savior Christ says: ^ath. 19.
It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a nedle, than for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of god. Riches and authority engender labor
and pain, and make a man like unto a Squirell, which running to and fro in
cage, ^urneth oftentimes his wheel, but howsoever he toyleth and trauaileth,
it avails him nothing. Also it makes a man much like unto one named Ixion,
who was made fast to a wheel turning continually, because he was amorous of
Juno, a goddess (as Poets do feign) of realms, highness, and powers, which
Ixion, when he saw a cloud somewhat like Juno, took it for her, but he being
deceived, embraced nothing else but vapor and smoke. Which fable also notes
unto us the vanity, unprofitableness and wretchedness of the ambitious
covetous men which worship the shadow instead of the true thing, and in the
place of good and sure things choose changeable and uncertain. The same Ixion
was he, which engendered the Centaures, half men, half horses, after him
named Ixionides. Here is also to be considered, that the couetou^ and ambitious
persons are of the same condition, which being past al reason, turn their
human nature into mere beastlynesse, and like unbroken and wyld colts, ^trike
out on every side, hurtyng and vppressing almost every body. Lib. Ethi. ca. 13.
and li. 10. ^^p. 8.
Aristotle describing an happy and blessed man, would not he should be rich
to be such a one. Riches are Sophistries of goods wherewith that great
Sophister the devil does deceive the s^^ple and silly soul. For even as a
Sophister seems through his science to be wise, and is not in deed, even so
riches have a semblant of bounty and virtue, where in deed they are farthest
from all. ^n hi^. 5. ser^on of the ^orde of God.
S. Augustine has a goodly saying very apt to the purpose: He is wicked (says
he) which esteems riches to be good. Great rentes or revenues, dignities and
good fortune, keep men company only their life time, but at the hour of
death, yea and oftentimes before, they leave and forsake their possessours and
lovers. Fortune is worthy to be named Plagaria, and is called so of the
learned, after one named Plagarius, which brought unto servitude and thraldom,
such as were fre^ before. Likewise fortune and riches makes men very slaves,
misers, and cowards, full of cares and mistrustfulnesse, yea she makes some to
be like unto ye Dog that will suffer none to have part of the bon^ which he
picketh at. Some other become thorough riches, like unto the Dragon which kept
the Golden apples of the Orchard of Hesperide, whereof he himself had no
commodity, n^yther suffered any other to enjoy any part of it. In his apology.
ca. 29
Tertullian says, that riches resemble and are much like unto the Apples of
Sodom and Gomorre, which seemed goodly and fair to the eye, but being once
touched, fell and straightway turned into dust and ashes. This worldely
prosperity and estimation abasheth not only the simple and silly souls, but
eu^n casts down and subdueth many learned and wise men. Math. 1^.
Mark.4.
They are thorns that hinder the good seed of Gods word to grow and
fructify. Luke.8.
Exodus 32.
The children of Israel forsook GOD for Goldes sake, and fell a worshipping of
the golden calfe, which being consumed by fire, was made to be a drink, and
ever since gold has been as it were in contempt, In his apology. ca. 2^.
and very meet for the fire, as Tertullian does affirm. And what
covetousness and ambition has brought to pass since the Apostles time,
shall somewhat be spoken of in his place. Abac. 3.
Riches (says Abacuck the Prophet) are thick and filthy mire. Chrysostom.
It is dong wherein worms. etc. And Crates the Phisopher understanding what
great enormities and inconveniences follow of covetousness and des^re of
money, says: In his book of the ornaments of women.
O thou hurtful and damnable covetousness, avoid from me, I shall drown thee
least thou ouerwhelme me. Mart. where he disputes that no man comes in
trouble but by himself.
Martial testifies, that it is not possible to be rich like Croesus, and
religious like Numa. I made a good and prosperous voyage (said the Philosopher
Zeno) when I had lost al. Riches are copwebs, smoke hurtful to the eye, which
soon alter, vanish, and come to nothing. 1. Tim 6.
Proverb. 23.
Math. 13.
They that would be rich fall into diverse and sundry tentations and snares of
the devil, and other foolish and noisome desires and lusts, which drown men
into perdition, for covetousness is the root of all evil. The Fool
dispraiseth things that be, as though they were not: again, In his H^^^^o^^e.
other that be not in deed, he desires, as if they were. Damascene says:
Things that be, are everlasting, and unchangeable: but things that are not, be
worldly and transitory. Earthy and transitory things are like unto a cloud
painted on a wall, which seems to be some thing, where as it is nothing: as
a fool follows the shadow of a ca^dle, thynking it to be some body, even so
does the carnal and voluptuous man follow and pursue the earthly trashe instead of heavenly treasures. These men I say, are like unto the frantike man,
Li. ^. epistola^u^. Epi. 2.
whereof Horace makes mention, which supposed to have seen a trim play, where
he heard goodly songs and pleasant melodies, and thought him self to have
been in all kind of voluptuousness: and although it was nothing but his
fancy, yet it was pleasant unto him: but this man being thorough the
diligence of friends, delivered of his phrenesie, and rest^red to his health,
found him self frustrate of that which he in his disease persuaded him self
to have had. Even so it goth with the worldely man, whom Christ answers,
saying: Luke.12.
Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be taken away from thee, then whose
shall those things be, which thou haste provided? Even so it is with those that
lay up tresure for them selves here, and be not rich in God: As if one should
say with the Prophet David, Psalm. 38.
The rich of this world are rich in their own conceits, but when they shall
perceive it (as it is in deed) after they are gone out of this world, they
shall find them selves wholly destitute and naked of all. As for great estates,
dignities and authorities in commonweals, Plutarke reherseth, Of the life of
Demos^.
that the most famous Orator Demosthenes was wont to admonish young me^ which
resorted unto him, that they should not hunte after promotion dignity or
great office, saying unto them in this manner: If there were two ways laid
before thee, whereof the one should lie unto death, and the other unto
promotion and admynistration of a Common wealth, and it were known what
troubles, pains and grie^es, iealousies, suspicions, envy, publyke and pryuie
hate, backbytinges and Sclaunders, noise and Dyssentions are enclosed there,
men would rather choose the way unto Death, than the other. Li. 8. de
^^^nita. cap. 85.
Wherefore Saint Augustine says: He which seeks after promotion or
authority is separated from God, not because of the diversity of the degrees
or estates, but of the desire which proceeds of ambition. They take pains to
advance themselves temporally, but forgo a gain perpetual.

The Gyauntes (as it is said) b^yng affectioned to reign unto heaven, ^ayde
Mountains one upon an other to ascend up thither, but all in vain, falling
at length headlong downewarde themselves. They are (as Saint Ambrose says)
like unto those which would by the ladder of Worldly honor cl^mbe into Heaven.
Saint Cyprian testifies, In his bok^ of Noe and the A^ke.
saying: That which thou thynkest to be authority and power, is poison ^ydden
under a fair show, a^^ misery under a costly cover. Whereby S. Austine says,
Epist. 2. li^ E^^s^o.
that the more a man is lifted up in authority the greater danger he is in.
Upon the 106. psalm
A^istophanes ye Poet describes and sets forth ye god of riches (which they
call Plutus) to be fearful, and to trust no man, because that riches and
promotions make men to do so, and that because of the great danger they be in
continually. For to get goods every one looks abroad: The thief lies in
wait to steal: the crafty merchant, the dissembling lawyer, by guile and
subtlety to deceive: Children and other that be inheritors, wish the death of
their parents and friends, to possess their goods. Other ambitious persons do
long for the death of such as are in office, that they might enjoy their
places: Promoters and other officers search and seek narowly to find any
occasion to make the goods forfaite. Whereby Iuuenal says: Sa^y. 10.
Riches gotten by great care and labor, choke and kill oftentimes their
possessor: whereunto he alleged many ensamples. Seneca confirms also: That as
wild beasts or fishes are caught by the false hope of a dainty morsel, in
snares and hooks: Even so (says he) are men by the vain trust of the gyfts
of Fortune, which in deed ought not to be called gifts, but rather deceytfull
shifts, yea snares and dangerous rocks. Consider I pray you, how many we see
go to wrack both bodily and spiritually, temporally and everlastingly. How
many realms and countries have been subverted and cast vpside downward? What
tirannie or cruelty has not been showed? What robberies both upon sea and
land? what peri^ries, murders, pilling and pollyng, viol^nce and force,
inceste, and all kinds of myschieues are not committed of the greedy and
insa^iable desire to attain to riches and estimation? yea of the most puissant
kings and mighty men, which Daniell called Treasurers. Daniell.11.
And what shall we say then of worldely love and carnal concupiscence? Also of
the passions and unnatural affections which thence ensue? Plato says, that
Love at the beginning, gives some sweetness, but in the end engenders one
mischief upon an other. Love is the first which has found out, and brought
forth the sundring and renting of the heart, and troubling of the spirit. And
these things followyng, proceed from carnal love, to wete, car^, sorrows and
griefs, weakness of the brains, Com^ed. ^^rcat.
curiousness in apparel, madness, dreams, thoughts and sighyng, calamities,
errors, anguish, unquietness, trouble, foolishness, vncomlynesse,
wantonness, mystrustfulnesse, jealousy, and other like. Men (I say) are
entangled in these by love, even as Ulysses fellows, which thorough the
melody and sweet songs of the Syrenes would abide in Afrike, forgetting
themselves and their native country. Love makes a man out of his wits, and
clean beside him self, it casts him backewarde, and seduceth him thorough
sweetness and flattery, it counsels nothing according unto reason and
equity, but leads unto al enormities, it robs a man of all temperancie,
it is like to a hook which plucketh all manner of things unto it, it is a soft
enemy, sweet sorrow, and sad gladness. Love makes men slaves, and
divides them from themselves. He is hurt grievously, and utterly perished
which falls in love, it is insatiable, never saying it is enough. Terence
says that it seduceth and leads out of the way, even those that se^, and
the^ that are learned and wise. ^e is happy, that by other men's example will
take warnyng, and through the spectacle of others fall, wareth wise. ^riefly,
all and every kind of evil proceeds of those three with their adherentes,
wherewith the whole world is polluted, as witnesses saint John in his
Canonical ^pistles, saying: Love not the world, neither the things that are
in the w^rlde: If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in
him. For all that (says he) which is in the world, is the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of ly^e, is not of the father, but of the world, and the world
passes away, and the lusts thereof, but he that fulfylleth the will of God
abides for ever.

Touching which three ^ices I might rehearse of all sorts of people more than
ten thousand examples. Whereof some (I speak but temporally, and not of
matters concerning the soul) have lost their money, goods, and estymation,
some their friends, liberty, life and goods. But what need I to spend my
time, and to trouble my brains about it. Al books, whether they speak of the
Assyrians, Egiptians, Persians, or Medians, Grecians, or Jews, Romans, or
other countries, are full of it. Whereof read Diodorus Siculus, Josephus,
Plutarch, Titus Liuius, and diverse other historiographers, which have written
until our age and time, and we shall find that all kind of evil, at the
least comes out of one of these three, and daily we find it by good
experience, that al mischief springs out of these, yea even in such as had
incorporated and joined them selves to the church of Christ, foreseyng
persecution, crosses, and tribulations to ensue thereby, and by and by for fear
of a little loss of worldly goods, commodities, honors, or otherwise,
forsook and turned again like the dog to their vomit, and like the sow,
after she has washed her self, to her puddle and mire. And to set the
vanity and inconstancy of worldly and transitory things, liuelier before
your eyes, I have brought in in here twenty sightes or vysions, and caused
them to be graven, to the end al men may see that with their eyes, which I go
about to express by writing, to the delight and ^lesure of the eye and ears,
according unto the saying of Horace.

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci.
That is to say, He that teaches pleasantly and well,
Does in each point all others excel.
Of which our visions the learned Poet M. Francisce Petrarche Gentleman of
Florence, did invent and write in Tuscan the six first, after such time as
he had loved honestly the space of.xxj. years a fair, gracious, and a noble
Damsel, named Laurette, or (as it plesed him best) Laura, borne of Auinion,
who afterward happened to die, he being in Italy, for whose death (to show his
great grief) he mourned ten years together, and amongst many of his songs and
sorrowful lamentations, devised and made a Ballade or song, containyng the said
visions, which because they serve well to our purpose, I have out of the
Brabants speech, turned them into the English tongue.

The first then is: That he being upon a day alone in his window, where he saw
as it were in his mind by a vysion a very fair hin^, and also two swift
hounds, one white and the other black chasing and pursuing ^ir so long, that
at length they caught and killed her. Which sight caused him to burst out into
sighs and tears for the piteous destiny thereof: That is, for the appointed
time of ye death of his love Laura, w^iche he meant by the fair hi^de, as by
the hounds white and black he understood the day and night, meaning the time
passing away, and not tarying for any one.

Moreover, he saw a fair ship or vessel made of yuorie and Hebene wood,
whereunto also he compared his love Laura, to wete her white colored face unto
Iuorie, and her blackishe brows much like unto the wood of Hebene. The
coardes and ropes were of Sylke, and the sails of cloth of gold, whereby are
meant not only all her costely rayement or app^rell, but also her noble and
excellent virtues wherewith she was beautified and adorned.

Again, he saw a new bushe out of a fair Laurel tree, Holly bows buddyng
forth, under whose shadow little small birds did sing, with a very sweet
and melodious harmony: Understandyng hereby, her loving and courteous talk,
her most pleasant and sweets song. And by and by he saw the lyghtenyng and
tempest to wyther and dry up this fair and goodly Tree. That is, that a
burning sickness came, which took away the life of this fair damsel his
love Laura.

The other three Uisions followyng, are in manner all one, notyfiing hereby
that there is nothing else in this world but myseries, sorrows, afflictions,
and calamities: And all that man does stay him self upon in this world, is
nothing but vain fancy, wind, and smoke. And thus as he had passed over
many a year in great and unfeigned love toward her (during her life time)
what with flattery and what in commendyng of her beauty, caused him upon a
sudden change after her departure (as it is said) so long a time to mourn
and to lamente, but considering with him self, that th^re was no comfort, hope
or salvation in ^orldely love to be looked for, ^urn^d himself to Godwarde,
lamenting and sorrowing the rest of his life, and repen^ed him of his former
life so ydlely and indecently spent.

The other ten visions next ensuing, ar described of one Ioachim du Bellay,
Gentleman of France, the which also, because they serve to our purpose, I have
translated them out of Dutch into English.

First of all, he speaks of a certain Architecture or kind of buildyng,
gorgeously and magnificentlike made, as you may see more plainly in the seventh
figure of our visions. Secondly he saw a spire, thirdely an Arc triumphant.
And then the Dodonian tree, spreading his shadow upon seven hills, namely upon
the hill of Palatine, the h^ll Capitolie, the mount Vimiall, the mount Cely,
Esquilin, Vimiel, and Quirinel. After that, the bird which is able to behold
the Sun, that is the Eagle imperial: and the great Statue, whom he saw
leaning on a stone pitcher, whereout runn^th a great water, whereby he means
the river of Tyber, with ye she wolf, giving suck to two children, which is
the Arms of the Romans. The seventh is a Nymph mournyng and wringyng of her
hands. Eighthly, a three flaming fire, wherout a bird flushing mounted on hie.
Ninthly, a fair spring, and a hundredth Nymphs round about it, unto whom
came the Faunes, which brake the Fountain, and drove them away. Last of all,
he tells of Typheus daughter, which after her great presumption and pride
was vanquished and slain. With all these he goes about to persuade, that all
things here upon earth, are nothing but wretched misery, and miserable
vanity, showing also how Rome has been destroyed, which of a base and low
estate was lifted up, and become very hie, and that by none other means than
covetousness and the great desire which that people and nation had to money
and Ambition, that is, to be reg^rded, and to have authority and rule
following the nature and condition of their progenitors and Predecessoures
Romulus and Remus, which were (as histories do tell,) nourished and brought up
of a she wolf, called Lupa. Out of whose breasts they have sucked all manner
of cruelty and beastlynesse, gettyng so unto themselves a woluish courage, yea
worse than a Wolf, as Mithridates King of Ponte cast them in the teeth,
because they were never satisfied of blood, honor, dignities, and riches, but
always endeavored them selves to get other princes, nations, countries and
Cities, goods and dominions, whervppon followed the oppression of other
nations, through many great robberies, with great labor and pain, yea to the
peril and loss of their own men and Capitains, and so amplified and
augmented above mesure their empires, realms, and domynions, stuffed and
furnyshed their City with abundaunce of all manner of riches, whereupon did
ensue all kind of sup^r^^uitie and worldely pompousnesse. So that they adorned
their City with all manner of sumptuous an^ costely buyldings, with all kinds
of curious an^ cunning works, as Theaters, Triumphall Arkes, Pyramedes,
Columns, Spires, and a great number of graven Images, Statues, Medalles and
Figures, made of diverse and sundry kinds of stuff, as Marble, Alablaster,
Gold, Silver, Copper, Pourphere, Emplaster, Brass and other like metal,
some graven, and other some cast. All which sumptuousness and superfluity
has oftentimes thoroughe dissension, discord and sedition amongst them
selves, also by their enemies privy conspiracy, hate, and particular profit,
and by childish and folish counsel, ben to their great hinderaunce and damage.
As it is to be seen in their own Histories. And as they proceeded in all
wickedness, abomination, superstition, and Idolatry from time to time, even
so after that CHRIST our Savior, and King of al Kings was crucified under
Pylate, president of Jerusalem, they ceased not daily to kill the poor
Christians, persecutyng the church of God in all places, by all kind of cruelty
and tyranny, especially in the time of Nero, Domitian, Traian, Aurelian,
Dioclesian, Maxence, and other like, because they would not observe and keep
their false and superstitious worshyppyng of God, but rather rebuked them, and
proved theirs to be false. And forasmuch as that ancient Rome would not amend
it self, and renounce their enorme vices, Idolatry and superstition, and
convert unto the Lord Jesus Christ, to embrace the true worshippyng of God,
and the everlasting Gospel, they have been justly plagued, receiving according
to their deserts, such measure as they had measured to others. Therefore are
the Persians, Huines, Frenchmen, Germains or Dutchmen, Va^dales, Eastgothes,
and Westgothes risen against them and their Empire, and have divided it, and at
length have they besieged Rome, and have taken and subverted, burned, spoiled,
and wholly rased it. So the Lord through his just judgment has reu^nged the
innocent blood of his children. This is showed unto us by these visions and
sonets. O worldly vanity, al things must pass, save the love of God: That
which was lifted up into heaven, is fallen and brought even to the ground, and
most miserably perished. As also before their time many other realms, as of
the Chaldes, and great Cart^age, and other, ar likewise perished. So Rome never
obtained the like estimation since, as it had before being in his flower, as it
is to be seen yet by some ancient monuments, buildings columns, and walls,
which appear there as yet to bear witness of Gods vengeance which came upon
them for their sin and wickedness, to the end that all godly and well
disposed persons might perceive, that God can and will perform his promises,
the which he has thretned in his word.

Besides all this, the Roman Empire has been without an Emperor.iij. hundred
and twenty years, nam^ly since Augustus until Charlemayn. In the mean time
the Bishop of Rome began to forget all manner of simplicity, humbleness and
poverty, and to neglect the service and administration of a true pastoure, and
to put his mind upon temporal dominion and rule, beginning so (through the
liberality of many great Princes, as King Pepin and many other great Lords
which he inchaunted under the pretense of holiness,) to become so great, that
at length he has set him self in the cha^re, as sovereign above all the
rest, that even Emperoures were at his commandment elect and deposed. For the
fervent zeal and devotion was in many Christians already cold, and many of
them were addicted and given to worldly quietness, great estate, and all manner
of inte^perancie and voluptuousness: so that they had more mind to security
and idleness, than to labor and pain, to sleep, than to work, to take,
Sig^bertus.
than to give, to banquet, than to preach: Geniblacen.
and had rather to take their pleasure in this wicked world, Carolus Bo^illu^.
than to enjoy the heavenly pleasures in the world to come. After this,
dissension rose amongst them for the supremacy: then sought they ambitiously to
rule and govern ever all the whole world. They would well be confessors (as they
termed them) but few or none would be Martirs, for preaching was cast aside,
and pride had occupied the roum of it: whereupon did follow of necessity, as
(Scripture speaks: where as Gods word is not preached, there the people
perish) many and diu^rs heresies, schisms, and sects: as Sabellians, Arrians,
Emonians, Macedonians, Priscellians, Nestorians and Eutichians, which diverse
and sundry ways erred in the doctrine and faith, concerning the divinity. The
Mani^hes contempned and made light of the old Testament. The Donatis^s did
hold it necessary to be rebaptised again. The Pelagians taught that men could
deserve heaven by merits without grace, and other like to the^. Amongst the
Bishops was discord in all places. In the R^mish church were many mutations
about their el^ction: Between Liberius and Felicius was great dis^ord about y^
popeship. Likewise was it between Damasius and Vrcisius, Boniface and Aulatius,
Simache and Laurence, Hieronymus. Sigebertus. Ge^iblacenfis.
Boniface and Dioscore, Constantine and Philip, Eugenius and Sisine, Formosie
and Stephen, S^rgie and Christopher, Benedict and Leo, Vincentius. Anthonius.
Plan^ina.
Gregory and diverse other. Amongst which, many were accused of heresies, some
of incest, and some of other kinds of evil, Abbas Vrspergensis. Iacobus
Bergen^is.
of which some were banished, some deposed, some s^landred, some had their
eyes put out, other some miserably slain and murdered no practices, Herman^us
Shedel.
frauds, guiles nor violence or oppression was left behind: to none other end
than to attain unto promotion, honor dignity and great estate, and to obtain
their malicious purpose. After this sort did the bishops proceed in all kinds
of vanity and idleness, to become loytering prelates puffed up in pride and
presumption, whereby verity and truth was defaced, and quite abolished. The
Sun began now to be darkened and become black as a hairen cloth, and the
Moon like unto blood, the stars of heaven to fall down: For they daily
practiced to get new and more dominions, they attempted by all means possible
to increase their authority and power, all their whole study and labor was
to advance their h^nour and dignity here upon the earth, not without
scattering of the commons and innumerable murders of the people. John
Archbishop of Constantinople, debated to be Primate and soueraign of all other
Patriarchs. Boniface the third of that name, Bishop of Rome, took upon him to
reign and rule over all, and to be the lieuetena^t of God, upon earth. Again,
Mahomet coming afterward, would be adored as a great prophet, and messanger of
God. So that by the means of covetousness, ambition, and carnal
concupiscence, the truth is darkened, and the church of Christ most miserably
scattered and dispearsed. The I^wes by a crafty slight, wrested the scripture
to maintain their Talmuith: the Sarazens their Alcorane: and these prelates
and Bishops their Decretals, and all other errors and herisie^ which were under
that false prophet Mahomet in Asia and Affricke, and under the Pope in Europe,
with all their curssed traditions and trifles. They have banished and abolished
Christ and his doctrine, every where preferryng their own ambition, profit,
commodity and ease. Whereunto and to obtain it the rather, they have brought in
many superstitions and traditions of men, as Latin service (because ye common
people should not understand their doings) bells, organs play, cymbales,
incense, palms, candles, tapers, purgatori^, masses for all souls, diriges,
obsequies, Pilgrimages, indulgences to deliver the souls out of purgatory,
after they have gotten money enough. Item, church holy days, Rogatio^ days,
Relikes, yea coals wherewith S. Laurence was broyled, Joseph's ^osen, the arms
of S. Cornelis, with many more trifles and other relikes. They proc^ed further
to the forbidding of marriage, meat, eggs, butter: in like manner images, and
crucifixes were set up, woorkyng thereby false miracles, always foreseing to
their Mao^in, that is, great shops, churches, temples, chapels and Altars,
where they might sell their trumperie freely, not without great gain, yea so
well that they were mounted ^o hie in power, riches, and voluptuousness, as we
have se^ne by experience, and daily is to be seen in places where they are,
that they rule above emperors, kings, and princes: and all this under a show
of piety and holiness, as we heretofore have say^e. Of these S. John in his
revelation does warn us in his sixte chapter, Revel. ^.
where he says manifestly, that when the lamb had opened the seventh seal,
he saw a pale horse, and he which satte upon it, was named death: for this
congregation of hipocrites, notwithstanding their copper faces, and carbuncled
noses, through their unmeasurable gluttony and drunkenness, are yet in their
soul pale, deadish, black and blew, as unwholesome and dead bodies: for th^i have
no true life within the^, nor ye blessedness that co^sistet^ in Christ Jesus,
Romans 2.
and his holy word. Luke. 12.
And he which sat on it was death. Math. 6.
Their doctrine and teaching is nothing but death and damnation. For hypocrisy
eng^ndreth nothing but des^ruction of salvation, and their f^uits are shame and
confusion. For hell follows them to destroy those that are seduced by them.
Esaias. 5.
Daniel and Paul they have foretold that Antechrist should be borne of the
subversion of the Empire, ^^^uerb. 5.
and desolation of Rome. And to the end we might speak more at large of the
thing, I have taken four visions out of the revelation of S. John, where as
the holy ghost by S. John sets him out in his colors.

I saw a beast (says S. John) rising out of the s^a, ^^uel. 13.
signifiyng the congregation of the wicked and proud hypocrites, which exalt
and advance them selves as the Ceder trees of Libanus, they are unnatural and
beastly like unto Elmas the inchanter, full of fraud and guile, full of falshod
and pride, they are whelps and generations of the devil, subuerting the ways
of the Lord. This beast is described here as the pale horse in the fourth age,
and the cruel Grasshoppers in the fifth age, and the mad horses with Lio^s
mouths in the vj. age. ^poc. 6. ^poc. 9.
This beast, meaning the odible, falls, and damnable errors and pestiferous
inspirations of the devil, which at this time reign in the beastly me^bres of
that monstrous body of the beast, as namely in the outrageous bishops,
spiritual lawyers priests, hypocrites, and false Magistrates, for their heads
are their subtlety, and their horns signify their tyrannous might. It had
also ten crowns upon his ten horns, signifiyng their great dominion and
superiority throughout the whole world. The devil is their prince and
Captain most cruel, and that through the iniquity and ingratitude of the
people: but in this point differ the dragon and the beast, from the devil and
his members, Satan and his carnal and beastly congr^gation, for he had seven
crounes upon his seven heads, and they have ten crowns upon their ten heads,
mening, that that which he only has stirryng up of the thing, that have they.
The signification whereof is, that Satan is only of ability and power to blow
into their ears the thing which they with violence, and by force maintain:
where as he is but able by fancies and inspiration, there are these his meet
instruments to perform it and put in execution by violence, and power, by
menaces and compulsion. Where as he he dallieth only by play, there do they
seriously force and violently compel. When he has only engendered and found
out any error or false doctrine, they with all diligence, as an infallible
truth, allow, confirm and stablishe it, and make of it a necessary article to
believe on, as they have put in practice their purgatory, auricular confession,
transubstantiation, worshippyng and carrying about of dumb Idols, and Images,
the hearing of latin service, Mass, and other abominations. As he has found
out any lie (as he is the fat^er of all lies, and has been since the beginning)
so may they hold it for a perfect written verity, making it of good
authority and might, as experience may testify, they have done. Hereout and
such like, it is manifest, that they being his ghostly ministers and spiritual
instruments, may e^ecute effectually more wickedness than he him self alone,
as their works may well testify. Satan was not of power to put Christ to
death, if it had not be^ through Judas, into whom he entered, and afterward by
the bishops and Scribes who persecuted him unto death. The Apostles, true
ministers and other witnesses of Christ should never have be^ persecuted,
whipped, Math. 2^.
scourged, tormented and miserably slain, neither should they at this present,
if these popish prelates did not follow and maintain their old and accustomed
manners, and fulfill ye mesure of their fathers. And upon his heads were names of
Blasphemy against the Lord and his Christ. All this is nothing else than their
shining and glorious titles, where with they suborne and make great their
supremacy and their estimation, and as holy and blameless to be regarded
among men, and before the world, wherevnder is covered and comprehended all
manner of iniquity. What ar Popes, Cardinals, patriarks, legates, chief heads,
archbishops, pronotaries, archdeacons, officialls, commissaries, prebendaries,
vicars, lord abbot, master or doctor, and such like, what are these I say
else but names of blasphemy? for these offices and titles are not of the holy
ghost, neither is there any mention made of them in the holy scripture. What is
it I pray you else, than a great abomination and blasphemy that the Pope
claims to him self to be the most holy father, to be the Uicare of Christ,
God on earth, supreme head of the Church, the only steward of the gifts,
graces, and mysteries of God? What means it that Priests and Bishops do
arroga^tly ascribe to the^ selves to be Bridegromes, to stand in Gods stead, to
have power to pardon sin, and to be our Ladies clean and vndef^led knights?
What be these else than names of blasphemy? For they are nothing else as
Zachary terms the^ (having no care of feeding of the flock, but through
^^^re negligence and sloth set a side preaching of the word, through these
vain titles) than very offending Idols. Their Decrees, Decretals, traditions,
rules, ordinances, statutes, customs of the Fathers, general Counsels,
Sinodes, and other of their vsages, not grounded on the word of God and his
will, are nothing else but dampnable hypocrisy, and devilish dissimulation,
blaspheming the name of the Lord. For the names of blasphemy on his head is
nothing else but to maintain under an honest and virtuous show, that which is
blasphemous, to his own adua^cement. This beast was like the Leopard, spotted
and blemished, tokens of inconstancy, chaungeablenesse, and temeritie. His
feet like to a Bears feet, fearful and horrible, il favored of fashion, and
deformed, signifying cruelty, stubbornness, stoutnesse and uncleanness. And
his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, declaring hereby the pride, theft, murder,
and all kind of wickedness of those Prelates. Daniel saw in a vision, a Lion,
whereto that proud kingdom of the Assirians and Chaldees were to be compared.
Unto the Bear which he saw, was likened the barbarous and rude realms of the
Medes and Persians. By the Leopard is meant the unsteadfast kingdom of the
Grecians. The Assirians and Chaldees were for their stealing and Pride, rebuked
and curssed of the Prophets Esaias, Nahum, Nahum.25 Esaias. 13.
and Abacuck. Abacuck.1.
The Medeans and Persians kept the people of God in captivity and bondage. As
it is to be seen in the books of Hester, Hest. 23.
Paralipomenon and Esaias. 2. Paralip. 3^ Esaias. 22.
The Grecians also were very spiteful, 2. Macha. 2.
and full of reproach to the people of God, in the time of that cruel Tyrant
Antiochus, as it appears in the Book of the Machabees. ^. Macha. 2.
But this beast which S. John speaks of here, does comprehend all these
three which Daniel saw, namely the body like unto a Leopard, paws like unto a
Bear, and the mouth to the Lion. Whereby the holy Ghost teaches us, that
within this one curssed Popedom or kingdom of Antechrist, should be as much,
and more abomination, Idolatry, fornication, murder, and all kind of
wickedness, as were in all these three realms aforesaid. As at this day it is
to be seen, and we have had good experience. No where reigned at any time more
pride, idleness, cruelty, Idolatry, fornication, adultery, uncleanness,
Sodometrie, envy, dissimulation, falshoode and inconstancy, vain glory,
iniquity, sorcerie, superstition and impiety, than does in this one dominion
of Antechrist. He alone has more contaminated Gods holy Temple, than all the
infidels together that ever were: they have most shamefullye entreated and
judged the very elect people of God, 1. Corin. ^
which are the vessels of his glory. Romans 9.
They have most miserably and narowly kept under, and as it were in prison, the
true Minister^ of God by their Decrees and traditions. The severity and
rudeness of Pharao, Antioche, and Caiphas, is nothing in the comparison of
theirs, for in them is all kind of beastliness, vncleanlinesse, wantonness,
concupiscence and carnal security. No reason or humanity has any place
amongst them, they are more like beasts than men. The rigorous Proclamations
against the Jews, Hest. 3.4.
(at the request of wicked Ammon and of Antioche, 1. Match. 2.3
) are nothing to speak of, to the ordinances and statutes of the Antechrists,
for those were only against the body, but theirs are against the soul and
conscience of man also. After this sort does the Popedo^ (which is the dominion
of Antechrist) bear the Image of the Leopard, of the Bear, and of the Lio^,
because it is not only partaker of al ye wickednesses with other realms, but
it exceeds and surmounteth al other vi^. times double in all kind of
iniquity, Psalm. 9
Romans 3.
idolatry, Romans ^.
and abominations yt ever were committed under heaven. They have the mouth of
a Lion, always blasphemyng, cursing and banning: Their feet like a bear,
signifiyng their insatiab^e covetousness, runnyng headlong to every kind of
mischief, Romans ^.
very ready to sheade blood: as leopards are they polluted and spotted with
diverse and sundry inconstant minds, institutions and obseruings, never
steadfast or constant, but in all things chaungeable and foolish: ^ Thessalonians. 2.
for such as receive not Gods truth, are worthily forsaken of God. Therefore
God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies, that all
they might be damned which believe not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness. The D^agon (says S. John) which is Satan the Diuell^ gave
to the beast or cursed generation of Antechrist, his beastly members, his whole
power, his seat of blasphemy, and his great authority. To give them his
power is nothing else, than to make them perfect and skillful by all manner of
craft, subtlety and dissimulation, cunnyngly to seduce the simple and silly
souls: and so forth to confirm and stablysh them in all kind of wickedness
and falshods. To give unto him his seat, is to leave him he^e a glorious
kingdom, full of vain glory, ^is^imulation, and other wickedness. 2 Thessalonians. ^.
To give him hi^ great authority, is to work by false miracles, signs and
wonders, and by false and ^rr^nious do^^rine, to allure the p^^ple, and to draw
the vnb^leuing infidels the rather to the p^t of perdition and everlasting
torments. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
On this manner is that great Antechrist a king with Satan ^uer all the
children of pride and darkness. He occupies and possesses ^alsly with
Lucifer the seat and ^oume of God, taking upon him even to search and creep
into men's consciences: For he b^steth him self to stand in Gods stead to
deceive them that ^well on the earth, to reign and to bear rule over them,
for so much as they (having a blind guide) are l^d into the ditche of all
error and false doctrine, the very way unto everlasting pe^dition. Touching
the seat even as Christ our Lord (with his Father reigning eternally) sits
in heaven upon the seat of his Majesty in eternal glory and felicity, eue^
so sits ^ntechrist, the Pope of Rome, I mean^ with his ^ather the Devil,
full of pride and blasphemy, in the seat of condemnation, in eternal
darkness, ignomie, and shame. Mat^. 28.
Concerning his power, John.17. John.1.
even as Christ received his power of God his father, even so has he rec^iued
his authority of his father the Devil. Even as Christ is full of mercy and
truth: even so is this Antechrist full of envy and hate, untruths and lies,
and al other mischiefs: of whose abominations and errors, the unbelieving and
infidel has tasted. As the holy ghost and the sprite of Christ opens the
mysteries of the truth in his elect even so on the other side has the spirit
of error, since the death and revelation of Christ, darkened truth and set
forth the secrets of his malice in the ennimies of Christ. Concerning his
aucthority, as christ being man, ^ohn.3.
received his aucthority of god, ^. Thessalonians. 2.
to do such miracles as no man else could do: Even so does this Antichrist, by
the Devil and Gods permission amongs the infidels and unbelievers. So that he
in all power and authority unjustly usurped, follows, yea passes his father
the devil. For as he robbed the godly man Job, Job. 1.2.^^
and spoiled him of all his substance, goods, children, servant, and cattle,
and tormented him in his body with ^oils and Botches, even so does this
ravenous and greadye Leuiathan, and cruel murderer, vex, consume, and
oppress the poor people, by his spoiling Grasshoppers, defrauding the poor of
their sweat and blood, Psalm. 73.
of their pains, Revel. 9
travail, necessity, and living: no not sparing the feeble and sick, neither
widow nor fatherless. No kind of good (be it never so unjustly gotten) being
brought to them, in shriuing of some one burdened in conscience, but that they
are contented to receive it, and that by the way of restitution. Yet
nevertheless do they, (which is worst of all) lead men's minds to
dissimulatio^, false belief, and other diuelishnesse, doubtful, desperate, and
comfortless.

Finally, even as in the body of Christ, dwells fullness of the whole Deity:
Even so in this body of Satan dwells the whole mass of impiety,
subtilitie, fraud and malice, with power to work all manner of mischief
mightily, substantially and corporally. And I saw one of his heads, as it were
wounded to death, with the sword of his mouth: ^. Thessa. 2.
that is, through the anouncing and preaching of the Gospel. Which thing is
come to pass since the time of John Hus in Boheme, and after that in Germany,
and is since (God be praised) daily more and more, that the head of the Beast
is wounded, in places where gods word is preached. As in England, France,
Scotland, Poland, and else where, as every one may well perceive, except he will
needs be blind. For it is evident to al men, that in most places, Bulls and
Pardones of the Pope are little set by, his power and might trodden under feet,
his name blotted out, his Purgatory, Masses, Pilgrimages, Idols, and other like
trumperies, cried out upon. If this be not a deadly wound on the head of the
beast, I think it to have none at all. If this be not a manifest token of his
fall to come, there is none to be looked for. But his deadly wounds were
healed. Although the Gospel has been preched in sundry and diverse places, and
the popes abominations cast vpside down, yet remains (in some places) their
false priesthood vows not to mary, Sodomish chastity, auricular con^ession, or
at the least the fashion of it, and other more superstitions. For the beast
seeks al means to recover, yea and has brought to pass, that the eyes of
many learned ministers, and pastors wax dim, and as it were asleep, so that
they do not narowely search, or diligently try every matter by the only
touchstone of Gods holy word, but weigh them rather by deceiuable custom, and
take their course to the fathers, and their good intents. Although they are
sure, and throu^hly persuaded the Pope to be very Antechrist, and that these
names are put out of their books, yet are these ceremonies, (before of no
value or at the least indifferent) now of necessity to be observed and kept,
as godly rites, honorable and singular ornaments. Although they say, the Mass
to be of no value in Latin, yet in their own language to be a sacrifice
propiciatorie: other have a great trust and confidence in saying Dimitte
nobis, or any other like thing, not understood. Some will uphold and
maintain the free will in man. Other some will not be Papists, but are well
half, yea and worse than Papists. Also the wounded head of the beast is
healed and redressed in some places by force and power of worldly princes, the
which must fight for the Pope, and in such time and place as it se^meth him
good, slaying, kyllyng, and burning all such as he commands, destroying
their own realms, murtheryng and banishing their good and true subjects,
because they seek the honor of GOD, and to serve him arighte. These Princes
be as it were bewitched and drawn by a subtle kind of flattery, in calling
them ignominiously most christen princes, defendours of the universal and
catholic faith, meaning the Romish decrees. And after this sort is healed and
cured the wound of the Beast, by the means of these oyntmentes and
Chirurgians. And the whole world (says S. John) did wonder at the beast.
etc. The foolish people, worldly and carnal minded, not understanding the
wisdom of the holy ghost, imbracyng all those glorious and ioylye sightes, as
godly, meritorious, and spiritual matters, and wondryng at them, worshypped,
exalted, and made much of it, yea above the things ordained and instituted of
GOD. whose blyndenesse is grown to such grossness, that they will not nor
can forsake their old and more than outrageous kind of worshippyng, which is
rather custom than religion. For when they have any hope that their wicked
custom shall continue, they clap their hands, and cry out ^or joy with
Baals priests Gaudeamus. And they worship the Dragon, who gave power to the
beast, that is to say, they rejoice in their minds, hoping that their kingdom
shall abide and stand: chiefly when they see his head again whole and sound
that is their governor, the godly prechers burned, the Instructers of the
people slain or banished, persecuted and put to silence as it has been
practiced in our native country of low Germany. All those that worship the
Dragon, worship the beast also: for as those which honor Christ, honor his
father also, in like manner all those which adore Antechrist, that is to say,
consent and hold of his traditions, masses, and ordinances, all those (I
say) worship the devil, of whom they have received all his wickednesses. Who
is like unto the beast? namely in out ward show of holiness, or observation of
false rites and Ceremonies. Who is able to war against him? say they,
consyderyng that worldly princes are ready to defend his quarrel, and take
his part. The papists go about by all means possible, be it by craft or
subtlety, by force or violence to maintain their adulterous, fained, and
disguised church in her diseased estate, power and holy show: no kind of
wickedness, craftiness, or policy leave they unassayed or unattempted to
make them to be regarded of the people, for holy and spiritual men of great
power, worthiness and estimation. It follows in our text. And there was given
unto him a mouth to utter great and blasphemous things. When Gods truth was
reveled unto them, they thanked him not, but became vain in their imaginations,
Romans 11.
and therefore God gave them over to unclean lusts of their own hearts,
blinded with unbelief and perverted minds, so yt when they thought to be very
wise, becam then stark fools. Now utter they in their counsels, consistories
and sermons, blasphemies against God, and his Christ. They make the people by
straight laws to cleave to them, and all their Romish and beggarly ceremonies
and vile borrowed trumperies: be it never so great a grief to them. The holy
and sacred scriptures may not once be red, neither may it be had in the mother
tongue. For the Scripture (say they) must be expounded as pleases them, and
according as they think good for their own advantage. And how trow ye, could
this wound of ye beast else well be healed? for the infallible word of God
(which be the Scriptures) has given him this wound. They will not that Christ
be our alone and sufficient Savior, without our own merits and deseruings. The
Lords supper (which in holy Scripture, is called the Communion of the body and
blood of Jesus Christ,) must be with them a new crucifiyng of his body:
Wherein, as in a play or Comedy, one creature alone, plays five or six
personages or players parts, namely of Judas, Anna, Cayphas, Herod, Pylate,
and the Jews. We^lorke is called of them unclean, notwithstanding it was
instituted as a good and undefiled ordinance of God him self, Tim. 4. Tim. 4.
^eb. 13.
no papistica^ vows of Monks and Friars may be broken, although it be
sufficiently proved to be most wicked and devilish and has engendered a
thousand Sodomites. Again, that without the blind mumbling and laying on of
the priests hand, sins can not be forgyuen, as they say: for in deed by
this one vow their kingdom is maintained. And more other abominations are
uttered by his mouth, and yet daily be, of which (to make it shorter) and not
to trouble the reader overmuch, I will leave rehearsing of them: yet must I
needs touch by the way, the great blasphemy which they commit in saying,
that the entryng into the holy Church consists only by the means of their
greasing and shauyng, excluding herewithall all other of what estate or
condition soever they be, calling them lay me^, and under the pretense of this
false title, they take upon them to be saviors of men's souls, affirmyng
their Masses to be sacrifices propiciatorie for the quick and the dead,
iustifiyng, helping and comfortyng, and ex opere operato saving and redeemyng
man. And over their abominable and stinkyng troop of Antechristes, they
create and make Emperors and kings chief gouerners, only to be maintained and
defended by them in their malicious wickedness. Kings and princes are ordained
of God to be heads and rulers in civil and pollitike matters: but God forbid,
that a godly and virtuous Prince (whom they disdayn, and are rebellious and
disobedient unto,) should be called their head, and claym^ a title and
supremacy over them, ^or that only belongs unto Satan: for the Devil is
(says Job) the only chief head of the proud. ^ob.41.


And power was given unto them (says our text) for.xlij. mon^ths to rule, ^.
Reg. 17.
which are the three years and a half of Helias, Dan 12.
and one half time of Daniel, Apoc. 21.13.
and the thousand two hundredth and three score days of S. John. He opens
his mouth to blasphemy against God and his name, and to blaspheme his holy
Tabernacle and inhabiters of heaven. The tabernacle of God is Christ Jesus, in
whom the fullness of the godhead abides wholly and perfectly. By the inhabiters
of heaven, is meant his true church, whereout the Angels are not excluded.
These inhabiters then, are those which lead an heavenly life in a true and
unfeigned faith, ^oloss. 3.
seeking the things which are above, ^ohn.4.
and not on earth, worshipping god the father in spirit and truth, Math 24.
abidyng steadfast and immovable to the end. Luc. 9.
^phe. 6.
Many have entered into this heaven, but are not found faithful and constant
unto the end, which is lamentable.

And to this beast, (or beastly Antechrist) was given power to fight against
the Saints. 1. Corinthians.
They trouble and vex continually, Acts.4.6.
with force and violence, Exodus 1.
by their wicked and ungodly Decrees, laws, Hest. 3
and ordinances, by their worldly authority and power, 1. Machab. ^
Math. 20. 1
the true witnesses, Luke.2.
and godly preachers of Christ, 1. Peter.1
instructed and taught (even as the Apostles were) of God him self in the truth
of his holy word, eue^ as the wicked Phariseis in the time of Christ, and his
Apostles did. They persecute them by writs and proclamations, by banishments,
fire, and sword, as the cruel tirant Pharao and Antiochus did, to show
manifestly that Christ is that stumbling stock, and the stone of offense,
whereat the world stumbled. They search and seek here, they hunt there, never
ceassing until they have him fast in prison, and forthcomming, whereat they are
not yet satisfied, till such time as they have proceeded openly before all men,
(following their placcate) thereby to fortify men in their error against them.
And so vanquished (as they boast) to condemn the^, although they are otherwise
before GOD. Then either they make him to recant, or else if he abi^e constant
in the faith of Christ, they put him to most cruel death, either by fire or
water. And power was given unto the Beast over every kindred, tongue, and
nation: For these wicked and abominable Antechristes spare no man, small nor
great, young nor old, high nor low, rich nor poor, sick nor whole, learned
nor unlearned, but that they must bow before them, and become subject to their
most wicked commandments, either by force or otherwise: they must have them,
at the least once a year at shrift before them, to know their mind and
intention, whether they be Town dwellers or Strangers, Governors or common
people. No excuse will serve or take any place in this behalf, or else they
must with Christ, reign at the Bar among Thieves. Math. 27.
And this power they have not only in one place, Mar. 15^
but in all places, Luke.23
tongues, and in every Town, ^ohn.19
yea they must have to do amongst every family, destroying the true and godly
faith of all men. For all that dwell upon earth, shall worship the beast. They
must all consent to their great abomination. They must blaspheme and offend
God, 2. Tim. 3.
observe and keep their most filthy traditions, and Romish trashe. They that
dwell upon earth, are such as do love them selves more than God, their own
affection more than Gods truth, putting their confidence, comfort, and hope,
in the only beggarly merits and vile deseruings of these beastly and
abominable Hipocrites, and not upon the sweet promises of God in his word,
Luke.10
Whose names are not written in the book of the Lamb. Romans 11
They which are not confessed of Christ, Philip. 3
nor accepted by his word and promises. 1. Corin. 6.
John.15
They which with the righteous as members of one spiritual body, Psalm. 16.
and ^idden in him, John.14
are not marked nor Registered, (whose part and portion is not in the land of
the living) that are not of the number of those which the father has given
unto Christ, to be participant of one spirit with him. They which are not
ordained, predestined nor written in his forknowledge, neither of him before
the foundations of the world, Romans 9.
Ephesians. 1.
elected, and chosen to be his children immaculate in Christ. John.1.
Al these I say, must worship the Dragon. John.15.
The Lamb is Christ Jesus, ^. Tim. 2
the which only takes away the sins of the world, in whom is only life, for
he is the life him self, of them namely which believe on him, which was slain
from the beginning, for all them which are created to salvation. So that his
only death, resurrection, and ascentio^, through the promise of God, ^. Corin.
10.
is the salvation of the^ all, for they all have tasted of one spiritual meat,
and drunk of one spiritual stone. Albeit he came a long season after them in
the flesh, he only did tread down the head of the Serpent. Also he has been
slain from the beginning, Genes. 3.
Math. 23.
in his members, as it is to be seen evidently in just Abel, Jeremy, John
Baptist, and many more. Genes. 3.
Math. 14.
But those which are not written of the Lamb in the book of life, be sealed in
the book of death, 2. Peter.2.
and kept (as S. Peter says) with the Devil and his angels to eternal death,
because of their unbelief. John.1.
He that has cares to hear, let him hear, (says the text.) He yt has any
wit, let him give place to ye admonition which follows, he that will be wise,
let him judge according to the demonstration of these things. After this sort
does the holy Ghost certify his faithful, 1. Corinthians. ^
warning them to consider that all which is written, is written to our learning
and edification. He that leads into captiuitie^ shall go into captivity.
This warning gives the Lord, let them take heed i^ they lust, for he will that
his judgments be known. They which do afflict and vex the faithful in their
bodies outwardly, shall be vexed and punished in the spirit with inward
darkness, and stricke^ with blindness of the mind, to abide the rather in
the net of Satan, and sin: God will leave them in a reprobate sense, Romans 1
and inordinate lust, 2. Thessa. ^
and suffer them to enter into great errors and diuelishnesse, to believe all
manner of lies, that they might be damned. If any kill with the sword, 2. Tim. 4.
the pore and innocent for their faith, 2. Peter.2.
must also be killed, Ephe. 6.
judged and condemned through the sword of the spirit, 2. Thessa. ^
which is the word of God. The word which I have spoken (says Christ) shall
condemn them at ye last day, as he testified also in his Revelation in the
eleventh Chapter: If any will molest or trouble them, the fire shall proceed
forth of their mouth, to consume their adversaries. And I saw yet (says S.
John) an other Beast rising out of the earth, having two horns like the Lamb.
Signifying and representing all manner of false Prophets, ungodly teachers,
which are in their intents and purpose wholly and altogether beastly, idle,
carnal, and corrupted. They are also abominable in the imagitions of their
malicious hearts, not seking god, but their belly, not ye honor of christ, but
their own aduanceme^t and vain glory. They rise out of the earth, inclined and
given wholly to earthly and worldly wisdom. The desire and lust which they have
to reign in this world, makes the^ to preach not for any love or zeal which
they bear to truth. The desire of money and covetousness thrusts them in.
They go forward in all kind of wickedness, and shall continue til the Lord
destroy the^, even as the godly goes on in virtue and godliness til y^ time
that they shall see ^od face to face, 2. Peter.2.
in that everlasting Sion. 1. Cori^. 1^
This beast was a murderer from the beginning first of all in Cain, Gene. 14.
Gene. 9.17. 21.57.28.
and consequently in the carnal children of this world. ^xod, 7.
Namely in Cham the first unshamefast son of Noe, 2. Timo. 3
in Ismael and Esau, in James and Iambres, Nume. 22
in Balaam and all the false prophets of Baal, Iudic. 22.2^
in Annas and Caiphas, Jeremy. 20
in Baricha and Diotrephe, Math. 27.
and is now a days risen again in Friars, Monks, Acts. 13
Chanons, Priests and Chanters, John.1.
as every one, 3. Reg. 16.
(have he never so little a sparcle of light in him) may easily see and
perceive: especially in their cathedral church where they have their ^ull
course. This beast had.ij. horns like the Lamb, but cou^terfaited and
altogether falls. For she spoke like the Dragon. The horns of Christ are hie,
and great, wherout only springs the sweet comfortes of the promises of God,
given to his Church, congregation and people. Gods word is right, Psalm. 44^
and the Scepter of the au^thority of Christ, and the rod of his righteous
ordinances, that wheresoever this word rules, there are none other strange
scepters, institutions, or customs. The Lamb of God upon the Mount Sion
(signifying Christ Jesus) has seven horns, for in him consists the fullness
of al truth. ^pocal. 14
This beast has but.i^. horns, and those counterfaited and false. They have
well a show to be Christ's horns, John.16.
but of a truth they are not. Collos^. 2.
These then do signify the corruptyng and falsifiyng the meaning both of the
old and new Testament, expounded and wrested to a worldly and carnal
understanding. Wherout it is too apparent and manifest, that it is but a false
show, full of dissimulation, and altogether contrary to the Lords meaning, not
discearning the true meaning of the holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 2.
This letter without the spirit of God, 2. Cor. 3.
is death, and nothing agreeable unto Christ, John.14
neither has any regard unto him. John.6
He is the truth and life, this is very lies and death. ^. Cor. 13
His word is spirit and life, theirs is but sounding Erasse, or tinkling
Cimbal, fantastical, ^ained, Sophistical and crafty: although they seem to
have a likeness to Christ, yet are they to none more unlike. They are only
the horns of the beast, to maintain the kingdom of Antechrist, and not of
Christ, for Christ's ^yngdome is not of this world. They change the true
usage of the good creatures of God, John.1^^
making Idols of trees, Romans 1.
adornyng and deckyng stocks and stones, with gold, silver, silk, velvet,
and other iewelles, turning the holy estate of Matrimony into shameful
whoordome, Heb. 13.
and to all kind of vnchafte living, to make us to wander from that service
which God has commanded us, Math. 15.
to their false and most abominable superstitions, so to abolishe and make of
n^ne effect Gods commandment, and to establish their wicked traditions, to
bring and lead men at length to detestable idolatry, whereof they are full, and
to worship things forbidden. And for the maintenance of their estate, they have
with the aid and help of Satan their chief captain, wrested, chopped and
changed the scriptures to prove the adoration of the departed Saints to be
necessary, their mass meritorious, and their works of supererogation
profitable, their purgatory to be a fearful and horrible thing, and other
innumerable. These beastly asses and belly God bishops, are not ashamed to
say, that by the ^yter which they do wear, is represented the old and new
Testamente, which to be true, they defend with toothe and nail. They
confess (as it is in de^de) that they do wear but the figure of the thing:
for it is but a shadow in deed, and an outward show, not to the glory of
^od, but their own ambition, profit, and commodity, seeking an occasion to
persecute the very truth. Math. 7.
They are, of a truth, the false Prophets, 2. ^hes^. 2.
the very limbs of Satan, 1. ^im. 3.
deceyuers, Wolves, hie minded, 1. Corin. 6.
inconstant, Math. 3.
shaking with all manner of wyndes, 2. Corin. 11.
traitors, and very folowers of Judas, Ezech. 34.
dreamers, liers, idolaters, enemies, E^ay. 56.
and adversaries of truth and verity, Philip. 3.
serpents, and generation of vipers, Esaias. 6.
Foxes destroying the vineyarde of the Lord, Iere. 2.
deceiptful workers, ^aintyng pastors, blind watchmen, dumb dogs, devils
incarnated, wicked or evil routes, insatiable beasts, whose belly is their
god, and their end perpetual confusion and shame. All these, and many more
names, the holy Ghost does attribute unto them, because they myngle the
sweetness of the word of God with the bitter worm wood of their Traditions,
so that almost the whole world is defiled with the dregs of their inventions.
This beast did all that the first beast^ could do before him. This beastly
generation has the self same lying power to deceive the people, and under the
show of holiness to continue and uphold thoroughout all the worl^e, the same
abhohominations, as that great Ant^christe has done every where. Namely,
under the Pope in Eu^ope and in Asia, and in Affrike under Mahomet. Finally,
there has Satan his chair, where any s^range wors^yppyng or false seruyng of
God is admitted.

And he caused the earth and them that dwell therein to worship the beast. They
make not those only to commit idolatry that are ignorant and blind, but
force such as have knowledge and understanding. Oh how many are at this
instant in Brabant, Flande^s, and the low country, and else where, which
against their belefe, conscience, and the holy ghost, maintain, allow, and
permit the mani^est ^abylonicall abomination, communicating the venomous
dregs of the barbarous cup of these Baals priests. They had rather to tarry
ignominiously in this beggarly trashe and filthy ceremonies, than to be
deprived of this worldly fri^ndshyp (to forsake father, mother, children,
estate office and living,) banished and persecuted, or adventure their lives,
and if need so require, to loose it for the truth, so delectable and sweet
these worldely pleasures are unto them. They rather with Samuels sons will
perish, transgressing the ordinances of GOD, ^. Reg. 12.
and with Dathan, Chore, Abiron, be swallowed up, and sink into Hell amongst
the wicked, than to suffer with Christ any trouble, contempt, reproach,
poverty, or other calamity. Such I say, as seek and love the commodity,
and ease of their own flesh, their honor, and profit, more than the
advancement of Gods truth, let them not persuade them selves to be worthy
of his grace, for they must worship the beast, whose deadly wound was healed,
his old and abolyshed Relygion polyshed and vernyshed up a new, and his woren
Romyshe trashe p^tched and newly redressed, embrace upon pain of death. To
those hellishe dogs and infernal Cerberus must be rendered and given for a
time, more honor, reverence and worship than to GOD him self. Their wicked
and most fylthie traditions must now be more (in our country) set by, Math.
15.
than the pure word of God and the eternal verity. And why should it not be
so? Have not they erected a new sinagoge and congregation, wherein the wounded
head of the beast is now altogether cured and made whole? They have amended,
botched, and renewed again their Idols, to some they hau^ made a new nose,
hand, arm or leg, other some are painted up or colored, vernyshed and made
a new, so that they now (more like mad men) do carry them round about the
City in Procession, honoring the same images (which they ^aue so newly arrayed
and decked with silk, velvet, gold, pearls and precious stones, beads,
gyrdles, purses, flowers, green bows, and all manner of sweet herbs) with
song and sundry musical instruments, torches, candles, offerings, and all
other kind of service, and kneelyng before them bare headed, they worship,
serve, and hold up their hands to them. They keep and observe now again
their diuelyshe feastyng, ^phe. 4.
solemn processions and church holy days. They eat, they drink, they laugh,
they quaffe, and run after whoores, they fight and pike quarrels, their stews
are furnished with whoores: ruffians, and bauds are now good vittaylers, and
are haunted freely: yea all manner of filthynesse, iniquity and wickedness,
are committed with all greediness. Briefly, the kingdom of Satan is in all
things newly erected fortified and established: the head of the beast well
anointed and redressed: so long as the popish church stands, so long must
they observe his comaundementes of his religion, and maintain and uphold his
customs, so long shall the true servants of God, the good Christians, be
persecuted, bannished, blamed, slaundered, mocked, and scornefully entreated,
cried out upon, taken, imprisoned, killed, myserably slain and burned, in
such sort that their corpses are cast here and there abroad, hanged on trees,
g^bets, and bushes, and no man will bury them. But this diuelysh generation
and fleshly minded and wicked people clappe their hands together in token of
great joy, Psalm. 79.
they dance and leap, they make merry and are glad, they make great diners,
and send presents one to an other, being wonderful well disposed, because they
see those that did rebuke them of their wicked conversation, and ungodly
behauioures, so irkesomly entreated, they sing and make ballettes, they compose
in meter, and set forth books of great slanders, blasphemies and lies,
against GOD, his Christ, and his Church, which thing surely does
sufficientely prove the wickedness of their hearts: they rage and fume, they
are wood lyk^ blood thyrstie Tyrants, they gnashe as fierce and cruel Lions,
and they are very sorry that any should escape their bloody hands. This may
those testify which have heard the Sermons of one B. Cornelis y^ Hisper at
Bruges, B. John vanden Hagen at Gaunt, and that worthy knave that preached at
S. Goule, which for his behavior was banyshed out of the Haghe in Hollande,
as the rest of them were worthy to be. But God be thanked, that the Papists
of our country can none otherwise cleanse them selves, than with such ^oule
and filthy dishe cloutes, and fight with such darts wherwyth they hurt them
selves.

And it was permitted to him, to give a spirit unto the image of the beast, so
that the image of the beast should speak. After this sort come they then,
having received power of the devil, flatteryng to the Image to maynteyne their
malycious wickedness, saying after this manner: Your majesty is the most
virtuous, the most gracious, the most valiant, the most wisest, the most
puissant, the most noble, the most blessed, and most learned of all Christian
Princes and Potentates, all other are but Asses, yea nothing in comparion of
your highness. If it please your majesty to command this or that, or
establish and ordain any thing in your realm and jurisdiction, who is he that
dare withstand your majesty? yea if it were against the commandments of God
twenty times, it must be observed and kept. Upholde then the old Catholic
religion of our mother, the holy Church of Rome against these Heritickes, so
can ye not do amiss. God shall prosper you in all your affairs. Command
therefore throughout all your dominion, and straightly charge them by law and
Proclamation, sending one upon an other, so straightly as it is possible, to
show manifestly, that you are the lively Image of the Pope. It is our duty to
make the Image of the beast to speak. Therefore lift up your voice, speak out
with a courage, command and charge that against the word of God our old
Decrees, traditions, and Ceremonies be observed, let them be published and
cried abroad in your name and authority in every streate, and cause every one
of your subjects to keep your placate upon pain of death. And albeit other
Realms or Princes blame or check you, for that you govern not well, and
according to equity: make ye no account of them, neither regard their sayings,
but go forward still, and obstinately persiste and stand to that which seems
good in your own eyes. Give ye straight charge that all be put to death that
will not worship the Image of the beast, or how their knees before it, and keep
all his ordinances. Thus doing, ye shall be our well-beloved son. Let no man
escape your hands. Let none of them live, but slay and kill them, either by
fire, water, sweard, rope, or any other torments: spare no man, neither old
nor young, rich nor poor, great nor small, man nor wife, married nor unmarried,
yo^g man nor maiden, for they al speak against us and our Dragon, whereby our
kingdom should fall, we should lose our best profits, and suffer great damage
and loss. Cause also that all and every one, great and small, rich and pore,
bond or free, be marked on their right hand, or on their forehead. And above
this, that al Massemongers, Monks, Friars and Priests be shaven, their fingers
greased, and then holding up their right hand (which they are not ashamed to
call it the second baptism) promise, and swear by oath, to obey and reverence
the Pope, and the Romish Church, and there to vow chastity. Moreover that
Emperoures, Kings and Princes, Archbishops, Bishops, and Doctors, schools, and
all estates, receive also a token by oath, which they swear to him, that they
shall take nothing in hand which is against the Pope and his Decrees, laws
and ordinances, his Seat, and priueledges: yea that all men receive this mark
in the forehead. For he that is not greased with Crisome or Cream (which they
call Confirmation of the Bishop) cannot be counted (though he be baptized, and
believe in God and Christ never so faithfully) for a right christian: but for
above al, they are marked and graffed in the trust and confidence ^f their own
merits and deseruings^ For as the right mark of an upright christian, is the
faith working through charity and love, (for the pledge of the children of
God, is faith unfeigned,) even so is the true mark and seal of the Popish
Antechrist, to brag and trust in their own works and deseruings, as Masses,
Pilgrimages, shrifts, Bulls, and Pardons, to be buried in a gray Friars coat, so
many Pater nosters and Aue Mary's, and an hundred more such dreams. And that
no man might bie and sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the
beast, or the number of his name. Whosoever does not confess or allow that
which the Pope teaches or commands, but is contented and willing to
observe, so much as in him lies, all that which Christ teaches, commands
and promises, is to have no regard to the Pope nor his trumperies, nor his
Masses of Requiem, Diriges, absolutions, and other abominations: those may
neither bie nor sell amongst them. Yea they are excommunicated, persecuted, and
condemned to fire, sweard, gibbet or water. But they that bear his mark, are
al good children, especially those that have the double mark, and Caracterem
indebilem, (as they call it) namely his greased and ^hauen troop. Those I say,
may traffic and occupy freely, practicing Simon^e, changing and selling of
Bene^^ces, Prebendaries, and all other of their Romish pedlary, and peuish
trash. Jesus Christ cast out of the Temple the biers and sellers, Math. 21.
Mar. 12.
but Antechrist brings them into his Temple, Luke.19.
there to uphold them. Here is wisdom. John.26.
The true and heavenly wisdom consists in well understanding of things, and
judging aright of the same: for when we do not understand things, we are
fools and not wise men. Therefore the Lord does admonish his auditors
diligently to search of Antechrist, to ye intent that they might keep them
selves from him. For these which receive the mark of the beast, and worship
his image, shall drink of the wine of gods wrath. But al those which (detest his
Popedom from the very heart) follow and embrace Christ Jesus and his holy gospel,
shall drink altogether with him on his table the drink of life, and of the
gra^^ of God in his kingdom. Hereby we may conclude what great wisdom it is,
through which we escape the wr^th of God, and attain to everlasting
blessedness. For the holy Ghost says here incontent by S. John. He that has
wit, count the number of the Beast. That is, they (which are not altogether
foolish and deaf, let them count and cast over the number of the beast, let
them study and meditate continually on the thing, find fault with it, and
abolish that which seems marvelous in the sight of the world. Count (says
the Lord) for it is the number of a man, that is such a number as the careful
and dilygent man may easily find out. God commands here expressly, that we
must search and count. Therefore they may well keep their peace (says Aretes)
which blame and slander our godly study, diligent labor and great pains
which we take to write against the Pope and his adherents, and his false
detestable doctrine: saying that the time is not well employed, when we go
about to cast over the time, and count the number. For they may evidently see
and perceive here, that the holy Ghost does command us to search out, to try,
and to make an account, to know whom to hold for the right and wicked
Antechrist: him namely which (having dismissed and put down three Kings,) is of
nothing come up and exalted above all, and especially to the subversion and
throwing down of Christ's true religion, has begone to reign and rule.

And his number is six hundred, three score and six. For so many make these
letters in the Greek tongue (...). The name Latinos, Latinus, comprehe^deth the
number of six hundredth three score and six. And it is well and very credible
(says the holy Martyr Irene,) that his name should be so called, for so much
as his dominion has that name, and are all Latinists that rule and govern
there. We see here of a truth, that this godly teacher being full of the
spirit of god has not failed to foretell the true mening of the holy Ghost in
this behalf. For it is evident that the Romish church, is called the Latin
church, and the Pope sovereign and supreme head of the same. We see also yt
all things in this Church, are done in Latin. And in their spiritual courts,
(as they call them) nothing but Latin is used and spoken: no man may serve in
this church, except he be a Latinist. Moreover they call Hebrew to be Iudaike
or Iewishe, and the Greek erroneous or heretiquish: yea they hold the Hebrew
and Greek Bible to be suspected, and straightly charge and command their
Latin (falsely called Ieromes translation) to be of every one embraced and
holden for the best. Which thing is so manifestly known, that it has no need
of any further exposition. This number of 666. is signified by some Greek
words, (for this Prophecy was written first in the Greek tongue) as
Anthemos, that is: against the glory of god. Also it is signified by Aruine,
whereby is noted a denier or forsaker of God. And Titan, that is the son or
the name of Nemroth the tirant. These three names or words, although they
sound diverse, yet they do comprehe^d no more nor less than the just number,
and all this may be made agreeable and approved by scripture and reason. For he
that is not with Christ, is against him. Some expositors leaving ye Greek
words, have practiced, to their own advantage a Latin word, namely Lux,
containing the number aforesaid with the cou^tyng letters, which signifies (as
they name it them selves) the light, or a spiritual company, where in deed
they resemble nothing less: for they are very darkness which in no wise will
receive the light, but seek to extinguish the light with all manner of cruelty
and torments. We might bring in here besides these names two other names of
Antechrist, namely Diabolus incarnatus, and Filius perditionis, which signify
Devil incarnate, and child of perdition: Where as in the one lack but four
of the number, and the other six, cou^ting those letters, which are commonly
numbered. But amongst so many words above mentioned, is none fitter and better
to the purpose than the word Aruine, co^taining a great mystery, an^ is as much
to say, as I deny, or I forsake. It is manifest then, that these have received
the mark and sign of the beast, or else are sealed with the number of his
name, which when they hear Gods truth reveled unto them, say: I will not hear
of it, nor believe any part of it, so long as it agrees not with the doctrine
and gaye Ceremonies of our holy father the pope, and our mother the Romish
church.

Upon the.xij. Sonet or vision.
I saw (says S. John) a woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast. Revel. 17.
This woman did a far off seem to be honest and virtuous, but in deed she was
far otherwise, as ye shall hear. Reave 12.14
^. These. 2.
This beast is that great Antechrist (of whom we have spoken right now) or
rather the body of the devil, containyng within him the Pope, Cardinals,
patriarchs, legates, bishops, doctors, abbots, priours, chanons, Monks, friars
prebendaries, priests, indulgences, bulls, Nonnes, and the rest of all such
diuelyshe sects, being full of hypocrisy and dissimulation, reignyng within
the whole Popedom. In like manner all Magistrates, and secular powers (that
fortify and defend, as well the Pope him self, as also the abominations and
detestable idolatry which the Romish church does use) be he Emperor, King,
or Prince, Duke, Earl, or Lord, Mayor, Judge, Chauncellor, Bailie, Constable,
or whatso^uer, that maintain, defend and uphold by force and violence any
thing against God and his truth. Of whose number I my self have been sometime,
and that (to mine own great grief be it spoken) thorough mere ignorance,
thinkyng to do God great service. Whereof I am now ashamed and most ^arnestly
repent me, and am sorry for it. And I pray God that this, nor any of the rest of
my sins, be laid unto my charge, but that he will pardon me thorough his
infinite goodness and mercy, in the name of his dearly beloved Son Jesus
Christ, our only Savior and redeemer. And I thank him from the bottom of
my heart, that it has pleased him of his mercy, without my deseruings, to
have called me with the Apostle S. Paul, out of the shadow of death and the
company of his enemies, to the knowledge of his eternal wisdom in the
fellowship of his true spouse his church. Of these I say, which seek not
themselves, nor any thing in this world, but seek the glory of him that
bought them, and the accomplishment of his kingdom^ counted in the sight of the
world, as outcastes, but glorious in the sight of God. This beast is whole of
the color of scarlet reddish, in token of great tyranny, sheddyng of blood
and murders, which they commit against those which will not agree to their
wicked and devilish institutions. She is also full of ignominious blasphemous
names: as, your holiness, your clemency, your lordship, your fatherhod, your
mastership, your serenitie, your worthiness, honor, reverence, magnificence,
bounty, vicar of God^ spiritual lord, physician of the soul, defen^er of the
faith, supreme head of the church, and many other, as it is se^ne daily by
their letters and writyngs. Moreover their too too mu^he know^e trumperies, and
Jack an Apes plays, are no less blasphemous than processions, confirmations,
greasyngs, purgatory, Masses for all souls, pilgrimages, pardons, mattins Aue
Maria stella, or Salve regina, Placebo, Candlemasse, Palm sunday. etc.

This beast had seven heads, and ten horns, signifiyng all his subtle
practices, his crafty fetches and false conspiracies, thereby to impeche and
withstand the graces of God, and gifts of the holy Ghost: And under a cloak
of authority, through tyra^nish violence resist the commau^dements of God. And
this woman was aray^d in purple, and gilded with gold and precious stones and
pearls. Which signifies their coapes of gold, corporal, stoales, staves,
miters etc. and other like trumperies of silk, purple, crimosin satin, read
colored, bordered with gold, pearls and precious stones, and above this,
their counterfaite piety and show of holiness. This painted, pampred up, and
so gaily decked Romish church bragged and boasted much of her Gospel and her
Apostles, of gold, silver, wood or stone, decked and arrayed with all kind of
costlynesse, which is but an outward appearaunce, for they look for nothing
less than to imitate or follow, and to express them in their conversation.

She had a cup of gold in her hand full of abomination and filthiness of
her fornication. This cup, is her false and cursed Religion, 2. Tim. 4.
which she daily communicates, distributed about the Chalice, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
which her Merchauntes do so wickedly abuse. ^. Tim. 3.
It contains all kind of false and dyuelish doctrine, all kind of erroures,
lies, and beastlynesse, all manner of crafty works of hypocrites, all manner
of inventions of fleshly wisdom, all man's witty devises, either by craft,
art, or otherwise invented, as also all strange kind of worshippyng, of
idolatry, fornication, Sodometrie, and all other kind of iniquity. Outwardly
she seems to be gilded, she reports yea and boasts to set forth the
glory of God, namely the magnfying of the name of Christ. Coloss. 2.
They say, Heb. 10.
they preach the sacred Scripture, they live in chastity, Romans 2.
and all is nothing else, but a false, a counterfaite, and deceiptfull show of
holiness, full of hypocrisy and dissimulation, a cover or cloak of all
mischief and abomination, 2. Cor. 3.
it is but the bare letter, and the only name, as the rest of all their doings
are.

And in her forhead was a name written, a mystery, great Babylon. A name
declaring what manner of woman she is. She is known well enough by her naughty
fruits, of such as are skillful of godly knowledge, and have also the spirit
of understanding. So that they b^yng illuminated, conducted and led by the
spirit of GOD, may easily perceive, judge, and know, according unto the
Scriptures, that she is nothing else but an unshamefast and pestyferous
whore, full of all iniquity, abomination and wickedness. But this judgment
is hydden from the Infidels, the which are so bewitched and inchaunted by the
means of their fair outward show, their humble kneeling, creepyng, and gaye
Ceremonies, that what soever she does, speaks, or commands and takes in
hand, they make much of it, worship and embrace it, as holy, honest and
perfect good: which thing God permitted for their vnbeliefs sake.

She is called mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth, Revel. 17.
much passing the town of the Chaldees in all kind of wickedness, for she
is the mother and fountain both of spiritual and carnal whordome and
abomination. And I saw that she was the married wife of the devil. For I saw
her drunk of the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of
Jesus, which she outragiously and most severely has persecuted and slain.

And when I saw her so, I marvelled with great marvel, not only because I saw
her defiled and sprinkled of murder and sheding of innocent blood, but also
because of her great and abominable blasphemies. Psalm. 85.
And most of al, I was above measure amazed and marvelled, John.4.
Romans 2.
that almighty God could or would suffer or permit so long her intolerable
wickedness and detestable and horrible impiety. This woman is called of the
Angel, the great whore: that great City which ruled over the kings of the
earth, namely Rome. It is no marvel though she be called that great whore,
for no where was at any time more strange and superstitious, worshippings,
vain institutions, cold and trifling ceremonies, bisides sects, errors, and
false Prophets, yea so many kind of vnclea^nesses reigned in her, more than
ever did reign in Sodom or Gomorre, or the miserable land of Egypt. This
Babilonish whore or disguised Sinagoge of these shaven and greased ones,
sits upon many waters, which is, many foolish, inconstant, and wavering
people, and not upon those which are grounded upon the sure rock of Gods word,
and the true doctrine of the articles of the christian faith. With this most
wicked, vile, and stinking whore and common strumpet to all men, have the
most mighty Kings, Princes and Potentates, committed spiritual whoredom, in
that they consent to diverse and sundry kinds of their strange, new found, and
altogether superstitious Ceremonies, and other their most wicked decrees. Here
if I should make a discourse of all that might be spoken of in this place, time
should fail me. My purpose and meaning at this present, is only to make a
short exposition and declaration upon these our visions, and that in as few
words as is possible, to the consolation and edification of all godly and
faithful Christians. Seeing the^, what through the subtlety and crafty
fetches of Babels priests on the one side, and what for the cruel and
straight plackets of Princes on the other side: the dwellers upon earth or the
worldly minded, are all drunk of the wine of her wickedness and abomination,
and spiritual whooredom. They are al fallen without the prescript rule of Gods
holy word, to a strange and new found kind of serving of God. Moreover, not
only these as covetous, carnal, and other wicked and sinful persons have
followed their abominations, but also an infinite number even of the elect and
chosen of god, have been entangled, yea and have given credit to their false
lies and erroures. They were so nusled, and busily occupied with their fond
and fained traditions, with their naughty customs and inventions, that they
more like senseless persons, without any discretion or understanding, yea
without any respect of Gods holy word, wandered from all godliness and grace.
Not only have they stouped, bowed, and kneeled before stocks and stones,
lighting candels before it, made Crosses, blessing it, kissing it, and held up
their hands to it, but also have put their confidence in it. Nevertheless it
shall not continue always, for it follows. Esaias. 45.
The.x. horns which thou saw upon the beast: Baruc. 6.
Signifying the Kings, Princes, and their subjects, Ierem. 2.
which heretofore were favorers, servants, Revel. 15.
and maintainers of the Romish church, seeking to do good to that whore, yea
to their own damage and hinderaunce, because of the good will and blind zele
they bare unto her: Even as a man which loves a light and an dishonest woman,
is through her love and allureme^ts, so blinded, that he considers not her
dishonest behauior, nor ca^ mislike any thing in her, but frames himself
always to her pleasure, friendship or service, and so much as in him lies,
hating, contemning, and putting to death, through unlawful love, (wherewith
she has bewitched him) all them which (meaning his wealth) warn him of her,
and tell him of his fault how he is deceived and greatly misused: setting before
his eyes her fraud, falshoode, unshamefastness, fainednesse, and
unfaithfulness, all which he cannot judge of, until his eyes be open, and his
understanding illuminated by the grace of God, so that when he perceives how
he was beguiled and deceived, he hates and defieth her the more. Even so are
now a days the eyes of many Princes and Kings, Countries, Towns and Cities,
and other well disposed opened, and their hearts are touched by the mighty
working of gods holy spirit, and by the means of preaching and hearing of the
word of God, so that now they defy the whore with all her traditions and
abominations which they were wont to maintain and defend so willingly. Yea
those I say which for very blind zeal and love which they bare unto her, were
contented to kiss her feet, shall be as now her mortal and deadly ennimies.
They shall not pass upon her authority: they shall condemn her vsages: they
shall take from her the Realm and dominion which she now unjustly possesses:
they shall deny her tribute and obeisaunce, or to do her any homage, and at
length shall leave her desolate and comfortless. This shall not Princes only
do, but Kings and other temporal Magistrates, yea even the Metropolitanes,
Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops and Prelates. Of which, many ensamples are at
this instant to be found. And more followers of these ensamples, will be
hereafter. Which albeit they were the horns of the beast to defend yt whore
withal, yet shall they so abolish her, mislike her, and forsake her, that at
length she shall be left whole naked. They shall chase, pursue, and hunt the
Babilonish whore of Rome, with the clear trumpe of Gods holy word, that she
shall become pale and colourlesse, ready to sound.

Call to remembrance what God has wrought by his servant, John Wicliffe,
John Hus, Martine Luther, Oecolampadie, Zwinglie, Melancton, Capito, Bucer,
Calvin, Theodore de Beza, Viret, Peter Martyr, Bullinger, Alasco, Brentius
Regius, and other more. All which have brought low their Relics, Crucifixes
and Idols, (which they call saints,) Abbayes, Purgatory, Masses for all
souls and Indulgences. And moreover God shall raise some not inferior to them,
which shall make so much a do, and bring her to such a fall, that she shall
not be able to recover again, so that no man shall regard her any more,
neither shall there be any found to set her up again. They shall strip her
naked, that so many as behold her, may cry out upon her, and detest her, and
finally consume her flesh. Moreover they shall, bisides the taking away from her
al temporal revenues, rents, and al other worldly pleasures, confound her
perverse and carnal judgment of the scriptures, and so consequently consume
and make weak the keeping and observing of all her whorish Ceremonies. Last of
all, they shall all to burn her with fire, and bring to naught the whole mass
of their Decrees, Decretalles, Canons, Customs, and all other kind of
Idolatry. When as all these abominations shall cease, and be gone by the
means of the preaching of the Gospel, then this whore shall not be seen any
more, because the harlot continues no longer than her estimation lasts. Take
away their customs and Ceremonies, their jewels and costly raiment, their
Images (the light of their dominion) their paternitie and estimation, keep
back their Altares, their Mass, Bishops, Priests, Miters, Staves, Crosses and
Banners: of what estimation (I pray you) shall be their holy (as they term it)
wh^rish Church? which stands in nothing else than in outward false show of
many gay trifling and vain hipocritical Ceremonies.

This kind of consuming of the flesh, or this manner of burning, is not only
declared by external proves and evident examples, as it is come to pass in
many places in our days to diverse Friars. Monks or Priests, which setting
themselves for the defense of the Romish church, were killed and slain. And
yet shall it be with them, even as Baals Priests with the prophet Helias about
the river Rison, but are yet spiritually by a mystery of that which has been
foretold. For the Fowls, as ye shall hear, shall consume her flesh. For god
has (says the Angel) put in their hearts to fulfill his will. God has given
by inspiration of his holy spirit in the minds of those aforsaid, and such
like persons, to accomplish in this behalf his secret will and pleasure.
Namely to root out wholly and altogether that false and hipocriticall religion,
to suffer no longer the enormitie and foul abhominatio^ of that Antechrist.
After all these manifold Revelations, Revel. 1^.
I saw an other angel (says S.John,) signifying the true ministers and
preachers sent in these our days. As also in the.vj. Chapter of the
Revelation, Reave..6.
is made mention of the Angel which had the seal of the living God. Again in
the.x. chapter, Reave. 10.
of the angel which was environed with the cloud, and in the.xiiij. Chapter,
Revel. 14.
of the Angel which published and cried out the fall of Babylon, coming from
heaven downward All which is to declare that the godly preachers are sent of
God (having received great power, John.1.^^.
Acts.13.
Mar. 3.
Acts.18.
Romans 12.
John.6.
^say.11. Esaias. 9. 10.
fervent zeal, and steadfastness of the spirit of God) to declare and
pronounce the will of god valiantly, to the overthrow of that pes^ilent whore.
For like as the father has the life within him, even so has his son Christ
Jesus also, and in him live his servants, without any fear. And the earth was
light of his brightness. Not of the Angel which was but a Messanger, was the
earth lightened, but of the power which was given unto him. Where Gods word is
once truly preached, there the whole earth is lightened of the brightness of
the glory of God. And this Angel cried aloud, she is fallen. That great
Babylon, which was so proud, hie minded, and so common a whore, that
blasphemous sinagoge of the hipocrites, is turned vpside down. She is by the
just judgment of God, brought to great ignomie and shame. Her first overthrow
was, John.16.
when as the prince of this world was overcome and vanquished through ye death
of our savior Jesus Christ. Consider and ponder we^^ ^^ your mind, the
destruction of Jerusalem, after what sort the Jewish service ceased, and took
an end: namely when the material temple was thrown down, ^uke.19.
and not one stone left upon an other. Now in this our time, she shall have a
more sharper and severe judgment through the publishing and preaching of gods
word, to the comfort of all believers. Which although it be somewhat as it were
deferred, yet let them be as well assured of this her judgment to come, as we
know and certainly believe the other to be come. Call to remembrance, and
compare this place with the haling and plucking down of Abbays, Frieries, and
other religious houses (as they call them) in Germany, England, and in other
places, and make your accounts, that more and more sorrows shall happen, and
surely fall upon her shortly. The occasion of her fall, and the desolation
before the lord, is this: She is become a dwelling place to devils, Esaias. ^2.
more than ever she was before her first fall, for now enter they a great many
at once, yea well seven for one.

And she is become a keeper of unclean sprites. For all manner of Idolatry is
maintained and kept by her spiritual Courtiers and holy fath^rs (as they call
them) as be their Bishops and pries^s. Here reigns Simonie, Acts.^.
bying and selling of benefices, sacrilege, Galat. 5.
usury, ambition, fraud, covetousness, desire of money, Ephe. 3.
and to shed blood, envy, malice, lechery, gluttony, pride, uncleanness,
and all other wickedness. She is become a sauegard or cage of all unclean and
execrable birds. Gene. 18.1^
For in her dwells the adulterous Bishops, the buggerous Cardinals, and
lecherous Prelates, and a heap of Sodomitish Monks and Friars, Nuns, and
Sisters. All these compares Esaias the Prophet to wild beasts: Esaias. 34.
namely to Dragons, Ostriches, Eagles, Monkeis, Owls, Mermaides, and other
ravenous and greadie birds, and monsterous and strange beasts: for amongst
them has been used always, and is yet at this present, all manner of vain
and foolish toys, as mockings, scoffings and iestings, with crossing,
coniuring, gasing, singing, playing, and diverse other folish and strange
fashions to mock God withal. Here we might speak and rehearse many things:
Namely of the keeping of their stews, and how they go a whoring two manner of
ways: wher^unto we might join and declare what gain and profit the ruffian
prelates get thereby. As it is to be seen, nam^ly at Rome, what revenues and
rents, that great and soueraign ru^^ian gets by his whoores. And afterward
of the drouning and killing of children, and secretly murdering, and casting
in corners and ditches, as is usually practiced amongst these riggish and
lecherous prelat^s.

It is ^allen. For all the kinreds and nations of the world, except a very few
of simple and seely souls, which god through his unspeakable goodness, mercy
and grace has chosen and predestined to him self, Have dro^k^n of the wine
of the wrath of her fornication, Because they have not rendered thank^s to
almightye God, when occasion, opportunity and time served, therefore they are
fallen into that bottomless pit of all error and abomination, to the loss
both of body and soul. They have very carefully and narowly searched to run a
whoring after their hurtful and damnable witchcraftes and inchauntments,
believing and crediting their false doctrine and teachings, and so consequently
apply the^ selves to express it in their conversation and living.

And the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 13.
not having before their eyes the love and fear of God, Ierem. 3.
Eze 16.
have committed formcation with this vile and filthy whore. Oseas.2.
Yelding the^ selves to many false, Revel. 18.
Idolatrous, and strange worshippings. In such sort, that by the teachings,
admonitions, and persuasions of their holy fornicatours, they have broken the
bond of peace, Esaias. 54.
and have warred against the true children of God. Eze. 17.
Which notwithstanding yt they have wrongfully molested and troubled,
scornefully entreated and mocked, viol^ntly oppressed and persecuted, have yet
(chasing and banishing them) confiscated their lands and goods, turning their
wives and little children out of the doors a begging. Above all this, so
murder they and slay all such as they can catch, and shed very much innocent
blood, as hanging, drowning, or burning them most cruelly without any cause,
yea without any remorse of conscience, Luke.16.
even as if there were neither hell nor heaven, God nor devil, life nor death,
and as if there were no judgment, Romans 4.
or no accoumptes to be given before God of all their doings and cruelty. Also
their mitred Merchaunts, and shaven Massemongers, factors and sellers of men's
souls, are waxen very rich and welthy by selling of their Oil, Cream, Salt,
Holy water, Shrift, Candels, Blessings, Crosses, Banners, Ashes, Palms,
Incense, Wax, Beads, Bulls, and Pardons, letters of Dispensation to contract
Matrimony, licenses to eat flesh, eggs, butter. etc. All which not God, but
they upon pain of everlasting damnation, to their own commodity and profit
have forbidden. Of like quality are their Images, Ringing of Belles, their
Relics, Bones of departed Saints, and other like things. Whereby, and by
many other of their fained holiness, they are become (through the abundance
of their goods and richesse) so lusty, spiteful, proud and lofty, that they
have obtained the possession and governing of Countries and Realms, of Cities,
Fortresies and Castles, and many other pleasant places, Woods, Warrennes,
Parkes, Farms, Conduits, Fountains, Hounds, Horses, and Mules. So that in
authority and power, in riches, and substance, and in all kind of pleasant
things, they are nothing inferior to Kings and Princes.

Moreover, they are not ashamed to take other men's wives to fulfill their
most filthy and insatiable desires, yea honest men's daughters, maidens, and
servants, yea and young men too, which they most abhominably and shamefully
defile, mar and spoil. I leave you to consider what gains Bishops and
Prelates gather of the first frui^ts of the tenths, of Bulls, Pardons, and
resigning of benefices. Again it can not well be told, what gold and silver
they get by singing and saying of their Collects, by going and gathering of
their yearly Offerings, and the great livings, revenues and rentes, which
their Cathedral Churches, Abbeis, Religious houses and Couents have, so that in all things they pass the welthiest. There is no kind of pleasure come it never
so far off, be it never so dear and costly, but they will have a taste of it.
Notwithstanding, they ca^ play so well the hipocrites at their sermons, yt it
seems they regard nothing less than the vanity of this world, and praise
above measure fasting and abstinence. Math. 6.
But they have their reward here, and shall hereafter have their portion
with the dissemblers and hipocrites, where shall be weeping, wringing of hands,
and gnashing of teeth.

And I h^ard another voice, an other warning of the spirit, whereby the true
and faithful ministers of God are instructed and taught, warning us and
saying: ^ Esd. ^.
Go out of her my people, come away with Esdras out of that wicked Babylon,
Gene 19.
go forth with Abraham out of Caldee, ^say.52.
run and fly with Loathe out of filthye Sodom^, and meddle no more with that
whoorish Church of Rome, deny, forsake, and detest wholly her false and fained
holiness, her foul and filthy ceremonies, abhor her dissimulation and
hypocrisy, curse and ban their trifles and iestings, and have no fellowship
more with these whooremongers, Nicolaites, and Balaamites. Lift up, and repent
from the bottom of your hearts your former folly and abominations which you
have done in times past, and come to me (says the Lord) all ye that trauail
and are heavy laden, and I shall refresh you. Get ye away from among them,
without looking behind you, that ye be not partakers of their sins, which is
the vengeance and ire of Gods wrath, and indignation. At all times and seasons
there have been holy and godly men, and well learned fathers, which through
their excellent and divine works and writings have exhorted and cried
(especially since the coming up of the Pope) for redress and reformation of
the church, for the amendment of many faults, and to see brotherly
exhortation and christian discipline used in the same. As by Bertrandus
Herebaldus, Bere^garius Thuronensis, Bruno Andegauensis, Peter Damianus,
Valeriane Medeburgensis, Bernardus Clareuale^sis, Robertus Tuitiensis, Ioachim
Abbas, Cyrillus Graecus, Ioa^nes Salisburgensis, Gilbertus La^tcestrius,
Angelus Hierosolimitanus, Guilhelmus de sancto Aniore, Guido Bonatus, Nicolaus
Gallus, Hubertinus de Casali, Pelius Casali, Petrus, Ioannes, Marcilius
Patauinus, Ioa^nes Paris, Arnoldus de villa noua, Michael Caesenas, Gulielmus
Occam, Nicolaus de Luca, Marcus de Flore^tia, Ioa^nes wiclefus, Ioa^nes Hus,
Michael de Bononia, Ioannes Hildeshem, Dantes Aligerius, Fra^ciscus Petrarcha,
Nicolaus Clemadis, Petrus de Aliaco, Ioannes Gerson, Laurentius Valla,
Lodouicus Arelatensis, Ioannes Segebius, Thomas Redone^sis Gallus, Mattheus
Palmarius, David Boys, Dionysius Chartusianus, Ioa^nes Miluerto, Ioannes
Gorchius, Ioannes de Vsalia VVormace^sis, Ioannes Ghyler, Ioa^nes Crutser,
VVessalus Groenegensis, Eneas Siluius, Redoricus Samorensis, Iulianus
Brixiensis, and Hieronymus Sauonarola. Beside these there be other which are of
our time, as Ioa^nes Reuchlin, Baptista Mantuanus, Baptista Panetius, Johannes
Crestonus, Erasmus, Lutherus, Zwinglius, Caluinus, and more other. All which,
the Papists for the most part have condemned for heretics. To rehearse here
their wrytings, their reasons and testimonies, it would require to much time, I
must therefore leave it behind. I have only rehearsed some of their names to
this end and purpose, that it might appear to the Reader, that at all times
God has had one or other, that has not ben in all points consenting to their
blasphemies. Albeit, the light of Gods truth was not then so perfectly reveled
unto them as it is now a days (God be praised) unto us. Many godly and
virtuous Emperors and Princes, have by general Counsels, and by all other
means possible assayed and proved to have a refourmation and amendment made
of all absurdities, and abuses, which were crepte into the church, but they
have always met with wicked and ungodly princes which resisted them and let
them of their virtuous enterprises, which also maintained those Antechrists in
their impiety and wickedness, defending them with toothe and nail to the
vttermoste: nevertheless it is without any doubt, that these, as Pharao, with
all his power in the red Sea, and as that proud kind of Phariseys and
priests of the Jews in the City, because of their manifest blasphemies
perished, so shall likewise at the hour and time of God appointed, all these
perish and vanishe away. For the sins of this whore, or the innumerable
blasphemies of this false religion, the great abomination and filthy
idolatry, the burning, hangyng, drowning, and sheading of innocente blood,
are come up into Heaven, ^poc. 1^.
there to desire the vengeance of God, for their uncleanness and
vnsh^mefastnesse, has caused and provoked Gods wrath and indignation against
them. And God has remembered their iniquities, The multitude and greatness
whereof ar come up into heaven Therefore have they most justly deserved the
threatened plagues of the most righ^eous God, no less than Sodom and Gomorre,
^en. 19.
for their transgression and wickednesses: which when it was foretold them,
made light of it, and went forward to al mischief, until God pouring out his
vengeance, destroyed them with fire and brimstone.

Reward her even as she has rewarded you, Measure unto her again with such
measure as she did measure unto you. Take ye good heed, and look narowly, ye
that have gotten the judgment seat: Cry upon her, even as she did cry upon
you, snare her, as she has snared you. Again, as she has heretofore
wrongfully molested and troubled you, scornefully entreated, yea, and by her
Traditions judged and condemned you even unto death, so now do ye likewise
rebuke her, and exhort her of her wickedness, Math. 5.10.
judge her like a very harlot, John.6.
and condemn her by the mighty and true word of God to everlasting fire, 1.
Corin. 4.
which can not be quenched. And give her double according to her works. And
in the cup that she has filled to you fill her the double. That is, render
unto her double in all punishments, and give unto her even for worldly
punishements which she has brought upon the elect of God, hellishe torments.
For corporal and bodily troubles and vexations, eternal pains and torment of
the mind: for the blame and ignomynie of this world, perp^tuall shame and
confusion: for temporal death, everlasting damnation both of body and soul.

And the cup. etc. That is al kind of troubles, adversities and miseries
which she filled to you out of her cup, that is, caused to come upon you,
shall be doubled to her again: for (as it is said) she shall receive for
temporal evils, everlasting. The holy Ghost calls here double, that which is
without comparison, even as a little time to no time or euerlastingnesse. Her
pleasure and joy shall be converted into sorrows and griefs, her merry and
pleasant talk, her iestyngs and laughyngs into weepyng, mournyng, wringyng of
hands and gnashyng of teeth. Her commaundings shall be turned into crauings,
her reverence into contempt, her honor into shame. etc. For she has
pretended most faynedly an holy kind of priesthode, she boasts and braggeth
much o^ that which they are furthest from. She has usurped and wrongfully
taken upon her, and proudely claimed unto her a royal majesty and highness.
Which two kind of dignities she has yet worse used: let her therefor
wait and attend on the plagues and punishementes due unto her pernicious
temeritie and arrogancy. Take away her pleasant Euphrates, with the spoil
and great revenues, wherewithal she has hitherto so unjustly maintained and
kept her self, and throw her in the deep pit of all mis^ries and
wretchedness. Esaias. 47.
Math. 11. 2^
For she says in her heart, I sit being a Queen, Math. 16.
enuironned with joy and pleasure, I am the chief of the universal world, on
me depends the Catholic and holy Church, I have authority and power in
Heaven, earth, and Hell: I have also might to bind and to loose, to save and
condemn: It stands not with me, as it does with th^se that be not of this
world, for all things here are at my commandment.

I am no widow, I am not d^solate. The highest powers and governors of this
world do assiste and defend me, putting to death al those that lay against
me. Nero, Domitian, Traian, or Maxence were never more addicted to the defense
of my predecessors, than are now adays the Princes of our time ready to
maintain with fire and faggot my Decrees, Traditions and Ceremonies. Therefore
I shall see no mournyng. I shall continue always, I shall be called Madame at
all times: Deuteronomy. 8.
my kingdom shall abide for ever, my seat shall no man take away from me, I
shall never fall, nor any evil can come upon me. After this sort, boaste
(with no small presumption) our Papists also, saying: That the little vessel
of Sain^^ Peter may well by the reason of weather and tempeste be shaken, and
with the waves of the sea troubled, but never can be overwhelmed or perish:
hereby going about to prove that their superstitious and Romyshe church
should abide still, and never be overthrown. But they consider not of what
ability and power the Lamb is, which abides upon the mount Syon, against
whom they stick and make war against continually: whose congregation and
little flock they persecu^e daily with great tyranny, cruelty, and
rigorousnesse. Therefore shall her plagues come at one day. God shall once pour
upon this wicked race and malignant church, Death, sorrows, hunger and sw^rde^
even as he did send upon the ^ynfull Cities ^ire and Brymstone. They shall be
deprived for ever of the life w^iche is in Christ Jesus, Gen 19.
Exodus 9.
they shall remain in sobbes and tears, Psalm. 11.
they shall not cease to mourn, to wring their hands, Collos. 3.
and gnashe their teeth, Math. 24.
they shall be inheritours o^ eue^lastyng darkness, Mark.9.
their worm shall never die, they shall hunger and never be sati^fied. Math.
25.
And this whore with the whole generation of hypocri^es shall be burnt with
unquenchable fyr^, pr^pared for the devil and his angels. This sent^nce is
not so severe as true, for the Lord who shall judge them, is of power and
might: Psalm. 50.
he is holy and fait^ful in mercy, true in his word and promise, Romans ^.
marvelous in all his works, Dan. 5.
fearful, Leui. 10.
terrible and righteous in his iudgement^ against the wicked. Deuteronomy. 1.
No man then shall be able in those days to withdraw any part of the
threatened vengeaun^e of his wrath from the evil doer. Neither our Lady with
castyng of her b^ades into the ballaunces of S. Michaell, neither S. John
Baptist, with his lamb holdyng a cross, neither S. Peter with his Key, nor S.
Paul, with his sword (as they use to make them) yea and if Moses, Samuel,
and the rest of the Prophets, with Noe, David, and Job, would make
intercession yet should they not be heard. And the Kings of the earth, namely
the worldly and carnal Princes which have committed fornication, and lived in
pleasure with her, in all uncleanness and filthynesse, shall bewail her, when
they shall see her overthrown and so ill entreated, it shall grieve them sore,
that they may or can not maintain and defend her with water, fire and sword
against ^od and his saints, for they shall be nothing well pleased with the
ordinances and institutions of Christ, because they do hate nothing more
than the works of the spirit, that is, to frame their lives according to the
will of God. It shall anger them to the heart, that they are not able to burn
still and slay all those that speak, write, or preach against the deeds of
the flesh and do reprove them of their fornication, adultery, and their
mischeuous and inordinate life, and rebuke them of their most abhomynable
idolatry.

And lamente over her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning. Revel. 1^.
And shall stand a far of, for fear of her torments, crying and saying:
Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that m^ghtie City. Alas, our mother the
holy Church of Rome, so many holy fathers, Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops:
Alas, for our Monks, Chanons, and Friars with their so holy, so devout and
straight lyu^s and rude garments. Alas, for so many Pardons, Indulgences, and
confessions, so many principal bye Feasts, Holy days, and gay Coapes and
Garments. Alas for our holy Water, holy Candelles, holy Palms, holy Ashes,
hallowed Belles, organs play, and prick song, and the res^ of our so gay
ceremonies. With these and the like words shall they bewail her, trembling
and quakyng for fear, and crying out on this manner: Woe, woe, to that strong and
great city Babylon, y^ mighty city: for in one hour is thy judgment come.
2 Thessalonians. 2.
Thou art suddenly perished with ye sword of his mouth, before thou can be
aware of it. Alas, who shall now pray for us? who shall now sing our Diriges,
masses of Requiem, and do the funeralles for our soul? Whether shall we go
now to ^hrifte? who shall now absolve and pardon us our sins? where shall we
now fetch our ashes? Who shall consecrate us our Candles and Palms? who
shall sing or ryng and cast holy water at our burials, and redeem us out of
purgatory? Such shall be the complaints of the wicked and faithless persons.

And the merchants of the earth, which do make any trafike of the merchandise
of their Temple (which place does serve them in stead of the market) as well
amongst the Mahometistes, as the Papists. But because we are most troubled
and molested here in Europe, of that popish Antechriste, we shall endeavor to
speak as we have done hitherto most of him. These merchantes then (I say)
shall bewail her, and mourn over her, very sore, and much more than the
Kings did. For no man buieth their ware any more. their pedlary is nothing set
by any more The wares or merchaundises of their shoppes, are Masses, prayers,
blessyngs, Crosses, their cakes, great and small, which they sell (to get the
more, as it is esteemed) in steed of God their maker, Holy bread, holy water,
Candels, relikes, Pardons, S^ala coeli, Diriges, Annuaries, and diverse other
like, whereby they get the very sweat and blood of the poor silly souls.
All which they sell for good mo^ey daily, and yet they keep nevertheless:
For the people have but the hearing, the eye sight, or a taste of trifles.

And every Ship master, and all the people that occupy ships, and
shipmen, and whosoever travail on the sea, shall stand afar of: That is to
say, all Bishops, Ordinaries, Abbots, Parsons, Uicars and Massing Priests, and
other like, living on the sea: Of these waueryng, blind and zealous people, al
these (says the voice) stood a ^arre of, even as the merchants did, and cried.
In like manner When they saw the smoke of the burning, saying: What City was
like unto this great City in riches, power, wealth, and voluptuousness? No
Prince or lord is better entertained, of al things better provided, and more
attendance given upon him than these shauelings be. For their trust and
confidence is only in this City, this is their God: Herein consists their
whole felicity and blessedness.

These Shipmen shall (because of their great loss) so weep and wayle, that
men shall cast duste upon their foolish and fond wytlesse heads, that is to
say. They shall be so wrapped in darkness, that they shall not see in their
understanding because of their unbelief, and also their knowledge shall be
made dull, blunte, and beastly, by the means of jealousy, fury, and rage.
All this shall they do, to show their great grief: as for their repentance,
Genesis 4.
it shall be like unto that of Caius, Pharao, Esau, Antiochus, Exodus 8. 9. 10.
11. 12.
and Judas, their predecessoures. And in their sorrow, Math. 26.
they shall complain on this manner: Alas, alas, that great City, that
worthy and most famous Rome, that sweet and pleasant Babylon, our holy
mother, wherein we were made so rich, so proud, so myghtie and glorious, that
all the world did dread, honor and serve us, and we felt no trouble, no
kind of adversity, or misery, is now made desolate, she is fallen. The
apples that thy soul lusted after, are departed from thee, the learned, the
wise and men of understanding which thou for the maintenance of thy beautified
whoordom desiredst (says the menacing voice of the holy Ghost) are now
departed from thee, and will not (since they have seen and considered thy great
abomination) have to do with thee any more, but they shall forsake and leave
thee, curse and abolishe thee quite: and where as they were wont to praise,
ma^^ much o^, and magnifye thee before the world, shall now defye th^^, yea,
and (by the testimony of the holy and sacred Scripture) rebuke, condemn and
confound th^e. Of the common sort also men of an ^onest and ciu^le lyse,
which were wont to defend thee, nothing suspecting but thynkyng that all
these trumperies, and beggarly Ceremonies were profitable and necessary to be
observed (notwithstanding that thy life and conuersasation was wicked and too
too heinous) shall speak against thee, and fly from thee as soon as their
eyes and understanding by the virtue of the spirit of God shall be opened, Math.
6.
seeing that thou art detestable and diuelishe. Gala^. ^.
Briefly, no man, have he never so little a taste of Gods holy word, 1 Timothy 4
shall be ab^e to abide thee, 2. Tim. 4.
or suffer thy m^ny^es^ whordom any lon^er: for thy vphol^ers are but
dissemblers, men plesers, fl^tterers, ra^ling Sophistes, Scoffers, brawling
Canonists, Sorbonists, Epicures, Libertines, and other ungodly and slanderous
persons, very Antechristes. Touching honest, sober, 1. Tim.3.
discrete and virtuous persons, busy in godly works, 1. Tim. 5.
fearing God, and seeking his glory from the bottom of their hearts, which
also desire with all their strength, zeal, and feruencie to set forth the
same, they shall leave and renounce al thy pestiferous and dangerous ways.
These gross and fat ship men, and mariners shall say yet. Woe, woe, Alas,
alas, that great City wherein we were m^de rich, all that had ships on the
sea, by her costlinesse, for in one hour she is made desolate. We which had
Bishopriks, Abbays, Benefices, Prebendaries, and great Revenues, amongst these
foolish unsteadfast, and worldly minded people, waxed by all manner of ways
welthy and rich, through the dear and costly wares which our ships were
laden withal on every side, which are innumerable. We (I say) are in great
heaviness, and in such a perplexity when we remember of that so great and
famous City, as we are not able to express, because of her so sudden fall,
being in one hour.

The.14. vision containing the just judgment of god over the assembly of
Antechrist, and that gracious vengeance of the innocent blood of his good and
faithful servant: which I have taken out of the.xix. chapter of the
Revelation, where it begins in this manner.
I Saw the heavens open: that is to say. The mysteries of God were showed me,
Reave. 19. 11.
and his secrets were fully declared and expounded unto me, I perceive that
through faith and humbleness, great knowledge of the mysteries of God were
obtained. ^say. 66.
Wysdom.11
For the heavens are opened when Gods word is freely preached, M^th. 11.12.
and are shut up when it is not preached, or not regarded, but in the stead of
it, men are fed with dreams and lies. And behold a white horse appeared unto
me. Hereby are meant the true and faithful ministers of the word of God: whose
office and condition is, (as S. Paul says) to announce throughout all the
whol^ world this heavenly doctrine, 2. Corin. 1.
and instruct, teach, and admonish both great and small. And he that sat upon
him, wa^ called faith^ull and true. This is the only and true son of God
which is called faithful, just, and true, Math. 16.
because h^ is found faithful, Acts.9.
and infallible in his promises and word, Psalm. 145.1^ Psalm. ^^.
for the Lord (says the Psalmist) is very righteous in all his ways, true in
his sayings, p^rfect in all his doings. He cannot but teach a right, and speak
a troth, Romans 9.
for he is the truth him self. John.14. John.16.
No more cannot those which are endued with his spirit, who leads and
conducteth them in all truth. He has done according to justice and equity in
condemning that wicked and abominable whore, in destroying that filthy
sinagoge of Satan, in d^liuering and exalting his poor afflicted Church.
First of all he did fight in his own person, as a worthy Champion against the
devil, hell, and damnation, whom he has overcome, Psalm. 23.
conquered and vanquished by his own death, and glorious passion. And now does
he overthrow the Devil, Ioh. 16.
and all his adhere^ts, by the means of his faithful servant, distributers
of his holy word and mysteries, ^. Cor. 15.
which he now graci^usly sendet^ under the figure of the white horse. ^ohn.12.
For his servant (as Abacuck testifies) are lusty and well animated horses,
^ba. 3.
whom the Lord condu^teth, which are (as Jeremy calls them) whiter than snow,
by the means of their unfeigned, and undefiled faith. And his eyes were like as
a flame of fire, mighty and clear. Whereby is not only understood his godly
wisdom and knowledge, whereby he knows and judges al things, but also all
the heavenly and spiritual gifts of the holy G^ost. Behold says Zachary,
Z^ch. 3.
1. Cor. 1.
upon the only stone (which S. Paul expounds to be Christ,) shall be.vij.
eyes, which are the.vij. spirits of god, wherewith god does lig^ten the hearts
of his chosen, and kindles the fire of his love in ye mind of his faithful.
Psalm. 119.
His word is a la^tern to their f^e^e, his law an^ testimonies are pure, and
undefiled, giving light to the eye. And upon his hea^ were many crowns. Even
as the same was seen (being a figure of Christ) upon the head of Jesus the
son of Iosedech the high Priest, 1. Esd. 3.
E^cle. 4 9.
to signi^ie that Jesus Christ is the sovereign and king above al kings, which
has power in heaven and earth for ever. He rules and governs al nations
with an ir^n rod. For he is the Lord of hosts, the everlasting king of glory.
He is a mighty and puissa^t gouernoure, setting over the Mount Sion his holy
hill. He gives prosperity and government to Kings, and his elect and chosen
are crouned in him with grace and mercy for evermore. For he reserueth in
heaven for us, an inheritance immortal and undefiled: 1. Peter.1.
Again, he has laid up for them that keep the faith, ^. Timo. 4.
a crown of righteousness, Revel. 2.
and will give a crown of life to them that be faithful unto the death. etc.
^ames.1.
All warrefares and victories of the saints depend upon him only. And he had a
name written, to wit, almighty, marvelous and fearful, Adonai, Emanuel, a
name above all names, even the holy one of Israel, the Lord of Sabbath, the
Lord of hosts, our redemer, savior, and righteousness. Math. 16.
No man knew this name but him self and them which he has reveled it unto,
neither flesh nor blood, nor Heathen, Turk, Jew, or false Christian is able
to comprehend this name ^right: Math. 16.
Albeit they have good signs and tokens, yet no man can say that Jesus is the
Lord, 1. Cor. 12.
without the inspiration of the spirit of God, who opens the very truth of
God. The number of Gods elect are also signified or comprehended under this
name, which the world can not acknowledge nor understand. And he was clothed
with a garment dipped in blood. His mortal body which he took upon him for our
redemption, was so sore beaten and grievously wounded, that from the soul of
the feet to the very crown of the head, even from top to toe, nothing was
left whole or sound. This mighty Champion is he which came from Edom and
Bos^a, whose garments were sprinkled with blood, his clothes were rayed, even
as of those that tread the wine press. For his manhood suffered most shameful
and pain^full death. Esaias. 63. Esaias 53.
He him self alone trod the wine press of his wrath, Math. 8.
and had none to help him. He his own self was wounded for our sins, 1.
Peter.2.
and our infirmities were laid upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. And
his name was called the word of God. John.^.
Christ Jesus the son of god, Ephesians. 3.
is that eternal and everlasting word of God, Psalm. 33.
which was from the beginning by God, Heb. 1.
by whom also heaven and earth are made, Colloss. 1.
and all that in them is, the very ^mage of his substance in whom the father
is represented, whereby also we understand and know the will of the father, for
the word of God is a true guide of the conscience. This word was made flesh:
John.1.
that is, became man for our sakes, saving, ius^ifying, and glorifying all
those that believe on him. And the warriers which were in heaven, followed him
upon white horses. These are the true and faithful ministers which follow
their master and c^ief captain Christ Jesus upon white horses: that is in
innocence of life and godly co^uersatio^ which they profess. These horses are
nothing else than their mortal bodies ready to battle. For true christians
mortify their flesh, yt concupiscence thereof, Coloss. 3.
and bring their carnal lusts under subjection, Gala. 5.
and their bodies obedient to ye spirit. They become servants to
righteousness, and not to sin, Romans 6.
they are worthy Soldiers of God, for they follow the Lord of ^ostes: such an
army saw the servant of the Prophet Elizeus in Doathim in a vis^on. They were
clothed with fine linen, white and pure, signifying the simplicity and
innoce^cie which they have in Christ Jesus their captain, and good and perfect
gifts which the Lord gives them. As S. John him self expounded them a little
before, where he says that the fine linen are the true iustifications which
they have of none other, but from their head Christ. These are ye spiritual
weapons whereof S. Paul speaks, saying: 1. Cor. 10.
Though we walk in the flesh, yet we do not war after ye flesh, for the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty through god to cast down
holds: and out of his mouth went a sharp sword, which is that wonderful
judgment of his word. Through this sharp sword are the faithful and beleuers
saved to ^ife everlasting, and the wicked infidels judged to everlasting death
and damnation. For it is unto some a savior of life unto life, and to others a
savior of death, unto death. John.15.
1. Corin. 5.
With this sword shall be cut of the dead branches which in him bear no
fruicts, and the rotted members from the body. In like manner shall be the good
from the bad, Math. 24.
and the Goats from the sheep, Psalm. 2. 45.
with this sword divided and separated: Oh how terrible, fearful, and sharp
shall be the judgment of the Lord, the rod and scepter of his dominion against
the wicked in those days, as he shall say: Mat. 25.
Go from me ye curssed into everlasting fire: Again, how comfortable and
joyful a thing shall it be for the elect to see them selves exempted of this
condemnation, and to have the fruition of that souerain blessedness in eternal
glory. For he it is that treads the wine press of the fierc^nesse and wrath
of almighty God. That is: Esaias. 63.
he shall pour forth his vengeance upon the proud and infidels, and shall
punish them most grievously with his strong and mighty arm, stretched over
their heads, striking them in his rage and fury, wherunder all things are set.
And I saw an A^gell standing in the Sun, signifying the Apostles and al true
ministers of the word of god which stand in the bright and clear sun of
righteousness, ^al. 4.
^eue. 20.
^eb. 10.
which is Christ Jesus, that amiable and shining morning star. And these
worthy witnesses stand fast in a sted^ast assurance of faith in his name,
against the whole multitude of Antechrist, 1. Corin. 10.
without moving of their feet from ye well grounded stone, which is Christ
Jesus, which for nothing in this world, Romans 8.
be it persecution, pain, torment, or death, will shrincke therefro. And he
cried with a loud voice to all the Fowls that did fly by the mids of
heaven. This voice cried, and shall call until the worlds end, Esaias. 55.
with a fervent and constant mind, Proverb. 1.
unto al fowls which fly under heaven, James. 1.
to them which are humble of mind, Esaias. ^1.
and be^^me spiritual through faith and heavenly gifts. These f^ying fowls
laying aside, and quite abolishing all worldly plesures or corruptiblenesse,
Philip. 3.
lift themselves up above their affections on hie, and make their conversation
to be in heaven, and lead here in earth an heavenly life. These are the chose^
souls which the father feeds and sustaineth wyth^ute their own deserts. Genesis
11.12
Such a one was Abraham in Mesopotamie, Exodus 19.
Moses in Sinai, Helias upon ye mount Carmelus, 3. Reg. 1^.
Daniel amongst ye lions, Dan. 6.
^aul in Damas^o, S. John in Pathmos, and many more even herein England, Acts.9.
and in other places, R^ue. 1.
and shall be to the worlds end. Ephe. 4.
The manner of their calling is: Colloss. 3.
Come assemble you in unity of faith and mind, knit your selves together in
Christ Jesus, in love which is the bond of perf^ctnesse, that the peace of god
which passes al understanding, Phil. 4.
keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus our Lord. Prepare ye (says the
Angel) to come to that great and supernatural good supper of the Lord: Which
is that eternal and everlasting refreshing of the soul. Come on and taste of
the most daintiest dishes, and most sumptuous fare, 1. Corin. ^
which never eye has seen, Esaias. 6 4.
neither care has heard, neither came into man's heart, which God has
prepared for them y^ love him, Romans 1^.
learn out of gods holy word what his good will and pleasure is, Ephe. 6.
follow the same in life and manners, 1. Peter. 5.
fly from al worldly pleasures. Live soberly, temperately, chastely and
righteously in the fear of god, attending and waiting upon the coming of our
Lord and God. Finally, order and frame your life so, that ye may eat the fl^she
of kings, that ye may by exhortation and ensample, teach the worldly gouerners
to convert unto the Lord, and to forsake all manner of filthy, carnal and
sinful lusts. And that ye may eat the flesh of all captains and mighty
men, pluck down the hie minded hearts of tira^ts, to bring under their ^rueltie
and lofty stomachs, devour also the flesh of the worldly rich and proud man,
cause him to leave of al worldly pleasures, ^xcesse, and manifold vanities.

And the fl^she of horses, and of them that sit on them. And the flesh of al
fre men and bo^dmen, and of small and great Regard neither horses nor them that
sit on the^, but tear their flesh in pieces. Spare no man, neither hie nor
low, rich nor poor, bond nor free, but check and taunt them, that they
leaving their old and wicked ways, turn to the lord. As for the obstinate and
stubborn which will not bow but resist, break them and hew them in pieces,
punish the wicked and carnal worldlings of what degree so ever they be, and
these beastly Antechristes and cruel Grasshoppers which sit on them: take away
the pride and loftiness from these loitering prelates, and idle bishops, and
also of the^ that imitate and follow their mischeuous hypocrisy, deliver the
oppressed, and turn back the cruel persecution from the innocents, pour
down thy wrath over the wicked according to their deserts, Math. 24.
and let none escape. Luke. 17.
Imitate the Eagle and Kite, resort there where as the dead carcasses, (men
without lively faith, and drouned in sin) be. Teach every one to walk
honestly in their vocation, let Princes understand that it behooves them to be
learned and wise in all sciences: Psalm. 2.
but abo^e al in the holy Bible which be the Scriptures, and that it becomes
the^ to walk in the fear of god, not to do al things unadvisedly, and
according to their own pleasure, but orderly, as reason and equity does
require, not to oppress the poor, innocents and fatherless, but to aid,
succoure and help them, and to punish the wicked and malefactors, nor use
exfortion in taxing overmuch their commens and subjects. The rich and welthy,
that they be merciful, good stewards and distributers of ye gifts of God
committed to their charge. To the hipocrites and Idolaters, that they leave of
their vain trust or confidence, in any creatures, and return unto the living
God. 1. Cor. 7.
Again the whoremonger, that he go no more like a beast and Mule in whom is no
understanding, after other men's wives, but rather take his own wife, to fly
al occasions of evil. Command the ruler to be faithful in his calling, ^om. 13.
and the Commons lovingly to obey. The wife to be true and obedient to her
husband: ^. Pet. 2.
again, ^phe. 5.6.
the husband to be friendable and loving to his wife, Coloss. 3.4.
defend her, cherish and nourish her, even as Christ defended his Church, and
cared for her. Children to be obedient to their Parents, the Parents not to
provoke their children to wrath. And the servant to obey them that be their
masters. etc. Thou shall eat the flesh of the Giantes, ^zech. 39.
^sal. 67.
and drink the blood of the Princes of the earth, of the Weathers, of Buckes
and Bulls which shall be slain at Basan. And I saw the Beast, and the Kings
of the earth, and their army. That is, these Ruffians and lecherous Bishops,
Monks, Abbots, and the rest of these shauelings of Antechrist, with the
Princes of this world, cruel tyrant^, catchpols and hangmen of the Beast, are
assembled together, to consult and gather soldiers, and set them out to fight
against him which sat upon the white horse, to make war against Christ and
his beloved Church, his chosen and peculiare people, his servant which
without any kind of doubt or wavering, follow him. They seek (I say) to kill
and slay these pleasant birds, because they did eat and consume their flesh.
They rebuked their evil corrupt manners and unrighteous dealing, their wicked
and abominable life, therefore they make war against Christ, where so ever
the word of God was sincerely preached and taught, the glory of God
preferred, and the security and naughtiness of man's sinful and abominable
life reproved, there has always insurrections, tumultes and seditions risen
amongst the hipocrits of traitorous enterprises. Luke.2.
For the word of God is a sign of contradiction, and the stone of offense.
These Princes and captains with their most cruel soldiers are set on,
provoked and stirr^d by the malice of these Idolatrous Bishops and Prelates,
even as Pilate and Herod were moved of Annas and Caiphas to put Christ to
death. ^a. 27.
^ohn.18.
^ctes.28.
And as Felix governor of Jury at the request and pleasure of Ananie the hie
priest, kept S. Paul in prison. The Emperor Traian and other tyrants should
never have persecuted the Christians until this day, if their horses had not
been pricked so fast and so often with the spurs of wicked and leu^e Prelates.
And what diligence and endeavor they have done to overthrow, vanquishe and
root out the truth, may be seen by their letters, written and sent to so
many Kings and Princes. No small a do had they to bring John Wicliffe in
discredit and slander with the people, the which (after he had been buried
forty years) took up his bones, and burned them with fire, and cast the ashes
into the river, showing their tyranny upon his bones, whom they could not be
revenged of in his life time, no not for all their requests and suits made to
the king of England, Richard by name.

Again, Sigismunde the Emperor would never have done contrary to his promise
fortified by a safe conduct granted unto John Hus, to go and come safely to
the Counsel at Constance, and in a manner forced him: for if he would be the
image of the beast, and an obedient child of the Romish church, he must do all
as it pleased them. It is manifest what diligence and travail they have
assayed, what violence and force they have used, to banishe and chase the truth
of the Gospel out of Germany, what practices, crafty policies and fetches
they have sought to deface it here in England, and what cruelty and tyranny
they show in France, to the utter destruction of the country we have seen
and see, and yet daily at this instant seele they. And above all, have we
felt, and (...) yet feel the experience of it in low Germany (our native
country) and Flaunders, where as soon as Gods word was sincerely preached,
and the Gospel of Jesus Christ openly declared, O how Sata^s kingdom was rent
and diminished? how idolatry and superstition was brought low, and all
excess, surfeiting and drunkenness, all wickedness and vice, all pride and
naughtiness beat down and forsaken. The whooremongers and adulterers began to
be ashamed of their filthiness: priests and Friars misliked of their estate,
and durst not say Mass, go on procession and funeral, and other of their
abhominatio^s: they covered their crounes, let grow their beards, hid
themselves, yea and demed yt they were such. Many light women were converted,
many ruffians and baudes were astonished for yt they saw their houses not so much
haunted as before. These with ye rest of the spiritual baudes and ruffians,
were well ashamed and wist not where to hide themselves, because of y^ light,
which did shine so bright in the world. On the other side, consider how the
kingdom of Christ increased, augmented and multiplied daily, how the honor of
God was set forth, the name of the Lord was magnified and inuocated, praised
and blessed. How many people which hitherto have lived like ignorant doltes
in all security and beastlynesse, were then come to knowledge and
understanding, and leaving their former life, gave the^ selves to virtue and
godliness, and cleauyng to that which they heard, expressed it in their life
and conversation. Last of al, it was marvel to see how charity, humility,
sobriety, honesty, and al other godly exercises ye works of the spirit were put
in practice amongst this new springing church: and contrariwise, the deeds of
the flesh forsaken, and laid aside. But that great dragon the devil, that old
serpent, who from the beginning hated the truth, and man's felicity, seeing his
kingdom go to wrack, his gay and finely disguised church d^cay, his pilferyng
trashe and beggarly Ceremonies nothing set by: yea and seeing his beastly body,
and al his members by ye preaching of Gods word so clean uncovered, and beaten
to the ground, did wax mad and outrageous. Wherefore he moved and stirred
up kings, who entering in allegiance and alliance with his Antechrist, gathered
a counsel against the Lord and his church, to scatter and put asunder his
flock, and to kill and slay his chosen. Which thing afterward they practicing
made them up, and not without treason, invaded the countries there, not to
govern according to justice and equity, but violently and tyra^nously to rule
and reign, yea notwithstanding their priuileages enacted and given by act of
parliament, confirmed and established by oath of the Prince him self, have
they yet against all reason and law oppressed the commons, and innocents. As
for the christians, it is too well known how they are used, therefore I leave
of to speak any more of that matter, not mistrusting but that it shall be
declared at large of some diligent writer. Psalm. 2.
But what is their purpose? Acts.2.
The Lord against whom they strive, Proverb. 1.
is too strong, he knows all their enterprises and imaginatio^s, Psalm. 37.
Psalm.59.2
and laugheth them to scorn, He sees their fall and overthrow, and the
victory of his chosen, and the deliverance of his people is in his hand. Let
them rage never so sore, let them murder and slay never so many, Reave. 14.
blessed are they which die in the Lord, they shall never be able to root
out the truth, much less to obtain any victory against God, for the Lamb
is strong, and abides valiantly upon that immovable and inexpugnable mount
Syon, having with him an hundredth and.4400000. These be as many as have
received his true faith, and are the true seed of Abraham, having the seal of
the holy Ghost, Psalm. 2.
Math. 3.
bearing the name of their father engraued on their forhead, John.8.
Romans 4.
redeemed and bought from the earth, predestined and chosen to life
everlasting, 2. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 2.
which are not defiled with women, Ephe. 1.
Romans 9.
whose souls and faith are not spotted with false doctrine or idolatry and
superstition papistical. Reave. 14.
These ar virgins which receive not the false, Ephe. 4.
hipocriticall and whoorish doctrine of ye Antechrist. These be the virgins
whereof the holy Ghost speaks, and not them only (as they say) which never
married, else Abraham, Moses, David, Zachary, Peter, Philip, and the rest of
the godly which have been married, could have been of the number of those
virgins: for they judge marriage to be vncl^ane, and a deed of the flesh. They
are not ashamed to aduouch in their Decretals, that it is better and a smaller
offense to keep a ^u^dreth hoores, than to marry or contracte matrimony,
after they have vowed chastity. Oh beasts that ye are, the spirit of
Chastity did never cause you to forbid holy matrimony, but it was the spirit
of uncleanness Asmodeus, Beelsebub, and that spirit whereof the Sodomites, and
them of Gomorra were driven. These foul spirits made you to do it, to
accomplish the prophecies of S. Paul, and of Daniell, which amongst other
words, speaks of Antechrist on this manner: He shall ^xalt him self above
all, which is called God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
For the God of his predecessors he shall make no count of. Dan 11.
He shall love neither God nor woman, Revel. 15.
but only his Maosim, for he exalts himself above all things. The natural
duty and affection which God has graffed in man and wife, to love and have
company comfort and healpe one of the other, to increase and multyplie, is the
only mean which God has provided to prevent the decay of mankind. It is
also a great kind of benevolence and friendeshyp, wherein the one part of
ma^s nature honoreth (as well for the likeness, as for the creatours sake) the
other in the fear of God, whom they in the state of matrimony, not only
serve, (if it be well used) but honor and worship. Then, the du^tie of a good
husband is, according to Gods word, to labor, and with the sweat of his
brows to get his bread, to care and provide for his family, for his wife and
children, that she neither thorough poverty, hunger, or other cause of
wretchedness, have no occasion to commit or do any thing against the rule of
honesty and prescript commandment of God. A good wife again, will be
diligent and careful for all things necessary and belonging to the house, she
shall be sober, honest, faithful and busy. This affection and kindness,
whereof we speak here, proceeds out of the natural love, given unto us by
nature, and all men in general are bound to observe it. This natural
kyndenesse and divine love has not this monstrous beast and beastly monster
Antechrist, nor his sodomitishe greasy ones. They lurk only in their dens,
and with dainty dyshes and delitious meats fill their bellies, and make
merr^e, they care for no body, they bear neither honest love, nor heart, or
any good will to woman, neither for propagation^ nor for the ordinance of God,
who is the author and instituter of it. They labor not to maintain their wife.
they seek not to defend any against dishonestie, rauishment or shame, they
desire none for their own, but when they lust, they take one now, and an
other to morrow, and then send her packing, to have neither trouble, cost nor
charges of her, nor of the child, but like unkindly Cuckoes lay their eggs
into other folks nestes. Whether these things tend to the despysing and
disgracyng of women or not, judge you. And surely the rather for that they, not
passing for the ordinance of God, but rejecting it, take one or other of their
acquaintance after their own mind, forsooth to cast her of like a broken
pot, and to take an other so often as they lust. But what great evil and
inconvenience does proceed and follow here hence, is to be seen in great
Cities, where these belly gods for the most part use to haunt, as at Rome, and
in other places where any Byshoprikes or canonistes or colleges be, where ye
may see an infinite number of quean^s and painted Curtisa^s, which get their
living by y^ l^tting of their flesh and body to these beastly and unnatural
kind of people, to whom they bear neither heart nor good will for abusing them
selves. In that they have to do with them, they loose their honesty and fame,
they mar and destroy both body and soul. I le^ue the murtheryng and slayin^
of chil^^^n, which is no sin amongst them: (...) ^any other unclean,
unnatural and (...) abominable filthy deeds usual amongst them in their
privy chaumbres and celles. These be the fruits of their promised sworn
unchaste chastity. For what I pray you is chastity or virginity more before
God than marriage? ^^b. 3.
no more than circumcision to uncircumcision, ^om. 23.
one is neither better nor worse before god than y^ other, concerning the life
of a christian man. Christ Jesus requires and demau^deth only of us true faith
working thorough charity: so the^ al they y^ lead their life in the holy state
of matrimony, according to the word of God, are reputed virgins, as S. Paul
testifies: The Lamb which takes away the sin of the world stands with
them, ^. Cor. 12.
which y^ father has given him upon that strong mount Syon. Contrariwise, the
Dragon and the beast with all their adherents, are set upon the slyding sands
of the sea, their kingdom, their power their might, their laws, statutes, and
ordinances, their free will and wicked purpose, their proud titles have no
sure foundation, but are builded only upon the waueryng sands of
doubtefulnesse and falshode, against which when any tempeste or wind of Gods
holy word blows, suddenly it is moved and overthrown: yea and these vile
shauelyngs them selves are these sands, wh^reon their captain the dragon
sta^deth^ they are the chair and dwelling place of the devil. Thoroughe them,
as instruments, and false prophets, he used to speak, to command, and
execute all his deceiptfull and false hypocris^es and idolatries. It is then
most sure and certain, that this beast with all their beastlynesse, can never
abide long. For it follows, that the Beast was apprehended and taken, and
with her the false Prophets which did signs and wonders before them. As
heretofore James and Iambres, the enchaunters of Egypt, went about to
counterfaite the sig^es, Exodus ^.
which Moses and Aaron did in the presence of Pharao: 2. Tim. 3.
lykewy^e do these false inchaunters pervert the truth in these our days,
namely in that they show greater wonders, than any heretofore has been heard
of: That is, that they (as they affirm and violently hold) can turn very
bread into natural flesh and blood, and that so cunnyngly that it can not be
once perceived, neither in beholding feelyng or tastyng of it otherwise than
bread. And more other: as to redeem souls out of Purgatory, by sacrifices
and works supererogations, and other shameful braggs, wherewith he deceived
them that received the beasts mark and seal, and worship his image.

These both, namely the head and the body, the beast, and the false prophet,
were alive cast into a lake of fire, burning with Brimstone: These shall
surely thorough the power and ryghteous judgment of God, receive their portion
with the hypocrites and false Prophets.

And the remnant which follow, of what state and condition so ever they be, were
slain with the sword of him that sits upon the horse, which comes out of
his mouth.

This sword is (as is before said) his mighty and true word, which has
within him spirit and life. Such then as are not afraid of this word, but
obstinatly cleave fast to their false doctrine and ordinances, also those
which being stricken of this sword, and believe not, nor repentyng them of
their misdedes, frame their life accordyngly, shall perish without doubt with
this sword for evermore. Romans 8.


And all the fowls are folks which God of his mercy, has chosen and
plucked from these worldly pleasures and naughty desires, shall be howesouer
the matter goes filled with their flesh, whether they be saved or damned: For
if they be saved these shall be glad because that their number is increased.
Again, on the other side, shall they rejoice, when that they see the wicked
and obstinate, through the just judgment of God punished. The righteous
(says David) seeing the vengeance of God, Psalm. 5^.
shall rejoice, and shall wash their feet in the blood of the wicked: Even so
shall the ungodly, which resist God and his holy word, with all their vainglorie
and pomp, suddenly and with a great noise perish. The Lord shall destroy
them for ever. The wicked doers (says David) fall, they are cast down,
Psalm. 36.
and are not able to stand. Again, he says: ^salm. 37.
As for the ungodly, they shall perish and come to naught: and when the enemies
of the Lord are in their flowers they shall vanishe, ^salm. 1.
yea even as the smoke shall they consume away. They shall perish in their
wickedness like a shadow, and wither away as the thistle, and like the chafe
and dust, which the wind scatters away from the ground, so likewise the way
of the ungodly shall perish. This will su^ely come upon the wicked as it has
done in all ages, and as we have seen it with our eyes, and daily shall ^ee it
more and more. But they which fear God and love him, shall obtain his grace
and mercy, and shall enjoy his faith^ful promises, the inheritance of his
everlasting kingdom, as ye may hear next following.

I saw^ (says S. John) a new heauen^ and a new earth. Revel. 21.
S. Peter says also, 2. Peter.2.
that every thing (going before the judge) shall be cleansed and purified, ^. Sap.
3
Psalm. 50.
and not consumed, for all things must be changed and made clean of all
corruptiblenesse. He means not says Aretes) that the creatures should
consume away, and be no more, but only yt they serving to a better use,
should be renewed, so the godly and chosen shall be delivered two manner of
ways, that is to say: Here in this world from sin, and hereafter of death and
damnation, and so shall be led and conducted unto the true liberty and joyful
inheritance of ye children of God. Romans 8.


The first heaven defiled with the pride of the angels, and the first earth
corrupted with the manyfolde wyckednesses of man, were passed away altogether,
and shall be no more, not that the verity of them shall vanishe, but the
nature, complexion, and quality of them shall change and turn into sincerity
and perfection. And there was no more sea^ yt is, y^ vain and inconsta^t
people were no more: for all prickings and remorse of conscience, al
desperation, mistrustfulnesse and doubt, shall be taken quite from y^ godly and
chosen. All kind of anger sorrow and adversity shall be turned into joy and
peace of the holy Ghost, all hindrance, fear, persecution, tyranny, violence,
and adversity which we endure here in the troublous sea of this world, ^.
Cor. 13.
shall cease at the day of the lord, when we shall see him face to face. And
the sea shall be no longer subject to vanity, than all other creatures, but
shall be purified from all corruption, and shall henceforth be so clear as any
crystal, although it remains the same substance.

And I John saw, by revelation and permission of God, the holy City, new
Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven. By good reason is this holy City
the congregation and church of God called new Jerusalem, come down from God
her Creator and maker, for she is holy, not of her self, but of him that made
her, and chose her to be his well-beloved spouse, prepared like a bride ^^immed
for her husband, for she is purified and made new again, ^phe. 5.
as the well trimmed bride for her husband, ^euel. 12.
the lamb Christ Jesus. ^it. 3.
This bride shall hereafter through regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost
show glorious and perfect holy: ^ath. 19.
so long as she continues here, she makes no account of any thing in this
world, but does govern her self according to that rule which he her husband
has left her, namely his holy word. But hereafter shall she (being delivered
from sin, wretchedness, and all kind of corruptions) more perfectly follow
his steps. She is called new here on earth, for so much as she has laid
off, and put away through the virtue of Gods holy spirit, the old man with
all his lusts, Colloss. 1.
Eph^s. 5^
and has no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. But
hereafter shall she be new by his favor and grace, for so much as she shall
be delivered from sin, death, and all manner of corruption. She is called
the new Ierusal^m both here and hereafter, because that all their Citizens are
of one belief: yet shall they be hereafter of like glory and unity. Here
her Citezens are among the Saints, Ephesians. ^^
and the family of God, and there shall they be both children, and inheritors
with Christ, Romans 6.
she came down from god out of heaven: Revel. 21.
Math. 16.
her Christian faith is neither of flesh nor blood, Gala. 4.
but by the gracious Revelation of the heavenly father. Tit. 3.
But Jerusalem (says S. Paul) which is above, is free and mother ^uer us all.
She is that City which God has builded. She is furnished with the gift of
faith, and with the fountain of life, Ephe. 5.
prepared and trimmed to be a fair and glorious church, 1. Peter.3.
without any spotte or wrinckle. John.1.
She is cleansed from her sins through his blood, she is very costly, and well
fauoredly adorned and beautified with joy, peace, long suffering, patience, and
other more virtues of the spirit: Gala. 5.
Ephe. 5.
even as an honest and true Bride is dressed and trimmed for her loving and
dear husband. The bride (says David) stands on thy right hand in a vesture
of fine gold. Psalm. 45.
But her raiments (so long as she is on earth) are invisible, they are
spiritual jewels of the soul and m^nde, and not of the body. And I heard
(says S. John) in the midst of this last vision, a mighty voice out of the
heaven, the everlasting and only throne of GOD, a voice saying after this sort
unto me. Look up and behold, for your own (and al other bele^uers) commodity
and instruction, the holy Tab^rnacle of the Lord, which shall be with the
chosen for ever, is also here with the Militant Church upon earth. Moreover,
consider that every believing soul is a Temple of the holy Ghost. 1. Corin. 6
As Christ him self testifies: John.14.
He that loves me, and keeps my word, I and my father will come to him, and
dwell with him. In like manner speaks God by the Prophet Ezechiel: Ezech. 37.
saying, I will make a bond of peace with them, which shall be unto them an
everlasting covenant, I will set my sanctuary among them for evermore. My
dwelling shall be with them, yea I will be their God, and they shall be my people.
The same also he confirms here in this place, saying: Reave. 21.
He will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God him self shall be
their God. Esaias. 43.
In such sort that they shall never acknowledge any other, than him only. He
shall always comfort and strengthen the^ here by his holy spirit, and
hereafter by his presence so mightily defend and surely keep them, that they
shall never fail him here, nether afterward be separated from him. And God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, so clean that no kind of trouble
or fear, shall make them afraid, neither any adversity shrink or make them
heavy. The same also says the lord by his Prophet: I shall make a pleasant
Jerusalem, ^say. 25.
and I my self will be glad with her. From that time forward shall there be
heard within her, no more sorrow nor pain, neither shall there be any death,
for death shall be destroyed for evermore. The conscience of man shall not then
be subject to any mistrustfulnesse or other infirmity, but shall have joy in
the holy Ghost. They shall through sin, not die any more, but shall live
through faith in God. That cruel whore shall drink dronke no more in the blood
of the Martirs, for she with all her adherents, and wicked tirantes, shall be
kept in that filthy lake which burns with fire and brimstone for evermore:
So that no kind of trouble, persecution, slander, hatred, malice, anguish or
pain, or any kind of adversity, cruelty, Mat^. 5.
or wretchedness, which could be devised, 2. Corin. 4.
can hurt or hinder them: for sorrows, wailing, and weeping, Esaias. 25.
shall be put far from them. Revel. 7.
The building of the frame, Revel. 20.
and the situation of this city was four square, which signified not only unto
us the sure ground, and steadfastness of the true Christian faith, which God
keeps tenderly nourishes and augme^teth in his elect, but also shows yt
everlasting certainty of that mighty and inexpugnable kingdom of Christ, and
that hope which is never ashamed: for who so ever believes and depends upon
Christ, shall never be confounded. Psalm. 12^.
Whatsoever is four square, abides firm and immovable, Prou. 1^^
and is not subject to rolling or unstableness, like a boule or spear, or any
thing that is round. In like manner have we to consider of the four squarenesse
of (...) new Jerusalem, (whereof material Ierus^^^^ b^ing also square was a
figure) that none of what so ever kindred, language or nation he be, shall have
either preferment here in this city, or be less regarded, for whether he be
from the East or the West, from the South or the North, rich or poor, Grecian
or Barbarian, if he be but a true believer, he shall be received and accepted
of God. Whereof we have a manifest ensample in the Gospel, where Christ
teaches by the Parable of a certain householder, ^ath. 20.
which hired laborers into his vineyard, who calling them unto him in y^
evening, gave as much to them that wrought but an hour, as he did unto them
that wrought the whole day. The walls of this City are strong and well
furnished, Math. 16.
wherout we may conclude and gather, Esaias. 2^.
that the blessedness of salvation or Gods promises are sure and strong, in so
much that hell gates can not prevail against, or withstand them. These walls
are of such a height, that no enemy, be he never so crafty, subtle, or wise,
by any means of fair speech, dissimulation or hipocri^ie, Revel. 2^.
is able to get over them, only must they enter through the gate which is
Christ Jesus. This holy Jerusalem is glorious, blessed, heavenly and spiritual,
not made by man's hand, Heb. 12.
but it is made and builded of God the heavenly father, the father of light (of
whom all good^ and perfect gifts only do descend and are sent down) Therefore
has she a marvelous, James.1.
and incomprehensible light and wisdom of almighty God. The Lamb Jesus
Christ is her light, Psalm. 119.
and his word the lantern to his f^ete. Philip. 3.
And her shining light and spiritual wisdom was like an oriental stone, most
precious: for his word is more costlier than gold, yea than the most finest
gold. Psalm. 119.
This City has twelve gates for to open and to shut, with sundry names,
because of the diverse nations and languages. For from every side of the world,
come the people to the church of Christ, yet pass they al through one gate,
which is Christ Jesus. None (says he) comes to the father but by me. John.14.
I am the door to enter into the sheep fold. Who so ever enters through me,
shall be saved. John.10.
This Jerusalem has twelve gates. And on every gate was a very costlye and
precious Pearl, for the doctrine of the Gospel is precious and costly without
comparison, whereby so many as are ordained from all coasts of the earth,
enter into the kingdom of Christ.

And at these gates were set twelve Angels. In that respect David also did
sing, Psalm. 33.
saying: The Angels of the Lord are about the tents of them that fear him, to
keep them. He did set a guard upon the walls of Jerusalem, ^say. 62.
(says Esayas) to annou^ce his worthy name: So that it is well guarded and
fenced round about. The Devil with all his bost have no force against it. Math.
16.
No man is able to draw any one out of his hands. ^ohn.10.
And above these gates were written honorable names, namely the names of the
twelve tribes of Israel, which are Judah, Ruben, Gad, Assure, Nephthalim,
Manasle, Simeon, Leui, Isachar, Zabulon, Joseph and Benjamin. These names were
written here, because the right inheritance was promised to the seed of
Abraham, and Christ Jesus was the true seed of Abraham, (...). 4.
and by him are we made children of the promise. Reave. 22.
The walls of the City has twelve foundations, grounded upon y^ strong and
mighty stone Christ Jesus, which is immovable: for so much that from the
beginning the Church of God upon him has been builded and grounded. Upon him
did Adam, Noe, Abraham, Moses, David, Helias, with the rest of the godly
fathers that ever were, build, and remain steadfast, 1. Cor. 3.
although they were never so long before him, or shall be after him, 1. Peter.1,
Genesis 11.1^.
for they believed certainly on the promises which God had wrought to the^ by
Christ. Reg. 19.
They all, being under the cloud, Exodus 2.
did eat of one kind of meat, 3. Reg. 17.
and drunk of one spiritual stone which is Christ Jesus, Luke.1.
which afterward is come into the flesh. 1. Cor. 10.
No man may lay any other foundation (says S. Paul) than that which is laid
already, 1. Corin. 13.
which is Christ Jesus. Upon this one, strong, and everlasting foundation, were
laid and builded these twelve foundatio^s agreeable unto him. Namely the twelve
Apostles of the Lamb, Math. 10.
Peter, John, James, Andrewe, Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas, Matthew, James the
minor, Simon, Thade^ Acts.1.
and Mathie. These were prefigured by ye twelve stones which Iosue erected in
Galgala, Iosue.4.
for a memorial and remembrance of the passing of the children of Israel on
dry land through the Jordan. They were also signified by other twelve stones,
whereon Elias the Prophet builded an aultare upon the mount Carmelus, 3. Reg.
1^.
in the name of the Lord. The sure ground of these foundations, ^ath. 16.
was, the Confession that Christ was the very son of the living God. Upon
this foundation they all builded, by the announcing, preaching, and writing of
that which the Prophets and true preachers did believe. Namely, that he, that
is, Christ, ^ohn.1.
was the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, for they
sought the way of salvation, and labored for the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, Math. 6.
2. Peter.2.
showing them selves thereby to be the lively workmen of this spiritual
building.

Here we learn then that the faith and doctrine of the Prophets and
Patriarchs, is all one with the Apostels, and are all grounded upon Christ
Jesus. Whereunto S. Paul accords very well, saying: Ephe. 2.
Now are ye no more strangers, but ^itizens with the Saints: and are build^^
upon the ^oundation of the Apostles and Prophets. And by these twelve
foundations ar^ not only understood they before named, for then should Paul
(which him self did more labor than they all) of this number be excluded: 2.
Cor. 11.
In like manner should be Barn^be, Sylas, Agabus, Judas the righteous,
Acts.9:11 15. 21.
John which was otherwise surnamed Mark, with many other more of the like
vocation and calling, and also all other faithful and true ministers, which
are of the like faith, and teach that doctrine. For ye must consider that the
number of twelve in this place, is a perfect and a common number, as the
number of seven and ten in other places, co^taining the whole under the
chiefest and principallest.

The buildings of the wall of it, was of Jasper. This signifies, that in
Christ Jesus, are the most costliest, the most pleasantest, louingest, and
surest things that can be devised. For they which believe in him aright, shall
always abide fresh, green, lusty, well favored and lively, and they shall
be very mighty, yea great and strong pillars of his holy and undefiled
Temple. He that believes on me, and keeps my word, (says our Savior
Christ) shall never taste of death. John.15.
And the City was pure gold like unto clear glass. The Church of God is
without any spot or wrinkle. Ephesians. 5.
It is pure and undefiled like the gold that is tried in ye fire.vij. times.
Prou. 17.
The light of the City is Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1.
which never did any sin, neither in word or deed. His death and sheading of
his blood, has made this city more costly than pure gold. And the
foundations of the wall of the City, were garnished with all manner of precious
stones, which preciousnes notifieth unto us the costlinesse of our salvation.

1 The first foundation was Jasper, which being of a green color, notes unto
us that the faith of the forfathers, is not yet dead nor withered. Genesis 6.
The faith of Enoch appears until this day, the (first which called upon the
name of the Lord) and of more, which all are yet true, fresh and green. 2 The
second foundation was of Sapphire, whose color is blew and somewhat whitishe, a
stone in deed which at the first look seems to be of no great value,
signifying unto us the simple and seely souls, the which although they be
(with holy Job and Thoby) of no value in the sight of the world, yet are they
highly regarded of God through their faith and good life. 3 The third of a
Chalcedonie, which is yet less set by (to our seeming) then the Sapphire, but
of nature very costly, strong, and virtuous. 4. Reg. 1^.
Of this nature were Helias, John Baptist, Math. 3.
and such like, Luke.1.
which lived in the desert painfully and very straightly, yet proved they most
precious at their appointed time, Math. 3.
Mark.1.
rebuking and reproving boldly the wickedness and sin of the people, drawing
them from the same, even as the Chalcedonie pulls and takes away the duste
from any thing, reprehending and judging very sharply the Idolaters and
hipocrites. 4 The fourth of an Emeraud, which of himself is not only green,
but makes the air round about him show of ye same color. Ierem. 2.3.
Of this condition was Jeremy and S. Paul, which without ceassing, Zach. 31.
preached and spread abroad the doctrine of life, Ac. 9. 16.17
after they had once received and known the same. 5 The fifthe is of a
Sardonix, which word is deducted of Sarda and Onix, and is of nature underneath
blackishe, Math. 5.
and red on the outside, ^hilip. 9.51. ^30.
and white within: so all those that are meek of heart, ^uke.7.
which with David and Marie Magdalene acknowledge and confess their sins
before God, through faith are pure and holy. Cant. 1.
Although I am black (says the true Church) yet am I nevertheless fair and
clean. Albeit our outward man (says S. Paul) perish, 1. Corin. 4.
therefore do we not go forward, or are any thing weary, for the inward man
renueth and augmenteth every day. 6 The sixth of a Sardius, which is of the
similitude of red earth. Even so are those which esteem them selves as
unworthy children of Adam, Luke.16.
notwithstanding that they have received many goodly gifts and great benifites
of God, which (as Philo expounds it) are the red earth. Of this nature and
company was the virgin Marie the mother of Christ, Luke.1.
which called and esteemed her self to be but an handmaide. And for all the
honor, favor, and other great benefits which were showed unto her, she
said that her spirit reioysed in God her savior. Of this sort was Abraham
also, Genes. 18.
calling him self but duste and ashes before the Lord. 7 The seventh of a
Chrisolite, a stone of al kind of colors shining like gold, and as a burning
fire, casting sparks and a great shine from it. Here under are comprehended
those which having the wisdom of the holy Ghost, kindle and lighten other men
therewithal, and make them altogether hot and burning, and bring them to the
fervent love of God and their neighbors. Exodus 4.
So did Moses and Esaias, Esaias. 2. 34.
Barnabas and Paul, Acts.14.
in whom abundantly appears the graces and glory of God. 8 The eight is of
Berll, which is of a sad and deadish gr^ene: Signifying such true and faithful
Christians, which through compassion and pity, sorowfully have bewailed and
lamented the fall of their brethren. Of this good and divine nature was Steven,
A^^es.7.
praying for them which did stone him to death. Thus did Samuel in his time,
which with great sorrows and complaints, 1. Re. 15. 16
mourned over Saul ye king, what time he saw him cast out of the favor of God.
9 The ninth of a Topace, co^taining in it the color of al other stones. And
this represents all them which are adorned with all manner of virtues, as
Daniel was a man full of godly desires, and John the Evangelist whom Christ
loved most of al, y^ did write the Revelation in Pathmos. 10 The tenth of a
Chrisophrasius, whose nature is to shine like gold, and yet greenish in the
sight. Such are those, who having received good knowledge and perfect wisdom
of God, distribute unto others according unto the talent which god has
delivered unto the^. Math. 25.
Thereby to awake the sluggish and dreaming people, and bring to heavenly
meditations. Amongst those, may Ezechiel well be counted, which in his time did
see marvelous things, and wonderful strange Revelations. ^ze. 10.11.
11 The eleventh of a Iacinct, the color of which stone is like unto water,
having stripes glistering like the bright shining beams of the Sun. By this
stone are represented, such as do seem to be ignorant, and are counted
noddies and fools before the world, which notwithstanding have heavenly wisdom
enough, Iaco. 1.
although in sight very idiots, John.3.
void of all knowledge, yet nevertheless are they instructed and taught of
God, to reveal hidden and secret mysteries of the number. Of those are Ozee,
Joel, Amos, and which was but a poor shephierd, with the rest of the small
prophets. Such were also Andrew, Peter, Philip, Thomas, and the rest of the
Apostles of Christ. 12 The twelfth an Ametist, this is of a violet or purpure
and roste color, and this signifies them, which abide zealous, meke and
steadfast in the known truth of the Lord, which also are ready at all times
to die and shed their blood even for the same: such were the seven brethren
of the Machabees, 2. Match. 7.
with their mother. Such were also James the greater, Acts.12.
and Antipas that faithful witness, Revel. 2.
with many more disciples and martirs. John.18.
No man can show any greater love than this, when any man bestows his life
for his friends. All these says our Savior, are blessed, and the kingdom of
heaven does belong unto them. On this manner then is notified by these
fundations, the same which the true and faithful ministers and pastors of the
church of Christ, according to the diversity of gifts given unto them, have
builded upon, some gold, silver, or precious stones: but such as have added to
this buildyng, any wood, hay, or stubble, which are customs, traditions, and
other du^be Ceremonies, or else vayneglorie, worldly honor, riches, and
pleasures, ^xod. 28.
shall never be accounted among this heavenly company. These fundations have been prefigured by the precious stones, which were in the stomacher of Aaron the
high Priest, and in the costely and royal garments of the King of Tyrus. He
which is desirous to know more of the nature, condition and propretie of these
precious stones, may read Pliny his.xxxvij. book of natural Histories, or
Bartholomeus de proprietatibus rerum: and concerning the mystery and
allegory, read Saint Hierome upon the.54. Chapter of Esaye, or Beda, Haymo,
Costasius, Baco^thorp, Eleyne Tilney, and diverse more other, which have
written upon the Revelation. It suffiseth us, to have showed thee (according
to the meaning of Saint Austen) that these stones do signify the manyfolde
gifts and diverse grac^s of the holy Ghost: for the only spirit of the lord
works all these things dyuersly. He measures his gifts unto every one
according to his good will and pleasure, the which altogether are singular,
preciou^ and most excellent, as it shall well a^peare in that great and
joyous day of the children of God.
And the Angel (says Saint John) which did show all those foresaid
things, moved me in spirit, to take the more heed to the gracious and
merciful purpose of the Lord, and to bring me to a more deeper knowledge of
his mysteries, showed me a pure River of water of life, which is therefore
called the Water of Life, because it makes whole, and gives salvation to our
souls. This River is nothing else but the fl^wing verity and the word of
Salvation, or the myghtie doctrine of Christ. This is that sweet River,
which proce^deth of Edom, to refresh Paradise, which dividing it self in
four, waters the four parts of the earth. This runnyng water makes the
City of God very pleasant and delectable. This river is marvelous comfortable,
springyng into eternal life, it is here a spiritual comfort for the children
of God, and shall be hereafter that incomprehensible glory of the Saints in
heaven. ^^hn.6.
To whom shall we go (says Peter) but to thee, for thou have the word of
eternal life. The virtue and nature of this water is to satisfy, purge and
cl^^se, to comfort, to make whole and healthful, for it proceeds and flows
from the majesty of God, it comes from that eternal and excellent school of
the father, and thence proceeds forward to the ouerfulnesse of the lamb
Christ Jesus, and his divine spirit. I will pour clean water (says the
Lord) upon you, and ye shall be free from all your filth and uncleanness, I
will also give you a new heart, ^zec. 36.
and plant in you a new spirit. ^salm. 51.


In the mids of the street of it, and of either side of the river was the
tree of life. This river signifies the two testamentes of the Lord, whereby
stood that most pleasant tree of life, John.6.
namely Christ Jesus the mediator and pastor, Math. 21.
the savior and redeemer of the world. Romans 1.
Out of the root and progeny of David, Luc. 1.
Genesis 2.
spryngeth this tree (according to the flesh) conceived of the holy Ghost,
borne of the virgin Marie. As the tree of life, in the beginning was planted in
the midst of Paradise, even so is he spiritually in the midst of his
Church, which is his most pleasant garden: if that ground or earth which
makes the trees twice fruitful in the year, be called happy, so may this
garden by good rereason, well be called happy and blessed, Where this tree
stands, which never is without fruit, nor dries up, or withers, which
does not only bear twyce a year fruit, signifiyng all the unspeakable
gifts of the holy Ghost, but renders his fruits every month of the year,
that is, continually, both Summer and winter. All they which are this
Congregation and people have continually so long as they live, great
Consolation in all their assaults and trialles, and in all kind of adversity
both spiritual and temporal.

And the leaves of the trees served to heal the nations with. The promises and
the word of GOD are spirit and life, the nature propretie and virtue of them,
are blessedness and eternal salvation. These leaves can not by any means
wyther away. When Gods word is sincerely preached and taught, then we
remember the benefits of our deliverance, then is our conscience appeased
and satisfied, and the mind merry and glad, then does the soul of man
rejoice, and renders therefore to GOD the Father most hearty thanckes,
worthy praises, syngyng and magnifiyng him for his eternal goodness and
mer^ie. So then the Nations are quite healed and made healthful thorough
belief, and cleaving fast unto the word, acknowledgyng and confessyng
Christ Jesus to be their only Savior, righteousness, and true holiness. The
word of GOD written, or preached, is like unto the leafes, which being well
and reverently received, by the woorkyng of the holy Ghost, is of much
importance and wayghtie, healthful strong and myghtie in operation, much
like unto the mustard seed. Above all things (says Zorob^bell) is the Truth
most strong, 3. Esdr. ^.
and overcomes all: For it is the will of the Lord which never shall
perish. This word then (I say,) is so myghtie and victorious, that the
Congregation of Christ, and true believers, what soever trouble, persecution
or violence they do suffer, shall yet even in their extreme pain and
distress be comforted and quieted in conscience and spirit, Zach. 2.
Psalm. 117.
be^ing well assured, that God keeps them as the very apple of his eye: for
they know that they are under his protection and governance: and that hereafter
they shall inherit (how conte^ptuously so ever they lived here) eternal glory,
felicity and blessedness in the presence of God, in that new and heavenly
Jerusalem. Of which glory and blessedness to make a discourse, I should labor
in vain, and bysides that never get my purpose, nor finish mine enterprise: For
never no ear heard it, ^. Cor. 2.
nor eye saw it, neither came it into any heart: And to say al, never any man
was able to comprehend it, that God has prepared for his elect that love him.

Ye have now (gentle Reader) sufficiently (as I hope) herd, what wickedness,
thraldom, labor, pain, and trouble, covetousness, concupiscence, and
ambition brings to them that love it, follow it, wish for it, and seek
after it. Likewise ye may consider here, how and after what sort they draw man
from God, from natural reason, from all goodness, and mutual and brotherly
love, unto all kind of iniquity, cruelty and unnatural vices: and oftentimes
come so far, that they not only bring other men in great danger to attain
to their purpose, but they themselves also body and soul. Ye have heard also,
that the Devil, the Prince of this world, is a father and the author of al
wickedness, and wicked doers, and how that that mischeuous Antechrist (which
within a ^ew years hitherwards has been reveled) did proceed and was borne of
him: as ye may see more evidently out of this Genealogy following.

The book of the Generation of Antechrist, the desolatour and child of
perdition.
FIrst the devil begot Darkness. Ephe. 6.

And darkness begot Ignorance. Acts.17.

Ignorance begot error and his brethren. 1. Tim. 4.

Error begot Freewill, Ignorance, and Self love. Esaias. 10.

Free will begot Merits. Esaias. 58.

Merits begot forgetfulness of the grace of God. Romans 10.

Forgetfulness of the grace of God begot Transgression. Romans 1.

And Transgression begot mistrust. Genesis 3.

Mistrust begot Satisfaction. Mat. 17.

Satisfaction begot sacrifice of the Mass. Dan. 12.

Sacrifice of the Mass begotte Popish Priesthode. 2 Thessalonians. 3.

And popish priesthod begot Superstition. Math. 15.

Superstition begot Hypocrisy the King. Math. 23.

And hypocrisy begot Lucre. 1. Timo. 6.

^euel. 9.
Lucre begot Purgatory.
^. Cor. 15.
And Purgatory begot the Fundation of Pentions.
Deuteronomy. 32.
Fundation of Pentions begot Patrimony of the church.
Luc. 16.
And Patrimony of the church begot Ma^mon of iniquity.
Job.12.
Mammon begot Abundance.
Esaias. 28.
And Abundance begot Fullness.
2. Tim. 3.
Fullness begot Cruelty.
Math. 23.
Cruelty begot Domination.
Ezech. 34. Ezec. 16.
Domination begot Pomp.
John.5.
Pomp begot Ambition.
Acts.8.
Ambition begot Simonie.
2 Thessalonians. 2.
Simonie begot the Pope and the Cardinals his brethren in the transmigration of
Abomination.
Math. 7.
And after the Transmigration of Abomination, the pope begot the Mystery of
iniquity.
1. Tim. 4.
And the Mystery of iniquity begot Divine Sophistry.
Ierem. 17.
Divine Sophistry begot Reiection of holy Scripture.
Math. 24.
Reiection of holy Scripture begot Tyranny.
And Tyranny begot murder of Saints Acts.7.

Murder of saints begot dispising of god. Psalm. 5.

Dispising of God begot Dispensation. Psalm. 32

Dispensation begot License to sin. Reave. 15.

And License to sin begot abhominatio^. Esaias. 1.

Abomination begot Confusion. Revel. 1.

And Confusion begot Trauail of ye spirit. Miche. 7.
1. Tim. 1.

Travail of the spirit begot Disputation and matter to seek for the verity,
by the which that desolatour Antechriste has been revealed.
You have heard^ also (gentle Reader) how that the Devil with all his
adherents, according to the verity of Gods holy word, and his righteous
judgment, shall be ^hrowen and cast into the pit of eternal pardition of
unquenchable fire, which has been prepared for him and his angels, his
s^ruauntes and followers, marked with his mark from the beginning of the
world: where shall be gnashyng of teeth, and wringyng of the hands eternally.
Moreover, it has been said, how that neither he, nor all his members are able
to do any thing against Ies^ Christ, nor against his kyngdom^ or Church.
Which because they are not of the world, therefor the world and all that
belongs to ^he world, have from the beginning hated them, persecuted and
afflicted them, as well Satan himself, as the world and ye worldly minded: as
it is seen daily, and shall be, so long as the world continues:
notwithstanding there has been sometime a little quietness seen and shall
be, it is possible yet, namely so long as the malice and violence of Satan and
his members be bridled and tied short, so long shall the godly people have
peace and quietness, and shall see some years of grace. Furthermore, it was
showed you, how that Christ Jesus became man for us, and is now in eternal
glory in the kingdom of his father, with all his Apostles his chosen, with all
such as believe through them in him, which has been prepared for them from
the beginning, where is and shall be unspeakable joy. Here you may see and
judge of God, and the devil, Christ, and Antechrist, the kingdom of God, and
of Satan, the Church of Christ, and the synagoge of Rome, or the assembly
of the reprobate, the broad way, and the strait gate, heaven and hell,
eternal life and euerla^tyng death. Now t^en, if every one might choose the
one or the other of these two ways, I believe that no man would be so foolish
or ignorant, that would not choose rather salvation than condemnation, to
ascend into heaven, than to go into hell. Nevertheless those that will be
saved, and are desirous to be accounted under the numbr^ of the elect, must
diligentely take heed, that they wander not, nor be deceived by every wind
of doctrine. For like as cou^tousnesse, pride, arrogancy, ease of the body,
voluptuousness, and pleasure of the world, has chased and driven away all
manner of devotion, zeal, and godly exercises pertaining unto true christian
religion at the primitive church: In like m^ner shall the Dyuell not yet
cease or leave o^ to reign and rule in his members, notwithstanding that the
child of perdition, that Antechrist is already manyfested, and openly showed:
yea he attemp^eth yet daily by the means of such vices, a little before
mentioned, to raise up even in the reformed Churches among the brethren,
dissension and trouble. And it is to be feared, that in the end he shall
prevail more and more. ^ath. 24.
For it is written, that ini^quitie shall abound, ^dr. 15.
and have the upper hand, and the charity of many shall wax cold. But so
many as bear more love to God, and seek more to please him than the devil,
they must take good heed to do that which pleases him, according to his
revealed will: For whom, it is not sufficient to know Antechri^t, to blame him,
to speak and report of him as his doings deserve, but it is requisit^ for
them most chiefly, to confess the name of the Lord even from their very
hearts, to honor and fear him, to believe and put all confidence in him, to
love him, and as near as we can, John.14.
to express him in our conversation, thorough love unfeigned, thereby to show
our selves to be his Disciples: For not every on^ (says our Savior
Christ) that says Lord, Mark.8.
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Luke.9.
but such as do the will of my father. John.12.
Again, says Christ: Luke.6.
Whosoever louethe his life here in this world, Math. 5.
shall loose it, and who so hates his life here for my names sake, shall keep
it to life everlasting. Again, he that will be my Disciple, John.17.
let him follow me, and where I am, he shall be also. Who so serves me, my
Father shall honor him. Ioh. 15.
The servant is no better than his master, and a messenger is no more than
he that sent him. If we keep the commandments of Christ, we shall remain
in his love, John.15.
even as he did the will of his father, and remained in his love. His
commandment is, that we love one an other, as he loved us, let us therefore
henceforth lead a good life and conversation, according to the will of the
Lord, and frame our life to the doctrine and exaumple of our master and Lord
Jesus Christ, in keeping the commandments of the Lord Christ. Luke.6.
Let us not be wrathful, Math. 5.
but love one an other. Pray (says the Lord) for them that persecute you,
and speak evil of you, and be ye perfect as I am perfect. That this our
sinful body might be destroyed, and that henceforth we serve sy^ne no more:
for he that is dead, is free from sin. Let us then think, that we are dead
to sin, Romans 6.
and live not to our selves, but to our Lord and Sau^our Jesus Christ. Let not
sin (says the apostle S. Paul) reign in your mortal body, that ye should
obey the lusts thereof, Romans 6.
but be ye true servants of righteousness unto life, and not servant of
sin of the flesh or the world ^o death, neither give ye henceforth your
me^bres, as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, but as weapons of
righteousness unto GOD. For when we were the servants of sin we were not
under righteousness, what fruit had we then in those things, whereof we are
now ashamed: Romans 6.
for the end of those things is death, but contrariwise, the fruit of
rightousnesse is everlasting life. Brethren, it is now time to awake from
sleep, forasmuch as the night is passed, and the day approaches, and is even
at hand.

God has freely sent his true and faithful ministers, Romans 1^.
and gives his word ple^tifully to be preached: let us cast away then the
works of darkness, Romans 13.
and take unto thee the armor of light, Coloss. 3.
and walk honestly as in the day time, Luke.21.
not in gluttony and drunkenness, ^phe^. 5.
nor in chambering and wantonness, James.3.
nor in strife, nor envying, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no
thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, but according to the
good pleasure of God, in all spiritual exercises. The works of the flesh are
notorious and manifest, Gala. 5.
as adultery, fornication, 1. Corin. 3.
uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulation,
wrath, contentions, heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and
such like. The workers whereof, are ye most wretches and miserable slaves that
ever were: yea they are threatened, that who so ever commits such things,
Gala. 5.
shall not enherite the kingdom of heaven. 1. Corin. ^.
On the other side, the fruit^s of ye spirit are love, Ephe. 5.
joy, peace, R^uel. 22.
long suffering, ge^tlenesse, goodness, faith, meekness, temperancie, and
such like. ^phes. 5.
After this sort ought every christian man to walk, ^om. 6.
being careful to mortify his own flesh, exercising himself in these good
works which God has prepared for him to walk in, ^^he. 2.
casting of the old man, ^phe. 4.
which is corrupt through deceiuable lusts: ^o^. 6.
be ye therefore renewed in ye spirit of your mind, and put ye on the new man,
^phe. 4.
which after god, is created in righteousness and true holiness. ^phe. 4.
Wherefore cast of lying and speak every man true unto his neighbor. Colloss. 3.
For we are members ye one of the other. ^. Peter.2.
Be angry but sin not: ^ach. 8.
let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, ^sal^. 4.
neither give place to the Devil. ^^co. 4.
Let him that stole, steal no more, ^phes. 4.
but let him rather labor and work with his hands, ^ These. 3.
the thing that is good, that he may have to give him that needs. Let not
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, Math. 12.
but that which is good to edify withal, Ephe. 4.
that it may minister grace unto the hearers. ^ Cor. 11.
And grieve not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. Let all bitterness, anger, and wrath, crying and evil speaking, be
put away from you with all maliciousness. Be ye courteous one to an other, and
tender hearted, Coloss. 3.
forgiving one an other, Math. 6.
eue^ as god for Christ's sake, Eccle. 2^.
forgave you. Ephesians. 5.
Be ye then followers of god as dear children, John.13. 1^^
walk in love eue^ as Christ has loved us, Math. 5.
and has given him self for us, Galat. 2.
to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to god. Tit. ^.
So then fornication and all uncleanness, Exodus 23.
or covetousness, 1. Corin. 6.
let it not be once named among you, as it becomes saints. Galath. 5.
Neither use ye filthiness, nor foolish talking, Colloss. 2.
neither jesting, which are things not comely: 2 Thessalonians. 2.
but rather giving of thanks. For this ye must know, that no whoremonger
neither unclean person, nor covetous person, which is an Idolatour, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God. Math. 24.
Let no man deceive you with vain words, Ierem. 20.
for by such things comes the wrath of God, Mark.13.
upon the children of disobedience. Luke.21.
Be not therefore companions with them: 2 Thessalonians. 2.
for so much as ye were once in darkness but are now light in the lord: walk
therefore as it becomes children of light, Galath. 5.
for the fruit of the spirit is in all goodness, righteousness and truth.
^ath. 18.
Approve and assay that which is pleasing to the Lord, ^. Cor. 5.
and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even
reprove them rather: ^ccle. 17.
take ye heed that ye walk circumspectly and wisely, ^olloss. 4.
not like the foolish, but as the wise, ^om. 12.
and redeem ye time, ^phes. 5.
Collo^^. 3.
for even these days are evil and dangerous days. ^. Thessalonians. 5.
Therefore be ye not ignorant, but replenished with knowledge and spirit. Let
the word of God dwell in you plentuously in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing your own selves in psalms and spiritual songs, Psalm. ^8.
synging with grace in your hearts, giving thanks always to god the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians 5.
submitting your selves one to the other in the fear of God. Colos^. 3.
Wives submit your selves unto your husbands, 1. Peter.3.
as unto the Lord: for the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is
the head of the Church, and is the savior of his body. Therefore as the
Church is in subjection unto Christ: Even so let the wives be to their
husbands in every thing. Ye husbands love your wives, 1. Pet. 3.
dwell with them as men of knowledge, giving honor unto the woman, as unto the
weaker vessel: even as they which are heirs together of the grace of life.
Gala. 2.
Even as Christ loved the Church, and gave him self for it, Ephesians. 5.
that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it, and make it unto himself a glorious
Church, without any spot or wrinckle, but that it should be holy and without
blame: So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies: for he that
loves his wife, loves him self. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it, as the Lord does his Church, for we are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. For this cause shall a man leave
father and mother, Ephesians. 6.
and shall cleave to his wife, Collos^. 3.
and they twain shall be one flesh. Children obey your parents in the Lord,
for this is right. Exodus 20.
Honor thy father and mother which is the first commandment, with promise.
Again, ye Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in
instruction, and information of the Lord. Ye servants must obey unto them
that be your bodily masters according to the flesh, Ephesians. 6.
with fear and trembling in singleness of your heart, Colloss. 3.
as unto the Lord. Math. 15.
Not with service to the eye, as men pleasers, Tit. 2.
but as the servants of Christ: 1. Peter.2.
doing the will of God from the heart, with a good will serving the Lord, and
not men: Eccle. 33.
being well assured that whatsoever good thing any man does, Colloss. 3.
that same shall he receive of the lord, whether he be bond or free. Therefore
ye masters, do the same thing unto them, putting away threatening, knowing
that you have a master also in heaven, with whom there is no respect of
persons. Finally, I beseech you all indifferent, of what estate, condition, or
calling so ever ye be, that ye will show your self an ensample in word and
conversation in all good works, 1. Tim. 4.
keeping your self always under discipline, and true doctrine, without any
damage of prejudice to any, keeping the word whole and irreprehensible, yt the
adversaries might be ashamed, having no occasion to speak evil of you with
the truth. Therefore submit your selves to Princes, Romans 13.
rulers, and powers, Peter.2.
and be ready to every good work. Accuse or blame no man, be ye not
spiteful, co^tentious or wrathful, but amiable and peaceable, showing loving
kindness and courteousnesse to all men. Girde the loins of your heart. Stand
manfully, and put your whole trust and confidence in the grace which is now
offered. Let your love be unfeigned. Romans 1^.
Abhor that which is evil, and cleave to yt which is good. Be affectioned to
love one an other with all reverence. Be not slouthful or negligent to do
service, Ephe. 4.
but be fervent in spirit. 1. Peter.2.
Frame your se^fe according to the time. Rejoice in hope, be patient in
tribulation, continue in prayer, distribute unto the necessity of the Saints,
giving your self to Hospitality. Bless them which persecute you, bless I
say and ^ursse not, if it be possible, as much as in you is. Have peace with
all men. Pr^uerb. 20^
Be all of one mind, Philip. 20.
of one concord and one judgment. That nothing be done through contention or
vain glory^, but that in meekness of mind every man estee^e other better
than him self.

Let no man seek his own, but the profit of other men. Be ^eruent in love,
have brotherly love among you, 1. Corin. 13.
without the which, Luc. 17.
al other things are nothing to speak of, of what faith so ever we boast our
selves to have. Love is courteous, long suffering, not envious, not guileful,
nor puffed up, desires no dishonestie: It seeks not ^ir own, is not
provoked to anger, Phil. 2.
it thinks no evil, it delights not in unrighteousness, but reioyseth in
the truth, 1. Peter.2.
endures all things, hops in all things, and never fails. Through very love
and charity, is Christ Jesus become man for us, and has humbled him self in all kind of obedience through love, and suffered death on the Cross to save us.
So then let us abide in charity, and do well without weariness: Gala. 6.
for that which man sows, ^. Thessalonians. 3.
that same also he shall reap. If he sow in the flesh, he shall reap again
of the flesh, perdition. But if he sow in the spirit, he shall reap of the
spirit, life. Therefore continue in well doing, although ye suffer rebuke and
ignominy of the world. Be humble and meek with Abraham, Moses and David. Be
long suffering and pacient with Job and Thobie in all kind of troubles,
aduer^ities, and tribulations. The Lord always uses to send his rods first of
all over his house: therefore when he chastneth us for our sins which we have
done in times past, Math. 6.
we must patiently bear it. 1. Tim. 3.
It must be of necessity, James.1.
that the godly suffer persecution to exercise their faith, Genes.. 12.
and show their love and feruencie. Job.1. 2,
Abraham was proved here of the Lord, Acts.4.
Prou. 17.
and Job troubled and molested, Wysdom.3.
and were both found faithful and constant. The Apostles were merry and glad,
that they were found worthy to suffer injury, wrong, contempt and hatred for
ye name of Jesus Christ. The Lord tries and proves the godly as gold in the
furnace. James.1.
He chasteneth al them which he loves, Heb. 12.
and scourges every son which he receives. Prou. 3.
It is only faith which overcomes all evil, 1. John.5.
and obtains victory through patience. The fruit springing unto eternal
life, is maruelously assaulted in the godly, whilst we be here in this world.
The things must needs fall upon us, seeing we are imperfect. Let us therefore
be steadfast and immovable, ^^hn.7.
^^mes 5.
having a good hope always in our affliction, ^^ Corin. 13. ^^p. 3.
trouble, or persecution, in the losing and forgoing, be it of our friends or
goods, ^^ Peter.1.
^^ Corin. 5.
yea our bodies, yt we shall be reco^pe^sed greatly for a little trouble which we
here endure: ^^od. 16.
^eut. 8.
^^cle^ 2.
God will prove and try us, and receive us (if so be we abide constant) as an
acceptable sacrifice of swe^te sauoure. Let us then depend wholly upon him, and
he shall keep us, let us hope and trust upon him, and he will not forsake us,
let us steadfastly cleave unto him, and he shall not leave us destitute.
Therefore my dear brethren, let us consider and ouerrunne al ages and times,
and diligently mark, if at any time any one was put to confusion and shame,
which trusted in the Lord. He which called upon him in faith and confidence,
was he ever forsaken or contempned of him? Was there ever any, were he never so
wicked, which turned to the Lord, not received? No surely, for God is
merciful, ^^al. 103.
long suffering, and ready to forgive. He hears in the day of trouble, and
he is at hand to all them that call upon him. He is a protectoure and
defendoure of all those that seek him in truth, Psalm. 91.
and trust in him. But fie upon them, curssed are they that are faint hearted,
inconstant, wauerers, untempered brains, yea mockers and very libertines,
fearing men, poor princes more than God, which have a greater care of these
transitory goods, and have much rather to please the world than God,
because they look for none other God here, than to have that they lu^te and
desire for their belly: yea they say in their hearts, there is no God. They
would gladly leave to God the heavens, so that they might r^maine upon the
^arth. They know none other heaven then here on earth, which rather might be
called an hell, than heaven, because we all are subject to many infirmities.
Esaias. 26.
Bisides that, they cannot have here any rest or quietness in mind or
conscience. Neither can they have things as they would, be they never so rich.
These men, as they are altogether worldly and carnal, so can they never come to
any knowledge of God. ^. Cor. 2.
For the worldly and natural men can not perceive the things which are of
the spirit of God, neither consider they the glorious majesty of God, ^say.
26.
neither are they so much as once careful of the life to come. Woe be unto
the sinful lips, slothful hands, to the sinner which keeps two ways.
Woe to the dissolute of heart, for they shall not be defended, because they
believe not. Woe unto the impatient, that have lost and forsaken the right way
to decline and wander in the crooked way. Woe unto them, for what shall they
say when the Lord shall search them out? Let us love the Lord therefore all we
that fear him. Let us put our confidence in him, let us remain faithful, and
let us walk according to his holy will, let us search diligently after those
things which please him, let us prepare our hearts, and frame our selves to be
acceptable in his fight, and humble our souls before his face, let us
patiently abide the time, until he send us succor, help and comfort, saying:
Romans 5.
It is better to fall in the hands of men, than in the hands of the Lord: Iam.
1.
for as he is great and mighty, Esaias. 57.
so is he also merciful. Let us then be pacient, and not shrink, yea rather
let us manfully strive in the midst of our troubles, afflictions and
miseries, knowing that adversity engenders patience, and patience trial or
probation, probation hope, and hope shall not be ashamed, for the love of God
is poured into our hearts. Go forward then my brethren to all good works, and
make your self sure to the Lord, and to the power of his might: Take unto you
therefore the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to resist in the evil
day. Stand therefore, having your loins girded with the truth, Ephe. ^.
and having on the breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace. Above all, take unto you the shield of
faith, wherewith ye may quench the fiery darts of the wicked. Ephesians. 6.
Take unto you also the helmet of salvation, Psalm. 131.
and the sword of the spirit, 1. Corin. 1.
which is the word of God, Wisdom.5.
and pray without ceassing in all your assaults and necessities) making your
prayers in hu^blenesse of the spirit. Be diligent and watchful. Be you wise
and subtle like Serpents, and simple without fraud or guile as Doves. Be sober
and watch, 1. Peter.5.
for your adversary the Devil, who goth about like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour. He uses a thousand sleights and setches, many kinds of
ways, diverse and sundry means to entrap and snare by. Resist ye him therefore,
be steadfast in faith, and defend thy self with the armor right now before
mentioned. 1. Peter.5.
Bear your self manfully, confirm and refresh your self every time with that
excellent meat of the spirit, which does not perish, which is the word of god,
John.6.
that ye might withstand him both day and night like a good souldior, and all
his assaults. Take ye heed therefore to give any place to evil, but set your
self valiantly and courageously against him, at what time he shall assault
you, either by fair or foul means, Math. 4.
by flattery, in showing you the riches, the glory and pomp of this world,
to none other end and purpose, than to entrap and deceive you, or by cruelty,
persecution, or trouble, to overcome and vanquishe you, if ye hearken unto him
any manner of way. 2. Cor. 10.
And because he can transform him self into an Angel of light, it is
requisite and necessary that every sprite be proved by the touch stone of
Gods holy word, if so be that it agrees therewith, so must it be holden for
good, be believed and followed. But if so be that it in any part be contrary
to that, it must according to the Apostle S. Paul's saying be accurssed.
Galath. 1.
Let no evil take any root in your heart, but pluck it out forthwith. God is
meek, holy, long suffering, merciful, and altogether good, but feeling that
any one brings any thing contrary to these particularities appropriated unto
God, be ye sure that that spirit is not of God: from those refrain your
self, resisting them with the weapons before mentioned.

Be sober and humble in mind, content with a little, not carried away of
covetousness after the richesse and glory of this world, neither be ye
seduced by the pleasure of carnal concupiscence, and voluptnousnesse of this
world, which are deceitful, and bring great pains to them that follow after
them. But to keep your self the rather clean from the thraldom of them, way
and consider how vain, uncertain, and vile a thing it is: what evil
proceeds from it. Again, remember that all flesh is gra^se and hay, Psalm.
103.
and all the glory, honor, Esaias. 40.
force and might of it, as the flower of the field. The grass withers, and
the flower fades away. Yea all Princes and people are but hay, where over, if
ye breath of the Lord do but blow, it becomes dry, ^say. 40.
and the flower of it falls. But ye word of the lord abides for ever. ^.
Peter.3.
Thou let man Lord (says David) pass away as the herb which is green
in the morning, ^salm. 90.
and at night is cut down. The time of our life is three score and x. years
and though men be so strong that they come to four score years, yet is their
strength then but labor and pain. What is man (says he) or what is the
wisdom of man? The number of hy^ days are a hundredth years at the most, and
a thousand years compared unto eternity, are not so much as a drop of water
to the whole sea, or as a little duste unto the sands of Affrike, for that
comes to an end, and eternity has none end, but continues always. Esaias.
4.
All flesh waxes old as a garment, and all that is made and can be seen,
shall perish in season. The generation of flesh and blood is such, that when
one is borne, an other dies. One kingdom increases, an other decreaseth: Who
so ever commits wickedness, shall perish with them. Blessed is the man,
which through wisdom exercises him self in all goodness, and declares holy
things with understanding. This many of the Heathen Philosophers, and other
Pagans, could well discern and judge of, by natural reason: the which also did
contemn and forsake riches, great estimation and authority, because of many
labors, pains, and unquietness, and other euyls, which herehence proceed
for to pass over and spend their time in more quietness, would not be
entangled with any kind of thing that might hinder them of their study and
other exercises.

Cecilius Metellus, a valiant captain would never receue the office of Dictator
which was offered him, neither the charge of a Co^sul or magistrate, saying
that he would spend that in quietness, yt he had gotten by great travail and
pain in ye wars. The Philosopher Anatillus did refuse to be gouernoure of
Athenes, saying that he would be rather a servant of good men, than a hangman
of the wicked. Nicodius did not regard nor made any account of the great
tresure which king Cyrus sent him for a present to go with him to war.
Aristotle forsook the good entertainment of Alexander the great, because he
had rather be at Athenes, to read to his scholars after his accustomed manner,
Philosophy. Apollon^us Thianeus leauyng his own native country, took his
journey to go thoroughout whole Asie, to go to see the philosopher Hirarchus in
Indie. M. Curious contemned the great sum of gold the Samnites offered him: The
great Philo^opher Crates, mentioned in ye beginning of our book, cast al his
goods and riches into ye sea. The inhabiters of the Isle of Varales being
advertised of the a^arice and covetousness of their n^ibors, threw al their
tresure, their gold and silver into the sea, because they should not take
occasion to make war against them for their goods. Upon a day in the presence
of Phillip king of the Macedonians, was moved a question among the
philosophers, namely: What was the greatest thing in this world? Whereunto one
answered, It was the Sun: the next said, the sea: the third, the mount of
Atlas: the fourth said: that great and learned Poet Homere. Shortly, every one
^ayd that which seemed him best. But the wisest of them all, answered after
this sort: The greatest and most commendable thing is, the heart and courage
of Man, which does not regard worldly and transitory Riches. But I could
rehearse here, a great many more of examples, if need should so require, and
time serve. But if the Heathen have done this, how much more ^ught Christians
to do that in knowledge and discretion, which they did in ignorance? And to
draw your selves the rather from all vain and transitory things, which lead
men unto all evil, and to address your self with heart and mind toward the
Lord, ye must call to remembrance often, the wrath which shall come to the
servants of unrighteousness, the children of the world, the flesh and the
devil at the last day. Again, call to mind that worthy reward and glorious
inherita^c^ which the children and servants of God have prepared for them. The
time passes, and is turned from morning until evening. Therefore be ye wise,
and have the fear of God before your eyes, keep your self from doing of evil,
in these dangerous days. The fool has no consideration of the time, but the
wise man understands all that belongs to knowledge, and takes heed to
instruction. He which finds wisdom, esteems it, and makes much of it. A
witty man in talk (says the wise man) walks wisely. Also they have known
verity and justice, and have searched after true judgment. Withdraw your
self then, (if ye will b^ counted wise before God) from the vanity of this
present world, and cast aside all manner of voluptuousness, pleasure, and
carnal Concupiscence. For if you follow the perverse judgment of the world,
and give the bridle to the wicked desires of the body, it will cause your
enemies to rejoice over you. Ps^lm. 37.
Let it not grieve you, to see ye wicked prosper, to be regarded, and to come to
high promotion: Be not ye abashed or displesed, for consideration of te^porall
felicity, which god gives here upon earth unto the ungodly, wicked, and
carnal libertin^s^ to Epicures, bellygods, and other, seeing they are of no
continuance, they shall fall, vany^he, and come to naught, they shall consume
like smoke, and perish like the herb and flower of the fields: But trust
ye in the Lord, and go forward from goodness to better. Christ Jesus our
Savior, to the comfort of all troubled Christians, warns us, saying: Fear
not ye him which kills the body, seeing he can not hurt the soul, which is
in the Lords keepyng, though ye body be never so miserably tormented or ill
entreated, yet are we sure, that God shall raise it up again, and so body and
soul being joined, receive everlasting joy and blessedness. Contrary wise,
all the wicked which persecute the true members of Christ, as does at this day,
that wicked tyrant the Duke of Alba, with all his adherents very hangmen and
cruel murderers of the Pope, shall have an ylfauored and shameful end here in
this world, and hereafter have eternal ignominy and confusion in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone: The reward in deed of all such tyrants
and wicked ones, as now be, or ever were: as Ne^o, Dioclesian, Dioscore,
Maximian, Iouian, Maxence, Licinus, Constantius, Phocus, and many more other,
whose fearful and terrible examples ought to move the cruel tyrants of our
days, were it not that they by the just judgment of GOD, were hardened in
their wicked malicousnesse. Examynyng then the naughty end of these wicked
tyrants, and waying again, our good end and ^ure consolation, which we gather
out of the word of God, we ought by good reason to rejoice and be glad of our
estate, and from the bottom of our hearts to thank the Lord our God, that it
has pleased him to call us to such a good state, and that he has thought us
worthy to suffer any thing for his name sake. Then be of good cheer, and take
courage, and taking thy cross on thy shoulder, follow stoutely Christ Jesus,
thy king and only head. ^ut if thou will do this, thou must contemn, cast of
and forsake (even as Christ did) al covetousness, worldly honor, carnal lus^s
and concupiscence, and thou shall find, that it is much easier to serve the
Lord, Math. 11.
tha^ to ^e a slave to this wretched world: Ierem. 6.
for his yoke is light, and his burden is easy. 1. John.5.
Be ye therefore stre^gthned and comforted by virtue of gods holy spirit:
neither purpose or desire either by word or deed any thing yt displeases
him: put al thy trust and co^fide^^e in him. Thus doing, let him be the mark
whereat thou shootest, the conductyng star, the compass and true token,
whereat thou saylest, the way whereon thou go, the rock whereon thou
stan^est, the sure ground whereon thou buyldest, the strength and fortress
wherein thou trustest, the end whereunto thou hastest, the good which thou
desire, the life which thou seek, the comfort which thou do wish for,
the treasure wherefore thou labourest, thy glory, perfection, and all thy
trust and confidence. So then it shall come to pass, that no kind of evil
shall hurt thee, neither fire nor water, l^sse of goods or honor, wife,
children, of friends, land, house, inheritance or any other possessions,
neither yet contempt, sclaunder, backbityng, persecution, banishement, or any
other myserie sufferyng for his name sake. Have no regard unto the inconstancy
and variable^esse of Fortune, nor unto the vncertainti^ of richesse and time,
then shall thou in poverty be rich, in reproach highly regarded, in distress
merry, in heaviness glad, in prison at liberty and abroad. Therefore bridle
thy lust, and refrain thy heart from al worldly, carnal, and transitori^
riches, and be lifted up in mind and spirit to heavenly and incorruptible
treasures: so shalt thou be regenerate of the holy ghost, and being confirmed
by the word of God, may well be called Microcosme, that is, the whole world
upon the little foot. Ye shall be true Christians, Kings and Priests,
esteeming nevertheless your selves as unprofitable servants. Ye shall live
happily and plesaunt, and quiet in conscience: ye shall know your own: and
being thoroughly persuaded of the truth, ye shall abide steadfast and
immovable, not waueryng with every wind. No kind of affection, envy, hate,
anger, sorrow or pain, shall trouble you, ye shall put away al wicke^^esse, and
make no account of worldly matters, but your conversation shall be in heaven:
ye shall then continually meditate of God and his kingdom, that being busy
therwithall, ye might contemn al worldly things from the heart. Nothing then
shall be able to separate you from the love of God, but ye shall go forewarde
in all virtue and godliness, till such time as it shall please Almighty God
to take our souls unto him, then shall we see him most perfectely face to
face. Unto the which perfection and joyful sight, vouchsafe to bring us O Lord
Almighty, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thorough the same his only and
well-beloved son: To whom with the holy ghost be all honor and glory, power
and dominion everlastingly. And to all faithful christians here upon earth
peace and comfort of the holy ghost, and hereafter life everlasting.

AMEN.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knight riders streat, at
the sign of the Marmaid. ANNO. 1569.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM.


