A MIRROR FOR The Multitude, OR GLASS, Wherein may be seen, the violence,
the error, the weakness, and rash consent, of the multitude, and the
dangerous resolution of such, as without regard of the truth, endeavor to
^unne and join themselves with the multitude: With a necessary conclusion,
that it is not the name, or title of a Protestant, Christian, or Catholic,
but the true imitation of Christ, that makes a Christian.

By I. N.

NON VI, SED SVRSVM VERITATE.



Caueamur, Virtutem incolumem edimus, sublatam oculis sero quaerimus inuidi. AT
LONDON, Printed by John Wirdet. 1586.



Enforce oh Lord In Zeal All Breasts,
Effectually To Honor her:
who Ruling: Each man Gains his right,
In Naught she shows A mind to err.
TO THE RIGHT FAMOVS AND MOST virtuous Princess, Elizabeth by the grace of
God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, defendresse of the true
Catholic faith, be constant perseverance therein, a joyful reign over us,
Gods protection from her foes, and after this life, a glorious reign, with the
King of Kings.
SO small (right excellent and most virtuous Queen) is the talent of my
learning, that, notwithstanding, I have not willinglye conceiled it, it has
been deseruedlye unregarded: which held my willing mind, all amazed, at my
first adventure into this my truly affected purpose: Yet duly, and dutifully
considering, that he that said unto David, Aperi os tuum and implebo illud,
was all sufficient to direct me: and who said unto Paul, Meafortitudo in
imbecillitate perficitur, both could and would assist me, I found no cause of
doubt: but feeling further instigatio^, I proceeded And, this (most gracious
princess) is the effect of my poor travail, which being thus simply
performed, true affection moved me and the daily experience of your Majesty's
clemency, resolved me, this day (though trembling) to make it a messenger of
my loyalty: although in value, less then the poor widows mite, and
therefore far unanswerable, to your princely worthiness: yet in true zeal
not inferior to a most precious present. It may please your Majesty,
graciously to accept it (so were I happy) but through the weakness of my
ability, I can not but reverently acknowledge, that, might it be accepted, at
your princely hands, with bening patience, it is not in respect of my
deseruinges, but proceeding only, and altogether, of your Majesty's wonted
clemencye. The experience whereof, has engraven in the hearts of your truly
affected subjects, such a perfect print of free presumption, of your gracious
acceptaunce, even of a cup of cold water, flowinge from the fountain, of
their loyal obedience: that I nothing despair of that, which your royal
heart has so generally afforded to many.

Among whom, although I be the most unworthy, the causes moving my willing
mind, to wade hereinto (time and occasions considered) were not unreasonable:
tending (most godly princess) to the comfort of the little stock of true
Christians, that in these dangerous days, they yield not unto the course, nor
be dismayed at the threats of the multitude: a monster compact of many
dangerous members, domestical and foraine: protesting, that the rash and
perilous resolution, which is to be noted in the multitude in these days,
without regard of the truth, gave greatest inforcement, to my travail: which
(in respect that therein, the multitude may see their error, and weakness) I
have entitled it, A mirror for the multitude, and in all humility sheilded
the same, under the protection of your Majesty: a patroness most pure and
perfect: nothing doubting, but it may please the great Shepherd (even in the
time of your royal reign) to gather all his children into one fold* and with
the sword of his truth, to drive away all beasts, and wolves, and all kind
of savage creatures, as traitors, and such like cruel monsters, with their
multitudes, and mighty adherents, from touching as much as the hemme, of your
Majesty's garment, to the indaungering of your royal person, being so armed,
with the undoubted shield of faith in him, that first (beyond some expectation)
placed your highness in the imperial seat, who shows himself both al
sufficient, mindful, and willing, to protect you, and with the balance of his
justice, to try the lightness of some, that before they be duly peazed,
seem substantial, and trusty: Magna enim est veritas and preualet: Even the
adversaries of Gods truth, to the terror of their own consciences: and the
truly affected, to the comfort of their hearts, consider the effect of grace,
in your majesty's proceedinges, and that it is decreed by the highest Judge, to
use your Majesty, as his instrument, to cut off the aspiringe head, and to
break the greedy jaws of that fierce Holophernes of Rome: and to turn the
swoordes of all his blouddy accomplices (bent against your Majesty, and al true
Christians) into their own bowels, That the remembrance of them may perish,
with the sound of their own deserved shame, and their name be wyped away for
ever and ever: No true Christian doubts it. Many are the unfeigned prayers
(most godly Queen) that not a few true Christians, your faithful and obedient
subjects, continually make, for the preservation of your majesty, and
confusion, or conversion of these wicked men: that as they have these twentye
and eight years so (were it to Gods glory, and your comfort, as many
quadrebled) they and their posterity, may under your sacred government, suck
the sweet of the saving truth, without fear of recaptiuitie in Romish Babylon.

Your majesty's faithful and truly affected poor subject, JOHN NORDEN.

To the Christian Reader greeting.
I Know (dear Christian Reader) that the multitude, chiefly in these days,
expects novelties, things pleasing, fleshly fantasies, and especially rare
news from beyond the seas, miraculous The multitude expectethnoueltie^ The
greatest wonder lasts but nine days.
events, and strange Stratagems, and wonders, from foreign countries, as also
here at home: And yet we see the most strange wonder, to continue (as a wonder)
but (as the old proverb says) for nine days, nay with some not nine hours.
For who almost, has not forgotten the general earthquake, happening of so
late years: nay, The late earthquak a great vvonder.
who did not within nine days, throw the consideration thereof behind his back?
Being so strange a motion, as the most ancient of our days, have not felt the
like: nor scarcely theirfore fathers. A thing (though now so clean forgotten)
yet of great moment, and weight, and of no small regard with the godly, who
take it and account it (as indeed it was) a very Caveat unto the obstinate, to
become more conformable The earthquak a caveat.
in their duties to God, least that he that then so shook, and caused the earth
so to tremble at his presence, showing but as it were the fiercenes of his
countenance toward it, should come down and visit our iniquities with the
plagues, which his justice has already provided for the inhabitants thereof.
For although we so slightly (in silence) pass over so ponderous a presagement
of our punishment he that then shook the earth, in love, to call us unto him,
can shake the inhabitants thereof, in pieces, and grind the rebellious to
powder, even with the breath of his mouth. For surely he that can shake the
tree, even to the roots, he can much more disperse the leaves, and consume
them to naught. Seeing I say (good reader) that our dulnes is such, and our
hearts so besotted with the oblivion of any regard* of so high a matter, of so
new a thing, and so strange an event, I am utterly discomforted to present
thee any more news, then within nine days, I may assure me, shall perish in
the flood of forgetfulness. And on the other The stranged nevves soon
forgotten.
side, to write what has been already written, to present unto thee, what
has been or is already extant, I know it will be thought stale stuff, and so
a needles travail. So that ^are is the travail in these days, that draws
not after it, some mislyke, of the author be it new or old.

But such is my boldness, in the fear of God, and premised obedience to my
dread Sovereign, that I have adventured to present unto thee, such things for
thy learning and comfort, as have been in the days of our fathers of old
done, to show the goodness of the Lord, to those that trusted in him, and his
vengeance and judgementes against them, that were rebellious against his
truth, and that stood upon their own strength and multitude against the same:
which (although I confess has been already written) yet to show my self
willing to do thee what good my poor tallent can extend unto, I have
endeavored to perform this little travail: the sum whereof is but to
encourage thee to frame thine affection to the* truth of Gods word, and not to
be dismayed at the threats of gods enemies, notwithstanding they seem The
sum of this travel
unvanquishable, in respect of their multitudes, and boast of their assurance
of the truth, in respect of their many heads. These are frivolous vauntes,
whose fruits declare their profession pestilent, and their persuasions nothing
else but to pluck men into the pit of wilful rebellion, against God, and
conspiracy against his anointed of the land. And that which I have here
collected, is The fruits an a^g^m^nt of the profession.
nothing but the fruits of the tree of life, the sacred word of God, for thee
to feed upon, in these dangerous days: persuading my self that if thou be a
true christian, thou w^lt more willingly accept it (though altogether void of
eloquence) the^ that which the multitude covet, namely What the multitude most
desire.
that, which may increase subtilty of wit, and make men more wonderful among
men, in respect of the curious conceited rules, of falsehood and fellowship, of
Sophistry and such like, which as it is far from the intent of my travail, so
I know thou will not expect it, as a thing necessary to stain the way to the
true christian profession, or to move willing zeal and zealous willingness to
persevere therein.

I have entitled it* A MIRROR FOR THE MVLTITVDE, for that as in a glass all
men may see and behold the common course of the most part, alienate from the
Gods children are the least number
truth of Christian religion: And the lesser number to be the true servants of
the living God. For notwithstanding the common censure of the world, does
rashly attribute greatest assurance, of having the truth, in respect of many
Gods truth contrary to the minds of the multitud
heads, and general consents of countries and kingdoms, and do yield greatest
likelihood of safty unto the might of many adherentes: It fares not so with
Gods eternal truth* which he reuevleth unto babes and sucklinges, and hides
it from the wise of the world, and who plucketh A flight of satan.
down the mighty and proud, and exalts the humble and meek. And therefore
is it a deceit of Satan to allure men to consent unto the multitude, to be
sure of the truth, and to trust in the mighty shows of multitudes to be
preserved from the foil. It is not the horse that saves a man in the
battle, but the mighty hand of God. God is not tide to the force of man, but
the puysaunce of the A dangerous thing to follow the multitude.
mightiest multitude, under the power of the invincible God. And therefore a
dangerous thing to follow the multitude. For many are called, but few are
chosen, many are invited to the heavenly sweet banquet of the true knowledge,
and exercise of the sincere religion of God, The way to true religion bodily
dangerous.
but few there be that frame their wills, and powers to perform it in
deed. And why? only for that they find the way thereunto, rough, burdensome,
and bodily dangerous, and therefore start aside like broken bows, and retire
like dastardly soldiers, and attain not unto the end of the race that leads
unto life, but take the broad, pleasant and easy way, that trayneth unto
errors and feyned holiness, and consequently unto death. It is a painful,
hard, and tedious thing to flesh and blood, to forsake worldly The flesh is
weak and unable to abide mortification.
vanities, and pleasing things of the world, to follow Christ, for that in
flesh there is no goodness, pronenesse or readiness to do well, to deny and
suppress our own natural affections, and as it were to kill our own selves
in true mortification, to the end the more freely to embrace the cross of
Christ, and to live to him in singleness and pureness of heart. The Apostle
says for thy sake are To. 8. 36.
we killed all the day long, agreeing with the words of the Prophet, who
likewise says, that for the love and dutiful Psalm. 44. 22.
affection the godly bare unto God, for his sake, they are slain contitually:
namely suffer the wicked to rage The godly are for gods sake killed continuallye
against them, to rail at them, to persecute them, and punish them: wherein,
being led by the spirit of God in perfect holiness, they take it not only
patiently, but to their unspeakable comfort, for that they are thought worthy
to suffer such reproach, for the testimony of their true and very Christian
profession, when they are carried as The comfort of Christians in their crosses.
sheep to the slaughter, for their faith in Christ, and not as wicked doers,
traitors, rebels, murderers, and blood thirsty men, for Blessed are they that
suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven. But if any man Mat. 5. 10. 1. Pet. 4. 15. We must regard the cause
of our sufferings.
suffer as a murderer, or an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's
matters, he has no portion with the^. And yet such is the blindness of our late
conspirators, that they are persuaded their rebellions, their treasons,
murders, and all their bloody practices, not only lawful, but meritorious,
only by the dispensation which they have, from the vicegerent of Satan, who
presumes to make the word of God in this behalf (namely that no murderer or
wicked person shall enter into the kingdom of heaven) of none effect, and not
only tollerateth murder and other the most intolerable evils, but warranteth
the actors thereof, not only The misconceit of evil doers. Romish
dispensations cause of many evils
pardon, but great reward for murdering the most godly upon the earth, yea
and when for these wicked pretended practices, they come by due proof, and
course of laws, unto the gallows, as wicked doers, such is the blasphemous
boldness of the man of Rome, that he blusheth not to canonize them Saints, when
the scripture the very word of truth, conde^neth, as very reprobate. Judas
killed not Christ, The canonization of Judas.
although he were the mean to encourage the Jews to lay hands upon him, yet
such was the guilt of his conscience, that after the fact, he ran desperate
and hung himself, here was the canonizing of a man as holy as these, that now
conspire the death of her Majesty, her Counsel, and Magistrates, the spoil
of the land, and the utter exterpation of the glory of God, and merits of his
Christ, some of whom as we see in a guilty conscience, have canonized the^
selves after the manner of Judas, and the most proudest of the^ (yea) he that
carries the most resolute mind (had they their desire, which God forbid)
would run with Judas and Cayn desperate, for so rashly betraying the innocent
blood.

And howsoever these foolish and more then mad ministers of the Romish
confederacy, flatter themselves, who have vowed the overthrow of the true
religion of Christ by The vain hope of traitors.
taking away the chiefest props thereof, in hope (for their reward) some to
sit at the right, some at the left hand of Christ in his kingdom, as the
false father of all the faithless, the proud Pope, has flatteringly
persuaded the^: let the^ assure themselves, that if the word of God be true,
then shall not such as suffer for evil doing, nor such as have their
consciences feared with the hot iron of consent unto such like conspiracies,
enter into the kingdom of heaven, nor have their portion in the presence of
Christ, neither sit at his right or left hand, in his kingdom: no, they shall
not have the privilege of enjoying the light of his countenance, the bright
beams of his glory shall not extend toward them, to their comfort in the last
day, but mere Their assured revvard that seek the overthrow of the godly.
horror, anguish, torment, and the worm, which is the testimony of their
guilty consciences, shall be their portion to drink for evermore, and the great
deceyuer himself who^ Satan has deceived, shall have his hire with them in
utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

And therefore (good Reader) take heed that the sufferings We must take heed
of the causes of sufferings. The causes of the sufferings of the wicked.
of these me^ deceive thee not, for mark the cause of their sufferinges,
whether it be for the testimony of a good conscience or no. Thou have heard,
that he that suffers for evil doing, as for murder and such like, can
challenge no benefit of the promise, made to such as suffer for righteousness
sake. Thou art not ignorant of their practices, thou art (no doubt) resolved
of their profession, to be accompanied with treasons, rebellions, tumults,
co^spiracies, practices of farrain invasions, for the overthrow of thee and all
true Christians, for which, they suffer as they deserve* and the cloak of good
intent, can not hide their hearts fraught with manifest desire of the blood of
Christians, from the throne of him, to whom the innocent hands of many
Christians are lifted up, for a testimony of their The zeal of the godly.
sound profession, and to show themselves not only guyltlesse of such
wickedness, but zealous of the reformation or confusion of such blodthirstie
men. Just up thy hands with a clear conscience therefore, with the truly Our
duties remembered.
godly, and crave the assistaunce of him that never fails the faithful, that
he will continue the defense of our Sovereign, the stay and guide of our
Magistrates, the protection of our land, and a severe Judge of those that
seek by these wicked devises to confound him (if it were possible) in his
members, that for his sake are killed all the day long. And if thou suffer,
suffer as a Christian, namely How we ought to suffer.
as a faithful member of Christ, taking the narrow way to life, with such
as never desired other canonization then the merits of their master and head
Christ Jesus, How the righteous desire to be canonised.
whom whosoever desires to imitate, and be pertaker of the joys provided for
his very Saints, must be likewise pertaker of his cross, for his sake in
this life: for far better it is by labor to obtain rest, by tribulation to
win joy, and by death to procure life, then by rest to come to labor, by joy
to purchase tribulation, and by a pleasant and lou^e life to procure death,
and eternal destruction, for this is certain and nothing more certain, Life
or death in the last day eternal.
that what comes last be it life or death, it is eternal and for ever to
endure.

Shall therefore persecution, and threats of bloody tyrants, keep us back
or dismaye us from that profession, which leads us unto life? or shall the
dangerous devises of the ministers of Satan draw us again into the palpable
darkness that leads unto death? God forbid.

What should then move us to fear the force of the A good admonition.
many and mighty favorers of the strong deceyuing whore of Babylon? Shall
the infirmity and weakness of our flesh and blood, accompanied with so many
sharp bickeringes of temptations, and such vneasinesse of the narrow way, that
we must walk in, we being few and so unlike to withstand the encounter of
our many enemies? No surely, for God by whom we live, and in whom we trust,
God is our staff and strength, he will defend us.
has promised to stand by us, to help us, and to send his spirit to
strengthen us, who being always near unto his, will aid us, being omnipotent
will assist us, and not suffer his vaunting proud adversaries, that imagine
such mischief against his people, to take effect in their devises. Psalm. 2. 2.
Although the Kings of the earth, stand up, and the Princes The kings of the
earth not to be feared it they go about to resist the truth.
assemble themselves together against the Lord, and against his anointed:
although they increase mightily that ^eeke to violate the sanctuary of the
Lord, and great multitudes rise up against his word, utterly to supplant it,
and root it out, let God deal with them according to Psalm. 3. 1.
his divine wisdom, and in the end we shall see those that now take these
wicked counsels, laying their heads together, imagining how and by what
means they may banish the godly of from the earth, to melt away as wax at The
end of the wicked.
the fire, (yea) they shall consume in the imaginations of their own hearts,
and perish in their own wiliness, he has spoken it, that for ever has and
will confirm it: he has said it, that will for evermore perform it.

And therefore although Satan have sounded his trumpets, and beaten up his
drumbes of Alarm round about us, to allure foreign invasions, preparations
to civil tumultes Satan has sounded up his trumpets of alarm to invade
christians in the behalf of Antichrist. Christ is a careful watchman. The
benefit of Gods protection.
and vprores, practices of secret conspiracies, among our selves, that the red
dragon of Rome, may the more freely reestablish his kingdom of darkness: we
see and to our undoubted comfort we may note the diligent eye, and careful
diligence of our watchman Christ, who has brought all their devises to light,
So that we may say, had not the Lord guarded her Majesty, defended our Nobles,
watched our Cities, and protected our whole Realm, she had been devoured, her
Magistrates massacred, our Cities ransacked, and our Realm and common quiet
come to utter ruin and subuertion, and the Lords honor laid in the dust.
Thus may we little Israel of England lay* The snare is broken and we
delivered.
If the Lord had not been on our side when men rose up against us, they had
swallowed us up quick, and yet is the snare broken and we delivered, immortal
praises be unto his blessed name therefore.

The trumpet has given our enemies (the enemies of gods truth) an uncertain
sound, they were ready to battle, but (God be thanked) they are returned to
their own shame.

And notwithstanding (as these late conspirators have confessed) the King of
Spain, has vowed the consummation The raske vow of the king of spain.
of half his kingdom, but he will win little England to subjection, unto
the usurped authority of the whore of Babylon, who doubts but he may spend
all, and spoil his own soul (unless he convert*) and yet he that has
hitherto guarded us, is for ever sure? And as he from high beholds the little,
yea, the least worm in the earth, so doubtless he winketh not at the vain
vauntes of this mighty king, and his wilful permittance, of his most wicked
inquisition, The permittance of the spanish inquisition most wicked A good
remedy for the clensing of a man from self mortification
whereby many godly members of Christ are cruelly martyred, to fulfill the most
damnable will of that man of Rome, the red devouring dragon. But before the
blind and bloody expectation, of this rash conceited king be fulfilled, no
doubt but our gracious Sovereign shall (at the pleasure of our good God) live
to hear of his vl^imum vale, or certain conversion, in washing himself in
the blood of the lamb, the merits of Christ, from the pitch of the poison of
Romish affection, wherewith he is now so defiled, that the savor thereof,
has infected many, and martired not a few.

How many have there bin martyred in Spain, massacred in France, spoiled in
Portingall, slain in Flaunders, endangered in England, and many other
countries and kingdoms, as in Naples, Italy, Florence, Ferrar^, Mantua,
Myllayne, Germany, Denmark, and many other, where the poison of tyranny has
been sprinkled abroad, to please the Popes high holiness, to feed his
hellish humor, and to fill his belly with the blood of the Saints of God, that
in these places have like constant christians, denied his usurped, and more
the^ The book of martyrs* ^ glass of romish cruelty.
blasphemous authority. Marvelous is the mirror of our time, and specially the
volume of Martyrs who have suffered for the testimony of the truth of the
Gospel, wherein may be seen, that it is no new thing that these men so
egerly thirst for the blood of the godly, in every kingdom, country, province,
City and congregation, not only from the killing of godly Abell, to the
beheading of John Baptist, but during the reigns of all the tyrannous Emperors
of Rome, and since continued by succession all the time of all the blouddy
ministers of the red Dragon, the Popes of Rome, who seek by all means to
devour the child, the Gospel of Christ, wherewith the true Catholic church
trauaileth, as a woman to be delivered, namely to have it spread through all the world, which the Pope, the man of The cause why the pope and his disciples
now storm.
sin, the father of deceit, and dispensor of murder, seeks even now to
stop and prevent, least the general true knowledge thereof, should so manifest
his wickedness, blasphemy, and rebellion against Christ, that the world seeing
his falsehood, should fall from him and be saved. And that (good Reader) is the
cause that he is now so busy and seeks by all means he can to bring that to
pass, which God for his mercies sake, never permit. But thus every good
Christian must resolve himself, that during the time A christian resolution.
of our pilgrimage here in this life, these wicked ministers of bloody
Antichrist, shall not cease to persecute him* and by all means seek, to
suppress the true servants and extinguish the true service of the living god,
for that therein stands the salvation of every faithful in Christ. And
therefore whatsoever storms and tempests, tumultes, vprores, conspiracies,
rebellions and such like buffits of Satan, rumble We must bewarre of
starting back.
about our ears, we may not start back from our profession, we may not be
faint hearted, to fall from our faith to feyned holiness, notwithstanding
threats of invasions, sacking of our Cities, cutting of our throts and
murdering of our bodies. For behold although it should please our heavenly
father to give us over unto the hands of his and our enemies, and they to take
their wills against us, they have power but only over our bodies and not over
our souls, which shall rest in the bosom, namelye, in the safe custody of
our Savior Jesus Christ under the alter, indewed with the long white Robe^ of
innocence washed in the blood of the immaculate Lamb. Whereas if we (for
fear of the loss of our goods, favor of our f^^endes, or lives) join with
these men, to be pe^take^s of their bloody practices against the godly: then
shall we be likewise of the number of those, against whom they that now he
under the Alte^ Christ, cry for vengeance for the tyranny done against the
just, that waded thorough the pikes of persecutions. We must therefore beware
of giving any consent unto their practices, and rather yield our own necks
unto the yoke of their tyrannies, the: when the number The end of the godly.
of Gods elect is fulfilled, and the Lord appearing in glory, we also with
him, may be pe^taker of the same glory, when we shall no more hunger nor
thirst, but be in the continual presence of the throne of our Savior Christ,
and serve in his temple day and night, that he that sits in the throne may
dwell amongst us, and we with him, for evermore: so that for the joy of his
presence we shall no more mourn nor weep, but all tears being wyped from
our faces, we shall continue in singing the joyful song of praise unto his
name that sits in the throne, for his most loving protecting us in our
corporal life, in such constant perseverance in his truth, (among the bitter
persecutions of the wicked, that then shall have their portions in utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth) that in his merits
are thought worthy of The end of the wicked persecutors.
that blessed life, whereunto he that will attain, must willingly accept of
such cross, as his master by his divine providence thinks meet, and
expedient to be laid upon him, which (in what manner ^oeuer ^t pleases him to
deal with us) vouchsase thy zealous prayer, that all true Christians may
patiently suffer.

And to conclude, why should we fear the force, the The conclusion.
threats, and great bragges of these men, seeing we have the Lord himself to
be our King? Let the multitude of Pharaohs host and the mighty company of
Senacherybes Army fiet as they will, let them champe and chafe like wilds
boares, yea although the whole earth shake and all the foundations thereof
tremble and quake* as of late it has done, let us not be dismayde, but go on,
in love to fear, and in faith to love him that has promised to be with us,
even he that dwells in the Cherubyns: who has sufficiently declared his
power in Sion, whereunto all these proud boasting, murtherous, and bloudthirstie
men (nill they will they) shall be for evermore subject, and shall not pass The
wicked are tied within the limits of gods power
those lymits, to touch her highness, her crown and dignity* her Magistrates,
and common weal, which he has already determined for our good: and therefore
need we the less to fear, what they can do unto us: but rather let us trust
upon the assured protection, of our mighty and most merciful God, and
magnify his name, most terrible to his enemies: It is holy, they corrupt, all
honor is due unto it, and eternal plagues are due to them. Wherefore I say, we
need not to seek any succor besides him, who (no doubt) will sharply punish
all those rebellious multitudes, of whom and by whose means, we are unjustly
endaungered. For it can not be (good Reader) that he God vvil not suffer the
wicked to go vnauenged.
should suffer such outrage, treasons, conspiracies, and wickedness vnauenged,
that is the author of equity and justice it self, and has prescribed unto
the posterity of Jacob, the very rule thereof, which we must carefully embrace
and follow, not only in outward show, but in the inward Our dutiesto God.
soul. And seeing we see the goodness of our God, so far extended to our
continual comfort: let us praise him, let us in holiness and righteousness,
fall down before his footestoole, and truly worship him, for he is only 1.
Tim. 2. 1.
holy: And as S. Paul exhorts let supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks for all our brethren, as well here at home, as in other
Countries, suffering violence for the testimony of their good consciences to
God: And especially let us pray for our most gracious Sovereign, that God of
his goodness will preserueher, and protect her in his power, from the bloody
sword which Gods assured enemies, have whetted to take away her most innocent
life, her Counsel, and Magistrates being The stern of our common weal.
under her the stern of our peaceable government: let us duly regard in our
prayers, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. And
as the Lord consecrated Moses and Aaron of old, and set Samuel also amongst
them, to exercise the office of the Mediator for the people, and whylest they
executed the same sincerely, they were heard, and the Lord spoke unto them out
of the cloudy pillar* prescribing unto them the way and rites of his divine
worship: So let every Moses and Aaron, together Every man must execut his
duty.
with Samuel, the priest and the Prophet, the king and the people, execute
their duties unto the same God in true worship, in supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks one for another, as the careful members
of one body in our head Christ, in whom who so follows the good example of
Moses and Aaron, shall assuredly be likewise duly heard, and in convenient time
relieved. For the Lord many times vouchsasing his ear unto them* suffered
himself oftentimes to be pacified, by their faithful prayers. Seeing then
that we have a Mediator, even Christ Jesus, to present our prayers unto God,
and to reconcile us to God* let us not be slack in our prayers, nor weak in
our faith, but constantly believe that as he has hetherunto protected us, so
he will continue our defense for evermore.

Thine in Christian goodwill, I. Norden.

Errata.
Page 8. line 25. for Maximius read maximinus. p. 10. l. 18. f. wheat whet^e.
p. 13. l. 39. for perish precisely. p. 14. l. 14. f. in religion to religion.
p. 15. l. 14 f. we no. p. 22. l. 11. f. of such with such. p. 24. l. 6. f.
auere auerre. p. 24. l. 19. f. they way the way. p. 34. l 26 f positions
potions. p. ^1. l. 5. f. implication application. p. 86. l. 28. f. consent of
consent to. p. ^8. l. 7. f. sacrifices sacrificer^ p. 89. l. 5 f. begun begin.
p. 93. l. 26. f. draw drown.

A MIRROR FOR the Multitude.
CHAP. 1.
A Comfortable discourse to persevere in the truth, notwithstanding
persecution, with a dehortation from joining with the multitude in conspiracye
against the same.

ALTHOUGH it is, by the 2. Tim. 3. 1.
1. Tim. 4. 1.
Providence of Almightye God, our lotte to fall into these dangerous times,
and troublesome days, foretold so long ago: wherein we see, and hear the
maine and severe thunderclapps of bitter persecution, to rage and rattle in
diverse corners of the earth: And especially, where the glory of God is most
Persecution is there most sharp where the word of God is follovved most
sincerely.
sought for, his truth most embraced, and the darkness of error most
rejected. Let us be of good comfort, let us arm our selves with a full
assurance of our happy estate in resisting errors and the pleasing things of
this world, with the force of Christianlike patience in a clear conscience,
wherein also let us take hold of that assured truth, which God by Christ has
to our comfort, Queen Eli^abeth an instrument under whom God has reched us
his truth.
by his instrument our most gracious Queen, as with his outstretched arm
reached and restored most lovingly unto us again, being taken away by her
sister Queen Mary. Let us therefore like valiant soldiers, under the ba^ner of
a most victorious and wise captain, let us march-on as we have begun, nay
(if it be possible) more valiauntly, more willingly, and more circumspectly,
through the brunt of al contemptible things, namely, through the darcksome
night of ignorance unto the daylight of the sincere truth, not fearing the
force of the pikes of whatsoever persecution threatened, whatsoever policy or
practice pretended.

And for our defense let us take hold of the sweet promises and promised
swetnesse of our head and assured rest Christ Jesus, who is our guide and
captain, under whose ensign we must fight, without fear of bodily
affliction, We must follow Christ in accepting his cross.
for we must follow him in patient acceptance of his cross for the truths
sake, as he himself has trained the way. He is the loving husband of his
obedient spouse the Church, whereof whosoever accompteth himself a member must
think himself happy, if he be thought worthy to suffer like affliction with
him. For he The seruante is not above his master.
has allowed none that are his indeed, any farther prerogative of quiet and
liking days, in this natural body, then he himself was forced to abid in the
pilgrimage of this life. And for that he would not have his little flock
discouraged, when the stormy blastes of persecution should beat against the
walls of their weak nature: as though some strange thing did happen, he The
children of God must not look for a pleasant life in this world.
gave them forewarning, and (as it were) a caveat, that they should not look
for a pleasant life in this world, for every one that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution: And by many tribulations they must enter
into the king 2. Tim. 3. 1^*
dome of heaven.

It is evident, that the truth in Christ, namely the truth which he taught,
is the way that leads unto the kingdom of heaven, which truth also never
passes without some buffets of Satan They that profess the truth are
busseted of Satan.
and his ministers. And why? only because it is the overthrow of his kingdom
of darkness. And therefore whatsoever he be that seeks and endeuoreth to set
forth the glory of God, and the mysteries of his Christ, whether by preaching
or by whatsoever other christianlike exercise, must arm himself against the
assaults of this Satan the archenemy of the church of Christ.
wonted and Archenemy of the church of Christ who in the beginning, seeing our
first parents in a blessed estate, and in a sincere and godly course of life,
he never left by pernicious practices until he had plucked the^ from their
obedience to their maker, into wilful rebellion and sin, and consequentlye
unto death. And has not since in any age, ceased to seek the means to
prevent the passage of the truth, and Satan seeks to prevent the salvation
of man.
to hinder as much as in him lies the salvation of all men. He raised up
wicked Cain to lay violent hands upon godly Abell, and to shed his innocent
blood, only because he saw that Abell began to serve God aright.

When Ioshna the high priest prayed unto the Lord for the prosperity of the
Church, Satan Zachary. 3. 1 Satan stood at the elbovv of Joshua when he
prayed.
stood at his elbowe to resist him: and of a surety, so endeuoreth to resist
every action, every enterprise and motion, tending to the setting forth of the
glory of God, and the salvation of our souls.

He raised up wicked Saul to persecute godly Saul persecuted David.
David, Herod to seek the death of Christ, and his many ministers, even mighty
multituds, to persecute his Apostles. We may read how he incited ungodly
Iesabell to seek the death of Eliah: and to conclude, has never omitted time
and Iesabell.
means to persecute as many as have professed the truth, such is his malice
toward the church of God. And for that the church of Christ is so subject to
the stormy tempests of Satan's persecutions, and every godly action so
encountered Mat. 8. 26. The church of God is compared to a ship tossed upon the
sea.
and kept back with the blusterous blasts of his buffets: It is rightly
resembled unto a ship, that is beaten, battered, and continually subject to
the rough and boiling waves of the raging Sea. But herein is our comfort, that
when the greatest tempests and storms do arise, when we seem to be in most
peril, and likely to be overwhelmed with the belowes and fomy flashings of
affliction, and when we think that our heavenly father is a sleep and
regards not our troubles our dangers, or present and imminent perils, he
suddenly arises and rebukes the winds, and changes the storms into calm
weather, our despair of help, into a manifest token of our certain safety.
And as in respect of the trobles incident unto the professors of the truth,
their estate is resembled unto a ship tossed in the sea: Even so let us further
consider, that as the ship that is grievously tossed, and the mariners and
passengers, that thereby are most perilously endaungered, have then the
greatest care, and take circumspectest heed, that they run not against the
rocks, nor be driven into any gulf: Delivery from deepest danger procures
greatest joy.
and if they safely ariue unto their expected harbor, their joy is then the
more great and gladesome, by how much they were in desperate peril. Even so
the poor souls that are most cruelly handled, and the bark of their frail
flesh most sharply tossed and driven to and fro with the force of bitter
persecution, for the testimony of the truth: their care and diligence to keep
the even and direct course, is the^ most regarded and they carry then an eye
unto their course, least the wind of these troubles should drive them upon the
rocks of error. And when they shall safely, namely truly and constantly ariue
at their wished harbor, namely of the passage from this mortal life, unto the
immortal haven, whether it be by Martyrdom or by any other kind of
determination of their course, their joys shall be so much the greater, by
how much their afflictions and persecutions have been for the testimony of
their godly professions with constancy and due patience tolerated and
accepted: for blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. This Mat. 5. 10.
the^ is our sufficient warrant, patiently to accept The hope of the kingdom of
God a^meth us to ^e^e persecution.
of Satan's buffets, knowing that the grace of God shall hold us up, and
preserve us from confusion. And therefore although through persecution and
crosses, we be thought contemptible in this world, and through the slanders
and reproaches of the wicked, we be thought and accounted abiects in the world,
let us persuade our selves that all the persecutions, afflictions, troubles,
cares, calamities, scornings, scoffings, scurgings, and crosses which we can
bear in this life, are not worthy of the joy of the life to come. Yet may we
fully resolve our selves, that as a sparrowe lights not on the ground without
the providence of God: no more does the least of these afflictions light upon
us without our heavenly fathers will for our salvation. And therefore we may
not think it strange, when this fiery trial of persecution comes, but rather
1. Pet. 4. 12. They that truly suffer shall appear with Christ in glory.
to rejoice* in so much as we be thereby made pertakers of Christ our dear
masters sufferings: For when his glory shall appear, we with him shall
appear in glory.

But why should God permit his children to A frivolous question.
be so hardly dealt withal by the wicked? Why does Christ suffer his sheep
thus guiltless to be slain: and his spouse (the church) to be so persecuted
and afflicted? for that shepherd that has special regard unto his flock,
will not suffer the^ to be so hunted and vexed by the tyranny of ravening
wolves. Neither will that father that loves his children see them abused, and
ill dealt withal by any, but will with speed show himself a careful father,
and the shepherd a watchful shepherd unto his flock. Even so natural
reason would seem to control Christ, in that he wincketh at the wicked when
with open mouths they run upon the godly as though they would swallow them,
and devour them up quick: but should rather presently take their cause in
hand, and revenge himself of such as defile his sanctuary. Wherein our
comfort stands in persecution. Reu. 6. 7.
But Christ to resolve our weakness, and to confirm a farther hope in us
touching his good pleasure herein, says, that it must be so until the
number of the faithful be fulfilled, that the wicked shall persecute the
godly, as who should Io. 16. 2. 3
say: I do allow that my children shall taste of the whippes of the ungodly,
and by them to be cast out of their Sinagogue, to be excommunicated and put to
death, and why? For my names sake (says he.) And in that they thus afflicte
them, they shall think they do god good service, namly in that they know
neither God the Father, neither Christ: whereby we see, that none that truly
know God, or seek his glory, will move as much as their hands, or tongues
against any of his servant: much less against his anointed They that know
not Christ persecute his members.
against lawfully established kings, princes, and magistrates, which covet to
maintain the setting forth of his truth, and exalting his name. Then to
conclude: what may we hold them that seek the murdering of Christ's
anointed, namely our Queen and gouernesse, and such like defenders of his
true religion. May we not say they be such as know not God, such as seek
nothing but how to crucify Christ in his members? Nabuchadnezar, not knowing
God, neither Dan. 3. 1.
being acquainted with his truth, did even the like in persecuting the three
children. So did those that cried out crucify Christ, crucify Christ and such
as longed for the blood of his Apostles: and finally all such as have of late
days martyred, or caused so many godly ones to be burned, and otherwise done
to death, for the testimony of their master Christ: as in the time Ignorance
of the truth mother of persecution.
of Queen Mary in England, now in France, and Spain, and in other countries
where the truth of Gods word, is turned into men's own inventions, Dioclesian,
Maximinian, Maximius, Maxentius, Tirannous emperors not knovving God.
and such like tirannous Emperors, not know, ing God, persecuted the children
of God, whose ends were miserable.

What thing can there be more lamentable, then the want of the knowledge of
GOD and Christ? whereby men fly unto all kind of evil devises, without
remorce of conscience, even as blind horses run into the dyke of their own
destruction, contempning the truth, and embracing falsehood, making war with
christ and christians, putting their confidence in Pharoas strength and
multitudes, the broken reed of Aegipt, whereby they endeavor to pull down such
as GOD has exalted, and to exalt those whom Gods word pulls down, to root
up that which God has planted, and to plant that which the truth of God
rooteth up: to condemn those whom God vouchsafes to save, The Papists
absurdities.
and to save those that the judgment of God condemns. This we daily see
comes to pass through want of knowledge of the word of God, which yet the
most part perceive not, the multitude consider not, neither do they desire to
know it. But the time will come, when their own consciences, wherein they are
now nothing touched, shall be as a thousand witnesses against them, yea as a
book laid open before them, wherein they shall see, that they have taken The
conscience as a book laid open.
foolish enterprises in hand for want of the wisdom of God: and shall then
acknowledge that they whom they accounted heretics, and whom they accounted
vile and contemptible, whom they persecuted and put to death for acknowledging
that which they accounted false and erroneous, were the true servant of the
high God: the sheep of the heavenly shepherd: the church immaculate of the
true God, and the obedient spouse of their beloved Christ: And the^ selves to
be ledd and wilfullye carried away with the vain traditions of mortal men,
when they shall sing, Woe and well away all too late. The judgment of the Lord
lies heavy upon them, the truth inviolable, has already condemned them, and
their wicked devises, their traitorous practices, and mischeeuous enterprises,
are sufficient The practices of the papists sufficient testimony of their
comdemnation.
testimonies and tokens of their utter condemnation. Do not these their
manifest and open practices manifest unto us men, the corruption of their
consciences to God? And that they are the ministers of Satan, sent to buffit
not only Paul, and such as preach and teach the word of God truly: but even
the general company of the church, and especially the head thereof here in
England, our most gracious and godly Queen, yea they cease not to wheat
their swords to sharpen their weapons, to devour all the godly upon earth. But
behold it is Christ himself who^ they persecut, it is he whom they resist, it
is he whom they despise, it is he against whom they rise and assemble
themselves together, and it is he whom they seek to crucify again in his
members. But they will say, no, they persecute not Christ, they seek not to
crucify him again: but they seek the blood of such as agree not to their
inventions: they think that they themselves (knowing not God) do not stretch
forth their hands to the spoil of the saints, and that their tyranny
reaches not unto Christ. But alas, they are far deceived: Paul thought
the like Paul's persecution before his conversion.
before his conversion, who persecuted with might and maine, the Christian
congregations, when he (being void of the true knowledge of God) with much
cruelty thirsted after the blood of many innocents, as he traueled toward
Damascus, Act. 9. 4.
with authority from the highpreist (as these men now pretend to have from the
high Bishop) to persecute the christians, the mighty power of God struck him
to the earth, and the Lord spoke unto him saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? he said not, why persecutest thou my Saints? why seek thou thus
to vex mortal men, but plainly said: why persecutest Paul's conversion.
thou me? which proves, that although christ be in heaven, who is the head,
his church which are his members here militant in earth, is most dear unto
him, and he that touches them, touches him, yea they are as tender unto him,
as the apple of his eye. Yea such a union is there between him and his children
the saints, namely the godly in earth, that he with a general term names them
himself, and makes no exception Christ and his church all one.
between them and himself. Wherefore it is a perilous thing to attempt or
enterprise the least motion of evil that may be done against the least of
them: much more to be avoided to practice these inhumane, and brutish, yea more
then heathenish attempts against the chief members thereof, as of late has
been attempted. Bewarre, bewarre therefore al ye that have been defiled with
this pitch, wash your selves again in the blood of the Lamb and be cleansed,
and cry out and make it known by an earnest confession, A good salve for a
conscience guilty of ^auoring traitors.
and say we have sinned, we have sinned in seeking to betray the innocent blood.

Seeing now (dear christian brethren) that it has pleased our gracious God in
his son: to vouchsafe us so comfortable and happy a lotte as to be accepted
as his dear children: And for the further confirmation of our hope in his
blood, the price of our redemption, to make us pertakers of his crosses: Let us
assure our selves, that these dangerous attemptes of the wicked are stirred up
by the means of Satan, permitted by God for our good. Namely lest that we
slumbering in a secure estate, accompanied with A singular benefit of God.
no dangers, should fall into forgetfulness of our duties to him, who has
not only reueiled to us his truth, but aforded us long tranquillity and the
benefit of a peaceable time, to enjoy and exercise the same. For there is no
mortal man, can so duly address himself to the discharge of his duty to
God, to way the goodness of god S^^^rity dan g^rous.
the performance of his promises and hope of his protection, so effectually, so
duly, thankfully and carefully in the time of the tranquillity of body, and
quiet estate of all things, as in the time of affliction in the time of
perils and dangers, yea when Satan begins to raise his forces, and
buffets against us. As appears by P. feeling this combat of Satan, striving
and laying siege and battery unto his soul, then repaired Pau^e repaired to
God, when Satan assaulted him.
and betoke himself under the banner of his captain Christ, and prayed his
aid and help to resist him who is always ready, if we rightlye seek him,
and sincerely serve him. And for the increase of our comfort and constant
patience in the bitter assaults of Satan incident unto our profession, and
that we should not yield nor be discomforted or dismayed, he wills us by
the answer which he gave unto Paul, when he prayed that the buffets of
satan might be taken from him, and cease in him: to assure us of help, he
said, that his grace is sufficient for us.

This no doubt was written for our learning, for our comfort, and although
spoken to Paul to assure him, so to us and for us, to assure us of Gods
defense and protection in all our troubles if in like sort we hold our
selves, by the same grace that always offers it self unto us, whensoever
we be persecuted, whenever we be blamed of the world, or whenever
Satan by any means seeks to buffet us or discourage us, for the testimony
of an upright and sound conscience.

For what is the cause, that they which live godly, they which profess the
truth of god boldly, they which take Gods true religion in hand effectually,
and seek to maintain the same perish to manifest it openly, to sow and
disperse it generally, and to acknowledge Christ constantly. are misliked of
the multitude, condemned, sclaundered, reproved, rayled at, reviled,
imprisoned, hated, afflicted persecuted and cruelly Trust in God is the cause
that the world hate th us.
martyred? Is it not because they trust and beeleeue in the living GOD?
because they repose their cheefeste and sole confidence in the mighty God of
hoastes? and do disclaim the manners, the conversation, the profession, and
vain devises of the multitude, who color their actions, and paint their
practices, with counterfeit holiness, giving all the causes of their
conspiracies, of their tirannous treasons, treacheries and bloudsheds, the
gloss Conspiracye and treasons ha^^ alvvais the gloose of good intent
of the love in religion: when indeed the word of God, reproves, forbids,
condemns and punishes these wicked practices and practisers: altogether
disallowing the courses of their cou^sells, the prooceedings of their
practices, and the dealing of their devises, whereby they (as we see) according
to the ancient enterprice of Satan, seek to bring all the favorers, followers
and supporters of Christ's gospel, the members of Christ's church, his whole
flock, and especially the chief proppes thereof here on earth to utter
consusion.

But (dear Christians) seeing the word of God, so much disaloweth, and God so
much disliketh, and condemns the practices and policies God detesteth the
desire of shedding innocent blood.
of this perverse and peevish people, whose desire and only seeking is for the
shedding of innocent blood, let us utterly refrain our affections from all
familiarity of their faction, yea and let us carefully bewarre of indifferency,
as though we cared not which side did prevail. It is a dangerous thing to be
neither hot nor cold, to be effectual in neither side, for of such
Indifferenci^ and lukvvat^^ nesse very perilous.
says Christ, Euomam eos ex ore meo, I will spewe them out of my mouth.
Therefore in the name of our good and victorious captain Christ Jesus: I
earnestly exhort you, that we may al arm our selves, with a constant desire,
and ardent zeal, to maintain the truth, and not to wink at those that under
color of Catholics desire a change.

We although we were assured to enjoy A godly admonition to avoid consent
unto the devises of counter ^ait catholics.
not only our goods, lands liberties, and lives: but to have for our reward
of joining with them great preferments, high places, and honors and
dignities: For better shall the poor beggar, and base seruilian, (fearing the
Lord and professing his name) be, then the high and mighty Monarch, denying the
same and reuolting from his truth: for there is no respect of persons with him,
but he that fears him and walks in his ways is accepted with him. And he
verily denies him that rests indifferent, that can sail with every wind.
Let us therefore bewarre of inconstancy, and take heed that for fear of loss
of goods, lands, liberties, or our lives, we run not with the multitude, nor
join our forces to the greatest part or likeliest company of foreign powers,
that take part with our domestical traitors, for surely it is most dangerous.
A vveake and wicked resolution.
And the resolution to run with greatest number is both weak and wicked,
grounded upon vnbeeleefe: a foundation laid upon the san des, slippery and
deceitful, and of no assurance, whatsoever persuasions, reasons, or arguments
they allege to induce us, or whatsoever practices they put in ure, to move, or
encourage us, to set our helping hands to their devises. For we have had
sufficient try all of their tirannyes, many proofs of their pernicious
practices, Flattery a cover for deceit.
and do plainly see, that they deceive most when theyflatter fairest. They have
dispensations to dissemble what dealing is there then with them? who will play
with him that can cog? who will trust them that may lie by authority? who will
confederate themselves with such as have Counterfaite Catholics like unto
Camelions.
no faith, but like the Camelion, can turn them selves into all colors, and
by dispensation, persuade themselves free to break what promise, vow,
contract or loyal obedience soever.

Oh detestable, devilish, damnable, drunken and drousie doltes, that wink in
the day light, and stare in the dark night, that strain out a gnatte The
blindness of the Papists.
and swallowe a camel, that follow satan and forsake Christ, that persecute
truth and preach lies, that by wicked and sinister means seek to pluck down
the godly and most religious princes, to set up Antichristian authority, crying
out and saying, crucify Christ, crucify Christ, and deliver us Barrabas, hang
Paul, and save Judas. And yet they are in the catholic way, they are in the
way of life, they are the church, the church the church, Alas if these men be
the church, who is their chaplain, surely* not Christ, he never taught me^ to
murder any, much less the innocent, he never commanded to rebel, much less
to kill their sovereigns. Butlo, their fruits declare of what they came, he
that taught Simon a Catholics known by their fruits. A president for our
present conspiracies.
Monk of Swynsted Abbey in Lincolnsheere, to poison king John, and absolved
him before the fact, teaches these present treacheries.

But seeing their fruits be wray the substance of their profession, Let us
pass over their horrible devises and devilish practices with more silence, for
the ripping up of all their wickedness, would make the godly to vomit through
the lothsomnesse thereof. Wherefore let us crave of God their conversion* or
utter confusion, and the extirpation of them (if it were possible) out of the
land, they are worse then the frogs of Aegipte: yea what can be more
perilous, then their policies and practices? But they are men, and therefore
have we so much the less cause to fear their forces, for God is on our side,
though the multitud be of theirs. Let us not fear therefore God is on out side,
therefore the les cause to fear man
the braggs of corruptible flesh, although they have already cast lots upon
our garments. possessions and goods, and although they say, come let us
devour them up quick, let us set upon them, and destroy them: let us
overthrow them that they rise not again: these are vain words, these are of
the vaunts of vaineglorie, The practices of the wicked turn to their own
perdition.
and shall return as pricks in their own eyes: and as their own swords into
their own bowels: For God who is true, (and these men liars) has spoken it,
and he will perform it. Wherefore let us in a steadfast hope, hold fast by
the promises of our good God, who has made us, and assured us of his help,
with promise that our enemies shall not prevail: but will make The providence
of god toward us and our enemies.
them to stumble and fall, and will with joy rid us out of their hands: he will
not suffer the cruelty of our enemies further to touch us, then shall make to
his own glory, to our comfort, their confusion and our salvation.

Wherefore I say let us not account our selus weak, let us not carry
dastardlike minds, or be faint hearted, as for fear of these shadows of
evils, to fall from the truth. Let not the multitude of the professed enemies
draw us into the gulf of their wilful rebellion. For assuredly god will A
fevv good Christians* shall be stronger then many counterfeit catholics
make us more strong in our few true and unfeigned Christians, then the
multitudes of their counterfeit catholics.

He has revealed his truth unto us most plainlye: wherein as in a glass
we may behold their falsehood, and consider and se what his mighty hand has
done for our faithful fathers of old, how he delivered them from their The
godnesse of God toward our godly fathers.
enemies, from the huge multitudes of their adversaries, and how he drove
back their enemies, and discomfited the^. And now even in these days (blessed
be his name therefore) he has wonderfully revealed many mischiefs, which
these men have imagined, so that their wished purposes, God has otherwise
disposed, to our safety and their shame to our comfort and their confusion, to
the assurance of our continual protection by his mercy and their perdition by
his justice. Whereby he shows forth as in a book The goodness of God extended
toward us in these present dangers, shovveth us as in a book his aid for
eue^ more ready.
before our eyes that he is ready to take part with us, and that he is of
power and readiness to help us in all extremities, if we yield him due
praises, and acknowledge the safety of our cities, and all other blessings to
come from him: and continue constant professors of his truth unto the end.
For he that continues unto the end shall be saved.

He has hitherto preserved us, so that the sun of persecution has not burnt
us by day, nor the moon by night, as it has been practiced, but have freely
inioyed the benefit of the sun light of the Gospel, and due course of
temporal government: to the unspeakable comfort of all believers and terror of
all our adversaries. The light of the gospel, and course of temporal*
government.
And as Agrippa said unto Paul, the continuance of our quiet and peace, and
the due course of government in our land, has made even the Turk to say
these things do almost move me to become a christian. Yet as the multitude
What good good examples work even with fidels.
ceased not to hunt after the life of innocent Paul, but persecuted him more
and more: So must every good and faithful christian think that although our
estate is very admirable, even unto the enemies of the truth, yet shall Satan
raise up great troubles against the professors thereof, for great are the
troubles that the righteous must suffer, but the Lord delivers them out of
all. And the arrows which these rebellious confederates endeavor to shoot at
the true of heart shall return unto their own faces, and to their own
destruction. They are mpudent and stiff hearted, they are proud and arrogant,
yea they are shrouded with the cloak of counterfeit holiness to work their
cursed conspiracies. Ezech. 2. 5.
And as the Prophet Ezechiel says, they are a rebellious company, who will not
hear, they will not perceive, they will not understand their errors and
evil ways, that they might return to God, seek peace and ensue it. But
behold the comfortable words of the same Prophet, fear Notable comfort.
not (says he) fear not, nor be afraid of their words, be not dismayed at
their great bragges, although rebels and thorns be amongst you, and although
ye remain among Scorpions, let us not therefore fear: the Lord himself
has said, fear nor my little flock, for I am with you Lu. 12. 32.
and will be unto the worlds end. For behold I have made thee a defenced
City, and an iron Gods protection makes the believers strong.
pillar and walls of brass, against the multitude and force of thine
enemies, who although they rise up against thee: yet shall they not prevail.
Ier. 1. 18.
For I am with thee to deliver thee: as I was Josh. 1. 5.
Heb. 13. 6
with Moses (says he) so I will be with thee, I will Ps. 118. 6.
not leave thee nor forsake thee. So that we may boldlye say the Lord is our
helper, we will not fear what man can do unto us. Therefore let us not fear
Jeroboam of Rome, who has stretched out his hands even his multitudes, to
lay violence upon our most gracious Queen, and upon our country. For the
Lord we see has dried them up, so that he cannot pluck them in again, 1.
King. 13. 4 The Lord dries up the arm of antichrist, by cutting of his
ministers.
the justice of God we see (his name be praised therefore) has cut them short,
so that they could not prevail as they devised: the Lord uncover them all,
and give them with speed their due deserts. But although they cannot all be
found out as yet they shall surely perish in their own imaginations, they shall
melt away as wax at the fire. And although they say we have strength, we
Although all our adversaries yet be not found ou^ to abide the law, their
own consciences, vvil be such a law as shall make them consume away.
have power, and will prevail, for our multitudes are great, and who can
withstand our forces? Alas who is it but concludes that these arrogant
speeches have always proceeded from the mouths of them that knew not God.
From the mouths of such as stood upon their own strengthes as if they had been
Gods. As the king of Babylon, the king of Tyrus, and now the Romish Antichrist
and his adherents. But as these braggers and boasters have come continuallye to
utter confusion, so we doubt not but the breath of his mouth who has blown
away their pride, so that it is now remembered to their utter shame and
reproach, and as a byword to all posterities, so shall these proud aspiring
minds, fall before the humble in Christ. For says he: I will throw down the
proud, and exalt the humble and meek. And so long as that co^forter which was
promised even the holy spirit of God does testifye in our hearts, that we yield
not unto these their devilish practices which tend only to the sheding of the
blood of innocents, which the word of God manifests, to be merely against
the truth: we Ps. 26. 5
may truly say with David, we have hated the assembly of the wicked, and have
not entered into confederacy of such as have conspired against Christ and his
spouse. And so like true subjects unto We must ^o^^^ with the godly in the
(...) of pr^^^e.
our prince, and obedient servants unto our God, we may wash our hands in
innocence, and serve the Lord with pure affection* and join with the godly and
pure in heart, to offer the sacrifice of praise unto the Lord for his wondrous
works done for us, even in the days of greatest dangers. But our adversaries
say, that what they do, it proceeds only of zeal they bear unto the The
v^i^e excuse of romish catholics for their conspiracyes.
Catholic religion, and because they will not seem to be singular, or as men
taking these things in hand, and practicing it of their own heads, they
ascribe the foundation of their devises to come from the wel-spring of
wickedness, from him that can dispense, and give tolleration for murders and al
wickedness else whatsoever, and say further that the wise, the learned, the
mighty, and the multitude agree, and give not only their consents, but their
helping hands with money, and force to further their enterprises. And therefore
is their madness in taking such actions in hand, so much the more to be
tolerated and borne withal, nay to be favored and accepted. Alas poor
weak defense, a slender excuse: were there not two hundred and fiftye
Captains, famous Number. 16. ^1. The conspiracy of Korah Dathan and Abyram.
men, joined themselves to Korah, Dathan and Abiram, whose general consent was
neither a sufficient excuse, neither a proof that their rising and rebellion
was lawful. But Moses told Korah another tale, for said he thou and all thy
company are gathered together against the Lord. This agrees with the word of
God to Paul, when he went to persecute the christians, namely that he Act. 9.
4.
persecuted God himself. And thus we see, that although these men arm
themselves with the glorious title of the Catholic church, their devises
manifest, and plainly betoken that their hearts are set against the church,
against Christ and christians. And therefore although they outwardly pretend
great shows of holiness, devout works of charity, and thereby win unto
themselves credit in the world, and glory of their long continuance, The glory
of counterfeit catholic*
though their cunning collusions have caught as in a snare, and with their
enchantments bewitched the greatest part of the world, and brag of their union,
of their mutual consent, and of their mighty adherentes, and great multitudes
that join with them, yet seeing they have forsaken the faith: seeing they deny
the truth, fight against it: seeing they seek to resist the passage of the
gospel, with out which there can appear nothing but the shadows of good
things: seeing they set not forth but utterly deprave the glory of God, and
the merits of his Christ. Seeing they go about, and endeavor, as (we see) not
only to resist, but to betray and overthrow Moses and Aaron: We may say and
truly auere, yea co^sta^tly affirm, that they have a golden vizarde upon their
leaden faces, A golden vi^ard upon a ^eaden ^ace.
they have the names but not the effect or fruits of Catholics. They call
themselves the Church, and are not of the Church. Christ commands that the
light of every good christian should so shine before men, that they might see
the fruits of the true light. And is not murder of Princes? Sacking of
Cities? Overthrowing of commonweales? Nay of their own native countries, the
fruits of their light? Are not these the fruits and works of darkness, which
bewray their consciences to have no true light? Is this course which now they
begun to take, they way to make Esa. 1. 16.
themselves clean, to take away the evil of their works from before the eyes
of the Lord? Is this course that they take, the mean to become holy, as our
heavenly father is holy? No, no, but they eat the bread of malice and deceit,
of liyng ^. Pet. 1. 15
and slaughter which in their mouths seems sweet but the operation thereof
shall fill even their bowels with deadly gravel. But all ye that are infected
Pro. 2^. 1^. A godly ^^^eat unto those that* ^re polluted with the poison of
popish practice*
and polluted with this poison of their practices, callinto your minds (for the
love of God) the danger of your estates here in earth, where the law through
the just judgment of God, condemns you, the devil deceaueth you, and the
merciful God leaves and forsakes you, who al though he will that al me^ shall be
saved, and come to knowledge of the truth: he detesteth and abhors 1. Tim.
2. 4.
he cannot abide wilful conte^ners thereof. Receive therefore with meekness,
the word of the Lord, which is able to save your souls. For behold by it we
hear the most comfortable promises of our merciful God: by it we may learn
the way to his truth, and to avoid the policies The benefit of the word of
God.
practiced against the same. Let us therefore yield with reverence our ears to
hear it: our tongues with diligence to read and declare it: and our hearts with
joy and understanding to consider it. And the^ may we rightly apply this saying
unto our selves Come unto me all ye that travail, and are heavy Mat. 11. ^8.
laden and I shall refresh you. Lo dear Christian brethren, what greater
comfort can we have then this? If any be burdened in conscience that he has
addicted himself too much to the crooked and by ways of man's inventions,
forsaking the direct rule of the sacred word, and endeavors duly to reform
himself and to be cleansed: then I say, here is water offered, here is the
liquor of life, extended in the basin of Gods The water of life is in the baso^
of gods book.
book, to refresh us withal. Let us joyfully receive it, and turn unto God
and verily we shall be saved. We have sufficient warning to fly the company of
the enemies of God and Christ, and to have no fellowshippe with their
unfruitful works of darkness, let us (I say) learn of Peter to save
ourselves from this froward generation, Act. 2. 40.
so shall we eat the good things of the land, namely we shall enjoy the
things necessary for Esa. 1. 19.
our pilgrimage here, and above all shall be fed with the bread tending to
the feeding of our 20
The revvard of rebellion.
souls to life. But if we refuse and become rebellious, we shall be devoured
with the sword, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Wherefore I say, let us girde up the loins of our minds, and refer ourselves
faithfully unto our Lord God, being sober, trusting faithfully and 1 pet. 1. 13.
perfectlye on the grace that is brought unto us by the revelation of Jesus
Christ: And let us show ourselves obedient, and not to fashion our selves to
the course of our fathers, who were led in ignorance, neither according to the
course of this world, which with greedines follows and imitateth the red
Dragon, who seeks to devour the gospel of our Lord and savior, and with
tyranny to persecute even to the death, all the professors thereof. But the
truth is great and it shall prevail.

Yet have these men that pretend these mischifes (which have been so
graciouslye by the almighty God revealed) had their only confidence Whereupon
these men ground the hope of their defense.
in the strength of the multitude of their confederates: and in respect of the
great number of them, and the little number and small company of the true and
constant christians, they cry out and say they have the truth with them: for
that so many and so learned men as hold with them, cannot be deceived,
neither can so many and so mighty, as take part with the^ be conquered or
resisted. These are arguments which they ground upon natural reason, and
therefore does the word of God utterly confound them, as by the testimony of
the word, and truth of God shall appear.

CHAP. 2.
A most comfortable discovery by examples out of the holy Scriptures applied to
our time, how dangerous a thing it is to measure our profession according to
the minds of the multitude, and how vain a thing it is, to join ourselves
with the multitude, as the chiefest refuge and mean of our safety in the time
of trouble, wherein the perilous resolution of such as intend to hold with
the most (be it with the truth or against it) is plainly proved to be merely
wicked.

AS touching the glory of the multitude, Multitude the glory of Popish
profession.
whereupon these wicked men do build the chifest foundation of their profession,
as a strong argument that they have and hold the truth, and that they are
victorious and invincible, I think there be none so blockish, or barbarous, so
void of the knowledge of gods word, and especially such as account themselves
christians, can not be so besotted with the pestiferous poison of Satan's
instigations, to hold this argument as a sound reason, that either their
Religion should be of Christ, or that the force of their multitudes, of the
huge troup of deceived souls, should be such, as that there should seem no
possibility, with the small number of the faithful Christians, to withstand
them: but that perforce in dispite of Christ and Christians, they will break
down the hedges of our quiet estate and godly government, and intrude
themselves into the vineyard of God: and the inheritance of his What gods
enemies have protested to do.
son Christ Jesus: violate his Church and defile his Spouse, as they by their
rebellious practices have endeavored and by their vauntes have vainly
protested. Surely yet I think, there is none having any feeling of the grace
and mighty power of God, that can be so far carried away with Satan's
instigations, with Antichrists inchauntmentes, or with his wicked ministers
persuasions to think it. But that every sensible man, having but the
principles of the truth in his heart, and but entering into the rules of the
profession of Christ, will hold it a weak foundation, to build upon the
power, the wisdom, and direction of the multitude, and a mere absurdity, to
follow the opinions of the most, as a mean to attain unto the truth,
considering The multitud a monster of many heads
that as the Philosopher says it is, monstrum multorum capitum, a monster with
many heads, and tot capita tot sententiae, many men many minds. The truth
has but one head.
But the truth has one head, one spring, one issue, one end, and one mean to
lead us thereunto: even the holy Ghost the spirit of truth, the taste,
feeling, knowledge or direction whereof how many had in the time of Christ?
When they all with one voice cried out and said let him be crucified. And some
of them to prove their difference in opinions, said he is a druncarde, he is
a Devil, he does these and these things by the power of Belsubub. And of
Paul they said, he was mad: others, that he had How dangerous it is to
cleave un to the multitude.
the spirit of God, and Agrippa and Festus found no cause of death in him.
Wherefore if any will so rashly take parts with the multitude, leaving the
head of the truth, and come to that spring Esa. 14. 12.
of errors, he takes Lucifer by the tail, and with him leaves the blessed
estate of the faithful to fall down and become a reprobate. We may not
follow a multitude to do evil, neither consent or agree in a controversy to
decline after Ex. 23. ^.
many, and overthrow the truth.

Yet we see how these men brag and boast themselves of the multitudes, and
that their religion is professed generally in most countries and kingdoms of
the world: and so conclude, How the pa^^ls do conclude that their religion*
is good.
bonum, iustum, rectum, and approbatum est. It is good; just, right and
allowed, and why? Because the most part hold it so. But if this argument hold
always true, the^ was Christ rightly put to death when we know, that all
Christians hold and cannot but confess the contrary, and that in him there
was found no guile, no deceit or sin, or cause of death. And yet cried the
multitude out against him, that he should be crucified for (say they) we have
heard him speak Such slanderous and false accusations are now common with
the Papists against christians.
blasphemy. But when they had their desire, when he was executed, and these
busy follows which so mainely cried out against him: when they saw the
graves to open: and the vale of the temple to rent, and cleave a sunder, when
they saw the clouds of darkness suddenly to ouerwhelme the bright beams of the
sun, when they saw the earth to shake and to tremble, when they saw such a
miraculous alteration of things, they changed their opinions, and altered
their common voices, saying surely this was a righteous man: but then it was
too late, they could not call again the innocent blood which they had shed,
nor restore the guiltles to life, who^ they had falsely condemned. So surely
although many and great multituds congregate themselves together, and link
domestical and foreign power together with the bands The slanderous
accusations o^ the Papists against the Queen and Realm. c.
of treacherous conspiracies against the Lord and against his anointed,
falsely crying out and saying: she is an Heretic, and all those that allow
of the present estate of England are heretics: whereby they allure the weak
to their wicked practices: hoping by their devises to They shoot at the head,
that it being cut of the members should decay The gain that these men should
get by their change.
devour poor Christians, and eat them up (as it were) like bread, shooting
especially first of all to the head, hoping that then the members would be
the sooner cut off, (which both, the Lord defend.) But if their wickedness
should, (which God forbid) take effect they should see then the change of the
bright beams of peace, turned into the clouds of blody wars, the light of
truth into the darkness of errors, and they themselves feeling the grounds How
their guilty conscience would work in them.
and roots of their hearts to shake and tremble by the guylt of bloody
consciences, insomuch as they would not only confess with the multitude, she
was a righteous Gouernesse, but with Judas that they have done most wickedlie
in betraying the innocent blood, and with Cayne like runnagates roue to and
fro, saying and accusing their offense to be greater, then they are able to
bear. Furthermore they In fine they shall find the falsehood of their father
of lies the pope, merely* to deceive their expectation. Gal. 5. 19.
should then generally (as some of them have already particularly) find the
falsehoode of their Father of lies, who deceyueth them with his fair, but
false promises of pardon of their sins, and merit in heaven for their
execrable and bloody practices. When the Apostle affirms the contrary:
Namely, that Idolaters, murderers, and such like, shall not enter into Proof
of the condemnation of conspirators.
the kingdom of heaven. Then does this man of sin greatly deceive those whom
he persuades to persevere in their bloody intentes, and where he persuades
some under the promise of preferment, some of reward here, and some (nay all)
under color of deserving heaven he does it The effects of the popes Promises.
but to work his mischief, and in the end to content himself with them to
take the due reward of Judas hire, in utter destruction. But forsooth some
shall be made Dukes, some Earls, some of higher some of more inferior
preferments, and that none that sets his helping hand to this infernal
action, shall go without some reward. They shall be crowned with Parries
perpetual ignominy, with Throgmortons deserved reprooch, and The crown of
their glory
with the due deserts of such rebellious rascalles, whose end (without the
surpassing mercies of Christ against whom they kick) shall be with the Devil
and his Angels in perpetual torment of the conscience: the worm whereof,
shall never The cause of their color.
die. And yet for all this cease they not to cry out and say away with these
new fellows, these hererikes, these Lutherans:, Zwinglians, Caluinists, and
such like, they reprove our darkness, they bewray our wickedness, they reveal
our deceitful dealing and draw the hearts of many from Their determinat
counsel christians
us. Wherefore let us take counsel against them let us crucify them, let us
burn them, break their bones in sunder, carry them unto the inquisition, and
give them Herod's law, for our vows sake. Let us practice their destruction,
for our holy father the Pope has spoken it, he has commanded it, he has
willed it, and we will work it, ipse dixit, he has said do it, whose will
and authority is sufficient for our safety, come therefore, and let us move
false accusations against them, they have spoken blasphemye against his
^evvish^o^n sell to take christians.
holiness and therefore are worthy to die, and therefore go on Judas with
thy kiss, and we will follow with swords and staves, nay go on Parry and thy
fellows dissemble with Judas kiss, keep thy self close in thine own heart,
dissemble the matter with crooching and kneeling, and Dissimulation the
beginning, and destruction the end of their practices.
all dissimulation, and when thou have given the token we will be at hand
with our swords and staves, nay with our mighty forces of shippinges, of
multitudes of men of war from foreign Countries, who shall aid thee and
assist Willful blindness.
thee. Oh sooles fools, can you not yet see how all your devises are drowned
by the way? They pass not the seas without the merciful revelations of God
to his children: whose blood ye seek. Perceive ye not, the peevishness of
your practices, to be presently prevented? the eye of our good GOD pearceth
your hearts and sees your wicked thoughts, his ears are open and hears your
cankered consultations, his mouth is ready to open, nay the birds of the air,
nay the very grass of the field Gods goodness in reueling their
conspiracies.
do reveal your treacheries, his will ready to be revenged of your
bloud-thirstinesse, and his hand both mighty and out stretched* to defend
his own: Wherefore leave off ye that deal thus wickedly. Are not ye the men
that see and will not perceive, that hear and will not understand, and have
great experience of your folly, and will not consider it? Learn, learn to be
wise, forsake evil, cleave unto goodness, fly these pernicious practices, and
lean not to the hope of aid of the multitude, or of preferment or any sure
reward for your comfort, from that deceyner. I wish to God, that it might
please him, to convert you so that you might return and truly seek after the
living GOD, whom only to serve is life, and whom thus manifestly to deny is
death: which if you will not do, it is my part even in Christian How every
Christian ought to pray for these me^.
charity and zeal, to pray him to confound you and your devises. Take heed
therefore be warned, let not custom or the multitude make you feign to follow
their folly. God will not be mocked with all, he has torn the visarde of
your faces, found you out, and showed us what ye are: namely, hypocrites,
dyssemblers, deceitefull, and such as under your muffull, and mussell of
holiness, carry devilish devises: under the outward habit of Christians,
the inward heart of Judas, under the title of Catholics, The ven^u^e of
hypocrisy.
Caynes cruelty. Wherefore now convert, or else will not God hold you
guiltless, not only you that have vowed the attempt of the action, but as
many as desire in heart the execution thereof shall stand in like spott of
conscience, before his tribunal seat: you Not only the act but the desire is
to be auovded. Indifferency perilous.
(I say) that by your coldenesse in the truth, stand as men indifferent,
beware, come out from among them, fly fly that huge whore of Babylon, be
none of her train, who with her poisoned positions, has enchaunted the
greatest part of the world, and has so bewitched the multitude, that what by
dispensations and absolutions, sin increases, and what by falsely awarding
The effect of the popes dispensations an increase of sin.
heaven and hell to such as he list, by terror of the one and presumption of
the other, it appears manifestly that he has won the most part of the
world to commit spiritual fornication with him: and to run after his will
hither and thither, to commit all kind of villainy with greediness heaping
together such a huge The Popes assistants.
number of many sorts of men, Papists, Athistes, Newters, and such like, to
perform that which God preuenteth, who is even forced to say: I will come
down, and be revenged upon these men.

Wherefore, let us beware that we run not with the multitude, for we shall be
then infected with their fornications, we shall be defiled with the We must
bevvare of the multitude
pitch of their deceitful doctrine and devises. But let us utterly detest, and
carefully eschew the familiarity, the love, the league, the friendship and
society of those men that congregate themselves together against the Lord and
against his anointed: Let us exclude our selves out of their acquaintance,
that hold of superstitious vanities, yea although the most part of the world
do allow, yea if all the world should embrace that which the word of God
condemns, we may constantly affirm, and boldly pronounce to be spiritual
whoredom, wherein we seem to consent to strange gods, or to strange devises to
serve the true God: to forsake the most sweet and wholesome direction of the
word of God, and yield our consentes unto strange doctrine, to forsake Christ
and cleave unto fantasies, as many of our forefathers have done, and too many
in these days do, only to walk the broad way with the multitude without
further defense or warraunt for the obstinate and wilful starting from the
truth. But such as hold of the truth, such as embrace the Gospel, and
seek their salvation in Christ, will duly avoid this dangerous immitation,
and not be dismayde at the name and mighty threats of the multitude.

Therefore, as it has pleased our good The goodness of God toward us.
God, to bring us from our ancient captivity and long bondage under
tyrannous Pharaoh of Rome, into the land that flows with the milk and honey
of the free profession and exercise of the truth: Let us be unfeignedly
thankful, and repose our confidence in his mighty protection, to be
delivered from For Gods protection toward us, we must be careful of our
duties to him
his tyranny, and from the force of his mighty and strong multitudes, who as
he has done these great things already whereof we have such great cause
to rejoice: So assuredly (if we hold fast by his power in faith and
thankfulness of heart) he will forever preserve us, and not suffer us to
hurt our foot against the stumbling blocks of their inventions.

Let us not therefore be dismaide though the grand captain, of the enemies of
gods truth (he that possesses the seat of Satan) have drawn such a huge
multitude after him, although he seem to bind even kings with the bands of
his enchauntements and enjoin them to raise their powers in his behalf,
against those that profess the name of Christ: although they have bent their
bows and made ready their quiuers full of sharp arrows: although they have
whetted their swords, prepared powder, pieces and shot: let us not (I say) be
any whit at all dismayed God being jealous of his own glory will not suffer
the vv^ked to prevail*
at these their hautie attemptes. For behold God who is jealous of his own
cause will not suffer his honor to be thrown in the dust, his Church to be
overthrown, his truth trodden down, nor man's own inventions (grounded upon
the weak foundation of good intent, and not upon the rock, the word of
God,) to go away with the glory. For surely great is the truth and it shall
prevail, let Herod rage, Ma. 2. 1. 16.
let Judas dissemble, let Pilate Judge, let all the Lu. 23. 18.
crew of Antichristian potentates conspire, consulte, The truth vvil prevail
notvvithsta^ding all resisters.
condemn, control, conjure, afflicte, persecute, and seek by all means to
suppress the truth. It shall in dispighte of them and all their forces,
break forth, appear, and show it self most triumphantly, to the
unspeakable comfort of the little flock of Christ, and to as great terror of
these men and mighty multitudes, as the renting of the temple, shaking of the
earth and the other strange euentes at the crucifying of Christ, were unto that
huge multitude, of the adversaries of the truth in those days: yea far
greater, forasmuch as it is now plentifully preached, manifest and ancient:
then new and strange and not revealed to all* We are now void of all
excuse, and although Christ himself No excuse now for the obstinate blind.
prayed his Father not to lay the crime of his death upon them, or to their
charge, in respect of their ignorance, it shall be far otherwise with those
that in these days so obstinately seek to crucify him again.

But to imagine or think, that either the truth is tied to the multitude, or
to be overcome by the wisdom, the policy, the force, or multitude of men,
or that the rage of Tyrauntes, can extinguishe that ardent and godly zeal,
that by the instinction of the holy It is mere in credulity to think that
the truth may be suppressed by the force of man.
Ghost is imprinted in the hearts and consciences, of the faithful members of
the assured head, and immovable rock Christ Jesus, were mere
incredulity, nay a mere denial of Christ, and of his power and virtue.
Wherefore be it far from us, to yield any prerogative at all unto the
multitude, further then may stand with the word of God. And for our
instruction and farther comfortes sake, let us with pure hearts and innocent
intentes look back and consider, what our good God has done for our Fathers
of old, that did profess his name aright, whereby we shall have due proof,
that it is not the multitude that embrace his truth, nor that can resist,
suppress, or prevail against the same, although from the beginning the church
of God has bin far the least part of the world, the least part of every
country and kingdom: the least part of every City, yea the least part of
every congregation. Yet such has been the care, and loving Gods care
toward hi^ small number.
affection of God toward his few and small number that he has not suffered
them at any time to take the foil at the hands of his adversaries being,
never so many and mighty.

But doubtless this their argument of the force The argument of the multitude
hurtful to the vveake.
and soundness of the multitude, does not a little harm, with the weaker sort
of people, whose hearts are not grounded upon the sure foundation of Gods
mighty protection. And by reason thereof is the very sound of the multitude,
terrible, only for that they know not, nor consider the mighty works of the
Lord, whose hand brings mighty things to pass, they are ignorant of the
truth, and therefore can not conceive the goodness of the Lord: but
desperately break out into this dangerous resolution: namely to take part with
the multitude, be it with or against the truth. They consider not how that god
To. 2. 11.
has said, that he has chosen the weak things of the earth, to confound the
mighty, the foolish, such as in the world are accounted foolish, to confound
the wise in their own conceits: the vile and base ones and such as are not
regarded but despised in the world, he has raised up and appointed to bring
those things to naught which in the judgment of man are of great estimation and
account: and the cause is that none should too much glory in his own
strength, wisdom, or power. No flesh should glory in the presence of God.

Is not this sufficient to move the hearts of all those that covet to be
accounted Christians to stand in the truth, although they be therefore
despised in the world, threatened of the world, and are as strangers, and
outcastes to the world? rather then to accompany the multitude and become
glorious in the world and hated of god: strong in the world, and weak in the
truth, familier with the world, and at discord with Christ: conversant in the
world, and strangers in the Church of God. Seeing that it is not the number
of the persons, the power or glorious show of the persons, but the inward
godly zeal of the heart, the unfeigned affection of Not the outvvarde show but
the inwa^de zeal, makes to persevere.
the heart, which brings forth perseueraunce in the truth unto the end,
whom God regards to whom he gives aid to stand and victory wherein truly
to boast, and say the mighty hand of the Lord has done this thing, and in
so doing he will not suffer his little contemned children to be confounded of
the high and hautie minded multitudes, but will confound them in their own
imaginations. And therefore says he fear not my little flock, be not
disco^forted or discouraged, I will fight for you and will scatter your enemies
before your faces, I will throw down and confound these wicked people that
delight and long for war, that thirst after blood and hunger after the
destruction of the Saints of God. But we see that our heavenly father
comfort us, he lovingly wills us and counsaileth us gladly to leave the
bondage of Egypt, speedely to fly The good pleasure of the lord is to have us
leave bondage, (...) take liberty.
from the filthiness of Sodom, and with Noah to enter into the arc of our
safety, even to the amiable courts of the Lord, to hold our selves by the
pillar of the truth, even the Gospel of his Christ, and to visit his temple.
So will he be our God and we shall be his children, he will be our father, and
we shall be his sons and daughters whom he will mightelye protect and
defend from the force and erroneous course of the multitude. And whatsoever
Satan, Antichrist, and their adherets do devise or imagine against us,
howsoever they seem to fear us, and dismay us with their multitudes, let us
be patient, waiting the Lords leisure for our delivery. Let us be both
careful and constant in our callinges, and every one from the highst to the
lowest, the head and members every one according to his office and function,
frame our selves diligently to have clear hearts and ready hands, in the
fear and due reverence of him that has promised us aid, to stand (not only
upon our own guard) but as one body compact of many members stand all upon the
guard and defense of all: to the honor of our master and comfort of the whole
congregations of Christ's churches abroad and at home. And especially let those
that are in authority over the inferior sorts call unto mind the due care,
diligent regard, and watchful eye that Paul the approved minister There
must be a godly care in all sorts of men and a vvatch full eye, after the
example* of Paul.
of God had unto the Thessalonians, who in the time of Satan's busy rouinges
abroad to deceive, fearing least they should be seduced from that truth which
he with travail and great industry had preached unto them, being careful and
truly desirous of their salvation, sent Timotheus unto them to put them daily
in mind of We must daily have in mind Satan's diligence to seduce us, and
with grace to arm our selves against him.
satan's diligence, in subuerting and slandering the truth, whereby he doubted
that they might be easily drawn into erroneous devises, and so his endeavor to
retain them in their due obedience to God should have been in vain. And
surely if we duelye consider the present estate of our days, and how the
diligence of satan and his accomplices, the kings of the earth, and the many
nations of the world, does now show it self as we see in such manifest sort
as every Paul of our days has great occasion to appoint many Timothies to
ouer-see the estate of the Thessalonians of this land: such I mean as l^^ue
tasted of the sweet and comfortable doctrine of the We had need of many
watchmen.
gospel of Jesus Christ, which Satan and his wicked ministers, Antichrist
and his adherents, Seminaries and Jesuits, and their confederates seek to
resist, and utterly to supplant, and to turn the hearts of Christians back
again into The endeavor of the popes ministers.
Egypt, and to their ancient bondage there, from the comfortable land of the
gospels liberty, to murmr and grudge at Moses and Aaron to join themselves
to Korah, Dathan, and Abyram, and to the multitude, and to stand resolute, to
run with them headlong into eternal destruction.

This we see is the resolute opinion of the most The good and godly resolution
of Sidrach, mesech and Abednago
of them, that have not the truth in their hearts. But it is a resolucion
contrary to the resolucion of Sydrach, Mesech, and Abednago: for they saw the
multitude to do that which they detested, and stoutly refused: and whereunto
if they had framed their affections, and measured their opinions according to
the course and general consent of the whole multitude, they had run into
wilful rebellion against the living God, and committed horrible idolatry, in
giving worship unto a false God, to a stock, a block, to dirt, and dross of
the earth: they saw the whole multitude to fall down at the sound of the
trumpets, and gave solemn worship unto the image, yet could not that
president prevail with them, they saw it no sufficient warraunt for To
follovv the multitude is no good excuse.
them, no lawful excuse before the living God whom they served, and therefore
absolutely resolved themselves, not to follow the multitude in an action so
repugnant against the truth, and so great a derogation of the glory of the
high God. This was a good and a godly resolucion, wherein they constantlye
perseuered, being apprehended as rebels against the kings decree, they were
neither dismayed in respect of the multitude, nor tied unto consent unto the
thing in respect that the multitude held it as a necessary duty, and service
done for the kings pleasure: No although they saw the Nobles, Princes, Dukes,
Judges, Receivers, Counsailors, and all the officers and governors of all
provinces, yea all the nations under the kings government to fall down and
worship it, they were nothing moved to commit such abomination before the
Lord. The fierce and cruel countenance of the king himself, the threats of
his tortors, torments, and of death it self could not discourage them or
remove their hearts from this sound resolucion, this godly and salutarye
resolucion, seeing the kings devise to be so merely repugnant against the
truth. Thus must every good Christian, every one that will think Christians
ought to have this resolution.
himself the true member of Christ, resolve him self, namely constantly and
boldye to refuse to bow their knees, or do any outward action to Baal of
Rome, to the dishonor of the true God, to fulfill and satisfy the saucy,
malapert, and hautie mind of him that has set himself against God, craving
his honor to be done unto him, and his power to be attributed unto him: no,
although we see many and mighty multitudes to Weakness of potentates in
yielding servitude to Antichrist.
bow to him before our eyes, though we see Emperors, Kings, and mighty
potentates of the world to kiss his feet, and to afforde their necks to be
his foote-stooles, and all the wise men of many nations to do him reverence:
Let us refuse it, for behold it is merely against the truth: and therefore the
president of the mighty, the president of the multitude, the president of
generallities is nothing to us that have and ought to govern our affections
by the word of God.

But we see a strong resolucion in many of The resolution of recusants.
the obstinate recusants of our time, even of these days, which whether it do
agree with the order of that of these three men, it were not amiss to
consider. But such is the subtlety of their shameless devises, that it is
almost impossible to discribe their resolucion rightly. For mark where as
Sydrach, Misech, and Abednago, were willed to fall down and worship the image,
they stood not mute, or dumb, or with this bare desence: namely pardon us, we
are resolved not to do it, as our recusants do. But they did boldly yield a
reason of their recusancie, saying that it was contrary to their duty to the
living God, whom they ought only to serve. But these men will maintain their
idolatry even with this only answer: Forsooth we are resolved, wherein, and
how? Forsooth to persevere in idolatrye, and to dissemble before men, and yet
to carrye clear A special thing to be noted in the resolution of our
recusa^ts.
consciences before God (as they say). Here is a notable thing to be noted in
their resolucion, namely that it is lawful for them to dissemble, and to frame
themselves in the outward action, like unto the thing commanded, and inwardly
to carrye a contrary desire, and yet this is no denial of him (as they say)
whom they pretend to serve. But I think they hold this but as a shift, a
point of policy, and not as the truth, their holy Dispensation for
distunulation.
father contents himself to dispense with the word of God in that behalf,
and tells his pupiles that wander abroad to work his wickedness that it shall
not be laid to their charge in This is taken from the serpentssubtilty in
seducing Ad^ and ^u^.
the last day, that they have denied Christ in counterfeyting their
consciences, and framing their fashions according to the time: as with the
wicked to be wicked, with the holy to be holy in show, to profess light in
words, and to hold with darkness in the heart: they may by tolleration
outwardlye please men, and inwardly serve God. How rash were these men whom
Nabuchadnezer condemned? They might have desembled the matter and have had the
favor of the King? They might have done as the most did, and have pleased
all men, and yet A damnable policy practiced by the Papists.
have borne inwardly a conscience to God. Neither did Paul well, when he
constantly confessed Christ, neither have the Martyrs done wisely in so stout
profession of the truth, they might have turned their coats, according to the
company, as most of these fellows do, that follow the multitude, and have
saved their skins whole. But these men think they do well to seek to
sleep in whole skins, according to the proverb. But the time shall come
that the vizardes of their villanye shall be pulde off, and their cloak and
counterfeyt consciences revealed, and take their reward with the reprobate,
whom God abhors.

Christ himself shows them whereunto they are like to trust, saying, he
that seeks rather to obey man then God, or seeks to deny God before man,
such will Christ deny before his father in heaven.

But what is the cause that so many come so near God in the outward show,
and stand aloof in their hearts? That they come outwardly The foundation of
dissimulation is dispensation*
to hear the word of God, and be inwardlye very recusants? That they can
kiss Christ, and Christians with Judas in the face, and stob daggers at their
hearts in their desires. Is not this the very cause, namely that whatsoever
GOD commands outwardlye to be done, and inwardly to be believed, his
holiness dispenses with the one and pardons the other? Carrying men's
affections to the pleasing of mortal men, manifestly to displease the immortal
God

But behold these three men of the true God, were of a contrary mind, they
were led with It cannot found with the will of God to dissemble before men.
a far, contrary spirit, and moved with a contrary zeal. For the truth
resolved them that it could not hang consonaunt to the will of their heavenly
father, to dissemble before the world, (what inward zeal soever they seem
to have) to save their own lives, although we see these wicked men* that
practice the perdicion of the faithful, and account themselves Catholics,
whose dispensation comes from the false fox of Babylon, to put their
enterpryses in practice, altogether under color of some notable virtue:
either of love and dutiful Parries counterfeit obedience.
obedience as did the false traitor Parrie, who could with lowly crouchinges,
and reverent behavior outwardlye, with all hayle Madam, and such like goodlye
tokens of dutiful affection, when in deed his heart was so full fraught with
the poison of popish pardons, that lay so heavy upon his conscience that ere he
could vomit it out to the purpose of his masters will, it brake his own
bowels, and his filthy carcas, cracked his His due reward.
own cragge. A plain reward for a dissembling sot. Here might be remembered
these new chosen champions, of late armed against the head of our quiet in this
land, whose manner of proceedinge in their practices, was with like pollicye,
Conspiracy of Ballard and the rest of his confederats.
Barnewell, Ballarde, Babington, and Bellamie, with the rest of that
rebellious rout, a multitude of miscreantes, a cursed crew of Cormorants, who
sought to devour the blood of so many noble personages, pillars of our
prosperity, and props of Gods truth, their practice was perdicious, their
pardons poisoned, their pardoner worse then poison it self, yea worse then the
poison of Aspes, I mean the dispenser of their diuilishe device. The
remembrance of whose pretended mischief is loathsome unto Godly minds, it is
contagious to be considered, stench in the nostrels of the God of heaven, and
an everlasting ignomie and byworde to all their posterities for ever more in
earth. The resolucion of these men Their damnable resolution
was damnable, like unto the vow of those that swore they would neither eat
nor drink till Act. 23. 12. An encouragement to be constant.
they had killed Paul. But as the Lord encouraged Paul to persevere in his
godly beginning, to proceed to testify of the truth, so he encourages all
those that are his to be constant in the profession of his name,
notwithstanding the vow of these conspirators, that cunningly cloak their
cursed pretense with counterfeyt Catholicie. Nabuchadnezer made preparation to
put these three poor men to the most grievous death, because they would not
fall down to worship the image, and the more to terrify them Tirants vs^
threats to te^^i^y the godly but all in vain.
said unto the executioners, let the torment be seven times more vehement then
ever before, hopinge that those tirannous words would move the poor men
rather to fulfill his idolatrous will then to abide the torture. But he was
far deceived: For they referring themselves constauntly unto the providence
of the only Lord of hosts, said unto the kings face, know this oh king,
and year ye this all ye multitude, that the true God whom we serve, the God
that will not have his glory by any means to be imparted unto another, is able
to deliver us out of The faithful constancy of the godly.
your hands: but if it be his will to make a sacrifice of our bodies, and that
your bloody devises and desires take effect against us, yet will we not A
right resolution.
fall down to give honor unto any thing, as a God, which is not God, no
although so many both wise men and mighty multitudes satisfy the kings will
therein before us, this is that resolucion which all men that rightly profes
christ must hold namely, notwithstanding the decree of the great Nabuchadnezer
of Rome, wherein he commands and wills all Emperors, kings, How we must
resolve our selves, against the tyr ranny of Roman conspirators.
potentates, realms, kingdoms, nations and toonges at the noise and sound of
his Mandamus and precipimus sub poena mortalis peccati, and such like sharp
commandments, to fall down before his holiness, and the idolatrous and
adulterous puppettes and toys which he has caused to be set up, and to do
such other bastardly service as he commands contrary to the word of God,
and to believe and confess that which the Lord has not willed but forbidden.

We must with these men put on the complet harneis of a clear and constaunt
conscience, and even to the faces not only of these that have authority to
pronounce his excommunications, curses, and comminations, but even to the face
of that proud, prouder, and proudest of all proud prelates of the Romish
rabbell himself.

Know this thou Pope, and hear this ye papists, that the Lord whom we
serve in his Our resolution.
Christ, in whom we trust, is able to deliver us out of your hands. But if
it be his good pleasure, for his glories sake, for our saluations sake, and
your reprobations sake, to permit our bodies to be made sacryfices by your
blouddy hands, we will not fall down unto your abhomminable devises, we
will not join with your confederacies, although you have already decreed our
torments to be made seven times, yea seventy times seven times more bitter
then before. And then (dear Christians) upon this our clear and impolluted
resolucion shall that God whom we serve deal with us, as he dealt with
these three men, namelye although we be cast into the flames Our undoubted
comfort in Christ, in all sorts of torments is not to be doubted.
of bitter torment, he will so mittegate the griefs thereof, by the inward
comfort which then he will send us, that it shall even in the terror of death
be a sufficient testimony unto our consciences, that he has a careful eye
unto us: and by our deliuerye show even unto these persecuting executioners,
that it is not their tyranny that can suppress, or the cruel force of the
multitude that can resist the approved and manifest truth which we
profess, and will show and openly declare that the devises and imaginations
of man are but vain: Nay further to show his judgments of these
bloudthirstie Gods judgments against the wicked conspirators of his
servants confusions.
men, he will send their destruction with the same torment they prepared for
his children

For let us behold, and to our comfort and for our learning consider, that
notwithstanding these three poor men were cast into so fervent a burninge
flame, that there appeared no possibility for them to escape, even sudden
consumation of their bodies with the force of the fire: yet such was the power
and providence of him that has all things in subjection under his feet, that
he preserved them in such sort as in the midest of the fire they walked
safelye, and to show his justice threw out the slame upon those ministers of
the king that executed his will therein, so that they that dug the pit for
others, fell themselves into the same, they were taken with the snare, that they
provided for others: Even so shall that proud Haman of Rome in the end be
hanged in the gallows that he has set up for godly Mardocheus of England. We
must think that these examples were Good examples to be applied to our time.
written for our learning, and very sit for our time to be considered,
according to the present course of men: for as then Nabuchadnezer thought that
the consent of so many great men unto his idolatry approved the same to be
very sound and good: And when these three men stood in defense of the true
religion of God, as now we Gods providence alvvaies ready to help his.
see that our small Islande of England among many other famous countries of
the world, holds and possesses the gospel with part of other nations, as it
pleases God to afforde his grace among us. And as then these three men were
condemned of the multitude, and our selves in like manner misliked of the most:
as the living God then provided for their safety so (no doubt) he does and
will do for ours, though not in present outward deliverance, yet no doubt in
inward comfortes, whereby there appears no cause why the children of GOD
should fear the multitude, although the people God is alvvaies ready either in
outvvard delivery or inward comfort to aid ye
in a common proverb agree, that many heads are better then one: whereby they
go about and seem to approve the venomous and brutish serpent Hydra to be
the wisest beast that ever was in respect of the multitude of his heads, when
we know many silly creatures of the earth in many virtues to exceed such
monsters. But this seems not agreeable to my matter, being Euangelical, for
that this application is poetical: But surely it is not without good moral:
for the multitude in deed may be well compared to a beast of many heads
unstayed in respect of many guides, inconstant in respect of The multitude
with their many heads resembled un to Hydra the serpent.
many minds, unruly in respect of many members. And therefore this argument of
many heads better then one, holds not in causes of heavenly revelations, for
the truth comes not from the multitude, it proceeds not from the wise, nor
is to be expected of the learned in respect of the many professing one things
or in re*spect of the wise in natural policies: nor in respect of profound
study: It comes not from men of whatsoever judgment, but even from the very
spirit of God the teacher thereof. The truth is Gods, it is of God, and his
gift it is that The spirit* of God teaches the truth.
the men of base callinges, and judgments in worldly causes conceive the
truth, speak the truth, and are able to teach the truth, which in deed of
it self is simple, pure, clear, and not mixed with the traditions, nor the
devises, nor tied to the power or strength of mortal men.

And therefore, to show the weakness of many heads, and their errors, and
to confirm his truth by the hands of one, and that of the God does show his
power not to consist in the multitude and his truth, not to be founded upon
many heads.
weakest and most frail sex: he caused an example in that behalf to be
written for our experience: namely that where there were many magistrates in
the City of Bethulya, and they all layinge there heads together, determined a
course contrary to the truth, namely, rashlye to tie the will of God, and his
hand to their own prefixed time, or else to give over their City to the
Captain of the enemy of God: This was their resolute determination, when
indeed it behooued The citizens and magistrates of Bethulia in their many heads
deceived.
them by the rule of Gods word, to have referred themselves in faith unto the
good providence of God, as these forenamed three men did, and to tarry the
Lords leisure for their delivery. But a silly woman perceiving this their
rash resolucion, by the instincte of the holy Ghost, the teacher of the
truth, openly reproved them, in that they showed in themselves no spark of
patience, neither allowed that power and omnipotency to God for their
delivery, which he showed to many before them, but tying (as it were his will
unto their wills) indented with him the time and manner of their delivery. And
she referring the whole state of the City unto the mighty hand of the
Lord, in a perfect hope sounded upon the truth miraculouslye prevailed, in
delivering, the poor besiged City from the blouddy hands of the* wicked
idolaters.

This was a weak mean in the judgment of man, yet did the Lord vouchsafe
unto her proceedinges, the success acceptable unto the poor oppressed hearts
of many people. And let us then but think the like, or far more power is
given unto the hand of our godly The godly Judith of England shall cut off the
head of Holophernes of Rome.
Judith, to cut off the hautye aspiringe head of mighty Holophernes of Rome
and his adherentes, the graunde Captain of all the adversaries of Christ and
Christians. These examples reprove those that in their actions go about
either to tie Gods truth unto their many heads, or build their resolucion upon
the might of the multitude.

If Noah had builded his resolucion upon the Noah's resolution not builded upon
the multitude
resolucion of the multitude, and had joined his consent unto the resolute
determinations of the multitude, he should have had his portion with the
multitude in the swelling and mercylesse waters, and not have tasted the
sweetness of the providence of GOD in the Arc. So surely if we should look
into the common sort of men, into the generality of consents, or into the
common use of countries, and not guide our selves by the rule of Gods word we
could not but perish in the merciles waters of errors, and never enjoy the
sweet comfort of the Arc with the true Church of Christ.

And therefore had Lot a care, a diligent eye, Lots care and diligence to
avoid the general course of the people of Sodom.
and careful consideration unto the course of the City of Sodom, and feared
to give consent unto the multitude because he knew their general inclinations,
declininge from the right way: And so leaving the multitude unto their own
course, took a private course with himself, according to the direction of the
truth, and was saved from the destruction that fell upon the multitude, so
that we may see that we are not to fail with the most* if we will arrive in
the port of safety, and avoid the dangers of destruction.

There was no small company, but a great multitude, a huge army that departed
out of Egypt, to go into the land of promise, but because with a general
consent they declyned from the truth, and fell to murmuring against Moses and
Aaron the servants and ministers of GOD, every man joining himself to the
multitude, and the multitude looking back again The danger of looking back
into ancient errors.
with a longing desire to retire into Egypt they came all too short of the
promised pleasant land: But Joshua and Calib who depended upon the truth of
the living God.

Even so a great number and mighty multitude were in the days of the late
famous King Many were brought out of Romish Egypt in the days of king H. 8.
Henry the eight, brought out of the bondage of the spiritual Romish Egypt,
into the pleasant land of the Gospel, and so continued the days of the
godly King Edward the sixth, and The continuance of our* reduction o^ of Romish
Egypt by K. ^. 6. Our recaptiuity in the days of Qu. Mary. Our redemption by
Q. Elizabeth. To beware of murmuring against her Majesty and other godly
magistrates.
in the perilous days of Queen Marie they start back again into their
former thraldom, from whence again our good Joshua, Queen Elizabeth has
redeemed them. And therefore let us beware of murmuring against her, let us
rather be constant in believing in the promises of our good God, who has
promised us the fruition of the pleasant land of knowledge, if we be truly
obedient unto his will: otherwise he will cut short all those that rather
covet to run with the generaltie of other Countries, and will not accompany
good Joshua and Calib, in our journey already taken in hand, in the name of
Christ our head, under the conduct of Moses and Aaron.

It is therefore a perilous thing and warily to be avoided, to yield our
senses but to the remembrance of the errors of old, and the very name of the
highest bishop, the vicare of Christ, the Pope, yea and the very title of
Papists is to be sent into the furthermost bounds of utter oblivion, yea all
the ceremonies of their enchanted and Nicromantiall doctrines are to be
detested and to be thrust out of every man's mind, much more is it to be
avoided to give our consentes, again to entertain the palpable and cloudie
doctrine wherewith our Fathers, and the greatest part of the world were and
are besorted. For whosoever imbraceth these things, or but looks back again
into the^ with desire to follow them, shall never attain unto that promised
The danger or looking back into Egypt or Sodo^ appears by Lots wife.
land, the new Jerusalem, nor escape the suddayne destruction of Sodom, but
with the wife of Lot be turned into a pillar of stone, without sense, feeling,
or knowledge of the lively and lightsome truth, the way whereunto, is pure,
plain, direct, and straight, according to the steps of Christ, who in all
his teachinges, preachinges, and proceedinges, used neither invention,
policy, or tradition of man's imagination: neither was he tied with the fear
of man's persecutions, led by the example of the most, or carried away with the
force of the multitude.

But such is the enmity and dispight of Satan against the truth, and the
professors thereof, that he has from age to age raised severe persecution
against it, and them: and that not by the least and men of weakest ability of
the Satan raises even kings to persecute the godly. David's complaint against
conspirators, to be applied to these days
earth only, but even Kings of the earth, and Princes of the world, to
conspire and assemble their multitudes together against the Lord and against
his anointed. And therefore as David in his days was moved to complain in
that behalf: so may we at this present iustlye cry out and say, that Kings
of the earth rise up with their armies of their multitudes, banding
themselves with their bloody Captains, roouing like Lions abroad, and like
bears and wild boares, thorough the world to tear, to spoil, and root out
all the godly upon the earth, putting their confidence in the force of the
multitude, as though they should always vanquish, and never be vanquished.

Even so did the Egyptians, who puttinge The foolish vaunts of the Egiptians.
their trust in the multitude of their men, and charriottes, their horses, and
their strongly barred, and artificially wrought wagons, fit for the wars,
persuaded themselves, even sure of the pray before the onset, dividing the
spoil before the victory: But the mighty GOD, whose power is not included
within the multitude of an army, nor tied to the show of much munition,
perceiving their devises, founded upon the strength of their own arms
alienate from and not joined with the invincible power of his right hand, to
be vain, weak, fryuolous and fantastical, laughed their vain hope, they
conceived of their own strength, to scorn: and because he would have his own
power to be seen, and their weakness to fall as dounge in their own faces,
he turned their bravery and proud boasting to their own shame, their pride
into their own perdition, and made their mighty multitude an argument of
their own weakness. The history hereof is plain, and a most comfortable
instruction for us, and a notable caveat, for such as shall stand too much
upon their own power and prowess, not taking the Lord for their strength,
whose hand stretches it self out for the defense of his children, and
overthrows such, in the red sea of utter perdition, which with hautie
Pharaoh of Rome shall say, what is God that can deliver little England out of
my hands?

Let us apply some other examples out of the writings of the truth, to
confirm these mighty works of the Lord.

Nabucadnezer putting his affiance, in his own power and strength of the
multitude, rose up against The strength of Nabucadnesa^s multitude was his own
confusion
the children of God, saying: who can deliver you out of my hands? what God is
there (says he) that can prevail against me, for your delivery out of my
hands? For have I not conquered Ier. 27. 1 2. King. 24. 7
Egypt? have I not destroyed Jerusalem, brought many and mighty kingdoms
into subjection? And have I not of my self by my mighty multitude performed
many like famous exployts? Notwithstanding whose great brags, whereby he thus
began to eleuate and heave up himself, not only above all other Princes in
the world, but endeavored to draw all men into adoration of him as a God,
saying most arrogantly: who is God that can deliver you out A resembla^ce
between the actions of old Nabuc of Babylon, and the new Nabu* of Rome
of my hands? the Lord against whom he rose, confounded him in his own
strength. And does not the great master of all this mischief, and present
hurleburlie in the world exalt himself in like arrogant sort? persuading
such as will join with him in his devilish devises, that they shall not fear
but proceed in their conspiracies: and that there is no God that shall
withstand them, for he has dispensed for them, and has the living God (as it
were) within the limits of his usurped power and authority. But let us note
(I pray you) what became of this proud King Nabucadnezer, that we by
perfect implication, may compare the likelihood of the end of this
Nabucadnezer of Rome, unto the former for our instructions sake.

The God of hoastes who always favors, The favor of God toward such as
build their enterprises upon the truth.
aydeth, assisteth, protecteth, and conducteth the humble, and such as
attempting weighty matters attribute the good success thereof unto his
goodness, mercy, power and providence: and who detesteth, abhors,
resists and utterly overthrows such as stand upon their own power and
strength: that God (I say) looked down, and beheld the ways of this
tyrant, this boasting and aspiring creature, that blushed not to set himself
up against God, and the godly, Gods justice in casting down the proud.
and plucked him down from his high and glorious seat of majesty, from his
chair of pride, and brought him to the most base, most vile and more then
servile estate of all other men of the world: namely unto the condition of a
brute beast, dividing him from the familiarity and society of men, to
accompany the most savage and Nabuchadnezars revvard for his pride
brutest beasts of the field, to leave the delicate diet of his Regal table,
to feed upon the herbs, grass and weeds of the earth, even as the ox
lives, so lived he, by the space of seven years in the wilderness, a dombe
beast, whose body (which before was curiously kept in delicate attire, in his
kingly palace) is now forced to accept of the naked attire of the bare skin,
and the same to be wette with the dew of heaven. A metamorphosis of
Nabuchadnezar
Here we see was a sudden Metamorphosis, a strange alteration, yet this was
the change of this earthly God, of a man to become a monster, of a King, worse
then a subject, of a Captain, worse then a captive, an abject not companion
with the vilest subject. Alas where is now become the great vaunts of his
victories? where is the might of his multitude? where is the glory of his much
strength? where are the mighty men in whom he trusted? what service can they
do him? what aid can they show him? what comfort can they give him? where is
the service of a king become? whether is the glory of his usurped godheade
gone? Truly all is gone, and nothing left but only a poor distressed
carcass, who before accounted himself a God, and no man, and now seen to be
not only no God, but in worse case then the most servile man, yea The
applications of the ^^ll of Nab.
a very monster, his hair become as Eagles feathers, and his nails like
birds claws. What is there more to be said of this man, but to apply the
example of the fall of his pride, unto the The vauntes ofromish Nabuca^dnezar
like vaynegloryous young God Nabuchadnezer of Rome, whose pride and
vayneglorious ostentation is fully aunswerable thereunto. For what does his
hautie holiness? does he not vaunt and exalte himself above all other men
of the earth? above all Emperors, Kings, Princes and Potentates? and does he
not challenge solie unto himself, that power and that authority which Christ
himself has left generally His usurpations.
to all his faithful ministers? and does he not affirm the virtue of the
death of Christ to be tied and fastened (by no other mean but by the cords
of this own will) unto his chair at Rome? Has he not set himself in the
place and seat of Christ, binding the consciences of men under the pavne of
deadlye sin, to acknowledge him to be the sole Vicare of Christ here in
earth? and that all other the ministers of Christ ought (upon pain of
excommunication) come in by him, live under him, and to have their authority
from him? What is this, but to compare with the pride of this Nabucadnezer, to
say what is he that is able to deliver you out of my hands? what Christian
could not blush to consider of this vaineglory? and cannot think that this
proud Nabucadnezer was a direct and manifest type of him of Rome.

And further to approve it, let us look into his many and great bragges,
wherein he vaunteth himself of his own and his predecessors conquests, of
many, and mighty kingdoms vanquished even with the dynt of falshoode?
continued with tyranny, and led by Idolatry: terrifying many silly souls of
the earth, saying: is there any that can deliver you out of my hands?
considering the multitudes of many Countries, yea and the kings of many
Nations, that yield me obedience, and have plighted me their trothes, to take
my part? with these vauntes, and vomits has he won the greatest part of the
world to follow his filthiness: wherein he thus tryumpheth. The pride and
fall of Nab was a^^pe of the pride and sub^^ersion of the Pope.
But we must a little further consider of this mighty Monarke, that as this
Nabucadnezer, was the type of his pride, so surely was his fall and brutish
transformation a figure of his Ho^v the Pope and his ad^erents are become trans
f^^med into bruit beasts.
ruin and decay, of his fall and subuertion. And although we yet see the plume
of his pride slicker in the air, as a mark to be seen thorough all the
world, that he keeps and continues his chair of estate: yet is he cast
down, into a reprobate sense, he and his are become brute beasts, they are
fallen from knowledge and excluded from the familiarity of Christ and
Christians: and feed not as we see upon the pure Their food
bread of the Gospel, but upon the weeds and grass of man's own inventions,
and the hair The hair of ^^^ir heads.
of their heads, even all their wits ouergrowen with foolish traditions and
further their nails even with their bloody persecutions of Christians The
^^yles of their hands
become as the Eagles claws, that lives by the spoil of the simplest birds.
By these marks is he dissiphered and known to be another Nabucadnezer, whose
heart is alienate from the true God.

But for the love of our dear master Christ The (...)ce of our delivery in
Christ.
Jesus, let not his threats terifie us: for although he proudly say, who can
deliver you out of mine hands? Let us assure our selves that he that delivered
the children of Israel out of the hands of Pharaoh shall deliver us from the
hands of this tyrant of Rome and his adherentes, for experience of gods
protection, teaches us to believe that their power is vain and frivolous. Let
them murmr and mutter, let them fret and fume, let them stir the coals of
their malice against us, so far as God will permit, and in the time of greatest
peril he shall work for us as he did for Joshua, before whose face he threw
down the mighty city Jericho without shot of bullet, or stroke of Jericho
thrown down with the breath of Gods mouth.
sword, so (no doubt) his power is able to deal with all our mightiest
adversaries, yea even with that Nabucadnezer and al his mighty multitudes, he
shall even with the breath of his mouth, stir those coals into a flame which
now they have inkindeled against us, to scorch up and consume even the chief
doers of his host: as he did the executioners of the three men in the hot
oven. And let us in the faith and fear of our good God will turn the flame
of these conspiracies, to consum^ the actors thereof.
God assuredly persuade our selves, that of his mercies, and for his own
glories sake, he will bring the due desert, and deserved reward upon them
all, as he has begun with some that lay secret wait and by conspiracies
seek to bring, not only the head, but many the chiefest proppes of our
quiet estate, to an untimely Let us cast away the cords of conspirators from
v s.
end, and our Country into a common calamity. And therefore let us speedely,
willingly, and frankely cast away their cords from us, their cords of
falsehoode, flattery, and tyranny, where with they endeavor to bind us unto
their wills. Let us not be won by their allureinents, nor fear their forces
domestical or foreign, for God that dwells in the heavens, shall laugh them
to scorn and they that fear his name shall have them in derision, he shall
break their bows in pieces, gnappe their spears in Ps. 2. 3.
sunder, and make their artylerie their munition, and other their martial
provisions, scurges and rods to correct themselves: for although he have a
long time winked at their wantonness, and wiliness: and they have flattered
themselves nianye years in a foolish hope, and a devilish desire of
overthrowing the truth, and the chief protectors thereof, here in earth, let
us assure our selves that he will not have his glory defaced, nor permit his
own power to come into sclaunder, but by a few of his true and faithful
servants will show himself able to vanquish the greatest multitudes of his
adversaries. How we must encourage out selves in God.
And although he be able to confound them even with the breath of his mouth:
yet will he show his power, extending aid unto his servants, taking the
defense of his truth in hand: the adversaries where of he sometimes
consoundeth even with the hands of his adversaries risin^ one against another.

He suffered Shenacheryb King of the Assyrians 2. Kin 1^* 13 The pro^de vaunts
of Senacharib.
a long time to flatter himself and to boaste and brag of his mighty
multitudes and his huge hoaste of mighty men, who did in the bravery of his
own conceit, make open proclamation (as it were) against the living God, the
God of truth, blaspheminge and saying: know ye not how, and what I, and my
Fathers have done in other Countries, how we have conquered many Nations,
raunsacked Cities, and brought their people into great subjection, bondage, and
servitude? Why does Hesekyah then persuade you to trust in any other but in
me? and to fear any besides me? For were the Gods of other lands of force
to withstand my multitudes, the power of my mighty men of war, and to
deliver the people out of my hands? Noe more shall ye be able to stand
before me. And therefore, yield your obedience and loyalty to me, and my
ministers, or else I will deal in the like measure with you. Here are great
and glorious* words, here are terrible and sharp speeches, thundering as he
would have thrown down heavenly Jerusalem, and have plucked the King of
Kings out of his throne.

And I pray let us a little compare the hawtie bragges of the Romish
Shenacheryb, with this A comparison between Senach. k. of Assiria, and the Pope.
Assyrian King: and by the success of the one conjecture of the end of the
other. The itteration or repetition of the bragges, boastings, and thundering
vants of Senacheryb of Rome is needless, being so plainly every where noted,
and especially from the sea of Rome, from Spain, France, and such like hot
and furious Countries where the sun of perdition shines. But as this
Assyrian Shenacheryb, and his Fathers by Gods permission, prevailed a while in
oppressing many Countries, Cities, and people: Yet at the length, when he
thought himself sure of the pray and spoil of Jerusalem, suddenly The
spoil and overthrow of Senacheribs army.
came the power of him who never fails the faithful, and destroyed all the
valiant men, Princes and Captains, even his whole army, to the number of one
hundred fourscore and five thousand men. And this great boasting tyrant
himself, flying unto Niniuie and in the temple of his Idols, as a just reward
for his arrogancy, The death of Senach. k. of Assiria.
pride, and blasphemy, Adramelech and Sharazar his own sons slew him with
a sword: Even so although that Shenacheryb of Rome and his predecessors have
these many years prevailed, with force and falshoode bewitching the hearts
of many Kings, Countries, Nations, Cities and people, saying: who is the
Lord? am not I he, that have brought so many into my subjection, servitude,
and bondage? Why does then Hesekyah of England persuade her people to trust in
any besides me? The vaunts of Romish Senacherib.
for as I have done to Spain, to France, and diverse other Countries,
Cities, and people, England a prick in the popes eye, and therefore he
threatueth it.
so will I do unto England, I will bring them into their woonted obedience
unto my decrees, or else will I send my multitudes and my mighty men, to
beseege their Cities, and to vanquish their people, in such sort as they shall
not escape.

Here is much a do, here are great words, a fryuolous ostentation of a
mortal man, the The Popes holiness.
enemy of God, a member of Satan, friend to no good man, a poison to every
Christian soul, that is defiled with his enchauntmentes, the pitch of
perdition, which who so touches is polluted with a deadly filth, can he not
look into the course and confusion of this Assyrian King, and set him as a
mirror or glass to behold his own proceedinges: and what shall become of him
without his unfeigned conuertion.

And cannot his adherentes call to mind the A mirror for the Romanists.
end of this Assyrian army: surely, (were they not besotted with the
confidence in their own power and strengthes) they would call it to mind and
tremble for fear, that their success in the service of such a master,
cannot be good, nor take a salutarie end. Wherefore with diligence in the
fear and reverence of the mighty GOD of heaven, let us eschew their faction,
and march under the banner of Christ's truth, assuring our selves, that as
the Lord with the breath of his mouth, overcame so mighty a multitude, of the
Assyrians, thyrsting for the spoil of Jerusalem. And as he raised such as
descended from the loins of that Assyrian King to kill him for his tyranny
and pride. So is he able to resist or confound the multitudes of our enemies,
the enemies of the truth, abroad and at home.

And further, if with patience we wait his good pleasure he shall raise up
such as have descended of the bowels of the Romish Shenacheryb God is ^^l^ to
(...) (...) (...) from the popes own (...) to con^^u^d him.
to turn even their forces, and their powers against him in the judgment of
GOD to confound him. It is not in vain that our merciful God commands his
children to call upon him in the day of trouble, and he will hear them, and
relieve them, against whatsoever adversaries: for he has no respect of
persons, but he that walks in the truth and works righteousness is
accepted with him, he brings the proud boasting of the arrogant to howling
and weeping, and exalts such as are lowly in him.

There was no comparison between great G^lyah and little David to the eyes of
those that The vn^^klihoo^ o^ (...) to ^^l Go (...).
saw them both march toward the combat. For natural reason could not have
judged the victory to go with David for that, that in respect of his stature
and person, there was no more equality than between a little mouse and a
great Elephant, and as their persons and strengthes were far unlike, so were
their weapons and external instruments of war, for the strong man had far
the greater odds, for he was armed for the purpose with spear and shield,
and poor David was naked, only a slinge in his hand, wherewith (yet such was
Gods providence) with a stone he killed this huge and Gods providence against
natural reason.
mighty monster, who vaunting of his own strength, blasphemed the God of
heaven, in whose myraculous death, the power of GOD and his hatred against
manns trust and confidence in the strength of flesh and blood, was showed: to
the comfort of the godly, and confusion of the wicked.

This and such like examples are written for our learning, that we through the
assurance of our defense in our Captain Christ, should not The glory of the
Pope.
fear the force of our boasting adversaries the strength and hautie courage of
the graund captain of the Romish Philistines, who challenges all men that
seem to take their defense in God, glorying and boasting in his many
Countries, strong and fencible Cities, and many multitudes of people, that
are in subjection under him. Ios. ^. (...), and the strength thereof.


Jericho, was a mighty and strong City, the walls whereof seemed
invincible, being most strongly furnished with many men and munition*
wherein they gloried, boasted, and set themselves alofte in their own
conceit, as thou^^ no power had been able to overthrow th^^: But God, who
wincketh not at such arrogancy, nor suffers such rebellious people, to go
unpunished, neither their Cities to stand in such contempt of him (puffed up
with the pride of their own strength) directed Joshua the Captain of the
Israelites how and in what manner he should deal for the overthrow and
subversion thereof. And because he would have his power to be seen, and his
mighty arm to have the praise, and not the strength of Ioshuas army, least
he should have bragged and boasted as did Pharaoh, Nabucadnezer, Senacheryb,
and such like mighty Princes, who attributed the praise of their success and
victories, unto their own strength and multitudes: he willed Joshua to carry
the Ark of the Lord, seven times about the City, with the sound of seven
trumpettes, and a great shoute of the army, whereat (without The overthrow of
Jericho.
more a do) without the shedding of one drop of blood of Ioshuas company,
the walls of the City fell flat to the ground, Inso much as Joshua with
his army entered, put the people to the sword, and burned the City with fire.

Even so did he work for Gydeon and his small Iud. ^. 15. A huge company o^
Mad^ouercome by Gideon and a (...) number of (...) men.
company, to the overthrow of the Madianites, what a mighty GOD is this,
whose power is such and so great, that he works so far beyond all
natural expectation, yea against all possibility, by worldely reason, to the
confusion of such as rise up against his Church, against his Christ and
Christian?

And therefore although we see Romish Jericho, which consists of many
Cities, which is the mother of many daughters, although she triumph as
invincible, although she sit Reu. 18. 7.
as a Queen and say, I shall be no widow, neither shall I be touched with
any sorrow: Let us not doubt but the breath of Gods own mouth The mean to
overthrow Romish Jericho.
shall overthrow her: The Ark of the Lord, the gospel of his truth being
carried in countries round about her, and the trumpets of Gods messengers
sounding the same, and the heartye praises of the army of Christians being
shouted unto the heavens, shall bring that to pass which S. John prophesies,
namely that the joyful Reu. 18. 2.
tidinges of the fall of Romish Jericho, and her utter ruin unto Ioshuas army,
namely to the congregation of the faithful in Christ. It is fallen it is
fallen, Babylon that great City, the glory of the Romish queen, the pride of
Jericho is come to Esa. 21. 9
confusion. This no doubt by the finger of God shall be brought to pass,
although they seem to build their strength never so mightily.

The people about an hundred and thirty years after the flood greatly
increased, and their Genesis 11. 4.
multitude increasing to an infinite number, began to be proud and arrogant,
insomuch that as they devised the means (in their own conceits) to extol
their glory unto the heavens, and therefore endeavored to erect a tower, the
height whereof should reach unto the skies, their enterprise thus begun, they
proceeded to perform it according to their own imaginations, wherein their
pride so increased, and their hearts asspired against the God of heaven, who
beholding the secreats thereof, and their weak and rebellious intent, in that
they could not content themselves to enjoy the liberty and commodities of
the earth, and their lives at his God throvveth down aspiring minds.
hands, but would aspire to make themselves equal with him, and as it were
his fellow neighbors even in the clouds, where they pretended to have their
habitations near unto his seat of Majesty in heaven, as they imagined,
quickly cut them short, and used a speedy confusion of their follye: namely
confounded their The confusion of ^ongues.
language in such sort as one could not understand the other.

Surely this example of man's pride and their sudden confusion by the
judgments of God, is worthy to be noted. The multitude of these The multitud
of Nimrods company.
men, namely Nimrod and his company were great, insomuch as if God should
have dealt according to the sense of human reason, as these men now do in
their multitudes, what course should God have taken, considering that (as
before the sloud) so now they all joined themselves together to become rebels
against him? But as his wisdom is always unsearchable, and his power
infinite, and all to bring all things to pass without the aid of man, he
used this only mean to stop their devise, namely to confound their language
whereby their work ceased, they were scattered, and their enterprise came to
none effect.

By this most worthy example we may see how God abhors those aspiring
hearts that God detesteth the devises of those that covet to climb into
heaven by their own deserts.
covet to clymbe up into heaven by the tower of their own devises. What a
touchstone is this to try the glitteringe show of Nimrod of Rome and his
adherents to be but copper, who as we see indeuoureth to erect a tower, not of
brick and mortar, but of their own merits, whereby they will ascend and set
themselves even side by side with Christ himself in the kingdom of heaven.

And I pray what is this but to call Christ down from heaven, to confound
their languages, and to show them plainly that their buildinge shall never
take effect, nor be accomplished: How is it come already to pass among
these builders? How many are The confusion of the language that the Romanists
use.
there that can understand the language of their worke-men? Is it not in
Latin, a language far from the understanding of the most. For if the
builders of this detestable work should call The difficult agreeing of the
builders and laborers or seruitors of the Romish tower. Aho^chpotch o^
inventions instead of the sincere relig^.
for the brick of true worship of GOD in his tongue, their poor seruitors
bring forth the stubble of idolatrye, the confusion whereof we see, in that
these builders even in the judgments of GOD have patched, peeced, and made a
hotchpotch thereof, in such sort as the buylding of that tower, which is
founded upon the merits of Christ above, wherein we must be saved, is
meerelye neglected and rejected amongst them. And therefore it behooves
every true christian, to come out from among them, to forsake their company,
and not to set to our hands to the gathering of stubble, to make their brick,
nor slime for their mortar. The counterfeit brick and mortar of the Romanists.
For such is their bastardly dealing, that in steed of the pure straw of the
word of God, wherewith they should make the brick of a christian conversation,
they take the stubble of their own traditions, and in place of the pure mortar
of the spirit of God, they use the slyme of their own carnal wisdom,
wherewith they build this tower of their glory, wherein they so brag and
boaste, as though by the same tower they could themselves ascend into heaven,
and keep others with the force of their many builders from ascending to God
by Christ. Their inventions are evil, their pride odious, and their folly
filthy in the sight of God. And yet say they we will prevail, we will
perform our enterprise, The resolution in building the tower of vvilfull
rebellion against the death of Christ.
accomplish our device, for our multitude is great, and therefore who can
withstand our force? But we have plentifully seen the mighty works of the
Lord for the confusion of his adversaries, and the comfort of those that
delight in his salvation.

Yet let us a little further call into our minds, and for the comfort of our
consciences, and encouragement of our hearts, consider his mighty potection
and provident care he has of his children.

David was most cruellye persecuted, and his 1. Sam. 13. The trouble^ of David
by Saul*
life a long time, and by many means sought for to be taken away by Saul, a
mighty king and his mighty multitudes. Yet such was the patience of David, that
when he had fit opportunity to have killed Saul, he would not, but rather
referring his case unto the providence of God, only cut off the lap of Saules
garment and departed, and at another time took his spear, and a cup of oil.

Saules tirannye still raging so far that he commanded 1. Sam. 24. 4.
Jonathan his own son and servants to kill David. But the Lord moved the
heart of 1. Sa. 19. 1.
Jonathan to favor David, yet such was the cruelty of Saul that David was
forced to fly into the wilderness of Zyphe, and being in great distress, and
in such a strait, that he saw in natural judgment no possibility to escape
the hands of his David's extreme distress and his delivery by the providence
of god
adversaries, he was by the gracious providence of God mightily defended. For
in Saules hottest pursuit after David's life, there came a messenger unto Saul
that informed him that the Philistines had invaded his land, at which news he
was forced to leave David, and with speed with all his host to return home to
defend his own realm. This is duly to be noted and his mighty providence of
God in thus miraculously defending David, is to be applied unto every christian
in his distress and persecution, and a godly instruction for our dear
Sovereign, that although Saul of Rome and his adherents wait for the life of
her highness, that yet there be many Ionathans that have made covenant with
her, to aid her and assist her as men moved even with the zeal of the Lords
house, and love of her majesty's virtues, yea the Lord himself is her
protection, who we see has not only cut off the lap of Saules garment, but
has taken away his spear, namely his ministers and cursed conspiratours
against her, by whom he hoped with a spear to have dispoyled her highness of
her life, and us of our quiet estate. But The greatest foe of our felicity is
partly unarmed.
God be thanked he is partly unarmed, and therefore let us be patient and
suffer him to rage a while, and at the length no doubt she shall take away
the cup of oil which is his comfort, namely all his flattering and deceitful
accomplices, his glory and renown, his power and authority, notwithstanding
the many threatened invasions by foreign forces, and secreat conspiracies at
home, when they are in the prime of their pride, when their tyranny is most
sharp and cruel, when their shippinges are prepared, their armies and their
multitudes at the most, When our adversaries are in the prime of their hope
they sh^l ^li^ back ^t, and be dis^*
and when they gape widest to swallow up David, the poor Christians in England
and elsewhere, God will prevent them with some invasions of their own
terretories at home, and thereby give occasion to Saul and his mighty men, to
return to defend themselves at home, yea the mighty monacke of Spain that
seems to rule but is ruled, who as it has been confessed by the late
conspirators, will spend his whole kingdom, but will bring England to his
purpose, and conform to the ancient Roman religion, even he and all his
adherents, ministers of Saul, Psalm. 2.
of Rome shall be deceived, God is on our side who is a sure defense in the
due time of need, his aid comes when men's cases are desperate, he helps
past hope, and makes the counsels, attemptes and policies, the might and
multitude of the adversaries of his truth to be God cannot abide any practices
against his church.
vain and of none effect, yea he laugheth them to scorn, he cannot abide
their conspiracies against Christ and his church, although they prosper and are
glorious in the eye of man for a time, yet (if we note the ends of them) we
shall have good occasion to say as David of the wicked said. I looked, and
behold although they were even Psalm. 73. 3.
now flourishing as green bay trees, they are suddaynlye consumed, and their
place is not to be found* The same prophet says that he stood in admiration,
and even fretted to see the prosperity of the wicked. And surely it is in these
days It is admirable to see the prosperity of the wicked.
very admirable to see the prosperitye, the glorious estate and brave outward
show of those that set their mouths against heaven, namelye that blaspheme
God, and slander his power, in tying it unto the multitude, and contemn other
men, as vile and weak in respect of themselves, that condemn all men, and
justify themselves, thirsting after blood, and yet say we are they that will
prevail, who is Lord over us?

But behold God sets them in slipperye The wicked namely conspirators are
in slippery places.
places, he casts them down, brings them to desolation, destroys them
suddenly, and they in their counsels come to a shameful and fearful end.

Thus have we seen with our eyes in our late conspirators, of whom some of
them and they Ps. 7^. 18. 19.
not the least, have with this persecutinge Saul been hangmen and butchers
unto themselves. God destroys all them that withdraw themselves 1. Sa. 31. 4.
Psalm. 73. 27. God is good unto the godly.
from him and go a whoring after strange Gods, but is good unto Israel, even
to such as are of a clear and a pure heart. And therefore let us be assured
that although there be many Saules against one David, many IeZabels against
one Elias, God will not suffer such as are godly in deed, christians in deed,
fervent, zealous, and not duke warm hypocrites or newters to be over thrown of
the^, but will make away for them to escape, as he did for his servant David,
even when their state is most dangerous.

Poor Daniell was in a marvelous distress, in Dan. 6. 12.
a desperate estate in the judgment of man, when he for the service which he
did to the true God, was (by a sinister decree made and signed by Darius,
through a general conspiracy of wicked men) cast into the Lions den, whom
the mighty hand of the God whom he served sufficientlye protected, shutting
the Lions mouths so that they could not hurt him. But when those The revvard
of conspirators.
were cast into the den that conspired his death, they were rent in pieces ere
they came to the ground of the den.

This Daniell was likewise hardlye beset with many enemies, for that he in
zeal of Gods Daniel. 14. Daniel hardly beset for reprehending idolatry.
truth reprehended Cyrus king of Persia, for permitting and committing such
idolatrye unto a filthy monster Bell the idol, of whom such was the opinion
of the king and the people that they worshipped it as God, the whole multitude
fell down before it. But Daniell resisting them to their faces said, this that
ye worship is an idol The boldness of Daniell in the zeal of gods truth.
and no God: and when the king heard that, he seemed wroth, and to maintain
this Dragon to be a God, he framed his argument saying, do thou think it to
be no God, behold he eats and drinks, and therefore do thou speak
blasphemy against our God, he eats an hundred gallons of fine flower, and
forty sheep, and A gluttonou^ God.
drinks six great pots of wine every day, here was a gluttonous God. But
behold the poor idol was slandered and deceived, for the priests, their
wives and children devoured all this provision secreatlye. These were like unto
our late abbey lubbers, who devoured that in loiteringe lasines, which the
painful laborers should live by. But poor Daniell being sharply reproved
not only at the hands of the king, but threatened by the multitude not fearing
their force, having his assured confidence in the help of the living God, and
seeking to maintain his glory and deface superstition and idolatrye,
undertook the destruction of this false God, without sword or staff, which
he by his power, whose hand is always ready to assist his servant, and to
confound The confusion of an imaginatiue God.
his adversaries presently performed; and brake it all in pieces, confounded
it, and showed it in it likeness, namely to be a false and counterfeyt image,
and (in deed) no God. Whereat the whole multitude of the Babylonians raged not
only against Daniell, but also against the king himself, for that he
permitted Daniell to take this enterprise in hand: The king being timorous and
more fearing the force of the multitude, then seeking the glory of the living
God, delivered poor Daniell into their hands, who threw him violentlye into
the Lions den to be devoured. But such was the omnipotent power of God over
these greedy and ravenous beasts, which Daniels adversaries of purpose kept
hungry and without meat to make their stomaches so much the more greedy of the
blood of this servant of the true GOD, who in such sort stopped their mouths
that they hurt not Daniell at all. What Amiraculous work of God to stop
ravening lions mouths.
a most loving God, what a mighty and merciful judge of our distress does he
show himself? for this is also written for our learning, to show that he never
saileth the faithful, but helps them in due time of need. And that we should
not fear the great and mighty multitudes of Romish Babylonians, that endeavor to
bring us into the den God never saileth the faithful.
of their devouring Lions, their spanish inquisition, and such like deep
deuoring gulphes, that they have devised to overthrow (if they could) every
true Daniell, by persecutions, torturs, and the fear of death.

Now for as much as we have seen the mighty The conclusion.
works of the Lord in great abundance toward the delivery of those that put
their unfeigned confidence in his protection, vsinge sometimes worldly means,
sometimes his power against worldly means, and sometimes without worldly
means, to allure his people in their distres to come unto him, and for their
encouragement has made ways for their safety, when natural reason could not
devise or imagine the God by many means shovveth himself helpful to his.
mean to escape, and has by few of his servants ouerthrown and vanquished
great multitudes of his adversaries pulled down the mighty by the hand of the
weak, and exalted the weak against the expectation of the mighty. Let us
therefore duly apply all these his mighty works to our instruction, and
according unto the time set them before our eles, as a mirror or glass to see
the estate of the enemies of God, their slippery standings and weak holds, and
the sure refuge, the buckler which the righteous have in the mighty hand of
God. The christians we see are environed Christians a^ environed with many
snares.
with many perilous snares of the enemies of God: their state in natural
reason stands dangerous, but the Lord delivers them out of all. And
therefore let us assure our selves of the aid of him that has not (as we see)
failed those that truly and constantly professed his name. And as he has been
near unto them, so will he be unto us, if with pure hearts and constaunt
minds we persevere and continue (not as hypocrites, God vvilbee near unto us,
if we be near unto him with singleness of heart and not as hipocrites.
neither as such as bear the name only of Christians but) very christians,
not in name so much, but that our conuersations may be aunswerable thereunto to
the uttermost, to the praises of God, and our salvation in Christ.

CHAP. 3.
A comfortable conclusion, to stir up such as covet to be called Christians,
to be inwardly the same, that they do outwardly profess to be, considering
that it is not the name, but the pure life in Christ that makes a Christian.

THE bishop of Rome and his adherentes do persuade all men to join with them
in the Religion which they hold Catholic, which the holy Ghost reprooueth
The holy Ghost reproves the romish religion
and shows it to be mere idolatry, and altogether repugnant against the
truth. They say and affirm it to be true, pure, and the sound religion, the
way that leads unto Christ, and salvation in him. But the truth finds
that the foundation thereof is laid upon traditions and inventions, and not
upon the rock Christ Jesus, from whose example, whosoever dissenteth cannot
(though in name) yet not in deed) become a perfect Christian, or true catholic
whatsoever great shows of devotion, works of charity, abstinence, prayers,
or other outward ceremonies, these feigned and false foxes, these hidden and
cloaked Catholics can, or do glory of, although they could derive the same
from the beginning of the world, from the wise, from the studious and learned,
from the mighty or greatest multitudes of the whole world, and from True
religion is not grunded in the heart by the will or power of man.
a general president. For the truth whereupon the conversation of every
Christian is to be grounded, is settled in the heart of none, by the power, the
will, the wisdom, or inventions of man, neither can it be increased or
bettered by the policy of any, nor sufficientlye protected or maintained by
the authority of princes, but where first the spirit of GOD has framed the
foundation. By the mere workinge whereof, it The spirit of God the tryer of
true religion.
is apprehended followed, embraced, and duelye maintained, and by it the
spirit of error and falsehood, and counterfeyt christianity is revealed,
controuled, suppressed, and confounded, and so consequentlye the perfect truth
confirmed and allowed. Besides which truth who so endeavors to establishe any
doctrine, carry it never so fair and glorious a show of good intent is a
rebel to the death of Christ, a deceiuer of the people, a blind guide, who
together with those that he guydeth shall fall into the pit and puddell of
desperate ignorance, and so consequently into the lake of perdition. And
therefore let not the fair show of these counterfeyt christians, cloaked
Catholics, the crew of the cursed sect of Iugling Jesuits, shaven
Seminaries, and perdicious priests betraye us, or allure us to their
profession, the fruits whereof being so ripe that they fall from the tree of
the The fruits of papistry, are fair without and soul with in.
Romish sea, rotten within and fair without, having honey in their lips, and
gall in their hearts, the poison of aspes, the love of Judas, the zeal of
Caine appears in their practizes, they are no christians, why then should we
give them the name of Catholics? They seek blood, they thirste for the
death of christians, they are murderers, they are not worthy the name of men,
they are Vipers, they covet to eat out the very bowelles of their mother that
bare them, the common weal that fostered them, and would fill the land
wherein they were fostered The description of Romish catholics.
with the blood of the^, by whose protection they have lived, and by whose aid
they have been mainteyned, they are no subjects, they are traitors and rebels,
their name of Catholics we see makes not their calling sure, but the name
shall Their name shall be a witness* against them.
be a witness against them, when the veil of their outward show, shall be
plucked away, and the inward intent of their hearts appear.

But he that will be a true christian in deed, must cast away all
dissimulation, all hypocrisy, all malice, all desire of blood, all consent of
rebellion, treason, envy and idolatry, and put on not only the outward
habit, but the inward zeal of godliness, as love, faith, obedience, and
true and unfeigned subjection to GOD and his anointed of the earth.

But alas too many are the dissembling christians of these days: I would it
were not true, for there has been manifest proof of the cancred hearts of
such as outwardly appeared dutiful subjects, whose practizes are so new, that
the hearts of all true christians are yet bleeding to Cancred hearts under the
outvvard show of due tifull subjects
consider it.

But now upon this manifest trial of their treachery, let even the name of
the counterfeyt Catholics, be even as a lesson to warn us by their
rebellions to become good subjects, by their falls endeavor to stand, by their
harms seek to be wary and wise in Christ.

Constantius the Emperor intendinge on a The policy of Constantius in trying
the hearts of his servant.
time to try the hearts of* those that were about his court whether they were
in deed christians or idolaters, whereby he might the better discipher and
judge of their love and faithful obedience toward him, knowing that they that
appeared the true servants of God, would be most faithful unto him, and the
other the more warely The faithful servant of God are most true subjects to
their princes.
to be avoided, used this policy (when hypocrisy and feyned subjection was
not (as now it is dispensed with) he called together all his servants and
officers, feyning himself to chose out such as would do sacrifice to devils,
who should only remain in the court, and execute the offices there, and they
that refused should be expulsed. Whereupon the courtiers divided them into
companies, and some of them showed themselves very ready to fulfill the kings
will, and proffered to do sacrifice to devils, others constauntly and boldly
refused to do it. The Emperor seeing the rebellion of some of them against
God, and the faithful obedience of the other, he forthwith expelled these
sacrifices out of his Court, and retained the other, affirming that they only
Who they be that are fittest to attend upon a prince.
were fit to be about a prince. And therefore from thence forth he accepted
those his most trusty counsailors and defendors of his person and Empire,
saying that such were more worthy to be had in estimation, and to be accounted
of Faithful sub^e^^^ as dear as the best treasure.
then the substance that he had in his treasury. Thus we may note that every
one that shows outward loyalty unto a prince, is no more a true subject by
the only outward show without the inward love of God, then he is to be
accounted a true Christian, which in outward ceremonies appears a Catholic
and in inward affection declyneth from Christ and his truth. A good prose of
faithful hearts about her majesty*
But God be thanked there has been sufficient proof of perfect hearts near
her majesty in these late dangers, and such hearts as will not do sacrifice
to the Devil of Rome, nor give consent unto the tolleration thereof in others:
But with the swoorde of their authority endeavor to cut off both the causers
and effectors, the tree and the branches of these conspiracies, and (no doubt)
if we show our selves true christians in deed, and not key cold or newters,
but zealous in the defense of Gods truth, and stand assistan according to our
bounden duties, as true subjects to her Majesty in hearts and hands, We
shall see these Romish Babylonians, to cry out, lament Reu. 18. 10. The
doleful song of the ruin of Romish Babylon.
and mourn, as they already begun to sing this doleful song: Heu, heu vrbs
illa magna Babylon, vrbs illa potens, etc. Alas, alas that great city the
mighty city Babylon, that was so beautifully dected and finely clothed, in
lynnen, purple and scarlet gilded with gold, and beautified with pearls and
precious stones, whose destruction draws near. But these that thus cry out
and lament her ruin, stand a far off for fear of her torment, the kings
of the earth shall bewail the fall of this great and glorious City, with
whom they have committed fornication, and played the harlottes and taken their
The estate of romish merchaunts namely buiers and sellers of souls, in the day
of their ruin.
delight and pleasures in her. Then will her Merchants, her spiritual buyers
and sellers of souls, her Seminaries, her Priests, and Iesuytes, and such like
companions, who lived by the whoredom of this great whore of Babylon the Pope,
for loss of their accustomed rewards and wonted gain, howl and weep, and
for their punishments at hand, shall stand desperate of all help. This shall
be the estate of those that to some seem now very perfect Catholics, who
have secretly withdrawn men from their true obedience to Princes lawefully
established, and have moved the spouse of Christ to commit spiritual
fornication with the man of Rome, and of such as will not now suffer wholesome
doctrine, but having their ears itching get them teachers after their own
lust, turning their ears from ^ Tim. 4.
the truth, giving heed unto fables, unto spirits of error, and doctrines of
Diuelles, hardening their hearts through blindness, of whom Christ himself
speaks saying: The hearts of the people are waxed fat, and their ears are
dull of hearing, Christ prophesied of these days. Mat. 13.
and with their eyes have they wincked least they should see with their eyes,
hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and so return, that
they might be saved. What a dangerous thing therefore is this obstinate
blindness, and blind obstinacy? wilful ignorance, and desperate wilfulness?
and yet would these men be accounted Catholics and Christians. But such
crookednes and perverseness caused Jeremy to cry out and say, It is a
rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the
Lord: but say unto the seers, see not, Esai. 30.
and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto the people the truth, but speak
flattering words unto them, prophecy errors, go out of the way, forsake the
right path, cause the holy one of Israel to cease from us. Is not this the
manner of Simple men tied to the romish religion with cords of ignorance
these men to keep such from the truth which are tied to their usurped
authority, with the cords of obstinate blindness? which was the cause that in
the dais of Christ himself, the multitude cried out to crucify him, and yet
thought they did well: and Christ prayed his father to forgive the^ saying, they
know not what they do. But it is now otherwise Difference between the
ignorance of the Jews in the days of Christ, and these of this present
vvilfull ignorance
with us, for we have the truth before us, we may read it, we have the truth
preched, we may hear it, we have it revealed, we may understand it, and
therefore the neglecting thereof, is now inexcusable, and the Lord will not
suffer his truth now to be darkened with feyned holiness.

And therefore let us return unto our selves, and enter into consideration of
our own co^uersations We must call our selu^ to an account.
whether they be framed according to the truth which we have learned. We are
fruitfully and most plentifully fed with the bread of life the gospel of
Christ, beyond al other Nations of the world, let us not be therefore glorious
in our words only, or in our outward actions, expecting the praise of me^, but
let us be pure in heart, obedient in soul, and mind, to God that searches the
raynes, and entrals thereof, and accepts not, of those that can but brag and
say, we have the Gospel, we have the Gospel, and bring not forth the
fruits of the Gospel. It was not enough for The title of a christian no^^
enough without the deeds.
the Iewishe Priests, to cry out, the temple of God* the temple of GOD, as
though the bare title of the temple makes it the true temple of God, or the
name of a Christian, a member of Christ, or the title of a Protestant (whereof
some do boast) a man in deed that protests in life and inward zeal, that
he is a true Christian. The Papists cry out we are catholics, we are
catholics, The bragge^ of romish catholics
we are of the Church, for look upon our external works of charity, and
actions of devotion, we fast, we pray, we give alms, we pinch our bodies, we
scurge our selves, we are they that shall ascend unto the holy hill. But alas
how Good works ill done.
far these things are of themselves from that which God requires, he himself
declares saying, such as have pure hearts and clean hands, such as are
inwardly zealous together with the outward Who they be that shhall ascend into
heaven.
testimonies of their godly life, such shall inherit heaven. And therefore
there may be many wolves in lambs skins, many devils under the habit of
Pharazaicall devotion, and therefore not in words or outward behavior only
stands the perfect estate of a Christian, but even in the sincerity and
perfect pureness of the heart, depending in faith upon the merits of Christ:
The outward action is the messenger of the heart, it is a witness of the mind,
but not at all times a like, for the outward kiss of Judas, was outwardly
Words and on^vvarde ^hovves often de ceaue.
a token of love, and yet it proceeded of an heart full of gall and
bitterness, of deceyte and murder, his words of all hayle master came as if
his lips had testified obedience to his master, but the poison of Aspys was
under his tongue. The muncke of Swynsted that poisoned King John, came with his
poisoned potion, with the sweet words of wassayle my Liege, and inwardly
pretended the death of the King, and are there not in these days many that
can cover their poisoned practices with the outward show of all hayle Madam,
and God save your Majesty, and such like fair words that come from a
poysonsom stomach? does not counterfeite deuation cover Counterfeit devotion
covers devilish deuise^
many devilish devises? Is not sometimes dutiful obedience made the cloak for
wilful rebellion, and diligent attendance made the color Parries outvvard
attendance a cloak for treason.
of conspiracy? Look upon Parrie and his practices, and there is a proof of
these policies. Man sees not the hearts of men, but God finds them out in
their secret counsels, he bewrays some to be traitors, that make outward
show of true subjects. And therefore let no man deceive God discovers
hipocri^^ and gives them their revvard.
himself in a persuasion of his saftie, when his heart is burned with the hot
iron of a guilty conscience, against God or his Prince, God will not be
flattered with, although man flatter man, dissemble with man, or play the
hypocrite before men: for he will uncover their cunning, and reveal their
inward devises, and show them unto the world as a due reproach, and reward
them in fine with the condign guerdon of their endless torments.

Oh let us therefore be wise in the truth, let us be circumspect as serpents,
that we be not over taken, with these alluring Cerenes that sing sweetly in
our ears, absolution, absolution* pardon, pardon, dispensation, dispensation
for sin, they deceive us, they draw us, with the floods of errors: beware that
their pleasant tunes prevail The vvisdome of Ulysses.
not with any of us, but like wise Ulysses, let us bind our souls to the
maste of the truth of Gods word, least we yield the sails of our consentes
unto the wind of their wiliness, and so being pertakers of their practices,
we become likewise pertakers of their punishments. Let us be simple as doves,
let us harbor no kind of will to join our selves with these dangerous men,
(although the greatest part of the world) that under the pretense of holiness,
under the title of catholics, seek to overthrow the kingdom of god, the
church of Christ, the knowledge of his word, and preching of his gospel.
Although they say Lord Lord, they are not thereby made the servants of the
Lord. If we do not that which the Lord commands, we are mere enemies unto
the Lord. It is not enough to bear the green leaves, and the beautiful
blossoms of a godly life: but we must bring forth the fruits which come from
the root, and heart of our in ward affections, and zealous obedience,
wherewith every true christian is so adorned, that whenever Christ our savior
passes by us with consideration of our goodworkes, God blesses our hearts,
and vva^e^eth them so with his holy spirit that they bringforth the outvvard
fruits.
he finds the^ so fruitful that he blesses the fig tree of our hearts,
making it profitable (though no^ of it self) yet by the inspiration of his
holy spirit, in such sort as men may see our good fruits, and glorify our
father for his merciful watering our souls to the bringing forth thereof. And
on the contrary where there are the The Lord has no de light in painted
holiness.
leaves, the glorious show of a godly life, only in external actions, without
the true fruts proceeding from the heart, the Lord has no pleasure in that
tree but curses it, and withers it even with the breath of his mouth: so
that they that pass by shall say that in such painted Sepulchers the Lord
has no delight.

We must therefore endeavor to bring forth the We must follow Christ in our
conuer sations and professions.
fruts of a godly, holy and innocent life: following as in outward profession:
so in inward zeal, the steps of our head, our husband and master Christ Jesus:
who, as he is pure, so he expects perfect sanctity in all that profess
him: he can not abide hypocrisy, a double heart, a disse^bling tongue, or lips
that speak feyned things. And therefore what profits it us to have the name
of Christians, to have the name of Protestants, of Catholics, and such like
glorious titles, whereof many in these our days brag and boast? namely that
they know Christ, and confess him only in the outward show, when in deed in
our actions and inward cogitations we deny him, in framing the^ according to
the world, and according to the course of Mat. 7 11.
the multitude, for every one that says Lord Lord shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of god which is in heaven. And
again, why call ye me Lord Lord (says Luc. 6
he) and do not that which I command you. We It is not enough to say we
know Christ, but we must do that we learn of Christ
see then that we discharge not our duties to god in saying we know him, but
in performance of the truth, which we learn of him. And therefore as we in
respect of our profession challenge the name of Christians, and seem as it
were offended, when the messengers and ministers of Christ charge us out of the
word of God, that we degenerate from the perfect conversation of a true
Christian, by the looseness of our lives* and slack performance of our duties
to Christ: let us frame al our affections as becomes true Christians. And let
us not deceive or slatter our selves, with a foolish conceit of being
Christians, when in deed our conversation differs far from the doctrine of
Christ. It behooves us to examine our lives, not according to fleshly
fantasies, but according to the truth of gods word, which is a glass whereby
we may set al our actions right, and in good order, and judge between truth
and falshoode, between light and darkness, between the Gospel of Christ,
and the traditions of men. We have a good president hereof, namely to try and
examine our zeal, by Act. 17. 11. The men of Thessal. and Berea an example to
try and search for the truth.
the example of the men of Thessalonica and Berea (not in that some of the^
persecuted the Apostles) but in that, as they received the word of God, they
searched the scriptures, for the increase of their knowledge of the truth,
whereby they might not only frame their own lives, but direct others, not
only in word, but in godly life and conversation, which was the cause also
that the disciples were called Christians in Antiochiafirst, namely for that
they came near unto Christ in godliness of life. Search the scripturs, for they
are The sciptures testifle of Christ. 105. 39.
they which testify of Christ: of his manner of conversation here in the
earth, and of his eternal truth, the sincere profession whereof, makes a
perfect Christian.

Then this name of a Christian only, is not due of right unto him that can
only speak of Christ, or that can dispute of his godheade and manheade, how
he came into the world, when he came, to what end he came, and such like: for
so can even the Devils do. But as we see we are Christians in this, that as
we know Christ, and profess Christ in word, so should we follow him in
life. If we have the spirit of Christ, then are we Christians. For he that
has the spirit of Christ will conform himself according to the image of
Christ. And as Saint Augustine defines a Christian: he is a perfect Aug. de
vit. Christiana.
Christian, which shows mercy unto all men, and who is not moved, he that
regards another The definition of a christian
man's grief as his own, whose table is open and ready for the poor, who
seems contemptible, base, and of no account before men: he that
despiseth*earthly, to win heavenly things, who suffers not the poor to
be oppressed, he that succoureth the needy: he that weepeth, when others do
weep, showing himself of merciful affection toward all men: who is weak
(says Saint Paul) and I am not diseased? This is a true description of that,
whereof we would be accounted professors, namely true Christianity, which as
we see chiefly consists in mercy, in love, and charitable Christianity
consists in mercy and love.
affection one toward another: In so much as we see that by the rule of this
Christian duty, we must show our selves assistaunt to all so far forth as
our ability will extend and especially to those that are of the householde of
faith, we must do to others, that which we would that others should do unto us.
But alas how far too short come many of our time, to this Many that are
called Christians come too short o^ being true christians.
Christian duty: yea of such as will not only be termed, but which term
themselves Protestants, and Christians? It were too hard and a very
unmannerly enterprise for me to enter into the discourse of that wherein I know
I shall offend many A thanklese office to ^eprone offenses.
and especially froward, stubborn, and stiffnecked natures, who I know will
bid me pluck out the beam of mine own eye first: and for my own The
confession of the author.
part I thank them for their good remembrance I trust I stand not to justify
my self, but openly condemning my self as a wicked wretch, justified yet in
faith by the blood and merits of Christ.

But good Christian brethren, the dearest thing to satisfy my greatest
expectation is, patience The authors cheifest expectation.
for my boldness. And to return to my purpose to control in the name of
Christ, such as will outwardly show themselves what, inwardlye they be not,
namely Christians: for surely great has been the trial of Christians of late
days. And the former policy of Constantius for trial Gods providence in s^n
ding dearth a try all of true christians.
of Christians, came far too short of the mere providence of God, the year
past and very likely to continue the year to come: namely, the general dearth
of corn and other necessaries for the relief of man, in which extremity, many
were the mouths that wanted reliese, yea the mouths of good christians, which
the gluttonous cormorancie of Epicu^es devoured in excess: nay the trysling
toys, the needles and bootles creatures, A great abuse in many in these days
of dearth.
as hawks, hou^ds and other offensive things in the sight of god has devoured
more in many men's houses in a week, the^ some of the masters of the same have
given to the needy in a month, which is a testimony of cold christianity:
the back and the belly will be constant witnesses against some in the day of
the Lord, that their hearts and external professions with the tongue, have
been at discord, namely the excess of gluttony and pride in apparel, will
testify that their actions were not guided by the infallable rule of that true
Christianity.

Furthermore, be there not in the world, that can and do profess Christ with
the mouth, resort to his word, argue thereof, and can cunningly dispute A token
of cold christianity.
thereof, that in this miserable estate of the poor oppressed members of
Christ, see them to want, hear the^ to mourn, lament and cry out for relife,
and they will not consider it? they will not hear the cry of the poor: having
their barnes full of corn old and new: and their bags full in their chestes
of white and red: and yet wincke at the estate of the world, expecting greater
extremity to come to the poor, that their own riches may increase, and yet
will be accounted christians? Alas what Christianity, what love, nay, Let us
pray for reformation.
what humanity is in this? God grant reformation of these things, in this
acceptable time.

A great volume might be replenished with such like manifest testimonies of
cold Christianity in England of the most estates of men, who are daily warned
out of the word of God, to return from their wickedness of heart, and to
seek truth and persevere theerin, and yet regard it not. And of all other
testimonies of an unchristian like conscience (howsoever they The greatest
testimony of an vnchristia^ like conscience
slatter themselves with the outward profession of Christ) the greatest is in
the time of dearth and famine, to retain that store which God the free giver
of all things, has afforded them, and to hold up the price of their victual
(which they have freely received) to so high and intolerable a price, that the
poverty of such as are in the sight The hungry bodies of the poor must pine
to fill the filthy desires of the rich.
of god as dear (nay perchance more dear) then they, can not obtain
sufficiency of any thing to relieve and sustain their lives, so that the
hungry bodies of many are driven to pine, to fill the ravening desires of
few, in their filthye mucke. who is there that of his small store does a
little relieve the poor, that has less? nay who of his superfluous
abundance extends his hand to help him that has nothing at all? This is
a fault intolerable and yet unpunishable. But be not deceived ye that gape so
wide to swallowe up the poor, that shut your cares from the cry of the
needy, and draw out your noses so long to smell, and your tongues and hands
to lick up, and take away the sweet of other men, howsoever you color it
under the name of Christians, Catholics or Protestants: for assuredly your
destruction is near.

Come forth therefore, and as you are armed (as you say) with the names of
Christians and He that is a true christian must fight against concupiscence.
the knowledge of Christ, fight now in time against these wicked desires, this
dangerous poison of concupiscence, try your selves to be, that in deed which
you brag to be, the soldiers of Christ to fight against the world, and the
servants of the world, that fight against Christ, for between them is there
noe congruetie. Say not my corn my store my victual and mine increase is mine
own and therefore at mine own disposition, for thou deceyuest thy self: is
not the whole world the Lords, and all that therein is? He can then take all
from thee, and The whole world is the lords.
give it unto thy needy brother. And where thou say, I must not lend, I
may not give, I will not diminish my store which I have provided for mine own
use, in what extremity so ever my needy brother be, for fear least I should
want my self, for even this also (thou fool) is an A perilous conceit of the
rich.
argument of little faith in thee, and less charity. How I pray you do the
most part of us, that are so hard hearted, weep with them that weep? Do we
not see many poor fathers and mothers of families, and many fatherless and
helpelesse little ones, howl and weep, lament and We do not weep with
them that weep.
mourn, and we do not only not weep with them, that is take part of their
miseries, but we give the cause of their weeping, with the bitterness, of our
consciences that far unlike christians, hold fast that with the cords of
covetousness which God vouchsafed of his liberality, and yet we must be
accounted Christians, this is lamentable. Can God that is a just God winck God
will call an a^e count (...) us, how we ha^^ bestovved our goods.
at this our counterfeite holiness for ever? will he not call account of us,
how we have bestowed our goods? And how shall we answer him? shall we say we
have bestowed them upon building our gay houses, upon purchasing of farms to
make our children gentlemen, upon hauks and hounds for our repast, upon gay
attire to make us seemly to the world, or upon delicates for our tables, or
upon any such transitory thing? will these things be an excuse, or a sufficient
discharg for our colloured Christianity think you, when the needy members of
Christ shall stand before you? the vewe of whom shall strike such a guilt in
your consciences, that even your own conceits will cry out against your
countersect holiness, and condemn you: and the heavy judgments of God which
acco^panieth such unfaithful stewardes, shall light upon you, and for evermore
confound you. Oh this will be sour sauce Sovvre sauce after svveete meat.
after your sweet meats, this will be more bitter the^ gal, unto the
conscience that is now nothing at all touched with the consideration of these
things. Oh it behooves us the^ to look about us in time, and to take
circumspect heed that those things which proceed, either of obstinate
hardness of heart, or hypocrisy, which is too general a disease, lodge no
longer in our dissemblinge breasts. Let these things that are so manifest
against the truth of our profession be driven far from us. Let not law be
governed with will, but let will be subject unto godly laws, let not law
Go(...) god*
be turned into licentious liberty, but let our liberty be grounded upon the
perfect rule of our freedom in Christ, and let the Magistrate minister
indifferent judgment.

The very adversaries unto true Christianity note (in those that crave and
covet to be called Christians) too much rebellion eue^ against their own
profession. And even reioycingly cry out and say among themselves, there there,
so would we have it. They make our lives (which digenerate from the truth,
which we seem to hold, and teach) an argument against us, there be so The
adversaries of gods ^^uth, note our profession to be accompanied with ungodly
actions.
many fig trees that have fair blossoms and green leaves with little or no
fruit, that they even say of us, they seem to be that they are not, And we
make our corrupt life, a sclaunder of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. But no
doubt this feyned Christianity is not general: but would to God it were more
particular: it is not common to all, but would God it were not so common to
any. But such have been from the beginning, some there are, and some will be
unto the end. For necessary it is that offenses do come, but woe unto them by
whom they come. And therefore for the love of him whose servants we
profess in words to be, let us become the same in thought, word, and
actions. As we cry out Christ, Christ, in our mouths, so let us put on
Christ in our manners, otherwise our profession is but painted Outvvarde
sanctetie and inward sin.
with outward sanctity, and defiled with inward sin. We can not serve God
and Mammon, we cannot say, we worship Christ, and help not our brethren. Our
western parts have felt the displeasure of God, by a general dearth, Gods
visitation by dearth a good^ ^yall of true christians.
only to prove true Christians, namely the liberality, mercy and compassion,
of the rich, and the patience of the poor and needy. And it has wrought this
experience for our learning, The experience which we have by dearth finds
fevv true christians.
(to the grief of the godly Christians in deed) how that true Christianity
cools, and hypocrisy breaks forth into mighty fires, charity is choked
with the cloddes of covetousness, faith is fled, and pity pressed down with
pride, few men we find regard another man's want, another man's grief,
another man's estate. But by a general division, we see all men for themselves
and for their children: and none favors the poor, nor their distressed
families. Thus we find by experience in this hard time, which argues, that
all those are not true Christians, which in outward show, can profess
Christ, all not godly in deed, which seem holy in words, and yet will they
all be accounted Christians. And as for the patience of the poor sort, it is
for the most part imperfect for the bitterness of want is so sharp unto them,
that they can hardly digest it without vomiting out the poison of forcible
outrage, not waiting the good pleasure of God to be relieved, who fed his
people in the old world very miraculously. But the experience which we have by
this hard time, proves little faith generally. Where is our due consideration
of this comfortable saying blessed is Psalm. 40. A comfortable blessing to
encourage christians, yet little regarged.
the man that considers the poor and needy, the Lord will deliver him in the
due time of troble? Is not here a sufficient promise to stir up al true
christians to show themselves in their likeness, and especially in the time
of distress to show help to the poor? And let us duly consider that where a
blessing is pronounced to such as extend mercy and compassion (the best token A
c^^se against counter^a^^ christians
and badge of a true christian) the contrary must needs be, cursed are such as
consider not the poor and needy, the Lord will leave such in their distres in
the day of visitation. He that sees his brother want, having wherewith to
relieve him, and shuts up his compassion from him, how can he say that he is
a christian? Nay how can he Such measure as we meat such will God measure to
us.
look for any other reward, but to expect such measure at the hands of God,
as he measured to his poor afflicted brethren? that is he shall want and not
be relieved, he shall call and not be heard, hunger and thirst and shall not
be comforted. Let us have therefore special regard to this point of
christianity: namely that as we are all members of one body in Christ our
head, so let us hold together unfeignedly in one faith, one truth, one
religion and constant profession thereof: and as the members of one body, one
to assist, comfort, relieve, aid, succor, and support another, that we may
show heartily and not coldly, zealously and not slackly, truly and not
deceitfully, that we are the same in deed that we profess to be in show. For
it will be no sufficient plee for us, to answer the declaration of our own
guilty consciences, to say we have professed That which many do imagine
glorious now shall be in the end no excuse.
the name of Christ, we have embraced his word, we have disputed and reasoned
of the scriptures, we have repaired unto and been desirous to hear sermons:
we have acquainted our selves with and harbored the preachers and ministers of
the word of God: nay it will be no sufficient discharge for us to say we have
prophesied in the name of God, and in his name cast out devils. Our external
glory nothing.
What becomes then of all our goodly shows of our external glory, wherein we
stand as marks for the world to gaze at for holiness sake, and yet inwardly we
are not as we seem to be. How many are there then deceived, that persuade them
selves that even the bare name of a protestant and title of a christian is
sufficient to acquit us in the last day? Ananias and Saphyra bare goodly
leaves and glorious blossoms in the external show but for their harboring
dissimulation and hypocrisy in their hearts, they were rewarded with present
death. Dangerous are these present days wherein we may see goodly green leaves
upon most fig trees to make fair shows a far off. But when Many make fair
shows a far of.
we approach near them when we enter into consideration of their fruits we find
them either rotten few or none: how many be there that come to the church,
showing outwardly great devotion, they hear sermons, they become partakers of
the sacrament of Christ's body and blood, they out: Dangerous people.
wardly seem to favor the gospel: but when we come near them, when they be
tried with the touch, it is seen that there rests in many of the^ a cloak
of dangerous desire of enterteining the cloudy darkness of Romish religion, and
the usurped authority thereof, contrary to the light of the truth. Some will
control me for entering into judgment, but would to God the experience of the
cause could make me a liar. But we doubt there are such weeds amongst the
good corn, Weeds amongst good* corn.
there are such wolves in sheep attire whose hypocrisy is dispensed with,
and they must needs account themselves Catholics. And the more cunningly they
can cloak their dissembling desires, their secret and hidden mischiefs, so
much is their profession the more commendable. For Card. Comos letters to
Parrie. The cheifest lesson of the romish tutors.
it is the chiefest part of the lesson which these Romish tutors give their
pupils, namely to make an outward show of true obedience to her majesty, and
her most godly proceedings, yet if opportunity might serve, they are dispensed
with to murder her. Oh blouddy villains, and yet will be accounted Catholics?
How can this cunning cloaking two faces under one hood, stand with the name of
a good catholic or christian? How can they that dissemble before men, say
their hearts are to God? It is no doubt the policy of the red Dragon and his
adherents to flatter men in sin, to the end to draw them into eternal
destruction. What it is to deny Christ.
For (says Christ) he that denies me, that is stands not bold and
constant to confess him, in that perfect and sincere religion which is with
out gall or bitterness, accompanied with no desire of murder or revenge, such a
one will he deny before his father which is in heaven. What profit then do
these glorious falslye cannonized saints get for their dissembling obedience to
her majesty, cloaked duty, and counterfeyt holiness, whereby they inwardly
endeavor to commit such bluddy and Cainlyke actions against her maisty, her
country and quiet, only to satisfy the True religion shovveth itself in
charity.
blood thirstye desire of undoubted Antichriste? whose religion (were it of
God) would show itself in charity to all the world manifestly as the
testimony and badge of their unfeigned duty to Christ, and not in desire of
innocent blood, the known cognizance of cruelty, the handmaiden of satan. Let
us not deceive our selves, for he How to know a true and a false Christian
that is of Christ will suffer with Christ, will love Christ and christians,
but he that is of satan, will bring forth the fruits of sin. And he that
is neither hot nor cold, a key cold professor, a newter, Neuters deny Christ.
that is contented to run with every religion and think well of every
profession he that is indifferent between light and darkness, does also plainly
deny Christ. But if we will stand strongly in the faith of our master unto the
death, not only outwardlye in words, but even to the faces of our adversaries
in inward zeal unto the death, framing our affections, our hearts, our
minds, and all the powers of our bodies, to bring forth the fruits of that
profession, which we seem to hold, and as we have the names of The
adversaries of the truth do strive invaine against true christians.
protestants, so if we protest before men in our works, and before God in our
consciences, the truth of his word, then let the serpent seek what shifts he
can, let satan do his worst, and the red dragon the bishop of Rome, and all
the rabble of his adherents wait till they be weary, and their multitudes make
what glorious shows of threats for our overthrow they can: yea let all the
kings of the earth, and great princes of the world that have taken up the
sword against Christ, and his spouse the church frame all their forces, and
yet shall his little flock be safe under the shadow of God maintains the
true doctrine of his word.
his wings. The mighty power of the Lord has from the beginning defended,
maintained, and always preserved, the true doctrine of his word, and the true
professors thereof, and let us not fear but he will to the end defend,
maintain, and preserve the same, he has promised To. 15.
it that will surely perform it. Whatsoever is written, was written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have
hope, namely constantly for the love of the kingdom of God to stand in the
day of trial. For as the word of God is pure, simple, and without any kind
of spot or wrinckle: So it requires those that be professors thereof, to be
pure simple and constant, without deceit, without dissimulation or hypocrisy.
For The world and the multitude cannot abide the truth.
the world and the multitude, love shifts, starting holes and means to
deceive God and good men: And therefore brag the enemies of God and say, they
have the whole world on their side, the greatest part of people. And the reason
is, because their devises and traditions are of the world. For says Christ
unto his disciples, if you were of the world the world would love you, but I
have chosen you out of the world, and therefore does the world hate you. We see
then that the way to become true christians, is not to join with the
multitude, to tread the steps of the greatest part of the world, for so shall
we shake hands with the Elders and rulers, with the whole troop of the Jews,
with Pilate, with Herod, and the Emperors power, to rise up against Christ
and his truth (as now the greatest part of the world do) which God forbid, many
are called but few are All that hear the word of God of not the servants of
god
chosen. Then are not the greatest part of the world, that hear the word of
God, the servants of God. The truth is not tied to the multitude, nor to the
outward show of colored christian conversation, but he that fears the
Lord (which is in the heart) and works righteousness (which is also in the
outward conversation) is accepted with him. The multitude then make not any
thing at all for us or against us, the truth shall (no doubt) triumph and
mightily prevail, when we shall see Pharaoh of Rome, and all the huge host of
his confederacy over thrown in the red sea of their own inventions. For he
that brought Israel out of Egypt, he that dried up the red sea, he that
brought water out of the God that wrought so wonderfully for our fathers of
old will work for us.
hard rock, and he that has done so many wonderful things for our fathers
of old, which we may apply for our comfort, he which has brought forth
and revealed so many treacheries and treasons against our most gracious
Queen, and commonweal of late days practiced, he, even he shall deliver us
from the Romish tyranny, he shall dry up the sea of their blouddy
conspiracies, that they shall not touch us, or hinder us, but shall turn them
even upon their own pates, he shall bring the water of perfect knowledge out
of the rock of his word, whereof all the faithful of the world shall
drink. Therefore with a loving consent, let us make the sweet harmonye of
thanks giving for his most gracious deliverance, for which our mouths may
rightlye be filled with laughter at the foolish devises of these wicked men,
and our hearts be replenished with joy of the merciful protection of the
Lord, who has (as we see) done great things for us already, for which
every true Christian has great cause to rejoice.

The righteous love to speak of this they love to consider it, and likewise to
praise the the mighty power of the God of heaven for the performance of it. If
the children of Israel were much bound unto the goodness of God for their
deliuerye from the bondage of their bodies in Our delivery from the Romish
bondage is far more precious then of the children of Israel out of Egypt. A
good exchange. Our salvation stands in the true knowledge and service of
God.
Egypt: how far greater cause have we to think our selves bound unto the
mighty hand of God, and his aboundaunt mercies, that has brought us out of the
bondage of soul and body from the Romish Babylon, changing our spiritual
captivity into spiritual liberty, black idolatry into the true service of
God, in knowledge and true service of whom stands our salvation, our
assured help and infallible defense against the multitude of all the
adversaries of Gods truth. Let us therefore rejoice and singe that most
acceptable song which most pleases Reformation of our lives is the svvetest
song that pleases the Lord.
the Lord, namely the unfeigned reformation of lives, and conforming them after
a more dutiful sort to God and Christ, that our conuersations before men may
witness our perfect Christianity, and our certain being the children of God,
let us beautify the chambers of our hearts, with the flourishinge branches of
a godly life, let us morti^ie and kill all those evil and perverse affections,
which break forth and darken the bright beams of that profession, which every
true christian ought to hold. Let us bear the sails of our conuersations even
with the wind of the word of God. And let the holy Ghost rule the stern and
guide the rowder of our desires, least that we crack the bark of our
religion against the rocks of slanderous toonges: So shall our adversaries
be ashamed to mutter against us, for living contrary to that which we
profess, and God who is our only defense shall be pleased with us in his son
Christ, and continue his wonted protection toward us in this life, so that we
his little flock shall not be dismayed at any rumors of wars, and other
like threats of Gods enemies, but shall (though not of any deserts of ours
worthy) in the end through the merits of Christ, be partakers of the kingdom
of heaven, which God for his Christ's sake grant us. Amen.

A Psalm of praise, wherein the mercy, the love, the providence, strength,
and wisdom of God is remembered, his mindfulnes of the afflictions, and
dangerous estate of his servants, in the time of their greatest need, and the
deserved confusion of the adversaries of his truth, briefly declared.
Oh Ioua Domine noster, quam nobile est tuum nomen in toto terrarum orb?

I Will praise the Lord, with all my heart, and show forth all his marvelous
works.

2 I will be joyful and rejoice in thee, oh Lord, I will sing praises unto
thee, oh thou most highest.

3 For thou have turned back mine enemies, thou have thrown down those that
devised mischief against me: yea thou have reproved the wicked, and turned
their vain hope to naught, and their counterfeyt glory into open ignominy and
reproach.

4 Thou have taken my cause in hand, maynteyned my right, and preserved me,
thou sitting in the seat of judgment, have showen thy self an upright Judge.

5 Thou have rebuked the multitude of those ungodly ones, that have sought the
dishonor of thy name, the spoil of thy sanctuary, and blood of thine
anointed.

6 In so much as I may, to my comfort, say unto them, and to the chief
Captains of their multitudes, Oh enimye, the destructions that thou did
threaten, wherein thou vainly vauntedst to destroy Cities, to subvert Kingdoms,
and to extinguish the memory of the godly from of the earth (behold) thou thy
self consumest, the breath of the Lords mouth shakes thee, thy triumphing
before the victory, sounds forth thy perpetual shame, and deserved confusion.

7 The Lord, whose true service, thou seek to violate, and whose servant
thou seek to supplant, has an everlasting dominion, and he sits in
judgment, to give unto every man his due right.

8 It is he that only rules and governs the whole world with righteousness,
and with the balance of his truth and equity discideth every man's cause.

9 It is he that is the strong and a defensible Tower, to such as are
oppressed, an assured refuge to the afflicted, and an undoubted revenger of
such as seek to lay violent hands upon his anointed.

10 And therefore as many as know thy name, (Oh Lord) thy mercy and strength,
will put their confidence in thee, for thou never forsakest, but duly
relieuest, and protectest those that truly seek thee.

11 Oh sing praises, sing praises therefore unto the Lord, that has his
dwelling on high, and yet so beholds all such as are true of heart, let us
declare unto al people the worthy acts which he has done for us already,
whereof great cause we have to rejoice in him.

12 He seeks and finds out such as are desirous to shed blood, and thirste
after the destruction of his anointed, showing himself most mindful of
those that love him, and forgets not to deliver such as are in danger, and
winketh not at the wicked.

13 Have mercy (Lord) upon me, oh thou that have miraculouslye defended me from
deaths door. Consider how mine enemies yet cease not to imagine mischief
against me, and to lay violent hands upon my guiltles person, thou my
strength and aid, consider it, and deliver me.

14 That I may with joy sing forth thy worthy praises and entering into Syon,
may reioysingly declare, that thou art he that sauest me, by whom I stand,
and by whom my enemies are thrown down on every side of me.

15 A huge multitude of enemies have risen up against me, but thou have
brought it so to pass that they are overwhelmed with the sloud they devised to
bring in upon me, they are fallen into the pit they dug for me, and they
are strangled in the snare, they laid priuelie for me. This oh Lord is thy
doing, and it is comfortable even unto my soul.

16 Oh Lord thy wisdom is unsearchable, thy love incomprehensible, and thy
mercyes wonderful, and thy judgment known by executing justice, upon such
as use crafty wylenes against the innocent.

17 Rise up, rise up (oh lord) in the behalf of thy servant, let not thy
ha^dmayd be always forgotten, let not her hope, which she has always in thy
defense, be frustrate, let not the wicked prevail, in the crafty conspiracies
which they imagined: Cast them down (oh Lord) and let the effect of their
devises show their folly, and themselves to be but mortal men.

Esai. 35. 3. 4. Confirmate manus languidas, and labantia corroborate genua:
Dicite animifestinis, este fortes, and impauidi, en Deus vester vltor veniet,
praemiator Deus, ipse veniet seru^tum vos.
Non vi, sed veritate.
FINIS.

