THE RVLE OF THE MOST BLISSED* FATHER SAINT BENEDICT PATRIARCH OF ALL MVNKES.

Tu iuxta Regulam Patrum vivere stude: maxim autem Consessoris Sancti
BENEDICTI, ne declinas ab ea quoquam, nec illi addas quidquam nec minu^. Totum
quod sufficit habet and numquam minus habet. Gregorius Mag. in manuscripta.

Endeavor to live conformable to the Rule of the Fathers, Butt especially of
the Confessor Saint Benedict, do not swerue any way from itt* neither add you
any thing to itt, nor take any thing a way* for itt has that which
suffices, and it in nothing defective.

Printed at Gant by I^OS DOOKS.

TO THE HONORABLE, RIGHT REVER END AND HER MOST RESPECTED LADY THE LADY
EVGENIA POVLTON* ABBESS OF THE ENGLISH MONASTERY OF THE HOLY ORDER OF S.
BENEDICT IN GANT.
Honorable, and Right Reverend Madame
NEVER do the new risinge sun spreede forth his beams, with out a new
comfort to the behoulders; neither does the splendours yealded to so many
days, years, and ages, any whitt deminish the accustomed solace taken by the
new Spectatours. And can I doubt this glorious sun, our Rule, a bright beam
of divine light, newely raised to shine in this place, by your lady ships
predicessour and your endeavor, bring less them wonted joy to the inioyers,
and though itt has illustrated the world, for many days, years, and ages,
with so clear beams of Illustrious sanctity, cannonizinge with glorious
triu^ph more the^ 3000 saints* brought from the obscurity of idolitry, to the
light of faith, 33 nations adorned the Church with 15000 Bishopps 7000
Archbishops 200^ Cardinals, and twentye four Popes, most of which shined unto
the world, as brighte^ stars having taken there luster and light, as from the
sun, from this glorious Rule. Not to numbe^ the innumerable florishinge
monasteryes, the shininge and illustrious Doctors, and writters, the intyre
and purest Virgins, fruits, which this holy rule, as a most comfortable
sun, has produced, fostered, and brought up to inlighte^ and illustrait,
both with word, writings and examples, of singular sanctitye, the whole
Occident all church, Can I (as Isay) yet douht, that the vigor there of, is any
whitt deminished, butt rather as an experienced and an eye witness can I
auere, new comfort, joy, and solace, raised in the minds, and hares, of the
new Embracers, who under your ladyshipps government, happily do a new enjoy
the splendor of that light, and most comfortably do partake the fire of
charity, which with herbeames, she does inkindle in our hearts. Give me
therefore leave, most Respected Madame, though after many ages, to let this so
holy a rule spreed her rays a broad in our English tongue, under your
ladishippes protection, that as you instill the love of it in our hearts, so
you would make itt obuious to our Eyes, and a monge the rest to hers, who
desires to remain as she this day is become.

Your Ladishipps. Professed and vowed child, ALEXIA GRAY.

THE BREVE OF S. GREGORY POPE FOR THE CONFIRMATION OF THE RVLE OF SAINT
BENEDICT.
I Gregory Pralat of the holy Roman Church have writ, the life of Saint
Benedict, and read the Rule which the Saint has written with his own hand, I
have praised itt, and I have confirmed itt in a Holy Counsel, and have
commanded, that through sundry parts of Italy, and whersoeuer the Latin tongue
is used, itt should he exactly, observed by all whosoever to the end of the
worlds, should come to a retired life. And I also consitme the 12. Monasteryes
the holy Saint erected.

Ex originali in Monasterio sublacensi*

THE BVLL OF ZACHARY POPE Successor to Saint GREGORY* THE GREAT FOR THE
APPROBATION, OF THE RVLE OF THE MOST HOLY S. BENEDICT,
ZACHARY Bishop, servant of the servants of God. To all redeemed by the
blood of Christ, wishes health and Apostolical Benediction. We give
thanks to Almighty God, whose mercy is more dear then life, that he i^
glorious and admirable in his Saints* and ^istow^^^ with unspeakable bounty
hi^ virtues, and gif^es. For he has putt the most Blessed BENEDICT to be the
Father of all Munkes. He through the meri^ts of this Saint, has made the
monastery of Cassina placed in the ground of Tertullus Patritius* to (...)
above all the Monasteryes in the world. where the Saint writ the Rule of
Munkes, which our predicessour of holy memory Greg. has abundantly approved
and praised in his book of Diologs, and we approve and praise, and declare
itt to be holy, and in the dedication of that holy church while we are there
with therteen Arckbishoppes* threscore and eight Bishopes do ordain
appointing that wh^ soever shall dare to contradict itt, be excommunicated

FINIS.
THE RVLE OF OUR HOLY FATHER S.t BENETT.
THE PREFACE
HARKEN daughter to the commaundme^t of God thy Master: and inclyne the ear of
thy heart, and willingly receive the admonition, of thy pitiful Father, and
put it in execution; to the end thou may return again unto him by the
labor of thy obedience; from whom thou deddist depart by the negligence of thy
disobedience. To thee therefore, which dest renounce thyn own will with
intention to fight under Christ the true king, and to take upon thee the
strong armor of obedience these words are addressed; first of all desire thou
by most instant prayer, that that good work which thou purposest to begin, in
the may be perfected, that he who has vouch safed to accu^t us in the number
of his Children might not be contristated by our misdemeanour; and so we
must always obey him with those good parts that are in us, that not only he
may not at any time like an angry Father desinheritt us his children, nor like
a dreadful lord provoked by our offenses, adiudge us as naughty servants to
perpetual punishment, which would not follow him to his Glory; Now therefore
at lenght let us rise, the holy Scripture exciting us saying. Now is the hour
to rise out of sleep and with open eyes and attentive ears let us behold the
divine splendour, and hear that which the voice of God daily crying does
admonish saying. If this day you shall hear his voice harden not your hearts.
and again: he which has ears to hear let him hear what the spirritt
says to the Churches; and what says it. Come he there Children give ear to
me, I will teach you the Fear of our lord God Runn while you have the light
of life* lest the darcknesse of death ouerreach you. And God seeking his labor
our amongst the Common sort of people, says furthermore: what man is he that
wishes life and has a desire to see gooddayes? and if thou hearing this do
make answer saying, I am he. God says unto thee again, it you wilt enjoy a
true everlasting life refrain thy tongue from evil and thy lips from uttering
lies and deceipts, shunn ewill and do that which is good, seek peace and
pursue it; and at what time you shall do this, mine eyes shall watch over you,
and mine ears shall be attentive unto your prayers and before you shall call
upon me I will say unto you, be hold I am present, what thing dear Sisters
can be more pleasant to you, then this voice of God which thus does in vite
you behold how our lord of his Bounty, has Vouchsafed to show you the way of
life; having therefore our loins girt with faith and the observance of Good
Works, and our Feet shodd by guydance of the Gospel, let us go forware
in this way, that we may deserve to see him in his kingdom who has bestowed
upon us this holy Vocation; In the Tabernacle of whose kingdom if we desire
to dwell, let us labor earnesly to do good works, for none comes
thither, but by means of their good deserving; let us demand of God, saying
unto him with the holy Prophet, lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle or who
shall rest in thy holy hill? after we have asked this question, let us give
ear unto God answearing, and shewnig us the way, leading unto this Tabernacle
saying, he that walks without blemish of Sin, and does that which is most
just and righteous, who speaks truth in hishart, and forgeth noe Guyle in his
tongue: who does noe wrong to his Neighbor, and receaueth noe reproath against
his Neighbor, who has cast out of his heart that wicked Tempter the devil
with all his persuasions, and has brought both him and his suggestions to
naught, and has taken his Cogitations while they were new and little, and has
dashed them against the Rooke, which is Christ who fearing god take not pride
in their well doing, but beleiuing that the good they have proceeds not of
any power of theirs, but rather from our lord, and therefore they praise and
gloryfy him, thus working in them saying with the Prophett. Not unto us lord
not unto us, but give Glory unto thy holy name, as S. Paul the Apostle
attributed not unto him self, that followed of his preaching, for he says,
by the grace of God I am that I am, and moreover he adds, he that will
glory, let him glory in our lord. And therefore our lord says in the
Gospel, every one that hears these my words and does them, shall be likned
to a wise man, that buylt his house upon a Rock, the Floods came the winds
blew, and they beat against the house and it fell not, for it was founded
upon ^ Rock, our lord proceeding with us in the same manner daily expects
that we should be correspondent to his holy admonitions; and therefore the
days of this present life are afforded unto us in a manner of a truce, that
there* in we might amend our wickedness as the Apostle says, know thou
not that the benignity of God brings thee to Penance, for our morcifull lord
says, I will not the death of a Sinner but that he should be converted and
live, therefore my good sisters when we have Demanded of God, that person
which is to dwell in his holy Tabernacle, we understand the precept annexed to
that habitation, so that if we full fill the duty of Inhabitants we shall be
Inheritours of the heavenly kingdone, Come therefore and let us prepare our
hearts and bodies to serve in the holy obedience of his Commandments, and that
which nature is not able to work in us, let us beeseech Almighty God that he
will assist us with his holy grace, and if we desire to Fly Hell Pains, and
to attain unto everlasting life, while now we may, and that we are in this
mortal life, that we may atchiue all these things by the light of grace, now
must we run, now must we labor for that which may be expedient for us for
ever hereafter we must therefore set up a School to teath the Service of
God therein, wherein we hope nothing shall be tought by us to ^igerous or to
heavy, but if we proceed some what the more stricktly according to the Rule
of Reason, for the correcting of Vice and Conservation of Charity, thou must
not therefore upon Fear fortwith abandon the way of thy Salvation, which
cannot be begun but by a narrow Entrance, not with standing after some time
rymployed in this Conversation at pleasure thou shall run in the way of Gods
Commandments, having they heart

dilated by true Faith and with unspeakable sweetness of Charity, in such
sort as we never forsaking the School of God, but persisting in his Doctrine,
perseuering there in even until death in the Monastery, we may be made
pertakers of Christ's pains and Passion. so that hereafter we may deserve to
be his Compartners in his glorious kingdom.

HERE BEGINS THE RVLEOF OUR HOLY FATHER S. BENEDICT* OF FOUR SORTS OF
RELIGIOUS.
CHAP 1.
IT is manifest that there are four sorts of those which lead the monastical
life; the first are Cenobites that is to say Conuentuall, trained up in a Rule
under an Abbott or Abbess. The second is of Anachorites that is to say, of
Hermites, these are those that with noe Nouitiall feruor or heat of their new
Conversion, but after long trial of the Monastical life, have learned by the
aid and hartning of many to sight against the devil, and being well armed may
securely without the Consolation of any (only assisted with the Grace of God)
by there own force alone, proceed from their Fraternall Army, to undertake
the betayle against all their vices of their Flesh and Cogitations; The third
sort and that very pernitions, is of those which are called Sarabaites, who
tried by noe Rule, which is the Mistress of experience, they seem^ like unto
the gould of the furnace, but ye^ like unto soft lead, still by their works
adhering to the world, are known by their tonsure how unfaithful and
dissoyall they are unto God, who by twoes or threes o^ alone by themselves
without any Pastor o^ Sheapherd shutt up in their own Foulds* and not in the
Fould of our Lord, they take the pleasure of their own Wills, liking for their
Law, in accounting for holy whatsoever they shall think to be good, or of
wha^ soever they shall make election, and that to be only unlawful which is
not according to their Taste; The Fourth sort is of those who are called.
Vagabonds which spend all their life in running up and dawne indiuers
Provinces, and lodge for two or three days in diverse Monasteryes, always
walking and never settled, but at all times and at all places subject to their
own pleasures and Gluttony; so as thy are in all things fa^ worse then the
Sarabaits whose miserable kind of life it is better to pass over with Silence
then to make any longer discourse of the same. Omitting therefore all these,
let us by the aid of God come to set down the order of the Cenobites which
is the strongest and durablest sort of all.

What a Kind of Person the Abbess ought to be.
CHAPTER 2.
THE Abbess which is worthy to have the care of the Monastary, ought always
to bear in mind her calling, and to express in her actions that which by her
name is signified: for she is to bear Christ's person in the Monastary, seeing
she has his title as the Apostle says, you have received the Spirit of
adoption of Children of God, in which we call him Abba Father; wherefore the
Abbess ought not to teach, ordain, or command any thing which (as God for
bid) should ^ee against the Commandments of our Lord, but her doctrine and
commaunde^ents ought to season the hearts of her diciples as though it were the
Leaven of Gods divine Justice, let the Abbess always remember that an
examination must ^ee made of her doctrine, and of her Schol^ers obedience, and
that both together in ^he dreadful day of Judgment of Almighty God. And let
the Abbess understand that ^t is imputed to the Pasters fault, what want of
proffitt soever the Lord and Master may happen to find in his sheep, yet no^
with standing she shall be freed if she has bestowed all her diligence upon
her vnquiett and disobedient Flock, and that all her care has been ymployed
to heal their corrupt and diseased meanners, so^ their Pastors being set free
in the Judgment of God, may say with the Prophett to our lord, I concealed not
thy Justice in my heart I Declared thy Truth ad Salvation, but they contemning
despised me, and upon the Sheep which disobeyed her care and solicitude,
just punishment shall be inflicted, to wit, death it self; when there fore any
takes upon her the name of an Abbess* she ought to govern her Scholars,
with two sorts of Doctrynes, that is to say rather to show them all goodness
and virtue, or holiness in her life, then in her words; that she propose in
words alone the Commandments of God to those that are capable of
Instructions, but to those that are harde^ hearted or more simple, she must
show the^ the will of God by her life and external behavior; Therefore what
soever she shall teach to be hurtful to her Scholars, let her show by her
own actions, that they must in noe case admit it; lest she preaching well
unto others, should be found herself to be a Reprobate; and lest God might
say unto her, offending in this manner, why de^larest thou my Justices, and
take upon thee by thy Mouth, to talk of my law? thou have hated all
disciplyne and have cast my words behind thy back, and thou which ^^ddest see
a Straw in thy Brothers eye, ^idst not espy a Beam in thine own; By her let
noe difference of persons be made in the Monastery, let not one be more
favored then an other, except ^^bee such a one who^ she shall find to be
better then the rest in her good behavior and obedience, let not the noble
be praeferred before her, which was before her Connertion of a base or servile
Condition; except t^ere shall be some reasonable cause besides; And if foe be,
that upon just Couside^^tion it shall seem good to the Abbess, let her so
behave her self in the several degrees of each person: for otherwise let
every one keep her own place; for wheter bond or Free; we are all in our
lord and S^uiour Christ, and we bear the burden of equal Servitude under
one and the self fame lord, for there is noe exception of Persons with God,
herein we be distinguished by him of we be found better then others in our
well doing and of more humility; therefore let ^er bear an equal affection
to all, let one manner of disciplyne be observed toward, all according to
their merits and deserts. The Abbess in he^ manner of teaching ought always
to observe that manner and Form of the Apostle, according to whith he says
convince* entreat sharply, reprehend* that is tempering one ty^e with
another, f^yre words with Sharp threatenings, let her show the severity of a
Mistress, and again the loving affection of a Mother, that is to say ^he
ought to reprehend sharply the vnquiett, and those that will observe no^
discipline; and by entreaty to Deal with the obedient me^ke and patient, that
they will labor to go still forward; But we advise her that she reprehend
sharply and correct those that are negligent and despisers of disciplyne;
Neither let her wink at the faults of those which offend, but as soon as any
Vice begins to spring let her cut it of by the Roots with all her forces
possible bearing always in mynne the perilows punishment of Hely the Priest
in Silo* let her reprehend with only Words the more honest and docible
natures for the first and second time, but let her punish with bodyly
punishment and blows the stubborn hard hearted and disobedient, so soon as
ever they h^^e offended, knowing that it is written; the fool with words will
no^ be amended, and again strike thy Ghild with the Rodd, and thou shall
deliver his Soul from death; The Abbess ought to Remember always who she
is, and what her name imports, and to know that to whom the more charge is
committed, the more of them must be exacted; and let her consider ^ow hard
and important a matter she has taken in hand, as the gouerement of Souls,
and to accommodate her self to so diverse ^umours, and that she must conform
her self to every one, to this Sister with sweet in treating to another with
hard threatenings to another with forcible persuasions according to the
Condition and Capacity of every one that not only she suffer noe do^age in
the Flock committed to her charge; but that she may take Joy in the daily
increase and augmentation of her good and virtuous Troop: but above all let
her take heed lest with dissemblyng* and little esteeming the good of Souls
committed unto her change, she have not too much care of things that are
transitory, earthly, and mortal; but let her above all bear in mind
always that she has taken in hand the goue^nment of Souls, for which one
day she must render an account; and that ^he may not complain of the s^ender
Subs^ace of her Monastery let her remember what is written; First seek the
kingdom of God and the ustice of him, and all o her things shall be given you
besides; and again nothing is wanting to those which fear him; And let the
Abbess consider with herself that as she has taken upon her the charge of
other folks Souls, so must she provide to give up an account for them, and
see how many Sisters are under her direction, so le^t her most certainly know
that she must give a reckning to our lord in the day of Judgment for their
Souls, and that without all doubt besides the Reckning she must make for her
own Soul; The Sheephard shall endure for all the Sheep which was put to her
charge, whiles she dilligetly provides for the giving up of other Folks
account* she shall also thereby be made more careful of her own; and while
by her dilligent admonition, she procures the amendment of others, she
herself is cleared and set free from her own.

Of the manner how to call and admit^ the sisters to Counsel;
CHAPTER 3.
SO often as any business of great importance falls out to be done in the
Monastary. let the Abbess call together the whole convent and let her give
them notice what is there to be handled; And having heard the advice of her
sisters let her consider well there of with her self, and then let her putt
in execution that, which she judges to be most expedient, we therefore said
that all should be called to Counsel, for that our lord often times
reuealeth to the younger* that which may be the best; But the Sisters must so
give their advise, that it be with all humility and submission, so that they
may not presume stiffly to stand to their own opinion, but they may rather
^ely upon the Abbesses Judgment that what soever she shall Judge to be the
more fit, to that the rest may submitt themselves; but as it is convenient the
Scholars should obey their Mistress, so again it is thought meet that she
should prouidently and justly dispose of all things, Therefore let them all in
all things follow the rule of their Mistress* neither let any be so bold as
to swerve from it; in the Monastery none must follow her own hearts desire,
Neither let any Dare to presume arrogantly to contend with he^ Abbess; either
with in or without she Monastery, and if any should happen to be so
presumtious, let her be submitted under reguler disciplyne and Correction;
Not with standing let the Abbess do all things with the fear of God; and
according to the Rule, knowing that without all doubt she is to yeald an
account to God the most righteous Judge of all her Judgments, yet if any other
things happen for the Commodity of the Monastery which are of less
importance, she may only use the Counsel of the Seniours, according to that
which is written; Do all thy affairs with Counsel, and after thou have done
so, it shall not repent thee.

Of the Instruments of good Works.
CHAPTER 4
1. THE first Instrument is above all things to love god whith all thy heart
with all thy Soul, and with all thy Force

2. And thy Neighbor as thy self.

3. To do noe murder;

4. To committ noe Adultery;

5. Not to steal;

6. To have noe unlawful desires;

7. To bear noe false Witness;

8. To honor every one,

9. Not to do that to others which she would not have done to her self;

10. To deny her self that she may the better follow Christ;

11. To Chastise the body;

12. To seek after noe pleasures or delights.

13. To love Fasting,

14. To help the poor,

15. To Cloth the naked;

16. To Visitt the Sick;

17. To bury the Dead;

18. To assist those that are in Tribulation

19. To Comfort those that are in grief or Desolation.

20. To with draw herself from the affairs and businesses of the World.

21 To prefer nothing before the love of Christ.

22. Not to work her anger.

23. Not to watch for a time where in to execute and accomplish it;

24. To conceal noe guyle in her heart;

25. Not to make a feigned peace;

26. Neither to leave Charity;

27. Neither to swear lest she for swear^

28. To tell the Truth both in thought and word.

29. Not to requite ill with ill again;

30. To do injury to none, but to suffer patiently, what soever injury is
offered her;

31. To love her Enemies;

32. Not to speak ill of those that speak ill of her, but rather to speak
Well of them, and to pray for them;

33. To endure persecution for Justice sake

34. Not to be Proud;

35. Not to be a Dronkard;

36. Not to be an over great eater;

37. Not to be given to sleep and Idleness;

38. To be noe Murmurer;

39. To be noe Detracter;

40. To repose all her hop in our God.

41. If she see any good in her self, to attribute it unto god, and not unto
her self but what souer evil she has let her know that it comes from
herself, and so to impute it to herself;

42. To dread the day of Judgment;

43. To have a Fear of Hell;

44. With all her force to desire the everlasting life;

45. To have always her death before her eyes?

46. To have a continual eye to her Actions;

47. To know that she is most certaynely in the sight of god;

48. To Crush quickly her evil Cogitations as they come with Remembrance of
Christ, and to manifest them to her ghostly Father;

49. To keep her Mouth from evil and in convenient speaking;

50. Not to love much talking;

51. To use noe vain words or which might move to laughter;

52. To avoid much and D^ssolute laughter

53. To hear willingly Devout and holy lessons;

54. To give her self much to prayer;

55. To confess each day to god, in her prayers her naughty life and offenses,
with Tears and Sorrow, and afterward to amend her self of them;

56. Never to fulfill her sensual and carnal desires?

57. To hate her own will;

58. To be obedient in all things to the Commandments of the Abbess al
though she, (which God forbidd) should do otherwise then in duty she ought
to do; remembering what God commands, do that which your Superiors say,
and not what they do;

59. Not to desire to be esteemed good* before she is so, but let her be
so, that truly she may be accounted so;

60. To full fill effectually Gods Commandments;

61. To love Chastity.

62. To hate none;

63. To bear envy and an evil mind toward none;

64. To love noe manner of brabling and brawling;

65. To sly vanting and bragging;

66. To honor her Elders;

67. To love her Iuniours in Jesus Christ;

68. To pray for her Enemies*

69. To return unto peace and concord which those with whom she has
disagreed and that before the Sun got down;

70. And never to mistrust the Mercyes of God.

Behold here the Instruments of the spiritual art, which if we fulfill
continually, Day, and night, having laid them up against the day of Judgment;
the Crown which he has promised shall be given unto us; The eye has not
seen, the ear has not heard, nor the heart conceived, that which God has
prepared for those which love him The shopp where we may Dilligently exercise
all these things is the Monastery and constant perseverance in the Congregation;

Of the obedience of the sisters;
CHAPTER 5.
OBEDIENCE without delay is the first degree of humility, that which is most
delightful unto those unto whom nothing is more dear then Jesus Christ, in
respect of that holy service which they have vowed unto him, or for the fear
of hell* or for the Glory of that life, which is ever to endure, so soon as
any thing is commanded them by their Superior, they can endure noe delay in
acco^plishing it; as though the Commandment was made unto them by God
himself, of whom our lord says in the hearing of his ear he has obeyed
me, and he says unto Prelates, w^oe so hears you hears me, Therefore
all such persons, forsaking forth with that which ^iketh their own Fancy and
will, and leaning the works of their hands, about which they were occupied
unfinished and vnpe^ fited; let them presently with the Foot ^ obedience
follow the voice of the Comm^ under, and in one and the self some mom^ let
the Action of the Scholar be vnit^ with the Commandment of the Mistress i^
all diligence and in the Fear of God, which twoe things are most como^ly
acco^plish^ by those that have a desire to go to the eue^ during life, and
therefore they take the na^row may which leads unto life, to the en^ they way
not live at their own will and ple^sure, but to live and walk after the
Iudgm^ and commandment of another, living in* Monastery, and desiring to have
an Abbess and Prelate over them; without all doub such persons as these, follow
that sentenc^ of our lord where in he say^h: I came no to do my own will,
but the will of hi^ that sent me; Then shall this obedience be agreeable unto
God, and delightful vn^^ men; if that which is commanded be accomplished not
timorously slowly, or wit^ murmuration, or with an answer, as it were of one
who had noe mind or will to obey: for the obedience which is done to
Superiors, is done to God; For heesa y^ who so hears you hears me; and
it is necessary that the Scholars obey with agood and a merry Chee^e, for God
loves the merry giver; For if she obey with a repining heart* al though she
murmur not whith her mouth, but only in her heart, and yet fullfilleth that,
which is commanded, not with standing it will not be grateful to God, which
behouldeth the heart of the Murmurer; and by such an Action she obtayneth noe
Grace af all; but deserves the scourge of such as are Murmurers, except she
Repent her and make due satisfaction by her amendment;

Of Silence.
CHAPTER. 6
LET us fulfill that which the Prophett says, I have said I will keep my
ways that I offend not with my Tongue, I have put a watch be fore my Mouth, I
became speeth less, and humbled my self, and held my peace in those things,
that where good; here the Prophett shows, that some times we must not speak
of good matters and that in regard of silence, how much more ought we to keep
our Mouths from naughty and vain talk, for fear of committing Sin thereby,
therefore the perfect Sister may rarely have license to talk, though otherwise
of good and holy matters, in regard of the great decency of silence; for it is
writ in many words thou shall not eschew sinn^ and in another place, life and
death is in the power of a Tongue; for it belongs to the Mistress to speak and
to instruct, and ^ apportayneth to the Scholar to give ear^ and keep silence;
And therefore if you hau^ need to demand anything of the Abbess do it with
all humility submission, an^ Reverence. We utterly condemn by the
perpetual prohibition, in all places to vs^ any scurrell speech, or idle
words, giuin^ cause to laughter, and we do not permit that the Sisters ever
open their Mouth to an^ such manner of talk.

Of the sundry and manifold Commendations of Humility.
CHAPTER. 7
SIsters the holy Scripture cries out unto us and says, he whichexalteth
himself shall be numbled and he which humbleih himself shall be exalted; and
in so saying it declares unto us that all exaltation is a kind of Pride,
from which how dilligently the Prophett kept himself he shows when he
says; olord my ^art was not exalted, and my eyes were not borne aloft, neither
have I walked in marvelous things above my self, but what if I have not
^^ought humbly of my self, and if I have ex^^ted my Soul then let me be
rewarded (...) such sort, as the Child that is separated from ^^s mothers
breast and therefore Sisters if we will reach to the topp of this sovereign
humility, let us by our Actions tending to ^eauen wards, rear up the ladder
which ^^peared to Jacob in his sleep, on which the ^ngells were seen to
ascend and descend* this ascent and descent gives us to understand nothing else
but the exaltation which proceeds of humblyng our selfs and the descent
which is by exalting our selfs; And this ladder thus erected may be said to
be our life in this world. the which by humili^le of heart, god lifts up to
heaven; and we say our Soul and body are the sides of this ladder, where in
his divine Vocation has ^ett diverse digrees of humility or discipline where
by to ascend upward.

Of the first degree of humility.
THE first degree is if she have the fear of God before her hyes, and that
she take heed that she never for get herself, and that she continually
bear in memory all which God has commanded, and how those which contemn god
shall endure the pains of Hell for their Sins and offenses and that she
have always her heart settled on the everlasting life, which is ordained for
those that fear our lord, and that she keep herself at all hours and
moments from Sin, and Vice, either of the thought, of the Tongue, of the eyes,
of the hand, of the Feet, of her own will, and that she endeauou^ to root
out all fleshly desires, let each one consider that she is continually in the
sight of God, which is in heaven, and to be seen with his deuyne eyes, and at
all moments to be presented before him, by holy Angels; The Prophet shows
this when he declares that god is privy to our very cogitations, saying. God
searches the hearts and Raynes; And again he says God knows the
Cogitations of me, and more over thou understand my Cogitations a far of;
and an other time, the thought of man shall bewray it self to thee; therefore
to the end she may be careful of her ill Cogitations let the humble Sister
always say in her heart. I shall then be pure and fair in the sight of God;
when I shall keep my self from all ^niquitie; We are forbidd to do our own
Wills when the Scripture says unto us leave your Wills, and we say to god in
our prayers, that his Will be done in us; Therefore we are taught not to do
our own Wills, when we look to that which the Scripture says, there are
some ways which seem unto men to be right good, the end where of leads to
the botto melesse pit of hell; and also we shall avoid that which is said
of the negligent, that they become Corrupt livers, and abominable in their
delights, let us sted fastly believe that God is still present to all our
carnal desires, according to the Words of the Prophett spoken to god, before
thee are all my desires; Therefore we must esch ew all evil desires, for
death stands near to the entry of delectation* And therefore the Scripture
says, follow not thy Concupiscences; If therefore the eyes of God behold both
good and badd, and if the god of heaven look down upon the sons of men, to
see if there be any that attend and seek after God, and if the Angels that
are appointed to keep us night and day show our works unto our Creator* we
must therefore good Sisters be ever Watchful to that which the Prophett says
in his Psalm, that god see us not at any time declyning unto ill and becoming
unprofitable, and though he pardon us for the present because he is
mereifull, and expects that we convert our selves to a better life, yet give
him not occasion to say hereafter, thou have committed these things and I held
my peace and said not a word;

Of the 2. Degree of Humility;
THE second degree is, if any not loving her own will, take noe pleasure to
work her own desires, but follows in her manner of living the voice of our
lord, which says, I came not to do my own will, but the will of him that
sent me; also the Scripture says, that the Will has pain, and necessity
purchases the Crown;

Of the third Degree of Humility;
THE third Degree is when she renders her self subject in all obedience to
her Superior, for the love of God, inuitating there in our lord of whom the
Apostle says, that he was obedient even unto death.

Of the fourth degree of Humility*
THE fourth degree is, if in obedience exercised in hard, yea in Contrary
matters and in what soever iniuryes are done* her, she inbrace patience in her
Conscience with all Secrecy, and is not wearyed of suffering and yealdeth not,
the Scripture saying who so shall persevere unto the end shall be saved; and
again be courageous of heart, and atte^d our lords pleasure; And the Scripture
(showing us that the loyal Christian ought to endure all things for gods sake
though they be never so contrary) says in the person of the patient man; for
the love of thee, we die each day, we are esteemed as sheep destinated to the
slaughter; and being by hope assured of the reward at Gods hands, they say with
comfort that which follows, But in all shese things we overcome by the
healpe of him which loves us all, so the Scripture says in another place;
Thou have suffered us to be let down into the lake, and have laid tribulation
upon our backs; and for to show us that we ought to be subject to our
Superiors, it follows, thou have set men over our heads; fullfilling also
with patience the commandments of God in what soever adversities and iniuryes
may be offered; If being struck on the one Cheek they turn the other, and
let go their Cloak to him that takes their Coatt, when one forces them to
go one mile let them walk with them two; And enduring with S, Paul the
Apostle the persecution of false brethren; bless those that curse and speak
evil of thee.

Of the 5. degree of Humility:
THE fifth degree is, if she hide not from her Superiors by humble confession
all those naughty Cogitations which proceed from the heart, and the Sin which
she has committed in secrett; The Prophett exhorts us hereunto faying,
Reveal thy ways unto God, and putt thy hope in him; and again it is said,
confess your self to god for he is good, and his mercy endures for ever,
and also the Prophett says, I have manifested to thee my Sin and I have not
Cloaked mine Injustice, I have determined that I will pronounce against my self
my Injustice unto God; and thou have forgiven me the Sin of my heart.

Of the 6. degree of Humility:
THE 6. Degree is if the Religious be content which all baseness and
extremity, and that she judge her self an ill labourer, and unworthy of all
those things which are enjoined her to do, saying which the Prophett; I am
brought to no thing and I know it not, I am like a brute beast toward thee,
and I am always with thee.

The 7. degree of Humility.
THE 7. Degree is, if she not only with the mouth confess, but also from
her heart believe that she is the least and the basest of all others; humbling
her self and saying with the Prophett; I am a worm and not a man, and the
scorn of men and the Refuse of the people, but being exalted, I have been
humbled and confounded. Again, It is good for me that thou have humbled me,
that I may learn to keep thy Commandments*

Of the 8. degree of Humility.
THE eight degree is, if the Religious do nothing else, but as the common Rule
of the Monastery, and the Examples of her Elders teacketh her;

Of the 9. degree of Humility.
THE nynth Degree is if the Religious refrain her tongue from speaking, but
keeping her silence speak not before she be demanded; for the Scripture
shows, much speeck cannot be without Sin and that he which is full of
Tongue shall not well be directed upon earth.

Of the 10. degree of Humility.
THE tenth Degree is if the Religious be not easy and prompt to laughter, for
it is written, the fool laughing exalts his voice.

Of the 11. degree of Humility.
THE cleuenth degree is if the Religious use few words in* her* speath and,
those very reasonable, sweet without laughter humble with gravity, let her
not be clamourous in her voice, as it is written, the wiseman tells his
mind in few words

Of the 12. degree of Humility.
THE twelueth degree is if she not only with her heart, but with her body,
also show all ways humility, unto those which behold her, that is to say
that in her work in the Church, Monastery or Garden or in the way abroude in
the Feilds, or in what Place soever she sit, stand, or walk, she always
hold down her head and fix her eyes on the ground, ever calling to mind that
she is guilty, for her Sins, and offenses, and that she is already
presented before the dreadful Judgment Seat of God, saying that with the
Publican in the Gospel, lord I am not worthy to lift up mine eyes to heaven,
and again with the Prophett, I am plucked down and humbled on every side;
when therefore the Religious shall have mounted over all these degrees of
humilie, she shall come unto that Charity which being perfect expels all
ear, and so that which she kept before not without fear, she shall begin
to keep afterward upon a Custom, and in a natural manner without labor;
not for the fear of evil but for the love of Christ, and by a good Custom,
and for the delight fullnesses he shall find in Virtue; the which our lord
will show with his holy Spirit in his laborer which is free from all Vice and
Sinnefullnesse;

Of the deuyne Office in the night*
CHAPTER. 8.
IN the Winter time, that is from the Kalends or first day of November until
Easter according unto reasonable Consideration they must rise at the eight
hour of the night, so that they may rest a little more then half the night,
and then rise having well digested that which they have eaten, but that time
which remains after Mattins must be employed in holy Meditations, (excepting
those Sisters which have need to learn any thing in their Psalters) and
reading; But from Easter unto the affore said Kalends of November, let so the
time of the watcking be tempered that there may be left some little space,
wherein the Sisters may depart to do that which is needful and necessary unto
nature, that they may incontinently beginn the lauds, which must be said as
soon, as the day appears.

In what manner the deuyne Service is each day to be accomplished;
CHAPTER 9
AS the Prophett says seven times a day I showed forth thy praises, which holy
number of seven shall thus be fullfilled if we pay the duty of our Service
unto him which the hours of mattins, Prime, Terce, Sixth, Nynth, Euensong, and
Complyne, for of these hours the Prophet means, when he says seven times
each day I showed forth thy praise; for of the Nocturne and Service in the
night, the same Prophett says, at Midnight I arose to give praise to thee,
therefore at those times let us give praise unto our Creator, upon the
Judgments of his Justice to wit at the hours of Mattins, Prime, Terce, Ninth,
Euensong, and Complyne, and let us rise in the highest to do honor and
homage unto him;

Of the Disciplyne of singing the divine Service;
CHAPTER 10.
WE believe that God is present in every place and that the eyes of our lord
behouldeth both the good and the badd, yet notwithstanding let us believe this
with out all doubt, especially when we assist at the deuyne Service, bear
therefore in mind that which the Prophett says, serve our lord with fear,
and again sing sauorously, that is with spiritual taste and feeling: And in
the sight and presence of the Angels I will sing unto thee; Therefore let us
Consider how we ought to behave our selfs in his deuyne presence, and before
his holy Angels, and let us so attend to our Song that our thoughts may
accord with our voices;

Of the Reverence which is to be used in Prayer;
CHAPTER 11.
IF when we deliver any Supplication to men of account, we dare not present
our selfs before them but with lowly ^esse and Reverence; therefore With much
humility, Reverence, and purity of Devotion ought one to offer her prayers
unto God the lord of all things, and let us believe that our prayers are not
herd for our babbling, but for purity of heart, and Compunction Joined with
tears; and therefore your prayers ought to be breife and pure, except it be
prolonged by the inspiration of the grace of almighty God; not with standing
let the time of Prayer be short in the Covent, and after the Superior has
given a Sign let them all rise up;

Of the Deanes of the Monastery;
CHAPTER 12.
IF the Congregation shall be great let some Sisters of good Name, and holy
Conversation be chosen from the rest and a^poynted deanes; who are to have
care^ ten other Sisters in all things according ^ the Commaundemens of god and
of the Abbess, the which deanes ought to be el^cted in such sort as the
Abbess may securely part amongst them her burden and charg^ and let them not
be elected according ^ their order, but according to their life, a^ deserts,
and experience of their discretion for if any of them by chance being puffed
up with pride, should be found worth^ of reprehension, being admonished for
the first, second, and third time* if she amen^ not, let her be thrown out
of office, an^ let another succeed that shall be foun^ more worthy of that
place, and the like we^ do appoynte to be done as concerning the Prioresse;

The manner how the Religious ought to Sleep;
CHAPTER. 13.
LET every one sleep alone in a beed by her self, let them receive their
bedding after the manner of their conuertion ^t the disposition and appointment
of the Abbess, let them sleep all in one place if ^ may be conveniently,
but if the great^esse of their Company will not permit it, ^ett them take
their repose by tens and ^wentyes together, with those ancients which have
charge over them, let allways a Candle burn in the dorture until it be
morning, let them sleep in their Clothes girt with ropes, or other girdles,
and while ^hey take their rest, let them have noe ^niues hanging by their
sides, for fear of ^urting themselves in their sleep; and that ^he Religious
may always be in a readi^esse to rise forth with as they shall hear the
Sign, let the^ make have each one to be before the other at the work of
God, which thing see that they do which great modesty and gravity; let not
the younger ^ort have their places one near another, but let them always
have some of their ancients betwixt them; when they rise unto the work of god,
let each exhort the other with modesty to make speed for the excuses of those
that are drowsy and given to sleep;

Of the Excommunication of faults;
CHAPTER 14.
IF any Sister should be self willed, ^ disobedient, or proud, or a murmure^
or in anything Repugnante to the holy Ru^ and Precepts, if she be be found
a Contemner of the ancients* let this Sister be admonished secretly for the
first, and secon^ time by her Ancients, if she amend no^ let her be reproved
publickely before others, but if she will not amend for al^ this, let her be
excommunicated, if she understand what kind of punishment Excommunication is,
but if she be shameless and past amendment, let her be Put t^ bodyly,
punisment let the Excommunication and punisment be measured according to the
quality of the fault, the which quality shall be judged by the ^udgment of
the Abbess; But if the Sister be found in some lesser faults, let her be
deprived from the participation of the Common Table with others; This is the
order which must be observed toward those that are deprived of the Company of
the rest at Table, that they beginn noe Psalm. or Antyme ^ the Church nor
read any lesson until ^ch time as they have made satisfaction, ^ett her take
her meat a lone after all the ^ther Sisters have ended their refection, as ^or
Example, if the Sisters eat at the sixth ^ower, she shall attend till the
Nynth, and ^ the Sisters eat at the Nynth she shall ^ttend till the time of
Euensong, until by ^ew satisfaction she has obtained her ^ardon;

Of the more greuious kinds of faults.
CHAPTER 15.
LET that Sister that is guylty of the more greiueous fault be deprived from
^e Church and refectory, let her have noe ^onuersation or Conference with any
of the ^isters, let her li^e all alone attending to ^at work which is
enjoined her persi^ing in the bitterness of Penance consi^ering that terrible
Sentence of the Apostle; that such a one is delivered, to Satan for ^e
destruction of the Flesh that the Spirit ^ay be saved in the day of our lord;
let ^er take refection alone in such quantity and at such time as the Abbess
shall think good, neither let her be saluted or blessed by any which pass
by her, neither let the meats be blessed that are given her to eat;

Of those that Join themselves which such as are excommunicated.
CHAPTER 16.
IF any shall presume without the Abbesses license to join her self in any
sort with the Sister that is excommunicated to speak to her, to send her any
thing let her incurr the punishment of the like Excommunication;

In what manner the Abbess ought to be careful of those that are
Excommunicated;
CHAPTER 17.
LET the Abbess bear herself toward the Sisters that offend with all
carfulness, because the Physician is not needful for those that are in
health, but for such as are sick, and therefore she ought to use all means
of a wise Physician to send to them secrett Comforters, that is to say some of
the Ancients, and some of the discreter sort of the Religious, which may as it
were secretly comfort the troubled Sister, and incite her to humble
satisfaction, and might also comfort her that she be not wholly drowned and
oppressed with two much grief and discomfort; but that as the Apostle says,
Charity may be confirmed in her, and let every one pray for her; for the
Abbess ought to be right care full, and to use all prudence and diligence,
that she lose none of her Flock, for she must understand that she has
taken the charge of infirm and weak Souls, and not any tyrannical or cruel
authority over those that are Whole; And let her fear the threatening of the
Prophett by whom our lord says; that which you saw to be fatt you took to
your selves, and that which was weak you cast a Way, And let her follow that
Example of pity of the good Sheepherd who leaving nynety nine sheep in the
Monntaines, went to seek out one that had erred: upon whose infirmity he
had so great compassion, that he vouthsafed to lay her upon his sacred
Shoulders, and so to bring her back to his fould again;

Of those that have been often corrected* and will not amend.
CHAPTER 18.
IF any Sister has been often corrected for any fault, and if she will not
amend though she has been excommunicated; let her have more severe
correction, and then let the Abbess proceed even to Chastisement by shrokes,
and if for all that she will not amend or else, (with God forbidd, puffed up
with pride should mayn tayne and defend her own doings, let the Abbess do
that which the expert Physician uses to do, who when he has applied the
fomentations and ointments of good exhortations, the Remedies of holy
Scriptures, and finally the burning and seering of Excommunication, together
with the incision and launcing of bodyly Chastisement; if then she see that
her labor is in vain, let her use (which is most effectual) her own
Prayers and the prayers of all the Sisters for her; that our lord which is
omnipotent would work some cure upon this infirm Sister, and if by this
means she shall not be cured, then let the Abbess use the knife of
abscision, as the Apostle says; Take the evil from amongst you, and again if
the Infidel will depart let her depart, lest that one diseased sheep should
infect the whole Flock;

Of young Children and how they are to be corrected.
CHAPTER 19.
EVERY one must be measured according to their age and capacity, and therefore
so often as the Children, or the younger sort, or such as do not sufficiently
understand how great a punishment Excommunication is, let these when they
offend be penanced or be severely chastised with the road;

Of the ofice and duty of the Cellarier;
CHAPTER 20.
THE Cellarier of your Monastery ought to be such a one of your Congregaion as
is wise, gentle, and sober* not gluttenous, proud, easy to be in passion,
injurious, slouggish, or lavish, but which has the fear of God in her heart,
and may be as it were a very Mother to the whole Congregation, and she ought
to have the Care of all things, and to do nothing without the Commandment of
the Abbisse, but still to accomplish that which is commanded her, and let her
not be over grievous to the Sisters, and if any should make to her any
unreasonable request, let her not for all that by any contemptable usage give
them cause of disgust, but let her in a meek sort deny them, that with they
do not well and reasonably demand, let her look well unto her own Soul:
remembering that which the Apostle says, That they which have ministered well
shall purchase unto them selves a good degree; let her have a most diligent
care of the sick Children, of the guestes, and of the poor: knowing that
without all doubt she shall render an account for all these at the day of
Judgment, let her have the Custody of all the Vessels, necessaryes, and
Substance of the Monastery, and let her look unto them as she would unto
those things that are consecrated unto Gods Altar, and let her not think that
any thing is to be negligently regarded; let^ her neither be too sparing, or
a waster of the Substance of the Monastery, but let her do all things with
moderation, according to the Commandments of the Abbess, before all things
let her conserve her self in humility, and when she has nothing to give
unto her which requires any thing of her, at lest wise give good words, for
good words are much better then a good gift, let her have a care and Custody
of those things, which the Abbess shall appoynte her to have in charge, and
she shall not presume to intermeddle her self with any thing that shall be
forbidden her, let her give the Portions ordained for the Sisters without all
deceit and delay to the end that none be scandalized, being mind full what
they deserve according to the words of God, who scandalyze any of these little
ones, If the Congregation be great let her have the assistance of some
Sisters, by whose aid she may joyfully accomplish her duty and charge; That
which is to be given or dist^^buted must be done at competent and ^itt times,
and that which is to be requested of her let it be requested in a due season
that none may be troubled or molested in in the house of God;

Of the Iron Tools and other things belongnig to the Monastery;
CHAPTER 21.
AS concerning the Substance of the Monastery, the Iron Instruments, the
Apparel, or what else soever, let the Abbess provide such Sisters of whose
life and good behavior she may be secure, to whom she may deliver certain
things, as she shall thing good to be by them kept or amassed and gathered
together, of which things the Abbess must keep an Inue^tory, that when the
Sisters come to demand any thing she may know what she receaueth and what
she gives out. If any use those things which belong to the Monastery
negligently or sluttishly let her be punished, and if she do not amend let
her be put to regular discipline;

Weather the Religious should have any thing proper to themselves or not;
CHAPTER 22.
THIS Vice of propriety much be wholly plucked up by the Roots out of the
Monastery that none presume to give or Receive any thing what soever proper to
themselves: not so much as a book or writting Tables or any Instrument to
write withal, yea nothing at all; for they ought to have neither bodies nor
wills at their own disposing; They must receive all their necessaryes from
their Abbess neither shall it be lawful for them to have any thing, but that
which the Abbess shall give them, or appoynte them to have; let every thing
be common to every one as it is written; neither let any presume to say that
any thing is her own, If so be that any shall be found to take delight in
this pernitions Vice, let her be once or twice admonished, and if she amend
not let her be punished;

VVhe there every one ought to rcceaue all necessaryes equally.
CHAPTER 23.
IT is written that to every one was distributed according to their necessity;
We say not that their should be any distinction of Persons (god for bidd) but
rather that Consideration be had of every ones infirmity, so that she which
has less need be thankful to god therefore, and noe way greiued in her
mind; but she that has more need must be more humble in respect of her
Infirmity, and not puffed up with pride for the mercy which is used toward
her, and thus every member shall be in peace and quietness; We give you this
special Caveat to be ware that the Sin of Murmuration may not for any
occasion appear either in Word or in any external sign what soever, and if
any be taken in this fault, let her be putt unto severe punisment.

Of the hebdomadaries or weekly Offices in the kitching;
CHAPTER 24.
LET the Sisters serve each othersand none must be excused from serving in
the kitching, except she be hindered by sickness, or in respect of some
greater Commodity, for here by the more Charity and merritt is gained; let
the weaker sort have some solace, that they may not do it male content but
let them have some assistance, according to the State of the Congregation, and
situation of the place; If the Conhregation be great the Cellarier shall be
excused from the kitchen, or whosoever is hindered with business of greater
importance, as we have said, but let all the rest serve each other with all
Charity; being at the weeks end to go out of office let her on Saturday
make all things clean; let her wash the clothes where with the Sisters wipe
their hands and Feet; Both she that is to enter, and she that is to depart
must wash the Feet of all the rest; Let her resign all the Vessel belonging
to her office neat and whole unto the Cellarier, the which Cellarier must
deliver the^ again unto her that enters into that Office, that she may know
what she delivers and what she receaueth; The Hebdomadaryes must take some
piece of bread, and a draught of drink over and above their ordinary Portion,
one hour before the rest of the Covent take their Refection, so that at the
hour of Refection they may serve their Sisters without murmuring for their
over much labor; upon Solemn Feasts they must abstain till Mass be ended;
Every Sunday the hebdomadaryes which enter and go out of office shall kneel
them Down before every one requesting their Prayers; They that go out of
office must say this verse Benedictus es Domine Deus qui adiuuisti me, and
consolatus es me; blessed be thou o lord god which have helped me and
comforted me, which Verse being three times repeated, let her that enters
into the Office^ follow and say, Deus in adiutoriu^ meum intend, Domine ad
adiuuandu^ me festina and this being in like manner thrice repeated of all
having received the Benediction let her enter into her office.

Of the infirm and sscke Sisters;
CHAPTER. 25.
BEFORE and above all things care must be had of the sick, so that Service
be done unto them as to Christ himself; for he has said, I was infirm and
sick, and you visited me; and that which you have done to one of my little
ones, you have done it to my self; yea let the infirm Consider with
themselves, that all this Service is done them for the honor of God, and let
them not be trouble some to the Sisters which serve them, by over much
superfluity Not withstanding they are much to be borne withal; for by such as
they are the greater; merritt is obtained, therefore let the Abbess be
careful that they endure nothing, upon the negligence of others, Unto the
sick a place must be appointed, and some to serve them that have the fear of
God, and are careful and dilligent; let the infirm have the use of the Bath
so often as it shall be expedient, but let it be rarely granted to those that
are whole especially to the younger sort, yelett t hose that are all together
weak eat flesh for their Recovery; but when they are recovered let them
abstain from flesh as they were wont to do; let the Abbess have especial
care that the sick be not neglected, either by the Cellarier, or by those
that serve them, for it is imputed unto her fault how soever her Scollers err
and offend;

Of those that are old and very young;
CHAPTER 26.
ALthough that man of his own nature is easily, drawn to pity the old and
young, yet notwithstanding let them be provided for by the authority of your
Rule; let always consideration be had of their Weakness, and use not in
any wise the stricknesse of the Rule as concerning their dyett, but always
let them be confidered with pitty^, and let them prevent the ordinary times
of eating;

Of the hebdomary Reader
CHAPTER 27
THE Sisters must never be without reading at meals, yet let not every one
presume to read as by chance she shall take the book in hand, but let her
beginn upon Sunday that is to read all the weak following, who entering into
the office must request the Prayers of the rest ymmediately after Mass and
Communion that God would deliver her from the Spirritt of Pride, and let this
Verse be recited thrice of all them in the Church, Domine labia mea aperies
and os meum annuntiabit laudem tuam, and so let her beginn to read having
first received her benediction; let sovereign silence be observed at meat
neither whispering or other noise be there herd but only of the Reader, and
let all that is necessary both for meat and drink be so delivered to the
Sisters, that none may have need to demand any thing; Notwith standing if
any thing shall be wanting, let it rather be demanded by the sound of some
Sign, then by their voices; neither may any of them presume to speak either
of that which is read or of any thing else, that noe occasion may be given to
your ghostly enemy; except peradventure the Superior will say some what
breifely for their edification; let the Reader take some little pittance in
bread and drink before she beginn to read, lest peradventure her fasting
night be over greuious to her, and afterward let her take Refection with
those of the kitchen and the other Servants; The Sisters must not read
according to their order but only those that can best edify others by their
reading;

Of the quantity of their meat
CHAPTER. 28.
WE believe that two boiled pittances may serve for their daily Refection, in
every Month of the year, both one the day when the Fast, and when there is noe
Fast, and in respect of the infirmities which may be incident to diverse of
their Complexions, that those which cannot eat of the one, may make their
repast of the other; therefore let two boiled pulmentaryes or pittances suffice
for all the Sisters, and if there be any Apples or new Fruytes then make them
a third dish of the same, one pound of bread must be their daily allowance,
whether they make only dinner or both dinner and Supper, and if they are to
receive their Supper let the third part of their pound be reserved by the
Cellarier for their Supper, if their labor happen to be greater, then shall
it be in the Abbesses will and power to augment it as she shall think good,
having especially care that all excess and surfeting be eschewed, that the
Religious might never be troubled with indigesture; For nothing is more
contrary to a Christian then gluttony; As our lord himself says; see that
your hearts be not over charged with surfeiting and drunkenness, let not the
same quantity be observed, to the younger sort, but rather less then those
that are greater; observing frugalitie in all things; let all abstain
precisely from eating flesh of four footed beasts except those that are sick
and Feeble;

Of the measure of their drink.
CHAPTER 29.
EVERY one has a proper gift from God, one after this manner, and another
after that and therefore the measure of other Folks dyett, is appointed by us
with a certain kind of scruple and perplexity, not with standing considering
the weakness of those that are sick, we believe that a pynte of wine may
suffice for every one a day, let them understand that they shall have a
peculier reward upon whom our lord shall bestow the gift of abstinence; But if
either the necessity of the place or their trauyll or the heates of the Summer
shall require more; let that be remitted to the arbitrament of the Superior,
who must always duly consider, that it be done without saciety and
dronckennesse; Although we read that wine is noe drink for those that lead
a Monastical life, yet because we cannot so persuade these of our time at
lest wise in this sort let us yeald there unto, that we never drink our sill
but moderately, for wine makes even the wise to become Apostataes, where the
necessity of the place so requires that the before said measure may not be
had, but either much less, or none at all; let the^ which dwell in those
places bless our lord and beware of Murmuration, all ways warning you in the
speciallest sort we cann, that the Sisters ever live free from all Murmuration;

At what hours the Sisters must take their refection;
CHAPTER 30.
FROM Easter to whitsontide the Sisters must take their dinner at the sixth
hour, and their Supper at night, But from whitsontide forward through the
whole Summer let them fast wednesday, until the Nynth hour, except they
labor much, or that the excessive heates do much molest them, but upon other
days they dyne at the sixth hour, the which time of dynning, at sixth may be
continued either when they labor o^ when* the heats of the Summer are
excessive great, and let all these things remain in the providence and
discretion of the Abbess, who must so wisely temper and dispose all things,
that the Souls of her, Sisters may be saved, and that they may do their
duties without murmuring; But from the ^es of September until the beginning of
^nt, the Sisters must dine at the Nynth; In ^nt until Easter they must take
their Refe^o^ at Evening which Evening must be so ^nsidered that those which
eat may not ^ely need Candle light, but moreover ^at all things may be
finished within the ^y light, and at all Seasons of the year the ^ower of
Supper and of their refection ^ust be so continued that by the light of ^e
day all things may be well dispatched;

Of Silence in the night*
CHAPTER 31.
AL ways the Sisters must have care to keep silence, but especially in the
^asen of the night and therefore at all ty^es whether fasting or dining if it
be a ^me to dyne in ymmediately after they ^aue risen from Supper let them
sit dow^e together all in one place, and let one ^eade the Colations or
lives of the holy Fa^ers, or some what else that may edefy the ^earers, but let
them not read at that time ^e sieve books of Moses, or the books of ^e kings
for it wilbee little pro^itable for ^ose that are of small Capacity at that
time to hear that part of Scripture but rather let them read it at other
times, But if it be fasting day, a little after Even song let them go to the
lecture of the said, collatio^^ as we have said and after four or five
leaves have been read, or as the hour will permit all meeting together by
the space of the say^ lecture, if any be occupied about any bus^nee enjoined
her by the Superior, let her then come also, and when all are assembled let
them make an end and go to complyne, and after none may speak unto any about
any thing, for if any be found to break this Rule of silence, let her be
severely punished, except it be upon the arrival of some guess, or that the
Abbess, should command any thing to be done which notwith standing must be
done with all decency and moderation;

Of those that come late to the Service of God, and to the Table.
CHAPTER 32.
LET every one runn with all speed leaving what soever work is in her hads,
so soon as she shall hear the Sign to be given unto the divine Service,
yet with gravity, that scurrilitie may find ^oe entertaynment among you;
Therefore ^eware that nothing be preferred before ^he Service of God, for if
any come not to Mattines before the Gloria of the 94 Psalm ^ee said (with
Psalm for this cause we will have said in a long and leisurely manner) ^ett
her not stand in her own order, but ^ither the last of all or in some other
place, which the Abbess shall appoynte for such ^egligent Sluggerds, that so
she may be ^eene of the Superior, and of all the rest ^ntill she has done
true penance and ^ublike satisfaction at the end of Gods Ser^ice; and for this
cause we judge it meet that they should remain in the last place ^r else in a
place separated from the rest, that ^eing noted from all the rest, they may be
^mended for the very shame it self; for if ^hee should remain out of the
Church, per ^duenture there would be some, which would either lay them down
to sleep again, or would sit without and prate with others, and thereby give
occasion to the ghostly enemy, but let her enter in, that she ^ose not all,
and that she might do Penna^ce ^or the other part; At the hours of the day
^hee that shall not come to the divine Office after the Verse at the Gloria of
the first Psalm which is said after the verse. let her remain in the last
place according to the rule affore said, and let her not presume to put her
self in Company with those that Sing in the Quier, except the Abbess shall
permit her so to do, and upon this Condition that she do afterward
satisfaction for her fault; but at the hour o^ refection she that shall not
come before the Verse that all may say the Verse, Prayer, and all at once come
to the table together, she that through her fault and negligence shall not be
present, letther for thrice beerebuked for her fault, and if afterward she
amend not, let her not be permitted to sit at the Table with the rest, but
separated from their follow shipp; let her take refection alone with drawing
from her, her Portion of wine, until she has made amendment and
satisfaction; also let her be punished in like sort which shall not be
present at the Verse which is said after meat, and let none presume to take
either meat or drink before or after the hour appointed for their Refection;
Moreover if the Superior offer any thing to any of the^ and if she refuse to
receive it then, and afterward she have a desire to that, which she refused
or to any thing else let her in noe case receive it, until she has made due
amendment;

Of those that are excommunicated and what satisfaction they must make.
CHAPTER 33.
SHE that for her greuious offenses shall be excommunicated from the Church,
and Refectory: let herly prostrate before the entrance into the Church a^ the
^ower that the divine Service is celebrated ^n the Church, and let her say
nothing but ^ay her head upon the earth prostrate all ^long before the Feet
of all, as they come from the Church, and let her continue doing this so long
until the Abbess shall ^hinke she has duly satisfied; who being called by
the Abbess let her cast herself at the Abbesses Feet* and afterward before
^he Feet of all the Sisters that they will ^ray for her, and then if the
Abbess shall ^oe appoynte it, let her be received into ^he Quire, bu^ in the
Order that the Abbess shall think good, so that she presume not ^o into
neeither Psalm, lesson, or any thing ^lsin the Church except upon the
Commandment of the Abbess, and at every ^ower at the end of the divine
office, let ^er cast her self to the ground in the place where she remains
until such time as the Abbess shall command her to cease from that kind of
satisfaction, but those that for some small fault, are excommunicated from the
Table, let them satisfy in the Church so long as the Abbess shall please to
command them, and in such sort let them still continue until she gives
them her blessing and say it suffices.

Of those that committ any Error in the Church;
CHAPTER 34.
IF any Sister committ any Error in the Church in the divine office, when she
pronounces any Psalm, Responsary, Anthym, or lesson if in the way of
satisfaction she humble not her self before the rest, let her be severely
punished for the same, because she would not amend that with humility, which
she committed through her negligence; But the Children for such a fault must
be whipped;

Of those that offend in any other thing;
CHAPTER. 35.
IF any while she labors in the kitchen, Seller or other Office, Bakehouse,
Garden, or in any Art, where in she is occupied, or in what Place soever she
has offended, or has broken or lost any thing, or has committed any excess
and does not presently come before the Abbess or Congregation and offer
herself to do satisfaction, and shall not bewray her own fault let her be
more severely punished, if by any other it come to their knowledge; But if it
be a secrett Sin of the Soul let her manifest it to her Abbess or ghostly
Father who knows how to cure and heal their own and other folks wounds, and
not to detect and publish them;

Of the manner how to signify the hour of Gods service.
CHAPTER 36.
LET the Abbess have the care to make known both by day and night the hour
of Gods service, and either see she do it her self, or enjoin it to some
other dilligent and careful, that all things may be accomplished in their
proper and competent times and seasons, let those that are commanded intone
the Psalms or Anthymes still in their order after the Abbess, but let none
presume to sing or read but those that can well execute the office, that the
hearers may be edifyed, the which, she shall do with all humility,
gravity, and Reverence who thereunto by the Abbess shall be commanded;

Of the works of their hands.
CHAPTER 37.
Idleness is an Enemy to the Soul, and therefore the Sisters ought to be
occupied, at certain times with the labor of their hands, and at other tyms
in reading spiritual and deuynes things, and therefore we think that
according to this manner both times may be well disposed of, that from Easter
until the Kalends of October going from Prime in the morning they should
labor until the fourth hour, in that which shall be need full, and from the
fourth hour until the sixth, they should attend to reading; after the sixth
rising from the Table, they shall rest in their bedes with all silence, and
she that will read unto her self may read so that she be not trouble some
unto others, and they shall say the Ninth hour somewhat sooner, near unto the
eight hour, and then again they shall proceed to do that, that is to be
done unto the Eueninge, But if the necessity of the Place or their poverty
should require that they themselves should reap and gather their Corn, let
them not be greiued there at, for then they show themselves truly Religious,
yfthey live by the labor of their hands, as our Fore fathers, and the Apostles
were wont to do; yett let all thing be done with discretion, and with
Compassion toward those that are weak hearted, and cannot endure much labor,
From the Kalends of October until the beginning of lent, let them attend to
their reading until the second hour be expired; at the second hour say the
Third, and then let every one attend to that work which is enjoined her
until the Nynth, when the sign is given to the Nynth, let every one lay away
the work and be in a readiness at the second Sign; After Refection let
them attend to reading spiritual books or the Psalms, upon those days that
come in lent, let them attend to their reading unto the third hour full out,
and then let them work, that which is commanded them unto the tenth hour,
upon which days let every one take her a book out of the library, the which
she must read through out, and these books must be delivered to them at the
beginning of lent; See that one or two ancient be appointed to go through the
Monastery, at such times as the Sisters apply their books, and see that noe
Sisters be found Idle or prating with others, and not occupied in reading, and
there by is not only unprofitable unto her self, but troble some unto others,
if such an one (as god forbidd) should be found in this sort, let her be
rebuked for the first and second time, and if she amend not let her be put
to regular Correction, in such sort as others may be kept in fear and awe,
neither let one Sister be found with another at unfit hours, and seasons;
upon Sundays let all apply their reading except such as are deputed to other
offices; If any shall be found so negligent, and slothful, that she either
will not or cannot meditate or read, let her have some other work enjoined
her that she may not be idle and unoccupied; let such works an arts be
enjoined to those Sisters that are weak and delicate, that neither they may
be Idle or oppressed with the violence of their labor, that thereby they
should seek to shunn it, and so their weakness is of the Abbess duly to be
considered;

Of the manner of the observation of lent;
CHAPTER 38*
AL though the life of the Religious should be a perpetual lent, yet because
this virtue is found in very few, therefore we admonish you, that in the time
of lent you lead your life, in all purity, that is to wipe away all the
negligences of former times by the good observation of these sacred days,
which is then worthyly performed if we abstain from all Vice and attend to
our prayers with compunction of heart, let us therefore on these days add some
what to the ordinary task of our Service, as abstinence both in meat and
drink, and some peculier prayers, let every one offer freely with. Joy of the
holy Ghost some what unto God, above all that which is appointed her, that is
that she with draw from her body some what of her meat drink, sleep, talk
scurrilitie expecting the sacred Feast of Easter with joy in all spiritual and
ghostly comfort; notwithstanding whatsoever it is that every one does offer,
let her signify it to her Abbess that it may be done with her good will and
benediction, for what soever is done with out her permission and of the ghostly
Father is to be accounted persumption and vain glory and in noe wise
meritorious; Therefore all things are to be done with the good liking of the
Abbess;

Of the Oratory of the Monastery;
CHAPTER 39
LET the Oratory be that which the name there of does imparte, neither let
any other thing be there done or disposed; after the work of God is ended
let every one depart with silence and with reverence done to God, that that
Sister that can be able to pray perticulerly may not be hindered by the
miserule and importunity of others; but if it be so that any other will make
there her prayers, let her enter in with all simplicity and pray not with a
loud and clamorous voice, but with tears and devotion of heart, sheet
herefore, that does not this may not be permitted after the seruice^ to stay
in the place of Prayer, lest (as I have said) another suffer an impediment
thereby;

How it is unlawful for the Sisters to give or receive any letters or Presents;
CHAPTER 40.
IT is altogether unlawful for the Sisters to receive or give letters books
of devotion, or what other present howlitle soever, either to their kinsfolks
or to any other person, or one to another without the commandment of the
Abbes; And if any thing should be sent them from any of their kinsfolks, let
them not presume to receive it before it be showed to the Abbess, and if she
command them to receive it, then shall it be in her power to give it to her,
unto whom she shall command to give the same; And let not that Sister to
whom it was sent be sorry if it be given to another to the end noe occasion
may be suffered for the devil to enter amongst you, and if she presume to do
the contrary let her be submitted unto reguler discypline and Correction;

Of the Clothes of the Religious;
CHAPTER 41.
LET the Sisters have their clothes given them according to the quality of of
the place, where they dwell and disposition of the air; for there is need of
more in colder Countries, and in hotter of less; therefore let this
consideration pertayne to the Abbess, notwithstanding we believe that in
temperate places, it may suffice the sisters to have a cuculua and anin ward
coat They must have a Cuculua in the winter and that some what gross and
hayry, and in the Summer more synd and well worn, and a Scapular to labor,
and as concerning their Feet they shall have hose and Shoes, but as concerning
the Color or grosenesse of the^, the Sisters may not in any wise dispute but
let it be such as may be found in the Province where they dwell, or that
which may be bought the best cheap, let the Abbess look to the measure
there of, that the clothes be not two short for those that wear them, but of
a Competent greatness; when they receive any new thing, see that presently
they give up their old to be reserved in the Guardroabe for the poor; it
suffices that eath Sister have two Coats, and two Cuculuers both for the
nights and for to wash them, and that which shall be over and above this shall be
superfluous, and must be cut of, and as concerning their (...) and what old
thing soever, see they render it up when they receive any new; as for their
bedding let it suffice they have a Mattresse, a Covering over that, and
another to cover them, and a boulster; which bedds must be often searched by
the Abbess for fear of prepriety, that there it may not be found, and in
whom soever it shall be found, to have any thing that she received not from the
Abbess, let her be most severely punished; and that this Vice of propriety
may be wholly rooted out, let all things that are necessary be given them by
the Abbess, that is their Cuculua a Coat, shoes, hose, a muffe, a knife, penn
and Inck horn; needles, handchatchers, and some little Tables, that all excuse
of necessity may be removed; Notwithstanding the sentence in the Acts of the
Apostles is duly to be considered of the Abbess, that to every one was given
as they had need, even so let the Abbess consider the Infirmity of those,
that are in want, and not the evil disposed mynds of the envious, yet in all
her Judgments let her think upon the Retribution of Almighty God;

Of those Sisters that are shillfull in any art;
CHAPTER 42.
IF there be any sisters in the Monastery that are cunnig in any Art let them
exercise them selves in those Arts, so that the Abbess shall command them
there unto: but if any should wax proud of her cunning, because she esteems
herself profitable to the Monastery* ^ett her be put from her Art, and let
her not use it again until the Abbess after her humiliation shall command
her thereunto; if any of the works of those skillful religious are to be
sold let them look unto it through whose hands they are to pass, that they
presume not to committ any fraud and let them be always myndefull of
Ananias and Saphyra lest peradventure all those that have committed any fraud
in these affairs of the Monastery incur that death in their Souls which
these incurred in their bodies; as touching the prices of those works take
heed^ that noe avarice creep in* but let them be given better cheap of you
then they would be of other secular people, that in all your Actions Gods
glory may be exalted;

Of the manner of receiving of Nouices;
CHAPTER 43.
WHEN any comes newly to convert herself to god from the World, permit her
not to have easy entrance amongh you; But as the Apostle says prove the
Spirritts whether they be of god, if therefore she that comes shall
persevere in knocking* and shall be seen to bear patiently for four or five
days iniuryes that are offered her and the difficulty that is made her of her
admitting, then grant her entrance and let^ her remain for some fewd^yes in
the guess lodging, afterward let her live in the Cell of the Nouices, and
there let her meditate eat, and sleep, and let some ancient be appointed
over her, as it is fit to gain Souls, who must be very curious and careful
in considering whether she seek god in very deed, and is dilligent in his
service, in obedience, in reading and in enduring of iniuryes let her have
declared unto her the hardness; and asperity; by which she must labor to
come to God, and if she shall promise perseverance of her continuance, then
after two Months are expired, let the rule all in order be read to her,
and let it be said unto her* behold here is the law under which thou
desire to fight, if thou art able to observe, enter, but if thou can not,
depart with all liberty and Freedom; If she still continue then let her be
brought to the affore said Cell of the Nouices, and there let her pa^ience be
thoroughly proved, and after the space of six months let the rule by read
again unto her, that she may know what she takes in hand, and if she as
yet perseuere^h after four Months, let the same rule be read again and
if after she has thoroughly deliberated with her self that she will promise
to observe all, and to fulfill al things that shall be commanded her, then
let her be admitted and received unto your Congregation, knowing that by the
vigor of the Rule it is decreed; that from that day afterward she may never
depart from the Monastery nor may with draw her neeke from the yoke of the
Rule, that which she might have refused having so long and mature
deliberation;

Of the manner of their Profession;
CHAPTER 44.
SHE that is to be admitted must make promise publicly before all in the
Church before God and his Saints of her stability, change of manners and
obedience, that if peradventure she should do otherwise afterward she may
know that she shall receive the sentence of damnation of Allmighty God who^
she has mocked, of the which promise by her made let her make a petition in
the name of those Saints whose Relics are in that place and of the Abbess
there present. The which petition must be subscribed with her own hand, if
she cannot write, let another write i^ at her request, and then let her make
a Sign there upon, and afterward lay it upon the Altar with her own hand,
which after she has there laid, let her presently beginn this verse;
Suscipe me domine secundum eloquium tuum, and viuam, and non con^undas me ab
expectatione mea, that is to s^y; receive me a lord according to thy holy
word, and I shall live, and confound me not in my expection, the which verse
the whole Congregation answeareth three times, adding Gloria Patri etc. to the
last; Then let the new Sister prostrate herself before the Feet of every one
that they will pray for her and so from that day let her be accounted one of
the Congregation, if she has any thing let her either distribute it to the
poor, or let her make a solemn donation there of to the Monastery, retayning
nothing at all unto herself, for she is to understand that from that time
forward she has noe authority or challenge not so much as to he own body;
Therefore let her fortwith in the Church be spoyld of all her own where with
she was clothed, and let her put on the habitt of the Monastery; but let
those Clothes which she has put of be laid a side, and be kept in the
guardroabe that if at any time she should co^se^t to the devil to leave the
Monastery (which God forbidd) that then being spoiled of her Monastical habitt
she may be cast and expelled thence. But let her not receive the writting
which the Abbess took from the Altar, but let it be reserved and kept in
the Monastery;

Of the manner of receiving the daughters of Noblemen, gentlemen, Ritchmen, or
pooremen;
CHAPTER 45.
IF any Nobleman or gentleman offers his daughter to God in your Monastery,
i^ the child shall be very young, let er parents make the foresaid petition for
her, and with their oblation let them wrapp the fore said petition, and the
h^nd of the child in the Towell of the Altar, and so they may offer her; but
as concerning her goods, let them promise under their oath in the present
petition, that they will never by themselves o^ by any other person, or any way
besides give her any thing, or at any time offer her occasion to have any
thing, or if they will not do this, but that they will give any thing in Alms
to the Monastery for their Merritt; let them make a donation of those things
which they will give to the Monastery, retayning to themselves (if so they
please) the use and proffitt of the same, and so let every thing be shut up
and concluded, that noe suspicion may re^ in the Child's head, whereby she may
be deceived and (as god forbidd) may perish, as we have seen by experience
in others; In like sort let them do that are of poor Condition; but let
them that have nothing only make their petition and with oblation let them
offer their daughter in the presence of some Witnesses;

How externe and foraigne Religious should be received;
CHAPTER 46
IF any strange Religious women shall come unto you from some far Province, if
she will dwell as a guest in your Monastery, and wilbee content with the
Custom of the place which she shall find there, and will not be trouble
some to the Monastery with her superfluy^y, but will be simply content with
that which she therefindeth let her be received for so long a time as she
desires, but if she reprehend any thing reasonably and with humility let
the Abbess deal with her prudently, fort at perhapps she was sent thither
even for this purpose from god himself, but if afterward she have a desire
to make their her aboade, let not her request be refused; especially seeing
that in the time of her being a Guess her life might be well and thoroughly
discovered; But if in that time she shall be found vicious and given to
superfluytie, she must not only not be joined with the Corpse of the
Monastery, but let her have honest warning given her to depart, lest by her
miserable behavior others may be corrupted; but if she be such a one as
deserves not to be dimissed, let her not only be admitted into your
Congregation if she request it, but persuade her to remain that others may
be edifyed by her good Example, and because in all places one lord is served,
if the Abbess find her to be such a one as she may be, she may promote
her to some higher degree; and so the Abbess may appoynte her Religious to
higher degrees and preheminences without regard of the time and of their
Entrances, if she find their life to be accordingly; yet let the Abbess
beware that she admit not any Sisters of another Monastery known unto, her
to abide and dwell amongst them with out the license and letters of their
Abbess; for it is written do not that to another that thou would not have
done unto thy self;

Of the Order of the Congregation
CHAPTER 47.
LET them observe snch Order in the Monastery as by the merritt of the time of
their conversion shall be determined, or as the Abbess shall appoynte; the
which Abbess must not be trouble some to the flock committed to her charge,
neither may she unjustly dispose of any thing, using her free power and
authority, but let her think she must yeald an account to Almighty God of
her Works and Judgments; Therefore according to that Order which she shall
appoynte, or which the Sisters shall have, they shall come to receive the Pax
Communion, to intone the Psalms, or to stand in the Quier, and see that in all
places their ages make noe difference in their order, nor be preiuditiall unto
them, for because both Samuel and David being young children Judged the
Elders; therefore le^t every one keep that Order as they were converted;
excepting only those (as we have said*) whom the Abbess shall promote upon
some secrett reason, or shall degrade for some certain Causes, as for Example
she that came to the Monastery at the second hour must hold herself to be
Junior unto her, who came at the first, though she be otherwise of what
soever age or dignity; yett let all use good disciplyne toward Children* and
in all things; therefore the Iuniours must honor their betters and Elders, and
those again must love their Iuniors and youngers; even in the very naming of
each other it shall not be lawful for one to call another simply by her name,
but the Ancients shall call the Iuniours Sisters* and Iuniours shall call their
Ancie^ts mothers, by which name they must understand the motherly kind of
Reverence they must bear unto them; But the Abbess because she is thought to
bear the person of Christ must be called Lady and Abbess, not for any
presumption of her own, but in regard of the honor and love of Christ; But
she must well consider with her self, and so to behave herself, that she
may be worthy of so great an honor; wheresoever the Sisters meet one
another, let the Iuniour request her benediction of her elder and when soever
the elderpasseth by, the younger must rise up and give her place to sit
down, neither, maythe Junior presume to sit down with her except her Ancient
do command her, that that may be fullfilled which is written; with honor
preue^ting one another; let the Children or youth keep their Order both in
the Churches and at the Table with all good disciplyne, but out of those
places, in what place soever see you observe good watch and disciplyne over
them* until they come to years of discretion and understanding;

Of the Manner and order how to elect and choose the Abbess;
CHAPTER 48.
IN the ordination of the Abbess let there be used such Consideration that
she may be appointed whom the whole Congregation with the fear of god, or
apart though otherwise small elect; let her that is to be ordained be elected
for the merritt of her good life and wise dome al though she should be the
lowest of all the congregation; But if the whole Congregation should by
universal consent, choose such a person, as might yeald unto their Vices
(which god forbidd) and that their Vices be in some sort known unto the
Bisshopp in whose diocese the place is situated, or shall be euiden^ly known
to the Abbotts or Christian people dwelling near abouts, let them for bidd
that the Congregation of the wicked take place, and let them appoynte a worthy
dispensatrix Steward over the house of God, knowing that for so doing they
shall receive a good reward; doing it upon a pure intention and for the Zeal
they bear to gods cause, as on the Contrary part they shall fall into Sin if
they neglect it. Let her that is ordained for Abbess always consider what a
burden she has taken upon her, and to whom she must render an account of
her Steward shipp; And she is to understand that she must rather seek to
proffitt her flock then to have pre-eminence and the first place amongst them;
she must be skillfull in the law of god, that she may know to bring forth of
her Treasure new things and old; she must be chaste and sober, pittyfull and
humble, with mercy surpassing the Rigor of Justice, that she may for ^er own
self deserve mercy at the hands of God, she must hate all manner of Vice,
love her sisters and in her Correction she must behave her felfe discretely
that she persecute nothing over much, for fear lest while she indeauoreth to
scour away the rust she break the Vessel in pieces, and let her always
stand in suspicion of her own Fraylty, and let her Remember that the broken
Reed is not utterly to be crushed in pieces, and herein we say not that she
suffer vice to be nourished but that she seek with prudence and Charity to
Root it out, as she shall find it most expedient for every one as already
we ^aue said, and let her endeavor to be rather loved then feared; let her
not be troublesome, sadd superfluous, and obstinate in her own opinion, not
to jealous or over superstitious, for then she will never be quiett, let her
be provident and careful in her commandments whether they concern* god or
the World, let her discretely weigh and moderate all those works which she
shall enjoin unto others, with considering the discretion of holy Jacob
saying, if I shall make my Flock to over labor themselves in walking they will
all dye in one day, having this and such like examples of discretion the mother
of all virtue, let her so moderate all things that those that have a good
desire, may be still strong and able to accomplis it; and those that are
infirm and weak may not seek to shunn and avoid it, and especially that
they intyrely observe this present Rule, that when she has administered all
things she may hear of our lord that which the good Servant herd that
distributed his Corn to his fellow Servants in dew season, Amen I say unto you
(says our lord) I promote him over all my goods;

Of the Prioresse of the Monastery;
CHAPTER 49.
IT has often times fallen out, that by the Ordination of the Prioresse many
great scandalles have risen in Monasteryes while there are some that being
puffed up with the accursed Spirrit of Pride thinking them selves to be
second Abbesses take upon them to tyranise over others, foster scha^dalls and
raise dissentions in the congregation, and especially in those places where the
Prioresse is ordained of the same Bishop or of the same Abbotts that ordained
the Abbess, which thing how absurd it is may easily be perceived* for that
eue^ from the beginning of her ordination she has matter of Pride offered unto
her, whilst it resorteth unto her thoughts and Cogitations how she is freed
from all power of her Abbess because she is ordained of those by whom the
Abbess herselte is ordained; ^erevppon Envy, Anger braules, detractions,
dissentions, and discords are raised; for whilst the Abbess and the Prioresse
are of contrary opinions it is necessary that their own Souls stand in much
danger by this dissension, and those that are under their charge and government
while they flatter each party perish utterly; The fault of which danger falls
upon their heads who were the cause of such an Ordination, Therefore we
foresee it to be expedient for the Conservation of peace and Charity that the
ordering of the Monastery depend only upon the Abbesses Judgment and
authority; And if it may be done let all the Commodity of the Monastery be
ordered (as we have said) at the Abbesses disposition by the deanes, that
while the charge is committed to many, noe one may become insolent and proud;
But if the place so require it, or the Congregation shall request it upon
reasonable Causes with humility, and the Abbess shall judge it expedient
whomsoever she shall choose with the advice of her Sisters that has the fear
of God let her ordain her for Prioresse, which Prioresse, notwithstanding
must execute those things with Reverence which shall be enjoined her by her
Abbess, doing nothing against the Abbesses Will or Order, for by how much she
is preferred before the rest, by so much the more carefully ought she to
keep the commandments of the Rule; And if the Prioresse shall be found
vicious or deceived by the haughtiness of Pride, or shall be proved to be a
Contemner of the Rule, let her be admonished with words for some four or
five times and if so be, that she will not amend her self, then let her
be cast from her degree of Prioresse, and another put in her place, that shall
be found wortly there of But if afterward she behave not her self quietly
and obediently in the Congregation let her be expelled out of the Monastery,
yet let the Abbess Consider that she must render an account of all her
Judgments to god, lest she with the Flame of envy and Rancour of mind should
set on fire her own Soul;

Of the Portresse of the Monastery;
CHAPTER 50.
LET some ancient and wise Religious be appointed to keep the Port of the
Monastery, which knows well both to receive and render an answer, whose
gravity will not permit her to be ranging and wandering up and down; The
which Portresse ought to have her Cell near unto the Gate that those which
come may always find her present, from whom they may receive their answer,
and fortwith so soon, as they shall kno^ke, or any poor person shall call
unto her, let her answer, Deogratias, or bless me, and with all meekness
in the fear of God let her return them an answer with all speed
possible, and with all fervor of Charity; which Portresse if she need any
other for Comfort let her have some younger Sister; The Monastery ought so to
be buylt, if it be possible that it may contain with in it all things that
are necessary for it, as Water, a Mill a garden a Bakehouse, or so that diverse
arts may well be exercised within the Monastery, that there might be noe
necessity for the Religious to runn abroad, because it is not in any wise
expedient for their Souls; Our Will is that this Rule be often read in the
congregation, that none of the Sisters for their excuse may pretend Ignorance;

Of the Sisters that are sent abroad;
CHAPTER 51.
WHEN any of the Sisters are sent abroad, let them commend themselves to the
prayers of all their Sisters, and of the Abbess, and always at the last
Prayer of the deuyne Service; let a Commemoration be made for all those that
are absent; But when the Sisters are returned, the very day of their Return,
let them ly prostrate upon the ground in the Church through out all the
Canonical hours while the Service of God is a doing, and let them request
the Prayers of all the rest for their excesses, lest peradventure some evil
thing either in sight, hearing, or Idle words might have happened to them in
the way; neither may any presume to relate unto others, the things that they
have seen or heard out of the Monastery, because it is an exceeding
disedification; which thing, if any shall presume to do, let her be put to
the ^euere Chastisement of the Rule; as in like manner, those that shall
presume to go out of the Enclosure to any place what soever, or ^o do any
thing though never so little without the Commau^deme^t of the Abbess;

Of those that have any thing enjoined them that is impossible;
CHAPTER 52.
IF peradventure some Sister should have any thing enjoined her that is
impossible to be done, let her receive the Commandment of her that
commanded her with all sweetness and obedience, and if she see that the
weight of the burden does altogether exceed the compass of her force, then
let her at some fit time, and with all patience declare unto the Superior the
cause of the Impossibility thereof, without all pride, Resistance, or
Contradiction; And if after her suggestion, the Commandment of the Superior,
continue in the former Rigor; let the Inferior then understand, that it is
expedient for her that it should be so, and so let her obey with all love
and Charity reposing her trust in the help of God;

How one may not defend another in the Monastery;
CHAPTER 53.
YOU must take good heed that one Sister presume not to defend or bear out
another in the Monastery for what cause soever, though they be never so
familiar and near in blood; and in noe sort let this be presumed by the
Sisters, for thereby great occasion of scha^dall may arise; And if any
transgress this Rule, let her be severely punished;

That one may not presume to stricke another;
CHAPTER 54
TO the end that all manner of presumption may be excluded out of the
Monastery, we ordain and appoynte that it be not lawful for any to
excommunicate or stricke the Sissers, excepting her only to whom this
authority is given by the Abbess, Butt let those that offend be reprehended
before the rest, that others thereby may be kept in more awe; But let
Chastisement or sharp correction be given unto Children by the Sisters,
until they come to sixteen years of age, and let good watch be held over
them, yet with that regard and discretion that it pass not the bounds and
measure of reason, for who shall presume to stricke them when they shall come
to riper years, without the commandment of the Abbess, or to work her
passion indescretely upon so much as the very Children, let her be
submitted to the punishment of the Rule for it is written, that which thou
would not have done to thy self, see thou do it not to another;

That the Sisters must obey one another;
CHAPTER 55.
THE Virtue of obedience ought to be performed of every one, not only to the
Abbess, but also the Sisters must obey one another, knowing that by this way
of obedience, they shall go to our lord; Therefore after the Commandment of
the Abbess, and of the ancients put in office by her (before whose
co^mau^deme^ts we permit that noe particular persons commandments should
take place) let those that are younger obey those that are their Ancients,
with all love and diligence, and if any should be found to be a Comtemner of
her Ancients, let her be punished; likewise if any Sister be in any sort
reprehended by her Abbess or any of her Ancients for any cause how little
soever, or if she perceive that the Countenance of her Ancient be never so
little changed with anger against her (I say how little soever it be) let her
forth with cast herself upon the ground, and there ly prostrate before her
feet doing her satisfaction so long, until that motion be cured with some
benediction, and if any should contemn to do it, let her be put to some
corporal punishment, and if she continue still hardened in her opinion then
let her be thrust out of the Monastery;

Of the good Zeal and Charity the Sisters ought to have one toward another;
CHAPTER 56.
AS there is an evil and bitter Zeal and hatred, that seperateth from God and
leads unto hell; even so there is a good Zeal that seperateth from Vice and
leads unto God, and unto his everlasting life; Therefore let the Sisters
exercise one toward another this good Zeal with a most fervent love and
affection, that is to say let them prevent one another with honor, bearing
patiently each others infirmities, whether they be of body, or of their
behavior, and let them strive to obey one another with all their power and
ability; let none follow that which, to her own Judgment seems good and
profitable, but rather that which shall seem good to another showing all
sisterly Charity in a most pure and chaste love, see they fear God, love their
Abbess, with a sincere and humble affection, and prefer nothing before our
Savior Jesus Christ who of his goodness bring us all to that life that never
shall have end; Amen.

How that the observation of all Justice is not contained in this Rule;
CHAPTER 57.
WE have set down this Rule, that by the observing it in the Monastery, we
may show unto others, that we have in some honest kind good behauour and the
beginning of a holy Conversation; But for those that speed forward in the
perfection of holy Conversation, there are the good lessons of holy Fathers,
the observation where of brings a man to the topp of perfection, what Page or
what Word of the divine Authority is not a most right Rule of man's life, or
what book of the holy Catholic Fathers, does not sound out this, that by a
direct Course we may come to our Creator; Also the Collations of holy
Fathers, and the Rule of our holy Father S. Basil, what other thing are they,
but the Examples of good life, and of obedient and good people, and the very
Instruments of Virtues, but to us sluggish, ill, and negligent people they, are
a shame and confusion; therefore whosoever thou art, that make have to that
heavenly Country, fulfill by the aid of our Savior Christ this little Rule
written for young beginners, and then afterward by the protection of God thou
shall come to those more greater perfectio^s of doctrine, and virtuous life,
where of we have already made mention. So be it

FINIS

