

THE THREE ENGLISH BROTHERS.

Sir Thomas Sherley his Travels, with his three years imprisonment in Turkey:
his Enlargement by his Majesty's Letters to the great Turk: and lastly, his
safe return into England this present year, 1607.

Sir Anthony Sherley his Embassage to the Christian Princes.

Master Robert Sherley his wars against the Turks, with his marriage to the
Emperor of Persia his Niece.



LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by John Hodgets in Paul's Church yard. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Thomas, Lord Howard, Earl of Suffolk, Lord
Chamberlain of his Majesty's household, and one of his Highness most honorable
Privy Council.
Weakness (Right honorable) has need of help and supportance, as well in
Politic, as natural bodies: the like in studies and labors of the mind.
Caesar's commentaries needed no Apology, because his power was able to defend
the^: Nor his Triu^ verboru^ literae, to the Roman Senate, Veni, vidi, vici,
crave any other enlargement, because his fame went still before him to dilate
his acts. In private, and inferior studies, that want countenance in
themselves, the extensiue power of greatness and authority gives strength, and
encouragement, to intensiue weakness, when our endeavors though unworthy of
acceptance are suffered in their minority, and insufficient age, to grow up
and prosper in the defensive bulwark of protection, against the storms of
envious and calumnious tongues, that by continuance, through use and practice,
they may happily afterward prove worthy of regard. In the want therefore of
mine own worth, I have presumed to shield my self under your worthiness: and
finding cause to distrust mine own strength, I have adventured to shroud my
self under your power: Humbly desiring your Honor so far to grace these my
labors, as to vouchsafe them a passage under your Patronage, that thereby
(though happily they have nothing in them to deserve your private reading and
account) they may yet the better by your countenance find admittance and
respect to public view. For I must confess they come much short, as well of
the worthynes of the Subject, that they treat of, as also of your regard and
estimation. If therefore out of your general respect to all, your Lordshippe
shall be pleased to vouchsafe me this particular favor, I shall hereafter
admit all times, and pretermit no occasions to manifest my duty, Ever remaining

Your Honors in all service: Anthony Nixon.

Sir Thomas Sherley his Travails, together with his three years imprisonment
in Turkey, his Enlargement by his Majesty's Letters to the great Turk: and
lastly, his safe return into England this present year, 1607.
IT is a natural quality, both customarie, and commendable in all Countries,
to enlarge their fames, by divulging the memorable Acts of such worthy
personages, whose Noble Spirits, shown by their honorable attempts and
atchieuements, have drawn other Nations into admiration of their valors, and
emulation of their virtues. It were then a fault unpardonable in us of the
English Nation (whose acts and high attempts have not given place to any
people) to bury in oblivion the virtues of those our country Men, whose noble
deeds deserve for ever to live upon the tongues of men, with honorable
mention. Amongst whom, the Three Heroes of our Time, the hopeful issue of a
happy father, have so glorified their names by their honorable Acts, and
hostile employments, against the common Enemy of Christendom: that honor by
them has added to her glory, and Envy lost the sting of her Detraction. And
here am I drawn into a deep meditation of the Mind of man how infinite it is
in opinion, and weening, and unquiet by Nature: that where it is once set upon
the desire of honor, nothing can stay, or limite her adventures: But as the
Clouds are harried by the winds from one part of the Hemispheare to the other,
so the Body is carried by the Mind, even through the world, by land, by sea,
with toil and danger, making it to suffer hunger, watching, and cold; where at
home, it might sleep with peace, and feed with plenty. The manifestation
whereof, is known in the tedious Travails, and dangerous Adventures of these
three excellent spirits, that having no other Motives, but the honorable
desire and pursuit of Glory (which indeedeis the Spur to every noble mind)
have justly by their deserts obtained her, both for themselves, and for their
Country: whose fame and renown, being by them made known, me thinks they were
unkindly used by us, to be made strangers here at home. Having therefore
received some particulars of their travels, and their Occurrents in them,
though (I must confess. I am but lame as well in the instructions of their
Adventures, as also in mine own worth, to display their worthiness; I have
neuertherlesse attempted, though not to satisfy, yet in some sort to make
known to expectation (which ever gapes after Novelties,) their variable
fortunes, and honorable imploiments in strange Countries, and under great
Kings, so far as my knowledge of them, and hability in my self, will give me
leave.

And first to begin with Sir Thomas Sherley the younger, who as he was eldest
by the Fortune of his birth, so is he not inferior to the rest in the
commendable parts, and honorable qualities of his mind; though happily not so
succesfull in his Travels, as his other brethren: He began his last voyage in
Anno 1602. who having long time kept the Seas vnprosperously, and with unequal
fortune to his hopes and deseruings at length landed in Italy, and was for a
time highly respected in the Duke of Florence his Court, where he carried
himself in that honorable port as became both a Soldier and a Courtier, in
all those commendable qualities that serve both for use and ornament. But to
stay there long, was no life for him: the State being settled, and no
employments foreign, or domestical, fit for the level of his thoughts and
purposes; which aiming at a higher project, grew soon weary of the pleasures
of Italy. Which the Duke perceiving, and knowing the wants that his long
vayage by Sea had before bronght upon him, did honorably furnish him with such
necessaries, as for his purposed employments did fully satisfy his longing
expectation.

Being thus once more at Sea, full of hope and courage, he lay houering too,
and again a long time upon the Straites of Giblater, in a continual
expectation of some purchase or other, to satisfy the desires both of
himself, and of his company. In whom of late he found a strange alteration,
both in their countenances, and behauiours toward him, sauouring of Discontent
(the dangerous disturber of any settled state) whether it was derived from a
despair they had of the success of the voyage, or from a desire of return to
England, I know not; but afterward it turned to a mutinous revolt. He first
persuaded them with fair words of hope and comfort, and afterward for the
time appeased them; by applying himself in many things to their humors: but as
fire cannot be hid, whose smoke betraies it, so this poison of their minds
and intents, could not be long contained, but at last it brake out into an
vlcerous falsehood, and mischief which occasion afterward did thus reveal.

Sir Thomas having spent some time, and much part of his victuals in the
Straits, and doubting of success to satisfy the greedy hopes, and vngorg'd
desires of his company, and fearing least through idleness he might add more
matter to their mutinous minds, having three Ships, and five hundredth men,
held on his course toward Turkey. In the mouth of the Straits he met with a
great Hulke, and (having cause given) fought with her a long time before he
could come to boarde her, and afterward fought 8. hours aboard, before he
could take her. In this fight he lost above an hundredth of his own men,
besides those that were hurt and maimed: and when all his cards were told, he
found that the gain did not answer the loss he had sustained.

Thus the hopes of his company being frustrate, and failing of their
expectation, are ready upon the least cause to turn the nature of command
into contempt, whereof at that time some of his company gave an ill president;
for that present night one of his three ships forsook him, and ran away.

From thence with his two bigger ships he went to Legorne, where he stayed
eight days, as well to refresh his hurt men, and to furnish himself of fresh
water and victuals, which he then wanted; as also to receive directions from
the Duke of Tuscan, during which time diverse Merchants corrupted his men and
made them mutinous, alleging that the course he took was indirect, and
dangerous, his plots shallow and unlikely to succeed, and that he faild of
warrant and authority for his proceedings. Thus the matter of their mutiny
being set on fire, which burnt up all duty in the^, possessing them with
nothing but a neglect of obedience, which in their looks, words, and
behauiours was soon made known. Sir Thomas being much perplexed in mind
through this unnatural revolt of his men, and using all means he could to
appease them, with much care and discomfort took sea again. But the third
night after when he came within kenne of Capaslera, a Town in the Island of
Scicilia, one Peacocke an English Pilot, whom not long before he had taken in
at Legorne, went away with his second ship.

Of Sir Thomas his attempts in Turkey, and the treacherous revolt of the rest of
his company.
IT is the nature of Fortune seldom times to be singular either in her
frowns or favors, but that one is commonly heaped on the neck of another, as
appeared in this wayning state of Sir Thomas his hopes, for the next morning
after this revolt of Peacocke, a like part was played even in his own ship, for
the most part of his men begun a dangerous mutiny against him. They plainly
told him that they would be no longer under his command, and did absolutely
refuse to follow the courses and plots that he had laid, alleging with
unkind words and uncomely speeches, that their hopes and expectations were
deceived of him, that he was both uncircumspect in his attempts, and
unfortunate in his actions, they utterly dislike his intendments, refusing to
hear any thing that might sound of it, there being no possibility of good,
and a certain and continual assurance of danger; lastly they protested unto
him that they would still keep the Sea, and be no longer restrained of their
own purposes, but lay hold upon all occasions that should be offered to enrich
themselves, and satisfy their longing hopes Perfas, aut nefas, by any means
whatsoever. Sir Thomas being much perplexed with the contempteous and unruly
behavior of his men in his own ship first used threats and menaces besitting
his place and command: but the mutiny being general, and that he that was
their General being forsaken and left alone, he did but thereby add fuel unto
that fire that raged so fore in the minds and tongues of his mutinous company,
that he was enforced at last to leave all the extent of the authority of a
Commander, and as a common and a private person, with tongue, gesture, and
countenance unanswerable to his mind, in mild terms and gentle words, to
entreat them that they would not thus despise and forsake him, whom they
before had called their Captain, and their General, and had vowed to follow
him in all his Fortunes. Let not (quoth he) the conceit of our hard success
discourage your hopes so far, as to make a desperate account both of your
selves and me; neither suffer the remembrance of those runagates that have so
trecherously forsaken me, draw you on to do the like, by their example, I
have made choice of you, into whose hands I have committed my life, and
whatsoeueris dear unto me. Two ships I have already lost, not by the
vnsteadfast fortunes of the Sea, but by the unfaithful dealing of my
followers: I have only this one left me, and you in it, in whom I have
hitherto put a special trust; wherein it you likewise deceive me, let me not
live any longer, lest one day I record the place, where you unkindly and
unmanly forsook, and betrayed your Captain: We have yet a living hope of our
success, which if you kill not by these Mutinous dissentio^s, may yet ere long
enrich your expectations: for mine own part, I shall omit nothing that may do
you good, nor do any thing unfit or unworthy either your account of me, or
mine own reputation.

His men nothing satisfied with these words, but bearing still a mutinous and
rebellious mind against their Captain; Sir Thomas in doubt what to do,
calls before him the Lieuetenant, the Master his Mate, the Master gunner, and
other principal Officers in the Ship, and demanded of them, whether they
joined in mind and malice with the company against him: They answered him, that
they had no such meaning; but protested unto him, they were willing to sollow
him, and obey him, as it should please him to dispose of them, and to partake
with him in all his Fortunes. Whereupon Sir Thomas taking advantage of their
proffers, joined with them in the persuasion of the rest: and so for the time
the mutiny was appeased. Sir Thomas to keep his company still employed,
directed his course toward Millo, with a purpose to have taken an English
Pirate that was there; but foul weather and contrary winds drove him to Geo:
where he found a Venetian Ship at Anchor: and here again his men began to
mutiny, and he had much a do to keep them from spoiling that Ship. The
greedines of that prey, and the ill affection they had to make trial of their
Fortunes, elsewhere, increased their mutiny extremely; which with much ado,
was once again pacified: and in this place, by contrary winds, he was forced
to stay eight days. And to divert their humor, by putting Idleness from them,
he attempted the surprising of an Island belonging to the Turk, which was not
far off: the inhabitants being both Turks and Greeks; which in this sort
was managed, and put in execution.

The 15. of January 1602. Sir Thomas landed one hundred of his men between 3.
or 4. of the clock in the morning, the Moon being at full, and shining very
clear; he divided them into two squadrons: whereof the vanguard was
commanded by his Lieutenant, and he himself lead the Rere: and thus they
marched up toward the Town, being three miles distant from the Sea: after
they had passed thorough a plain, which was about a Mile in length, they came
to a crooked rock, through the which, there was a way cut so narrow, that not
above two men could march afronte. Having passed the rock without any
interruption, they came to a hill, which was very high and steep, and having
recovered the top thereof, they saw the Town, and were soon masters
thereof, it being a place vndefencible: and suddenly abandoned of the
inhabitants, who fled into the woods and rocks, and other places impassable.
Here he gave charge upon pain of death, that no Soldier of his company should
touch the person or goods of any Christian; but that needed not, for they had
carried all their goods with them, leaving naught behind, but their naked and
empty houses. Being thus in possession of the Town, where finding nothing to
satisfy their expectations, and in doubt what to do, whether to go forward,
or to return, he suddenly had intelligence by his Espials, that a great
rabble of the Islanders had gathered head together, with purposed resolution to
set upon them, and of greater force then they were able to withstand: which Sir
Thomas understanding: and perceiving his men to murmur, and be afraid,
commanded his Liuetenant to lead them down the hill, in a Souldierlike
retreat, and to keep an easy pace toward the Ship, encouraging them not to
fear the number of the Turks, for that they were a people in those parts
vnpractized and unskillful in any Military Discipline, and their best weapons
were but staves and stones. He further gave directions, that when they came
into the plain, they should make a stand, assuring there could be no danger
for them there: and for his own part, he promised to do the like with the
rereward. But his me^ being now changed from mutiners to cowards, not observing
any charge or direction of their Captain, without any order posted down the
hill, as fast as they could trot: which the Rere perceiving began to do the
like. Whereupon Sir Thomas, taking a Gentleman by the hand, went a head the
Rere, and so stopped the passage, that except they would have trod upon him,
they could not pass in that troubled and disordered manner. Here they were sore
beaten with stones, and many of his men hurt, and himself hurt in the leg:
howbeit, they maintained skirmish a while with them, and killed some of them, and
then marched quietly for a quarter of a mile, the inhabitants still watching
all advantages to endamage them: but at last they recovered the plain, which
was within a mile of their Ship; where, when the Rere perceived that the
Uanguard was fled so far before, that they were ready to go aboard, they
followed as fast after, leaving their Captain in the midst of all his enemies,
where he could not make any of his men to stay, and share fortunes with him,
notwithstanding be commanded, persuaded, and entreated all he could.

Sir Thomas being thus forsaken of his me^, and environed of his enemies,
having neither mind to fly, nor desire to live with a settled resolution, and
out of all hope of life, yet desirous to sell it at as dear a rate as he
could, pressed upon his enemies, and having ten Greeks assayling him at once
(only accompanied with two that could not escape) forced himself to make way
through them, bestowing his blows on all sides, that the Islanders themselves
well perceived, how hard a matter it had been for them to have ouerthrown, or
defeated his company, if the rest had retained his courage, and resolution. But
he being ouercharged with multitudes, was in the endesore wounded, and beaten
down: where being thus taken, and disarmed, they only can judge, that have
undergone the like danger (if any such there be) what thoughts possessed his
mind, when in this change of Fortune he found himself forsaken of his own
men and now in the hands of a trustlesse, bloody, and barbarous people.

The misery of Sir Thomas Sherly his imprisonment in a Turkish Island.
THough it be a heavy thing for a man to fall from a happy and prosperous
estate into a wretched and lamentable condition, yet is affliction the true and
perfect trial or touchstone of the soul and mind of man: for she makes a
deep search into our inward parts, whether she can find a residence of those
heavenly and humane virtues, that in the time of calamity ought to be in every
Christian: whereof, she found such store in the immutable mind of this most
worthy gentleman, that notwithstanding this forlorn and miserable change of
his estate, he nevertheless held on the settled course of that confidence and
constancy, that he before had in the time of his prosperity. But to return
to our History: Sir Thomas and two of his men being thus taken, and in the
hands of ten of the Inhabitants, nine of them were resolved to kill him,
howbeit the tenth by entreaty and persuasion saved his life; but they stripped
him of all he had, even to his boots and stockings, and binding his hands
with one of his garters led him back bare footed through the rock, so into
the Town. In all which time there was not a Grecian man or woman that they met
by the way, but either did, or assaild to strike him: His Ship staide ^.
days after in the harbor, but never made any attempt either by force or
entreaty for his delivery. All the while the ship staid there, they kept him
in irons, but when the ship was gone, they took them off, and used him in
better manner then he expected from the hands of so barbarous a people. Here
was he kept prisoner for the space of a whole month, and from thence was sent
in a small open boat to Nigro Ponte, and there delivered to the Caia, for so
is the principal officer of that Island called: at the first he was used
kindly, and entreated well, but safly kept, and watched every night with a
guard of eight men, 4. Turks, and 4. Greeks. After the end of five days, he
lent him a Ianissarie to carry his letters to the English Consul of Petrasle,
which was 5. days journey from thence, howbeit he received no answer of his
letters from the Consul; but upon the Ianissaries return, he was presently
committed into a dark dungeon, and with a great gally chain, bound fast with
a slave that was before taken, which grieved him worst of all.

He continued in this loathsome prison, from the 20. of March, 1602. until the
25. of July 1603. during which time, his best diet was but bread and water, and
his warmest lodging, the cold ground: having oftentimes besides the misery of
his imprisonment, many threats and menaces sent him, sometimes of death,
sometimes of the Galleys; being thus out of al hope of liberty, and in a daily
expectation of death, without any comfort, but such as his patience ministered
unto him, where nothing was presented to the eye, or ear, but matter of horror
and despair; yet did he still retain in his mind, that guidance and command
of his affections, as they were never much moved, or inwardly disturbed with
the outward distraction of his senses. In this time he wrote diverse letters
to the English Ambassador at Constantinople, entreating him that in regard of
his country, he would deal with the Admiral Bashaw (whose prisoner he in
right was) for his enlargement, protesting that as he was a gentleman, (whose
name and family he knew well) he would in as short time as he could postbly
requite his kindness at full to his contentment. But prisons are like graves,
where a man, though alive, is nevertheless buried from the regard, or respect of
any; for the Ambassador did not answer any of his letters, but told the Bashaw
he might use him according to his discretion. During this time of his
miserable imprisonment, some or other had informed the Bashaw, that he was
able to pay 50. thousand Chickeno's for his ransom: whereupon the Bashaw sent
him guarded by 4. Cappages, (whom we here call Pursiuants) from Nigro Ponte
to Constantinople. Thus were his miseries ended in one place, to be begun and
continued in another.

His misery in his imprisonment in Constantinople.
THe sick man that shifteth place, yet alters not his disease, finds little
comfort in the change of air, or climate, for that the nature of sickness does
kill, or control that pleasure and delight, which commonly keeps company
with a healthful body. Such was the condition of Sir Thomas in his remove
from Nigro Ponte to Constantinople, for both his usage by the way, and his
entertainment there gave him small cause of comfort, in that only he found the
place was changed, but not the nature of his imprisonment.

Between Nigro Ponte and Constantinople is five hundredth miles, and all that
way he was carried upon a Moyle, riding upon a pack-saddle with a great gally
chain about his legs, and another about his waste, and many times his legs
bound under the horse belly, sometimes he lay in houses, sometimes under trees,
and whenever he lay in any Town where there were any stocks, there they
lodged him: and when they faild of such a place, they bound his legs together
with a little chain, besides the great chain about his waste, and his hands
fast locked with manacles of iron: his guard were the 4. Cappages which were
sent by the Bashaw: It would have moved the patience of the best tempered mind,
to hear, and be forced to endure the dispightful taunts and approbrious
speeches, which though not by their language, yet by their stearne countenances
and behauiours, he might well understand in all his journey between Nigro
Ponte, and Constantinople, The 12. day after their setting forth, about three
of the clock in the after noone, they entered the City: Immediately upon his
coming, he wrote again to the Ambassador giving him to understand the cause
of his imprisonment, together with the manner of his former usage, and the
nature of his present misery: he much importund him that he would not leave him
in his calamity, nor suffer him, being his Countryman, and a Gentleman, to
spend his hope, his youth, his fortune, nay his life, in so vild and
dishonorable a prison, under the cruel tyranny of an unbelieving people. But
he flatly sent him word, That he would neither meddle nor make with him. Sir
Thomas being thus left all desolate and disconsolate, still armed himself with
his wonted patience, and settled confidence against the horror of despair, not
suffering his mind to be chained, and fettered (as his body) with servile
thoughts and fearful apprehensions; but in the freedom of his Spirit
maintained her liberty, and in the midst of all his fears, made hope the
predominant.

The next day after his coming to the City, he was brought before the
Bashaw, who demanded what he made in the Arches, and why in that hostile manner
against the law of Arms, and condition of the League betwixt both kingdoms,
without any leave or admittance, he had landed a forcible power, with purpose
to spoil and prey in that part of the Turks Dominion? sir Tho. answered, that
being violently driven into wants by the Fortunes of the sea and his long
travels, he was compelled to land, only to refresh his men, and the rather in
that country which he knew to be friend unto his King. The Bashaw replied
again, that his entrance was against law, and right and that he was justly
his prisoner, and thereupon asked him presently, and in peremptory manner, what
ransom he would pay for his delivery? Sir Thomas told him he knew no reason
he should be enforced to pay any ransom being in a friends hands, whom
neither in substance nor circumstance he had offended: and that if his cause
were rightly scand by an impartial Judge, together with the long time and vilde
manner of his imprisonment, it would be thought but equity, that he himself
should both require, and receive a sufficient recompense for the wrongs and
miseries that he had sustained. Finally, he told the Bashaw that he held him in
his own conceit and opinion, to be too just, and honorable to demand a ransom
of him, that never deserved to be a prisoner. But (to be brief) the Bashaw
told him that he knew he was a malefactor, and that his acts were violent and
indirect, which he auerd he could not answer, or otherwise the Ambassador
would not have abandoned him: withal protested with a high voice, and stearne
countenance, that he would have 50. thousand Chickeno's for his ransom, or his
head for satisfaction. sir Tho. doubting the cruelty of this barbarous Turk,
and being much wearied and weakened with the misery of a long and vilde
imprisonment, to buy some ease and quietness, was content to promise the payment
of 12. thousand Chickeno's, with condition that he might be well used, and
wear no more irons: the proffer was neither taken, nor refused; howbeit a
promise was made that he should be well entreated, but it was slenderly kept;
for he was had presently into the porters lodge in the great Turks Court, and
put into a filthy common Jail; where, though the first night he had a good
supper, he found no other bed to lie upon, but the cold stones: Now ebeit,
this had been well, if worse had not succeeded: for the Bashaw belike having
new intelligence both of his state and aliance, and supposing that no better
means could be used for the recovery of his ransom, then rough handling,
gave strait charge that he should from time to time be worser handled then
hitherto he had been, since the first time of his imprisonment.

Whereupon, the next morning at break of day he was removed to a worser
place, and both his feet put into the Stocks, a great iron chain about his
neck, both his hands tied before him, and his body stretched out all along,
with a great sharp stone laid under the raines of his back; so that it was
impossible for him to stir, being also vexed continually with lyee, which
was not the least torment he endured: so that he often wished that the
sentence of his death had been pronounced, and did willingly frame his
thoughts, and order his mind, to entertain with patience the destiny of such
a doom: for this misery touched him so near, that he was content to
relinquish all hope and desire of life, and to meditate on nothing, but of
death.

He continued in this estate, from Saturday the 23 of August, 1603. until the
Tuesday following* in which time, he was suffered to rise but 4. times in 24.
hours. That Twesday, about nine of the clock, he was brought again into the
presence of the Bashaw, as he fate in open Court, where he renewed his old
demand of filtie thousand Chickeno's. All Christian Ambassadors have in the
Bashawes Court continually two Interpreters, to have a care and regard of such
causes and occurrents, as may concern their Country. This day the English
Ambassador had none there, belike to avoyde the unportunities that Sir Thomas
in this his Tragic state might have used. But to return to the Bashaw his
demand: Sir Thomas answered him, that he found little constancy in his words;
that if his life might make satisfaction, that was in his power: and more just,
and honorable it were for him to take it, then to prolong it still with
torment: for his own part, he would promise no more, because he could
perform no more. To be brief, he told him, he might have his life, but never
his demand. The Bashaw never replied, but presently commanded his head should
be stricken off. But though he was rash in the doom, he did deliberate in the
deed: for Sir Thomas was carried back into prison, where though he found
rather an increase, then any mittigation of his former torments, yet was his
life still preserved by the miraculous power of Almighty God.

The Continuation of Sir Thomas Sherleys misery in his imprisonment in
Constantinople.
SIr Thomas being thus returned into prison, and his old torments renewing,
having small hope of life, and less expectation of release, every hour
awayting the execution of his doom; a certain Jew dwelling in the City,
understanding his imprisonment, and his vild manner of handling; and that he
was also a Gentleman of account, and estimation in his Country: in pity and
compassion of his estate, found the means to come and speak with him in
prison: where, after a few salutations, the Jew reasoned with him in this
manner. As you are a stranger both by your birth, and language, to this Nation;
so you also seem to be strange and ignorant of their Natures and Conditions.
I have heard of your long imprisonment, and though I know not the cause, yet I
grieve much at the manner of your handling. You shall do well in this, rather
to follow my counsel, that have a little experience of their customs, then
wilfully to cast your self away by ignorance. Be ruled by me, and make promise
of this great sum of money to the Bashawe, but take a long time for the
payment. It can be no way prejudicial to you, if you way your own state, and
his case aright: for if your King hold his amity with the Turk, and that the
league be continued, whereof there is yet no doubt, you may before the prefixed
day taken for the payment, by the benefit of your King, be freed without
ransom. If that fail, and a far less sum be brought in the mean time,
and that he finds there is small hope of more; they will rather accept that,
though it be little, then hazard your life, and so loose all. And I will also
give you a further comfort, which though it proceeds but from mine own
opinion, without particular intelligence of any such matter, (for in this
blindfolded state of Turkey, men may observe, howbeit know nothing, but to
obey:) This Bashaw, this great adversary of yours, that now has your life in
pursuit, is like ere long to loose his own, for the nature and quality of
his place will not hold an officer long.

Sir Thomas having a Woolfe by the ear, wherein there was danger, either to
hold or let go* doubting whether he were best follow the counsel of a Jew,
or trust the cruelty of a Turk: yet having well wayed his words, wherein he
could find nothing that sauoured of deceit, he thought it best to follow his
advice. And so holding that determination, he found means shortly to send unto
the Bashaw, to whom he promised forty thousand Chickeno's, conditionally to
have reasonable day for the payment, and in the mean time to be used like a
Gentleman, to be kept in a house by himself, and not to be troubled with all
manner of Rascals: to have allowed him two hundred Aspers a day for his diet,
which is ten shillings sterling, and a servant to wait upon him.

The Bashaw was glad to receive this proffer, and promised him more then he
demanded: that he should have a good house, and a fair garden; that he should
have two hundred Aspers a day allowed him, and two servants, at his choice,
either men or women to attend upon him: and that for his money he should have
good meat, and wine, because (quoth the Bashaw) I will have you contented.

Though Sir Thomas was glad of this proffer, yet was there an occasion
ministered very soon after to dislike it: for the next day the English
Ambassador wrote unto him that he was as sorry for his error, as for his
imprisonment, and that he entangled himself into an intricate laborinth; out
of the which, he could not wind himself, without payment of the money. He
therefore advised him, to revoke his promise, and by no means to accept the
Bashawes proffer: for if he did, he was either tied to his word, or his life
to the Turks disposing: and to comfort him withal, he told him that within
ten days he would procure his release, get him home to his own house, and
become his Bail.

Whereupon Sir Thomas trusting the Ambassadors promise, refused the Bashawes
proffer, and so was carried back into his old prison, where with great
misery and distress, he lay long after.

About Michaelmas after, this Visior Bashawe his great Adversary was hanged,
according to the Jews Prophecy, which gave him cause to entertain a new
hope of his Delivery: for presently upon the death of the Bashawe, he wrote
agame to the Ambassador, requesting him that now he would remember him, or
never, for now was the time, if it pleased him to extend his eredit in the
Court, to procure his Release, his Adversary being dead, and no bar in the
way to hinder it: and this he did with the greater instance importune, because
(quoth he) I am not able to hold out long, having endured so many grievous,
and strange afflictions: and being so much weakened with the tedious and
miserable indurance of the same.

Howbeit, the Ambassador returned him this discomfortable answer, That he
could do nothing, till there were a new Visior Bashawe ordained in his
place, and then he would do what he could for him.

It was ten days before there was a new one made: As soon as he was
installed, the Ambassador (as Sir Thomas was informed) dealt with him for his
liberty: but to no purpose, for the Bashaw answered him, that it lay not in
his power to do him any good, for that he was a prisoner belonging to the
great Turk, and therefore could not be delivered without his consent.
Whereupon the Ambassador preferred a petition to the great Turk in his
behalf, who presently gave commandment he should be enlarged the day
following, which was Thursday: and undoubtedly, had the Ambassador not slacked
this matter, but presently laid hold upon the Turks command, it had been an
easy matter to have set him at liberty that night. But whether it was the too
much confidence that he had in the Turks variable and uncertain humor, or
that other business and intendements of his own carried his thoughts other
ways* or that it was so ordained, that Sir Thomas his miseries should not yet
have end, I cannot tell, but the matter of his release was lingered, till the
Sunday following. At which time, upon new aduertisements the commandment of
his liberty was reuersed, and he retained still in prison, laden with more
cares, and less hope then ever he had.

The manner of Sir Thomas Sherley his delivery, by the benefit of the King of
Englands princely and gracious letters to the Turk.
THe Merchant after a long, and dangerous voyage, having recovered with safety
the Haven of his desire, though utterly lost the fruit of all his labors,
recounts with pleasure the perils past, leaving a glad memorial to be told in
after times by his posterity: for Contraria contrariis magis elucescunt,
Contrary is best known by his contrary: we should never know the excellency
of rest, but by labor; nor of plenty but by want; nor of safty but by danger;
nor of liberty, but by restraint. And I doubt not also but sir Thomas,
together with the pleasure that he now conceiues in the remembrance of his
forepassed miseries, does not forget in his daily prayers the sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving, unto that divine power that preserved him so
wonderfully in all his troubles, and delivered him so happily, even from the
very gate, and gulf of death and danger. But to return to Turkey, for we
have not yet brought him to England. Within a fortnight after the countermaund
of his delivery, the great Turk died-leauing his son, (a boy of some 14.
years) to succeed him: sir Thomas in this new world, retains a new hope of
his delivery, and not slacking to lay hold of any occasion, writes again to
the Ambassador, requesting him with much importunity, that it would please
him to take the opportunity of this tune for his release, for that he had a
hope, the young King whose mind was flexible, might easily be wrought to deal
graciously with him. Howbeit the Ambassador sent him word, that they boy King
could do him no good, he being by reason of his youth under government and
protection; till either the Admiral came, who was then upon the confines of
Turkey; or the Protector, who was shortly to return out of Egypt. At the
arrival of either of them (whosoever was first) he protested he would
solicit him in his behalf, and doubt not but he should soon work the
means of his delivery; in the mean time he willed him to comfort himself,
for he would not pretermit any occasion proffered to do him good Sir Thomas
lingered on this hope, and bare out the brunt of many a cold and bitter hour,
until the first of December, at what time the Admiral was returned: who being
importuned by the Ambassador; answer was made, that he would not deal with
the Prisoner, till the coming of the Protector. Not long after the Protector
returned, whom the Ambassador belike finding intractable, soon gave over his
suite.

The first day the Protector sat in Judgment, was Christmas day, before whom
Sir Thomas was sent for to appear, and this day also the Ambassador had no
Interpreter there. The Visior Bashaw having called him before him, asked him why
he was committed to prison? Sir Thomas answered boldly, that his fortune, and
the mistaking of his attempt and enterprise in the Island was first the cause
of his restraint, but the malice and ill opinion that Hashan Bashaw conceived
against him, without cause, had held him so long, a poor and miserable
prisoner: Honorably desiring the Protector, that since there was nothing
questionable that might touch his life, except the enforced power, and extent
of authority; and that if any fault were committed, his punishment was greater
then the crime: That it would please him now at last to give him his liberty.
But here was no such grace seated in the Protectors heart, for without any
reply, process, or order of law, he gave a present, and peremptory command,
That he with his two men should be hanged. It booted him not to ask why; but
having prepared his mind before to such an horror, and living long in a
continual expectance thereof, he yielded himself willingly thereunto; for he
knew well that naught but his death would satisfy the doom. Hereupon was sir
Thomas and his two men bound all together, and lead presently away toward the
place of execution: what could he wish in such a case (besides his divine
meditations) but that his mind and thoughts might suddenly be transported
into England, to execute his tongues office, (that is) to commend his humble
duty to his Father, and his kind remembrance to his friends and allies; to let
them understand the miseries of his imprisonment, and the vildnes of his death,
occasioned by the treachery and cowardice of his own men: from thence he might
wish them suddenly posted to Spain and Persia, that his honorable brethren
might understand the manner of his life and death, that in their hostile
employments against the Turks, they might be sufficiently revenged of his
death. But God did suddenly possess the heart of one of the Interpreters to
the Venetian Ambassador with a Christian pity, and regard of his estate, who
suddenly repaired (for otherwise that had bin too late) to the Protector,
beseeching him that he would not in his fury take away the life of so gallant
a gentleman, upon bare surmises that if he held him worthily a prisoner, (and
that but supposed) being no greater, it might please him rather to take his
ransom, then his life. At the first the Protector was very obstinate, being
importuned, and having a hope of the gain of 40. thousand Chickeno's, (which
were proffered) made him a little to relent: and so he commanded to stay his
Execution. Thus Sir Thomas brought from the place of death, and presently
carried to another place little better, it being a prison called the seven
Towers, where he was put into a miserable dark dungeon, and extreme cold.
There he continued till one of the clock in the afternoon the next day; at
which time the Ambassador having understood of the misery of that place, sent
one of hismen to the Jailer to entreat him, that he might be removed to some
better place: whereupon he was had out of the dungeon, and put together with
his two men, into a little shed, but two yardes square, built against a wall;
having neither clothes, bed, fire, nor any good meat. In this state he
continued fourteen days, in extreme cold, weather, of frost and snow:
during which time, one of his men perished, and died even of very cold: and he
himself was so benumbed in all his limbs, as he feared he should never again
have the use of them. In this poor estate he continued till the beginning of
April, 1604, at which time there were Letters sent from the Kings Majesty to
the great Turk, and money from his Father; for before that time, he had
received no news out of England: But whether by negligence, or some ill
accident, the letters were lost; Notwithstanding, by reason of his money, he
was admitted to buy a Chamber, and to hire a Servant to attend upon him, being
still a prisoner, and having a watchful guard about him. Thus he continued till
the Christmas following; In which time his father having understanding of his
great misery sustained, together with the loss of his Majesty's former
Letters, and his Sons present case (as it stood) became again an humble
suitor to the King in his Sons behalf, and eftsoons obtained his Majesty's
gracious letters to the great Turk for his delivery: howbeit those letters did
not work his release, for he was still continued in prison: But by means of
them he had not torture, nor torment inflicted upon him, as before, but
continued a prisoner till the middle of November. 1605. It which time his
Majesty of his Princely grace and favor, directed new Letters to the Turk, of
greater force then before: by veriue of which, and God assisting) he was
delivered, upon friday, the sixth of December, in the year aforesaid: which was
in this manner. The Protector Bashaw that day came in person to the prison, and
causing him to be brought forth; delivered him, together with his man, into the
hands of the Lord Ambassador with these words, He is your Prisoner till the
morning. Thus being delivered, but not absolutely freed; the Lord Ambassador
received him, promising to send him the next morning to the Duana, which is the
name they give to their principal, Court: because the Bashaw told him the
Emperor held him to be his lawful prisoner, and that he had forfeited his
life unto him. Howbeit to gratify the Ma. of England, he was pleased to give
him as a present to his King, and therefore he should be delivered to his Ma.
officers in open Court.

The next day following, being Saturday, he was brought into the Duana, there
was no great doubt or question made of his delivery, only the Testados (who
is, as we term him, the L. Treasurer) cast forth a word about the Kings
Letters, aduising the Bashaw to consider what he did, in the delivery of him,
for that he seemed to be a great man.

The Cadiliscar, (that is as it were the chief Judge in deciding men's causes)
answered, he knew that well enough, and it was so general understood, for so
great Kings, (quoth he) as is the Majesty of England, use not to write for
mean men; and that their Emperor had freely given him to the King of great
Britain, and therefore willed him to hold his peace: but his man ran a
daugerous fortune that day, for diverse great men of the court stood much
against him, affirming the Bashaw had no reason to deliver him, because he was
neither mentioned in his Majesty's Letters, nor in the Emperors grant. But
the Bashaw having under hand the pronuse of a great sum of money, after a
speech made, and some solemnity used, delivered both. Howbeit, the Monday
following, being the 16. of December, remembering himself began to find his
error, and to be afraid that he had run into danger for releasing of his
man, and thereupon presently sent to the Lord Ambassador, that he would send
both Sir Thomas and his man to him again. The L. Ambassador went to the
Bashaw himself, refusing to send either of them back, and with much ado
persuaded the Bashaw, for though he found no danger in Sir Thomas, yet he
teared much the Bashaw had a purpose to stay his man: and Sir Thomas was very
loath to have his man returned again to his miserable kennell. The Turk is
very strickt and prccise in punishing faults in his Officers, for that very
Evening the Bashaw was deprived of his place, for to other cause, but
delivering of his man without Commission.

Thus ended the tedious trouble and misery of Sir Thomas Sherley in his
imprisonment, which beginning in the Island where he was first taken, the 15.
of January, in the year 1602. was afterward continued in Nigro Ponte, and at
last ended in Constantinople upon a friday the 6. of December, 1605. So that
the whole time of his imprisonment was 3. years, saving a few days. And here
is to be noted what a stamp and impression of duty and regard the countenance
of a Kings Letter makes in the hearts of subjects, though in places far
remote. For the Ambassador that before that time did but faintly assist him in
all his atte^pts and entreaties, and was many times afraid to speak in his
behalf, and often refused to trouble himself in this business; upon the
receipt of his Majesty's Letters, stood so stoutly by him, that he flatly
refused to send Sir Thomas or his man back, notwithstanding the strickt
command of the Visior Bashaw, who in his place was a man of principal
authority in the country. Sir Thomas stayed in Constantinople (a free man)
from the time of his delivery, which was the 6. of December, until the 15. of
February following, 1605. during which time, he took pleasure to solace
himself there, where before he had endured so much sorrow and misery, taking
a view and surucy of the seat, and situation of the City observing their
laws, customs, and ceremonies, beholding their Courts, Synagogues, and
Temples, with other things not unworthy a strangers observation. And upon the
15. of February he departed from Constantinople in a Ragousian Ship, called
the Maria de la Rosaria, and landed at Callipoly the 19. of the same month,
from thence to Naples, and so at last to England: where being joyfully
received of his Father, and his Friends, he now lives by the benefit of his
Majesty's favor.

FINIS.
SIR ANTHONY Sherley his Adventures, and Voyage into Persia.
MAnkind does unjustly, and without cause complain of the state and condition
of his life, for that it is frail, subject to infirmities, of a short
continuance, and governed rather by Fortune, then by Virtue. But if we shall
consider what excellent sparks of ornament there are yet left in Man's nature,
notwithstanding the soil of some, which by the corruption of Adam, is
universally centracted unto all: and that we would but descend into our minds,
to see what matter of worth there is, or might be lodged there, both for the
life, Active, and Contemplative: we should not find Mankind so wholly depraved
in his degenerate nature: but that we may observe some signs and tokens yet
left in him, of the notable light and resplendant beauty of his first
creation, which by the two principal parts whereon the mind consists, viz.
Understanding and Will, and the faculties belonging unto them, may easily be
made mauinifest, what notable memorials both of their studies, and travels,
have been recorded to the world, and worthy to be continued to all ages,
until the end of time, and the beginning of eternity, by the natural
instinct, and industrious labors of the mind, to check and control the dull
and sluggish conditions of such men, as in their homebred affections consume
their time in base humor, and the delights of idle pleasure. And when I think
upon the circumstance of the subject I am to entreat of, I am drawn into an
admiration, that Sir Anthony Sherley, having so slender beginnings, should
nevertheless continue that state, countenance, and reckoning, as he has done
ever since his departure out of England, even in the Courts of the greatest
Princes, in, and out of Christendom: so far exceeding Stukeley, that I am
afraid to be taxed of an impartial, and rash judgment, but to intimate a
comparison between them, there being so great difference, both in the manner of
their travels, the nature of their employments, and the end of their
intendements. The one having his desire upon a luxurious, and libidiuous life:
The other having principally before him, the project of honor: which, not in
treacherous designs (as Stukeley attempted in the behalf of the Pope, against
his Country) he has impaired, or crazed: But contrariwise has so enlarged,
and enhaunsed the same, that his fame and renown is known, and made glorious
to the world, by his honorable plots and employments, against the enemy of
Christendom: which, according to the instructions I have received, I will
briefly relate unto you.

After Sir Anthony his departure out of England, he landed in a short time at
Vlishing, where being honorably entertained, and feasted by the Lord Sidney,
Lord Governor of the Garrison, he held on his journey toward the Hague, as
well to visit his Excellency, as to receive his pass for his better conuoy
through the Country. From thence he past along by many parts of Germany, as
Franckford, Noremberge, and so to Augusta, and from thence passed the Alps,
and within 10. days after came to Venice, having a purpose from thence, to
take his course to Ferrara, in aydance of the Duke against the Pope. But the
matter being before compounded, and agreed between them, that journey was
stayed.

He continued for the space of 10 weeks in Venice, where the Duke gave him
Princely entertainment* sending a mighty and Courtly banquet unto him, of al
sorts, of Italian delicates: but being soon tired with the pleasures of
Venice, in May following, having with others compounded for one Italian ship,
in one and twenty days he landed in an Island called Zane. In which time he
was much distressed for want of victuals, certain Italians being in the
ship, using them unkindly, of whom they could not get any for love or money.
Howbeit some Persians that were likewise in the ship, relieved them, and did
very kindly supply their wants. There fell also a jar between the English,
and the Italians, about the baffeling of one of their Country, for words of
Contumely, spoken against the late Queens Majesty, which iu the end was
pacified to the disgrace of the Italians, and the honor of the English. At
Zane he stayed 10. days, and was driven to take Sea in a little old open
boat, in which he passed with danger into the Isle of Candie, where he stay.
12. days, and was honorably entreated of the Governor of that Isle, it being
under the Venetia^ State. From thence he passed into the Isle of Ciprus, which
is part of the Turks Dominions: Here the Italians that before had iarred with
them in the ship (being landed before them in the Island, and bearing in mind
their old grudge) had so incensed the Inhabitants of Ciprus against Sir
Anthony, and his company, by telling them that they were Pirates, and Rouers,
waiting only for prey and spoil: that Sir Anthony and his company were no
sooner la^ded, but they were stayed by the Turks, and threatened to be sent
prisoners to Constantinople, but this storm was with a little money soon
ouerblowne.

From Ciprus he purposed to pass into the holy Land, and had hired a little
boat of some ten tun for that passage, but contrary winds drove him upon
Trypoly, passing the famous river of Orontes, where they were driven to endure
many villainies, and approbrious speeches by the Turks that dwelt upon the
borders of that River. From hence he sent to Antioch, to hire certain
Ianissaries to safeconduit him to Aleppo, being 6. days journey. At Aleppo he
was much honored, and respected by the English Consul, and other Merchants
there resident. Sir Anthony stayed at Aleppo 6. weeks, after which, having
received the Bashaws pass, (which is governor of that place) together with
the Consuls, and Vicconsuls for their safeconduit, through the heart of Turks
Country, he prosecuted his journey through the heart of Turkey, which he
found to be much unanswerable for the strength and populausnes, to the report
and opinion that the world conceiues of it. From Aleppo he came to a town
called Birrah, by which runs the famous river of Euphrates, that parts the
two Countries of Mesopotamia, and Syria: From hence after 7. or 8. days
tarriance, he sailed in the company of certain Turkish Marchchants along
Euphrates, by the space of 2. or 3. and twenty days, and were stayed by the
King of Arabs, (his Court and abiding being at that time upon the River side in
Tents) Before whom, Sir Anthony and his company being brought (after they had
kissed his hands) he demanded what they were? Answer being made they were
English Merchants, and come to traffic in those parts: the King was very
desirous to see their Merchandise, which they not daring to contradict; he
borrowed without any specialtie, thirty yardes of the richest cloth of silver,
to be paid, ad Calendas Graecas. From thence he iournied to Babylon, where,
by the Bashaw, all his goods were stayed, and arrested to be sold at his rate:
and they were constrained to take half that they were worth for payment. He
also extorted a great deal of plate from Sir Anthony, made of pure Emerald,
which he pretended to send as a present to the Persian King. Having stayed a
monteh or more in Babylon, he received Letters from Aleppo, wherein he was
councelled to make what have he could from thence, for that their were letters
shortly to come to Babylon, by which the Bashaw had a strict command to make
stay of him, and all his company: whereupon sit Anthony made what have he could
out of Babylon, being both weary of his entertainment there, and thoroughly
weakened with this news, and so passed through the waste Country of the Medes,
in company of a Carauan, which is a great many Camels together, and men to
drive them not much unlike to our English Carriars. Within six days after
they entered the Consines of Persia.

Of Sir Anthony Sherleys entertainment in Persia, and of his employments to
many Christian Princes, to join in League against the Turk.
TO set down the whole process of Sir Anthony his voiages and travels, both by
Sea, and Land, with his variable fortunes in them, from the time of his
departure out of England, till his coming into Persia, and the manner of his
receiving, and usage in several Courts of many foreign Princes, were a
Subject of it self, fit for a large volume, which happily my self or some
other more worthy (upon better intelligence of the occurrents thereof) may
hereafter publish to the world, as a matter worthy of memorial. I will now
relate his coming into Persia, his honorable entertainment there, and high
employments in those parts, according to the notes and instructions I have
received.

Sir Anthony after his long and weary iourneis, at last entered ye King of
Persia his Country, having his brother Robert Sherly in his company, who still
continued with him in all his travels, a kind and natural partaker of all his
fortunes. He found his entertainment good, the climate healthfully, the soil
fruitful; and full of pleasure; the people civil, and very gentle; far
differing from the nature of the Turks, whose Country he had already passed:
Insomuch that he wondered with himself, that being so little difference (as
there is) between them in climate, there should be so great diversity in
condition. The borderers understanding that his coming was to their King,
attended him with the more regard, and observance, and still as he past, sent
past before to the principal Officers of their towns, and cities, to give
notice of his coming, where he wanted not any thing that was worthy of
acceptance, both for himself, and his train. When he came near Casbin (their
Capital city in those parts) he sent word to the principal Governor, to give
him to understand what he was, and that he was come to see the King, hearing
of his worth. Whereupon the Governor prepared one of the Kings horses for him,
richly furnished, and appointed many gentleman of the best reckoning to
entertain him But Sir Anthony not desirous of any solemn entertainment,
being in his traveling apparel, (his carriage yet behind) and unfurnished
of show, stole by night at unawares into the city. Howbeit the Governor, the
next morning, accompanied with diverse of the chief Gentlemen of the Kings
house, with certain Officers also of the City, came to his lodging, where
after many Courtly salutations, according to the custom of the Country, he
told him, he was welcome, and that his presence would be very gracious, and
acceptable to the King: in whose absence, he should not want those things,
which either his own worth deserved, or the city could affoard, for his
pleasure, or provision: and that he would speedily direct Posts unto the King
(who was then in Person in the wars of the Tartarians, his borderers) to
inform his Majesty of his coming: and that in the mean time he would rest,
and solace himself in the City. Sir Anthony gave him thanks, and after some
complement between them, they parted for the cime each from other.

The next day, a post was dispatched to the King to give him notice, that a
Christian, a man of some account and reckoning, very well accompanied,
understanding of his great fame and power, was come from far to see him, and
to do him honor.

The King sent word back, that he should be well entreated, until his own
return. In which mean time, the Governor of the city, and the Kings Steward,
did many times feast Sir Anthony, and his company, bringing them to the Kings
Palace gate, to do that homage that all Strangers use to do: viz. To kiss
the entrance of his Palace 3. times.

Not many days after, the King made his return toward Casbin, and approaching
near unto the city, sent to the Governor, giving him commandment, that he
should furnish Sir Anthony and his company with horses, the next day to meet
him on his way, being then not far from the city. Which being performed
accordingly, Sir Anthony set forward toward the King, in this manner.

His whole company past not the number of xxvi. their apparel being rich, and
differing from the Persians, made a fair and delightful show: Sir Anthony
himself in cloth of gold, and his brother Robert in cloth of silver, both
their upper and under coats: some Gentlemen of his train, having their upper
ceats of cloth of silver, their nether coats of silk. The chief of his
servants in silk under coats, the upper crimson velvet: the rest in a fair
kind of stuff, all their upper coats being watched Damask. The King came
forward, in princely and triumphant manner, in honor of a late obtained
victory, against the Tartars: having a thousand of their heads advanced upon
Pikes, and carried before him, according to the custom of the country.

Sir Anthony being brought in presence of the King, dismounted his horse,
observing the manner of the country, and coming toward the King, bowed down
his body, to kiss his foot: which the King perceiving, did prevent, for in an
unusual manner he suddenly put his hand between his mouth, and his foot,
and so in a princely favor gave him his hand to kiss. The rest of his
company, according to the custom, performed that duty.

The King having welcomed Sir Anthony, caused him again to be mounted, and so
holding their way toward the city, Sir Anthony riding next unto the King: many
signs and tokens of favor and accepta^ce were all the way showed unto him.

Having entered the city, and the state and solemnity of the triumph being
that time to be performed, according to the custom, in honor of the late
succesull victory, the King commanded one of his greatest men to accompany
Sir Anthony, and to convey him and his company to the principal place of the
city, there to behold the solemn manner of the triumph. Which done, and the
King repaired to his Palace, he caused Sir Anthony to be brought before him:
who being by the Kings appointment, and his brother placed near unto him,
sitting upon his Throne, where he discoursed unto the Sophi of Persia, his
country, the state, power, and Majesty of his Prince, the religion, and
conditions of the people, the manner of government, with the nature and
discipline of their wars: then he descended to particularize the cause, and
the several occurrents of his Travels: Lastly, he declared the special matter
and occasion that drew him into Persia: namely the fame and renown that he
heard of his Acts and Government, and the inueterate hatred he bare unto the
Turks. The King was highly pleased with his discourse, and all this while
having well observed his speech, gesture, and countenance, he held him in his
conceit to be of very honorable reckoning, which after Princely thanks
given, and many graces and favors shown, he made manifest: for he took Sir
Anthony by the hand, and lead him into other inward Chambers, where being
that night royally feasted, he was after Supper by many principal Gentlemen
of the Court, conuayed and attended to his lodging, which in a far more
sumptuous manner then before, was newly provided for him. Not many days after,
the Persian King sent him a rich and costly present by his Steward, to
demonstrate his love, and the account and estimation he had of him.

Of the Manners, Conditions, and Customs of the Persians.
OUr English nation within these few years, by reason of their travels
(wherein I suppose they are at this day second to no country) have such
knowledge, and experience of all people, of their customs and conditions, that
it is an easy matter to control a writer, that discourses only upon report,
except he be truly and directly instructed, but so far as I have read and
heard by the testimony of such persons as know somewhat, (and have little cause
to say more then they know) I will be bold, for the better understanding of
those that are ignorant, in some sort, to relate the Manners and Conditions of
the Persians, as not impertinent to this present purpose.

For their devotion, it is much after the Turkish ceremonies, their Priests
somewhat differing in their Orders, and habit, their Temples and religious
places, much after their building and fashion. The Persian prays to Mahomet,
and Mortus Ally, The Turks both to them, and three others, that were Mahomets
servants: against which three, the Persian still inueighs, and is an enemy.

Their conceit of Christ, is, that he was a great Prophet, a most holy and
religious man, beloved of God, and mighty both in deed and word, but no way to
be compared to Mahomet, for Mahomet (say they) was that most excellent and
final Prophet, through whose grace, virtue, and power, all things concerning
the Resurrection, and salvation, are made full and perfect.

Further being only governed by Natural and Carnal knowledge, and wanting the
illumination of Gods heavenly and powerful Spirit to lighten the understanding
part of the Soul, with the inward apprehension of the excellent mysteries of
faith, and man's redemption, they affirm, that because God had never no wife,
nor never knew woman, it was therefore impossible that Christ could be his
son: So hard a matter it is for natural reason to comprehend the mysteries
of Faith. And therefore as Pallengenius says in his Zodiake: Succumbat ratio
fidei, et Captiua quiescat.

But to leave their religion to themselves, and their conversion to his divine
power that has their hearts in his disposing, let us speak a little of the
commodities that their Country affords. They have great plenty of silks of
all colors, great store of spices, drugs, pearls, and precious stones,
Carpets they make of diverse kinds, in which works they are excellent. Their
principal merchandise among themselves, is, to buy and sell men and women in
their markets, They are a people for the most part unlearned, ignorant in all
kind of liberal Sciences, yet are they good warriors, polliticke and valiant,
observing order, and discipline, they have heretofore been held a people
fierce and uncivil, little better then the Turks; But of late they are grown
very courteous, and respective unto strangers, by whose conversation they have
much bettred their manners and conditions. Certain Towns and Provinces,
belonging to the Persian, bordering upon the Turks, were lost by this Kings
predecessors, which he hops to recover, being now better able then ever they
were, or he himself has been in times past, for he has lately taken in
certain other Towns, upon the frontiers of the Turk, that will much
advantage him, whenever he begins to war. For the undertaking whereof, Sir
Anthony ceased not, during the time he lay in the City, by all importune
means, and forcible reasons, to animate and incense the Persian: alleging how
easy a matter it were for him, by his means, being a Christian, to join many
of the Christian Princes, his borderers, in League and friendship with him, and
draw them to the assistance of these wars, both with supplies in his own
Country, and also with powerful invasions in many other places of the Turks
dominions, far remote: that he being thus driven to sunder his forces into
many parts, his army should be the weaker against Persia, and he himself
being the head of this League and combination, would be the surer guarded. He
further alleged how honorable, and easy it would be for him not only to
recover those his Towns and Provinces, which now the Turk holds in his
possession: But be also able in short time to win upon him even in his own
Country, and that no time could be fitter then now, for that of late having
obtained a great victory against the Tartars he had no cause to fear them,
they being so weakened with their overthrow, that it was an easy matter for
his garrisons being manned, to keep them from all incursions, or other Acts of
hostility.

The Persian being tickled with this devise, and project of Sir Anthonies, set
the Lords a work in council and consultation of this ouerture, whilst he
himself in words and opinion gave his approbation, having now nothing in his
conceit, and fantasy, but plots, draughts, and stratagems, concerning this
war, and there was not a day past over his head, but he would send for Sir
Anthony and his brother, to confer with him about these matters, sometimes at
midnight into his bed chamber: at last the King and his Council fully
concluded and resolved to further these dessignes, and negotiations in what
they might, and by a special direction from the King, and a general consent
of all, Sir Anthony was made choice of, as a man most fit for these
employments: not only for that he was a Christian, and so might the rather
induce the friends of his religion, to the undertaking of this worthy
enterprise; but also that he had such an assured trust, and confidence in his
wisdom, and resolution, that he thought nothing could miscarry wherein he
was employed. So the managing of that was committed to Sir Anthony, and a
greatman of Persia appointed to accompany him; but the whole burden of that
imploymentt, obee upon Sir Anthony, who undertook it.

This concluded, they resolved to depart, and to take their journey from the
Persian Court, to some convenient place, where they might be embarked to pass
the Caspian Seas: for their intent was first to the Emperor of Russia, and so
forward to other Princes. To show how he was entertained in the several Courts
of such Christian Princes, as he had to deal withal in those affairs, is
needles, for it may be imagined, his entertainment to be so great and
honorable, as befitted the State of such worthy employment. All things sorted
to his desire, and expectation, but that this cross fell by the way, namely a
jar between Sir Anthony and the Perasin, that accompanied him, who striued
for the first place of that Embassage, albeit the dispose thereof was wholly
committed to the order and discretion of Sir Anthony: But his high Spirit not
borne to brook such indignity, did so thwart the Persian in his pride, as
that he followed his daring presumption even to his deep disgrace.

Of the Manners and Fashions of the Turks.
THere are two sorts of Turks: the natural Turk, and the Renegado.

The Natural Turk has his original in Scithia, not far from the Caspian
Seas, and they are, and have been ever the most inhumane of all other
Barbarians. Their manner of living is for the most part uncivil, and vicious.
For their vices, they are all Pagans, and Infidels, Sodomites, and Liars. They
are a very scornful people, and their pride is so great, as it is not
possible to be described. Next that, follows their cruelty; in which their
Kings exceed, Nero, Calliggula, or any other Tyrant whatsoever. They take
pleasure in bloody delights, and to see men put to death: For their breach of
promise, they hold it an high, and commendable virtue: for they say, if a man
speak what he thinks, his purposes will be prevented.

Touching their Justice, that is the most ordinary Merchandise, that is bought
and sold amongst them. For first the great Turk sells all his offices, and
governments to such Bashaws as will give most for them: And the chief Visior
Bashaw sits even in Judgment: If any other Bashaw offer no littie more then
he gives for his place, the Tyrant will presently send, and cut off his head
without any further circumstance. So did he to Mustapha Bashaw, the last of
December 1604. and to Hashan Bashaw in September 1605.

Their Renegadoes are for the most part Roagues, and the skum of the people,
which being villains and Atheists, unable to live in Christendom, are fled to
the Turks for succor, and relief. And of these are most of the Bashawes
made. Their ancient respect is now quite lost, and weakened, because the
arrogance of this king, and the dissolute negligence of his three Predecessors,
Selim, Amureth, and Mahomet, have caused the Turks to loose the awful regard,
which they used to bear their King in former times. His chiefest forces by
land consist of Ianizaries: these Ianizaries are al made of the sons of
Christians, that are taken from their Parents, when they are very young, and
are called Tribute children. They are at the first divided into two sorts, when
they are first brought to Constantinople, and Adrianople: for in these parts,
they are brought up. The one sort, the Turks call Hitch Oglandes: of them are
made the Sphayes. These are horsemen, and have fifteen Aspers a day, he that
has most: but many of them but twelve. The other are called Iam Oglandes, of
these are made the Ianizaries: no Ianizarie has above nine Aspers a day: many
of them but five. The manner of the fights the Turks use, are strange, and
altogether vnsouldierlike, for they are all unarmed, and the horsemen have for
weapons, a Lance de gay, a bow and arrows, and a Semitary, which is their
best weapon. They wear no armor, nor ever fight in rank, or troop, but
disperse themselves, and come to fight more like me^ that would play at iogo de
taro, or iogo de caro, then Soldiers. Of the foot: the Ianisaries do use a
certain piece, as long as a Musket, and the hight of a Calliuer, which makes it
carry far: they have very good Match there, but no good powder, but what
they have got from overthrown Christians, or else brought them out of England.
The other sort carry half Pikes, or short axes, and their bodies unarmed.

The Turks are beyond all measure, amost insolent, superbous, and insulting
people, ever pressed to offer outrage to any Christian, if he be not well
guarded with Ianisaries. They sit at meat, as Tailors upon their stalls, cross
legged, and their meat served them upon the ground, passing the day for the
most part in banqueting, and carousing. They will not permit a Christian to
come within their Churches, for they hold their profane and irreligious
Sanctuaries defiled thereby. They have no use of belles, but some Priest three
times in the day mounts to the top of their Church, and with a loud voice cries
out, and inuocates Mahomet to come in haste, for they have long expected his
second coming.

They that have passed through the heart of the Turks Country, report the
strength thereof to be very small, and that if the Christian Princes knew as
much as they do, that in their Travels with all circumspection observed it,
doubtless they would with no great difficulty utterly suppress him, or at
the least, so put him to the worse, that they would constrain him to embrace
the Christian faith, and rest at their devotion: or else remove his seat from
the help land, and parts adjacent. To give a taste how probable this is, they
allege that in all Palestine, and Syria, there are but one thousand and five
hundredth Ianisaries, that guard the cities of Aleppo, Damascus, Antioch, and
Jerusalem: as for Grand-cagro they are not able to stir, for diverse Arabs
that lie in the hills betwixt Jerusalem and it: Between whom, and those Turks
of Grand-cagro, there is a deadly emnitie. As for Babylon and Balsera, they
have like wise continual wars with those Arabs of Arabia Foelix. Besides,
there are a great number of Christians borne, and bred in those parts, which
would most willingly be assisting for their liberties.

Sir Anthony his receiving into Prague, by Rodolphus, Emperor of Germany.
SIr Anthony failing of his expectation in Russia, made what haste he could in
Germany, but for want of true instructions, we must let slip his occurrents in
the way, and with a pace as swift as thought, bring him from Russia to Prague.
The Emperor understanding of his coming, (as wheresoever he came, his fame
went still before him) commanded 13. Coaches to be sent for him, the Persian,
and their train. There came also to meet him, and to do him honor, at least
five thousand men, whereof the most of them were Coronels, Captains,
Lieutenants, and Gentlemen of note and account, together with many of the
Nobility; and with his train and attendance he was brought with solemn and
obseruant state and regard into the city of Prague: where being royally
entertained in the Emperors Court, and having delivered the purport and tenor
of his Embassy, found al things answerable to his worth and the weight of his
affairs. His lodging, together with the Persian, was provided in a fair
house, not far from the Court, they were served all in plate parcel gilt, but
in diverse manner, according to the several customs of their Countries. He lay
in Prague at least half a year, in all which time, he found nothing but
Revels, Feastings, and other pleasures of Court. Whenever he went abroad, he
had allowed him by the Emperors appointment, a fair coach drawn with 6.
horses: the Persian had the like, but still Sir Anthony had the chiefest place
and regard, which was the only cause of the often iarres and breaches that was
between them: for the Persian being haughty and ambitions, would many times
in his pride, and insulting humor, as well openly in words, and behauiours, as
closely under hand with plots and devises, attempt many things to bring Sir
Anthony into disgrace, which still was revealed, and in the end revenged, even
by his own Prince, in his own country, as you shall afterward hear, to Sir
Anthonyes honor, and the Persians shame and confusion.

But to return: having taken his leave of the Emperor in all reverend and
solemn manner, he came from thence to Norremberge, where, by his welcome and
costly entertainment, the citizens showed what account and estimation they
held of him: where also, besides many stately banquets, and rich presents,
they bare all his charges for four dates; and at his departure, they presented
two cups of gold, the one to Sir Anthony, the other to the Persian. Howbeit the
lining of Sir Anthony his cup, was better then the outside, for it was stuffed
full of gold. Having taken his leave at Norremberge, he came to Augusta, where
he was well entertained: from thence to Minikin, where also the Duke of Bauier
gave him great entertainment. From Minikin he came to Insbrooke, where stands
the stately house of Austria: from thence to Trent, and so to Rome: in all
which places, he still found his entertainment beyond expectation.

At Rome the Persian and he fell again at odds, about superiority, where
Sir Anthony plainly told him, that he had many times borne with his proud and
insolent behauiours, more then stood with his own honor, and natural
condition, only for the furtherance of the negotiations they had in hand,
which since (says he) you have done what lies in your power to cross,
observing rather your own ambitious humor, then the nature, and quality of our
employments, I will give you to understand, that from henceforth I will take a
more strickt note, and use a more peremptory controlement, both of your words,
gestures, and actions, and you shall learn to know I am your superior, and
that I do nothing that becomes me not, both in the worthiness of mine own
person, and in the virtue and authority of my commission. The Persian being
thus gauled, having neither a mind to suffer, nor a heart to rauenge, in a
sullen manner departed from Sir Antho. and took his journey toward Persia,
plotting and devising by the way all means he could to article against Sir
Anthony, letting nothing slip either from his own mischievous conceit, or the
false and malicious suggestions and informatio^s of his followers, to bring Sir
Anthony into contempt with his King. But as many a man digges a pit for others,
and falls into it himself: so this unhappy Persian, supposing he had carried
the poison of Sir Anthonies disgrace, brought in his heart the have of his own
undoing: for being come to Court, and having delivered before the Persian King
in the presence of Ma. Robert Sherley the whole process of their travels, he
did in a particular manner, and with an envious and a malicious tongue prefer
his suborned, and suggested accusations against Sir Anthony: which Robert
Sherley hearing with countenance and words, both befitting himself and his
wronged brother, humbly besought the King, that there might be an indifferent
hearing of this matter, and himself admitted to plead his brothers cause:
which being granted, he did so trip and confound the Persian in his
informations, that being found guilty in the breach of his Commission, and that
he had demeaned himself in these great affairs with acts and behauiours
derogatorie to the honor of his King, and dangerous to the effecting of so
great a business, his accusations also against Sir Anthony sauouring of
malice, and not of truth, he was finally doomed by the king to have his hands
cut off, and his tongue cut out, in the presence of M. Robert Sherley, who
being demanded what he would have more done unto him, in the revenge of his
brothers wrong, he answered that he took no delight in his torment; and that
which was already done, was more then he was willing, or consenting to: and
that now he would (...) in the behalf of the miserable Persian, for that he
supposed there could not be in his case a greater pleasure done unto him, the^
to have his head follow the fortune of his tongue and hands. Thus ended at one
time both the pride and life of this unhappy Persian.

Of Sir Anthony Sherleyes Voyage and Travels into Spain, with his
entertainment there.
MAn in regard of his mind and body, being compared to Heaven and Earth, is
said to be a little world: the one subject to corruption, the other to
immortality. Gold and silver therefore, which Saint Bernard calls Terra
rubra and alba, are not said to be the riches of the mind, but virtue is her
divine substance: by the power whereof she does extinguish that immoderate
fire of sense and appetite, wherewith man's Nature is dangerously inflamed,
drawing it to be governed by the qualified and temperate rule of reason: and
in the excellency of her own account being carried aloft with her celestial
wings (her object being drawn another way) she either beholds not or does not
esteem the riches, pleasures, and profits of the world, or whatsoever the base
delights and erroneous desires of men holds to be precious. From hence it
comes, that having the bodies government and virtue to be her own guide, she
does so rule and order it in all her proiects and intendments, that she suffers
it to commit nothing uncomely or unworthy her direction: but with a mutual
sympathy and agreement they pass the whole progress of this life, showing
themselves in all their desires and designs, to bereligious, temperate, just,
honorable and worthy the image of their Creator. They are not seruilely tied to
any place, or country, nor lulled with the delight of idleness and homebred
pleasures, but as well to enrich the intellectual part with knowledge and
experience, as also to exercise the body with the practices of labor, and
grace the life with virtuous attempts, they seek out other climates,
preferring the honorable drift of their desires before the respect of life, or
whatsoever is dearest unto man.

And thus having the assistance of the divine power, what a memorial do they
leave behind, worthy to be recorded to all posterity. Such was Paulus
Aemylius, and Publius Cornelius Scipio, who in their hostile employments and
successful attempts against Perseus and Hanniball, the two objects of their
honorable emulations, and the dangerous enemies of their country, besides
their valors, directions, policies, stratagemes, ordering, and ending of the
wars were otherwise: also even in their victories, and all their civil
actions so temperate and so virtuously governed, that at their return, men of
all Countries repaired to Rome, only to see them, and honor them, as men
exceeding the state of Mortality.

And when I compare the time of Sir Anthony Sherleyes departure out of England,
together with those great attempts he has undertaken and compassed (whereof I
cannot discourse at large, being solemnly instructed) I am drawn to wonder,
that neither the desire which every man naturally has to his own Country,
nor the joyful welcomes nor honorable entertaynements that attend him here,
can any whit stir his mind, or draw his affections from his purposed
intendements against the Turk, as well to show the Christian respect he bears
to his Religion (it being the principal Square and Rule of all his attempts
and actions) as also to make god his promise and protestation to the Persian
King, still to persist in stirring up the minds and powers of the bordering
Kings, enemies to the house of Ottoman, and the Turkish Alcoran, that there is
a great hope and expectancie in short time to see a sudden darkning and eclipse
of that glaring beauty and out stretched bounds of the Turkish Empire.

Let us therefore attend him a while into Spain (having already passed Russia
and Germany, and other parts) where, being entertained with all the honor of
the Court, and having delivered his Message, (wherein was included the scope
and purport of his coming thither, both in regard thereof, and of the honorable
League newly made, and likely to be continued betwixt the two famous Kings of
England and Spain) he found his entertaynement doubled, his lodging and
provision both for himself and his retinue in sumptuous manner prepared. To be
brief, nothing wanting that might either satisfy the delights and pleasures
of an honorable Stranger, or set forth the state and Majesty of so great a
Prince.

But Sir Anthony not desirous to bury his thoughts in the delights of the
Court, nor sleeping in the pleasures of that flourishing Kingdom, had still
his mind waking upon his affairs, holding al time misspent that was not spent
in the reuoluing, consulting, and concluding of the business he had in hand,
that his toyling mind scarce gave his body rest, so great a desire had he both
to redeem his brother, whom he left as pledge with the Persian King, but
chiefly to restore Religion to those unhappy conquered Kingdoms by the Turk,
where now the holy Churches and sanctified Temples of our Savior are changed
to be the idolatrous places of the blasphemous Synagogue of Mahomet.

He stayed not long in Spain, before the King installed him one of the Knights
of the Honorable Order of S. Iago, and created him Captain of his Galleyes
for the wars against the Turks: So great a liking and love he seemed to
bear as well to his person, as to the State and condition of his affairs,
which Sir Anthony at all convenient times did urge and prosecute, pretermitting
no occasion that might still stir up and inflame the mind of this young King
with an honorable desire to undertake this war.

As he had thus many honors done unto him by the King of Spain, and was well
entreated by most of his Nobility, so was he as much crossed by some other of
that country, who^ he had freed from captivity. For having by suit obtained
the liberty and ransom of three, who had bin taken prisoners: the said
prisoners upon this enlarged, and Sir Anthony expecting the payment of their
ransomes, received very good dealing at the hands of two of them: But the
other unthankful wretch to save the ransom which he was to pay, ministered a
dram of poison to him: which wrought so far with him, that it caused both the
hair of his head and the nails of his fingers to fall off; but yet took not
that devilish effect that he desired: for in short time he recovered, and God
restored him to his former health.

Sir Anthony his expedition into Turkey, with his respective kindness done to
an English Merchant at Lisborne.
BUt to return to Sir Anthony, his expedition into Turkey being thus concluded
on, great preparation was made for the war: Soldiers and Sailors taken up in
all parts; provision for armor and artillery, rigging of ships and galleys,
great suite for places of command and offices of account, new Coronels,
Captains, and Lieutenants made: In all which, Sir Anthony had the most
special place of command. In fine, his Commission was signed, wherein he was
established Captain General of the Navy, consisting of 200. great ships,
besides Galleys, and many other smaller vessels for provision, and 30. thousand
land Soldiers. All things being thus in a readiness, Sir Anthony repaired to
the Court to take his leave of the King. The King after many great signs and
tokens of grace and favor, took from his own neck a Jewel of great price,
with the picture of Philip his father on the one side, and his own on the
other, and delivered it to Sir Anthony with these words: When you look upon
it, think on me. Sir Anthony receiving it in all humble and thankful manner,
protested, that his life and that should part together.

Thus when all solemnities and complements of parting were ended, Sir Anthony
made what have he could to Lisborne, where his Army stayed his coming; and
where in a second state of entertainment he found his welcome beyond
expectation. But the wind joining with the necessity of his affairs (that
required expedition) stayed him not long there. Howbeit, before his departure
from Lisborne, we should do him wrong, unkindly to forget the remembrance of
a great benefit and good turn done by him to a certain English Merchant, whose
name and credit is well known in London: for Sir Anthony had ever a care in all
his travels to relieve such whom he found distressed, and especially his
country men, as among others, this for instance.

This Merchant having against the laws and customs of Spain, embarked 12000
ducats of gold of the Spanish coin, with a purpose to have transported them
into England: The searcher and other officers for the K. having knowledge
thereof, seized the whole sum into their own hands, it being by authority
prohibited, and therefore forfeited unto them by the Laws of the land. The
Merchant being much moved with this unfortunate and unexpected chance, it being
the principal stock whereon his state relied, with a heavy heart repaired to
Sir Anthony, unto whom complaining of his miserable estate by this accident,
besought his favor, that it would please him to extend the credit of his place
for the recovery of this great sum: which being lost, he knew well would be
the undoing, both of himself, his wife and children: protesting, that in lieu
thereof, he should command what part of it, it pleased him, and that he should
ever hold himself so much bound unto him, as that he would thence forwards
still acknowledge him to be the principal vpholder of his state and fortunes.

Sir Anthony being moved with pity of the Marcha^ts mischance, so charmed the
watchful keepers of this Treasure, that to his great honor and commendation,
without improprating any part thereof to his own use, he soon returned back
this great sum into the Marcha^ts possession, who like Jason with his
companions did merrily sail homewards with this golden fleece. Shortly after
Sir Anthony with all his Navy weighed anchor, and with a presperous gale of
wind soon lost the sight of Spain and Portugal, and we must now (for want
of further intelligence) leave him upon the Leuant Seas, to that hopeful happy
fortune that attends this honorable Enterprise.

Of Master Robert Sherleys employment in the wars of the Persian against the
Turk, after Sir Anthony his departure: Of his Victories, and his Marriage with
the King of Persia his cousin German.
MAster Robert Sherley after his brothers departure was made General, and
possessed the chiefest place in the King of Persia his wars against the
Turk, wherein he so valiantly bestirred himself, that the Persians gave him
a crown of Laurel for the victory: for being armed and made ready for fight,
taking a Pollaxe in his hand, he himself gave first such an honorable attempt,
and so amazed and repulsed the enemies, that his soldiers imitating his
courage, put all the foes to the edge of the sword: only reserving alive some
thirty of the chief Commanders among them, whom he led in triumph to the
King, having taken them prisoners: and forthwith dispatched a messenger to the
Turk with letters to this effect: That for the redemption, and liberty of one
that he kept prisoner (meaning Sir Thomas his brother, who was then
vndischarged) he should command the lives of those thirty, and have
themsafely without danger, or ransom delivered unto him. But envy that hangs
upon the sword point of the Turk, did so stir up the mind to revenge, that
he was so far from entertaining this proffer, as he did not only make
refusal thereof, and bid him do his worst with his prisoners, but he also
returned words of defiance, and menared that the sun should not twice step
from the bed of Aurora, but he would waken him with such an Allarum, as should
strike his whole company into wonder and amazement.

This might have daunted the mind of Robert Sherley, knowing his men to be
weak, and weary, and ouertoyled in the late battle and victory, to be so
suddenly called again unto Arms: and considering the strength of his enemy,
and that the Turk had always three hundred thousand men in readiness, but that
honor (the chiefest mark he aimed at in all his actions) abandoned Fear and
Timiditie: for he no sooner received the daring threats of the Turk, and the
denial of his gentle offer, but he presently cut off the heads of those 30.
Commanders, and (according to the custom of Persia) caused them to be carried
in triumph about the Market place, on the top of his Soldiers Pikes, and swore
in great choler, that that day should prove dismal unto his enemy, for
either he was resolved to return Conqueror, or to leave his carcass in the
field. And thereupon set his Soldiers in array, and imbattailed them with all
speed: who coming within view, might conjecture by computation their enemies
to be ten to one, which much affrighted the minds of his men: but he
perceiving it, began to give them encouragement, on this manner.

Master Robert Sherley his Oration to his Soldiers.
I Need not (worthy Gentlemen, and soldiers of Persia) seek to encourage you
with a long discourse, lest putting oil in the flame, I should add spurs to a
free horse: your former valiant resolution manifested as well in this last, as
in many other battles, assure me, that were the enemies multitude greater,
yet (our quarrel good and honorable, and our minds armed with true valor)
in despite of Fortune, we shall, (as hitherto we have done) return in
Triumph, and victory. And for that it touches mine honor, I will be the first
man in the battle, and the last man in the field, unless death give an
honorable quittance to my life: Let me be this day a mirror of your
Magnanimity: let my actions be your presidents: press but as far as your
General, and courage Gentlemen, the victory is ours: and with that catching a
strong staff, pulling down his be^er, and putting spurs to his horse, he
furiously rushed upon the Enemy, his soldiers following with such a desperate
resolution, that the Turks were amazed at his valor: for he ran without
stop through the troops, and like alyon massacred whom he met: which the
Enemy perceiving, and what a great slaughter he had made amongst them, many
of them fled, many laid down their weapons, and yielded, the rest he put all
to the sword, without partiality or savor.

Out of this his second overthrow of the Turks, he again reserues alive some
threescore of the chiefest of them, and sends the like proffer to the Turk,
for redemption of his brother (the Kings Letters not then come for his
enlargement.) But the Turk enraged that Fortune had thwarted his high hopes
with such contrary events, utterly refused to subscribe to his request, but bad
him still continue to do his worst, for he intended not to depart with his
prisoner. Upon which reply, Ma. Robert Sherley, as he did the first, so put he
the last to the sword, in remembrance, and revenge of the cruelty done to sir
Thomas, whose miseries (in the time of intercourse between the Turk and his
brother) were much more aggravated, and made so great, as the truth upon report
will hardly be believed.

In these wars against the Turks, this younger brother purchased such honor
and estimation, as the cousin German to the King of Persia (being the widow
of a Duke in that country) entered into such liking of his worthiness, as she
resolved (with Andromache) to rest her whole estate upon his prowess: saying,
Tu dominus, Tu vir, Tu mihi frater cris.

The which affection of hers, was likewise on his part answered with equal
proportion; so that after their private interchanging of faith and troth, their
several desires were made jointly happy in the honorable end of marriage.
Cuius virtus valde efficax est ad concordiam faciendam, quae adeo Deo placet,
sicut discordia multum ei displicet: Whose virtue is of great force to make
peace and concord, with which God is as much pleased, as he is displeased with
discord.

The King himself also was so well pleased with this match, that for many
days together he solemnized the marriage.

It is reported, that Ma. Robert Sherley since his marriage with the Kings
cousin German, has had isiue by her, two children, both Christened in that
Country, in the Christian faith, the King himself being a witness to one of
them in Baptism. He labors the King very much to christianisme, to which (it
is said) he lends such attentive ear, that he doubts not, but by Gods
assistance and his good persuasions, he may in time be brought to become a
Christian.

To strengthen which hope, Robert Sherley has already erected there a church,
called after his own name, in which he has divine service as duly read, as
here it is on this side the seas. He has also obtained of the King a number
of young infants of that country to be brought up in a house appointed for that
purpose, that altogether estranged, and kept from hearing or speaking their
own Language, may in time learn our English Speech, and come at length to
Christian knowledge, being brought up and educated among Christians. Howsoever
the effect answer the intent, his purpose is most honorable and religious,
and deserves such worthy commendations, that what Princes soever lend
furthera^ce to his godly proceedings, I may say with the Evangelist: Merces
little copiosa est in coelis: Their reward is very great in Heaven, where they
shall enjoy the abundant fulness of all felicity.

FINIS.

