PROVERBIA HN.

The Proverbs of HN. Which He reversed;in the Days of his Olde-age; has
setfourth as Similitudes and mystical Sayings.

Translated out of Base-almayne.



I will open my Mouth in Proverbs or Similitudes, and declare-fourth the Acts
which have been don of old. Psalm. 78. a. To the Children of Love and the
upright Disciples of Jesus Christ, it is geeuen to understand the Mystery of
the heavenly Kingdom: But to Such as are ther-Without, it is not geeuen.
For-that-cause, all things chance unto them in Similitudes and Proverbs.
Math. 13. b Mark. 4. b. Luke 8. b. The Proverbs of HN.
These are the Proverbs and mystical Sentences of HN. which He reversed;in
the Days of his Olde-age; has spoken or vttered-fourth, nakedlie and
uncovered, before the Children of the Kingdom and House of Love. But before
such as are ther-without, in Similitudes or secreat Sayings.

The First Chapter.
IN the Beginning Genesis 1. a.
and of the Garnishing of the same ^ and of the Genesis 1. c.
Man Adam, God opened or declared the The Linialdissent of the Passing-ouer of
the Light upon the Earth, from the Beginning til-vnto the End or Perfection.
First Thorowe-breaking of his true Light, upon the Earth: and there was not in
Heaven nor on Earth nor with the Man, anymore but one Only Being of God: and
thatsame, knew by the Man nothing-els but Good / same also nothing-els but Good
/ and did also nothing-els but Good.

2. But now besides thissame, the Man took on him Genesis 3. ^.
to know that which he knew not / to see, that he saw not / and to do,
that he did not. And thatsame which was nothing, was the Evil or Ungodliness /
which Sap. 1. b. 2. c
the Man, in his Fallingaway from God, fel-vnto / wher-through also, the same
Knowledge wrought in the Man, the Evil or That which is ungodly / because he
knew or understood not Thatsame which is nothing, as Nothing / and saw not
into it, as Nothing: but accepted the same for Something / and understood or
conceived the same Knowledge, partly for Good / and partly for Evil.

3. And through the same Science or Knowledge, the Man intermixed his Being and
Memory reversed;which were in all, Genesis 1. c. 2. a b. c.
Good; with the Nothingnes or That which was nothing, being Genesis 3. a. b.
void of Being and Life / which also was nether Nature nor Elementish /
nether had it any Memory or Understanding. And That was the Evil or
Ungodliness, insteed-of reversed;or besides; ye Good or that which is Godly /
the Death, instead of the Life / the Lie, instead of the Truth / the Darkness,
instead of the Light / and the disobedient Knowledge which Genesis 3. a. b.
the Serpent requires, instead of the Obedience which God requires: and
the same disobedient Knowledge, is the false Light / wherthrough Eccli. 37. a.
the whole World, is so become repleanished with Falshod / and wherewith also
the Man reversed;as consubstantiated; has intermixed himself / and which also
has opened his Eyes, to his own Self-seeking: and he is ther-through become
seeing, of that which he yetnotwithstanding saw not / and knowing also, that
which he yet-notwithstanding knew not: and euenso through the same false Light
of the disobedient Knowledge, Adam took on him reversed;against God and the
Requiring of his Word; to be Genesis 3. ^.
wise and knowledgfull himself, as God: and euenso reversed;according to his
taken-on Knowledge; he knew both Good and Evil: he saw also Good and Evil:
he did likewise Good and Evil: and broughtfourth also Genesis 4. ^.
good and evil Children.

4. See / euen-thus there was with the Man, upon the Earth / as-well Darkness, as
Light / sowell Falshod and Deceit, as Singlemyndednes and Faithfulness / and
as-well Disobedience, as Obedience: So that by that occasion / there was on the
Earth, as-well Death, as Life: and the Children of Adam walked-fourth partly
singlemyndedlie and obedientlie, in the Light / and were inclyned Genesis 4. a. b.
c
to the Good: and partly also subtillie / and deceitful, in the Darkness / and
were inclyned to the Evil: And those were the Fruits Genesis 3. a.
of the Good and of the Evil / wherthrough the Iniquity has so
ouer-measurablie 4. Esdr. 4. c.
multiplied itself euery-where, among the Children of Men.

5. Howbeit / the Good Fruits increased them continually, in the Light / and
in the Obedience which God requires: and the Evil Fruits increased them
continually, in the Darkness / and in the disobedient Knowledge, according to
the Requiring of the Subtil-prudentie of the Serpent. But the Evil Fruits
Genesis 5. 6. a.
augmented or increased them into many Multitudes upon the Earth: So that the
Evil Fruits became many-mo^, in the Darkness / then the Good Fruits, in the
Light. And so in processe-of-time, the Evil Fruits with the subtle Knowledge
in the Darkness, tooke-on to them the Dominion and Violent-power, upon ye Earth.
And it had euenso his Fourth-going or Continuaunce-of-course, till unto Noe.

6. WIth Noe God declared upon ye Earth, Genesis 6. c. 4. Esdr. 3. b.
betwixt the Good and Evil Fruits / and betwixt Those that lived according to
the Institution Genesis 4. e.
of Seth, and were of the right Stock of the good Being of God / Genesis 6. b.
and Them which had corrupted the Way of the Fleash / and lived after the
Lusts of their Concupiscence / and were of the Stock or Raze of the Wicked.

7. Likewise, at the same time of Noe, the Lord destroyed all Fleash that had
Genesis 6. b. 7 c
corrupted his Way, in the Evil and in the Darkness. And so it became known
and manifest / that the Fear of God, was or rested with the Genesis 9. a. b. c
Good Fruits in the Light. and that there was nothing but Fear of the Evil,
with the Evil Fruits in the Darkness. And ther-out it proceeded, that the
Evil / and the Degenerated from their right Stock, enterprised to make-them
Fortresses-of-strength / and Genesis 11. a.
sought their Honor and Preservation through the Works of their own Hands.
But God was the Strength and Preservation of the Good.

8. And the Evil or Degenerated from their right Stock, 4. Isdr. 3. b.
multiplied them again into many Multitudes / and into manifold Generations
upon the Earth. And the Lord with his Good Fruits, reserved or kept upon the
Earth no more but one Stock or Generation Genesis 11. c. d.
that feared Him / and lived according to his Law: and that was the Generation
of Sem, out of Noe. And it had euenso his Fourth-going, till unto Abraham.

9. WIth Abraham God declared, ye Third Genesis 12. 13. b 14. b. 17. a. b.
betwixt His People reversed;which He chose unto him as peculiar, to an holy
People; / and the many-maner of People and Generations of the Heathen. And God
set his Covenant betwixt Him and his People / and made therewith a Difference,
betwixt his People and the uncircumcised Heathen: and God increased and
multiplied his People the Seed of Abraham into Genesis 35. e. 49. a. b. c. d.
twelve Generations or Trybes: and they dwelled in the Genesis 47. a. b
Land of Egypt, where they Exodus 1. a. b
were heald-in-subiection by the Wicked. And it had euenso his Fourth-going,
till unto Moses, Exodus 2. a.
which releassed the Seed of Abraham, from that Violent-power / Exodus 12. 13.
14.
and lead them out of the Land of Egypt.

10. WIth Moses God declared, the Fourth Thorowe-breaking of his true Light,
upon the Earth. and also manifested thereby, which were his Exodus 19. 20. a. b.
c.
Ordinances / Law / and Rites, wherein his People had always lived / and who
were the right Ministers of the Priestes-office of his Law. And He made
euenso reversed;with the same Lights a clear Unfolding, who they were that
loved God and his Law or Ordinance / and believed Him. and who despised Him
and his Law or Ordinance / and believed not. And it had euenso his
Fourthgoing, till unto 1. Reg. 3.
Samuel, 1. Reg. 16.
David, and 3. Reg. 2. b. 5. b.
Solomon the kingly Seat of the godly Majesty / and till unto Gods holy
Propheates, under the Obedience of the kingly Law of the Majesty of God /
and of the Ordinance of the same Priesthod.

11. WIth Samuel, David, and Solomon 3. Reg. 5. b. 6. a. b. c. d. ^. a. b. c.
for Him and his Name / and should possess the Seat of his Majesty, on the
Earth: and who were meet for to minister the Priestes-office / and to
witnes-fourth his Word / and were sent of Him to that end: and who were 3.
Reg. 13. 18 d. c. 22. c.
not meet for to minister the Priestes-office / and for to witnes-fourth the
Word of the Lord ^ nether-yet sent of Him. And that had euenso his
Fourth-going, till unto the Destruction of Jerusalem, 4. Reg. 25. b. 2. Par.
36. c. d
of the Temple of the Lord / and of the kingly Seat of the godly Majesty
upon the Earth. and till unto the kingly Prince Zorobabel in Babylon.

12. WIth Zorobabel in Agg. 2. ^
Babylon, God declared the Sixth Thorowe-breaking of his true Light, upon the
Earth. And made with the same Light a clear Diversity, by whom his Vision of
Peace was / wherthrough the City of Jerusalem and the 1. Esdr. 3. c. d 5. a.
6. a. b.
Temple of the Lord, should be builded anew / and the People of ye Lord
brought again thereunto: and by whom the Vision of Peace was hidden / and to
whom the Darkness or Blindness was com / wherthrough the People were lead-awaye,
from the Vision of Peace / from 1. Esd. 8. 9. a 10. a.
the Temple of the Lord / and from their Lande-of-inheritaunce reversed;either
Heritage; of God. as also were heald-captiue 2. Par. 33. b.
in Babylon, and lived in a confused Intanglement: in such-sort / that they
reversed;by that occasion; were scattered so far-abrode in the foreign Regions
/ that they were not all brought again, to their Land-of-inheritaunce of God:
but many of them remained dispersed in the strange Countries / whereas they
could not behold the holy Psalm. 137. ^.
City Jerusalem, nor the Temple of the Lord / nor-yet the Stool or Seat of
the godly Majesty ^ nether-yet offer-vpp or bring their Oblation and Guiftes
to ye Lord, in his Sanctuary ^ nor sing their Songs of Sion. And it had
euenso his Fourth-going till unto Math. 1. b. Luke 1. c. 2. a.
Jesus Christ, in the Passe-ouer of his Suffering and Math. 27. c. Luke 23. c.
Death of the Cross, to the Entrance into his Glory Mark. 16. b. Luke 24. f.
Act. 1. b.
at the Right Hand of God his Father, in the heavenly Being: from whence He
powred-fourth Act. 2. a.
his holy Spirit on his Disciples / To the end that they reversed;through
the same holy Spirit; should John. 15. c. Act. 1. b.
be his Witnesses ^ and euenso publish to the People of the Lord, their
Releassing / and the Mercie-seate of the godly Majesty. and that the same was
Act. 10. 17. c.
for to com unto them reversed;from the Right Hand of their God; upon the
Earth. as also that God reversed;at the same time; would judge the whole Earth
with Righteousness.

13. WIth the same Jesus Christ and his John. 8. c. Act. 1. b. 10. d
Faith of Abraham, and the Anointing of the holy Ghost, was: who were the
right Children of Abraham: and who acknowledged Jesus Christ, Act. 2. d. 3. c.
4. 5. c.
to be their Lord / King / and cheef Priest / as also followed-after Him,
under the Obedience of the Belief: And He manifested euenso through the same
Believers, that He the God of Heaven would reversed;in the appointed Day of
the Coming of Jesus Christ; Act. 17. d.
judge the whole Earth with Righteousness ^ and reveal and set-vpp again the
Esa. 16. b.
High-seate of his godly Majesty, upon the Earth.

14. And these Believers in Jesus Christ, and those that in such-sort confess
or acknowledge Him according to the Truth, are the true and holy catholic
Church of Jesus Christ, unto the which all Heathen and Math. 3. a. 9. b. 11. c.
Act. 2. d. 3. c. 10. c. 13. d. c. 15. c. etc.
sinful Men reversed;to Repentance for their Sins / and to their
Justification from the same; are called and bidden, through the Belief or Faith
of Jesus Christ.

15. All which verelie reversed;from the time-fourth of the Apostles of Christ;
came-to-passe, to the Salvation of the Gentiles / and of all sinful Men, which
believed in Jesus Christ, and repented them / to theende that they might Act.
2. d. 3. c.
constantly persevere reversed;under the Obedience of the Faith of Jesus Christ;
in the Repentance for their Sins ^ and so prepare them ready against the
Coming of their Lord Jesus Christ. and that they might euenso reversed;in
the tocomming Day of the righteous Act. 10. 17. d.
Judgment of God; be preserved unto Godliness. and become Math. 8. b. 25. d.
Ephe. 2. b. c.
Coheyres reversed;in the Promises and Testamentes of the holy Fathers; with
Israel and Judah. And it had euenso his Fourth-going, till unto the
Falling-asleape of the Holyons of Jesus Christ.

16. AFter which Falling-asleape of the Holyons Jesus Christ, the false
Christians / together with all Iniquity and Abomination of Desolation
reversed;euenlike as the holy Propheat Dan. 8. 9. c. Math. 24. b. Luke 2^. c.
Daniel, and also Christ and his Witnesses, had forespoken thereof; are
entred-in besides the Church of Christ, upon the Earth: and have euenso upon
the Earth, utterly laid-wast the true Holy of ye Church and of the Tabernacle
of Jesus Christ. also caused the daily Oblation in the Holy reversed;which
serves or cometh-to-passe to the Forgeeuing and Purging of Sins; / and the
true God-seruice reversed;which extends to the Renewing of the Inward-man; to
cease or leaue-of. and in the Place of the Sanctuary of God, set-vpp the
Math. 24. b. 2. Tess. 2. b.
Abominations of Desolation / as also obtained the Victory ther-withall:
wherthrough also reversed;among Many; the right Love to God and to their
Neighbor, Math. 24. a.
waxed-colde in euery-behalf. And this has had euenso his Fourthgoing, till
that the Lord reversed;out-of his merciful Love; raysed-vp Iere. 13. b.
the gracious Word, according to his Promises / and elected HN thereto, for to
minister the same, under the Obedience of his Love / to the Ree^recting or
Restoring of his true Sanctuary / and of ye true Offering and Godseruice in
the same.

17. Through which gracious Word and HN, God revealed the Appeering of the
Coming of his Christ, and the Act. 17. d.
New Day of his righteous Judgment / as also the Flowing-fourth of his holy
Spirit of Love, to the Awaking 1. Tess. 4. b.
and Rysingv^p of all his Holyons, out-of the Sleep / Sap. 3. a. Math. 19. d.
2. Tess. 1. a.
to their Glorious-lordlynes with Jesus Christ, and to an everlasting
fast-standing Esa. 9. a. D^n. 2. e. 7. c Apo. 12. 21. a.
Kingdom of the godly Majesty, upon ye Earth / according to his Promises.

18. EVen-thus has God declared with HN, Act. 3. c.
which God has spoken from the Beginning of the World, through the Mouth of
his holy Propheates / and of the Evangelists of his Christ: and the same Eight
Thorowe-breaking of the true Light of God upon the Earth, is the New Day / to
the Renewing of the Life / which God has to-fore appointed, to reveal the same
in the last Time / for to Act. 17. d.
judge in the same, the universal Earth with Righteousness / to the Math. 25. d.
John. 5. c. Romans 2. a. 2. Pet. 2. ^.
Condemnation of all the Enemies of God and Christ, together with all the
Enemies of the godly Life / and Blaspheamers of his holy Spirit and Service
of Love. and to the Erecting of his true Sanctuary the Apo. 21. ^.
Seat of his Majesty / and the upright Government of his Holyons, under the
Obedience of his Love upon the Earth / and also for to declare euenso upon the
Earth reversed;in the same true Light of the New or Eight Day; the Mysteries
of God and Christ, even from the Be^ ginning of the World / ti^-vnto the End.

The Second Chapter.
THe Man, which God in the Beginning Genesis 1. ^. 1. Cor. 15. ^.
Earthly: and is appeered upon the Earth, visible and capable or feeleable.

2. But the Man which God procreated, out of the holy Spirit of his godly
Nature ^ and out of his everlasting Eternity, is 1. Cor. 15. ^.
Spiritual / and Heavenly: and is Math. 11. c. 1. Cor. 2. b. 15. c.
invisible and incapable reversed;before all Eyes of the earthly Men; upon the
Earth: but well to be seen and fealt, by all such as are spiritual and
heavenly, in the heavenly Being.

3. THe Man of the Earth, fails Genesis 3. a. b.
and changes: and his Light bydeth not firm uniformly, in one-maner of
Cleernes, everlastingly.

4. The Man of Heaven, does never fail nor change: and his Light bideth firm
of vniformebeeing in his Cleernes, everlastingly.

5. A Womanly Vessel Genesis 3. a.
or Body, is begotten-with-childe of one Father and of one Seed of the same
Father, with two-sondrie Men of God / for to bring-fourth thosesame on ye
Earth: namely / for to bringfourth the One Man of God, visible before all Eyes
of the Fleash. also heareable with all Ears of the Fleash: and to bring-fourth
the Other Man of God, John. 3. a. 1. Cor. 15. c.
invisible before all Eyes of the Fleash / and also vnheareable with all Ears
of the Fleash: But-yet sufficiently to be seen with all Eyes of the Spirit.
and to be heard with all Ears of the Spirit, in the godly Truth and upright
Righteousness.

6. THe One Man of God reversed;which is borne

7. The Other Man of God reversed;which is not borne visiblie before the Eyes
of the Fleash / but before all Eyes of the Spirit; appears and inlargeeth him
over few, with few, and in few People, upon the Earth: and is likewise seen
and heard by Few upon the Earth: Howbeit, he is seen and heard abundantly
and in great Glory, of many, by many, and in many spiritual People, in the
heavenly Being.

8. The Man of God reversed;which is created or brought-fourth visiblie before
all Eyes of ye Fleash; has reversed;in much Service and Feruent-diligence or
Labor; the Foregoing to the Entrance of the everlasting Vid^ Genesis ^y. de
Jacob and Esau.
Life. But-yet he himself inheriteth not the same / nether is he also any
Sonne-of-inheritaunce in the same everlasting Life.

9. The Second Man reversed;which is invisible, before all Eyes of the
fleashlie Mindedons; is reversed;without Labor; made an Heir in the
everlasting Life: and remains a Sonne-of-inheritaunce eternally, in the same
everlasting Life. And out of thatsame everlasting Life, he manifests upon
the Earth, the Kingdom of the God of Heaven, full of all pure Beauty: and
remains eternally John. 17. a.
consubstantiated or of-vniforme-beeing with the Deity reversed;as-well upon
Earth as in Heaven; in one-maner of Cleernes.

10. Whatsoever is borne of the Fleash / John. 3. a.
that

11. Whatsoever is borne of the Spirit / John. 3. a.
that is altogether Spirit: and bydeth also Spirit vnchaungeablie, for evermore.

12. THat which is not of the Earth ^ but John. 3. a. d.
of the Heaven / the same brings all Blessing / Life / and Joy, unto the
Earth / and unto them which dwell on the Earth.

13. But they that are of the Earth ^ and earthly of Being and Nature / John.
3. d.
and set all their Lust / Joy / and Comfort, on the earthly Things / Those
contemn the 1. Cor. 2. b.
heavenly Blessing, in his sweet and peaceable Life and eternal Joy.

The Third Chapter.
THe First Heaven and the First Genesis 1. d.
bewtifull, and sumpteouslie-garnished: howbeit the same changed / and the
Cleernes and Garnishing of the same, bid not permanent in the Sight of Men: but
it 2. Pet. 3. b. Apo. 21. a.
vanished-away from their Eyes, so that they beheld not the same any-more.

2. The New or Second Heaven / Esa. 65. b. 2. Pet. 3. b. Apo. 21. a.
and the New Earth, excelled the First or Former reversed;in Bewtifulnes and
Gorgeous-garnishing; far-away / and the Cleernes and Garnishing of the same,
remained standing and immutable reversed;in their exquisite Beauty and perfect
Righteousness; everlastingly.

3. THe God of Heaven, has garnished the Place of his Dwelling and his
Christ's on Earth, with Righteousness / and has sown the Seed of the good
Corn in his Field. Math. 13. c.
But the ^nuious Man or Gods Adversary, has theragainst, laid-wast or
ruinoussed the Place of God and Christ on the Earth / and has sown ye Seed
of the Weed reversed;instead of the Seed of the good Corn; in the Lords
Field.

4. Now when the Harvest Math. 13. d.
was great ^ and the Corn together with the Weed, waxen-rype abundantly /
then had the hungrye Men, no Lust to the Corn: Ier. 23. d. ^. Ezech. 13. b.
but they grew at contention and firiued verye-much reversed;one-with-another;
about the Weed / and about the Straw of the Field: and would needs prepare
them out of the Weed, Bread for to liue-by.

5. There went-fourth a Word / Wind / or Esa. 28. b.
Ballaunce of Equity. But at the same time, many Men became changed upon the
Earth: For many that were waxenolde, lost their Elderdom / and 4. Esdr. 6. c.
changed into Children / as-though they had been but then newly borne or
brought-fourth.

6. The Children which were but euen-newlie borne / and altogether Esa. 29. 32.
a
without Understanding, changed into Olde-men: and they witnessed reversed;in
all Lauding of the Lord; the Judgment and the Mercy, upon the Earth.

7. That which was 4. Esdr. 6. c.
full, became empty / and that which was empty, became full / or was filled
abundantly.

8. The Living became Dead: Psalm. 55. b. 73. b. c.
and the Dead became Liuingons.

9. THat which sat in Honor and was counted for blessed, came to Eccli. 10. b.
Reproach / and passed into the Condemnation.

10. That which was in Dishonor / and contemned as Infelicious, Eccli. 10. b.
came to great Honor / Glory and Renown / and went into the eternal Life.

11. THe Eloquent suffered Shipwreck in their Esa. 35. a. b. Sap. 10. c.
became very-prompt or ready to speak / and were eloquent.

12. That which seemed, as-though it should always endure ^ or that it was not
to be broken, become al-to-broken: and thatsame which was broken / Ezech. 17. ^
and that men scarcely believed that it could be made-whole again or joined
together, into One / joined itself together again / and became One / and was
perfect. And the Wisdom appeered or gaue-sourth herself very sweetly and
lovely, to Fruitfulnes / for to bear or bring-fourth the upright and good
Fruits, upon the Earth.

The IIII. Chapter.
THe Oldest-Mother reversed;which is altogether Lust for to do the Will of God.

2. Lust for to do the Will of God, broughtfourth Obedience to Gods Will.

3. Obedience to Gods Will, brought-fourth Belief and Hope, to obtain the
Righteousness of God and Christ, among the Children of Men.

4. Belief and Hope, brought-fourth among the Children of Men, Hunger and
Thirst after the Righteousness of God.

5. Hunger and Chirst after the Righteousness of God, inherited The Same
Righteousness abundantly. and also brought-fourth the same again abundantly,
on the Earth.

6. The abundant Righteousness of God and Christ, brought-fourth Love and
Mercy.

7. Love and Mercy, brought-fourth Concord, Life, and Peace. and works the
Unity of Heart, among all those that love the same.

8. Concord / Life / and Peace, brought-fourth Gods Strength, Ability, and
Honor, upon the Earth.

9. Gods Strength / Ability / and Honor, brought-fourth upon the Earth, Gods
eternal Riches, Joy, and Rest.

10. Gods eternal Riches / Joy / and Rest, brought-fourth upon the Earth, An
invincible Firmnes and Providence.

11. The invincible Firmnes and Providence, brought-fourth, builded, and
manifested on the Earth, The everlasting Habitation of the Oldest Mother and
her Children, namely / the immovable House of Love, full of all Equity and
Godlynes.

12. The Fulness of all Equity and Godlynes of the House of Love,
brought-fourth reversed;to a good Garnishing of the same House; upon the Earth,
Discreetnes, Orderlynes, and Louing-fauour, to the Welfare and Salvation of all
the Children of Men.

13. The Discreetnes / Orderlynes / and Louingfauour, to the Welfare and
Salvation of all the Children of Men, broughtfourth in the House of Love the
everlasting Habitation of the Oldest Mother and her Children A Calling-voyce
and serviceable Ministration, to the Salvation and Welfare of all the Children
of Men on ye Earth.

14. The Calling-voyce and serviceable Ministration, to the Salvation and
Welfare of all the Children of Men, cries reversed;on the Earth; out of the
Habitation of the Oldest Mother and her Children / and says:

15. COm-in hither Pro. 1. c.
to my Habitation, all ye Israel, and Children of Judah: For here in my
Habitation, is the holy Sion, Esa. 2. a. Mich. 4. 2.
wher-out now in the last Time, the Law of Life proceeds. as also the true
Jerusalem, wherout now in the last time, the Word of the Lord floweth-fourth
/ to the Setting-vpp and Establishing of you all, in your upright Stock of
Abraham.

16. COm-in hither to my Habitation, thou whole Christianity / together with
ye all that hope on Messiah or Christ, and have an Inclination to the
Obedience of the Requiring of his Doctrine. For here in my Psalm. 132. b.
Habitation or Dwelling, the true Messiah or Christ, has his Shape and
Safe-mating. also the upright Being or Efficatie of his Righteousness / and the
Word of his Life. For-that-cause there is here lifewise the Out-flowing of his
holy Spirit of Truth / of Love / and of Mercy. with which Spirit, He
leads his People, John. 14. c. 16. b.
into all Truth / Love / and Mercy: and into all Concord and Peace.

17. Out of this my Habitation, becomes also reversed;now in the last time;
the true Math. 24. b.
Euangelie of the Kingdom, published unto you: and the synceere Apostolical
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, is also reversed;even out of Love; heald-fourth before
you / for to renew you all in your Understandings, to an upright Knowledge of
the Truth of God and Christ. and to 2. Pet. 1. a.
pluck you all under the Obedience of the Love, to all your Concord and Peace,
in Jesus Christ.

18. For-that-cause com-in hither all now to my Christ, Ephe. 4. b.
and from his safe-making Doctrine / and that are plucked and bound
reversed;through manifold Discord; in a strange Yoke / wherewith ye suppose
to have the Verytrue [namelie / ye all that walk in manifold Diuistons, in
strange Yoakes.] For here in my Habitation, is the true Being / and the
upright Ordinance of the godly Life / unto the which all Men are created and
elected of God.

19. Com-in hither to my Habitation, all ye Kings / Pro. ^. a.
Princes / and Magistrates / together with all ye Rulers of Countries and
People: and be you all renewed in your Estate or Condition, under the Obedience
of the Love. For here in this my Habitation, ye may obtain the right kingly
Scepter / for to govern well and vprightlie / and to prepare all Peace and
Concord, on the Earth. For here is the upright Seat of the kingly Majesty /
together Sap. 6. a.
with the upright Laws / Ordinances / and Politike-orders-of-gouernment / for
to uphold therewith all Countries and People, in Peace.

20. Com-in hither to my Habitation, all ye Wise / Scripture-learned / and
Teachers / together with all ye Philosophers / Poets / and
Maistersof-science: and let all your Understanding / Arts and Cunning become
renewed, under the Obedience of the Love. For here in my Habitation, is the
ouerflowing Esa. 12. a. Pro. 13. b. Eccli. 1. a.
Fountain of all Wisdom / and the very-right Ground and Style of all good
Sciences and deep-grounded Understandings.

21. Com-in hither to my Habitation, all ye Pro. 1. 2. 3. 4.
upright Doctrine and Information of all Understandings: wherein ye together
one-with-another, may be taught, nurtered, and kept, peaceably and
concordablie ^ as also become instructed and taught aright in al-thinges, how
ye ought to live both before God and Man.

22. Com-in hither to my Habitation, all ye Sinners both Men and Women / and
all ye Diseased or Infirme-parties / and also all ye Heathen and estrayed
People / together with all ye which dwell in Darkness. For here in my
Habitation, is the Heb. 5. a. Apo. 21. a.
Seate-of-grace and the everlasting Remission of Sins / the right Physic, to
the Curing or Health of the Diseased and Weak / and also the true Apo. 21. b.
Light of the Lamb of God / and the permanent Cleernes of ye holy Spirit of
Love / together with the Apo. 3. 2^. a.
Tree of Life and his good Fruits / for that ye should eat thereof / and so
live for ever.

23. For-that-cause so com now in hither to my Habitation, all ye Lovers of
the Truth of God and Christ, of what-sort of Ordinance and Religion soever
ye be: and let your Understanding and your Zeal be renewed, under the
Obedience of the Love of Jesus Christ. For here in my Habitation, is all Truth
of God and Christ, Iam. 1. ^.
and the upright Religion and true Godseruice / and ther-to the Fulness of all
spiritual and heavenly Goods / and the immutable Math. 22. ^.
Righteousness and Holiness / as also the eternal Life.

24. THus com now all hither / and separate Ier. 7. c. ^. ^. 14. b. 23. d.
Ezech. 13. b. Mich. 3. 2.
preach Lies unto you / and make you Servants to their unfruitful Doctrines.
Esa. 3. b.
They blind your Understanding / and make Ier. 5. c. 23. d. Ezech. 13. b.
Abac. 1. b.
Snares, in your Hearts: and with their goodthinking Reasons or Speeches /
together with their Blaspheamie which they bringin to the burdening of your
Consciences, they take your Understandings captive under the (...) Spirits
Ephe. 2. 6. ^.
that reign in the Air / and euenso shutto the Kingdom of the God of Heavens
before you: and Math. 23. b.
they themselves also com not therein.

25. But whosoever com unto me, in my Habitation / those assemble them with Math.
^. b.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob reversed;among all Gods Propheates / and Holyons of
Jesus Christ, and among all the Righteous and Faithful which are risen-vpp;
into the Kingdom of the God of Heavens / and inherit all the Apo. 21. 22. c
Riches and Or^amentes of his pure Beauty and upright Righteousness.

26. With all which Holyons of God and Christ ^ and with all entered Believers
of the holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ, the Oldest Mother does greatly
rejoice her: and shuts without her Habitation, all Apo. 21. 22. c
Infidels and Enemies unto the Love and her Service: without which Habitation
of the Oldest Mother and all Holyons of God and Christ, there is not els-what to
be inherited either obtained, but all Math. 8. b. ^5. d.
Variaunce / False-witnessing / Misery / and Calamity / together with the
eternal Damnation.

27. Wherefore / O all ye People (when ye Math. 23. b. Luke 13.
of the Scripture-learned / and the foolish Math. 25. a.
Virgins; remain ther-without.

28. Thus be you now betimes counseled to the best: and seek no Life nor
Understanding in any other Habitation, then in the Habitation of God or House
of the Love / wherein also the Wisdom the Oldest Mother of all living Souls
has comprised her Habitation. For whosoever seeks any godly Life or holy
Understanding, without the same Habitation / he shall find nether Life nor
Understanding / nor-yet likewise any Truth or Righteousness. Therefore let
eueryone take this effectually to heart.

The V. Chapter.
There are many People found / which

2. Wherefore do the People (I pray you) runne-abrode so diligently in the
Field, in the Wintertime / for to see the Herbs and Flowers grow / and to
delight themselves in their Springing or Growing-vpp?

3. Who finds in the barren-time of Winter, the sweet smelling Cant. 2. ^.
Flowers / and the Fruitfulnes of the Herbs in the Field?

4. Who tastes the good Taste of the Fruits of the Trees / whylst that the
Springtime does yeat last / and that the Trees do but begin to blossom?

5. Who can behold at Midnight reversed;in ye Darkness; the Light of the Sun?

6. Who sows his Wheate-graine upon the Stonie-flyntes / or upon any Rock /
meaning to reap good Wheat thereof, for his Food?

7. Who comes to the End of his Iournye /

8. Who comes into the Sanctuary of God, ereuer Esa. 52. ^. Ezech. 44. a
Joel. 3. b.
he be circumcised / and with whom is the spiritual and heavenly Most-holie
erected / ereuer he have Heb. 9. b. c.
performed his Sinne-offering and Death-offering in the Holy, under the
Obedience of the Love of Jesus Christ?

9. For / to take-in-hand to finish anything, before the right time of the
Beginning of the same, is unprofitable Labor: and bringeth-in much vain or
unprofitable Travel.

10. COnsider: That which is for to com / that same comes at his convenient
time. And when the Way Esa. 40. 57. b. 62. b. Math. 3. a. John. 1. c.
is made eeuen / and the Streat plain / then may-men best-of-all and safeliest
walk thereon.

11. He is a valiant Champion, which has it easelie in his Power, utterly to
destroy his Enemies / and yet-notwithstanding suffers all Wrong at their
hands / and can euenso tarry his time. For such-aone perceaueth in
Understanding, in what-sort that he reversed;with small pain; can ^ring his
Enemies in subjection under him / and ^lucke or procure their Frindship unto
him.

12. FRom the time of Samuel fourth, the Math. 11. b, Luke 16. b.
till unto John the Baptist or Washer with the Water of Repentance.

13. From the time of John the Baptist fourth, the Kingdom of the God of
Heavens, was Math. 3. a. Mark. 1. a. Luke 3. a.
published to be hard-at-hand / till unto Jesus Christ.

14. With Jesus Christ became the Kingdom of the God of Heavens to be
manifested, Math. 12. ^. Luke 11. b.
in his pure Beauty and Cleernes, upon the Earth. But the Earth John. 1. b.
could not yeat away with the same. Forthat-cause, it must take his Luke 24.
^. Act. 1. b.
Dominion or Reign reversed;with Jesus Christ; at the Right Hand of God, in
the heavenly Being / till that the Love and Mercy, obtained their
Thorowe-breaking upon the Earth / Apo. 21. ^.
and that the Kingdom of the God of Heavens, shewed-fourth itself reversed;in
the true Love; upon the Earth / and euenso became glorious on ye Earth.

15. In the true Love, the Kingdom of Heaven Ezech. 7. Math. 24. b.
Ending. and to the Ungodly / together with all such as contemn the Love /
and blaspheame her holy Spirit, the eternal Condemnation: and they shall be
cast into the Apo. 20. b. 21. b.
Bottomlesse-pit / and into the Fire Math. 15. c. 25. d. 2. Pet. 3. b. Apo. 21.
c.
of Hell.

16. Whosoever then does let-passe the Time of Grace reversed;wherein men may
obtain ye Life of Peace; / and 2. Cor. 6. a.
respects not the same Time, with his Proffering-fourth of Grace
reversed;whylst that it is yeat present; He Esa. 49. b. 2. Cor. 6. a.
neglects much Good / and forsakes the purchasing of great Riches: and
falls euenso at the last, into manifold Miseries / and into great Pain or
Sap. 5. ^. Math. 8. b. ^5. d.
Smart of the Heart. But whosoever lets himself be infourmed and counseled to
the best, by the Wisdom / he may well be comforted.

17. There are Many to be found which utterly ^. Pet. ^. b.
good Days;: and apply them verye-diligentlie to compass the Slyme of the
Earth / wherthrough they pluck upon their own Necks, great Poverty and
extreme Misery.

18. And albeit that they live in all Poverty and Misery / yet are they
notwithstanding reversed;in that their Misery; of good-cheere and
light-hearted / and become th^rto very Ier. 4. d.
subtle and crafty, in allmaner of Wi^kednes and Falshod.

19. A Man may also find many People, which despise no Riches of God / and
which also would gladly enter into the Kingdom of God and House of Love / and
wyan^ or procure other-moe thereunto: But there are Few that prepare themselves
vprightlie thereunto. and yet many fewer, that do reversed;before all; endeavor
them obedientlie, for to become fruitful John. 15. ^.
in the holy W^orde of Love / and then euenso, to wy^ne or allure Other-moe to
the Love / and so to increase the Kingdom of the Love, in all Concord and
Peace.

20. A Selfwyse-bodye / or a good-thinking foolish Man reversed;whether that
he have much Knowledge or little; Esa. 5. a. 1. Cor. 1. 3. ^. Apo. 3. b.
is a poor ignorant Creature / that is Ephe. 2. a.
without God in this World: and whosoever will not be counseled by the Wisdom,
through her Service of Love / he cometh-tonothing, in his Good thinking.

21. When any-man reprooueth a self-wyse or Pro. 9. b.
and (...) he / also frowneth and murmur^th / and sp^weth-fourth against his
Master or Teacher, all Poison / Bitterness / and false Testimonies: but whosoever
proyseth him in his Folly / him does he commend for a Wyse-man.

22. I have seen with mine Eyes / that there was a wise Man pressed-downe, in
the most-contemnedst Place / and that he also lay reversed; 1. Cor. 4. b.
to a Footewispe and Treading-steppe; under euerymans Feet: and very few
received his Testimonies / and took his Contempt to heart. But I saw him
stand-vpp with the Righteous / and that he appeered in the Glory of the
Lord: and became therein so mighty, that all Presumptuous-pride was
constrained to submit itself under him.

The VI. Chapter.
THe World with her Children and

2. The One is / that they believe vnnatural^ Things / or some Natural-thing to
com-to-passe without ye right Course or Ordinance of Nature^ or which is not
in the power of the Elements or o^ the Nature for to do. And those manifold
vayn^ Foythes, cause such Variaunce and Division among the People / and do
breed also with Many, a false Opinion and great Error.

3. An Other is / that they endeavor them to obtain / and hunt or labor after
something, which seemeth-good to themselves / and that also is not reversed;in
their Goodthinking or Opinion; Pro. 33. ^.
to be attaynedvnto of them. And thats^me breeds among the People, manifold
Heauynes-of-minde and Despair. as also manifold Entraunces of Errors.

4. The Third is / that they afflict themselves with sorrow aboue-measure /
for that they are not able to get those Things, which they reversed;out of
their Goodthinking; hunt-after or labour-for / but must miss or go-without
the same. This is assuredly, a deceitful Thing / that Men reversed;for those
vain Things cause; bring themselves into great Heauynes-of-minde and into
much Misery. And thatsame works at the last reversed;through Luke 21. c.
Infidelity and Doubtfulnes; a grievous State-of-confusion / and ^n Estraying
of Minds, among many People.

5. I Have seen upon thissame Earth, that Math. 5. ^. 1. Pet. 2. c. 3. b
al-maner of Wickedness: and made unto themselves ther-withall, a Pretense or
Show of Justice. Thatsame is surely a great and heinous Falshod upon the
Earth.

6. I have also seen that wicked Men made-vp themselves reversed;with false
Matiers; against ye Sap. 2. b. c.
Righteous and their just Matiers or Causes: and have euenso reversed;with
false Matiers; pleaded their cause in the Law, against the Righteous and their
just Matiers: and Esa. 1. ^. Ier. 5. 22. b. Ezech. 22. b.
oppressed euenso injuriously reversed;with subtle Prudentie, in ye Law; the
righteous Men / and their just Matiers. And I saw that the Judges themselves
did not perceoue so-much / nether-yet took they the Matiers to heart. And
thatsame is among the Children of Men, a detestable Abomination.

7. There are likewise to be found upon the Earth, many Wrooters / which have ye
nature of Swyne / and do always reversed;resembling the Swyne; go-onfourth
with their unwashed Srowtes, wrooting or moyning over the Earth / and covet
very gladly, euery-wheare, whersoeuer they can find or sent any Dirt or
Filthynes; to wallowe in the Dirt and Filthynes: yea and generally, they also
desire to continue them very-gladlie in the same Nature. For although they
should be washed or that one desired to wash them / yet regard they not
reversed;for-althat; the Fairnes / but Pro. 26. b. 2. Pet. 2. b.
wallowe even alike-well again in the Dirt and Filthiness. For their Lust
stands not to any other thing.

8. There are also found upon the Earth, Highflyers / Pro. 23. a.
flie-vpp even to the Sky: and so reversed;through their high Flying; they
gather many deadly Winds: and bring euenso reversed;with their Wings;
thesam^ noysom and deadly Winds, on the Earth / wherout many Men are brought
to death / and so dye thereof in their Sins / and perrish with the Ungodly of
the wicked World. And yet those Flyers perceive it not: nether do they
likewise understand what is most requisite or needful for the Children of Men
reversed;upon the Earth; for to liue-by.

9. I have seen moreover, that the Feathers of many of those High-flyers,
grew-about cleene-contrary reversed;as from their T^yle upward toward their
Head; / and that they forthatcause-sake, could not reversed;with their Wings;
laue or make anye-more Wind, wherewith to fly on-high: but whiuered or
fluttered here- and -theare nigh unto the Ground / and were reversed;in their
Flying and Gathering of Wind; altogether without might: and remained euenso
creaping and flapping with their Wings, upon the Earth. Wherthrough many lost
their Great-reputation, on the Earth / Ier. 4^. d. e. Soph. 3. b.
and could not prejudice or indamage the Men anymore, with their deadly Winds.

10. There is a Dan. 2. ^.
vehement and blustering Wind fallen-downe from Heaven, even unto the Earth /
wherthrough all such as dwell upon the Earth, are greatly Ier. 50. 51. b.
stricken with Fear. Yea the Lions in the Wilderness are ouer-taken therthrough
with exceeding great Fear: so that by that occasion, all their Might and
Stout-courage fails them / and they have not any-more Lust, Ezech. 22. c.
to devour any living Beasts: but they Esa. 11. 65. d
feed much-rather with the Oxen / and eat Straw.

11. THe Wisdom and the Love reversed;which have 1. John. 5. ^.
full of Iniquity / and shall be 2. Pet. 3. b.
consumed with Fire.

12. Which incorruptible Arc, is not made of Wood / nor-yet laide-ouer with
Pitch, for that it might thereby fleet or swymme on the Waters / like-as was
the Arc reversed;in the time of Noe; Genesis 6. ^.
when the former wicked World perrished: but it is made and prepared of the
most-syne Apo. 21. b.
Gold / for to assemble and keepe-safe there-in, all Souls of pure Hearts /
and to reserve them to a Remnant upon the Earth, in the Perrishing or
Going-vnder of the last wicked World / 2. Pet. 3. b.
which shall be consumed or burnt with the Fire.

13. For that cause now (namely / to the Preservation Cant. 1. c.
most-syne Gold / To thend that the same and all Such as enter or are
comprehended therein, may reversed;without damage; remaine-ouer from the Burning
of the Fyers Vehementie, 2. Pet. 3. b. Heb. 10. c.
wherthorough the last wicked World shall perrish.

14. THe North Winds arose with a great and boisterous Tempest / and fell with
great Force into the Sea / and upon the Earth: in such-sort / that the Sea was
reversed;above measure; exceedingly troubled, with the same Winds: Yea so
troubled and chafed, that the Waves of the Sea arose and beat so mightelie
against each-other / that all the Ship-maisters on the Sea, f^ead reversed;with
their Ships; to the Land / for to sucker or preserve their Lives on the
Earth.

15. Howbeit, with the same North Winds and great boisterous Tempest / there
became Seven hellish Dragons reversed;with great Might and Dominion; soring or
whiuering euery-wheare over the Earth / and spetfourth over all Lands, much
terrible Fire / with many cruel Fyre-flames / to the Destroying of the Men
which dwelt upon Earth.

16. This terrible Fire with his cruel Fyreflames, Cry / that many
Ship-maisters on the Sea, were so exceedingly astonyed and stricken with fear
/ that they durst not approach to any Country of the whole World: but chose
much-rather to suffer Shipwreck in the Sea / and so to perrish / then to
turnethem to that great Calamity and Misery of the Earth / and so to be
swallowed-vp through the terrible Fire of the hellish Dragons.

17. This is reversed;doubtless; the extremest Apo. 8. 9. b.
Woe reversed;in the Sea and upon the Earth; of all the Woes that shall fall
over the Ungodly / in the dreedfull great Esa. 13. a. Joel. 2. a. b. Soph. 1.
b. Mal. 4. a. Apo. 6. b.
Day of the Lord and of his righteous Judgment.

The VII. Chapter.
ISRAEL and IVDA were in tymespast 2. Para. 9. ^. Psalm. 67. 114. a. 135. a.
Esa. 19. 66. a. Iere. 2. a.
and Heartes-lust on Them.

2. He adourned them with all costly Jewels and Bracelets wrought Ezech. 16.
of al-maner of Golde-worke / and with the most-costlye Pearls and pretioust
Stones: and made them euenso very gorgeous and glorious, above Oze. 14. c.
all the Women and Virgins of the Heathen.

3. He begat also by them many fair Children: They brought-fourth likewise
unto him exceeding fair Daughters / which He much-esteemed and set
great-store by: so that He also promised to geeue unto them in Marriage, his
only Son / which sa^ upon his Seat with Him / and reigned with Him in his
Kingdom / and which also was his H^yre in all his Riches / If they behaved
themselves honestly / and turned not themselves to any-maner of Whordom.

4. And according hereunto, so were the Daughters of Israel and Judah
reversed;in these Promises; nourrished and brought-vp in all Honesty and
Purenesof-life. and were likewise daily, very earnestly warned, to beware
Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 7. a. and in omnibus Prophetis.
of all Fornication / as also infourmed with Wisdom, that they should
reversed;in any-case; keep-well Leuit. 19.
their pure maidenly Bodies, from all Pollution of the Whordom / till that
they were meet to be married / and that their promised Brydegroome joined
himself unto them.

5. But when as they now were thus broughtvp Esa. 3. b. Ezech. 16.
stif-necked in the reputation of their Honesty / for to submit them to their
promised Brydegroome / and to geeue themselves unto Him in Marriage: and Pro. 1.
c. John. 1. b.
refused euenso for to com to their promised Brydegroome. They would not
moreover reversed;when as He showed himself unto them in all Humility; know
nor receive Him for their promised Brydegroome: For He came unto them Zach. 9.
b. Math. 21.
al-to-lowlie and to-meekminded: and they have euenso reversed;for his
Humility and Meekmindednes cause; Esa. 1. a. Math. 21. John. 19. c.
despised Him / and determined with themselves to tarry for some Other: and have
euenso remained for a long time, without any Brydegroome.

6. NOw when that thissame Son of the great and mighty King, was thus
refused of his beloved Frindes (Nea reversed;which yet was more; John. 15. b.
they hated Him / and drove him away from among them) / So turned He him then
reversed;or cast his favor; to the Math. 21. d. Act. 13. f.
Heathen / which lived in all Dishonest-sort and in Whordom / and whose Bodies
also reversed;even from the Head to the Feet; were altogether polluted / and
full of unclean Spots.

7. Euenso verelie, was this most-noble and renowned Act. 13. f.
gladly consented: and they began euenso, to turn their Love reversed;with
submitted Hunalitie and great Thankes-geeuing; toward Him.

8. And euenso, in this Good-willingnes of theirs / this most-noble Son of ye
puissant King turned his Love to the Esa. 55. a. Oze. 1. c. Zach. 2. b. Act.
13. f. Romans 9. c. d.
Daughters of the Heathen / and chose to take them unto him in Matrimony. And
thatsame caused He to be published reversed;through his Messengers; unto them,
to a joyful Message: and also to be signified unto them / that He would
purify them and make them bewtifull Virgins ^ also thoroughly purge or
wash-awaye reversed;with his pure ^ and healthsom Water; all the Filthiness and
Spots of their Body Ezech. 36. c John. 7. d. Apo. 21. 22. b
and so take them reversed; 2. Cor. 11. a. Ephesians. 5. c.
to a pure immaculate Bryde; unto him in Marriage: Conditionally, that they
should reversed;for their part; goodwillinglie turn them away, from all their
Whordom ^ also have a steadfast Belief Romans 11. b. c
or Confidence reversed;to the Purging of their Whordom; on Him and to Him ^
and thereto shew-fourth an upright Testimony of Repentance, that they leftof
their Whordom. and euenso (like-as an upright Espowsed-wife 2. Cor. 11. a.
ought to deal toward her right Husband) altogether cleave or holde-them unto
Him alone / So would He then likewise reversed;in all faithful Love; keep him
unto Them.

9. At which Message, the Daughters of the Act. 13. c.
were exceeding joyful / and gave great Laud and Thanks reversed;with all
Humility; to the great King the Father of the same Son Romans 15. b.
for the great Grace and merciful Love which happened and was extended
toward them: And they received euenso the same reversed;with entire
Good-willingnes and plain Intent; to heart / Act. 13. ^. Romans 11. b. c. Col.
1. a. b.
with purpose to do euenso: and applied them reversed;with all Diligence; to
accomplish all that which was told them by their Brydegroome / and Act. 13. c.
17. 1^. etc.
heald-fourth by his Ministers, before them: in such-sort / that this Son of
the great and mighty King, had reversed;in all their Diligence and Feruentnes
to accomplish his Will; a good-pleasure in them / and grewe-affected with great
Lust and Love toward them.

10. He heald himself also with his Love, wholly to them / for that they
might be Oze. 1. e. Romans 9. c. d.
throughliepurged. He decked them with all kind of costly Attire of golden
Jewels / and with al-maner of fine Golde-worke and precious Stones / as also
with the most-fyne Pearls: so that they reversed;in Beauty and
Gorgeous-decking / and in all costly Riches and triumphant Glory; Romans 11. b.
c
excelled and passed far-away, the Daughters of Israel and Judah.

11. Now when these goodlie-decked and bewtifull 2. Cor. 11. ^.
or Husband.

12. HOwbeit, many of ye after-borne Daughters of the Heathen, did not
vprightlie take-heede unto the right Conjunction with that noble Son / for to
keep themselves constantly reversed;with faithful Love; unto The Same, ^.
Cor. 11. ^.
their promised Brydegroome.

13. They failed not at-all, to challenge unto them the Name and the Honor,
that they stood ioyned-in-matrimonie with the noble Son / and walked in his
Doctrine or Discipline: but ye Deed reversed;to thapproouing of their
singleminded Obedience and Faithfulness; grew reversed;in processe-of-time;
veryemuch Gal. 3. a. Col. 2. b. c. Tit. 1. c.
diminished.

14. And when as they now heard of the Feruent-loue and Heartie-lust, which the
most-noble Son of the most-mightie King, bare toward their Mothers. and
that He reversed;for their Loves sake; had forsaken his dearest Lovers the
Daughters of Israel and Judah / Romans 11. b. c.
So waxed they then so much the statelier and arroganter / bragging veryemuch of
the Grace or Favor which was showed unto them: so that they became therthrough
very hawtie-minded / to a more Extolling of themselves in their Disobedience
and Presumption: and despised euenso the sorrowful and cast-downe or desolate
Daughters of Israel and Judah: and vpbrayded them reversed;with
Reprochful-woordes; of the Indignation and Desolation, into the which they were
fallen.

15. Moreover / in this their Presumption and Oze. 4. a. b. 5. a.
keep themselves pure or chaste from all Fornication / and to remain 2. Cor.
11. b.
faithful to their Lord, to whom they had promised all Fidelity: and turned
them eue^so to strange Men: and received into their Howses, the Gal. 1. 2. 3.
4. 5. a.
Enemies of their promised Brydegroome: and committing adultery with
thosesame, they brake ye band of Wedlock, which they had vowed unto him: and
reioyceing them in their Whordom, they bragged still nevertheless of their
Lord the Son of the great King that He was their Husband / and that They,
were his elected Wife. And euenso reversed;under that Covering of Bosting, of
the Name of that noble and renowned Husband, that He was their right Husband.
and They, his right Espowsedwife; they committed incessantly fornication
reversed;moreand-more; 2. Cor. 6. b.
with al-maner of strange Men: and did not once think, 1. Cor. 6. b. c 2.
Cor. 6. b.
to turn them cleene-awaye therfrom / or to shew-fourth upright Fruits of
Repentance for the same: but became euenso reversed;in their Whordom; the
longer the more, polluted and defiled.

16. NOw when that these desolate Daughters of Israel and Judah, perceived the
vncomblie and shameful Fornication of ye Daughters of the Heathen / and how
that they greatly polluted themselves with all Strangers / So could they not
then in any-wise be persuaded, that the Maryed-husbande of the Daughters of the
Heathen reversed;of whom they so bosted; was the right Son of the great and
mighty King / which was promised in Matrymonie unto them: but have therefore
somuch-the-more reversed;in their Ignorance; despised Esa. 53. a.
that noble Son of the great-mightie King / and judged Him to be false. and
that He was a Luke 7. 15. a.
Lover of Whordom and of all Uncleanness. and could not by any means believe,
that He was the right Lord or Husband of the Daughters of Israel and Judah. And
the Daughters of Israel and Judah Romans 11.
remained euenso reversed;in this Unbelief; as Orphantes, Lam. 5. a.
without Father / as desolate Widows, Lam. 1. 3. a.
without any Husband / and as contracted Mariageable-daughters, without a
Brydegrome.

17. And in all this Leauing-destitute and Heauynes, Vide Esa: Ier: and alios
Prophetas.
and prayed. But so-long as they saw not rightly into their Offenses /
nor-yet acknowledged wherefore they were forsaken / so were they not pityed nor
yet harkened-vnto, of their Lord and King. but euery-wheare despised /
brought-in-distresse / and afflicted-with-greef, among all People.

18. But when as now these unfaithful Daughters of the Heathen, had thus
reversed;a long-whyle; lived and walked in all manner of Whordom and Uncleanness.
as also estraunged themselves so utterly from the honest Matrimony and
faithful Love of their Husband. and yet heald them still nevertheless by
their high Bosting, that They were the right Espowsed-wife / So became they at
the last reversed;in their Whordom and Uncleanness; divided into many Parts /
and fell euenso to sharp Math. 24. b.
contention one against an-other, about the right Husband (namely / who should
have Him to be their Lord or Husband / and which Sort or Sect was his right
Espowsed-wife): and euenso (li^e as all Whoores and Adulterous-women use to
do) they v^brayded each-other with their Adultery / and discovered among
themselves one-anothers Shame and V^chastitie: Though yet-notwithstanding each
Sort manifested plaine-enough their Own, with the Expresse-inuring of their
adulterous Deeds / and uncircumcised false Hearts.

19. And although now that nether of these divided Sects or Parts of the
adulterous Daughters, was purged from their Whordom and Unchastity /
nether-yet had shewed-fourth any upright Fruits of Repentance / Yet bosted
and bragged notwithstanding each Sect in-seuerall, that they reversed;in their
Whordom; were the right Espowsed-wife of the Husband: and that All ye other,
were Strangers therfrom.

20. THissame continued and had reversed;in suchsort; Romans 11. ^.
Time was fulfilled, that reversed;out of the Love of God the Father / and out
of the Service of the same Love; the Cleernes of the upright Matrimony of the
promised Son of the great-mightie King / and the upright Form of his right
Espowsed-wife, was witnessed, declared, and evidently signified
reversed;through HN, Gods elected Minister; on the Earth. and that the Lord
reversed;under the Obedience of his Love; 2. Match. ^.
became merciful again unto his People: and euenso reversed;with his Love and
Ier. 31. a. b.
with the Love of his dear Son; Oze. 2. 3.
called and invited the Generations of Vide in omnibus Prophetis.
Israel and Judah, together with Esa. 17. 18. 19 53. 56. Iere. 3. b. Zach. 8. c.
all People and Heathen reversed;which confessed their Faults and Whordom /
and had a Lust to the right Matrimony; unto the right Marriage: and euenso they
all reversed;which believed his Word of Grace; became renewed in their
Understanding / and were brought to-right again, in the Obedience of ye
Requiring of his Service of Love / as also established in the Faithfulness of
his Love.

The VIII. Chapter.
WHo is-ther, that shall judge the Pro. 2. b.
of the Children which are borne out of ye Wisdom? For those know Her / and
can interpret her parabolous Sentences.

2. Therefore does the Wisdom speake-fourth her Proverbs, to her Pro. 1. 2. 3.
4. etc. Math. 13. b. c Luke 8. ^.
Children. and the Love utters her Understanding, to her Lovers / to the end
that they should hear and Math. 10. c. Luke 12. a.
understand the same in secreat / and then tell it fourth again openly.

3. THe God of Heaven reversed;as the Father himself; is com-downe: and He
brings reversed;in the Service of his Love; John. 14. c. 2. Cor. 6. b. Apo.
21. a.
Himself, with his Christ and Holie-gost / and with all that which with Him is
Gods, unto his obedient Man HN. And goding the same with Him, He has manned
him with the same: and his Will is, that now in the last time reversed;through
his Service of Love; all Ier. 31. a. John. 12. d.
People or Generations of Men, which are goodwilling to his Righteousness,
should assemble them unto Him and his godded Man: and euenso likewise with
them, all that which is manly / To thend that they all should become
of-one-beeing with Him and his godded Man ^ and so be all named Gods / Psalm.
82. a. John. 10. d.
and Children of the Mosthighest. For euenso, in the same Oze. 2. c.
Conioyned-coming and Conformitie-of-beeing [namelie / God, with all what is
Gods / and the Man, with all what is manlie] it all what is not Gods nor
Manly, becomes through God and the Man, utterly condemned.

4. Behold / That is now in thissame Day, Gods Math. 25. d. Act. 17. d.
Iudae. 1. b.
Judgment / and the Judgment of the conjoined Man unto his God, according to
the Righteousness. And the Publishing of thissame Judgment upon the Earth, is a
joyful Message and good Tydinges, unto all goodwilling Men / for to apply
them to the same Conjunction: and it is also to a Psalm. 96. 98. b
Life and Joy in the Godlynes, unto all such as believe that the God of Sion,
is reversed;in suchsort; become King upon the Earth.

5. THe Man is reversed;in his Estraunging from

6. Now when the Man has gotten a great Lust, for to inherit the Promises of
the Blessing / and to com into the good Land, wheare Exo. 3. 13. ^. Leui. 20.
Deuteronomy. 6. a.
Honye and Milk flows / so aryseth-ther up then in the Man, a
Diligentie-of-working / for to be made an Heir in the same Blessing.

7. Out of the Diligentie-of-working, there cometh-fourth the tried Knowledge of
the Man's Inability and Vnwisdom / for to attain thereunto, as out of his own
Selfnes.

8. Out of the tried Knowledge of the Man's Inability and Vnwisdom, there
cometh-fourth Two Parties, one against another.

9. The One Party, is the Unbelief Number. 14. a.
and Despair,

10. The Other Party, is the Belief and Number. 14. a
Hope, to obtain the same by Gods Grace, through the Almightines of God and his
Christ: For the Belief knows that all reversed;what is impossible with the
Man; Math. 19. d. Mark. 10. c. Luke 18. c.
is possible with God.

11. Out of the One Party reversed;namely / Unbelief and Despair; there
arises the Disobedience Number. 14. a. Heb. 3. b.
unto the holy Word and his Requiring. And out of the Disobedience unto the
holy Word and his Requiring, there arise the manifold goodthinking Wisdoms
of Men / 1. Tim. 4. ^. 2. Tim. 3. a. 2. Pet. 3. b.
and the many-maner of false Expoundinges or Interpretations of the holy
Scripture / together with ye lying and deadly Gloses.

12. But out of the Belief and Hope, there aryseth the Obedience Number. 14. b.
Heb. 4. a.
unto the holy Word and the Requiring of his Service of Love. And out of the
Obedience to the holy Word and to the Requiring of his Service of Love, there
arise the Consolations of Men, Psalm. 94. b. Heb. 10. d.
in the Pacient-abyding for the Lord, in their Long-suffering. And euenso there
comes to the Belief Abac. ^. ^.
and Hope, the Healp of the Mightie-power of God / and the Knowledge of the
godly Truth: and leads the faithful obedient Man John. 14. 16.
in all Truth and Love, in-to the good Land of Promise / Apo. 21. 22.
and in-to ye eternal Life, his Blessing.

13. At that time there is found by the Believers John. 14. Apo. 21.
and all Concord and Peace. But with the Unbelievers and Disobedientons, not
els-what but good-thinking Wisdoms / together with all Contention / Schism and
Partiality / Number. 14. 16.
and all Falshod / Deceit and Faynednes: wherewith they entangle or snare
one-another of them / and so remain without the good Land of Promise.

14. And euenso reversed;through these Two-maner of Fourth-goinges; become these
Number. 16. c. 2. Cor. 6. b.
Two Parties separated the one from the other / like as the Sheep from the
Goats. And the One Party, appears Math. 25. d.
at the Right Hand of God / and the Other, at the Leaft. And so the Judgment
passeth-fourth according to the Truth, expressing who are Gods Elect.

The IX. Chapter.
Presently in this Day, I am moved

2. HOw stands the case so reversed;I pray you; / or out of what Stock
proceeds it, that there are Certain / which will themselves, take-vponthem to
procreate themselves Act. 20. d. 2. Cor. 11. d.
to Men of God. also teach and nourrish-vp themselves in the Wisdom and
Understanding of the godly Things. and become euenso reversed;out of
themselves; Men and Elders of ye holy Understanding: and will likewise
geeuefourth themselves for Men of God / and again, beget Men of God / ereuer
that they themselves are begotten or brought-fourth of Men of God?

3. From whence comes it also, that the Fools account themselves Wise / and
persuade themselves to have Understanding: and are also reversed;of their
Consortes or Adherentes; esteemed for Such?

4. That the Dead, bost them of the Life. and the condemned Ungodly, praise
themselves for blessed?

5. That the Dombe and Deaf, will expound

6. That the Crypples, will teach Pro. 26. a.
the Lame to go right: and they which are Bondmen or Captives themselves, will
loose or set-free others that are Prisoners?

7. That the Blind, Luke 6. d.
will show the right Way to Such as err. and the perverse Eyes and dark
Bodies, will teach the Simplicity of Christ, unto another?

8. That Those which dwell in Darkness / and have never beheld the Light, will
yet Romans ^. a.
judge the Light and his Shape or Form. and reversed;ther-to; take upon them,
to bringfourth the Light out of the Darkness?

9. That the Sinners, will promise Forgeeuenes of Sins to Such as
transgress: and that likewise the Unclean, will Eccli. 34. ^.
purge or purify the Unclean?

10. That Such as are themselves unfit or unmeet, to enter into the Kingdom of
God / will yet take upon them to prepare meet Vessels, to the Kingdom of God?

11. That Those which will speak much of the John. 8. ^.
not yet themselves once hear the Truth / nether can they away-with the same?

12. That Those which were neuer-yet Disciples, under the holy Understanding /
geeue-fourth themselves as Masters of the holy Understanding. and take upon
them, to set-fourth and teach the holy Understanding / and to judge the same
according to their own Mind?

13. That the Needy and such as have no Bread themselves Esa. 3. ^.
in their Spences or Bynnes, go and call euery-wheare: Com fetch Bread / Com
fetch Bread / we have abundance thereof?

14. How comes it, that the hungrye Bellyes after the Bread, (...). 2. a.
suffice them with the Wind and Fame of Bread: and euenso reversed;as-though
they had eaten indeed and were satisfied; hold themselves contented?

15. From whence have ye Presumptuous reversed;which are themselves without
the Church of Christ, and have never seen nor known any one Stone of the same;
taken such an Arrogantie on them, that they will gather-together the Stones
unto them ^ also cowch and dawbe them together (...). ^. b.
with deceitful Mortar ^ and so buyld-vpp a Church of Christ: and do not once
perceive, that their Work avails not / nor comes to perfection?

The X. Chapter.
WHeare the Hunter hunteth / and

2. Wheare the true Light shows itself / and wheare-as the same is witnessed /
wheare also the Forefrunt and the Holy of the true Tabernacle becomes 1.
Esdr. 3. 6. 2. Esdr. 3. 3. Esdr. 1. 5. 8. 2. Match. 4. d.
sanctified anew ^ and the daily Oblation of the true Godseruice reversed;to
the Purging of ye Man from his Sins; set-vpp again / theare do then the
false Hearts of the Scripture-learned / with all euelwilling Men / and
Goodthinking-wyse, furiously rage-against and blaspheame the same.

3. IN the true Tabernacle of the Lord, the sweet and pleasant-sauourie Meat,
becomes now dressed or made-redie, to an holy Meate-offering: and after
the same, do the wild Beasts vent or smell.

4. The Levites are entered ^. Esdr. 1. a. ^* b. c.
into the Forefrunt /

5. The Priests are entered into the Holy / and they Ier. 33. b. Heb. 9. b.
kindle or set-on-fire theare, the daily Offering of the true Godscruice: and
euenso the Trespasse-offering and Sinne-offering, becomes reversed;thorough
the preparation of the Meate-offering; offred-vpp and burnt reversed;before the
Lord; in the Holy / to the Remission and Cleansing of the Sins: and it
geeueth-fourth euenso a sweet Savor, before the Lord.

6. The High Priest is entered into the Mostholie: Luke 1. a. Heb. 9. c.
and He kindles or setteth-on-fire theare, with his Offering of the Life, the
Death-offering / and consumes the Death in the Life: and the Life keeps the
Victory for evermore: and euenso 1. Cor. 15. ^.
the Death reversed;which is the last Enemy; becomes swallowed-vp through
Oze. 13. b. 1. Cor. 15. f. Apo. 21. a.
the eternal Life / and the Kingdom of the God of Heavens is inherited in the
eternal Life: and euenso in the same Inheriting, becomes now in this Day, the
great and glorious Feast Esa. 25. b. Luke 14. 22. ^ Apo. 19. a.
of the Lord celebrated or kept in the Kingdom of Heaven.

7. And the Holyons of God and Christ, eat and drink the wel-dressed Meat /
and the welprepared Drink of the Vine reversed;before the Lord and his
Christ; Luke 14. b. 22. c.
in the Kingdom of Heaven. And the sweet or pleasant Savor of the same is of so
great force, that it is also smelled even without-fourth.

8. Ther-after now do many uncircumcised Taste of the same. For it is not meet,
that the Uncircumcised Math. 7. a.
should eat thereof / nether-yet likewise, that any Vncircumcisedons Esa. 35.
52. a. Ezech. 44. a Joel. 3. b. Apo. 21. c.
should enter into the Sanctuary of God: For their Tit. 1.
Hearts and Thoughts are altogether unclean.

9. Many polluted and uncircumcised Hearts crye-out: God / Christ, and holy
Ghost. They do also not spare to open their Mouth very-wide, for to talk much
thereof. also to inuay-against and malign very reprochfullie all Idolatry
reversed;which they with their outward Eyes looke-on or judge to be Idolatry;.
and to curse or defye the Antichrist reversed;which yet they know not; very
vehemently: and yet reversed;ther-vnder; they themselves do serve the Deuell,
John. 8. c.
the Father of all Idols. They honor the Antichrist, 2. Tess. 2. a. 1. John.
2. c. 4. a.
the Deuels Child: and are repleanished with the wicked Spirit of Belial. And
are euenso before God and his Christ, not els-what but abominable Idolatours
and 1. John. 2. c.
Antichristians.

10. WIth the pure Hearts and Children of Christ of the same God Romans 13. b.
Gal. 3. c.
is plucked-on, in his christian Being: the holy Ghost is inherited, in his
John. 14. 16.
Love: and the true Light is seen or beholden, John. 1. c. 1. John. 1. a.
in his Cleernes.

11. The true Light shyneth upon the Earth / and shyneth among the Children of
the Earth, as through a Glass: but by the Children of the Love, 1. John. 3. a.
in perfect Cleernes.

12. The Mind of the Children of the World, is covered with many-maner of
Darknesses / and their Esa. 28. 29. b
Scripture-learned attain unto no Truth. For-that-cause they all walk in the
dark Sap. 5. a.
Ways / which lead unto Destruction.

13. WHeare-as the Enuiousnes has any place or room granted unto it /
euentheare burns Pro. 14. d.
it in, as a Fire / and fretteth or consumes away the Man, as a Canker.

14. All the Understanding of the Worldlie-wise Iam. 4. ^.
Smoke and Vapor.

15. Therefore is also the Day of the Lord, before the Scripture-learned
reversed;which are not Math. 13. f.
taught to the Kingdom of Heaven; and before all Wise of the World, altogether
Esa. 13. ^. Joel. 2. a. Amos. 5. ^. Soph. 1. b.
dark / yea not otherwise, but as a Cloud and Mist.

16. There are very Few which Esa. 44. b.
call upon the Name of the Lord: Therefore there are also Few defended by the
Lord, Joel. 2. d.
to Preservation in the Godlynes.

17. There are also Few that seek the Upright and Verytrue / or that endeavor
them thereafter with all their heart: but they all reversed;for the most-part;
set their Consolation and Confidence on vain Things. For-that-cause also the
begilefull 3. Reg. 22. c. Romans 11. b.
Spirit of Lies, has the Victory over Many: and thereon they highlie-bragge,
as-though they had the Truth. And so many People become ther-through seduced /
and are Psalm. 43. ^. Romans ^. ^.
brought to the Shambles.

18. There is scarcely any Iere. 5. a. Luke 18. a.
Faith / Fear of God / Oze. 4. a. Romans 1. c. d.
but Reuyling / Contention / Blaspheaming / Vprour / Traytorie / Envy /
Backbyting / False-witnes / Unfaithfulness / Idolatry / Bosting and Consolation
in Fleash / false Righteousness / forged Holiness / counterfeited Seruing-ofgod /
Hypocrisy / Lying-tales / Theeuerie / Pride / Adultery / Whordom / Seducing /
Covetousness / Pomp / War or Battle / and Murdering / with many-moe such
other Wickednesses, have euerywheare the Pre-eminence and Raigne-in-comon,
among the Children of Men: in such-sort as by that occasion, the Law of the
Lord is (...). 1. b.
despised. the Euangelie and the Belief of Christ, is takenon to a sinful Gal.
5. b. 2. Pet. 2. b. c.
Liberty. the holy Spirit of ye Love of God and Christ, is shamefullie Heb.
10. c.
blaspheamed. and the false Doctrine reversed;with her seducing Lies; is
euery-wheare harkened-vnto, honored, and followed-after.

The XI. Chapter.
IT goes Now with the Children of 2. Cor. 3. b.
Hearts, will live and gofourth, according to the Spirit.

2. The Children reversed;for whom it is yet 1. Cor. ^. a.
needful to be fedd with Milk; will eat strong Meat. and thereto be 1. Cor.
4. b.
named Men.

3. They will also reversed;as-though they were Men or Elders; 1. Cor. 4. b.
procreate Children in wedlock / and so be called Fathers.

4. The Disciples forsake the Doctrine and Instruction Heb. 13. b.
of the Elders / and set-vp themselves reversed;against their Elders; to be
Elders: and Leui. 10. ^.
place themselves euenso in the Office or Room of the Elders / for to minister
the Priestes-office themselves / and to appropriate and transport reversed;
Number. 16. b.
according to their Mind; the Government of Rulers, unto themselves.

5. The Bondmen reversed;which are subject to service; will be free Masters /
and pluck to them the Inheritance of their Masters: and so take upon them to
bear Lordship over their Masters. and the elementish Children / and ye
worldly Captives, will 2. Pe^. 2. ^.
apply the Freedom of the Children of God, on themselves.

6. The Hyrelinges reversed;which are Apo. 3. b.
altogether poor / and must of necessity live by their Dayewages / and have
no overplus by them; / will distribute-fourth much Riches / and bear the Name
that they are rich.

7. The Women will now marie with Women /

8. They that are bidden to the Mariage-feast, keep themselves back Math. 22.
^. Luke 14. b.
with Excuses / and they themselves prepare their own Mariage-feast / and
keep the same together with each-other, without Brydegroome and Bryde.

9. The Maried-women reversed;which ought to hold themselves in all
Faithfulness only by their Espowsed-husbandes; geeue themselves to commit
Whordom / and break the Wedlock. They play the harlottes with strange Ier.
2. d. 3. a.
Men / and take-pleasure Ezech. 16.
in their Whordom.

10. They are become likewise so presumptuous by themselves in their Whordom /
that they stick not to proclayme-them an whorish Mariage-feast. also bid Ezec.
16. 22.
many Adulterers and Adulterices thereto. and keep euenso the same with Whoores
and Naughtypackes: and become reversed;one with-another; utterly drunken with
the Apo. 17. a. 18. a.
Wine of their Whordom and Uncleanness.

11. THat which is Most-bewtifull, is now Math. 22. b. Apo. 3. b.
Wedding-feastes Garment, is now reversed;of Many; counted a thing worthy of
derision.

12. The right Bread, is counted to be vinewed or mustie / and the Children of
Men make one-another to loathe it: in such-sort / that they abhor to eat
thereof: and so they seek to saciate or fill them with strange Bread / and
with their own Dirt.

13. The upright Wine of ye right Vine reversed;which is pressed to upright
Ioyfulnes; is counted of Many, as fustie and sower or without good verdure:
and they will presse-them New-wine out of the Bramble-^eries / and so refreash
and rejoice them with strange Wine / and with their own and bitter Filthiness.

14. The forworne Fountains are become Ier. 14. a.
dry: their Waters are run to-an-ende in their course / and stand altogether
still for yielding of anye-more Water: And the Children of Men dig reversed;
Ier. 2. b.
with great Diligence; for new or freash Waters: and seek to get or com-by
the same, out of their Ier. 2. b. ^.
foul Pooles / and stinking Puddles or Pittes.

The XII. Chapter.
THe Husbandmen or Tillers of the Eccle. 3. ^.
Mowing-time. They know not likewise the Fruits, from the Leaves / nor the
Corn, from the Chafe.

2. The Wood-breakers and Carpenters, cannot discern the difference betwixt
the Heart-woode of the Tree / and the Bark of the same. nether-yet do they
know ye Instruments or Tools of their Science, as whereto eachone is
serviceable.

3. The Masons know not the good Stones, from the bad: nether-yet do they also
understand the difference betwixt the Work of the Foundation / and the Work
that is set thereon: and they mortar or lay-on all their Masendrie-worke Ezec.
13. b. ^
with deceitful Mortar.

4. The Carters, harnes or tie the Horses behind the Carts: and will needs
dryue-on the Carts forward.

5. The Physicians and Apotecar^es, know not the Herbs which serve to the
Health of the Diseased: nether-yet know they how to discern the diversity of
the Diseases or Sicknesses of Men. And the thing wherewith they go-about to cure
or heal the Lives of Men / therewith they bring-in the Death and Corruption to
the Life / and so mar the Life of Man.

6. The Merchants are inexpert in their

7. The Sheepheardes reversed;or Those that will be called Pastors of Sheep;
know not the Sheep, from the Goats. And the Howse-holders reversed;which
appoint the Heardmen over the Sheep; know not the Ezec. 34. a. b John. 10.
Heardmen or Pastors of the Sheep, from the Wolves / nor the Feeders, from
the Deuourers / wherthrough also in general, the Sheep are not protected nor
yet duly pastured.

8. The Wolves put-on Sheepe-skinnes / Math. 7. c. Romans 16. b. 2. Cor. 11. b.
and know how to bleate like Sheep and Lambs. And euenso reversed;in their
Bleating; they brute-fourth the seely Sheep, to be Wolves / for that they
might reversed;according to their woluish Nature; John. 10.
bite and devour the seely Sheep. But it has never ben seen / nether shall
it likewise evermore be seen, that the Sheep do byte or devour the Wolves:
but they greatliefeare the Wolves / and flee reversed;for that they might be
defended; to their Pastor or Heardman.

9. Howbeit, many Sheep are now become altogether John. 10. b.
And by reason that there are so many false Pastors risenvp / Ezech. 1^. b 34.
a. b. Math. 24. a. ^
which can counterfeit in the sounding-fourth of their Voices, the Voice of the
upright Pastors / the insensible seely Sheep, know not how to discern the
false Pastors / nor their seducing Voices, from the upright Pastors: and so
they run reversed;for the most-part; after the Sound of the Voice of the ^.
Reg. 22.
false Pastors: and become euenso very rufullie seduced / and brought to the
Shambles / and part of them also, into much Calamity and Distress.

The XIII. Chapter.
HOw can it reversed;by any reason; go-well

2. All Errors and unright Ways, are called right Esa. 5. ^.
Ways: and the Unfaithful, which steal the Goods out of their Masters or
Governors Chestes / and traffic or occupy false Marchandice therewith, are
called Iust-persons.

3. Those which have neuer-yet ben Disciples in the School of Christ. but are
risenvp out of Apo. 2. c.
the Deuels Synagogge / are now called Christians / or they geeue-fourth
themselves for Such. And the wicked and dark Consciences, place themselves for
Judges, Esa. 5. c.
betwixt Good and Evil / and betwixt Light and Darkness.

4. Those which have no Intelligence of the Truth nor of the Light of Life,
will now teach the Truth unto Others / and direct them to the Light of Life:
and the Ignorant, will plant Understanding into the Simple.

5. The Dead, bost them of the Life: and those which lie yeat as the Dead, in
the Graves / will publish the Life and the Resurrection of the Dead / and
promise the eternal Ezech. 18. b
Life, to the Unbelievers that are dead.

6. The Infidels account themselves for Believers: John. 8. c.
in their Sins: and the Inheritance of their Reward, is the eternal Romans 6.
a. Apo. 19. 20. c
Death. But the upright Believers, dye in the Death of Christ: Romans 6. a.
and the Inheritance of their Rewarding, is ye Resurrection with Christ, and
the eternal Life.

7. They which are minded against the Law / and are reversed;in all; guilty as
touching the Law / do yet enforce or Math. 23. a.
drive men to keep the Law.

8. They which are themselves unbelieving / d^ yet set-fourth reversed;very
strcictlie; the Belief to be kept, on pain of Damnation.

9. They which know not the Euangelie of the Kingdom / nor yet have ever
received the same ^ nor the Publishing of the same, out of the true Light / will
yet needs themselves preach-fourth the Euangelie of the Kingdom: and will
euenso run, wheare-as Iere. 23. ^. d.
they are not sent.

10. The Blind affirm John. 9. d.
that they see / the Spiritlesse-persons, do highly vaunt them of the holy
Spirit / and the Ungodly make their bost, that the only God is their God /
and that they have the Word of the Lord.

11. WHere now therefore it goes thus toworke, Esa. 1. c. Ezec. 22. a. b
euen-theare are the Just / together with all Singleminded and Littleons of
understanding, enforced reversed;in their just Causes; to suffer wrong: also
the sorrowful Widows and the Fatherles are oppressed ^ and the true Doctrine
of the Service of Love, blaspheamed and resisted.

12. The angwished Hearts for the Righteousness cause, find theare no place
for to obtain any Liberty or Refreashing: nether-yet is the innocent or
unguilty Blood defended either protected theare / but is rather Esa. 59. ^.
Iere. 22. b.
spilt or powred-fourth ^ and all upright Righteousness depressed.

13. The hungry Souls after ye Bread of Heaven, find theare Esa. 58. a.
Math. 25. d.
no Satisfying. the thirsty Hearts after the Righteousness, are not theare
refreashed: the naked Pooreons, are not theare clothed: the Witnessers of ye
Truth, are not theare harkenedvnto: nor yet the Prisoners, loosed or let-go at
liberty: nor the Erring or Strayed, lead on the right Way. but rather greatly
blamed and blaspheamed.

14. Moreover / whosoever would theare go-about to convert the Sinners from
their Sins / and to induce or lead them to an upright Life, both before God
and Men / he is accounted and judged for 2. Cor. 6. a.
a S^ducer: and he is slaundered with all Wickedness / and bruted for an
Euel-dooer. Thissame is ^ssuredlie, a great Misery upon the Earth.

15. Whosoever can new in the same wicked Time, Genesis 6. 7. ^9
the former corrupted World / and as the Time of Lot, in Sodom and Gomor, and
that in the same Time, all Iniquity and Falshod flourishes in vigor.

16. They may farther note and perceive / that in the self-same Time, the World
is couered-ouer with the Exodus 10. c.
Darknesses of Egypt, with the Plagues of Exodus 7. 8. 9. 10.
Pharao, with the Ignorance of the Cananites, with the Contention and Discord
of the entangled Genesis 11. a.
Babel, with the Deceit and Institution of the false Godseruices of 3. Reg. 12.
Jeroboam, with the wicked Enterprise or Devise of 3. Reg. 21. c.
Iezabel, with the (...) Srytefulnes of the Scripture-learned and Math. 22. 23.
24. 27. 28.
of the Pharisees and Saducees, with the Ambition of John. 19. b.
Pilate, and with the Tyranny of Nero, as also with all Heathenish
Instabilitie: and that the Destruction is hard-at-hande.

The XIIII. Chapter.
THe Kingdom of God, is grounded Math. 13. ^. Luke 17. c.
Field of the Man / euen-like as a Lillie-braunch is planted in the Midst of
an Husbandmans Field / which is by nature inclined to bringforth Thistles.

2. Now the Thistles Math. 13. ^.
growing-vpp, do shewefourth the Beauty of their Flowers: they get also some
Praise for their Fayrnes / until such time as that the sweete-smelling
Lillie-flowers, do makemanifest themselves reversed;out of the Lillie-braunch;
with their pure Beauty.

3. Howbeit / the Lillie-flowers do excel and pass reversed;in their pure
Beauty and sweet Smell; the Thistel-flowers, far-awaye: in such-sort, that
eueryone reversed;which beholds them / and smells their sweet and
delightful Savor; must needs Cant. 2. ^.
praise and commend the Lillie-flowers, more then all Thistel-flowers.

4. For-that-cause likewise, the Husbandman does love the Lillie-flowers, with
such a singular Love / that he utterly rootethout ye Thistles with their
Flowers and Seeds, from-off his Math. 13. ^.
Field / and so geeueth Room to the Lilly with her Flowers: and he brings
also reversed;into the same Field; by the Lillie-flowers, all the Plants of his
pleasantsmelling Herbs / and makes of the same his Field, a
Garden-of-pleasure.

5. THey which are either walk without the of God / Those harken-to and
geeue-eare reversed;from without-fourth; very diligently, what-maner of
s^raunge Sound thatsame Sound might be, which witnesses of the Kingdom of
God.

6. But when as they now make inquisition or search after the same / and that
they are com somewhat nigh unto the same Sound reversed;for to hear some News
therout / and not to stand obedient thereunto or to the Requiring of the same; /
So are then the same Testimonies of the Kingdom of God, not els-what unto them,
but as a closed Esa. 29. b.
Book / and a fast-sealed Pit / yea, and as it were a Proverb or secreat
Math. 13. b. Luke 8. b.
Sentence.

7. They looke-about diligently after the same: and they dig also
reversed;with all their own Understanding; very earnestly after the Knowledge
of the Kingdom of God, in their Inwardnes. But they cannot reversed;in all
their Understanding; consider nor yet once conceive ye 1. Cor. 2. b.
Form or Fashion of the same.

8. They seek likewise reversed;no-doubt; with painful Luke 17. c.
of his Coming.

9. Howbeit / it is granted to the believing and obedient Disciples of the
holy Word and his Service of Love, to understand Math. 13. b. Luke 8. b.
the Mystery of the Kingdom of God / and the Entrance into his Righteousness.

10. It is likewise permitted them, to eat of the secreat Apo. 2. b.
heavenly Bread. and thereto there is geeuen them a white Stone / wher-vpon is
written a New Name / which noman knows, save only he which receaueth the same
Stone with the New Name. And That is the Difference betwixt the true Being,
which is remaining with the Elders / and the Images or Figures, which are
administered unto the Disciples, to an Introduction for them unto the true
Being.

11. But where-as now there is no upright Difference Pro. 19. a.
can it not go-well with any Soul. For the Math. 2^. c.
Judgment nor the Mercifulnes / nether-yet the Ceremonies of the upright
Seruing-of-god, are not theare observed / nor yet likewise is the Truth of
thosesame effectually known.

12. But where-as the true Being of God and Christ, is remaining with the
Elders or Teachers: and that the same Elders, administer unto the Disciples
reversed;which are taught; the Images or Figures, out-of the same true Being
reversed;to an Introduction for them unto the same true Being; / euentheare is
then the Judgment Oze. 6. c. Math. 23. c.
and the Mercifulnes / as also the Ceremonies of the upright Serueing-of-god,
used or observed sinceerlie and according to the Truth.

The XV. Chapter.
FOr-as-much now as that the Wisdom Psalm. 78. ^.
in Parables; the Wisdom and her Mysteries. For in the Obedience of the Love,
it is granted unto them to Math. 13. b. Mark. 4. b. Luke 8. b.
understand the Mystery of the Kingdom of God / together with the Proverbs of
the Wise / and the Sayings of the Vnderstandingons.

2. Wherefore reversed;O ye Elders and Fathers of the Family of Love; Pro. 1.
4. a. b
so let now all these parabolous Sayings of mine reversed;which I presently
in this Day of mine Olde-age, speake-fourth unto you; sink into your Hearts.

3. Observe likewise and Keep reversed;with all Disigence; in the Congregation
of the Love, the Ordinances of Howsholding / and the Government of your
Family / and of all That which is under your Hands, even as I express or
hold-fourth the same before you.

4. Do you in like manner holde-fourth the same reversed;in all Love; before the
Goodwilling, which walk obedientlie in our mostholie Godseruice of Love / to
the end that ye reversed;in all your Ministrations; may euenso always rule
wisely and vnderstandinglie ^ and so accomplish all your Matiers reversed;with
good Providence or Circumspection; in the holy Understanding.

5. Geeue not over your Pro. 6. ^.
Lust reversed;at any time; as Act. 20. c. 2. Tim. 4. ^.
of your Subjects: and see that ye keep euenso always
reversed;fourth-and-fourth; a good Watch, against all the Destruction which is
a coming.

6. Let always the Ministration reversed;about the needful Things; sink
into your Hearts: and reversed;to a good Preserving or Safety; take evermore
good-heede, unto all that which is committed to your Charge and put-in-trust
unto you, either by God or Men.

7. Let not your Fields reversed;to any increasing of Weeds; lie waste Ier.
4. ^.
or vnplowed / lest that thosesame reversed;after the Nature of their own
Yielding or Bringing-fourth; growefull of al-maner of Weeds / or wax stubborn
and barren by themselves.

8. Therefore plowe your Lands or Fields betimes / and prepare them to a
mollified Earth: and euenso with the Harrowe, purge or scower them well from
the Roots of the Weeds.

9. Let not reversed;in anycase; any-what at-all, of the Weeds or of their
Roots, remain in your Fields, nether yet likewise anything of all
what-soeuer is like to hinder or indamage ye good Corn reversed;which ye sow
in your Fields; in ye Growing-vp thereof.

10. When ye now have well tilled your fields

11. And when ye then have reversed;in seasonable time; sown your Fields /
so be not ouerhastie to the Growing-vpp thereof / for to have the Harvest,
before ye right Time: but wait with Long-suffering, for Iam. 5. ^.
the Eauening-and-morning Rain / for the sweet Dew of Heaven / and for the
Warmth of the Sunne-shining: through which Conioyning reversed;or
Together-operation; on your sown Fields, your Seed shall receive his full
Increase / and be multiplied plentifully.

12. But forget not in all thissame, to bestow all your Care and Diligence,
for to Math. 13. d.
weede-fourth or pluckvp thoroughly all the Weeds reversed;which grow in your
Fields, besides or among the good Seed; from out-of your Fields / lest that
the same in growing-vp against the good Corn, should get the Pre-eminence
therouer.

13. Now if ye do euen-thus / and that ye take

14. When ye now in the Harvest, have reaped your Fruits reversed;wherein the
Lord has blessed or prospered you; from-of your Fields / so Math. 1^. d.
gather and lay you up the same then in your Barnes.

15. And whenas the Winter comes / and that all Fields lie barren and without
Fruit / then feed you your Howsholdes, with your Increase or Store that is
grown / and live therewith, in Joy: and satisfy yourselues euenso with the
Fruits of your Fields, eueryone according to the Desire or Appetite of his
Soul.

The XVI. Chapter.
COnsider adunsedlie and vprightlye Pro. 6. a.
right Time / whylst that the same serves and is necessary for you, to all
good Exercise / So shall ye then have always Corn in your Barnes / and Bread
enough within your Howses. And in the time when the Hunger Amos. 8. b.
falls upon the People / and that the Countries are clean without Corn / ye
shall Esa. 65. b.
have sufficient thereof / and that in great abundance.

2. And when that ye thus in the dear Time [namelie / in the Time of Lacking
or Scarcity of Corn and Bread] have Corn enough / and plenty of Bread, to
your Suffising / euen-like as in the Time of abundance: and that the Lord
your God, has made you rich and fat, with Corn and Bread / Leuit. 26. b.
Esa. 58. b. 65. 66.
with Gardens-of-pleasure and Vineyardes / and with all what-euer is needful
for you: and that ye have abundance of Water, in your Fountains and Rivers /
So become not then sluggish nor sleapie / whereby ye might chance to forget
all good Orders-of-discipline, serving to the Edifying of your Family / which
I do this-daye reversed;to the Preservation of You and your Families; express
and set-fourth before you.

3. Become not likewise wanton, inordinate, or Pro. ^4. b.
and Nettles ouergrowe or take-any-roote in your Gardens-ofpleasure and
Vineyardes / as also in your earable Fields: and that euenso reversed;through
such your Negligence; your Vines reversed;wanting their due and orderly
Dressing or good Husbanding; fail to yeeldfourth their Increase of good Wine
reversed;in any store or abundance; unto you.

4. For that cause neglect not the time, for to maintain and keep your
Fountains with their Waters, in all Pureness / and to cut reversed;in due
season; the Branches of your Vines.

5. Pare or cut reversed;I say; very well and orderly, the Branches of your
Vine: spare not hardly to pare them somewhat short / but cut off from them the
Ranknes of their superfluous Increasing or Shooting-fourth in their growing:
and let not the principal growen-fourth Branches be suffered to bear or
nourrish anymore then a few or short Shootes, in the Stem of their Vine / So
shall then your Vines yield you fourth great store of Wine and sweet Must, to
your Rejoicing.

6. But if ye let the Branches of your Vine

7. Take therefore now a good regard hereunto / and have euenso your delight in
the tilling and dressing of your Vineyardes: and rejoice you in the Sweetness of
ye Wine that proceeds of thosesame.

8. Travel and view also in like-maner reversed;to a ^ood Exercise;
thorowe-out, your Gardens-of-pleasure / Pomerayes / or Orchardes: and have a
good regard to the Twigges of the Trees / lest that they reversed;in the
Bringing-fourth of their Fruits; should hinder one-another / or-yet let or
keepe-away the Shining of the Sun.

9. Have no pleasure in the superfluous Multitude of Twigges / which may
any-waye be damagefull or-yet hindersom to the fruitfulnes: but prune them /
and shrid-away or cut off the unprofitable and noysom Twigges / whereby that the
Sun reversed;with his bright Shining; may shine-thorowe between them / and
that the profitable or expedient Twigges might euenso reversed;to the
Bringing-fourth of their perfect and ful-rype Fruits; have room enough for
them.

10. IN all this same your good Order-of-exercise, Pro. ^. ^. Sap. 6. a.
Wisdom of the Lord / to the end that your Howsholdes may be reversed;in
al-thinges; so lovely and peaceable / that nothing-els may be found,
perceived, either proved by them, but that they reversed;together with
each-other; are a concordable House of Love and Peace.

11. Therefore ought ye also to have always a sharp eye, Romans 16. b.
toward Such as adioyne not themselves to the Obedience of the Love / but are
rather prosumptuous and contentious ther-against / and thereto stirre-vp
Other-moe to Contention, against the same: And suffer them not reversed;in any
case; to have Place, for to dwell by you / lest that they disturb your whole
Family / and make them seditious, to all Vnpeaceablenes.

12. And albeit that They reversed;to the Satisfying of their Lust and Desire;
com crow^hing unto you, as though they were hungry and thirsty / yet Eccli.
12. a.
feed them not for-al-that, in their Hunger / nether quench you their Thirst:
Eat not also with them, of one Bread / nether yet likewise drink you with
them, out of one Cup: but let them passe-away / and have not any Pity or
Compassion at-all over them.

The XVII. Chapter.
Look well and advisedly hereunto /

2. The Wicked / together with all Seditious and Euel-willingons, shall tremble
or be-afraide before you / and flee-away far from you: and the Lord will
geeue you wide and large Room.

3. PRepare always requisite or convenient Work, Eccli. 33. c. d*
for your Oxen and Asses / for your Men-seruantes and Maide-seruantes which ye
have retained reversed;for to do your Service; within your House / whereby they
may be occupied and not rest-ydle / Lest that they reversed;by the means of
Ydlenes; should wax slothful / or-els reversed;having overmuch sparetime; be
moved for to devise some mischeuous or lewd Practice / or to employ and
endeavor them to some naughty Abuse.

4. Ye shall reversed;fardermore; observe or make Gal. 4. a.
no Difference, betwixt your Servants and your Children reversed;whylst that
your Children are yeat young / and must stand under the rule of Discipline and
the Rod; in their Labor / nether-yet shall ye suffer anyone to be idle or
unoccupied, but only on the Sabboth-daye of the Lord, when as the same is com
/ like as the Lord has Exodus 20. b. 31. c. Leuit. 23. c. Deuteronomy. 5. b.
commanded it.

5. In like-sort also ye ought always to be Heb. 4. b.
always mindful of the same, for to halowe it / and to rest them therein: and
that they all euenso reversed;which are Exodus 20. b.
mindful of the Sabboth-daye of the Lord, for to halowe the same; might
recreate and rejoice them reversed;with their Elders and Fathers of the
Howsholde; in the same.

6. Moreover, in this Sabboth-daye of the Lord / ye shall all reversed;one
with-another; keep alike Rest or Holy-daye together: namely / from the
Greatest or Principallest fourth / D^ut. 5. b.
even to the very Smallest.

7. BE not likewise negligent or slack, to present yourselues before the Lord,
in his High-festiual-times of the Holie-assembling: and observe Exodus 23. b.
34. b. Deuteronomy. 16. c.
euenso those same, according to their right Ordinance / together with the
Institutions and Rites / like as the Lord your God has commanded those same
to be observed ^ and ordained them in his Service of Love / So shall then the
High-festiual-dayes of your Holie-assemblies, be named a right Holie-assembling
/ euenlike as the Lord Leuit. 23. a.
has ordained the same.

8. Forget not moreover, the Poor and Needy which Leui. 29. Deuteronomy. 15. ^. Tob.
4. b.
dwell among you / nether-yet also the Widows Esa. 1. c. Iere. 22. a.
and Fatherles: but let them sink into your Hearts / and consider of them,
even as your own Souls: and Tob. 4. b. Esa. 5^. ^.
withholde not the Alms nor withdraw not your Healpe from the Needy: and be
in like-maner comfortable and frindlie (and that with all Counsel and
Information of the Testimonies of ye holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ)
unto such as are in Distress and afflicted with Sorrow / whenas they
reversed;with singlemindednes of Heart; shall seek Counsel or Comfort at
your hands.

9. TO all these good and laudable Exercises reversed;O ye Elders and Fathers
of Families; let your Minds and Thoughts stand always inclined: and hold
you always manly in the Wisdom, touching the Ordering and Government toward
your Families and Subjects / So shall then all those that have intended or
stoode-minded unto Wrong and Falshod, stand-in-feare of you. but ye shall be
heartelie beloved of those that love the Righteousness / and be likewise
commended and reverenced reversed;in your good Government; of all upright
Hearts.

The XVIII. Chapter.
O Ye Elders / which are become grisell you; have joined or coupled themselves
with you, as Fellowe-bodies of your Bodies / to their Preservation with you, in
all Godliness: and bear always a good Care over them: For / for that they
might be preserved with you reversed;in one Being of God and his Love; ye
shall nourrish and cherrish them, as your own Bodies: for they are with you
one Fleash, of your Fleash / Genesis 2. c. Math. 19. a. Mark. 10. a.
and one Bone, of your Bones.

2. Ye shall also, in all Orderlines reversed;euenlike as Ye yourselues do
walk in the Law or Ordinance of the Lord; keep your Wives submitted under
your Law, Ephesians. 5. d. Col. 3. c.
to all Obeysaunce: and nourrish and maintain them euenso therein reversed;with
all diligence; to a fourth-going of the Righteousness.

3. Permit them not likewise to do or to leauevndon any-maner of thing (be it
then what it is) but only that which is agreeable to your Law: and live and
walk euenso with them, in all good Government and Orderlines / according to
the Law or Ordinance of the Lord.

4. And in all this same, so love, foster, and cherrish Ephesians. 5. d.
own Bodies / and cleave wholly unto them, in Math. 19. a. Ephesians. 5. d. 1. Pet.
3. b.
one Love with God and his Righteousness. For euenso reversed;to the same
Conformitie-of-beeing; has God Genesis 1. c. 2. c
preordained you to be One of-vniformebeeing.

5. Forasmuch then as that ye to-gether are but one Genesis 2. c. Ephesians. 5. c.
Body / therefore ye shall not feign nor cover you before each-other. but
walk always openly and vncoueredlie reversed;in all naked Pureness; before
each-other: and have euenso a good-pleasure, in each-others Beauty and Pureness.

6. For God has Genesis 2. c.
created the Man in all naked Pureness or Sincerity / and in like-maner also
his Wife: and coupled them to-gether in the same naked Pureness: And unto the
same naked or uncovered pure Bewtifulnes, are we also All reversed;through
Jesus Christ and his holy Spirit of Love; called and bidden. For-that-cause it
is likewise Gods Will and Good-pleasure, that ye together reversed;which are
one Man and one Wife 1. Cor. 11. b. Ephesians. 5. d.
in the Lord; should always walk reversed;before God and before each-other;
in the same naked Pureness of the godly Fairnes ^ and live euenso reversed;as
one Body with each-other; in all Sinceere-purenes.

7. But let the Man be the 1. Cor. 11. a. Ephesians. 5. c.
Head / or the Lord of the Wife / euenlike as God is the Head or the Lord of
the Man.

8. The Wife shall not out of herself, 1. Tim. 2. c. Ephesians. 5. c.
bear any rule or-yet have any Maistership. but with the Man or through the
Man, according to his Ordinance.

9. FOr-that-cause ye shall likewise reversed;O ye

10. Now if ye perceive that they incline their Hearts to your Law / and to
your Freedom / so shall ye then have also with each-other 1. Pet. ^. a.
onemaner of Law in the Lord / one-maner of Faith in Jesus Christ, and
one-maner of Freedom and Unity of the Heart, in the holy Spirit of Love.

11. Heere-in reversed;O ye Elders and Fathers of the Howsh^lde; bec^m ye
prudent and understanding: and live euenso concordablie with your Wives
reversed; ^phe. 5. ^.
as one Body with each-other; to the Laud of the God of Life and his
Glorious-lordlines: also grow Genesis 1. c.
and multiply into many Thowsandes upon the Earth / and bring the Earth under
you, in all Unity of the upright Life.

12. NOtwithstanding, the Conclusion or Romans 6. 14.
nor live unto yourselues. but alone unto the 2. Cor. 5. b.
Lord your God, in all Love and Peace.

13. In like-maner also reversed;O ye Wives; ye shall not love nor live unto
yourselues. but alone unto your 1. Pet. 3. a.
Husbands: out of whose Lives and Bodies, ye are with them reversed;in God
and with God; one Genesis 2. c. Math. 19. a.
Body, to their Healpe.

14. And living euen-thus with each-other in all Love / so land and praise
reversed;with Joy and Thankes-geeuing; the Lord your God / for that He has
not created you to any Separation or Division. but has joined you together
reversed;as One; in one godly Being. and that the same God, is also your Head
1. Cor. 11. a.
and King.

The XIX. Chapter.
OYee Elders and Fathers of the Ephe. 6. a.
l^uelie and frindlie, toward your young-borne Children. And when as ye
Mothers have your young Infantes on their Lapp / and when they also suck the
Breasts of their Mother / then play and dally with them: and recreate and
rejoice yourselues euenso reversed;in al-maner of Pleasant-sweetnes; with your
Wives and young Babes.

2. In such-sort, shall ye reversed;in all Sweetness and Louelines; play, ^est,
and make-sport with the Sucklinges your young Infantes: and bring in their
Sight reversed;whylst that they in the simple Innocentie, yeat suck ye Milk
out of their Mothers Breasts; all whatsoever delights or pleases them / and
cannot destroy them. and deal or behave yourselues euenso with them, in all
Conformity of their Infantie / and restrain them not from any Joy or
Pleasure, in all what is commodious for them.

3. Let all thissame Louelines and delectable Frindlines reversed;with your
Wives and young Infantes; be always delightful or wel-pleasing unto you: and
use euenso all your Amiablenes and Government Pr^. ^. ^ Sap. 6. ^.
out of the Wisdom / So shall then your Wives stand evermore submitted to your
Law or Ordinance / and must likewise needs laud and praise the Virtues of
your Louelines / and the peaceable Being of your Wisdom. and so rejoice them
with you in your lovely Soscietie: in such-sort, that their Faces shall also
stand always very amiable and frindlie, to your Love / to all Unity with
your Hearts.

4. BVt-yet in all thissame, look well heerto, Eccli. 7. 30.
Infantes / that they reversed;through anything that they out of their
Childishnes, take pleasure in; destroy not / nether-yet hurt or hinder
themselves. Suffer them not in any-case, to suck the Breasts of any strange
Women. much-lesse then, the Breasts of Whoores.

5. But when as now your young Infantes, are a little growen-vp / so that they
can comprehend some difference, in their Understanding ^ and bringfourth some
Reason or Wittie-deuise out of themselves / Then shall ye weane them from the
Milk of their Mother / as also from their childish Delight or Pleasure: and
begin euenso then reversed;from their Youth up; to set before their Eyes Lam.
3. b. Eccli. 30. b. Ephesians. 6. a.
the Law of the Lord / and to teach them to Tob. 1. 4. a.
fear God: and so as the time passeth-on reversed;according to their
Growing-vp in Years; geeue them somewhat harder or stronger Meat reversed;then
the Milk of their Mother; for to eat / to a farther Nourrishing-vp of them
therewith, in all Comblines and Modesty / until that they wax to be Youngmen.

6. Keep them moreover reversed;with all Diligence; under your Pro. 13. 23. ^.
Eccli. 30. a.
Rod or Discipline: also accustom and exercise them reversed;even from their
Youth up; to live according to the Law of ye Lord: and humble always their
Hearts / Minds / and Understandings, Tob. 1. a. Ephesians. 6. a.
unto the Fear of God.

7. Instruct, nourter, and exhort them also daily for to stand-submitted unto
the good Nature of the Love / and unto the Math. 11. c.
meekminded Being of our Lord Jesus Christ.

8. HEer-in / and in all Equity, exercise and Eccli. 30. a.
cease over them / until that they reversed;in the Law of ye Lord / and in
the Fear of God; have obtained well Heb. 5. c.
exercised Minds / and are euenso reversed;with all wel-disposed Obedience;
attained or growen-vp unto the Age and Understanding of Youngmanship.

9. Howbeit, this Chasteonable-instruction reversed;which serves for the
weaned Children; ought to be don with convenient Distinction or approved
Discretion / thereafter as the Children are young or old / great or little /
understanding or ignorant. and thereafter as they are simple or wise in ye Evil
/ to the end that they all may growevp aright reversed;with good Exercise; unto
the upright Understanding / and be nourrished and brought-vp to Children of the
Kingdom / for to understand the Instructions of the Wisdom / and the Proverbs
of the godly Understanding.

The XX. Chapter.
OYee Elders in the Wisdom / and Eccli. 7. ^.
Daughters: But especially, when as their Breasts begin to growevp / and that
they wax mariageable / That they at no time apply or geeue-ouer their minds
to Lightbehauiour / ether-yet have anything to do reversed;or be conversant;
with the To^. 3. b.
Wanton-dallyers / or turn themselves to any Whordom / lest that they should
bring or cause any Shame or Infamy, in the Family of Love.

2. Teach them betimes reversed;out of Understanding; to use Policy or
Prudent-warines against the Strangers, which com-vnto and assault them
reversed;with subtle Fetches; for to spoil them of their Honest-fame and
Chastity.

3. For-that-cause, ye shall daily exhort your ioung Daughters to all
Foresightfulnes: and teach them also to use good Circumspection against the
Whoremongers / to thend that they suffer not them selves by any means, to be
defiled or dishonested: and nourrish or bring them up euenso reversed;in all
Foresightfulnes or Prudent-pollicie; unto all Pureness of Life: and keep them
in all good Nourtour and Honest-behauiour / Eccli. 7. b. 1. Cor. 7. c.
until that they reversed;with pure Bodies; be ioyned-together reversed;in the
holy Matrimony ordained by God; unto their Husband.

4. But when as now the Time of your weaned are growenvp reversed;in all good
Discipline and Order; even unto their Youngmanship or Approaching of their
manly Being or Estate / and stand-inclined to That which is right and
lawful: also rest goodwilling to increase in all Virtues. and to submit
themselves obedientlie unto the Pro. 1. 2. 3. 4. Eccli. 6. c. d.
Counsel of their Elders: and that they begin euenso to attain unto the
manly Agednes / and to growe-vp therein / So shall not then those
Good-willingons be from thence-fourth compelled or driven by way of correction
reversed;like young unlearned or unwilling Children; to the observation of the
Law or Ordinance of the Lord. but men shall setfourth before them, the Faith
of Jesus Christ, to Righteousness. and euenso begin to talk with them of ye
manly Agednes / and of That which is more-neere unto the Godliness / then is
the Nourtouring reversed;or Chastisement-of-discipline; under the Law. and
holde-fourth likewise before them, the Crown Pro. 4. b. Eccli. 1. 25. a.
of the manly Wisdom / the which the Man of God reversed;in the Elderdom Ephesians.
4. b.
of the Man Christ; receaueth / or becomes crowned therwithall: and what an
upright and lovely Conversation or Being of sinceere Righteousness, he then
inheriteth. and thereto also, of the Kingdom of the God of Heaven / and of the
spiritual and heavenly Riches Math. 13. b.
of the godly Mystery.

5. HEer-in now / and in suchlike, exercise and trayne-vp your Youngmen or
Those that are growing toward Mans-estate: and confirm or establish them in
the Nature of ye Love, with the godly Wisdom of the Truth of God and Christ,
and with the holy Understanding of the holy Spirit of Love.

6. Look to them also and cause them with all Iam. 1. c.
increase fourtha-fourth, in the godly Wisdom and upright Righteousness and
Holiness / til-vnto the perfect Oldeage of the holy Understanding of Jesus
Christ and of his holy Spirit of Love.

7. Now in this meane-time, whylst that the Youngmen are thus a growing-vp
reversed;in all goodwilling Obedience; unto the Col. 1. b. 2. Pet. 3. b.
Olde-age of the Man Christ, and that they profit or increase-them in the
holy Understanding of the holy Spirit of Love / ye shall permit them to be
conversant with the Elders of the holy and godly Understanding / and with the
Counsaile-lordes in the Family of Love: also to talk of Wisdom and
Righteousness / and of the Mystery of the Kingdom of the God of Heavens. to
demand or propone-question thereof / to hear Math. 13. b. Luke 8. b.
the Resolution thereon / and to answer thereunto / as also to make-manifest the
Secreatnes of their Heart.

8. In which godly Speeches or Communications Deuteronomy. 30. b. Eccli. 15. b.
and Life / betwixt Darkness, and Light / betwixt the Destruction, and
Preservation / and betwixt the Condemnation, and Salvation.

9. Teach them to know effectually and vprightlie, ether-other of those two
Ways / that they may also well and rightly Pro. 4. b.
discern the true difference of thosesame ^ and so live and walk aright in
the upright Ways of Life and Truth, under the Obedience of the Belief and of
the Love.

The XXI. Chapter.
WHen now then nour Youngmen

2. Ye shall moreover geeue them leave, to be always with you / or to sit
with you upon the Seats of ye Elders or Wise / for that they might euenso
among you, daily hear the Secreat-mysterie of all Matters reversed;which
concern the Right and the Truth; / and also argue or talk thereof.

3. For at thatsame time of their Elderdom, it is geeuen them to know ye
Truth / and they are able to understand the Mystery Math. 13. b. Luke 8. b.
of the Kingdom of God: as also to declare and speake-fourth the same, out of
the secreat Parables of the Wise.

4. Therefore shall those bearded Men reversed;in their

5. And euenso reversed;after a due Examination or Ouerhearing of their right
Knowledge, in the Testimonies of the holy Spirit of Love; they shall obtain a
free Permission of you, to euangelize reversed;among the Good-willingons unto
the Love; the Math. 24. b.
Euangelie of the Kingdom of God and Christ, and also to teach and exhort the
Disciples of the Word, to the upright Righteousness and godly Holiness: On
this condition / namely / that they reversed;in all their Ministration; shall
deal and communicate reversed;under the Obedience of the concordable Counsel
of ye Elders in the Family of Love; with the Wisdom.

6. EVen-thus verelie reversed;in ye same holy Form or Estate; shall than
those dayed or aged Men, be ordained or received into the holy and godly
Matrimony / and be married reversed;according to the right Ordinance of the
Lord; unto the holy and chaste Virgins of the undefiled Doctrine of the godly
Understanding: and be likewise known to be meet, to be fruitful Fathers in
the Family of Love / to the Procreation Sap. 4. a.
of the pure and chaste Generation / which is wel-pleasing before God ^ and very
lovely and acceptable with Men. as also to Fellowe-ministers of the holy and
gracious Word / which God has Ier. (...). b.
raised-vp in the House of the Love of Jesus Christ, according to his Promises /
to all Concord and Peace Luke 2. b.
upon the Earth, unto Men which are good of Will.

7. In which Prospering and Going-forward of Tob. 9. c. Psalm. 128. ^.
unto the third and fourth Generation, in Righteousness.

8. For in their just Life, they shall become graye or grisell with Age. They
shall likewise be known to be true Priests reversed;which are meet to
minister in the Sanctuary; / and righteous Fathers of the Howsholde (which are
taught to the Kingdom of Heaven / and are meet to bringfourth reversed;out of
the Treasure of their Hearts; Math. 13. ^.
the New and the Old) / and be esteemed and 1. Tim. 5. b.
reverenced for Such.

The XXII. Chapter.
THese Elders and dayed or wel-aged sit likewise in Judgment reversed;upon the
Iudgmentseates; with the Chief-elder / also hear the secreat Counsel of the
Chief-elder / and geeue-fourth their voice therein, with him.

2. For-that-cause also these Elders with gray Hears, shall not keep their
Counsel with ye Youngmen / but with the dayed 2. Par. 10. a. Eccli. 25. a.
Elders / which also reversed;like unto Themselves; are waxen-gray with Age.

3. For by the dayed Elders with gray Hear, the Eccli. 8. b.
Wisdom / and the Circumspection or provident Prudence, is to be found. as also
all good and weladuised Counsel, to all Peace and Concord / and to all
Preservation and Welfare of ye Congregation.

4. COnsider and have a good and singular regard hereunto, ye Elders and
Fathers: For all thissame that I here testify and express unto you, is the
mostholie Ordinance of the Family of Love / and the upright Conservation of
the manly Generation, in the Righteousness: namely / from the Man's Youth up /
till unto his Age of the gray Hear.

5. For-that-cause also, thissame Ordinance is the true Counsel of the Pro.
4. a. b.
Wisdom / which brings with it the Rest of the Children of God. and induces
or leads the Man unto the everlasting Life.

6. O Ye Fathers of Families and ye Counsaile-lordes Concordablenes, under
the Obedience of the Love.

7. And keep or retain all that which I presently holde-fourth before you,
in your Memory or Remembrance / Deuteronomy. 12. c. Pro. 4. a.
and write thatsame in your Hearts: For the same is the Kernel or Pith of the
holy Understanding / wherthrough the Countries may be well preserved or
kept-in-safetie / and the People likewise nourrished and maintained, in all
good Peace and Tranquillity.

8. For-that-cause reversed;O ye Elders and Wise; make always
reversed;according to this Counsel; all good Purueiance or Provision for your
Children and Youngmen / that they reversed;without any hurt or impediment; may
be nourrished-vp, unto their manly Old Age. And govern you al-thinges well.

9. Grow and multiply: Genesis 1. c. 9. a
Till the Earth / and

10. Sow and reap / and gather you together much Fruits: and use or
accomplish all things in convenient season.

11. Eat your Meat with Joy, according to all the Lust or Appetite of your
Souls: and drink likewise, of the Increase of your Vine.

12. MAke not in any-case your Garden-of-pleasure reversed;which is full of all
delectable Herbs, serving for the preservation of Health / and full of all
goodly Flowers, of sweet and odoriferous Smell / as also full of all
delightful Plants of delicate or wel-relished Fruits; common before
eueryone: but keep his Walls in firm Stabilitie / and have always a
careful Eye unto the Entrance into the same / that no unclean and corrupt
Thing enter therein.

13. But walk or recreate-you in the same, with the Elders and Aged / and
delight yourselues with them, in all the Delectablenes and Garnishing of
the same.

14. And for his precious Riches and bewtifull Garnishinges cause / it
behooves you to keep well and warelie his Entrance, from Many / to thend
that the same may euenso remain safe and in good Preservation: and that the
Children of the Kingdom / and all Those that are made Heirs in the spiritual
and celestial Riches of the holy Spirit of Love, may always enter and walk
therein ^ and recreate themselves in the same.

15. FArdermore / ye shall not talk of your

16. Also, when that ye have anye-thing to deale-in, that is to be wrought
with any prudent Counsel / so attempt and execute then the same with the
Counsel of the Wise 3. Reg. 12. a. Eccli. 25. a.
which are become graye with Age: and perform all your Matiers with and by
their Advise: and be euenso Math. 10. b.
foresightfull and understanding reversed;according to the Doctrine of the
Wisdom of the holy Spirit of Love; in all your Dealing and Purposes. and grow
always forward, to a full Enlarging of the peaceable Kingdom of the Love.

17. THe Lord bless and strengthen you in his Love / and confirm you with
his holy Spirit / Whereby that ye may always reversed;in all Firmnes; so
maintain and uphold unto the God of Life, his Workmanship or Building of the
House of his Love, in all upright Righteousness / as-that the God of Life may
have a Good-pleasure, to dwell / to Leui. 26. b. 2. Cor. 6. b.
live / and to walk in the Family of his Love, for-euer-and-euer. AMEN. That
com-to-passe euenso.

Take it to heart: and reuolue well these Proverbs of the godly Wisdom.
CHARITAS EXTORSIT PER HN.

