ELIZAES MEMORIAL. King James his arrival. AND ROMES DOWNFALL.

The memorial of the just shall be blessed; but the name of the wicked shall
rotte. printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by T. C. for John Baylie, and are to be sold at his shop near
the little North door of Paul's. 1603.

To the suruiuing late wife of his deceased Maecenas.
THe extraordinary good that I
From you and your deceased love received,
Have made me often to ponder with my self,
How in some sort I might requite the same.
But finding that so far beyond my power,
I purposed to take some thing in hand,
Wherewith I might present you as the sign
Of my great thankfulness to you again.
Then take this simple gift in gracious part,
Till better works shall answer your desert.
Yours most bound A. N.

ELIZAES Memorial.
EArly before Aurora show her face,
Or day-bright Hesperus begin t'appeare;
Before that Titan gins to run his race,
Awake my pen* and up thy self do rear,
To show to all posterity to come,
what perfect joys possessed Elizaes crown.
Had Maro lived in her golden days,
(Resembling joys that ever shall remain)
He would have tuned his oaten pipe to praise
The happy state of dread Elizaes reign,
And pretermitted as a thing but vain,
The troubles which Aeneas did sustain.
Her fame throughout the total Orb did sound,
Her wisdom every Monarch did admire,
Her Maidenhead with noble virtue crowned,
Has now attaind the hau'n of her desire.
The glorious kingdom of eternity,
Where she enjoys immortality.
She kept her self a Virgin for the Lord,
With whom she longed daily for to be,
That only he always she did accord,
Should have the prime of her virginity;
Who has advanced her to his heavenly throne,
Wh^re she enioyes the perfect union.
Her Scepter was the rule of righteousness.
Her Subjects more for love then fear obei'd.
Her Government seemed perfect blessedness.
Her Mercy with her Justice ever swai'd.
Her Bounty, Grace, and Magnanimity,
Her princely mind did plainly signify.
She was the golden Pipe through which great Jove
Derived to us his blessings manifold.
She was the token of his tender love,
Chearing the hearts of all both young and old.
She has extinguished all the mistie days,
And brought a light more bright the^ Phoebus rays
But now to come more nearer to the point,
The which I purpose to insist upon, There principal blessings accompanying
Elizaes ra^gn^*

Three things I mean to handle joint by joint,
And orderly speak of them one by one.
Which are the Captain blessings of his train,
Which did attend upon her Highness reign.
Where first I do account that chiefest good, The word of God the first.

Among so many blessings that are rife,
Gods sacred word surpassing Angels food,
That feeds the soul unto eternal life.
Not mingle mangle mixed with Popish custom,
But sincere milk derived from Gods own bosom.
From Gods own bosom first the same proceeded, Effects of Gods word

Begetting, strengthening, and our faith increasing.
Till we with him in glory may be seated,
With all his Saints and Angels there triumphing.
With this, God does all other blessings send:
For on this blessing all the rest depend.
Hence come the joys which heavenly pleasure brings,
While here we lead our lives deuoid of strife:
Hence flow the crystal euer-running springs,
Of wholesome waters of eternal life.
Hence comes the peace no earthly thing can give,
The peace of conscience while on earth we live.
A Treasure great, of price inestimable,
A Nectar sweet, distilling from above,
The food divine of truth incomparable,
Knitting our hearts in amity and love,
The way to rest, and all eternity,
The Pearl which Christ commanded us to buy.
That glorious light which did illuminate
Our hearts, which long in darkness had remained,
To make us of true light participate,
Whereby our steps from darkness are refrained.
How greatly are we bound to praise the Lord,
For this great blessing of his sacred word?
If all the costly Mines of th'Indians,
Which secretly lie hid within the ground:
If all the precious stones which in the sands
Of Libia land most plentiously abound:
If all the joys of humane hearts content,
Which seated are under the Firmament,
Should be transported to our English coast,
And here enjoyed as our proper own;
Of them we might not half so truly boast,
As of this sacred truth amongst us sown.
This therefore in the front is placed best,
Because it is the chieftaine of the rest.
The second head wh^reto I do reduce, The seco^^ head (...) long pea^^.

The several blessings of her Highness reign,
Is long and quiet peace, whose pleasant juice
Distilleth like the first and latter rain.
For such a peace before was never seen,
As we enjoyed under a Virgin-Queene.
The Husbandman then gladly tild the ground,
And sowed the same with grain in time of seed,
Expecting interest thence to abound,
As God had preappointed and decreed.
And at the Harvest reapt it up in peace,
Landing Jehovah for his great increase.
The Labourer that toiled all the day,
And took his penny for his hired pain,
At night might homeward safely wend away,
Praising the Lord, the Author of his gain:
Sweetly with peace himself in peace refreshing,
Void of all fear of foreign foes oppressing.
We were not vexed with those rumors great
Of wars, which other Nations did sustain:
We were not parched with the fiery heat
Of Antichrist nor of his filthy train.
The Son of right'ousnes had given us light,
Defacing clean their Veil of ugly night.
Whereby our Land a Harbor was become,
To such as sought to serve the Lord aright;
Who willing were to leave their native home
And all they had, to see this heavenly light:
Wherein who walks the path shall never miss,
That leads directly to eternal bliss.
This peace God grant to flourish in our Land,
Until his second glorious coming be:
And eke his sacred Gospel, to withstand
The hellish pit of ugly heresy:
That we may praise his name in all our ways,
Till fatal death shall consumate our days.
From long-bred peace great plenty did proceed, The third principal blessing,
is plenty of all things.

Even as the chiefest offspring of the same:
Of peace our plenty naturally did breed,
Even as the young engender of the dame.
Destroy the Dam, the young ones are not bred,
Take peace away, plenti's not gendered.
But Jove has given us so long time of peace,
As has brought forth the fruits of plenties store,
Which Riches are, much wealth, and ioies increase,
Surpassing all in England heretofore,
Or any Country under Heavens shade,
Since Elohim confused Chaos made.
So that our Land an other Canaan
Did plentiously with milk and honey flow:
Eliza was our Jesus to withstand
Our enemies that sought to work our woe;
And to destroy the Popish Cananites,
That would allure us to their Idolrites.
The Heavens did seem to smile upon the earth,
The clouds powered down ye moistened silver drops
The Sun did glad all things with joy and mirth,
To make of corn and fruits the goodly crops.
The Earth likewise did yield us ten for one
Of that wherewith the same at first was sown.
Plenty both Riches, wealth, and Honor brings,
Plenty is chief of earths felicity:
Plenty with mirth replenisheth all things,
Plenty abandons all necessity.
Truth, Peace, and Plenty (used well) makes us see
A glimring of the joys in heaven that be.
For Truth or true Religion represents
The redolent melodious harmony
Which heavenly Harpers with their Instruments,
Do offer to Iehouahs Majesty:
Sweetly resounding on celestial strings
Their Makers praise, whereto the holders sings.
Peace does resemble that most sweet content
Wherein the blessed souls most safely rest:
A midst the third and highest Firmament,
Under the Altar of the Saints request.
In great repose, much wealth and joys increase,
Which lasting aye, shall never fade nor cease.
Plenty of all things does possess the heavens,
Our plentie's but a shadow of that store
Of joys, which to the blessed souls are given,
For perfect joys are there for evermore.
No eye has seen, ear heard, or heart conceived,
The joys that God for his elect prepared.
Among which joys Elizaes soul does rest,
Sweetly refresht in the Elizian fields,
Where she enioyes the kingdom of the blessed,
That never unto alteration yields:
But ever shall endure both firm and stable,
Repleat with during joys innumerable.
(...)
Eliza for one death has gained two lives,
First in Elisium far above the Sky:
The second here on earth; her name reuiues,
Which never dying lives eternally.
And from this ancient saying I derive it,
As true as old, Virtus post funera viuit.
Oh! gain surmounting mortal man's conceit,
To loose an earthly crown to get the crown of glory*
To gain a lasting life with joy repleat,
For this which is but vain and transitory.
To gain immortal life for mortal breath,
Which seems life, but is a vital death.
All future ages shall admire her reign,
When they shall hear her princely government:
Until the liquid tears distill amain,
Their own untimely birth they shall lament,
That they might not behold her golden days,
So sweetly graced with immortal praise.
This Virgin-Queene did rule fair Albion
Twice two and twenty years, with great increase
Of peace, joy, wealth, much honor and renown,
And then resigned up her soul in peace,
To him that gave it an immortal crown,
In spite of thousands ten conspiracies
Which Antichrist against her did devise.
Thus have I briefly (as my slender skill
Permitted) now described the happiness
Which we enjoyed under Eliza still,
While she did here her vital life posses,
To be a Glass for ages that shall be,
Her prosperous and happy reign to see.
What though the Muses did not guide my quill
To run as does the puncted Grecian verse;
My Lines shall drop as from Parnassus hill
Eternal Nectar on Elizaes Hearse:
And in a suit which sable they do call,
Accompany her to her Funeral.
FINIS.
KING JAMES his Arrival.
Pass on my pen to Englands present state,
And show of sudden fear what hopeful joy Contention between fear and
hopeful (...) at El^zaes death (...) Iame^ ^ procl^.

Did spring alike, from out each others hate,
While Jove ruled both that nothing could annoy;
For fear did strive to make our hearts to swound,
Joy strived with mirth to make our hearts abound.
The first prefigur'd in Elizaes death,
When Fear triumphed in our fearful breasts:
The second in that health resounding breath, Fear for Elizaes death Joy for
K. James happ proclama^^^^

God save King James, of England King the first.
Here sudden joy ore-come the former fear,
A thing, the like whereof is seen but rare.
O joyful sound of words spoke in due season,
When as our former hopes lay all on bleeding:
When sad distrust could see no ample reason,
Of this right wise, most just, and good proceeding.
Words spoken in due time and fitly placed,
Like golden apples with silver pictures graced.
For when for true we heard this doleful news,
Eliza dead, our hearts began to faint;
Our sins were great, we could them not excuse,
God therefore just, we only caused the plaint.
We thought our life with hers did then decay,
We thought her death gave us no longer stay.
But mark and see the goodness of the Lord,
When we naught but confusion might expect,
Did guide our Nobles hearts with one accord,
The worthiest Prince in Europe to elect;
King James the first, next heir to the Crown,
To rule this Land in honor and renown.
Sprung from the line of that most royal race The royal (...) K (...).

Henry the seventh, who reigning married
Elizabeth fourth Edwards daughters grace,
Uniting so the white Rose and the red, H^nry the seventh of the hou^e (...)
Lan^^s^er (...) Edward the fourth his daughter the house York.

The houses two of York and Lancastar,
Which long before dissension did sever.
Whence he had issue princely Margaret,
Who to King James the fourth of Scotland King
Espowsed was: then she King James the fifth
To her said Husband happily did bring. Archibald Douglas Earl of Anguish,
Lady Margarets sec^^^ H^s^^nd*

But when King James the fourth her husband died,
To Earl of Anguish then she was affied.
To whom she brought a princely maiden bright,
Which to the Earl of Lennox married was,
And brought this Earl in time that worthy wight
Henry the Duke of Albany his grace, Lord D^^^^^^

Who married Mary then the Queen of Scots,
By whom our Sovereign James the sixth he got.
See here his worthy princely Ancestors,
(...) lineall descent and rightful claim:
Of English blood were his progenitors,
Whose noble Acts deserve immortal fame;
Whose same reuiues though they in dust do lie,
For Monuments to all posterity.
(...) King endued with such royal parts,
^oth of his body, and his princely mind,
Of manhood, prowess, learning, wit, and arts,
As though Queen Virtue had a place assigned
Within the Center of his learned breast,
For her and all her sacred gifts to rest.
A Prince most prudent and maiesticall,
As his profound and learned books declare,
Derived from a mind heroical,
Such works of Kings are never seen, or rare
But of our princely Lord and King alone,
An other David in his princely throne.
King David taught wise Solomon his son
To rule the kingdom after his decease:
So does King James prescribe his Solomon,
A ruled way to perfect joys increase,
To guide his helm in honor and renown,
Though adverse and co^trarious winds do frown.
King David burned with an ardent love
Of sincere truth and perfect godliness:
So does our royal Caesar well approve
His praise and glory to consist in this,
To meditate upon the law divine,
And thereby all his public laws refine.
If Julius Caesar merited such fame,
Who did indite his own most worthy facts;
How much more the^ shall fame advance thy name
(O worthy King) which sings Iehouahs acts?
Which seek not thy own praise and renown,
But his, that gave thee thine Imperial crown.
Most mighty Caesar, never can thou fly
The praise of fame, because she follows thee:
Thy name she carries through the cloudie sky,
With wings far lighter then the nimble Be,
And shall in time to come thy praises sound
In all the ends of this great circled round.
Thrice welcome then unto our English shore,
Thrice worthy Monarch of fair Albion:
Jove fill thy days with honor, peace, and store;
Long may thou sit upon thy princely throne.
Long may thou rule, and long may we obey,
In Justice seat long may thy Scepter sway.
Long may thy sons thy regal Scepter sway:
Long may they immitate their fathers ways:
Long may thy virtues shine in them, that they
May rule in peace and honor all their days.
Long may thou all thy childrens children see,
And after death attain felicity.
Make haste (dear Prince) and take possession
Of this thy long and quiet Regiment,
Presaged by a springfull horrison,
As by a thing most clear and eminent.
The Summer gives thee welcome with his heat,
The Birds thy VVelcome singing do repeat.
Thy Nobles long to see thy princely face,
Thy Clergy pray for thy prosperity:
Thy Communaltie would thrust to see thy grace
The perfect Mirror of true Majesty.
In brief, thy subjects all for joy do sing,
That James the sixth, is now become their King.
FINIS.
ROMES DOWNE-FALL.
VAnish away ye birds of ugly night,
Which with the Owl cannot endure the light;
The light has all your knauerie bewrai'd,
And to the view of all the world it laid.
Your neasts are found, your filthiness descride,
Then pack away, no longer here abide.
All know your rites are but men's fantasies,
To live in ease, and blind the simples eyes.
Your Mass is known a breaden-God to be,
Of all that have but half an eye to see.
You Are worse then Judas, so your deeds bewray;
He did for thirty pence the Lord betray:
(...) You sell him daily for a single penny,
You make of Christ even as you list, as many
Your curses and excommunications,
With bell, book, candle, are but Even songs,
Which you for Lucifer your masters sake
With Heathinish and Judicial rites do make.
Your thu^dring Bulls may serve to scar the crows,
Your Trentalls, Dirges, are but idle shows.
Your Jesuits and Priests are Locusts breed,
Which from the Lake that is bottomless proceed.
But what do I your filthiness recite,
Whereof the whole world has a perfect sight.
You long have looked for (as you did say)
To see the time when you should have a day:
Whereby you meant (as all men well do know)
Elizaes death should work our overthrow.
O! But is not your hope frustrate and vain?
Succeeds not King James our Sovereign?
A Phoenix from Elizaes ashes bred,
Though she possess a place among the dead?
What, is she dead? how failed your intent?
Because God had ordaind your punishment.
The Beast must fall you sit so safely on,
That strumpet vile the whore of Babylon.
Now is the time that God will vengeance take
Upon that whore which all the world did make
Drunk, with her whoredom and Idolatry,
Which reached up unto the cloudie sky.
For now her former sins are come to light,
Before the face of Jove's eternal might:
And as she has with sin rewarded him,
So he will fill her cup even to the brim,
And make her of his fiercest wrath to drink,
Till she to nothing utterly do sink.
As she delighted blood of Saints to spill,
So he will give her blood to drink her fill.
Now by this whore, is meant we all do know
(...)
The Antichristian Church of Rome, for so
The Angel unto John the same expounded,
A City that upon seven hills was founded.
No City on seven hills is built but Rome,
Then Rome it is, must have this deadly doom.
The River Euphrates now dries away,
To make her to the Kings of the earth a pray:
The kingdom of the beast becomes obscure,
By preaching of Christ's glorious Gospel pure:
And more and more shall henceforth day by day,
Until it come to ruin and decay.
Which God accomplish, when he sees the same
Most opportune to glorify his name:
That all may see it, and seeing, say with John,
It Is fallen, it is fallen, fallen is great Babylon.
FINIS

