THE Nauigations, peregrinations and voyages, made into Turkey by Nicholas
Nicholay Daulphinois, Lord of Arfeuile, Chamberlain and Geographer ordinary
to the King of France: containing sundry singularities which the Author has
there seen and observed:

Divided into four Books,

With threescore figures, naturally set forth as well of men as women,
according to the diversity of nations, their port, entreaty, apparel,
laws, religion and manner of living, as well in time of war as peace:

With diverse fair and memorable histories, happened in our time.

Translated out of the French by T. Washington the younger.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson. 1585.

To the Right Honorable Sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the noble order of the
garter, Lord President of her Majesty's Council in the Marches of Wales and
the principality thereof, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy
Council: And to the Right Worshipful Sir Phillip Sidney Knight, John Stell
wishes long life, and happy dai^^, with increase of honor.
IT is a wise, and not so wise as true a saying of a trau^^led writer (Right
Honorable and Noble) uttered upon his own experience, that he was always of
opinion and mind, that the perfect praise of wisdom and learning, is not to
be sought for in books, but to be gotten by very use and practice* They
therefore that by continual study, and incessaunt reading do usurp and
challenge to themselves the title of knowledge, are not alone to be judged wise;
but they rather much more are to be esteemed such, who setting apart al other
their private businesses and affairs (though to them very aduauntageable) are
conversant in this world as in a Theater of man's life, and by due trial are
taught the diversities of countries, the differences of peoples manners, the
examples of life, and manifold things besides, which Travelers do comprehend
with their eye, and compass by their wit. For what is more discommendable,
what more unbeseeming a man that is studious, specially being nobly borne, than
always to a^ide at home like a snaile in the shel, to wax old in vain
pleasure without praise, and unnecessary leisure, without profit, and not to
meditate and think that at one time or other it is meet to hoouer with the
wings, to leave the nest, and to fly abroad, that they may aspire to the
knowledge, and attain to the sight of great matters, wherewith they shall never
be acquainted, otherwise than by the book or the map, which differ as much in
moving the imagination and other faculties of the mind, as the representation
of a thing in a glass or a painted table, does vary from the thing
represented? To undertake traveling, the vtilitye (which is not small)
springing from thence, should inuyte all liberal minds and free natures. And
in truth none are so much adorned and benefited by peregrination as Noble and
Great men; though doubtless it is not deniable, that common men, (I mean not
triobular mates) men I say, of base descent and lineage, have thereby not only
bin commended to the Honorable; but also their own experience and trial of
occurrents in traveling, does procure thus much more than ordinary unto them,
that they are among men vntrauelled as Hesperus among the smaller stars. For
when we either hear or read of fruitful countries, of well governed
commonwealthes, of true religion and divine worship, of learned men, of
trayning up youth, of manners and behauiours etc: is it not sweet in every
ones ear, is it not worth the understanding, does it not deserve diligent
marking and remembering? But yet much more pleasant, and profitable is it to
view the very things them selves, to behold them, and to see them with
satietie, as the Poet very aptly says: That which we hear with outward ear,
moves not the mind so much,
As that which beams of rolling eyes,
atteine unto and touch.


A certain Traveler, but (as may be suspected by the course of his writing)
superstitious, according to his time, speaking of a voyage of his own, says
thus: Should it grieve or repent me of my peregrination to Rome, specially in
the year of Iubile? No in truth. For such things as were doubtful to me,
before uncertain, and as a shadow, are now, by the infallible testimony of
mine eyes assured unto me with singular credit, and have raised up in me an
exceeding delectation and astonishment. They therefore at no hand deserve the
hearing, which being induced by an argument drawn from the greatness of the
labors, and the dangerousnes of circumstances incident unto traveling, suppose
that the same is to be laid a ^^eepe, to be omitted, and not meddled with at
all. But what (think we) may be objected against those shelsnailes? This truly,
that people are borne to pains taking, as birds to flying. Aristotle in his
Ethics requiring a capable hearer of his moral precepts, rejects infantes
and old men as insufficient: which two degrees of age do seem (in some men's
thinking) unfit for traveling: because the one, by reason of their multiplied
years; are to be released from the tediousness thereof; the other also, in
respect of want in judgment, understanding and strength, are wholly to be
sequestered from it. But I do much mislike their opinion, and the reasons
likewise thereto ann^^ed. For though infantes are unfit for peregrination, yet
to exclude old men, as unapt, is (in my poor co^ceipt) palpable erron^ous.
For in a matter nothing doubtful to use needless proofe^ as Tullie neatly
says) we have an example of Jacob, an old man, and full of years, who
notwithstanding traveled out of his own^ country into Egypt, partly by
constraint of famine, and ^artly also for his son Joseph's sake, whom
naturally he loved* Again, if old men are condemned as unfit for
peregrination, then truly (by the same comparison) women much more whom the
same Aristotle terms imperfect creatures. But the Queen of the South,
hearing of Solomon's wisdom, glory, and mightiness left the territories of
her own dominions, ^o see him with her eyes, whose incomparable renown had
amazed her heart. So then by these instaunces the former reason seems too
halte, and the Author thereof to have said somewhat* but yet with little
aduisement and to small purpose. I might add to these Hagiographicall
examples, other t^stimonies deduced and brought out of profane Chronologies,
both ancient and modern; were it not that I fear the censure of some
politic Hanniball, and incur deserved blame for talking fondly of a thing
wherein I have no practice, as sometimes did foolified Phormio. Only this I
say, that the greatest commendation and praise of a traveler is, not only to
talk by knowledge roundly of such famous Cities, Countries, people, and other
strange obiectes as he has seen; but also to speak their language redily,
to learn their manners desirously, to know their religion perfectly, their
policy thoroughly, their government absolutely, and all things else, that he
may employ himself about profitably; as it is recorded of Ulysses* whom Ascham
out of Homer commends in these words: All travelers do gladly report great
praise of Ulysses,
For that he knew many men's manners, and saw many cities.


And as histories bear witness of Mithridates the King of Pontus, whose
peregrinations and expeditions into forreyne lands was so beneficial, that
(besides a number of unnamed commoditities) he had the exquisite use of two and
twenty sundry tongues. But now (Right honorable and Noble) to stop this
flowing stream of words, I leave to the level of your exact considerations
the manifold vtilities of peregrination, because you are completely furnished
with knowledge and experience in that behalf, not severed, but united.
Beseeching you to accept at my hands, with no less favor and well liking,
than is presented with hearty goodwill and honest meaning, a work extant in
French, published in Duitch, and now printed in English at my costs and
charges for the general profit and pleasure of the studious, and al such as
delight in novelties. Wherein things no less strange and true are remembered,
than either Christopherus Colonus notes in his voyage to the Indies, or Petrus
Martyr de Angleria mentions of the West Ocean ylandes, or Gonzalus
Ferdinandus Ouiedus specifieth of the occidentall Indies, or Ludouicus
Wertomannus rehearses of Arabia, Egypt, Persia, Syria, Aethiopia, etc. or
Maximilian Transiluan records of the wonderful navigations of the Spaniards
round about the world, etc. Hoping that your Honorable wisdoms will esteem
of it, as the commendable labors of an aduenturous and skillful traveled
Gentleman, does require: which is the uttermost, and indeed all in all* that I
can wish; saving health, and happy days to your Honors, with the fullness of
all virtue, and perfect nobleness.

Your Honors most humble to be commanded, John Stell

The first Book of the nauigations, and peregrinations Orientals of Nicholas
de Nicholaij of Daulphine, Chamberlain and Geographar Ordinary of the King of
France.
The departure and voyage of the Lord of A^amont (Ambassador for the King
toward the great Turk) from Constantinople to return into France.

Chap. 1.
ABout the end of the year of our Lord 1550. 1550. The Lord of Aramont sent
Ambassador from the king of France to Soliman Emperor of the Turks.
The Lord of Aramont (a wise and virtuous Gentleman,) after he had for many
years bin Ambassador for the most Christian kings, Frauncis the first of that
name, and Henry the 2. toward Soliman Emperor of the Turks, about certain
affairs greatly importing his charge* was by the said Soliman sent back into
France, and departing from the city of Constantinople aunciently called
Bizance, and of the Turks Stambolda, The voyage by land from Constantinople to
Ragusa.
having trauayled through the countries of Thracia, Macedonia and Bulgaria, and
surmounted the height and sharpness of the mount Rhodope vulgarly called the
mountes of silver, because of the silver mines that there are found, and passed
Morannia, Bossina and Seruia, which by the ancients was called Mysia
differing from those which are in Asia came to Ragusa in times past called
Epidauia, a city in Dalmatia most rich and famous, cituated upon the Sea
Adriatique and governed in common wealth as hereafter in his place shall be
declared. Navigations from Ragusa to Venice.
From thence inbarking himself in a Brigantin, passed along by the Goulphe
Adriatique and the coasts of Dalmatia, Journey from Venice to the city of Blois.
Slauonia, and the I Will of Istria, unto the city of Venice: afterward taking
his journey by land toward Padoa, Vincence, Veronne, Bresse, and other towns
of the Seigniorie of Venice, of the Grisons, and Switsers, arrived in the end
at Lions: and from thence to Roane, where he embarked upon the river of
Loyre, repaired to the king being in the city of Blois, where his master did
receive him with all royal humanity, and having well, and at large
understood the proceedinges in his charge, and the cause of his coming,
often putting the same to the deliberation of his counsel, his return was
finallye concluded and resolved, and that for the more surety of his voyage,
he should return by Sea. To which intent and in consideration of his virtue
and service (having already honorably endued him with the estate of a
Gentleman ordinary of his chamber, The Lord of Arramo^t made gentleman
ordinarye of the kings chamber and captain of two galleys.
) he gave unto him two Galleys of the best and best furnished that were within
the haue^ of Marseillie, and ordained the knight of Seur, (a man of great
experience and excellent judgment) to accompany him with his galliot well
appointed: The king commands the author of this book to go with the
Ambassador into Leuant.
and I (for certain causes) was by his majesty expressly commanded to
assist him in all places during his voyage.

The departure of the Lord of Arramont from the Court, to return in his
ambassadge into Leuant toward the great Turk.

Chap. i^.
THE said Lord of Arramount thus being dispatched with all things necessary
for his voyage, The departure of the Lord of Arramont from the court to return
on his Ambassadge in to Leuant in anno 1551.
having taken his leave of his majesty, and of all the Princes and Lords of
his counsel, we departed from Hoyron (a house in Poytou most fair and
stately, belonging unto Monsieur de Boissij, Knight of the order, and great
master of his Majesty's horse) about the last of May 1551. and in few days
after being come to Lions, we embarked upon the Rhone, a river being one of the
swiftest of al Europe, The Lady of Arramont receives the Ambassador her
husband at Auignion.
to go down into Auignion, where my Lady of Aramount of most fervent desire
and singular affection was attending her husband: as having been deprived of
his presence more then ten years. And there being arrived he was of her
received with incredible joy and contentation, as also of the Gentlemen and
Ladies dwelling within the City and thereaboutes, his kinsmen and Allies, who
all came to visit and bid him welcome. Afterward about the end of the
fifteenth day, after we had rested ourselves, the Ambassador being mindfully
bent to his charge, having set an order in his household affairs, and taken
his leave of all parties, sent down his train by water: and himself went by
land, accompanied with his kinsfolk, and certain Gentlemen went to visit the
county of Tend, governor and Lieuetenant general for the king in Province at
his house at Marignane: and the day following they both arrived at Marseillie:
and were lodged in the kings lodging, where within few days after, the
Ambassador was taken with a grievous sickness, which persecuted him so
violently, that men dispayred of his life. The Ambassador fell into an
extreme sickness at Marseille.

He recouereth his health.


Notwithstanding he was so diligently tended and succored of God and men, that
before the captain Cost his Lieuetenant had given order for the full rigging of
his galleys, and the knight de la Seure, his Galliot, he recovered his health:
so as the iiii. day of the month of Iulie in the year before specified, about
euensong time the Ambassador and his company embarked in his galleys. The
ankers being weied, by force of oars we went to the isle of If, distant from
Marseillye one mile at the fortress whereof my Lord the county of Tend
accompanied with the great prior of Rome, the Lord of Carses, the captain
Marse, and captain Pier bon, captain of the said fortress, and diverse other
captains, gentlemen and soldiers, and with xv. galleys: and there caused a
supper to be prepared. And after the table was taken up, and leave taken of
both parties, the said county with his company returned to Marseillie: and we
about the first watch sailed straight toward the port of Carry, being distant
from the isle of If xij. miles, Port of Carry*
at which place we made provision of fresh water for our galleys, and reuiewe
of the Gentlemen, soldiers and other of our company: the principal whereof were
the before named Knight de Seure, with his Galliot; The Lord of Monteuand
Daulphinois a man at arms of the company of the said county of Tend with
a frigate to accompany us and to bring back news from us. The Captayn Cost
Lieuetenant of the Ambassadors galleys, a nephew of his called Erasme, The
Lord of S. Veran, brother unto my Lady of Arramont; The young Baron of London,
and the Lord Fle^ri, both nephews to the Ambassador, the knight of Magliane:
the Lord of Corignac, chamberlain ordinary unto the king, who for his very
long voyages and travails in the kings affairs in Leuant, was after the said
Lord of Arramont, made chief Ambassador, (but notwithstanding afterward,
clean forgetting the honor and good which he had received of the king his
sovereign Lord, Ingratitude mother of al vices.
and the crown of France, contrary to that which duty and fidelity commanded
him, went over to the king of Spain:) The Lord of Vilrailh also chamberlain
ordinary unto the king, a gentleman learned and of singular experience: who for
that he had the duitch tongue, besides the Latin and other languages very
familiarly, has since diverse times under the reign and commandment of king
Henry, been very honorably and happily employed in great and honorable affairs
toward the Princes and Potentates of Germany and the holy empire: Three
gentlemen of Gascoignie being brethren called Iueuses: the Lord of Saint Marie:
the Lord De la motte otherwise called Chasteau Regnaud: the captains la
castelle Barges, and Bartolome de Auignon, Guiliam de Grantrie, nephew of
Monsieur de Laubespine presently elected and sent to Constantinople as other
Ambassadors: a nephew of mine called Claude de Bayard, and diverse other of whom
for avoiding of prolixity I leave to speak. The reuiewe being thus made, and
having returned on shore certain unfit eaters: our ankers being weyed, and our
sails displayed, we sailed along by East and by North toward the North of
the cape De creo in Cathalonia which the Spaniardes call Capo de Creuses: Cape
de Creo.
and after having passed Greece and Tramontane, sailed through the Spanish Seas
toward the Isles Baleares, so aunciently called: but by the modernes Maiorque
and Minorque, whereof passing forward we will make some more description.

Of the Isles Baleares, now called Maiorque and Minorque.

Chap. 3.
THE yles Baleares, Description of the Isles Baleares.
(which were so called and derived out of the name of Balee, companion unto
Hercules) although the Grecians have named them Gimnesie, and Diodore Gimnaisis:
yet are they vulgarely by the Mariners called Maiorque and Minorque, being
situated in the Spanishe or Beleare Sea, according to the name of the said
ylandes. The inhabitaunts whereof (as Vegece writes) were the first inuenters
of casting with the sling. Vigece says the inhabita^tes of this I Will to have
been the first inuentors of casting with the sling.
Maiorque, after the opinion of Bordon in his Isolarie contains in circuit
480. miles, although the maryners now adays do ascribe unto it but 200* and
in breadth 100. about which Isles there are certain shelues, whereof the one
which lies toward the South, is called Cabrera, and the other toward the
West Dragonera. The said Island has two cities, Palm now called Maiorque or
Mallorque, accorcording to the name of the Island, and Polence, now called
Alcidia: Minorque has in length 60. miles, and in circuit 150. and to the East
stretches from Maiorque 30. miles and has also according to the modernes two
cities, of which the one is called Minorque, but aunciently Mugo, and the other
Iamma, now called Citadella* And although Minorque is less then Maiorque, yet
in goodness nothing inferior: for certainly both are very fertile, and have
good ports.

Of the Isles by the auntients called the Pitieous Isles, and now Ieu^^e and
Fromentiere.

Chap. 4.
FRom the Baleares we sailed toward the Isles called Pitious, Description of
the Isles pitious
which in times past were called Ebuse: and Ophicuse ^^ that all the people
moved at it, run to the mole head to see us enter into the port: where we
being entered Cotignac was again sent with the Chiaous to the king to advertise
him of our arriual, who stayed not, but straightwayes there came with him diverse
other Chiaous, captains and Ianissaries to receive the Ambassador, presenting
him with a fair horse of Turkey harnished after the fashion of a Spanish
Gennet, to bring him to the palace, which stands in the midst of the
city, where coming in good order, we entered into the lower court from whence
the Chiaous which first was come with Cotignac, conducting us, Description of
the Palais.
brought us into another court something less then the first, in the midst
whereof was a small pond foursquare paued with marble stones. And at the end
which is toward the South, stood against the wall a great fountain for the
common service of the house, and at one of the sides was a great stayre of wood
which did ascend into a long gallerie standing upon pillars, some of diverse
marber stones, and some of white stone, and in the midst of the pauement
which was of Marberstone made very artificially a small fountain being no
higher set then the pauement: The king of Alger receives the Ambassador.
besides a seat which did enuiron it. The king being apparelled in a gown of
white Damask, sat at the end of the said Gallerie upon a very fair and
costly seat, and a little from him was his Capi-aga, Capi-aga,
which is the Captain of his estate, clothed in a long gown of crymson
Velvet, with a Tulbant upon his head, holding in his hand a long staff of
silver, near unto him were his Capagis, which are Porters, every one having
in his hand a staff colored green: Capigis.
a little further were in a range the kings slaves bearyng on their heads a
Saracoll of Crymson velvet, and before the front the band, a silver socket set
with long feathers, and certain stones of small value: And there the
Ambassador having done his reverence to the king in kyssyng of his hands, The
Ambassador saluteth the king.
the king caused him to sit down by him, and after certain talk, the
Ambassador showed him his commission, and so took his leave of him, and
returning too his Galleys, was accompanied by those which brought him up. The
whole day after we were visited of a great number of Turks and Moors, to whom
of our parts was made good cheer during four days the king sent to us every
day six oxen and xxi. muttons. Liberality of the king.
The captains of the Galleys of Alger, and other Turks and Moors brought unto
us all sorts of fruits, as Pears, Apples, Figs, Reasons, and millons of
excellent goodness, and certain bread without leaven like unto cakes or
bunnes. To eueri of the^ was given some money which increased their good will to
return often: For in all the world is no nation like to them in theft and
couetuousnes, we remained a whole week in good liberty and friendship,
Covetous nanation.
freque^ting the one with the other with great familiarity, during which time
the knight of Seure caused his Galliot to be new calked, and for this purpose
the king lent him one of his galleys and did further gratefully furnish him of
tallowe and other things thereunto necessary.

Of the great perils and dangers we were brought into by the means of
certain christian slaves that were escaped.

Chap. 7.
Upon the Thursday being the xvi. day of the said month of July, a christian
slave of one of the Foystes which had robbed Cotignac, being by subtle means
escaped, cast himself into the Sea to swim to our gally: but a Turk of another
gallie e^pying him did likewise cast himself into the Sea, and in swimming
followed him so swiftly that he mounted upon his back and without the succor
of our maryners, who pulled him being half dead into our gallie, had drowned
him: too whom incontinent came running diverse other Turks to recover him, and
amongst other his master, who despayring that his slave should not remain a
live any long time, was contented and left him with us for x. crowns, and from
time to time always came away into our galleys diverse other, and amongst the
rest a young nephew of the captain Cost, being slave unto a very rich mercha^t
of Alger, Who was perceived by certain Turks, as he was climing into the chief
gallie, who straighwayes came running with diverse other with great and furious
cries for to recover him. Conspiracy of the Turks against us.
After which time the Turks and Moors began to conspire openly against us,
for too endamage us, by reason whereof the Ambassador foreseeing the great
dangers into which he or his, might fall, went twice to the king to have his
dispatch and leave, to the end to follow on his voyage, on the other side the
Raise and Azappis of the galleys persisted instantly too have again their
slaves, affirming that since our arrival they had lost above xx. of them:
wherefore upon Sunday the xix. these Raise accompanied with a number of others,
came again into our galleys to demand their slaves, and especially the nephew
of the captain Cost, who^ they affirmed to be within the chief gallie, using
very rude and outrageous words toward the Ambassador: who excused himself,
and assured them that he knew nothing thereof and that he did not think that
any of their slaves were gotten into his galleys, which he said he would not
permit: notwithstanding for their more satisfaction to search a new within his
galleys and galliots, assuring himself that they should not find any of their
slaves. To whom, for the present they would give no ear: for that their intent
was to have our galleys discharged on land, and so have good means to saccage
us, which the Ambassador well perceiving would not agree unto the^, but to the
contrary dispatched the knight De la Seure, Cotignac, and me, to go and declare
unto the king of the great wrong and injury that was done unto him. But we
were not so soon on land, the knight De la Seure did instantly request me in all diligence to return to his galliot for a service him greatly emporting
touching the slaves, of the loss whereof the complaint was made, which I
willingly accomplished. And as I was again returning to the land^ the more to
augment our quarrels, and the suspicions which the Turks had conceived of us,
there came incontinent another slave into my boat with a cofin full of figs and
reysons, which he said he would carry to the master of our gallie, which I
would not permit unto him, considering the danger such people put us into. But
a Turk which was in another boat perceiving this, came inco^tine^tly into my
boat, and by strokes with a staff chased the slave into his, causing him to
mount into a galliot, and upon the sudden, altering his purpose, brought him
back again into my skiffe, which in spite of my heart he forced too pass
along by the poupe of the gallie royal, into which he made the slave too
climb, and whatsoever I could to the contrary they hoysed me up by the arms
into their gallie: as also they did to the master of my skiffe, which
presently and in my presence was made fast by the leg to a chain, and so they
kept me as prisoner, furiously threatening me, that I should not get out of
their hands before they had again al their slaves: notwithstanding I always
showed an assured countenance, making unto them protestations and remonstrances
of the wrong and injury, they did too our Ambassador and his, and that their
master and ours were mighty and sufficient enough to take up the matter, so as
in the end they agreed to let me depart, but kept my poor master, who
perceiving me departing, thought himself undone, and I was feign even alone
as well as I could my self too row my skiffe to our gallie, to give the
Ambassador to understand of all that had happened unto me, which troubled him
very sore: and forthwith he sent me a land, thereof to advertise the knight De
la Seure, and Cotignac, to the intent they should inform the king thereof,
whom I found on the way coming back again with the Caith (which is their high
Priest) having charge to do the excuses in the name of the king, and show that
it was not he, that thus troubled us, but the Justice of the town over whom he
had no authority, (for that Alger is as it were ordered as a particular common
wealth). This notwithstanding the other persisted in the demanding of their
slaves, and too the contrary, the Ambassador sought by all means to appease
them with good cheer and presents of silver, praing them once again to view
and search his galleys above and below, which they did curiously enough, and
finding nothing of that they sought for: yet could not persuade them selves,
and above al they said that in the Admiral and Galliot there lay many of
their slaves hydden, and in that opinion they departed for that time, not
forgetting to take with them the silver that was given unto them in secret. In
the mean space we saw al along the mollehead the people with the soldiers
both Turks and Moors, looking for nothing more then an opportunity too
saccage us, and therefore we set our selves in good order, and all the night
kept very good watch. The next day the king caused all his people to put
themselves in arms, and sent a great number of Harquebusiers and archars,
which were placed as well upon the poupes and foreships of his galleys,
Foystes, and Galliots, as upon the shore all along the mollehead: The Turks
rose in arm^s against us.
he caused also to be charged and bent all the Artillery as well of the town
as of the galleys, against our Galleys, and this done in most furious manner,
they came to demand their slaves of us, which seeing the knight de Seure and
Cotignac being yet aland did of new endeavor themselves to speak unto the king
which they could not do, for he would neither see them nor hear them speak:
and they finding the whole town in arms were greatly amassed. All which being
seen and understood by the Ambassador, and to eschew the peril wherein he
saw him self and his to be: caused him to be set a shore, and went straight
to the palace to seek to speak to the kings own person, but it was in
vain, for the access unto him was denied, and (which was worse) the king
sent his lieuetenant, and other captains into our galleys to have the captain
Cost and his nephew Erasme to be put unto the chain in steed of his other
nephew, which was stolen away, notwithstanding that the evening before he was
sent back again to his master by a Turk who gave to him his Tulbant and his
gown because he should not be known of others, Erasme nephew unto captain
Cost was delivered unto ye Turks ^o appease the^.
for that he had promised him that none should do him any harm: all this
notwithstanding the uttermost remedy to appease them was to deliver unto them
Erasme whom forthwith they condemned to be hanged and stifled upon the maste of
the gallie, which presently they would have done if the Ambassador through his
prudence (as of long time knowing the insatiable avarice of these barbarous
people had not appeased their force and rage with great sums of money,
promising the^ moreover yt in their presence Erasme should be put to the
chain and not be let out before they came to Co^sta^tinople. By these means
and like promises he was re^dred unto the^ having received many Bastonados of
the Turk) and incontinent according to the conuentions, put unto the chain,
where he remained not long. All this notwithstanding they were not appeased,
for the number of the soldiers and armed men did still increase, which made us
too fear that they would do some injury to the Ambassador being yet a land,
or at the least keep him prisoner, which they would feign have done, and in
deed with all rigor forced him to ascend into the gallie royal from which
they would not suffer him to depart, without first (over and above all that it
had cost him) he should give them for their losses and interest, two hundredth
crowns, which were paid down in ready money. Now the brute Barbaries were
not so soon departed, but we weighed our ankors, too escape their hands, and
dyned in the Rhode: and afterward by force of oars we came surging along by
the East and by South beyond the cape of Matafus, Cape of Matafus.
which is thirty miles from Alger, where we tarryed until the morning
attending a good wind. But before I pass further I thought it good to make a
brief rehearse of the foundation, force, and situation of the city of Alger,
with the manner, religion, and apparel of the inhabitantants thereof, so
much as by sight I could comprehend, and understand of the inhabitauntes and
other that have written thereof.

Description of the city of Alger.

Chap. 8.
ALger is a city in Africa very ancient, first builded by a people of Africa
called Mesgana, Change of names of Alger.
of whom she took her first name: afterward was called Iol, and was the
seat royal of Iuba in the time when the Romans bare dominion in Africa, in
honor of Caesar it was called Iulie Caesare, and since the Moors called it,
Gezeir Arab Eleagair, which in their language signifies yles, because she is
cituated near Maiorque-Minorque Ieuise and Fromentierre: but the Spaniardes
now do call her Alger: howbeit, she is situated upon the Mediterane Sea, upon
the hanging of a mountain euuironed with strong walls, ramperdes, ditches,
platformes and bulwarks, in form almost threesquare, the largeness which
goes toward the Sea side, stretches narrowly almost unto the highest
part: where as there is a great building made in form of a Citadelle to
command the town and entry of the heaven. As for the buildings being beyond
the palace royal, are very fair houses belonging too particular men, with a
great number of bathes and Cooks houses The places and streets are so well
ordained, yt every one in his occupatio^ apart: there are about three thousand
hearthsteedes. At the bottom of the city which is toward the North ioynyng
too the walls which are beaten with the surges of the Sea in a great place,
is by great artifice and subtle architecture builded, their principal and
head Mosquee, and a little below that, is the Arcenal, which is the place into
which are hayled up and trymmed the galleys and other vessels. This city is
very merchantlike, for that she is situated upon the Sea, and for this cause
marueylouslye peopled, for her bigness: she is inhabited of Turks, Moors,
and Jews in great number, which with marvelous gain exercise the trade of
merchandise, and lend out money at usury. They have two market days in every
week, to the which resort an infinite number of people, of the mountains,
plains and valleies, being neighbors therabouts, which do bring thither all
sorts of fruits, corn and foul, of very cheap price, for I have seen a
Partridge sold for a Iudit, which is a small piece of silver money, in manner
four square, and is in value of our money four pence and a myte, but true it
is that their partridges be not so big nor delicate as ours are: Furnaces fitly
made for breeding of chickins.
the hens and chickins be also very good cheap, for that they have in most
parts of their houses furnaces, made in manner like unto the hothouses or
stoues of Germany in the which with a small heat they do breed and hatch
their eggs without help of the Hen, and therefore it is not to be marueiled
at though they have great plenty of such pullen. Camels and oxen shod.
They also have a great number of Camels and Oxen, which they do shoo, lade,
and ride upon as upon horses. And going through the streets, because of the
multitude of people, which there is marvelous they go crying with a loud
voice, Baluc, Baluc, which is too say, beware, beware. I have also seen diverse
Moors mounted on Barbary horses without saddel, bridle, stirrops or spurs,
The Moors do ride their horses withwithout saddel or bridel.
having only a string in the mouth to stay them withal. And as for the men
they are altogether naked, having only about their middle part to cover their
priuities, some piece of a white sarge or blanket in manner of an apron, and
about their head a linen cloth rolled, which they bring about and under their
chinne.

Their weapons are three darts or long Iauelins, Weapons of the Moors
which they carry in their right hand, and do shoot and throw with
wonderful dexterity, and upon their left arm is fastened a large dagger
made a little crooked after the fashion of a woodknife, which they call Secquin,
and use to fight at hand strokes withal, and to anoy their enemies coming to
the close. The most part of the Turks of Alger, whether they be of the kings
household or the Galleys, are Christians renied, or Mahumetised, of al Nations,
Many ren^ed christians in Alger.
but most of them, Spaniards, Italians, and of Prouence, of the Islands and
Coasts of the Sea Mediterane, given all to whoredom, sodometrie, theft, and
all other most detestable vices, living only of rouings, spoils, and pilling
at the Seas, and the Island, being about them: and with their practick art
bring daily too Algera number of pore Christians, which they sell unto the
Moors, and other merchauntes of Barbary for slaves, A miserable life of the
christian slaves in Alger.
who afterward transport them and sell them where they think good, or else
beating them miserably with staves, do employ and constrain them too work
in the fields, and in all other vile and abject occupations and servitude
almost intolerable: And therefore it is not to be marueyled at though these
poor Christian slaves made of it no scruple at all in putting of us in danger,
to set themselves at liberty.

Without the City toward the West are many fair and pleasant Gardens
set and adourned with diverse Pleasant Gardens.
trees brynging forth fruits of all sorts. Amongst other things there be
milons of marvelous goodness and incomparable sweetness: they have also
another fruit called Pateque, which the Italians call Anguries, being like in
bigness and color to our green citrouilles in winter which they eat raw
without bread or salt, and has a taste so delicate and sweet that it melts
in ones mouth, giving a water as it were sugared and serve greatly to refresh
and digest. About their Gardens are many Wells full of good water, and the
ground there aboutes although it is mountains and valleys, is very fertile
for fruits and vines. On the other part toward the East, without the town
runs into the Sea a small river called Sauo, Sauo a river.
which serves well as well to drink of as other commodities, and also makes
many mylles to grynde. The course of the Sea from the Cape of Marfuz, (where as
yet are seen the foundations of the ancient city Tipasa, Tipasa an old city.
which in times paste was by the Emperors of Rome honored in praise of the
country Latin) does bow and wind like unto a Crosbowlath, and all along the
river and the shore the Moorishe women and maiden slaves of Alger do go too
wash their lynnen, being commonly whole naked, saving that they wear a piece
of cotton cloth of some strange color to cover their secret parts, (which
notwithstanding for a little piece of money they will willingly uncover). They
wear also for an ornament about their neck, arms, and legs, great collers
or bracelets of latten, set with certain false stones. But as for the wives of
the Turks or Moors, they are not seen go uncovered, for they wear a great
Bernuche made of a blanket of white, black, or violet color, which covers
their whole body and the head. And to the end ye should more easilye
comprehend the manner of all their apparel, I have thought good in the end of
this present Chapter liuelye too set forth unto you, a woman as she goes
in the street, and a maiden Moore being a slave. The second day after our
arrival at Alger, I found the means for money and with fair words too
hyre a renyed Spaniarde too conducte and lead me through all places that I
most desired too see. So as by his means I saw and learned many things within
iiii. or v. days that we were there in quiet: And namely brought me upon a
high mountain being a mile from the town, to see and behold, the cituation of
a very strong and great tower, being builded upon another mountain there
near about, and gently enquiring of him what strength the tower might be of:
he declared unto me, that the breadth of the ditches about the same, was xvij
brases, saving about the gate and entry into it toward the North, it was only
seven fadomes broad, and two spear lengths deep. Moreover he said unto me,
that within the fortress, there were niene great cast pieces, and xviij.
other, as well mynions, as faw conets and other: and that in the midst of the
tower there was a well of very good water, upon the height thereof standing a
windemill, and another standing without the gates. And that xxx. ordinary
soldiers are committed within it to keep the same. And to make short, that
this tower was made to none other intent (as also others since have confirmed)
then for the garding and keeping of the fountain heads which from thence are
brought and conveyed under the water into the city.

A Woman Moorisque of Alger in Barbary, as she goes in the streets.


A Maiden Moorisque being a slave in Alger.


By what means Cairadin Barberousse came to be king of Alger.

Chap. 9.
ALger was long time under the dominion of the king of Telensin, until such
time as they of Bugie chose a new King, unto whom they gave and rendered them
selves as his tributaries, because he was nearer unto them then the king of
Telensin, and that he could sooner help them (if need were.) But in process
of time, perceiving themselves to be as it were free and out of al doubt:
armed certain ships too the sea, with the which they became such Coursaires
or pirates, that in short time they annoyed by their pyracies and robberies on
the Sea, not only the coast of Spain, but also all the Mediterane ylandes.
Which perceiving Ferdinando the king Catholic sent to Alger a great army to
assiege them, Ferdinando king catholic constrayneth the Moors to a truce.
and for to keep them in most distress, caused with a marvelous readiness a
forte to be made in a small yland, which lies before the city, keeping them by
that means so straightly besieged, that in short time they were constrained to
require a truce for ten years: Which was agreed unto them upon condition of a
certain tribute, which they paid until the death of king Ferdinando, for
then they espying a convenient time and means too break the truce, and to set
them selves at liberty, called unto them Cairadin Barba-rousse, who after the
siege of Bone, retired to the castle of Gegill, standing in the coast of the
Mediterane Sea, upon the top of a high rock 70. miles from Bugie, who being
by them chosen too be their chief captain, gave many fierce assaults unto the
fortress, so as he put the Spaniards too flight, and incontinent after caused
it to be ruined and pulled down even to the foundation. He then seeing so happy
success of his enterprise, could no longer abide to be as companion, but in a
bath traitorously slew a prince of Arabie called Selim: Selim slain by treason.
who declared himself to be Lord of the City.

Afterward forsaking the name of a Captain any longer, caused himself to be
called king and coined money under his name, and so well guided his affairs
that in short time after he brought all his neighbors about him to become
contributory unto him. Such was the beginning of the magnificent estate of
Cariedin Barbe-rousse: after whose death, his brother Hariadne succeeded him in
the kingdom, and after him his son Cassam, who reigned at the time we
arrived there.

Of the further procession of our Navigations

Chap. x.
TO return to the discourse of our navigations, which I left at the Cape
Matafuz, from whence (having soiourned there a night) we departed in the
morning: the wind was so contrary that it forced us to come to an anchor near
to the cape Tedele: Cape of Tedele.
at which place we saw within a great rock, a deep entrance being 2. flight
shot long, into the which the sea enters even to the very bottom, where we
entered with our skiffe, even to the half way of it: and thinking to pass on
further, we found so great a number of strange myce, Strange myce.
that we were constrained to turn back: so were we persecuted. And so for
fear they should piss on our heads (their piss being venomous) we were
forced to cover us, and to wrappe our selves in our cloakes. This part of the
sea is very full of mountains and great rocks. Approaching the city of Tedele
are certain valleys, very fertile of vines, gardens, and fruitful trees, and
we there lying at anchor, certain of the city for our money, brought unto us
sundry victuals, fruits and melons. In the evening we took in fresh water out
of a well being a little beyond our galleys, and in the morning with a
favorable wind, having doubled the cape, we passed along the town of Tedele,
of which I shall make here a brief description.

Of the town Teddel, and of the Inhabitants thereof.

Chap. 11.
TEddel is a city containing about 2000. harthsteeds, Teddel.
cituated upon the sea Mediterane 60. miles from Alger at the bottom of a
mountain: and on the hanging o^ a great rock. On the midst of the mountain is
a little castle from the which along goes a wall stretching to that of the
city. The Affricans first did edify it, and at this present is inhabited of a
people very merry and pleasant. For, for the most part of them they are given
to the exercise of the harp and Lute. Their principal craft and occupation is
fishing, and dying of wolles and cloth, by reason of diverse small brooks very
fit for their dyings, which discending from the mountains through diverse
places of the town issue into the Sea. The inhabitants of the same place are
under the same obeisance and justice, that they of Alger are. Leaving the coast
and town of Teddele we bare room to seawards, and had so good speed, that the
24. of Iulie in the evening, we discovered the city of Gigeri, but even
thinking to be near it, within a moment arose such a sudden Borasque or Flaa,
Borasque of Barbary most dangerous for sailors.
that if our mariners had not nimbly bestirred them selves in taking in of
their sails, we had been in great danger to have been all drowned, and
immmediatly saw our frigate (which was made fast to our gallie) lost before our
eyes, because they had not quickly cut the halser, but al our men were saved
by swimming to our galleys. These Borasques (engendered of a wind called by the
Gretians Typhon, of Pliny Vertex or Vortex, but vulgarly Tourbillon or
whirlewinde, proceed not ou^ of the West, notwithstanding do often happen in
Winter) are very often and dangerous all along the coast of Barbary, and as
they come very suddenly, so are again soon appeased. The twenty five in the
Evening we arrived at the port of Bone: Port of Bone.
where we being come to an anchor, the Ambassador sent to salute the Caddy,
which keeps the town upon tribute under the king of Alger. This Caddi was a
renyed Christian, and notwithstanding showed himself very courteous and liberal
toward us, for over and above the refreshings of flesh, bread and fruits
which he gave us, about supper time sent unto the Ambassador two great platters
of Macolique, full of their kind of meat dressed according to their fashion,
which was a kind of Menudes made in paste with onions, and fat poullets with
certain sawces of very good taste and savor.

Of the city of Bone aunciently called Hippon, of which S. Augustine was
Bishop.

Chap. 12.
BOne aunciently called Hippon, Bone anciently Hippon.
of which Saint Augustine has been Bishop in times past edified of the
Romans upon the Mediterane sea, stands of the one side upon high and ragged
rocks, and there is a very fair and sumptuous Mosquee, unto which is adjoined
the house of the Caddy: but the other side of the town toward the South, and
the valley is cituated more lower, and as well within as without accommodated
with wells and good fountains. The houses within it (having been twice
saccaged and spoiled by the Spaniardes) are evil builded, and this town does
not now contain above 300. harthes. Thee Emperor Charles the 5. after he had
subdued the town, Charl. the v. builded there a castle.
caused upon a height of one side toward the West, a great castle too be
builded: which commanded of all sides, and did accommodate it with a number of
cestarns to gather water in, for that on this height there is neither well nor
fountain. Notwithstanding shortly after it was rased by the Turks and Moors,
The Spaniards driven out of the castle.
and the Spaniards driven out of it: without the city toward the East, is seen
a goodly and large champion country, Merdez a people.
inhabited and tilled by a kind of people called Merdez which country besides
the great quantity of corn that it brings forth, nourishes and pastoureth
in the valley a great number of oxen, kine, sheep and other cattle, so
plentifully, that with their milk and butter not only the city of Bone is
provided and furnished, but also Thunes and the isle of Gerbes* there are also
about it many fair garden plats, plentifully abounding with dates, figs, and
sweet melonnes. At the beginning of the valley pass two small rivers, whereof,
the next and greatest has a bridge of stone, under the which is a way to an
old ruined Church being between 2. rocks, which the Moors do say too have been
the Church of S. Augustine, A church builded by S. Aug.
which made me the more desirous to go and see it: Notwithstanding that a Jew,
borne in Spain, being then with me, used all the means he could to persuade
me from it: for the dangers which he said too be there of the thieves called
Alerbes, which there abouts do lie secretly hid too entrappe them that came
therabouts, by which his remonstrances notwithstanding he could not dissuade
me, but that needs he must accompany me: and certainly there I found by
experience: and upon the top of a high mountain he showed me a small troop
of these Alerbes stark naked mounted on horseback with their darts in their
hands, after the fashion of those I saw in Alger: In the haven or road which
lies before the fortress is found great quantity of very fair coral, which
Andree Doria then had in farm of the king of Alger, for which he paid unto him
yearly great sums of money. By chance we found there a ship of Marselie
conducted by a coursarie, to gather the same, who presented unto the
Ambassador many fair and great branches. The next day being the 26. after
sun set, waiyng our ankers, we departed from Bone, and passed from the gulf
which contynueth about 18. miles to the cape of Rose, Cape de Rose.
and passing further toward the sight of the yles De la Galite, and des
Symboles, there flew a fish into our Gallie of the length, Galite and Symboles.
color and bigness of a great sardin, A flying fish.
which before had two great wings and two less behynd his head and mouth
being great according to the proportion of the body: this fish is by the Moors
called Indole. And having doubled the cape Bon the twenty and eight day we
arrived at the isle of Pantalaree: where by reason of a contrary wind, we were
for that night constrained to come to an anchor, and to put us to the
disposition of the wind.

Of our arrival in the isle of Pantalaree

Chap. 13.
THe other night following, we came too an anchor in another road of that Island
about vj. miles from the city, and in the morning one of the warders thinking
we had bin of the Emperors party, or of Malta, came into our gallie too make a
present unto the Ambassador of a good quantity of reysons and figs, which he
brought in a goats skin upon his back. This present being not so soon
rewarded, as it was taken, our trumpetter was sent with this warder to demand
of the Lieuetenant of the yland, ii. slaves of prouence: which the day before
were run away out of the galliot of the knight de Seure. For all we had
delivered them from the captivity of Alger, with such danger as before I have
recited unto you: whilst we renewed our beuerage out of certain cesternes,
and toward the euenyng, the warder and our trumpeter returned without having
heard any news of our slaves, but in the behalf of the Lieuetenant told the
Ambassador, News sent to the Ambassador.
that the Turks army was at Malta, and that she had saccaged the town of
Augusta in Sicilia, and that Andree Doria meaning to have passed from Sicilia
toward the town of Affricque, to furnish the place with soldiers and
munition, did the vj. day of the same month of Iulie through evil conduct and
lack of knowledge, so beat against the isle of Lampedose, that of xv. galleys,
which were with him, there were viii. lost: to wit, his Capitainesse: and two
other being his own* out of which he and a slave only were saved, and two which
appertained to the Marquis of Terre neuf the Patron of Cigallela patron of
Monego, and the galissa of Sicilia with all those that were within them.

Description of the I Will.

Chap. 14.
THis I Will of Pantalaree, which by the auntients was called Paconia, Pantalaree
ancie^tly Paconie.
is very hilly and full of great rocks. There grows great quantity of
cotton, capers, figs, melonnes and reysons: and throughout the ylande is full
of cestarnes. There are also many small houses very aunciently builded within
the ground (made like unto caves) made by the Moors in the time they
possessed the Island: Along the sea side are found stones being black, and
glistering like unto fine iet, and certain rough stones. They have no horses,
but of oxen great store, with the which they do labor and til the ground, how
well there grows no corn. Of which they furnish them selves out of the isle of
Sicilia, unto which they are subject. But well there grows certain other
grain and herbs of small estimation. There grows a small tree like unto
Nerte: which the Moors called Vero, and the Sicilians Stinco, bringing forth
a small round fruit, which at the first is read, and being ripe, waxes
black. Of which the Inhabitants of the Island (which are very poor) make oil,
which they use as well too burn in their lamps, Oil made of Stinco.
as to eat: and the women after having washed their heads, do anoint their
hair with it to make it grow long and fair: As Well the men as women are of
nature good Swimmers, as by experience we saw by a woman of the country,
bringing a great basket with fruit, The women of this country are very good
Swimmers.
entered into the sea, and swimming, brought the same to sell in our gally. This
Island contains xxx. miles in length: and in breadth about x. miles.

Of our departure from the isle Pantalaree toward Malta.

Chap. 15.
THe 30. day of the same month of July we departed from Pantalaree with such
a favorable wind: that the 1. day of August, being passed the isle of Goze, we
arrived about the Evening in the road of Malta, where incontinent we were
visited by the knights Parisot and Villegaignon, and of many others of diverse
nations* And after the Ambassador had given to understand to the great master,
his coming, the chains of the haue^ being opened with salutation accustomed of
the one side and other, we entered into the haven, upon the sides whereof were
with the before named, diverse other knights come thither in the behalf of the
grand master (of birth a Spaniard) named Omede, which received, the ambassador
and presented unto him a mulet, on which he lighted and accompanied him to the
great hal of the castle, where the grand master with diverse knights attended
him, and having done reverence unto him, and declared part of his
auctorisation, the night approaching taking his leave returned to his galleys.
The next day he was by the great master bidden to a sumptuous dinner, unto the
which all the ancient and notable knights of the religion were also bidden and
assembled, and there was openly rehearsed, how that certain days before Sinan
Bassha, captain general of the Turks army hadd taken and saccaged the castle
of the town of Augusta in Sicilia, and that he from thence arriving in a port
of Malta called Mechetto, near unto that of the castle, put his men there on
land to ouerrun, ravish and spoil, all whatsoever they should find for their
advantage, which they executed most cruelly, as such barbarous people in like
affairs are accustomed to do. But a most valiant and well advised knight a
Spaniard, named Guimeran, captain of one of the galleys of the religion, who
could not abide such insolency, and secretly assembling certain number of
soldiers and Insulans, did by ambushes and other means so distress them, that
after having taken and slain such as fell into his laps, made them to remove
from that place: but notwithstanding did not desist of their enterprise: for
from thence they went to the Road of S. Paul, where they landed their
ordinance to assiege the city, Road of S. Paul.
whereof they got the suburbs, and framed their trenches too make the battry.
And for so much as they could not atchieue the end of their enterprise (by reason
as well of the roughness of the place being full of rocks, as seeing their me^
fail them, dying through extreme heat) they resolved to remove their siege,
and to imbarke themselves with their ordinance, Goze saccaged.
having slain, taken and saccaged all that they met withal at advantage. From
thence they went to the isle of Goze, being very near and subject to the isle of
Malta, which they saccaged and by deceiptfull composition took the Castle,
leading the people both men, women and children as slaves into miserable
captivity: being in number vj. thousand and three hundredth. 6300. prisoners
taken.
The knight de Villegaignon in his treaty which he has made of the wars of
Malta, does recyte a history no less lamentable then full of despair, and
unnatural crueltye: A pitiful history.
and is of a Sicilian which in that place had dwelled of long time, and
there married a wife, by whom he had two fair daughters then being in state
to be married, who seeing his last calamitye approaching, because he would
not in his presence see his wife and his daughters ravished and violated, and
to be brought in shameful servitude, and too deliver them from all shame and
bondage, having called them intoo his house, A strange cruelty.
first slew with his swoorde his two daughters, and afterward their mother.
And this done, with a Harquebuse and a Crossebow bent (as clean bereft of
senses) made toward his enemies, of whom he slew twain at the first
encounter, afterward fighting a while with his sword, being inuyroned with
the multitude of the Turks, brought him self too the end of his most
unhappy life. Behold the summarye of the miseries happened through the Turks
in few days in the yles of Sicilia, Malta, and Goze. After which things the
Bascha caused his army with the whole booty and preye to imbarke, and
removed the twenty seventh of July toward Barbary to assiege the castle of
Tripoli: the dinner being ended, The zeal of king Henry to the religion of
Malta.
the Ambassador in presence of that noble assembly, declared the zeal and good
will which the most Christian king his master had always borne to their
religion, and the great displeasure he would take, when he should understand
the great damage which the Turks had done to that isle, assuring them that if
in time he had bin there arrived, too have his remonstrance unto the Bassha, he
would neither have spared his pains, nor yet the favor of the king his master,
to have caused them to remove. Whereupon the great master (after his great
thanks) said unto him, that there was yet time enough to pleasure them, if that
according to the good will of the king, and offer which he had made, it might
please him to sail toward Tripoli, which the Turks were gone to besiege, to
the end too persuade them (in so great necessity, and before they should
proceed further) to remove and leave the siege* for he feared that the place
being little, and of small force, and moreover, for that by reason of the poor
treasure of the religious (as he affirmed,) could not have bin fortified nor
succored, and might not long hold out nor resist such a great army: The
ambassador consents to go too Tripoli, too persuade the Bassha to leave the
siege thereof.
whereunto the Ambassador did willingly consent, although the charge of his
voyage did command him to go another way. And they of the religion having
prepared a frigate to direct us, he assured the^ that (so soon as he could) he
would by the same give them to understand of all the news: we soiourned in the
I Will of Malta only two days, as well to make clean our Galleys, as too take in
fresh water and other things necessary. And within this small time I endeavored
all pains and study, to see and understand the things most notable and
singular of this Ila^d. In which the knight of Villegaignon for the old
acquaintance, he had with me, and the good will he bare toward me, was a great
help unto me. And therefore before I proceed any further I thought it not to
vary from my purpose, to make here a succinct description of the yland, and
memorable things thereof, following therein as well the writings of the ancient
and modern Geographers and Historiographers, as that which with mine eyes I
have seen.

Description of the I Will of Malta.

Chap. 16.
MAlta which by the auncientes was called Melita, is an isle in the Sea
Mediterrane between Sicilia and Tripoli in Barbary, Malta ancie^tly called
Melita.
which from the West to the East contains in length two and twenty miles, in
breadth xi and in circuit threescore. It is an Island low and stony, and has
five fair and large ports, all issuyng at one mouth: at the entry of which
I Will is the castle (where the graund master keeps) by art and nature almost
inexpugnable, The castle of the grand master very strong.
being furnished with good quantity of ordi^nance, and cituated upon a high
rock of three parts environed with the Sea: and on the side toward Cande,
separated with a large cha^nel from the Bourg, which lies underneath it, very
great, and well inhabited, full of fair houses and palaces, well builded,
every one with a Cesterne: for they ^aue neither there nor in the castle,
neither wells nor fountains. There be also many fair Churches both Greek and
Latin, and in the midst of the great place, a great pillar erected, where the
malefactors are punished. True it is that this Bourg is not defensible against
any great siege, because it is environed with great hills, unto which of all
sides it is subject: she is inhabited and peopled with a great number of
Commanders, Knights and Merchants of all nations: Many whores in Malta,
and above all there is great abundance of Curtisans, both Greek, Italian,
Spaniards, Moors, and Maltez. Summer clothing of the women of Malta.
The common sort wear none other cloathyng because of the extremity of the
heat, then a long linen white smock gyrded under their breasts, and over
the same a fine white woollen mantle, by the Moors called Barnuche, as in the
end of this chapter I have lively set forth unto you. The city is distaunt
six miles from the castle, Description of the city.
cituated upon the top of a mountain, environed on the three parts with
great valleyesfull of grauel and large stones very painful too go upon. On the
South side about two miles from the City, is a great fountain, bringing forth
such a marvelous number of Eeles, that it is a matter hard to be believed,
which have so sharp teeth, Eeles with sharp teeth.
that there cannot be a string so good, but they will bite it asunder, so as
such as will take them are forced to strengthen their lines about the hook with
a silk or cotton thread, and as soon as they feel them taken, be very ready
to pull the^ up: and out of this fountain our galleys took their fresh water.
There are in this Island 60. castles or villages all well inhabited and very
abundant of Barlie, Sixty villages in Malta.
Cunego (which is a grain which they mingle amongst their corn to make bread)
Cotton, Citronnes, Oranges, Melons, and other fruits of excellent goodness,
but for wheat and wine they do furnish themselves out of Sicile: there are bred
very good mulers and horses of the raze of Spain. The sir Villegaigon led me
into a garden, which the grand M Omede caused to be made beyond the port, and
near unto the Bourg, which garden is beautified with a goodly lodging
containing chamber, warderobe, hal and kitchen: the court is pauid with
Mosaique stone, and the fountains very fresh and good to drink, the gardiners
house, chapel, and ponde for to water the horses, all cut out by marvelous
and industrious art out of a great rock, which is of a very fair white stone:
and near the entrance of the gate, out of the same rock, is cut a great man
on horse back colored green, a great deal bigger the^ the rustique of Rome.
As for the garden, the earth is carried into it and planted with all sorts of
excellent fruteful trees, as apples of paradise, which they call muses, dates,
apples, pears, prunes, peaches, figs common, and of the Indias, and other
fruits and herbs of incomparable goodness, in such sort that this place
excels all others in pleasures and dainties. The air in summer is
dangerous, by reason of the great heat, and therefore they study to seek places
cool and shadowous, to eschew the heat of the Sun^ there is another port which
specteth toward the North, called the port of S. Paul (where the Turks as I
have said la^ded to assiege the city) and this place is so called, Port of
Saint Peter.
for that the apostle Paul having suffered the dangers of marvelous te^pests
upon the Sea 14. days, when by Festus he was sent to Rome, his feet and hands
bound, and being stong with a viper, Acts. 28.^^
cast the same into the fire, and healed the father of publius of the ague, and
flux, which happened in the third year of the reign of Nero.

A woman of the I Will of Malta.


Of our departure from Malta toward Tripoli.

Chap. 17.
To return to our Navigations, according too the request which the Grand master
had made unto the Ambassador* upon the Sunday being the second day of
August, at the going down of the Sun, being departed from the hauen^ having
doubled the Cape of Marche-Siroch, Cape of march Siroch.
we sailed until the tuesday following toward the evening, at which time we
descried the coast o^ Tripoli, but to eschew the danger of the night, because
of the coast which is low and sandy, and for that we would not at an undue
hour enter amongst the Turks army, having stroke our sails, we did nothing
but lie by the wind until the dawning of the day, when we perceived the
ignorance of our Pilots, Ignorance in Pilots is most dangerous.
which having taken no heed unto the stream which in those parts is very
fierce, we found our selves to be driven back about thirty miles from our
right course, and were constrained too go about by Lebech toward the cape of
Taiure distaunt from the Town of Taiure two miles, and twelve miles from
Tripoli. At this Cape of Taiure, Cape of Taiure.
were four Galliots of the rearewarde of the Turks army whom having saluted
we proceeded forwards toward the army, which was about a mile from Tripoli
where Cotignac with the Frigate was sent to show the Bascha of our coming
which straightwayes was sent back with a Raiz of the gallie and a ^anissarie
to receive the Ambassador and to bring him to the Gallie royal, who being
entered into his skiffe, honorably accompanied, went to salute the Bascha, who
made him good countenance, showing his coming to be very acceptable unto him.
The Ambassador saluteth the Bascha,
The talk between them was for this time not very long, for the Ambassador
incontinently returned to his Galleys, and within a while after the Bascha sent
unto him a present of five and twenty Muttons, and certain other refreshments.
All that day we were visited by diverse Turks and renied Christians: the next
day the Ambassador sent his presents unto the Bascha, which were two fine
pieces of Scarlet of Paris, one piece of fine Holland cloth, and one small
clock or dyall, which he received with very great contentment and pleasure.
Afterward Cotignac which had carried the present, returning, the Ambassador
accompanied of his Gentlemen, went to declare unto him the cause of his
coming, praying him in the name and behalf of the king to refrain from such
an enterprise, which the Bascha would not agree unto, but too the contrary made
him answere^ yt the great Turk was much agreeued, that the knights at the
giving over of the Rhodes having sworn, The Bascha his answer founded on the
perjury of the knights of the religion.
at no time after to wear arms against the Turkish nation, had not only
contrary to their oath, aided and fauorised all the enterprises of the Emperor:
namely at the taking of the city of Africa against Dorgut: but also of
themselves did daily make war unto his highness, and did thereunto all the
worst they could. And that he therefore was moved to dress this army, to
chastise their temeritie, and if it were possible, to drive them out of Africa,
and in all that lay in him to endamage the^: he complained also of the Seure
Leon Strossa, priour of Capua, for that he being in service of his most
Christian Majesty, had sent his gally to them of the religion, to serve in the
wars against them. Moreover that the day before he had understanding, that
the Frigate which we brought with us was of Malta, whereof he thought very
strange, of which the Ambassador perceiving, and that by no entreaty he was
to be persuaded from his pretense, determined too proceed on his voyage
toward Constantinople, with all diligence to him possible, to the intent to
assay whether he could obtain of the great Lord that which by his lieuetenaunt
was refused, making his account that the place (which too him seemed more
strong then it was, and better furnished of good men of war, ordinance and
all other kind of munition) would hold out longer then it did, but he could not
obtain his leave of the Bascha, but desired him to pass the time there until
such time as he had seen the success of his enterprise, which he hoped to
have shortly executed, which made the Ambassador very sorrowful, who did
greatly excuse himself upon the have of his voyage, but all was in vain, for
there was no remedy but to obey and to arm himself with patience. The Bascha
and Dorgut did in the mean space diligently advance their trenches and
approches for planting of their ordinance, which they did not without great
loss of their men: for they of the castle having a great deal of good
ordinance, and the best gunners in the world, did continually nothing but
shoot, and discharged very few shot in vain, in such sort that they were often
constrained to retire, and to return with longer trenches.

The seventh day of August, the Bascha came a land too cause the rest of his
artillery to be brought unto the trenches and therefore sent to the
Ambassador, praying him to come to see the placing of his camp, and the place
where he made his approches, which he durst not refuse for fear of putting
himself in suspicion, taking with him to accompany him the sir of S. Vetan.
Cotignac, the knights De Seure, and de Maliane, the sir Caius de Wirail, Saint
Marie, and the sir De Montenard, the Captain Cost, me* and certain other of
his household: he found the Bascha upon the sea side under a pauillion, which
for the hear of the Sun he had caused to be set up, and after they had a little
while devised together, we were brought upon an hill, from whence me might
easily see both the town and the castle, the planting of their camp and their
approches, by long and crooked trenches from about 3000. to near 400. paces
from the city, not without the great endaungerment of them of the Castle,
as well of their artillery, as courses and skyrmishes, which by the knights
were daily offered to them. A hardy enterprise of certain knights.
And the same very morning (as a renied Spaniard told me) 20. kinghts came
forth to the skirmish even to the pauillion of the Bascha, and that in despite
of the whole camp* ^hey carried away with them a Turk prisoner. Before I pass
any further, for the more certain intelligence of matters, I ha^^ ^hoght good
to make a summarie description of the foundation and cituation of Tripoli.

Foundations of the city of Tripoli.

Chap. 18.
Tripoli.
TRipoli is a City of Barbary, cituated on the maine land upon the coast of
the Sea Mediterrane, and was first builded of the Romans, and afterward
subdued by the Goths which possessed the same unto the time of Homer the
second Califfe, and was by the Africanes so straightly besieged, that about
the end of six months they constrained the Goths to flee toward Carthage,
and to abandon the city, which being taken pylled, and defaced, part of the
inhabitants being slain, and part kept prisoners, fell in the end under the
puissance of the kings of Thunes, which did reedifie the same. But it came to
pass that whylest Albuhenan king of Fez, made war with Abulhabbes king of
Thunes (whom he took prisoner) the Geneuois with an army of twenty ships,
took it, pilled it, and carried away the most part of the inhabitauntes
prisoners, of which taking the king of Fez being advertised, sent in diligence
to compounde with them for the deliverance of the city and prisoners, for the
sum of fifty thousand crowns, which were delivered unto them in ready money:
but after the giving over and their departure, they found the one half of the
money to be counterfeated. Afterward the king of Thunis was set at liberty,
upon an accord and alliance which he made with Abuselim king of Fez, and by
that means returned too Tripoli, which was of him and his long time possessed,
until such time as the inhabitants not being able to support the extortions
and Tyrannies of the Governors, Extortions of officers: cause sometimes the
subjects to revolt from their sovereign.
which by the kings were sent thither, did chase them away with all the other
kingly officers. And having chosen unto their Lord a Citizen of their city
delivered into his hands all the revenues and treasures of the same, who
governed for a certain space very well, showing himself mild and tractable
toward the Citizens. But when he saw himself, mounted to so high dignity,
waxing proud above measure, even suddenly changed his good manners and virtues
into most vicious tyra^nies, which gave occasion unto a brother of his to take
away his life from him, and to the people to constrain through importunity,
an Heremit which had bin brought up in the court of the Prince Abubaco, An
heremit constrained to take government upon him
against his will too take the charge and administration of the city, which
notwithstanding he governed with all modesty to the great contentment of the
inhabitauntes, until the year 1510^ and such time as Fardinando king of
Spain by force of arms came and occupied the same, and after his death was by
the Emperor Charles the fith, given unto the knights of the religion, Charles
the ^ gave the keeping of Tripoly unto the Knights of the religion
who brake down the city to the intent to fortify the castle, which they
furnished with artillery and other munitions necessary, and yet
notwithstanding has been so ill looked unto (whether it was through the
avarice of the grand master, or negligence of those of the religion, that in
the end to their great shame and overthrow, it is again fallen into the hands
of the Barbaries, in manner as hereafter shall be declared unto you. For that
presently we will not leave the following on upon our purpose.

So now this city is environed by great circuit, with hills and a great
number of Palm trees (bearing dates,) amongst which are seen many towers and
goodly buildings ruined with certain Mosques and cestarnes vaulted, amongst
which, one which was unbroken, besides that it was very great and full of water
of excellent goodness, was all paued with fine Marber of Numidia (and
notwithstanding that the ground is lean and sandy, yet being well tilled and
trimmed, does bear many good fruitful trees, as Olive trees, Corniers,
Carabiers, and great abundance of palm trees: of the fruit of which trees, the
more part of the inhabitants which are poor and needy are nourished^ Also
there grow good Melons, Raues, and pateques: in steed of corn they sow Maith,
which is a kind of gross Mill, and of that grain they make meal which they
knead with water, and thereof make bread for their eating, which they bake
upon an y^^n plate, heated with a small fire, because they have nothing else to
burn but the wood of the palm tree: and as for the commodities of the waters,
upon high places they use cesternes, but upon the plain along the Sea side
they have many wells of sweet water, as well for their drinking, as for the
watering of their ground and gardens, they have also great quantity of Oxen
Asses and sheep, which have very long tails more then a foot long, of which
the flesh is very tender and delicate, and above al other have great number of
camels, for I have seen in one field nere the town of Tripoli, above three
thousand going in one pasture.

Of Basar where were sold the christians, taken in the I Will of Sicile, Malta,
and Gose: and of the manner of trenches, Gabions, and battries of the Turk.

Chap. 19.
Having well considered the placing of the camp, the town and castle, we
returned to the Bascha, with whom the Ambassador talked a while, and in the
mean while I went to see the market of the Turks (which they call Basar) being
hard by where the poor Christians of Sicil, Malta, and Gose, were sold unto
those that most offered for them and last inhaunsers, being permitted unto
those that bought them (as the ancient custom of the Oriental Barbarians is)
to stripp them stark naked, Manner to search the christian slaves that come to
be sold.
and to make the^ go, to the intent to see if they have any natural
impediment in their bodies, visiting afterward their teeth and eyes, as though
they had been horses, and standing there, I saw creeping upon the ground a
Scorpion of yealowe color, being of length more then a long finger. The same
day the Turks brought their ordinance and gabio^s unto the trenches, which
Gabions are made of great plankes of three inches, which they carry upon their
galleys or ships to serve them when they have need of them: for when they
will batter any place, they set them in the ground in form of Baskets,
Afterward being set in ranks, they fill them with earth, and is a very
commodious invention, for the shot which can but slippering pass over it, and
can do no hurt nor damage. The Turks having in the night placed their
gabions, and their ordinance ready to the battry, did the next day following
being ye eight of August, begin to shoot at the castle with great fury, which
was not leaft unanswered, and every hour some slain: whilst this was a doing
the Bascha sent to pray the Ambassador that he would suffer none of his me^ to
com a land, least the Turks might do them some outrage in mistaking them to be
of those of the castle. This battery continued until about noon, but not
without receiving great damage of the besieged, who without ceassing shot into
the tre^ches, so as that day they slew four of the best gunners of the army,
two Chiaous, and certain Raiz of the Gallie: Raiz are captains of the galleys.
they also shot off the hand of the clarke general of the army, being a man
of great estimation and greatly beloved of the Bascha, and to be short there
were a great number of Ianissaries slain and hurt. Moreover they burst one of
their best pieces, and dismounted four other, which for that day made them to
leave of the battery, which they of the Castle did not, but shot without
ceasing to endamage the enemy: the night following the Turks approached more
near unto the castle, upon whom they of the Castle about the break of day,
gave an assault even to their trenches: and being retired, the Turks (at the
Sun rising, which they have in great reverence) renewed their battery with
great force and 8. pieces at once: upon the evening the fire by mischa^ce got
into their ponder, with the which were burnt 30. Turks, and many hurt, and one
piece broken. The Ambassador on the other part, sued with great instance for
license too prosecute on his journey, which was granted unto him, but as we
were upon our departure, the Bascha (being almost mad) sent to him by an Eunuch
his Dragoman, that he would stay 2. days longer, within which time he hoped
to win the castle. This message so grievous put the Ambassador in no less
perplexity of mind, the^ choler as well because of the retarding of his voyage:
as for the diminishing of our victuals, which began to scanten, but there was
no remedy, but to dissemble the matter. The 11. of the monethe the Sieure
Wirail, and I, went too see the trenches of the Salaris being not passing 150.
paces from the Castle, where he was battering with 8. great pieces. Morataga
being behind the Artillery, sent for me by a renied Spaniard, called Casa
matta, who having had acquaintance with me in our galleys, had told him that I
was an Engener of the king, and therefore enquired of me many things
appertaining unto the siege, and strength of a place: I made him a short and
brief answer, and clean contrary to that which by the reason of wars and
experience I did know, which he well per^eiued, and smiling, told me that he
saw well that I dissembled. This Morataga was an Eunuche of nation a Ragusey,
but for the feats of war of good spiri^e and judgment, and then had the
government of Taiure and all the country Tripoli, having no grater enemies
then the knights of the religion, who daily warred against him: Dorgot was
five and twenty or thirty paces, beyond Salarais also, beating with eight
great pieces: the Ianissaries and Azapis were on the left hand in their
trenches, with their harquebusies ready, bows and arrows, targets and
bucklers. And thus being placed they had so well continued the battery, that
they had beaten it down even to the very edge of the ditch: but that which
was beaten down in the day time, the assieged made up again in the night:
notwithstanding the end was such that an unhappy soldier of Prouence, borne
in Cauaillon, being the Popes country, which by the long frequentation he
had had in those countries, had learned the language and served as a spy
unto the enemy, seeing the occasion to be come to that pass, which his
knavery and dissimuled treason had wished for, and being corrupted with
money, found the menes to fle^ unto the camp, where he declared unto the
Turks the weakest places of the castle, by the which it might be battered and
soon taken, and it was against the governors lodging, which standing toward
the ditch, and having underneath it the cellars to retire the munition, could
not be repaired nor fortified: which the Bascha having understood, caused the
battery there to be planted, laying the pieces so low that easily they did
beat the vautes and cellars in such sort as in small time they did pearse the
walls, whereupon followed that the height being charged with rampardes through
the continual battery began greatly too sink, which amassed the soldiers
for that they knew no means to repayr the same, that setting al honor aside,
quyting themselves of their weapons, concluded together to take some party,
giving their captain to understand that having unto that instant quited
themselves as good men and valiant souldyers, seeing their matters too be in
despair of succor, and not able to hold out any longer: he would not think
evil of them, if they thought to practice some way for their surety. Whereof
the Governor called Vallier a knight of Daulphine beying advertised, and by
Argosin a Spanyshe soldier one of the eldest and most authorized, solicited,
to come too a composition with the enemy, before the walls were further
endamaged, was greatly dismayed: which seeing a sage and valiant knight of
France, named Poisieu, as the most ancient, in the name of the other
knights, declared unto them, that the breach was not so great nor profitable
for the enemy, but that it was defenceable too such as would diligently
repair the same: And moreover that it was more honorable to knights of honor
and lusty soldiers, to die valiauntly, fighting against the Barbaries for the
maintenance of the law and true Christian religion, then so fainte heartedlie
to surrender themselves to the mercy of those, at whose hands was nothing to
be looked for, but miserable servitude, and all kind of cruelty. But rather
to prevent these dangers, it were necessary too refresh the xxx. knights
which were there offering himself to sustain the assault, and to succor the
first that he should see weary or hurt: and therefore exhorted the Governor
to fight as long as he could. Notwithstanding all these his remonstrances
were of no effect, because the Governor was without ceassing solicited unto
and as it were constrained by Argosin, Importunity of the Argosin
and other of his party to surrender: which with vehemency declared unto him
the eminent danger, they and so many women and young children were in: findyng
himself bereafte of heart and fortune: and forsaken of his soldiers, without
further consideration consented, that a white banner should be erected upon the
walls too call the enemies too a Parle. And a Turk presenting him self, they
prayed him that he would understand of the Bascha, if he would receive
certain of them to treat of some good accord touching the giving over of the
castle, whereunto the Bascha lightly consenting, was in all diligence
dispatched a brave Spaniard, Conditions proponed by the assieged.
named Guiuare, and a knight of Maiorque to offer unto the Bascha the castle
with the Artillery and munition, so as he would furnish them of ships to
bring them with bag and baggage safely to Malta: to who^ summarily was
answered, that (forasmuchas, as yet they had not deserved any grace presuming
to be so bold as to keep so small a place against the army of the highest
Prince on the earth) if they would pay the whole charges of the army, he
would gladly agree to the matter proponed, or if they would not thereunto
consent (as it became them) that for their recompense, all they within the
Castle should continue slaves and prisoners: notwithstanding if they
incontinently and without delay, did surrender the place he would exempt out of
them two hundredth. Wheruppon the messengers returning in despair of any
further grace, were stayed by Drogot and Salaraiz with flatteryng words, and
feigned promises, that they would endeavor so much as in any wise lay in them,
too make the Bascha condescend to a better and more gracious composition: for
they feared that the assieged through despair would resolve (as their extreme
refuge) to defend themselves even too the last man. And incontinent went to the
Bascha, to declare unto him his oversight, in refusing those which of their
own voluntary came to surrender themselves into his hands, and that too put
the^ out of dout and despair, he ought with all mildness to agree unto all
that they demanded. For after he had the Ca^tle and all the men under his
authority, he might afterward dispose of them, as he should think good. The
Bascha finding this counsel good, caused the two messengers too be called
again unto him, declaryng unto them with feigned and dis^em^blyng words, that
at the instaunce and request of Drogot and Salaraiz, there present, inclining
unto their request, he did discharge them of all the costs and charges of the
army, swearyng unto them (the better to deceive them) by the head of his
Lord and his own, inuiolablie to observe all that which he had promised unto
them, which they (too easily) believed, and forthwith went to declare the same
unto the Governor and others within the Castle.

Of the Composition and giuyng over of the Castle of Tripoli unto Sinan Bascha.

Chap. 20.
THE Bascha the better to atchieue too his enterprise, sent forth after the
deputy aforesaid a Turk (one of the most subtle to his mind, that he could
choose) to whom he gave express charge to persuade the Governor to com with
him to conclude and treat concerning the giving over, and for the vessels
which should be necessary for their conduct too Malta, and that if he made
difficulty to come he should make a semblance as though he would remain there
in hostage for him* and that above all things he should have an eye to
consider of the strength and assurance of the assieged and of the disposition
of all things there, which the Turk could execute so finely, that the
Governor by the counsel of those that had persuaded him too surrender,
notwithstanding the reasons of wars, and duty of his office, forbade him in
such manner to abandon the place of his charge, resolved upon so small an
assurance of the Bascha, and gave ear unto the miserable end of his fortune.
Vaillier upon the Baschas word goes to him.
So as being deprived of heart and good counsel, taking with him a knight of
his household (too send him back unto those of the castle to declare unto
them the faythfulnesse or disloyalty of the Turk) under the conduct of the
Turk that was come to fetch him, went straight toward the Tents of the
Bascha, who by the Turk that first entered was advertised of the small courage
of the assieged, which he assured him too be such, that if he thought it good
he might bring the^ to such order and appointment as he would himself, upon
whose persuasion, calling in the Governor Vaillier, after he had rigorously
reproched his timeritie, said unto him: that for so much as he had given his
word, that if he would pay the charges of the army, he would let them go
with bag and baggage, otherwise he could discharge but two hundred, whereat
Vallier being greatly moved, answered, that is was not yt which with the
deputy of the castle he had agreed unto: But seeing he would do none
otherwise, that it would please him too suffer him to return too the place for
to have the advice and deliberation of the assieged, which he could not
obtain, but it was only permitted unto him too send back the knight that
he had brought with him too make report of these piteous news unto the
assieged and on the other party Vallier was sent to the Gallie with yrons on
his legs. Vallier sent to the galleys with irons upon him.
They of the castle having understood the premises, were greatly afraid of
the mischief, which they perceived approaching toward them and could take
none other resolution then the next day in the morning early to return the said
knight to the Bascha, to know whether they should look for no better. But as soon as he was com before him, the governor was brought in, of whom the Bascha
asked, which of both he would choose, either to pay the expenses of the army,
or that he and all they of the Castle would remain prisoners, to whom he
answered, that, a slave had none other authority then that which by his
master was given unto him, A good and wise answer of Vaillier.
and that having lost, besides his liberty, the power too command, if any
thing were yet reserved in him, could not counsel him to command too agree
unto any thing but that which was concluded with the delegates, which the
Bascha hearing, for fear that such an answer should not come to the knowledge
of the assieged, and that it should cause them desperately too fight it out
having taken counsel of his captains, took the governor by the hand, and
with a smiling and dissembling countenance said unto him, that without any dout
he would as he had promised them set the^ at free deliverance: and that therefore
without fearing any thing he would cause the^ al to com out of the castle: but
the governor (because he had before bin deceived, would not trust to his
words, but said unto him, that he should command him that was come from
the castle, for that he knew they would do never a whit the more for him. So
that the Bascha turning toward the knight, commanded him that he forthwith
should go unto them, and cause them to come forth: swearing unto them by the
head of his great Lord, and his own, that they should all be delivered and
set at liberty, according to the first conuentions agreed upon. Which the
knight believing, went to report unto them these good news: which they
received with such joy, that without any further care or consideration of their
mishap so near, and prepared for them, they ran to the prease with their
wives, children, and best moueables, preasing who should first go forth. But
they were not so soon issued, but were clean spoiled, and of the enemies,
Faith and promise broken^
part of the knights were sent to the galleys, and the rest to the Bascha; who
being by the knight Vallier admonished of his faith, which he had twice given,
answered that there was no promise to be kept with dogs, and that they had
first violated their oath with the great Lord, unto whom at the giving over of
the Rhodes, they had sworn that they never would take on arms against the
Turks. The castle being taken and spoiled, and about 200. Moors of that
country that had served the knights, cut in pieces, with great cries and
shouts, rejoicing of their victory, they discharged a great peale of ordinance.
At which noise the Ambassador there arrived, took in his heart great
displeasure, to see, that contrary to the oath given to this miserable
governor, and many other knights, they were thus villainously intreted, lying
along the ground as half desperate. And he being by them prayed to be a means
toward the Bascha, that for so much as he would not keep his promise which upon
his oath he had promised, that yet at the least according too the offer made
upon his own voluntary, The ambassadors care for the Prisoners.
he would release two hundereth of them* which the Ambassador went to declare
unto him effectually; but he purged himself with the excuses above mentioned,
and yet nevertheless did presently condescend, that 200. of the eldest and most
unapt, (amongst which was comprehended the governor, and certain knights)
should be set at liberty. But as for the Spanish knights and certain young
French men, which he had caused to be put unto the chain, there was no remedy
to get them away, but by great presents which the Ambassador made unto the
Bascha, and to those that were about him: and also that he should become surety
too cause to be rendered and delivered 30. Turks slaves, which were taken at
Malta at the landing of the army. There was within a tower (which the
Spaniards had buylt at the entry of the Haven when they took the city) a
French knight with thirty Soldiers which the Turks did practice as much as in
them lay, too overcome with fair words, as they had done with them of the
castle: but of his part he did dally with them so well and so long, and with so
many subtleties and conditions which he proponed unto them, that he found
means to recover a bark, intoo the which he and his men got* and after having
abandoned the place retired into our galleys. This is the whole sum of that I
could learn of the Knight, touching the composition and gyuing over of the
Castle: which the Knight de Villegaignon has more at large described in his
treaty of the wars of Malta, which he has directed unto the late Emperor
Charles the fifth. The Bascha sent to give the Ambassador too understand that
it were convenient for him to carry this desolated company to Malta^ and that
he therefore should cause his galleys to approach: (which during the siege had
layn in a rode four miles from Tripoli) for to take them in, and that he
should not suffer any of his to come to land, which was accorded and
accomplyshed out of hand. For about the evening were brought intoo our Patron
by a Captain of the Ianissaries the Governor Vallier and the Spanish Argosin,
and within a little while after were brought in a Bark, a great number of
Knights and soldiers promised, of which the Knight Valier kept the scroll for
to call them one after another, and the prease was so great, who should first
enter intoo our Galleys, that it was a thing most pitiful too behold: for
those that were too hasty, were by the Turks repulsed with staves and fystes:
and also some of them before they could get out of the bark were strip^ped
intoo their shyrtes. Now after the Knights were thus put intoo our Gallie, and
the Souldyers into the Patron, the next day being the fifteenth day of
August, through means of a gown of fine cloth of Gold fringed, which the
Ambassador gave unto the Bascha for a present, he obtained license to go to
see the town and the castle, and took with him his brother in law de Saint
Veran, his two nephews, ^leurij, Lodon. Montenard, the Captain Bartolomy and
me, with his Moustaffa and the Dragoman. But we coming too the gates of the
castle, finding them shut, gave to understand too him that had the ward, that
the Ambassador was there with license of the Bascha, to enter and see the
castle. Notwithstanding he made us to stay there a great while, and afterward
coming through the wicket upon the bridge, where with a staff he began to
beat certain other Turks which were there, and after returning to the
Ambassador, repulsed him with most injurious words, whereat he being offended,
sent to give the Bascha to understand of the rigorous refusal made unto him,
desiring him too send a Chiaous to cause him to have entrance. In the mean
space after we had gone about the ditches of the castle which are large and
deep we went to see the town which was (as before we have declared) altogether
ruined since the Emperor Charles gave it unto the knights.

Description of the ruins of Tripoli.

Chap. 21.
ALthough the houses and buyldings within the Town be ruined, yet it is
inuyroned with very fair and strong walls, accompanied with a great number of
turrets, double ditches and false breaches and the same are on the three parts
inuyroned with the sea, and within them are very good wells and fountains. We
saw in the midst of the Town, an Arche triumphall of white marber with four
faces upon four pillars of Corinth four square, An Arch tryumphal.
being graven in the front that looks toward the East (by excellent
sculpture) a Chariote drawn by two great griffions, and within it was Victory
sitting with two wings: Toward the West was graven a Chariot, wheruppon was
sitting Pallas, and about the edge were written diverse roman letters, but
were so ruined^ that scarce they were too be known. Notwithstanding, by that
which can be read, we understood, that they were made in the time of P.
Lentulus* which is a good witness too believe that this city, as before I have
said, was builded by the Romans. The inside of the arch was full of diverse
inrichments, and above after the fashion of a four square turret: and 2. other
faces looking toward the North and South, were cut as from the upper part of
the body unto the girdlesteed without any heads, two great figures of the
overcome. All the rest was set forth with all sorts of weapons in form of
Trophee, not far from thence was seen a great four square place environed with
many great and high pillars in two ranks after the manner of a porch, and near
that are the destructions of a high tower* which in times past was (as a Moore
of the country told me) the great temple or Mosque of the city: there are a
number more of antiquities ruined. The Chiaous being come which was sent by the
Bascha, we returned toward the castle, but might not at that time enter in
all, because the Bascha had given commandment, that there should not enter
with the Ambassador above 5. or 6. at the most, which were Sant Veran de
Fleury* de montenard, Batolomy, and the Dragoman* and I: at the entry we met
with Morataga and the captain which had the charge of the castle, which caused
us to be brought upon the rampards, too the end we might the better view and
consider of al things and having seen both above and below, we perceived for
certain, that all things were well repaired and furnished* and well appointed
with 36. pieces of ordinance, Munitions of war resting within the castle.
as well small as great, and that there was a great number of pykes and pots to
cast fire, abundance of all kind of victuals and other munitions, a good well
and fountayn: and that at the time when the siege was laid to it, there was as
well of knights as soldiers of diverse nations about 600 and the best gunners
of the world, it is an everlasting shame to them that so fainthartedlie
surrendered the same unto those barbarous people without any warlike reason. Al
which having well considered with a heavy mind we returned again too our
Galleys, whither incontinent the Bascha sent to desire the Ambassador that the
next day he would come to his solemn dynner, which he pretended to make for
joy of his victory, and taking of the castle, and that he would bring Vallier
with him, which he would not refuse, thinking by such occasion too recover
the rest of the 200. knights and soldiers which were yet to be delivered: and
therefore the day following being the 16. day of August 1551. accompanied by the
governor Vallier, the knight de Seur, Cotignac, captain Cost, Montenard, and
me* went toward the Bascha, being within the ditch against the breach of the
castle, where for a magnificency were set up 2. fair pauillions, the one for
him, joining unto a very fair fountain: and the other for the Ambassador and
his company: and so soon as he had sent his presents as well to the Bascha, as
to others his familiers (which of old time has been the manner and custom
that they that have to do with these Barbaries must observe) he was brought
unto the pauillion that was prepared for him, and forthwith served with all
magnificence, honor and superfluity of meats as well of flesh as fish,
diversely dressed according unto their fashion: and with wines very excellent
that they had found within the castle, and this service was done with noise of
al their instruments, and by officers in number above one hundredth, apparrelled
for the most part in long gowns of fine cloth of gold, tuffed or figured, and
the other of velvet and crimson damask, and diverse other colors. The Bascha
was no sooner set down, but all the ordinance of the galleys, foists and
galliots of the army (being in all 140. besides the great gallion and 2.
Mahumez) was discharged, with such a noise and thu^dring, that it seemed the
heavens and skies did shake. The table being taken up, the Ambassador and the
governor Vaillier entered into the pauilion of the Bascha, which in the end
agreed to deliver the 200. men which he had promised* and moreover gave 20 unto
the ambassador upon promise, that he should cause to be released the 30. Turks
taken at Malta, at the landing of the army. But the most part of them that were
delivered, were almost al Spaniards* Sicilians and Calabres, and few French
men: for the most part of them were put to the rank of criminels forsworn:
that day were brought into our galleys the coffers of Vallier, within which
were found certain apparel, a sack with money and a cup of silver, the rest
which he said to be more worth then 2000, crowns, the Turks had taken away and
spoiled: besides 2. pauillions which he esteemed worth 300. crowns. The Turks
having in their hands an ancient gunner of the castle named John de Chabas* A
cruel sacryfice upon the person of John Chabas a gunner of the Castle.
born within the town of Romance in Daulphine (to the end that their feast of
victory should not be unfurnished of some sacrifice of cruelty) for that with a
ca^non he had shot off the hand of the cleark general of the army, brought him
into the town: and having cut off his hands and his nose, they put him quick
into the ground eue^ to the girdle steed, and there with a cruelty was
persecuted and shot at with arrows, and in the end for to accomplish the
execution of his glorious martirdo^ they cut his throat* About 8. a clocks in
the evening were lighted upon all the galleys, galliots, foysts and other
vessels al along upon the takels, yardes, and other ropes and poupes, in every
of them above 300. candels, with cries and shouts accustomed, and sound of
drums and other instruments. To make an end of all their triumphs, they
again discharged all their ordinance. The next day being the 17. the Bascha
sent to be presented unto the Ambassador a gown of cloth of gold tissed, and
with the same his leave too depart which he so long had desired: and was not
received without a present given him that brought it, and to diverse other
officers of the Bascha which on all sides came running one after another as a
sort of hounds, to have their fee and share in the game, for they are the most
barbarous, covetous, and cruel nation of the world, and in whom there is
neither truth nor fidelity, never observing the one half of that they promise:
and yet men must always be giving to them. The 18. the Spanish Argosin bought
of them a Moore slave of his with his 2. little daughters, the one being 6.
year old and the other sucking as yet the mothers breasts for 62. ducats: which
slave, for my description of diverse apparel I thought good lively to present by
a picture in the end of the next chapter.

Of our departure from Tripoli to return to Malta.

Chap. 22.
THe same day the 18. of August about the going down of the sun, we took
our course to sail toward Malta. But after we had sailed 60. miles, the wind
about midnight did arise out of the North: so cold and contrary that we were
constrained to return to Tripoli: whereof the Bascha being advertised sent
word unto the Ambassador, that he was very welcome back again: and that
before he had well told him that at the Seas he should find a contrary wind,
yet nevertheless when he saw the time convenient to depart he might do it by
night or by day without demanding of further consent, we soiourned there until
the one and twenty in the morning within the which time we took in fresh
water and a few victuals. Afterward with an indifferent wynd sailing and
keeping our course North and by East, we had such lucky speed, that we came
to discover the yles of Lampedose and Linose being upon the Saterdaye the 22.
which day dyed of a fever most pestilent, the Master of our Gallye called
John Raymond, which was a great loss unto us, The master and two gallie^
slaves of our^ gallie died.
being a good Pilot and a very honest man. The day before there died also two
gallie slaves and four in the patron: all which were cast into the sea to
feed fishes. Upon the Sunday being the 23. approaching near unto Malta: we
sent the frigate on before along the coast of Gosse to discover whither the sea
were clear of galleys, galliots and other vessels of the enemies. For we
something doubted the galleys of Genua, after having long looked for their
return discovering the^ a far off, they gave us a sign that there was no
danger toward: and so sailing betwixt Goze and the isle of Malta: we arrived
there very late: and the entrance of the haven being shut, the Ambassador sent
his Lieuetenaunt with his skiffe toward the grand master to signify unto
him our ariual, and to desire him to cause the haven to be opened for us, and
too give him also to understand, that he had within his galleys the Governor
and other knights of Tripoli. But he understanding of the taking of Trypoli was
in such a rage and anger, that he sent word back again that he would do nothing
until the morning, that he should have all his counsel together, to understand
of them what were too be done, and afterward would let him understand his
pleasure. The knight Parisot sent foorthwyth certain refreshinges of bread,
wine, and sweet water: which were accepted in better part then the answer of
the grand master: Vaillier and other knights went to lie within the Bourge.
The next day in the morning the haven was opened, into which we entered without
any welcome bidden. And nevertheless the grand master sent Parisot and
certain other ancient knights to receive the Ambassador, who greatly
disdayned at the message that in the evening before was sent unto him, which
the knights would feign have cloaked and excused, but could not with honesty
do it: being come to the castle, he was received of the grandmayster with small
countenance, Ingratitude of the grand master.
as a recompense for that he had at his great charges and costs, besides the
loss of his men that were dead and diseased, safely brought away the knights
and soldiers from Tripoli, who if it had not been for him and his gifts had all
remained as Slaves to the Turks: wherein the grande master could not be
persuaded, which against al right and truth maintained his opinion, that
without the good wills of the knights, they would never have Surrendered. And
as for the 30. Turks being slaves, which Vaillier (upon caution and
assurance of the Ambassador) had promised too be redeliuered unto the
Bascha, he would by no means thereuntoo consent. The counsel of the religion
were three times assembled, where the ambassador by good reasons spared not to
reprove the false opinion of the grand master, from the which he was by no
manner of remonstrances to be persuaded. But to the contrary maliciously
suborned the spanish and Italian knight against us, so far that some said
we were come to Malta to espy and view the place, and to cause it to be
brought under the Jurisdiction of the Turks: other said that after we had
caused Tripoli to be lost, we would return again to the army. And generally
and above al, that we were the very chief authors of all the mischiefs that
were happened unto them by the Turks. Such was their unthankfulness for all
the good will and services which the Ambassador and his company had done to
them of the religion. Vaillier put under arest*
Departing from the castle, he went to dine with the Knight Parisot, where
Vaillier was under arest, attending that his process should be declared
against him: all the rest of the day there was preparation made too dispatche
and send away the knight de Seure toward the court, too advertise the king
of all that which during our voyage was happened unto us. And in the mean space
the grand master sent away three frigates toward Sicilie, Affrique and Naples,
too advertise them of the loss of Tripoli, or rather (as the common voice was)
to advertise Andre Doria (which was tarrying for us at the passage with 5
principal galleys) of the day of our departure, and the course we meant to keep
for we used al diligence to escape his hands. Nevertheless we made some small
provision for our galleys, and with much difficulty got certain victuals, and
wood for our kitchen. Moreover, we got a pilote being of the isle of Chio in
place of him that was dead: the knight de Seure did also no less diligence in
preparing his galliot too return into France, and being embarked with him,
the Lords of S. Veran, Montenard the knight of Magliane, Vestrie, Flamerin and
certain others (who having heard that Andre Doria lay in wait for us at the
passage, would not put themselves in hazard to fight, nor to fall into the
hands of their enemies) the 26. of August in the evening, their ankers being
weied, having a good wind, directed their course toward Marseilie.

A woman Moore of Tripoli in Barbary.


The second Book of the Nauigations and peregrinations Orientalles, of
Nicholas de Nicholaij of Daulphine, chamberlain and Geographer ordinary to the
king of France.
The dep^rture of the Lord of Arramont Ambassador for King Henry the
second, toward Soliman, Emperor of the Turks, from the I Will of Malta, to
proceed on his voyage toward Leuant.

Chap. 1.
THE Knight of Seure having with a very favorable wind taken his course
toward Marseille, we with our galleys after we hadd taken in fresh water,
the rest of our men that were a shore about the beginning of the night being
shot to the Seawards about 25. or 30. miles, found the wind to be at Northwest,
which served us so well, that having set our course southeast, we sailed that
night 60. miles further, and following the same course, we sailed so with that
wind, that upon sunday being the last of August, we had on our left hand the
sight of the Islands of Zefalonia, The Isles of Zefalonia and Zante.
aunciently called Zephalonia and Zante, sometimes called Iacintha, being both
subject unto the Venetians and contributory unto the Turk (as I hope to
declare in mine other treaty of our return from Constantinople. The same day
about noone we descryed a great ship of Ca^dia, laden with malmsies, Muscadels
and other marchadises, being bound for Venice. And yet notwithstanding we had
given them a shot of assurance, yet left not to set up a red flagge in which
were painted the arms of Candia, and began to prepare themselves to the fight,
thinking we had bin Coursaries, which the Ambassador seeing, made them beleene
that he was of Sicilia; upon which occasion they forthwith stroke their
sails, and the master with his bark came to salute the Ambassador, who^ he
straightwaies knew, for that he had oftentimes furnished him of wines at
Constantinople, and therefore presented him with a great barrel of muscadel, a
mutton and diverse other pouncils, A gift agreeable and necessary.
citrons and oranges, desiring him too help him with a barrel of fresh water,
for that theirs began to stink: which forth with was delivered unto him. In
which space an Italian slave which was escaped out of Constantinople, came
swimming intoo our gallie: which notwithstanding, we left not to prosecute our
race toward the isle of Sapie^ce, The isle of Sapience.
being distant from Malta 550. miles, where we touched not, but followed on
along the coast of Morea to pass the cape Malee, Cape Malee or S. Ange very
dangerous for Sailors.
now called Cape S. Ange, very dangerous for sailors: extending 50. miles into
the sea, the sailing by it is so perilous, by reason of the contrariety of the
wyndes blowing the one against the other, that oftentimes the Maryners are
constrained to put it in adventure twice or thrice before they can pass the
same, and as often are put back to the seashore, for the sea which so furiously
casts against Malee, is such that without great labor and long space she is
not to be recovered or surmounted, and oftentimes when men do think to be
escaped the most danger, are by contrariety of winds carried back again to
such places as oftentimes they cannot escape death. And there forthwith we
found our selves too be in great peril for having all the whole day sailed with
a prosperous wind: about the edge of the evening being ready to double the
cape, even in a moment arose a wind out of the Northeast, so cold and so
contrary to our navigations, that we were constrained thinking to go on
forwards, to go back 30. miles to the isle of Cerigo, The isle of Cerigo.
which belongs to the Venitians: In which we soiourned 8. days, and that by
reason of the contrary wind: to wit, one day at the port of S. Nicholas, Port
S. Nicholas.
where first we arrived, and seven days under the castle and fortress called
Capsali, The castle Capsali.
and to eschew the dangers of the Coursaries which every day were thereabouts)
whether we came too an anchor upon good will and request of the Proueditor
which incontinent after we were come to an anchor sent too visit and salute the
Ambassador with refreshinges of mutton, foul and fresh bread, commanding all
the inhabitauntes of the isle to furnish us for our money with all sorts of
their victualles, which did us great pleasure because of the necessity which
began too press us, in such sort that we were at the point to distribute the
bysket unto the maryners and gally slaves by weight: Courtesy of the Proueditor
of Cerigo.
which the Ambassador marking very well, and for that he would not be ingrate,
he sent unto him by his Lieuetenaunt and other his gentlemen reciproque
presents, which by him were courteously received and well esteemed* for he was a
Gentleman both honorable and virtuous, whereof I took experience at two several
times that I went to him: and being informed of mine estate and profession, he
used all courtesy and liberality toward me, in such sort that without fear or
scruple he caused to be showed unto me the whole fortress and the munitions
of the castle, which by nature and artifice seemed to be invincible, being
toward the sea side, cituated upon a high rock not to be ascended, and toward
the land environed with great and deep vallyes, having also the said Castle but
one gate to enter into, which is very strong and well guarded with 20. Italian
soldiers which cause al them that shall enter into it (without any exception)
too lay down their weapons. The Proueditors lodging stands toward the sea
and round about the hall are painted the arms with the names of all the
proueditors, which for the Seignorie have governed that yland from the year
1502. until the time of this said governor called Johan Andree Quirini, which
was in the year 1551. Under the castle stands the town being great, and
cituated upon the hanging of a hill, being evil to get up unto, for that there
is but one street cut out of a hard slipperie rock of black marber.

Description of the isle Citharee, vulgarly called Cerigo.

Chap. 2.
THis I Will of Cerigo, as writes Bordon in his Isolary, was first called
Scothera, Cerigo.
but as says Aristotle, Porphiris, for the beautiful marbers which are there.
And yet Pliny and diverse others do call it Cithere, by the name of Cithere the
son of Phaenis, and presently is called Cerigo. Within this isle Venus after
her birth made her first habitation, and (within a temple erected for her) was
worshipped and reuere^ced as a goddess and princess of the same. She
regards toward ye west ye cape Malee, dista^t from it according to the
opinion of the modern mariners 30. miles. But Pliny, Error of Pliny and
Strabon.
and Strabon make thereof but 5. miles distance, wherein me thinks they have
greatly erred, for experience shows the distance to be much greater. There
are diverse ports, which nevertheless are very straight and dangerous, and this
isle is round about so full of woods and mountains that she is almost desert and
uninhabited, but toward the castle, where the Proueditor dwells, and in
certain small villages of no account: the circuit is 60. thousand paces,
abou^ding (as recites the said Bordon) of wild asses, Wild asses having in
their head a stone of great virtue.
which have in their head a stone, having the virtue against the falling
sickness, pain in the flanks, and to lay upon a woman that cannot be
delivered of child.

Antiquities by the author observed in the isle of Cithare.

Chap. 3
DVring the time of our abode in this isle of Cithare for too refresh my spirit
and eschew idleness, I took the pain to seek out the relics and antiquities
as well of the city of Cithare, as of the castle of Menelaus and the old temple
of Venus, and in the end were showed unto me by one of the Island, upon the
top of an high mountain certain ruins which he said too be of the said
temple, Ruin of the temple of Venus.
and there were seen two high pillars Ionique without heads, with five other
foursquare, amongst the which appeared the form of a great portal, and near
unto it the stature of a woman clothed after the Grecian fashion, of bigness
unmeasured. But as my guide told me, certain years before the head had been
taken away by Proueditor of the I Will, which had caused the same to be
conueighed to Venice, The stature and effig^ of Helene.
and the Isolands do affirm that it was the effige of Helene, which John de
Maire of Belges in his illustrations of Gaul, does approve saying, that it was
there, where Paris after he had ravished Helene, took of her the first fruits
of his love. A little below this temple upon the same mountain, was the castle
of Menalaus, the husband of Helene, which was king of Sparta, and lord of this
I Will. The foundations of which Castle, are there as yet apparent by the residue
of the walls which are made of graven stone without mortar or plaster, of
length and bigness unmeasurable, then was also an high tower fouresquare,
Foundations of the castle of Menalaus.
from the which in fair and clear weather may be seen, not only the city
of Sparthe, but also the most part of Penelopese (now called Morea.) From this
castle, they descend into the City of Citheree, which was cituated on the East
part, on the hanging of a hill, in which appeared yet certain pieces of the old
walls. And for better witness of the antiquity thereof, the inhabitaunts of
the I Will do at this present day call all these old ruins Paleopolys, which is
to say, and old City under which passes a small river, which through the
midst of a gulf issues into the Sea, and upon the banks of this gulf are
within a great rock eighteen or twenty bathes small and great, Bathes cut in
rocks.
cut out by marvelous art, the most part being made with pypes and gutters to
bring the waters unto them. I saw these bathes through a great hole, which in
times past was made for a breathing hole, upon the top of a rock whereof the
principal entry was covered and shut with great bushes, and wild brambles,
which in process of time and lack of frequentation, were so grown and
multiplied, that to content my mind I resolved, by a coarde too go down into
this hole, which readily I did by the help of those that were with me, and
after me followed my nephewe, and we straightwayes so bestirred our selves
with an axe too cut down the trees and bushes, which let the going down,
that we made such a gap that every man might enter and see at his pleasure.
Likewise after our first arrival, the Ambassador having sent his guard to the
mountain of S. Nicholas (being very high, stony, and ill to climb up), I
showed him two chapels, being upon the top of it, of which the biggest had
as well within as without his pauement very antickly wrought after the Mosaique
fashion with figures of hunters on hosebacke, Hearts, Lions, Bears, Dogs,
and diverse birds,

And thus ye have the most part of those things which I have seen worthy of
memory: the wind still continuyng contrary, and the Seas being sore wrought,
constrained us to remain there all that while to our great grief. The 7. day
of September, and of our aboade, dyed of a blooddy flixe a young Gentleman
called Polmi, kinsman to Saint Marie, who (according to the commodity of the
place) was honorably buried with in the Bourg: which being notified unto the
Proueditor, fearing he had died of the plague, incontinently forbadde all his
folk and the men of the Island to deal or frequent any more with us, nor yet
to bring any more victuals unto us. The same night also we had news of a
Galliot of Messene, which coming from ventring, was arrived at the Dragoners
(which are two small Islands very near to Cerigo) and therefore the better to be
on our guard, every one put himself ready in arms. And as it pleased God,
which knew what was necessary for us (for that already we began to way out
the biscuit unto the gallie slaves and that in the Patronne there was scarce
left for four days) about the second watch in the night, the Sea which for
eight days before had sore raged, began to assuage, and the North East winds,
which so long had continued, favorably changed into the West and by North.

Of our departure from the I Will of Citheree or Cerigo.

Chap. 4.
About the third watch our ankors being weighed by the help of god (who never
forgets his in time of need) we departed out of the haven, and with sails
spread, doubled the Cape of Saint Nicholas of the same I Will, and after that the
cape Malee, and sailed as well with one as other wind, that we entered the Sea
Aegeum: passing by the Isles of Archipelagua, and approaching the I Will of Tino,
with force of o^res we ouertooke two Ragusian ships, for that the Seas being
calm they could not flee: the master refusing to speak with us sent a
passenger being of Chio, unto us in a small boat, whom the Ambassador asking
from whence those ships came, said that it was not five days past since
they were depa^ted from Messena in Sicilia: as for any news of the wars he
would declare nothing excusing himself said that it apper^ained too Merchants
to be occupied with their mercha^dise, and yet nevertheless told us that
Andre Doria with five ^allies well appointed, was twyse departed and returned:
and determined for too entrappe us at the passage, and that the first occasion
of his return too Messena was for that the Maste of one of the chief Galleys
was by storm broken, and the second, for that he had missed of his
enterprise, he was fallen sick with thought.

Thus having returned this good fellow (who scarcely would imparte any of
this news unto us) to his ship, we again began to follow on our course
toward the I Will of Chio, and in the night having passed the Cape Mastic, we
approached in the morning within eight miles of the City.

Of our arryuall at the City of Chio.

Chap. 5.
THE next day, being the tenth of September, after we had put our galleys in
order, with their flagges, banners, streamers and Gailiardets, and the Gentle
me^ and Soldiers set in their ranks, we made way toward the strength port of
Chio, Our coming to Chio.
at the entering whereof were discharged all the ordinance and harquebuses, and
afterward with sound of Trumpets and Clarons, we came to an anchor, near unto
the mole head upon the which, and al along the haven, the people came running
to see us arrive: and we had not so soon touched ground, An oration made to
the Ambassador.
but the Ambassador was straightwayes visited by the principal and most
ancient of the Seigniorie of which one made the oration for the rest, with
great courtesy and honor, offering him the City withal that was within it,
to dispose of the same according to his pleasure, and with great affection,
req^sting him to take the same for his lodging, quiet recreation, and repose of
his travails sustained on the Seas, assuring him that the Segniorie desired
nothing more, then the good entreaty of him and his. For which the Ambassador
rendered unto them his most hearty thanks, excusing himself upon the weakness of
his person and have of his voyage toward Constantinople, so as he could not
come a land and for that he was also resolved to depart that night: but
promised them that at his return he would certain days pass the time amongst
them. The said lords were not so sone returned into the town, but they sent a
boat lade^ with diverse Presents: to wit.xij. couple of quick partriges being in
twelve several cages, twelve couple of fat capons, sundry baskets full of
Citrons, Lemonds, Orenges, Pomegranets, Apples, Pears, prunes and Reisons, of
such bigness that there were some of them that every cluster weighed six or
seven pounds, a great quantity of new bread, and certain calves, and
mutto^s, which refreshings were unto us no less welcome then necessary.
Moreover in the afternoon they sent unto us a good quantity of al manner of
fruit with a 100. poullets, two buts of wine of Chio, two fourth parts of
muscadell, 12. boetes mastick 4. tapites floured, of pinsed satin, for there
are made the best and fairest of any place in Leuant, 4. Turkey couerlettes,
12. great streamers of green silk, and a good quantity of tallow candles. The
Consul of the French men called Joseph Justinian, sent likewise on his behalf
diverse fair presents unto the Ambassador, we had made our account to
reembarke and depart that night but there arose a wind out of the Northeast, so
contrary to our course, that we were constrained too prolong our abode until
the 13. day toward the evening: to the great pleasure and contentment as well of
us as the inhabitants and specially of the fair dames and maidens of Chio,
which entreated and entertained us with all courteous and honest liberality, in
such a sort that I dare well say and affirm for certain, that I have not
seen in any place where I have been, a nation more amorous and civil, nor
which studieth more in all honest sort to obtain the favor of strangers.
Now to come to the description of things most special and worthy of
memory, which are as well within this famous I Will, as within the City of the
same, I will first begin with the general description of this most famous
I Will, and afterward of the particularities.

Description of the I Will of Chio.

Chap. 6.
THE isle of Chio or Scio, by Ephore first called Ethalie, of Metrodore Chia, of
the nymph of Chione, and as others say, Macrin or Pithiosa, lies in the sea
Ionique specting Eastwardes by the distance of ten miles. Eolide, a country
in Asia the lesser by Ptolome Argenum Promontorium, and of the modern maryner
Capo Bianco, or as Pliny writes, Mysie: she is cituated between the Isles of
Samos and Lesbos, about the height of Erithase. The circuit thereof after the
opinion of Ptolome is 128. miles and 500. pases. Pliny makes mention only of
125. miles^ but Isidore adioyneth 9. more, Pli. lib. 5. c. 30.
although the mariners nowadaies yield unto it only 124. To the northwards she
is dista^t from the isle of Lesbos now called Metelin, 50. miles, and from Delos
now called Sdile (where sometimes was the famous temple and oracle of Apollo)
between the south and the North 90. miles, from Lango, between the north the
south 80. miles, and from Psara by Strabo Psira to the west 15. miles. This isle
is divided into 2. parts: to wit, by height and lowness, the height toward
the south is high and hilly, full of great woods, dark valleys and rivers,
which issuing into the sea, cause many myls to grind. There are also diverse
castles, some on the mountains, and some on the plain which is very fertile,
and abounds of al things necessary. On the end of the isle toward the West is
the mount of S. Helias: Mount S. Helie.
upon the which within an old castle (as the Insulans do say) is the
sepulture of Homer who lived as Iosepus writes 200. years after the
destruction of Troy.) But Pliny contrarying them, says that his sepulture is
in the isle Ios, which likewise was called Phenice, and presently Nio. The said
Insulanes do further say, that the said Homer was born in a village not far
from thence called to this hour Homero, whereas grow the best and most
excellent wines of al Graecia, which the ancients in their bankets and
feastings did greatly esteem as Pliny recites, saying: Book 14. C. 15.
that Caesar the Roman dictator distributed at the celebrating of his triumph
a 100. great pots of wine of Falerne, and 100. vessels of wine of Chio amongst
his guests. And likewise that in his triumph of Spain he gave of the wine of
Chio and Falerne. Mount Pelenee.
The mount Pelinee is the highest in all the yland: producing fair
marberstones, and as Pliny alleges, the sellers and vautes of marber of
diverse colors were first seen and discovered in this isle, ye have there
moreover the mounts Peparque Menaleto, S. Helene, Vicchio, Pino, Cardanella, S
Angelo and Aruisio, a place most rude and hilly: and yet brings forth very
good wines. And toward the North is the fountain called Nao. Vitruuius
says. There is another which is of such nature, that if any drink of it
unawares, he shall forthwith become bestraught of his senses.

Leon Albert in his Archirecture says, that in this I Will there are two other
fountains, whereof the one is so venomous, that if any man do but taste or
smells to the same only she procures present death without any smart, and
the other likewise kills those that wash in it. Not far from the fountain Nao
is the port of Cardamille, Port of Cardamille.
at the entry whereof there is a shelfe called Strouilli, and near this port
is seen a fair plain well inhabited, and watered with the flood Helusan, and
below toward the South, is the port Delphin, which at his entrance has the
rock of S. Stephano, with a watch tower above it. After that of S. George, S.
George.
whereas gather and spring many fair fountains, which after a long and sharp
course do come altogether into an universal flood, which by crooked ways
finally issues into the Sea. On the other side of the isle, between the South
and the West, is another great haue^ called Lithilimione, Lithilimione.
having in the entry two rivers, and round about it a great and plain field
watered with a little spring. The other and lower part, which looks toward
the South, the ancients have called Phane Promontoriu^ and now is called Cape
Mastico, Cape Mastico of the ancients, Phane promoutoriu^.
and is the place where the trees grow, which bring forth the Mastic, and
comes not (so far as is known) from any other part of the world, except
as the Spaniardes write, out of certain parts of the Indies. These trees do
properly resemble the Lentiscus (which is the cause that diverse do write that
the Mastic is the tear or droppings of the Lentiscus, but they are a great
deal higher and have more larger leaves. As for the trimming and gathering of
the mastick, is used in this manner. The Segniori gives unto the inhabitats of
every castle or village of this lower part, such portion and quantity of the
plants and roots of these trees, as they think good, upon condition that every
one in his degree shall trim them and keep the ground clean that is under
the^, and that the time and season being come to gather the Mastic, he do
deliver unto the Segniorie a certain weight and quantity according too the
number of the trees that are committed unto him. And if through the
plentifulnesse of the year they do deliver more then they are bound to do,
the Seigniorie pays unto them a certain reasonable price for every pound.
But to the contrary, if the barrenness of the year does not permit them to
furnish the quantity by them promised, they are constrained to pay for that
which lacks, the double that which was given unto them for the abundance,
and this charge the Lords do lay upon them to make them the more careful and
diligent, the better to labor, trim, and make clean the trees. The order to
pull and gather the Mastick from the trees is this. About the beginning of the
months of July and August, the husband men with a pointed Iron do rent and
cut the bark of the trees in diverse places, and out of these incisions and
cuttes proceeds the Masticke by drops as it were Gum, The manner of
gatheryng of mastick.
which they gather in the month of September following, and after do deliver
the same unto the Segniorie, as before is said, This done, the Lords do part
the same, and put it to the handeling and administration of four of them: the
one of which has the charge too furnishe all Grecia: the other, the whole West
parts, which is Italy, France, Spain, and Germany: the third distributeth
his part throughout little Asia, which verily is Turkey: and the fourth,
furnishes Suria, Egypt and Barbary. Moreover the said four Lords have under
them Commities, which do distribute the masticke throughout all the principal
towns being under their charge. The whole mass of these four may amount too
about 150. caces, every one weighing two Canters, which are wroth eighty
Hoccha of Constantinople weight, The price and value of the mastick.
and every Hoccha four pound, at eleven ounces the pound, the Cantar is worth
fifty crowns, and so is a hundrd crowns for every case.

Of the City of Chio.

Chap. 7.
THE City of Chio has in times past been so famous and opulent, that she
has kept an army emperial at the Seas: but by long prolapse of time, as
althings are subject to changes and varieties of fortune, the Empire
Constantinoplitan beginning to decay, and to fall into the power of the
Barbarous infidels, was brought under the dominion of the Geneuoises, which
long time defended the same against the fury and rage of the Turks, but in the
end perceiving their strength to be too much inferior, they became
tributories vnto^ the prince of the Turks, for 10000. ducates by the year. The
Geneuoises do pay unto the Turk 10000. crowne^ for Chio.
Besides the presents which they must give unto the Baschas, and other officers
of estimation, which amounts unto more then 2000. ducats. This City is
cituated upon the sea ten miles below the port Delphin having his aspecte
oriental toward Asia the less: the haven is very good and able to hold a great
many vessels, and the town is environed with good walls, large rampards, and
deep ditches: Upon one of the sides of the common place where the market for
victuals is kept, is the burse, whereas the Merchants do every day assemble, The
Burse where the merchants doc assemble.
as they do at the Change of Lions and burse of Antwerp, and royal exchange of
London, for the traffic and handeling of their merchandises: and on the other
side, on the left hand, is the palace where the Segniorie keep their counsels
for the affairs of the I Will and the City. The streets are fair and large,
and the houses and churches, builded after the manner of Genua and Italy,
without the walls are fair suburbs full of gardens, pleasant and delectable,
filled with diverse fruits of marvelous sweetness: as orenges, le^mons, citrons
figs pears, apples, prunes, abricors, dates and olives, and likewise of all
sorts of herbs, sweet flowers, good and wholesome waters both of wels and
fountains. The inhabitants are very gentle and courtuous toward strangers,
and are much given too music and all other virtuous and honest exercises. As
for the women and maidens, Prase of the women of Chio.
I do not think (without offense too any other) that in all the East parts
are any, more accomplished in beauty and good grace, and amarous courtesy:
for above the singular beauty, wherewith nature has so well endued them, they
do attire themselves so finely, and have so modest countenance and grace, that
men would judge the^ rather to be Nymphs or Goddesses, then women or mortal
maidens: Apparel of the women of Chio.
the women of reputation wear their gowns or coats of velvet, satin,
damask, or other rich silks, white or of other seemlie color, which they guard
about with broad bands of velvet, and do fasten their sleeves above with silk
ryband lace^ of diverse colors: their apron is of fine linen cloth wrought
and fringed about, and attire their head with a coyfe of white satin, or other
color embrodered with gold and pearls, and close the same about the head with
long stringes and other ^ibands of like silk, as about the sleeves, in which
they make knots and devises behind with a very good grace, and before their
forehead they wear a yeallow Cypress wrought upon goldfolie, which they shut
and knit fast behind their coyfe: but the married women differing from the
maidens in steed of a cypress, wear on their shoulders a fair rail white as
the snow, and generally their hosen and pattins are of color white. Briefly
there is nothing to be seen upon them which is not proper and pleasant, but
that they make their bodies short, and have their breasts hanging, because of
the continual frequentation of the bathes, but about their neck and upon their
stomach, they were many chains, tablets, and other trynkets of gold, pearls,
or other fine stones of great value, every one according to her quality and
degree, so that all their pleasure and study is to attire and set out
themselves to make the^ the more acceptable unto men as well private as
strangers. To return to the city of Chio, she is inhabited with Grecians and
Geneuoises, and a number of Jews, which severally have one street to dwell
in, and because they should be the better known from others, they are
constrained to wear for a token a great cappe of yealowe color: they exercise
great traffic, usury of money and other merchandises, as they do in other
countries where they dwell. The Grecans do obeisance unto the patriarch of
Constantinople and have a church on a mountain Westwards, A sumptuous church
of the Grecians.
and five miles from the City which is esteemed to be the fairest that is in all those Islands Ciclades, being artificially made of Mosaique, and was builded
after the common opinion of the Insularies, by the Emperor of Constantinople
called Constantinus Monomachus, which named her our lady of Niamoui.

I do here present unto you gentle Reader, lively set forth, two pictures of
the wife and maiden of the I Will of Chio, and another of the I Will of Paros,
notwythstanding that I do refer the description of the said I Will, and our
arrival in the same, for that it appertains unto the second tome, in which
(y^ God give me grace) shall be described our return and navigations from
Constan^tinople into Italy, where I disbarked to go to Rome, and by land into
France.

A woman of the I Will of Chio.


A maiden of the I Will of Chio.


A maiden of the isle of Paroe in Archipelagua.


Of the government of the isle and city of Chio.

Chap. 8.
THe government of this city is in form of a common wealth, for they have the
Mahomies which were the first gentlemen sprung out of the ancient stock of
Justinian of the nation of Genua: Mahomies ge^tlemen.

Geneuoises.


and for that they were the first Dominators in this isle from 2. years to 2.
years, one of the said Mahomies is elected and created potestate, and chief
justice both civil and criminal, the which has a Lieuetenant being a doctor of
the laws, which assisteth him in the hearing and decyding of all processes and
differences. They ordeyn further from 6. months to 6, months, 4. governors
which are assistants in the judgment of criminal persons, Four goue^^nors
elected.
when there is question to judge them to death, taking informations of al
things pollitique, as well of the City and suburbs, as generally of the whole
isle, and are also appointed to recei^e all Ambassadors as well Barbaries, as
Christians that come into their isle. They have moreover 12. counseilers which
are called when there are matters of great importance, Twelve councellers.
but above these the 4. Governors do command. There are also created 2. other
officers, Officers for victuals.
which are to take view and acknowledgement of al victuals, and may judge of
small matters being under the value of twenty crowns. Being also curious of
their healthes, they do establish two persons, which by reason of their charges
are called judges of health, for that specially they have a regard that in the
plague time no ship or other strange vessel do enter into their port without
first showing a good certificat that the place from whence they come is not
infected with the plague. Furthermore there are four other officers two of
which are Mahomies, 4. Officers for the ouerseeing of the buildings.
the third a Grecian and the fourth a Citizen, which altogether have the charge
to look unto the old and new buildings, and other mean and pollitike
affairs. Item more, two Lords being Mahomies which have the government of
the masticke, Two Mahomies have the government of the mastic.
being forbidden unto all persons upon pain of death not to gather and sell
the said Mastick, but by their leave and consent: they have also a captain
for the night, and diverse other mean officers, which for avoiding of
prolixitie I will pass over with silence, and yet will speak of two things
worthy of reciting, which I have seen in this I Will, whereof the first is of
the diverse nature of two fig trees, which were showed unto me in the garden
of the gray Friars, which is such, that the fruit of the one which is good to
eat, can never com to be ripe but with the figs of the other, which
notwythstanding are naught to eat, and therefore they use them in this order.
About the time that the figs begin to wax ripe, they tear certain
branches of the fig tree that is naught, and cast the same upon the other
that is good, or else do fasten by the stake certain quantity of the ill
figs, after they have first picked them, out of which pricks do engender
and breed certain small flying worms, which with their bills and stinges
picking the other figs, sodaynely after they are picked, they come to a good
and perfect rypenesse, and as I was informed they have of those fig trees, a
great quantity in that Island. The second thing worthy of memory is, that in
certain Casales or villages of that I Will, are seen an inestimable number of
great red partriges, as tame as though they were chickins or hens of this
country which the country folks do feed by great flocks, Tame partriges which
are led and brought to and fro the fields.
driving them in the day time too go grase in the mountains, and toward the
evening the boys or girls, which do keep them, do call them together with a
whistle or some song: and these Partriges being accustomed to such calls,
incontinently every flock (which sometimes are two or three hundred more or
less) gather to their conductor, which brings them home to their village and
dwelling as though they were hens or tame geese: they go also a feeding in
small flocks alongest the streets of the city and within private houses, but
being carried out of this I Will, they become wild, forgetting their tamenes. A
tribute which the widows of Chio that will not marry must pay
They of Chio (as diverse inhabitants worthy of credit have informed me)
observe a custom used of antiquity, that if a woman after the discease of her
husband, will remain a widow with pretense never to marry again: the Segniorie
co^straineth her to pay a certain piece of money, which they call Argomoniatico,
yt is to (saving the honor and reverence of the Reader) as a cout set at rest
of unfit. Moreover, that if a maiden of the country or city does lose her
maydenhead before she is married, and that she will continue in that occupation,
she is bound to give a duccat unto the Captain of the night, The whoore^ do
pay a trybute unto the captain of the night for thyr license.
and after may use it at her pleasure without fear or danger, and herein lies
the most assured gain which this gentle Captain has in his estate and
office. Diverse great and excellent personages have taken their beginning and
birth in this isle: amongst which were Io Tragicque, Io tragicque.
Theopompe the historia^, Theopompe the Historian.
Theocrite the Sophist, Theocrite the Sophist.
and as the Insula^s say, Homere.
the Poet Homer (producing for a witness those which were called Homerides:
which as Pindare says, were most excellent singers:) Bubale and Antherme
brethren, Bubal and Antherme brethren.
the sons of Antherme the most renowned caruer and grauer of Images were
there borne: which (as Pliny recites) in derision and mockery, made the shape
and proportion of Hipponax the poet Iambique, Hipponax the Poet Iambique.
because of his hardfauourednesse and deformity, and set it out openly abroad:
at which this Poet being full of poetical spyte and indignation in great coler
drew the sword of his wit, that is to say, of his verses, that some dare well
say that he constrained them of despair and anger to hang themselves. Now
after we had soiourned in this isle with all pleasures until the 13. day of the
same month of Septem. about the going down of the sun, we being al gone
aboard and our ankers weyed, ^ailed close along by the isle to the little isle of
S. Stephano, I Will of S. Steph.
which lies at the entrance of the port Delphin, Port Delphin. Cardemille.
and from thence too Cardemille distaunt from the port Delphin 10. miles, and
20. miles from the city of Chio. Afterward setting our course east Northeast
toward the goulph of Caloni, being from the isle of Metelin and distant from
Cardemille 30. miles, and for to be there the next night we sailed along the
land to the port of Segre, which is 20. miles below the goulph, whereas because
the wind was too fresh, we reposed until the break of day. But I will not pass
further without first making a brief description of the isle of Metelin,
following therein the opinions as well of the ancient and late Geographers, as
that which I could learn of the maryners and inhabitants of the country.

Of the I Will of Metelin.

Chap. 9.
MEtelin is an isle in the Sea of Aegee by the ancients first called Lesbos,
and aftewards named Issa, Pelasgie, Mytylene, Mytais: and lastly, Metelim of
Milet, the son of Phoebus, which builded the city, and named it Mytilene
which was not only metropolitan of all the towns of Eolea, but also (as
writes Pope Pius) obtained the empire of the Troyans. This I Will (as writes
Ptolome) extends from the South to the North in distaunce threescore miles,
In his descriptio of Asia the less. chap. 74.
counting from the City of manlee joining to the Promontorie Sigrie, unto the
cape Lesbos aunciently called the promontorie of Sytrie. Cape of Lesbos.
Notwithstanding that the modernes founded on a contrary opinion and ocular
reason, affirm the length thereof to be from the West too the East 110.
miles, and the whole circuit 160. Pompone says, that there were in it, five
cities Antissa, Pyra, Eresson, Ciraue and Mytilene, of which the who^e I Will
bears the name. But Seruie calls it Methine, howsoever it be, Strabo spoke
aright, where he says it to have two great ports, the one, on the direct
South, able to hold above fifty galleys and many other vessels. The other,
being great, sure, and deep, having at the entry thereof a small Island, but
where he says the second to lie on the North part, he may by the view and
eisight only be reproved, being in deed toward the East. Of the City of
Mytelene, was Pithagore one of the seven sages of Grecia: Alcee the Poet, and
his brother Antimenides, a man most valiant at arms: Theophraste and Phanie,
Philosophers Peripatetiques and familiar friends of Aristotle, and likewise
Ario^ the most excellent player on the harp, of whom Herodote speaks very
fable like, saying that he being by certain thieves cast into the Sea, was by
a Dolphin brought safe and sound to the port of Tenare. Of thence was also
Terpandre the famous Musitio^, which joined the seventh string to the
quadricord, after the likeness of the seven straying stars. Sapho, a woman
most wel^ learned in poetry, was also a Lesbian being called the x. Muse and
numbered amongst the ix. Poets Li^iques. She invented the verses which after her
name are called Saphic, and being very fervently in love with Phaon, who being
gone into Sicilia and fearing that she was not beloved of him again, in a fury
and rage of a love dismeasured, she cast her self down headlong from the
mount Epyre into the Sea. In our time are spro^g out of the same two so happy
and renowned Coursaries, Cairadni and Ariadne brethren.
brethren Cairadni and Ariadne Barberousse, which being gone (as being two of
the poorest of the I Will to seek their adventure upon the Sea, were so favorably
co^ducted by fortune, that they both are happily disceased with the name and
title of kings of Alger. The first inahbitants of this isle, after the saying of
Diadore, were the Pelasgiens, for after the Xanthe the son of Priape, king of
the Pelasgiens, had part of the Segniorie of Letia went to Lesbos, which the^
was not inhabited: after the palasgiens, succeeded the Eoliens, and after was
subject to the Empire of Persia, and after that to the Macedonia^s: and
finally, under the Emperors of Grecia, until such time as the Emperor Calo
Iani being driven away by Cartacusan, and afterward recovered ^he empire
through the aid of Catalusio of Genua, and gave unto him in recompense of the
help and succor which he had done unto him for him and his posterity, the
Lordship and domination over this isle. Notwithstanding since that the Turks
have made diverse rodes and spoils into the same, they have finally brought it
under their puissance and dominion. Metelin under the puissance of the Turk.
She produces of the best wines that are in all Graecia and great quantity of
al good fruits for although the most part of the isle is hilly and savage, yet
is therein the midst thereof a valley very good and fruitful.

Of our navigations from the isle of Metelin to Galliopoli:

Chap. 10
From Metelin we sailed alo^g by Natolia or little Asia unto the promontory of
Sigee by the moderns called the cape of Ianissaries right against which by the
distance of 10. miles is the isle of Tenedon, Promontorie Sige^.
so called of one Tenes, which first peopled ye same, and there founded a city
which he called after his name. Pliny in his natural history writes, The
fountayn Ephere.
that in this isle there is a fountain which by natural virtue from the third
hour of the Solsticium unto the sixth: does so abound of water that for a
certain time she batheth and waters the whole plain of the isle, and
afterward during the rest of the year remains dry and full of clifts. Strabo
also affyrmeth, that without the city of Tenedon, Temple of Neptune.
was the temple of Neptune greatly reverenced by the concurrence of the people,
which of al parts came unto it. Alongest this side between the port of Sigee,
and the flood Xanthus otherwise called Scamander are seven diverse ruins and
pieces of walls fou^dations, colomnes pillars and other monuments of the great
and ancient city of Troy by the elders so much celebrated, which ruins by
their long and large extending which they show, is made apparent the greatness
and magnificence of the said so renowned, and in the end most unfortunate city.
The river Sca^^nder.
The river Scamander being above it coming from the bottom of the mount Ida
(which is clothed with all manner of trees, as pinetrees, Serapins, Cypres,
Terebinths, Iemuers and other trees great and little Aroma ticque) runs
softly alo^g the valley of Mesaulon, Mesaulon.
and so issues into the sea, from thence we entered the streit of Hellespo^t,
^trei^e of Hel^espont.
for the safeguard whereof there are 2. strong castles, builded by Mehemet the 2.
co^querour of Constantinople, the one on the one side of Europe, Two castles.
at Charronesse Thracien, and the other in little Asia in the same places (as
they of the country do affirm) where sometimes were the 2. castles of Seste and
Abide so renowned by the fables of the poets in memory of the love of Lea^der
and Hero. Seste which is in Europe, is cituated at the foot of a mou^tain
whereof the circuit is made after the form of a double clauer leaf: to wit:
with 2. towers one within another, every one made in 3. half circles, and the
great compass of the wall in form of a tria^gle which have at every corner a
tower which beats and defends the other, for this castle is and always
has bin well provided of men and munition: the other on the side of Asia, ^byde
in Asia.
whereas stood Abide is more new and strong the^ Seste, for it is in form 4.
square cituated in a plain marish, the most fair and fruitful as in any
place, has bin seen, as well for gardens, fruits, tillage grounds and pastures
which are about it, as for the river of Simois wherewith it is watered, which
coming from the mount Ida (as does the Scama^der) runs along by the castle,
and so issues into the sea: the castle as I have begun to say is in form 4.
square, having on every corner a round tower, and in the midst of the base
court a high tower 4. square like unto a platform, which beats and commands
of al parts, al well and indifferently ra^parded and ditched, and furnished of
good ordinance, specially the curtines which beats al along upon the water
too the seaward. For oftentimes they are assaulted on that side. Before the
gate on the side of the Bourg, there is a great place to keep their markets in,
and a fair Mosquee. The guard having with a loud voice requested us to come
near the shore, we came to an anchor very nigh the castle, wherein when our
patron would follow us, taking the advantage of the stream which there is so
extreem and with such force, A stream very dangerous.
that there is no mariner so perfect, but that it would sore trouble him, and
not finding sufficient depth was so fiercelye cast thwart the nose of our
gallie that it whollye burst the same in pieces. Which the warders seeing, they
came forthwith aboorde of us with small boats, Exaction of those of the guard
upon the passingers.
and after they had seen the safe conduct of the ambassador and understood of
him the news of their army at sea: they gave him to understand that it was not
the custom that ambassadors should pass that straight, without some presents
given to the captain and other officers of the castle, so as to content their
insatiable avarice he gave to the^ certain ducates. Afterward having mended
and new covered a piece of our palliment, our ankors being weighed, we went
that day too come to an ankor at a great village called Maiton, Maito^ a great
village.
which lies on the side that the Seste is of, inhabited with Gretians, which
are all spynners of wool and cotton, I say as well men as women, and of their
thread they make Esclaunis, which are couerlets with long hair. The village
contains about two or three hundred hearthsteds and is cituated upon the
hanging of a mountain near the Sea side, and on the bending of it, which is in
the midst are seen the fou^datio^s of an old castle, and alo^g the streets of
the village and corners of the houses, are pieces of fair columns and other
monuments with certain figures broken, which gives an appearance that it has
in times past bin some renowned city. This place abounds of fair and
fruitful gardens, and is a great country of vines producing great abundance
of good wines, which they preserve in great earthen pitchers, which they bury
in the ground, to the intent too keep the same the longer good. They have also
abundance of pastures and good waters both of wels and fountains: al along
the sea side are seen 36. windmilles, having every one of them 10. wings,
VVindemilles with x. wings.
and also there are diverse of them about the castle of Abide. The next day in
the morning as we were lading of wines which we took in for our galleys, there
came a complaint unto the Ambassador of two Grecian mariners of the
Patronne: which the day before had stolen two gowns from one of the
Inhabitants of that place. Of which the one being taken had presently three
stroppados at the yardes arm of the gally: but the other being better advised
and swifter of his feet escaped. After dinner we departed from this place, and
having a forewinde, sailing along by Graecia, we passed the castle of widows
lying upon the sea coast three miles from Mayton: whereof nothing is seen but
the ruins, under which lies a vallie very fertile of al things. The Greeks do
say that it was there where the Turks first passed out of Asia into Graecia, by
the means of two Geneuoises, which carried them over in their ships for a
duccat a piece, and being passed, killed all the men that were within the
castle, which afterward gave the occasion that it was called the castle of
widows. About 5. a clock in the Evening we arrived before the City of
Galliopoli being 30. miles beyond the castle.

Of the city of Galliopoli.

Chap. 11.
GAlliopoli is an ancient city cituated upon Cherenesse of Thracia at the
point which looks toward Propontide near unto the city of Lamsacque, which
is in Asia the less: some hold opinion that she was builded by C. Caligula,
and other say that she was in times past inhabited by Frenchmen, for that this
word Gallipoli signifies City of the Gauls or Frenchmen, and for that the
Frenchmen do dwell in Gaul, as Nicopoli and Philipopoli signifies the city of
Nicholas and Phillip. She co^teineth 600. households, but the principal
habitations are so ruined that scarce there is any notable thing to be seen, but
that the haven is very good and able too hold a good army of all sorts of
ships^ nevertheless there is a castle which seems in times past too have been
very strong, but now is altogether ruyned, and yet there is an ordinary watch
kept there. In this city are diverse Windmilles, and there are also two
Amarathes, whereof the one is at the going out of the town toward
Constantinople, which was builded by Sinan Bascha, which was in the time of
Mehemet the second, which conquested Constantinople, and the other of Sultan
Baiaset, which lies buried there in a most sumptuous sepulture. Very near
unto it the great Turk has caused to be made a very fair fountain which
springs of very good waters through a conduit as big as a man's arm, whereof
the water is carried too be sold throughout the City for two Aspres the
burden, for they have none other water to drink then well water, which is
neither good nor wholesome to drink: The other Amarathe is within the City:
they have to them both belonging, two fair Mosquees, the City is not
compassed with walls, but is altogether open after the manner of a village,
there are within it many fair gardens and most fruitful trees of al sorts and
very excellent: upon the cape which stretches intoo the sea, is a high
Theater made like unto a Turret eight square, and about the cape are diverse
windmilles.

There are paid two ordinari tributes for every head, as well for men as
women and children, one of which, Tributes or head money.
which is an Aspre is called Piginte, and he that takes it too farm, pays
yearly unto the great Turk, 30000. Ducates, and yet gayneth a great deal,
besides that which he steals: the other is called the Capitanat, in which
they pay two Aspres for euety head, the farm whereof is worth to the great
Turk 60000. duccats* This city is peopled with Christians, Greeks, Jews and
Turks which do use their great trades of marchaundise being a town of great
resort as well from the firm land as the sea, which is the occasion that
victuals there are commonly very dear. The wind being very good for us we
continued our voyage along the costs of Thracia toward Propontide, passing by
Macrotique, Macrotique.
which otherwise is called Longus murus, afterward Byzante now Rodesto, or
Rodosto, Byzante or Rodesto.
being upon the midst of a gulf, (having 30. miles in breadth) leaving the
yles Proconese of the moderns called Mormora, and the Besbiques at this day
called Calanio on our right hand, and from thence passed toward the city of
Perinthe vulgarly called Heraclee, which as the foundations do show has in
times past bin very great. She stands upon the point of a promontory, which
stretches far into the sea, having one of the greatest and fairest ports
defensible against al winds as is or may be seen: which at the entry has
certain small rocks, and enter into it with a South wind. The rest of the
promontory is full of ruins uninhabited except that which is in the straight: and
whereas now the Town stands which toward the sea side is not walled, we
rested there one night, but nevertheless came not a land. And in the
morninge in the dawning of the day being with rowing gotten out of the port,
we found a fresh wind, which sailing brought us before the goulph of
Selimbrie, Goulph Selimbrie.
which the modernes call Seliuree, being an ancient city. Trauishing this
goulph, a Northerly wind came full in the face of us, and thought too have
made us turn back again: but we labored so, that we passed the mouths of
the floods Athiras (which is also called Pidaras, and presently Ponte Picciolo)
and Bathinias now vulgarly Ponte grande, and from thence we went to come too
an anchor at a fair Casal called Flora, which is builded on the brinke of the
Sea, within a wood of Cypres, and diverse other trees. From thence the
Ambassador sent a man by land toward Constantinople, too signify his
coming too his Secretary Phoebus, whom he had left there as his Agent which
was upon a Saturday being the nienteenth of September: having again weighed
our ankers, we recovered by force of oars the Casal of Saint Stephano, which
has a very good port. Casal S. Stephano.
And there are seen certain monumentes of old walls being of great
appearance. The said Casal has a small cape before which lie certain small
rocks: and we perceiving the weather to be very close, came to an anchor in
the Sea: which we had not so soon done, but the rain ouertooke us with
such an impetuosity and violence, that it seemed that the skies would fall.
After supper the rain being ceas^ed, and the ankers weighed, with strength of
rowing we coasted along even right over against the first corner of
Constantinople: in which place are seven towers by the Turks called Iadicula,
within which the great Turks one after another have kept their tresure,
Iadicula,
for the keeping whereof there are 500. me^ ordinarily called Assarelis, all
being slaves unto the great Turk, and which have bin his Ianissaries. Their
chief, called Disdarga, is a man of great praise and authority. From the
said Casal S. Stephano, unto the 7. towers are seen diverse walls ruined, and
many fair mines whereof are taken great quantity of stone too build the
Mosquee of the great Turk: and other edifices of the city. There came too visit
us in a boat a gray friar of Calabria called brother John, with a certain
Grecian being both of the Ambassadors family, unto whom they presented a
letter from his Secretary and Agent, being very glad to hear good news of his
a^^ayres and household: we passed a good part of the night with talk and making
good cheer, for the said Frater had brought with him a great bottle, which
the Grecians call Ocalips full of good muscadel with a quantity of Plaisantin
cheese, certain sauceges and other good and acceptable refreshments, to make us
merry with. Aftarwards when every one had prepared himself too go to his rest
about twelve of the clock, arose a fierce cold wind with a sharp shower of
rain, which continued until the morning, and so soon as it began too
cease, the Ambassador returned the Gray Friar, and we having weighed our
ankors, rowed alongest by the City too recover the point of the Sarail, which
is the second and most eminent corner. The wind and the rain took us
again with such a furour and impetuosite that it euidentlye seemed heaven and
earth would have gone together. Notwithstanding the great desire which the
Ambassador and his, had to join with a place so long desired, taking a good
heart, and setting al fear aside, we did use such force, that in despite of
the rain, wind and furye of the sea, we gate the point of the Sarail, but as
we thought to enter into the channel, we found* the stream that comes from
Bosphore of Thracia, so violent and outrageous: besides that, the wind was
altogether contrary, so as it was not possible for us to enter, but were
constrained not without great danger, to pass over into Calcidonie and
Natolie, Calcedon in Natolie.
and to pass along by the tower of the guard (lying in the sea called the tower
of ^anissaries) to get above the stream, working so forcibly with ores, that
we entered into the port, at the entering whereof were put out all the flags,
ba^ners, streams, and gailliadets of our galleys* and our artyllery charged,
wherewith we saluted them before the Sar^il: and to be short, thanks be given to
God (being the souerain pilot of al those that trust in him) which in so long a
voyage had safely co^ducted us being escaped out of many great dangers we went
to take our harborowe on the side of Constantinople, where the first Dragoman
of the great Turk called Hebrahim, a gentleman of Polonia of the Mahumet sect,
Our arrival at Co^sta^tinople.
and diverse other great personages Turks came to receive the ambassador,
as soon as he was landed accompanied with the Lord of Cotignac, the young Baron
of Lodon, S. Mary, the young Iueusse Serres, and me, with certain others of his
household, and having caused him to light on a fair horse which was brought for
him, was conducted unto the house of Rostan Bascha, The Ambassador being
arrived goes too salute the Rostan Bascha.
who received him with great countenance of friendship. And after being
returned unto the gally, we crossed the channel to go toward Pera, where he
was also received with tokens of great joy and gladness of all the christian
inhabitaunts: the most part of which accompanied him to his lodging, which
happened the 20* day of September, anno 1551. being the 78. day after our
departure from Marseille.

Of the foundation of Bizance now called Constantinople.

Chap. 12.
BYzance called Constantinople, is a city most famous (by Strabo entitled
Illustre, Byzance otherwise Constantinople.
and of Pliny and Justin most noble) cituated in Thracia (now called Roman, a
Region being one of the most fertile in all Europe) upon the goulph of Po^thus,
which separateth Asia from Europe. Description of Constantinople.
The form thereof is three square, whereof the two sides are washed by the sea,
and the ^hyrd joins unto the firm land. The soil thereof is very dele^^able,
bringing forth all kinkes of good fruits, necessary for sustenance of humane
life: the cituation whereof is so well de^^sed and ordered that no ship can
enter, nor go forth but with good will of the Constantinopolitans, being
masters of the sea Pontique, which having 2. mouths, the one coming from
Propontide, and the other from the sea Euxinu^, is by Ovid called t^^ port of
2. seas: Calcedon.
for the distance from Constantinople to Calcedon is but 14. furlongs, Phane.
and the place which by the ancie^ts is called Phane, cituated in Asia (whereas
Jason returning from Calchos sacrificed unto the 12. gods,) has in breadth
but 10. furlonges. But for so much as many great rivers of Asia, and many more of
Europe do fall intoo the black and Euxine Sea* (...) comes too pass that
being full, she gusheth out through the mouth of her with great vyolence intoo
the Sea Po^ticque, and from thence through the streit of Hellesponthus (being
not much broader then three furlongs) into the Sea of Egee. The time of the
building and repayring of Constantinople.
This city according to the saying of many ancient authors, was first builded
by the Lacedemonia^s under the conduct of their Duke Pausane, which was about
the year of the world 3292. and before the birth of Jesus Christ 663. which
after they ^ad consulted with Apollo, where they should plant and settle the^^
abode, and dwelling place, Megaria^s* why they are called blind.
they were by an oracle answered that they should do it eue^ hard by the blind,
which were the Me^aria^s, for that after they were sailed into Thracia, leaving
the good and fruitful coast (where since Byzance was builded) unadvisedly went
and planted themselves either for the oppositio^ most fruitful of the ground of
Asia, or for the vain hope they had for the fishing, they builded there a city
which they called Calcedon: But they found themselves greatly decea^ed, for the
fishes being carried by the violence of the flood, and tide of the Euxine Sea
into Propontide, approaching near unto the banks of Calcedon, Calcedo^ builded
by the Megarians.
being frayed through the whiteness of the rocks do retire streightwaies to
the side of Byzance, which gave occasion unto the valiant Pausanias to fortify
the city with good walls and ra^pards, changing the first name thereof which (as
Pliny says) was Ligos, Ligos.
called the same Bizance. Notwithstanding that Diodore and Polibe do contrarily
say that it was called Bizance, Diodore and Polibe contrary to Pliny.
by the name of a captayn which was the first founder thereof. Pausanias (as
Zonare writes) possessed the same 7. years, during which time Fortune showing
her self an enemy unto his magnificence stuffed the heart of the Athenians
with such an insatiable ambition, that they having brought thither their
forces, after a long siege and diverse assaults did bear away the victory which
the Lacedaemonians seeing could not abide: but with their whole puissance took
their weapons in hand with such pertinacie, that the adventure thereof on the
one side, and the other was very hazardous and variable, and being sometimes
taken again by her first founders, and afterward by her aggressors became in
the end a pray unto both the armies. And after that Seuerus succeeding in the
Romain empire, the Tyra^t Pissinin her mortal enemy being in possession*
Byzance ruyned by Seuerus the Emperor.
Bizance suborned the emperor to lay siege to the same: who not having
sufficient power to overcome the same by assaults, kept the^ besieged the space
of 3. whole years, and in the end through extreme famine constrained them to
yield them selves unto the mercy of the Romans, which was such that after
they had put to the sword all the men of war that were within it, and killed
the magistrates thereof, ruined and cast down to the ground the walls of the city*
and Seuerus afterward to satisfy his cruelty* spoiled the citizens of al their
rights, fra^chises and liberties, giving moreover the land and possessions unto
the Perinthiens. And thus this most famous city remained in miserable calamity,
until such time as Constantine the great emperor did reedify the same in manner
as follows.

The reedification of Bizance by Constantine the great Emperor.

Chap. 13.
COnstantine the great Emperor of the Romans seeking to resist the courses and
robberies which the Parthes daily used toward the Romans, deliberated to
transport the empire into the East parts, and there too build a large city,
which first he minded to have builded in Sardique, and afterward in Troiada a
country of high Phrigia, Troy begun to be new builded.
near unto the cape Sigee, in the place where sometimes stood the city of
Troy, which he began to reedify and to repair the foundations thereof. But
being by a revelation in the night inspired to change the place, caused to be
recommenced the works of Calcedon, A sign given by Eagles.
where certain Eagles (as Zonare writes) being flowen thither, took in their
bills the masons lines and crossing the streit, let them fall near unto Bizance,
whereof the Emperor being advertised, taking the same for a good sign and
divine instruction, after he had taken view of the place, called back the
masters of his works from Calcidon, caused the city to be repaired and
amplified, which according to his name he called Constantinople:
notwithstanding that at the first he had called the same new Rome, as likewise
it was called Ethuse and Antonie, but by the Grecians Stimboli, and of the
Turks Stampolda which signifies a large City. The Emperor now seeing his city
builded and sufficiently peopled, compassed the same with walls, towers and
ditches, building therein many sumptuous temples, adorning it with many
magnifique buildings and necessary works as well public as private: and
afterward for the more beautifying thereof, The palladi^ of Rome brought too
Constantinople.
caused to be brought from Rome diverse antiquities worthy of memory, and
amongst others the Palladium of antie^t Troy, which he caused to be set in the
place of Placote ye great column of Porphyre, which was set up in the same
place, near unto which he caused to be erected a stature of brass, too the
likeness of Apollo of a marvelous bigness, in which place he ordained his
name too be set up, but in the time of the Emperor Alexis Comine this
stature, through a great and impetuous tempest was cast down too the ground
and broken all to pieces. This Emperor lived there many years most prosperously
in happy estate, as likewise did many of his successors, but not altogether
exempt of diverse persecutions* as well by wars, fire pestilence, earthquakes,
as sundry other calamities, until such time as god being bent to punish the
people for their sins through negligence of emperors stirred up Mehemet the
2. of that name, Mehemet the 2. spoyleth and saccageth Constantinople.
and the ^ Emperor, unto the Turks: who being moved of an ardent desire to
bring the christians unto decay: and thereby to augment his empire, being
beyond measure ^elous too see this noble City so flourish before his eyes,
went with a marvelous power both by sea and by land, to give a furious siege
unto the City. The end and issue whereof was such that after a long siege,
battery and diverse assaults, the Infidelles having gotten the walls with a
great hurlement and fury entered into the City, where at the first entrye they
made a marvelous slaughter of the poor assieged without sparyng any age or
degree. Constantine the emperor killed in a press.
The Emperor Constantine they killed in the press as he thought too have
saved him self: and after they hadd cut off his head in derision and
ignominy, they carried the same upon the point of a spear round about the
camp and City. And afterward Mehemet not contenting himself with the
violating and deflouring of the Emperor his wife, The emperesse, with her
daughters, and maidens, ravished, defloured, and after cut in pieces.
his daughters, and other Ladies of honor, by a more then inhumane rage,
caused the^ in his presence to be dismembered and cut in pieces, during the time
of the saccaging which continued 3. days: there was no kind of fornication,
sodometry, sacrilege, nor cruelty by the^ left unexecuted: they spoiled the
incomparable temple of S. Sophia (before by most marue^lous expenses builded by
the emperor Iustinia^) of al ornaments and hallowed vessels, The temple of S
Sophia made a Stews.
and made thereof a stable and a brodell for buggers and whores. This lamentable
loss of Constantinople being chief of the Oriental Empire, and likewise of
the City of Per^ by the Turks called Galata, being the seat of trade of the
Geneuoises, lying hard by Constantinople upon the other side of the Chanel, was
in the year of our Savior 1453. the niene and twenty day of March, some do
say of April, and others of May, after it had remained under the dominion of
the Christians 1198. years. But this is a marvelous thing and worthy to be
noted, that Constantinople being reedified and new set up by Constantine the
son of S. Helene, after the proportion and likeness of Rome, A marvelous
providence.
was by another Constantine son of another Helene, taken, saccaged, and
brought into the hands of the Turks, which for ever shall be an irreparable
damage unto all Christendom. Mehemet after he had thus taken the city
resolving to keep there the seat of his Empire caused in all diligence the
walls to be new made, and certain other places ruined to be repaired, and in
steed of the great number of people, that were there slain and carried away as
prisoners, he caused to be brought thither out of all the provinces and cities
by him conquered, a certain number of men, women, and children, with their
faculties and riches, whom he permitted there to live, according to the
institutions and precepts of such religion, as it pleased the^ to observe, and
to exercise with all surety their handicrafts and merchandises, which ministered
an occasion unto an infinite multitude of Jews and Marannes driven out of
Spain, for to come and dwell there, by means whereof in very short time, the
City began to increase in traficke riches* and abundance of people. This
Mehemet was the first founder of the great Sarail, which he builded at the
entry of ye channel about one of the corners of the city upon the Promo^torie
Chrisoseras, which afterward by the great Turks which successively have
dwelled there, has been greatly beautified and augmented, he founded likewise
upon one of the mounts of the same city, a sumptuous Mosque, Amarathe and
College, enduyng them all with great yearly revenues, Twelve kingdoms and
200* cities by the Turks taken from the christians.
whereat is not too be marueiled for fortune was so favorable to him, that
after he had ruined the Empire of Constantinople and Trebironde, he toooke
from the Christians twelve k^ngdomes and two hundred cities, so that by reason
of his great prowesses and conquests the name and title of great was given unto
him, and to this day remains unto the house of the Othomannes.

Of two marvelous fires by chance happened at two several times within the
City of Constantinople.

Chap. 14.
ZOnar the Constantinopolitan historian, makes mention in his histories of two
fires marueilously happened unto Constantinople, whereof the first was in the
time and empire of Leon the great, spreading it self from the North unto the
South along by Bosphore, too wit, the length of one of the Seas to the other,
and was so horrible and furious for the space of four days, that it devoured
and brought to ashes the whole beauty of the city: namely, the place where
the Senate and citizens, chosen to deliberate upon common affairs, did
assemble. There was also burned another princely house, and a palace joining
unto the cave or den called Nymphee, and diverse other churches and private
houses: the second fire which was in the time and reign of the emperor
Basil, lightened in such sort that it compassed the market of copper, and
consumed to ashes the houses and streets thereaboutes with the palace, A
Library of 120000. volumes.
within which was a Library of 120000. volumes of books, and the stature of
a dragon of the length of 120. foot, which was written in letters of gold, the
Illiade and the Odisse of Homer. The stature of of a dragon 120. foot long
And moreover burned the most renowned Simulachres of Juno, of Samos, of
Minarua, of Lynde, of Venus and of Guide: and finally, devoured the most
pleasantest places of the city.

Of two earthquakes happened within Constantinople.

Chap. 15.
THe said Zonare recites, that during the reign of Anastase chosen unto the
Empire of the East parts, there happened such a great Earthquake, that it
ruined even too the foundations a great number of buildings, not only at
Constantinople, but likewise in Bithinia, and other places therabouts. but the
last, whereof diverse worthy authors have written, namely, Munster in his
Geographi, was so strange and fearful for the space of xviii. days
continually, that with horrible fearfulness and damage it cast down to the
ground the walls of the city, and all the buildings toward the Sea side, and
overthrew all the ditches: it did also cast down the tower where the Turk kept
his munition with five others more: the house of tribute which stood near
unto the wall was overthrown even to the foundation into the Sea, with the
leadinges of the waters and conduites, which with incredible expenses had been
made to lead the waters out of the Danube intoo the City, were for the most
part broken and bruised: and the channel which is betwixt Consta^ntinople and
Pera, was so moved that by great surges, it cast the water over the walls of
both the cities, but the worst of all was that more then 13000. persons
remained dead on a heap: This great Earthquake happened in the month of
September, in the year of grace 1509. in the reign of Bajazet the second of
that name, and the nienth emperor unto the Turks (which succeeded Mehemet the
2,) who with all diligence caused the walls of the city to be repaired.

Antiquities of Constantinople.

Chap. 16.
THe rest of the noble antiquities, which presently are to be found at
Constantinople, are the Hippodrome, Hippodrome.
which the Turks do call Atmayden, which is the place where in times past the
Emperors made the horses to run for the pleasure and delectatio^ of the
people, which beheld the same upon a stage or Theater, which now is altogether
ruined. In the midst of this place was set up upon four bowls of fine
Marber, a fair obelisquie of colored stone all of one piece 50. cubits high
beset with letters Hieroglificque, and nere to it is a great colomne, in y^
which are carved by histories the things memorable, which have been done in
this Hippodrome: there is also another great column near unto it of marber,
and one of bras, made by singular artifice, in form of three serpents, wrong
one within another, and diverse other antiquities which are dispearsed in diverse
places of the City, as the palace of Constantin the great, her first
restorer, which joins to the walls near unto the corner which is toward
the West. The sepulchree of the same Constantine, The sepulcher of Constantin
mad of Porphyre.
which is made all of Porphyre* being in a corner of a street the most
filthiest in all the city. And going toward the gate of Seliuree is to be
seen a great Colomne of Marbre historied after the manner of those of Antonin
and Adrian, which are at Rome. Moreover there are conduit pypes, and diverse
cesternes vauted, supported some by vaultes, and othersom by a great number of
pillars, and diverse other fragments of Antiquities.

Of the Castle of seven towers, by the Turks called Iadicula.

Chap. 17.
Upon the corner of the city which stretches toward Gallipoli, nere unto the
Sea side, there is as before I have said, a very strong castle compassed with
seven great towers, environed with high and strong walls, furnished with a
good quantity of artillery, which castle is by the Turks called Iadicula,
for the keeping whereof there is a captain called Disgarda, a man of great
revenues and authority, which ordinarily has under him five hundred dead
pays called Assarelis, which have all been lanissaries, and have every one of
them for their wages, five thousand Aspres by the year and there the great
Turk keeps such guard, for that he and other Emperors, Turks, his
predecessors, have always there kept their treasures, and yet the great Lord
comes thither very seldom.

Of the Sarail wherein the great Turk dwells.

Chapter. 18
Upon the corner of the city, which the Grecians have called S. Demetrius, and
the ancients the Promontorie Chrisoseras which stretches toward the East,
right against the mouth of the port, stands the Sarail, where ordinarily the
great lord Turk does resede when he is at Constantinople, and this Sarail is
enclosed with strong and high walls, being in circuit about two miles, in the
midst whereof upon a little hill is to be seen a fair and delectable garden,
which beginning on the midst of the mount discendeth toward the Sea there
are diverse little houses and dwelling places, with a gallery, standing upon
columns after the form of a monastarie, round about the which are about 200.
cha^bers, and therabout the great Turk dwells for the most part of the
summer, for that it is a place, both high, of a fresh air, and abounding of
good waters: in times past these inhabitatio^s have bin of the depende^ces of
S. Sophie, but Bajazet the 2. caused the^ to be divided: and in the midst
thereof caused a principal house, to be builded, within the which in the lower
cha^bers to eschew the Northeast wind (of the Grecians called Boree and
Aparctie, as coming from the party of Arctus which in greek signifies a she
Bear, which by the Bosphore Thracien comes out of the great sea) he dwells
all the winter. A little more below, was another small habitation, al made of
very clear glass, joined and tied together with rods of Tin in form of a
round Hemisphere, under which by wonderful artifice passed a fair and clear
fountain, which sweetly disce^ding by the same Hemisphere, spreads over the
whole garden. In this place Bajazet in summer often went to refresh himself:
and pas his sleep over with the sweet noice of the waters: Sarail of Sultane
wife to the great Turk.
but now the most part thereof being ruined, the water has taken his course
toward other places, within this compass is as yet the Sarail of Sultana,
wife to the great Turk, the Sarayl for the young Slaves.
garnished with bathes most magnificque, and nere unto the same a place for
young children, which are pages, being notwithstanding esteemed as slaves, are
there nourished, instructed, and exercised as well in their religion, as to ride
horses, to shoot, and do all other warlyke exercises, even from their age of
eight, niene, or ten years, unto twenty, the ordinary number of these
children being commonly about five or six hundred. There is also a great
stable, within the which the Turk ordinarily keeps forty or fifty of his
most fairest horses. The first and greatest gate, whereby me^ enter into this
Sarail, on the fide of S. Sophia, is very great and well set forth, with
letters of gold, and leaves of diverse colors after the fashion and form
Iamesque, and through the same they enter into a great and large place vnpaued,
at the head whereof between two great towers, is another gate guarded by a
number of Capagis and Ianissaries, who upon the same have their furnitures and
weapons hanging. for there all those that do resort unto the Sarail or court
do accustomably alight of their horses, and from thence go on foot into
another great Court, where the Baschas three times in the week give public
audience unto all comers, The court where the baschas 3. times in the week
do give audience unto all comers.
of what nation or religion soever they be as well in matters politic, as
processes and other differences. And notwithstanding the number of the people
coming together from all parts is very great, yet such silence is kept, that
ye could scarce say that the standers by did either spit or cough: In the
midst of this court is a very fair fountain, set about with diverse fair
cypres trees: and below the garden toward the point of the Sarail, whereupon
the sea beat^th, is another gate, near unto which is a small pauillion, out of
the which the great Turk embarketh, when he will go to pass the time in his
garden, which he has caused too be made in Natolie, in the place by the
Turks called Scutary and by the ancients Calcedon, and for this intent are
ordained two Brigantins, upon one of which he is embarked by Bostaugi Bassi,
Captain of the gardens and gardiners: and the other Brigentin follows after,
being kept and reserved as at a moment to succor and supply the instant
necessities which might happen.

The great lady and wife unto the great Turk.


The great Sarail, or Sarail of women.

Chap. 19.
THere is moreover within the midst of the city, the old Sarail, which
first was builded and inhabited by Mehemet the second, before the edification
of that before mentioned, which likewise conntaineth 2000. paces in circuit,
enclosed with high walls of fifteen cubits, and of thickness accordingly,
without any towers: it has only two gates, whereof the one commonly stands
open, being well guarded by Eunuchs and the other almost never opened, the
porters of this Sarail are Eunuchs.
within this Sarail are diverse small houses, being separated with chambers,
kitchins, and other necessary commodities, whithin which do dwell the wives and
concubines of the great Turk, which in number are above 200. being the most
part daughters of Christians, some being taken by courses on the seas or by
land, The turk has above 200 co^cubin^.
as well from Grecians, Hongarians, Wallachers, Mingreles, Italians as other
christian nations, some of the other are bought of merchants, and afterward
by Beglierbeis, Baschas and Captains presented unto the great Turk, who
keeps them within this Sarail, well apparrelled, nourished and entertained
under straight keeping of the Eunuchs, and every ten of them have a Matrone,
too instruct, govern, and teach them too work all sorts of needle works.
The captain of this Sarail called Capiangassi, is also an Eunuch or a gelded
man, having for his wages threescore Aspres every day, and is clothed twice a
year with cloth of silk, he has under him forty Eunuchs, which supply the
common service of these Dames, of which the great Lord takes his pleasure
when he thinks good: and if it so come too pass that any of them be gotten
with child, he causes her to be separated from the other* augmenting her
estate and pention, accounts her amongst the number of his wives, so as if
she be brought a bed of a ma^child, the same may by order and course succeed
in the Empire. But as for the other by whom he can get no children, he
marryeth them unto his Spachis, or other officers of his court, and is not
permitted, that any other but the great Lord and the Eunuchs of the Sarail,
how greatly soever he be favored, shall be permitted in any manner of wise to
have the sight of them. And therefore to find the means to represent unto you
the manner of their apparel I fell familiarly acquainted with an Eunuche of the
late Barbarousse called zaferaga of nation a Ragusan, being a man of great
discretion and a lover of virtue, which from his tender age had been brought up
within the Sarail, who so soon as he had perceived, that I was desirous to see
the fashion of the attire and apparel of these women, to satisfy my mind,
caused to be be clothed two public Turkish women, with very rich apparel,
which he sent for the Bezestan whereas there is too be sold of all sorts, by
the which I made the draughtes and protractes here represented unto you.

A Gentlewoman of the Turks being within her house or Sarail.


A woman apparrelled after the Surian manner.


A Turkey woman apparrelled after the Moorish fashion.


Of the most famous Temple of S. Sophia and other Mosquees of Constantinople.

Chap. 20.
THe temple of S. Sophia in times past builded by Justinian the 15. Emperor of
the East parts, Justinian fou^der of the ^e^ple of S. Sophia.
was a work of bigness, building, beauty and riches incomparable: the midst
whereof is made in form of a Hemisphere according to the proportion of the
Panthee of Rome (which is the Rotonde:) but a great deal higher and larger.
There are 2. sorts of pillars of fine marbre very great, and of compass such,
as two men can not embrace the same: and afterward another rank of less
height and bigness which are for the holding up of the Cube, which within is
most artificially made with Mosaique figures, garnyshed with gold and Asur and
the inner part of the temple is altogether plastered and covered with great
tables of Porphyre, Serpentines and marbres of diverse colors, and the
cloisters about it are of the same stuff, and making, of a singular beauty and
largenes more the^ ordinary but as forth Images of Mosaique and other flat
pictures, the Turks have scratched out their eyes for that they will not allow
or permit any picture or image, saying, that we ought to worship one god only,
The Turks o^pinion of ima^ges.
the Creator of heaven and earth, and not the walls nor pictures, which are
but dead things, and in whom there is no sense or feeling The covering of this
temple is of led, and the gates (being the fairest in the world) of fine
laten of Corinth: in such sort that in the time of the Christian Emperors it
might justly have been called the most perfect, most rich, and most sumptuous
temple, not only of the parties oriental, but likewise of the whole world.
For it had one hundredth gates, and was in compass more the^ a mile, within
which also were comprehended the houses of the Chanons and priests, and was in
revenues worth more then 300. thousand duccats a year. But incontinent after
the taking of the City the Turks changed the same into a Mosquee, and of
the most part of the cloister, for that it was near unto the Sarail, they made
stables for horses. Besides this magnificque temple of S. Sophia (which is to
say, S. Sapience) there are within Constantinople three other fair Mosquees,
accompanied with their Amarathes (which are as hospitals) fountains and
schools to instruct the poor infants in their laws. The first of which
Mosquees and Amarathes was founded by Sulttan Mehemet the second, Mosques in
Constantin^ple.
which took Constantinople. The second by Bajazet his son, and the third by
Selim the father of Soliman, which now reigns, and they are all three buried
within the same, every one in the place which he had founded. But that of
Mahemet is the fairest and richest, being aninuated with 60000. ducates of
rent, and in bigness and similitude being very like unto that of S. Sophia,
has about it an hundred houses covered with leadd, and round above, made to
lodge their Doctors and priests of their laws, and to receive all pilgrims
and strangers, passingers of what nation or religion soever they be, where
they may refresh and rest themselves, their servants and horses (if they have
any) for three days and there be lodged, meated, and their charges paid for,
as well for the^ selves as their train, without paying of any penny, without
the presinct of the Mosquee, there are moreover an 150. other tenementes for
the poor of the city, unto whom so many as do dwell within the same is given
every day an Aspree, and as much bread as they need: but they esteem that kind
of life so unhappy, that oftentimes the most part of these tenements stand
empty and void: and is doubtless, that in this Country are not to be found
any companies of vagabonnds, ^ewe vaca^oundes in Turks.
which do say themselves to be diseased of the sickness of S. Antonie, S. Main,
or of S. Fiacre, as there are in other our Christian Countries, especially in
France, Spain, and Italy, for there they should not be well welcomed. But if
it shall so happen that if the money ordained for the poor is not there
bestowed, the alms masters do se^d y^ which rests into the hospitals of the
Leapers, sick folks and mad men, for as soon as they find any one of these
fools, doing harm within the city, he is forth with taken up and by force
brought into an hospital therefore appointed, and with stripes and buffetinges
constrayne them to become wise. But as for other sick folks they are gently
entreated, lacking nothing that may serve for their ease, whether it be
Apothecarie wares, surgerie or any other necessary thing. The other two
Mosquees are almost like unto them, but that they are not so great, nor so
rich. There are four other particular buyldinges founded by four several
Baschas, the first by Daat Bascha in the time of Mehemet the second, the second
by Mehemet Bascha, the third by Haly Bascha, and the last by Mostafa: which
was in the time of Baiacet the second.

Of the Bathes and manners of washing of the Turks.

Chap. 21.
IN Constantinople as also in all the other cities Mahematised in Graecia,
Asia, and Africa are a great number of very fair baths, as well public as
private: Bathes publik^ and private.
which according to the imitation of the ancient Graecians and Romans, are
constructed and builded with industry, sumptuousness, and expenses almost
incredible: and above al others those of the Sarails of the great Turk, his
women and his Baschas: yea even the most part of the common bathes are
beautified and set out with pillars in crustures tables and pauements of diverse
marbers rare in color and beautye. These bathes are builded after this manner,
that there are 2. principal great bodies of building round and strongly set up
vawtwise in form of the Hemispherike: and the first wherein they do enter,
which by the ancie^ts has bin called Apoditayre has in one of the corners
thereof a furnace like unto the hot houses of Germanye serving too dry the
shyrtes and other linne^, which do come thither to bath: and in the midst is a
fair fountain of Marber, either of a natural spring or artificial, and round
about the walls are diverse several seats, made the one a little from the
oother, covered with tapistry of Turkey, upon the which they unclothe
themselves, leaving their garments in sure keeping of the Capsaire: and such as
will bath themselves after they have covered their privy members, with a great
blew linen cloth which is given unto them, do first go in to the Tepidarie
too make themselves sweat, and from thence they enter into another great place
of the bath being more higher, and the ^eeling thereof made clear with diverse
windows, too the intent too show the brighter: in the midst whereof is also
a fountain most magnificque casting forth water abundantly, and even hard by
the same is a table of fine Marber, set upon four round bowls, upon the
(which after they have well sweated and have well bathed themselves in a great
vessel of Marber of Porphyre which stands ready at hand) the servants which
there are in great number, require you to lay your self along flat upon your
belly, and then one of these great lubbers after they have well pulled and
stretched your arms as well before as behind in such sort that he will make
your bones too crack, and well rubbed the sooles of your feet, mounteth upon
your back, and so with his feet slydeth up and down upon you, and upon your
raynes, as if he would brouse them in pieces, and then again makes you to
turn on your back, pulling and removing your joints as before is said, and
nevertheless without doing unto you any harm at all, but to the contrary
does so comfort your sinews and strengthens your members, that ye shall be
after it a great deal more fresh, lively and better disposed: and being thus
dressed, ye enter into a little chamber, temperately whoat, where again this
great fellow comes too rub you: and after that he has well soaped and
rubbed your body and your members with a purse of Stammin, or Chamblet, which
he holds in his hand in manner of a glove (in steed of the Strigil which
the Romans used) he washes you with very clear water spryng out of 2.
conduits or fountaynes, the one being whot and other cold, both which do fall
into a basen of Marber, within the which he tempereth it, pouryng out the
same with a fair basen of Copper damasked, and also with a pounced stone he
rubbeth and cleanses the plants of your feet, and then cutteth your beard
and the holes underneath your arm pittes. But as touching the privy members,
they give you a rasour, or rather a Psilothre (which they do call Rusma)
which is a paste which being laid upon the hearye places does forthwith
cause the hairs to fall out. And of this paste the Turks both men and women
do often use for that they do abhor to wear hair in those places: and after
ye have in this order sweated and have been pulled, stretched, rubbed,
scratched, and washed, you do return to the place where your clothes are for
to dry, and make you ready again: and after ye have given certain Aspres in
reward to the servants, and 2* or 3. Aspres unto the Capsayry (which sits at
the entry of the gate to receive of those that come thither to bathe) ye may go
whither it pleases you. Now is to be noted that al nations of what faith or
religion soever they be, are al alike and indifferently received and entreated
for their money in these bathes. But above all other the Turks, Moors, and
generally all the Mehemetised frequent thither most often as well for their volupt
pleasure as bodily health. And principally for, the observing of their law
which comma^deth y^ no Muselmans shall enter into their Mosques* without they
be first well washed and purified, The Mahumatised may not enter into the
Mosques with out first being washed.
these brutish Barbarians esteeming of the outward washing, and not that which
inwardly touches the soul. Behold here so much as touches the bathes, which
now a days are in Turkey which the Turks do ^al Tschimuns, and the manner of
their bathing and washyng. Josephus in his book of the wars of the Jews,
does very amply testify unto us where he speaks of the public bathes which
Herod caused to be made in Tripolys, Herod.
Damas and Ptolomaide, as also Herodian in the thirteenth chapter of his first
book, where he makes mention of Cleander of Phrygia a slave unto the Emperor
Commodus, Cleander.
who pe^ceiuing himself through the means of his master, and the chance of
fortune to be exalted from the estate of a chamberlain, to the captainship of
his guard, durst very well advance himself to come too the estate imperial,
whereunto too attain, after he had gotten together a great mass of goods,
used diuer^ liberalities toward the soldiers and people, and for to obtain^
their good wills, amongst others, caused many public baths to be made, wherein
every man might go to bath without paying of any thing. I cannot also pass
with silence the greatness and magnificence of the costly and sumptuous Thermes
of the Agrippians, Neronia^s, Domitians, Antonians, and diverse other whereof the
ruins are as yet to be seen at Rome the ample discovery whereof I will
nevertheless omit, for avoiding of prolixity* and too return to the entreaty
of our matter in hand, which is too speak as well of the bathes of the women of
Turkey, as we have done of those of the men.

Of the women of Turkey going unto the bathes, and of their apparel and manner
of cleanness.

Chap. 22.
THe Turks wives by ordinary custom and ancient observation, which they do
reserve of the old custom of Asia and Graecia^ do delight at al times to haunt
the bathes, as well for the continuance of their health, as beautifiyng of their
persons which is not to be reputed as spoken of the women of base estate or
co^ditio^, but likewise of the great and notable dames, which ordinarily do
frequent the bathes 2. or 3. times in the week, not the public but their
private bathes, which for the most part they have very fair within their houses
or Sarails, but such as are of the meaner degree go unto the^ at the least
once in the week, if by other they will be esteemed not infamed or scarce
honest. And notwithstanding they will not gladly fail to go thither for two
several occasions, the one being for the observation of their Mahumeticall
law, which as before I have said forbids the^ not to make their prayers
within the Mosquees, except first their bodies be washed and purified,
notwithstanding that few women do enter into the same Mosquees, but such as are
dames of great reputation and authority, the other and principalest reason is,
to have good occasion and honest excuse too go abroad out of their houses,
within the which they are continually closed up for the great jealousy of
their husbands, or rather for the observing of the ancient custom of their
ancetors, which after that sort kept their wives and daughters closed up in
the backsides of their houses, which they call Ginaises: so as the Turkey women
being shut up without permission to go abroad, nor to appear in the streets
openly, except it be going to the bathes, whereto they ne^erthelesse go with
their faces covered too bring their Ielous husbands out of suspicion, which
continually so keep them under subjection and closed in, and oftentimes under
color of going to bathes, they resort to other places where they think good to
accomplish their pleasures, and come home again in good time without the
knowledge or perceiving of their husbands, wherein they fear nothing at al, for
that to those bathes no men do frequent, so long as the women are there* and
there are also certain women which do serve and te^d to such women as come
thither without an^ waiting maids: and likewise that sometimes they do go. 10.
or 12. of them together, and sometimes more in a company as well Turks as
Grecians, and do familiarly wash one another, whereby it comes to pass that
amongst the women of Leua^, there is very great amity proceeding only through the
frequentatio^ and resort to y^ bathes: yea and sometimes become so ferue^tly in
love the one of the other as if it were with men, in such sort that perceiving
some maide^, or woman* of excellent beauty, they will not cease until they have
found means to bath with the^, and to handle and gr^pe them every where at
their pleasures, so full they are of luxuriousnes and feminine wantonness: Even
as in times past were the Tribades, of the number whereof was Sapho the Lesbia^
which transferred the love wherewith she pursued a 100. women or maidens upon
her only friend Phaon. And therefore considering the reasons aforesaid, to wit,
the clensing of their bodies, health, superstition, liberty to go abroad, and
lascivious voluptuousnes, it is not to be marvelled at that these baths are so
accustomably freque^ted of the Turks, and that likewise the women of estate do
so gladly go thither in the morning betimes for to remain there until dinner
time, being accompanied with 1. or 2. slaves, the one bearing on her head a
vessel of brass made after the fashion of a small bucket to draw water with,
and within the same is a fine and long smock of cotton tissed, besides another
smock, breeches, and other like linen with a drugge called Rusma, which being
putuerised and tempered in water, they rub upon all the parts of the body
where they will have the hairs too go of, which incontinently with the sweat
do fall of. This vessel thus garnished is born being covered with a rich
pauillion of velvet or crimson satin set with gold and silver, and hanged with
tassels of silk and gold. The other slave (if there be two of them) carries a
fine couerlet with a fair pillow beer: and in such order the slaves do go
behynd their mistresses, which under their gowns are clothed with a fine
linen smock by them called Barami. Now being come to the place of bathing,
the couerlet is spread abroad, upon the which they unclothe them selves and lay
down their garments and jewels: for their preparation and order is such, that
going to the bathes whither they be Turks, or Christians, the better to be
liked the one of the other, they set forth them selves with their richest
apparel, and most precious tablets: and being thus unclothed upon the
carpet, they turn the vessel with the mouth downewardes, and the bottom
upwards for to sit the more easily, and then the slaves the one of the one
side, and the other on the other side, do wash and rub the body until it
do suffyce: and then do go to repose them selves in a small chamber being
indifferently hot. In which mean space, and during this repast, the slaves do
wash one another. And after they have thus remained in the bathes and whot
chambers so long as it does please them, the slaves do again lay up the
smockes and other linen into the vessel, and so following their maistresse do
return homewards, as ye may perceive by the picture following: after that she
has paid unto the mistres of the bath such sum as the men do pay, The usage
of the baths has been anciently observed of the Scithes.
and as before I have recited. Herodote in his fourth book says likewise, that
the baths of long time past had been much used by the women of the Scithes,
who after they have been well washed in the baths, did with a rough stone
puluerise the branches of Cipres, Cedars and of Fra^kincense, which they
te^pered like unto an vngue^t, wherewith they anointed their bodies and visage,
which caused the^ to savor and smell very sweet: and the next day the unguent
being taken away, made them to show clear and bright, and consequently more
amiable.

A woman of Turkey going to the Bathe.


Of the place called Bezestan and other public markets.

Chap. 23.
Having already sufficiently spoken of the Mosquees, A marathes and bathes
which are in Constantinople, I will not forget to describe unto you the place
called Bezestan, being a house, great, fouresquare and high, made after the
manner of a hall covered, having 4. gates, and as many streets within it,
being round about set with shops, furnished with all sorts of rare
marchaundises and of high prises, as ringes, precious stones, furs of
martirs, Zebelins, Sables, Wolves, Buckes, Foxes, and other fine skins of good
prises, Good cheap^ Pelt^rie.
in respect and comparison of this country: for oftentimes it happens that
he shall have the whole furring of a long gown, al of fine martirs, for
fourscore or a 100. duccats, where here you shall not have the^ for 3. or 4.
times so much. Al sorts of cloth of gold, of silver, of silk, chamblets, and
fine Mockados, bows of Turkey, Targets and Bucklers, and other merchandises
very rich and necessary. And there are also to be sold unto them that do
bid and offer most for them, Slaves sold as horses are in markets.
an infinite number of christian slaves of al ages and nations, in such order
as we do use to sell horses, for such as do cheapen them and are desirous to
buy any of them, do view their eyes, teeth, and throughout the whole parts of
the body, yea cause them too be stripped stark naked, and see them go, to
the intent they might the better know the defaultes, which of nature might be
in them, or imperfection of their persons, a thing most pitiful and lamentable
to behold: I have there seen stripped and 3. times visited in less then an
hour, on one of the sides of the Bezestan, an Hongaria^ maiden, being of
thirteen or fourteen years of age, and of beauty indifferent, which in the
end was sold and delivered unto an old merchant a Turk for four and
thirty ducates, I hope with God his help in my second volume to treat more
particularly of the pain, calamity and miserable servitude wherewith these
poor christian slaves are entreated by the hands of these cruel Barbaria^s.
The Bezestan stands every day open until the after noon, except upon the
Friday which is the festiual day of the Turks, The Friday is unto the Turks
as the Sunday to the Christians, and the Saturday to the Jews.
as the Sunday is unto us, and the saturday unto the Jews. There are besides
this diverse other public places to sell upon the market days: one for old
apparel and other things, as Saint. Thomas Apostle is in London, and the
lousy mart in Antwerpe: and the other for all sorts of gold works, and of silk
wrought with the needle, and in the Sadlers hall are sold many fair furnitures
for horses, vessels of gold and other fine things, fair painted after the
Damaskin fashion, or after the Iamesque sort, fayrer then in any place in
Turkey. But the aforesaid Bezestan is the place where the most costly things
are sold.

A Woman Turk going through the City.


A Woman Turk leading her children.


Of the city of Pera or Galata

Chap. 24.
PEra or Galatha, which ancie^tly was called Cornubyzance, is a city of great
antiquity, Pera Galata, Cornubizance
builded by the Geneuoises, who sent thither one of their Colonies, and is
vulgarely called Pera by a Greek word which signifies beyond, for that it is
cituated beyond the Canal very nigh unto constantinople, Pera signifies beyond.
and men do pass from the one town to the other, with barks called Permes,
it is well to be gone by land, but that it is in compass round about 12.
miles. As for the haven it is one of the sayrest and commondiousest, which as I
think is in all the world, for in circuit it contains more then four or five
great miles, and the breadth at the entrye thereof is more then one mile, and
in some places half a mile. The depth thereof is such, that there is no ships
or Gallio^s of what bigness soever they be, which cannot ankor on both sides
even to the very houses sides. This city of Pera is builded partlye on the
midst and partly on the hanging of an hill, Description of Pera.
being in compass little less then three miles and is separated by walls in
three parts, within one of the which do dwell the right Peratins, in the other
the Grecians, and in the third the Turks, which have the whole government
thereof, and a certain of Jews, Pera inhabited by three sundry nations.
for that the most part of the Jews do dwell in Constantinople. The
proportion thereof is in a manner confused, for that she is broad in the midst
and lowest parts, and long at the further end. She is very well beset with
houses, which nevertheless are neither greatly fair, and less commodious,
notwithsta^nding there are diverse tayre fou^taines, led through pypes out of
the river Danube, and other floods nearer unto the^. All the whole length of
the City is washed with the springs of the Sea: without the gate which is
toward the haven side, is the arcenal of the great Turk, An Arcenal of 100*
Arches.
which has near an hundredth arches or vaultes to build and hale the galleys
under covert and dry. And on the further part of the havens mouth, is the gate
of Bombardes or gunnes, which is the place where artillery is cast near unto
the sea side, where are to be seen diverse great and little pieces as well of
brass as of iron being those which the Turks have won of the Christians in
Hungary, Artillery gotten of the christians.
the Rhodes and diverse other places in Christendom. On the height of the other
part of the city, are the vynes and gardens well tilled, accompanied with diverse
pleasant houses, for the most part appertaining to certain Christians, of
whom the most part does dwell at Pera, and few at Constantinople, for so the
great Turk wills and commands. The Frenchmen and true Peratines do live
according to the laws of the Romish Church, which differs much from the
religion of the Graecians, which is the occasion that they do not greatly love
one another, for the diversity of their faith* whereby it comes to pass that
if a Greek do marry with a Perotte, Francke, or a Grecian woman with a Perot
Franco, every one of them do live according to their religion and do therefore
not agree very well together. There is also without the city the Sarail of the
Azamoglans or Ianissaries, Sarail of the Azamoglans.
and the places ordained for the burying of the Jews and Turks. Churchyards.
But the Ambassadors of France do ordinarily keep their residence within the
City, as likewise do the pledges or ostages of the Venetians and Florentines,
The Ambassadors of France Venice and Florance, were lodged in Pera.
as well to maintain the leagues and confederacies of the amity which they have
with the great Turk: as for their traffic and trade of merchandise, which they
do there exercise, and likewise through out all the parts of Leuant.

Of the women and maidens of Graecia, and the Peratines Franques of Pera or
Galata.

Chap. 25.
The apparel of the Graecians and women of Pera is exceeding rich.
THe apparel of the women and maide^s of Graecia and the Peratins Franques is so
rich and costly, that he that had not seen it, would scarce believe it, for
that they do not only set al their care and study to be brave and well
attired, but that which is more, they do oftentimes wear about them their
whole substance as they go along the city to their churches or bathes, for
there is not so base a citizens or merchants wife, which does not wear her
gowns of velvet, crymsin, satin, or damask, set with passament lace and
buttons of gold or silver, and the meaner sort, of taffaties and figured
silks, with many chains, handrings or bracelets, carquants, tablets, and
other Jewels, garnished with diverse stones, some of them being fine and some
again of small value: and on their head (I speak of the maidens and newly
married) they wear a round cappe of crymfin satin, or cloth of gold figured,
wound round about with a band of two inches broad, being of silk and gold, set
with fine pearls and stones very costlye: their smockes are of cypress or
taffata colored, hemmed and ouercast with gold, like as the Turks do wear:
they forget not also to attire themselves after such a sort, that if a man did
see them as they do march, he would take them to be Nymphs or Spouses, which
is the occasion that the most part of them specially the married sort, Excess
of apparel procures unshamefastness.
do in steed of virtue and chastity give themselves too all voluptuousness
and unshamefastness, for if the husband will not or cannot intertaine them in
apparel according to their will and desire, they will procure one or more
friends, to furnish them at pleasure, which amongst them is very common, and
according to the custom of the country almost ordinary. But it is also very
true, that the women being somewhat aged, notwithstanding they are richly
apparrelled, yet do wear the same modestly, for as they go about the
streets they do wear a fine white linen cloth, hanging down behind even
to the calfe of the leg: but the widows wear the same colored yeallow
with saffron, marching with great gravity, as ye may at large discern by the
three figures following.

A Gentlewoman of Pera Franque.
A Gretian woman of estate of Pera Franque.


A Maiden of estate of Pera.


The third book of the Nauigations and peregrinations oriental of N. De
Nicolay of Daulphine, Chamberlain and Geographer ordinary of the king of
France.
Of the origin, life and bringing up of the Azamoglans being children of
tribute, levied upon the Christians being Subjects and tributaries too the
great Turk.

The first Chapter.
AZamoglans are children which the Turk sends for to be levied in form of
tribute from 4. years to four years, throughout al Grecia, Albania, Valaquia,
Seruia, Bossina, Trebisonda, Mingrelia and all other provinces of his Dominion
of the Christians dwelling within the same, Of 3. male children one levied for
tribute.
taking away by tyranny more then barbarous, of every three male children one,
at the choice and will of the Co^missarie, and notwithstanding that all
christians dwelling in these countries, are not subject unto this kind of
tribute of souls, yet are they so over charged with such excessive Subsidies
and exactions of money that oftentimes not having wherewith to pay him, they are
also constrained to give and deliver their own children into bodily servitude,
Compassion ought to be had of these christian slaves.
and eternal perdition of their souls, a tyranny I say again, most cruel
and lamentable, and which ought too be a great consideration and compassion
unto all true christian princes for to stir and provoke the^ unto a good peace
and christian unity, and to apply their forces jointly, to deliver the
children of their christian brethren out of the miserable servitude of these
infidels, which by outrageous force ravish these most dear infants and bodies,
free by nature, from the lappes, of their fathers and mothers, into a servitude
of enmity more then bestiall, from baptism to circumcision, from the company
of the christian faith, to servitude and Barbarous infidelity, from childly and
fatherly kindness to mortal enmity toward their own blood: 200. Co^missaries
ordained for leuying of these poor children.
for the executing of these lamentable leuyings are ordained more then two
hundred Commissaries, which returning to Constantinople, bring with them an
incredible number of these children, amongst which the most fairest are chosen
to be put into the Sarail of the great Turk, where they are nourished and
brought up in the law of Mahomet, and by diverse masters being Eunuchs, are
instructed well to ride horses, shooting, and all other exercises of arms and
agilitie, to the intent in process of time to make them the more obeysant and
apt too support all pains and travails of the wars, or else they do teach
them to learn some art or occupation, according to the capacity of their
spirit: and such as amongst them are found to be the most grossest, they are
put some to carry water and wood into the offices some other to make clean the
Sarail, or in the winter too gather the snow which falls from heaven and for
to carry the same under the ground into a place called Carlich, where it
preserves all the whole Summer in his accustomed nature and coldness without
melting, Snow preserved all the summer long.
and this being reserved in these cold places serves in whotte weather too
refreshe the great Turk his drink: the other are made gardiners or cooks, or
are put to serve the Ianissaries Spachis, or captains, unto which degrees by
succession and time as fortune and virtue directs the^, they may attain unto
themselves: they have for their wages two or three Aspres a day, Wages and
entertainment of the Azamoglans.
and are apparrelled and hosed twice a year with course blew cloth, wearing on
their heads a high yealow hatte made after the fashion of a sugar loofe, and
are under a captain called Agiander Agassi, which has for his provision
thyrtie Aspres a day, clothed and apparrelled at the charges of the great
Turk. The finest of these Azamoglans, are kept prettily apparrelled, according
to their fashion: And although they have no skill of the art of music, they
do nevertheless give themselves to play on diverse instruments, and most
commonly going in the steetes they do sound upon a thing very like unto a
Cittern, which they call Tambora, Tambora like unto a Cittern.
too which sound, they do accord their voices with such an evil favored and
unpleasant harmony, that it were bad enough to make a Goat to dance. Of these
instruments, and of their apparel, ye may see the form naturally set forth
(as all the other are) by the figure following.

Azamoglan or Iamoglan a child of tribute.


Of the Azamoglans rustique.

Chap. 2.
THE Deputies and Co^missaries appointed for the leueing of the christian
children, after they have put the fairest and pretiest of them into the Sarail
of the great Turk, send the other being the most rustique into the Natolie
(being little Asia toward Bursie and Caramanie) to labor and till the ground,
and keep the cattaile in the fields, to the end to use them to labor,
indurance in heat and cold wether, and to learn the turkish language. And
afterward at the end of 4 years, against which time others are levied, they
are brought to Constantinople, and delivered to the Aga of the Azamoglans or
Ianissairots, which distributeth them in the service of the Ianisses, or else
causes the^ to be taught in some art or occupation serving for the wars, and
thus exercising in diverse places their apprentiships of Ianissairots, The
Azamoglans do become deadlye enemies to the Christians and their own parents.
are entertained and brought up (as the others are) at the charges of the great
Turk, except for the time yt they are in the Natolie, where they are nourished
and apparrelled at the charges of those whom they do serve. Of these
Azamoglans, christian children Mahometised, the venomous nature is so great,
mischievous and pernicious, that incontinent after they are taken from the
lappes of their parents and instructed in the laws of the Turks, they do
declare themselves, as well by words as deeds mortal enemies unto the
Christians, so as they practice nothing else then to do unto them all injuries
and wrongs possible, and how great or aged soever they become, they will never
acknowledge their fathers, mothers, nor other friends: for by example I have
seen in Andrinople, The great Turk being there a natural uncle of the late
Rostan first Bascha and brother in law of the said Lord, Unnatural
ingratitude of Rostan Bascha
which his poor uncle and certain his nephews christian men, went openly a
begging through the City, without that the said Rostan (being sprung up of
the raze of the Azamoglans) would vouchsafe once to know them, and much less
too do them any good, and yet some are found amongst them, (but very seldom)
that by their own goodness, virtue and nobleness of heart, have not so
unnaturally forgotten their blood, native country, nor humanity and true
religion, but have inclined, and finally returned unto their natural and
primitive virtue: as of late the most valiant knight George Castriot, Georg
Castriot called Scanderbegus being brought up as an Azamoglan reuolteth against
the great Turk and sets his Cuntrie at liberty
by the Turks called Scanderbegus, which is to say the Lord of Alexandria,
the most manly of the manly, and most valiant of the valiauntest, who from his
childhoode being taken away from his father John Castriot Despot of Seruia,
his country being desolated, and his people overthrown and carried away, he
was brought unto the Turk, was Mahumetised, and put into the Sarail^ and after
he had in feats of arms done very great services, and marvelous prowisses
under the great Turk Amurat the second of that name, finally revolted against
him, and returning to the christianity, revenged and set at liberty his
country and people, and so long as he lived, kept the same against the
puissa^ce of the great Turk making a strong head against him, of whom he had
learned the forces and understood the falsenesse of his religion, and the
knavery of the Turkish nation. But of these or like very few are found, so as
now a days the renyed Christians, are a great deal worse unto their
christian Brethren, yea unto those of their own blood, then the natural
Turks are, Unhappy bringing up Passes nature
so does this unhappy bringing up of them deprive them of their first nature,
and inclination,

By the figure following (which is of the Azamoglan Rustique) may almost be
seen and judged, their gesture and great manhood.

The Azamoglan Rustique.


Of the origin and first institution of the order of Ianissaries.

Chap. 3.
Having already by descriptions and figures given amply and clearly enough to
understand the vpspring of the Asamoglans I have thought good by the same
means to describe unto you the estates and dignities unto which consequently
they may from degree to degree come and attain unto, beginning with the
Ianissaries which are likewise of the number of those which have been taken
away from the hands of their fathers and mothers, brought to leave the true
faith and light of Jesus Christ, and to follow the dark and blind sect of the
false prophet Mahumet. Their order was first instituted by Amurat the 2. of
that name and 7. Emperor of the Turks: The order of the Ianissaries instituted
by Amarat the 7. Emperor of the Turks.
and their number has been since augme^ted by his son and successor Mahomet
Conqueror of the great city of Constantinople, and usurper of the oriental
empire, so as the number of them now is 1200. in their order, which is the
principal strength and most puissaunt force of the army of the great Turk. For
by their help Amurat and such as have holden the Empire after him, have gotten
and overcome diverse battles: and overcome all the East parts, without that
ever it has been proved that in any day of battle those Ianissaries have bin
overcome. The order of which is nothing else then the following of the
Macedonian Phalangue with the which Alexander the great extended his domination
and monarchy almost upon all the regions of the earth, and seems that the
Turks occupiers of his empire are also imitators of the warlike discipline of
the old kings of Macedonie, Armure of the Macedonians.
although the difference of their weapons is most evident, for that the
Macedonians covering their heads with sallettes, and their bodies with curates
carried long pykes with shields or bucklers of iron cast upon their backs, to
the intent promptly to take the same again, and to cover themselves therewith
when it should come to fight hand to hand with swords. But the Ianissaries or
the most part of the^ wear other arms, Armure of the Ianissaries.
as a Cemiterre, and a dagger with a little hatchet hanging at his girdle, using
also long harquebuses which they can handle very well: the other do carry half
pykes. And to the intent they should seem the more cruel and furious in the
aspect of their faces, they do not suffer their beards too grow but above the
lips, and let their mustaches grow very long, gross and thick: and the rest
of the hairs of their beards they do cut away with the rasor, as also those
of their head, except a tuffe of hair on the top of their head, to leave some
hold to take up their heads being stricken off by the enemy, if it should chance
them to be overcome, so as by such defiguration they do show very horrible,
hideous, and fearful, no less then in times past was the cruel Caligula, as
the histories do witness of him. They are clothed twice in the year with course
blew cloth, as the Azamoglans are, and on their heads of a peculiar
prerogative, in steed of a sallet or morlion, they wear a hood of fine white
felt, which they call Zarcola, set out in the forefront with a garlande of
fine drawn gold, with a socket of silver and guilt, set up right in the fore
part, enritched with rubies, turquesies, and other fine stones of small price,
within the top of which socket they set such plumes of feathers, as they do
wear. And yet this is not permitted unto every one of them, but only to those
who in the wars have done some notable feate in their person. Their order
universal is distributed in tenths, hundreths, and thousands: every ten of
these Ianissaries going to the wars have a pauillion or tent, Distribution of
the order of the Ianissaries.
and a tenth person in their language called Oda Bassi, which distributeth and
parts amongst them the offices of the chamber, as to the one to cut the wood,
the other to dress up the pauillion, and the other to make ready their meat,
an other to keep the ward, and so consequently all the rest: and by this order
of equality, they live together as in a fraternity, quietness and incredible
concord. Moreover, they have their Bolu^z Bassis being chiefs of hundreths, and
the Chechaya, or Protogero which is chief of a thousand or Lieuetenant
general over them, and over al these is sovereign captain one called Aga,
being a man of great authority and reputation. Al these captains and chiefs go
on horseback: and in their apparel do much differ from the Ianissaries, as
shall be seen in their places. The wages of the Ianissaries are not alike, for
the one has more and the other less: they have from 4. to 8. Aspres by the
day, according to the estimation of the person, it is not to be thought that
either favor or recommendation shall stand them in steed for the advancing of
them to any higher degree, for every of the^ have their wages augme^ted
according to his merits and warlike qualities, Wages of the Ianissaries.
for that he which in the wars takes upon him, or puts in execution any
act of valiant prowess in the sight of every man, atte^deth his good or evil
fortune: moreover, since yt these Ianissairies have perceived their company to
be become so great in number, force and authority, they have usurped and
maintained such a bold advantage, that so soon as their Emperor is dead,
incontinently are given unto them for a prey and pillage all the money, clothes
merchandises, and moueables of the Jews and Christians, The spoil of the
Merchant Jews and christians given unto the Ianissaries by the new Emperour^
which for their haunt and traficke of merchandise, both by Sea and land, do
dwell or frequent at Co^sta^tinople, Pera, (or Galata) Andrinopole, Salomique,
Bursia, and other places of the dominion of the great Turk, for otherwise being
called too swear unto the new emperor succeeding, they will never swear
fidelity unto him, before he have first granted unto the^ pardon for this kind
of pillage and in form of a gift or reward given unto the^ for a welcome, this
spoil made upon ye Jews and christians: Being a custom certainly very
barbarous and cruel and more then tyrannical, which reasonably to consider
as well the time past, present, and too come, is a true and manifest token of the
ruins threatened of this Oriental empire; which by the same forces whereby now
it is mainteyned, shall one day be clean overthrown: for even as the Roman
Empire (without comparison both greater and better ordered the^ that of the
Turks, was ouerthrown, and in the end brought into decay from the time that the
Caesar's and Antonines failed, and the Pretorian legions (which now adays
represents the estate of these Ianissaries) began to become rulers over their
masters, under pretext of such a Military gift: even so by these means shall
it happen unto the Turks, for that was the beginning to make the empire unto
the world so odious, that from the election of the estate being come to a
succession inheritable, was in the end made poison, and by the bands Pretorians
and other the legions Castrenses, set at a price and delivered unto him that
offered most for it, and that under the title of a Militaire gift. And also the
emperor chosen by such corruption being once rid, and void of money, those very
same which had elected him slew him for to have a new one full, and ready to
give, with who^ in few days after they dealt as with the former, as also they
did by ye old Iulia^, with Partinax Maximia^, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Caracola,
Heliogabulus, and diverse other, whereby in the end the Roman empire which
before was the monarchy of the whole world ca^e unto ruin and decay, and was
ruled in diverse regio^s by sundry emperors tirants, being chosen in every place
by their Legionaries who sold the title of the empire for a gift corrupted, and
so finally fell in decay that of the great name Imperial (in times past
chief of the world) there is almost nothing left then a shadow thereof, and
that through an usurped arrogance under color of a gift Military used by the
Pretorians Captains and soldiers. And likewise according to the pleasure of
this Monarque, it shall happen unto the empire of the Turks, and that through
the faction of these Ianissaries, which one day shall choose a great Lord to
their own will to wit, one that shall give most unto them and suffer them to
take al, whereupon afterward they shall chase him out of the empire, or rather
kill him for a recompense of his deserts: therefore this warning pronosticated
and evidently founded upon such pillage and robbing of the merchants,
Aduertisment for all princes
Jews and christians, may serve for all Princes that they do not suffer their
people to be spoiled, for whose defense they are chosen and ordained, nor yet
their subjects to be robbed through the lice^tious orders of the soldiers, for
fear least they by such custo^able permissio^ do become arroga^t, do not
ouermatch their chief, and be not the causers of his ruin: as (if he look not
unto it) it cannot choose but must happen unto the great Turk, if he cut not
his Ianissaries from such outrageous pillage, and constrain them to content
themselves with their ordinary wages, which are paid unto the^ from 3. moons
to 3. moons, and as we might say from 3. months to 3. months, for whereas
we reckon by the months, the Turk counts by the moons, after the order of
the greeks, which called the^ Neomenies, which signifies new moons.

Of the Ianissaries going to the wars ye may see the natural draught by the
figure following.

The Ianissarie going to the wars.


Of the Ianissaries which are continually about the gates of the great Lord, or
at Constantinople.

Chap. 4.
OF the Ianissaries some are married and some not married, The Ianissaries
unmarried in time of peace do keep watch in Constantinople.
and for the dwelling and lodging of those which have no wives, are ordained 2.
quarters within the city of Constantinople, where they do dwell in time of
quietness and peace, and do ordinarily every day and every night by change and
turns to the number of forty or fifty keep watch and ward within the
streets, to the intent that no question or strife should be moved or any
robbery be committed within the city bearing none other weapon then only a
long staff of a cane of the Indies or of some other wood, for that it is
forbidden that none of what law, estate or quality soever he be, shall carry
any weapons about him. The order in living of these Ianissaries, is that they
lay together a certain number of aspres by the day for their daily provision
which is prepared by a steward and a cook, who do provide their victuals: and
as for the rest of their personal service, those which amongst them have the
least wages, do serve by bond, for to get part of their expenses, by the other
which have more, and in this manner without any woman they do order their
Economy. The Ianissaries which are married do abide and dwell in the towns and
villages of Graecia and Natolie with their wives, living particularly by some
kind of means as they think good for the maintenance of their household. And
of both these estates of Ianissaries married or unmarried, diverse of the^ are
sent abroad for the assistance and service of strange Ambassadors of what law
or nation soever they be, being come unto the court of ye great Turk for any
kind of business, Every Ambassador has 6. or 8. Ianissaties for his guard.
so as every Ambassador has 6. or 8. waiting on him for his guard,
conservation or surety of his person, his house and family, so as to them or
none of theirs be done any wrong or injury, which if any should attempt to do,
these Ianissaries have full authority for to punish such by beating them with
a staff upon their belly, and buttocks, yea and sometime under the soles of
their feet, without that any dare withstand or resist them, such is their
great authority. And for this assured guard they have of the Ambassadors above
their ordinary wages 4. Aspres of pension by the day, but upon that they must
find themselves: and besides this they do stand in hope, that after they have
well and truly served the Ambassadors, unto whom they are set over as their
guard, by the approving, good report and laudable attestation of them for their
merits and good service, they may obtain of the great Turk augmentation of
their wages, or aduacement unto a more higher degree, to wit, of Spachis
Zainligelers, Zagarzis or other more higher estates. But when these men become
to be old, A commendable order for intertaining of the old Ianissaries.
so as they can serve no longer in the wars, or that upon any other occasion
the great Lord will have them to be discharged of the states of Ianissaries,
they are sent as Assaries, which is to say, keepers of castles and towns, who^
we do call dead pays, and the chief of them are made keepers of the castles,
having every one of them like wages as before they had: by reason whereof none
of them can decay into such miserable poverty, but that by reason of their
wages ordinary, they always have good means to live.

The figure following does lively represent unto you the proportion of the
Ianissary about the gates of the great Turk, or at Constantinople.

The Ianissarie or Ianissarler, being a soldier on foot, and of the ordinary
guard of the great Turk.


Of the Bolukz Bassis being captains of 100. Ianissaries.

Chap. 5.
THe Bolucks Bassis are chiefs of a band or captains of a 100 Ianis^aries,
having a pension of 60. Aspres by the day, mounted on horseback, and
apparrelled according to the manner, presented by the figure following. Like
unto which are also they whom they do call Oda Bassis, which are chief of the
cha^bers, or tenthmen. And although they are apparrelled after the fashion of
the Bolucz Bassis, yet have they but 40. Aspres by the day. Their number is 3.
or 4. hundredth, and their office that when the great Lord goes to the Mosquee,
or into the fields, to sit upon fair horses, well and richly harnished, and in
very good order, before the esquadre of the Ianissaries, being in their hands
a lance or light spear after their fashion: and upon their saddle bow, their
roundel and the Busdeghan (being the mase of arms) and being thus mounted and
armed with their great tufts of feathers upon their heads, they seem in their
appearance proud and hawty, and fearful to those that do see them coming a
far off, being of such a show, that the number of them which is about 400.
shows more in sight, then a 1000, of our horses would do. These Bolucz
Bassis being grown into age, and discharged for that they can serve no longer
in the wars, are committed as Captains to keep the places, fortes and
castles with a recompense equivalent unto their accustomed sallery and wages.

Boluch Bassi Captain of one hundredth Ianissaries.


Of the Ianissarie Aga, being Captain general of the Ianissaries.

Chap. 6.
THe Captain general of the Ianessaries by the Turks called Ianissarie Aga, or
simply Aga, or Agach, which in their language signifies a staff, has a 1000.
Aspres in wages by yt day, and 6000. duccats of Timar, which we do call pe^sion
and is clothed 5. times in the year with good cloth of gold and silk. And
moreover is furnished of victuals, and all other things necessary for the
supporting of his house and estate: he has under him a Chechaia or Protegero,
Chechaia or Protegero.
which is as his Lieuetena^t general over all the Ianissaries, having for his
wages 200. Aspres a day and 30000. Aspres of pension. He has under him also a
Ianissairiazigi, which is to say, a Cleark of the Ianissaries, which has for
his stipende a 100. Aspres by the day, but no yearly pension.

This Aga has 2. or 3. hundredth slaves of his own for his service, The
Ianissarie Aga does sometimes marry the daughters or sisters of the great Turk.
and is a man set in such estate, dignity, and authority, that oftentimes it
happens that he marries the daughters or the sisters of the great Turk. And
whenever he keeps his court and house open, which he does twice in the
week, he is bound to give a breakefast or repast unto the the Ianissairies,
and cause the^ to be served with bread, rise, mutton and water: and they are
bound to present themselves every morning at his house, to know whether he will
command them any thing, and thereupo^ pro^ptly too obey him: and as often as
the great Turk goes into the country, or too the Mosquee, the Aga rydeth
alone after the Esquadre of the Ianissaries, mounted upon some fair Turkey or
Barbary horse, the saddle, and other furnitures wrought with goldsmithes
works, and set with precious stones, he being clothed in a long gown of cloth
of gold frised, or else of velvet or Crimson satin, as ye may see in the
figure followinge, which I have only represented on foot, hoping in the
third volume to set him forth, marching on horseback in his order as also all
the other household officers of the great Turk.

Aga captain general of the Ianissaries.


Of the Solaquis, archers, and of the ordinarye guard of the great Turk.

Chap. 7.
THe Solaquis are 300. in number, 300. Solaqu^^
chosen and picked out of the most strongest and most excellent archers amongst
the Ianissaries, for the ordinary guard of the body of the great Turk: and
are al clothed in one livery of damask or white satin, wearing their garment
long behind, and before short, and tucked up with a large and rich Turkey girdle
of gold and silk: and upon their head a high hat of white felt, and set
behind a great plume of Estrige feathers of indifferent great price. They
wear for their arms a Cemiterre and in their hand a bow gilded, being bent
with an arrow ready to shoot, and a quiver upon their back. And whenever
the Turk goes into the fields, or to the Mosquee, they march in this order two
and two about his person, to wit, a rank on the right side, which are
lefthanded, and another upon the left being right handed, observing this order,
because that if it should happen for necessitye, or pleasure of the Lord: it
should behooue them to loose their bows, To turn the back toward the great
Tur^ is accounted great irreverence.
they should not turn their backs toward him for that they take the same for
a great irreverence, shame and dispraise, and upon this occasion they are
called Solaquis or Czolachers, which is to say left handed men. Now if that the
Lord going through the country, must pass through a River or brook, they must
also wade through it, but true it is that if the water do come unto their
knees, the Lord gives every one of them for a present fifty Aspres, and if
it pass above the gyrdlesteed, they have a hundred Aspres: and if they must
wade deeper one hundred and fifty. But if the water be too furious and deep,
they pass through it on horseback, and is to be understood, that they have
not such a present at every River which they do pass: but only at the
first, and at the other nothing at al. Their wages are from twelve to fifteen
Aspres a day, and are clothed and hoased twice a year as the other
Ianissaries, but are not subject as the other are to watch or ward, nor go
unto the Sarail, but when the great Lord means to ride into the fields or
to the Mosquee. They have two Captains called Solach Bassis, which have every
of them threescore Aspres a day, their liueries and other necessaries, as other
Captains have and go on Horseback.

Solachi or Solacler archer ordinary and of the guard of the great Turk.


Of the Peicz or Laques of the gerat Turk.

Chap. 8.
BEsides the number of these Solaquis, the great Lord has 40. Lackies being
Persians, called in their language Peicz or Peiclars, every one having eight or
ten Aspres by the day, and twice in the year new clothed with garments of
satin or damask, figured of diverse colors, upon their heads they do wear a
high Bonnet of fine silver gilted, called in their language Scuff, set round
about with diverse stones, whereof some are fine and some false, and in the
top a great and high tufte of Eastrige fearhers, set out with many diverse and
rare small feathers of birds. About their body they are girded with a large
girdle of Tissue, or of silk and gold, called Cochiach, being very fair
and of great value, and of such length that it goes three times about the
hodie, and overthwart the same, do wear a brave dagger by them called Biciach
set with Iuorie or bones of fishes, Sugar candy good for fain^nes.
carrying in one of their hands an Anagiach being a small hatchet, and in the
other a handkercher full of Sugar Ca^die, which in running they do eat, as well
for their sustenance and strength, as to take away the faintnes. These Peicz do
run before the great Lord, always leaping on their toes without ceasing or
rest: and if it chance that in their course they com into any green meddow or
upon any plain way, they suddenly turn their faces toward their great Lord,
They run backwards on the way.
and so do go backwarde a certain space, or so long as the fair way dureth,
criyng loudly, Alau Deicherin, which is to say God maintain and preserve the
Lord long time in such power and prosperity.

The light running of these swift Peicz is also employed in services of more
importance, for if it happen yt the great Lord has to send and dispatch in
have any matter into any places of the Empire the same is committed unto these,
who, so soon as they have received the same, and with great reverence taken
their leave, they do speedily depart, crying with a loud voice, Sauli, Sauli,
which is as much as beware, beware: and upon this ready departure, they run
leaping amongst the people like unto young rams, and travailing both day and
night without any rest or stay, do dispatch more way then the best horse in
Turkey could do: it is thought certainly, that these light runners in their
youth do consume their mylte, by a mean which they keep so secret, that for
nothing in the world they will disclose unto any person: as for my part I
refer me too that which it may be, and will not otherwise assure it to be
true, for that I have not my self seen it, notwithstanding that diverse at
Constantinople have affirmed unto me the same be true and accordingly has
written John Antonio Menauino of Genua, which as a young slave was brought up
within the Sarail in the time of Sultan Bajazet.

Peich or Peicler of nation a Persian one of the Lackies of the great Turk.


Of the apparel, custom and manner of living of the ancient Peicz or lackies
of the Emperors of Turkey.

Chap. 9.
IN times past, and in the days of other Emperors of Turkey, the Peicz, whom
we call lackies, have varyed much in their apparel, custom, and manners, from
those which are now adays, for as some have written, they following the
example and antiquity of the Grecians and Asians, travailed and ran
barefooted without any shoes, or any other thing on their feet saving that the
soles of their feet were shod like unto horses, the skin under the plant of
their feet being so hard that easily they could forbear the nails and irons
being but light* being a matter so hard that at the first I could scarcely
believe it, for that amongst all the Peicz, The ancient Peiz were shod like
horse^
I had not seen one after that sort, but having curiously enquired of the very
same party by whom the lively figure before set out was made, he did assure
me the same to be very true, yea and that there were as yet some of his
companions (then absent from the gate and court of the Turk) which caused
themselves to be shod, wheerin to give me a more faithful testimony, he
caused me to see one in Andrinople, whose soale of his foot was so hard, that
with a bodkin how sharp soever it were, ye could not easily pea^^e it. And
being thus shod the better to counterfeit the horses, did wear in their mouth a
bal of silver, Peichz wear a bal in their mouths like horses
perced and made with holes in diverse places, like unto the bit of a bridle,
and is for to keep their mouth fresh and the longer to sustain their breath.
Round about their girdle, which was very large and very well wrought of leather,
they hung diverse cymbals or belles, which by moving and shaking in their
running made a very pleasant and delectable noyce, observing that manner as I
believe of the Tartares, as Marc Paul Venetian has written, saying, that the
foot posts or messengers of the great Cham Cublay Emperor of the Tartares
did likewise in runnyng wear a Gyrdle houng full of Belles, like as the Peichz
now a days do and in one hand carried an Anagiach, which is as much as to
say a little hatchet damaskined, and in the other hand a cruese or vial full of
sweet and smelling water to besprinkle such as they do meet in their way
for to have of them some piece of money. Their cappes, which they called
Meulai were not of silver as now adays they are, but only covered with
velvet or some light cloth of gold, upon the tops whereof they fastened certain
common plumets of Eastrige seathers, or of other birds. And these iollie
lackies have such an opinion of themselves that they do not think in the whole
world to be any other persons that can run with like force and swiftness,
whereat is not to be maruailed, for truly they do run so swiftly, that the
best horse in Turkey could not do the like: so as being so required they
travel from Co^sta^tinople to Andrinople and back again in 2. days and 2.
nights, as by some I have been credibly informed, which is as much as a good
horse keeping his ordinary pase, could do in four days, being distant from
the one city too the other five days journey of the Turkish iourneies, being
three or four days travel in England: and the reason wherefore their
iourneies are longer then ours, is that they do not go or ride from the
morning to the evening as we do, but from the morning to high noone. And being
arrived at the place of their bait, whether it be in town or village, they
take up their lodging in a Caruasseras, which is like unto a barn or great
stable instead of an Inn, for that there are none throughout the whole country
of Leuant. And if it happen that the bayt be too long, they stay at half way or
near unto the bait in some fair meadow, There are no ^nnes throughout al
Leuant.
near unto some river or fountain, there alighting do let go their horse to
pasture, and set down themselves under the shadow of some tree or hedge upon a
carpet, if they have one, or else upon the fair green grass, refreshing
themselves with such victualles as they have brought with them in their
satchel, but do drink of such drink as their horses do, to wit, fair and
clean water, and so being gotten on horseback again, they proceed on their
journey. Now to return to our ancient Peicz, the figure following sets
forth unto you, the manner of their going, and form of their apparel.

The apparel and ancient form of the Peicz or Lackies of the great Turk.


Of the wrestlers of the great Turk called Gurelsis or Pleuianders.

Chap. 10.
OF all the games anciently exercised in Asia and Grecia, the Turk has
observed the Palester of the Athletes, which is too say, the wrestling, being
very near like unto the old custom of the Greeks, Asians, and Romans, for the
great Turks for one of his accustomed recreations, entertaineth in wages o.
men, strong, big set, and full of flesh, and sinews, which are of diverse
nations, but the most part Moors, Indians, or Tartares, by the Turks called
Peluianders or Guressis, Pleuianders are Moors, Indians, or tartares.
which signifies wrestlers, who at all times and as often as it shall please
him to take therein his pleasure, do wrestle before his person two and two with
force of arms, being bare on all their members, saving that they wear
breaches of leather, gathered and made fast under the knee, anointed with
oil, as all the rest of their bodies likewise is, according to the ancient
custom of the Romans to the intent to give or to take the less hold the one
of the other, Why wrestlers do anoint themselves.
by reason of the slipperous glyding of the oil dropping upon the dead leather
or quick skin, whereby it comes to pass, that when they are well chafed,
oftentimes for lack of good hold with the hands, they with their teeth do
fasten upon the flesh of the one and other, like unto the fighting of the
mastiffes with the Bears and wild Bulls, and in that order they do bite and
with their teeth nip one another, in ye nose, ears, or any other part of the
body sticking out, or where any hold is to be fastened on, so as oftentimes they
do carry away a piece of the flesh with their teeth. The wrestling being the^
ended either through victory or a sign of abstinence given, and to wipe of
the sweat, they cast about their shoulders a cloth of blew cotte^, checked
according to their fashion. And such is their form, order, apparel and manner
of their combat in wrestling, but when they are without the bars, and at
common rest, they are clothed with a long gown, which they do call Dolyman,
girded with a large girdle of silk, according to their manner, their head being
covered with a bonnet of black velvet, or with the fur of a young lamb, which
they call Taquia, ha^ging upon on of their shoulders after the fashion of the
Georgians or the gentlemen of Polonia but that it is more even and straight,
they do say themselves too be impolluted of body and obserua^ts of virginity,
which in their opinion (being not unreasonable) does the longer preserve and
maintain their bodies in strength: and what forces with their bodies abandoned
soever they do, yet are they not therefore servants or slaves, but of free
condition and for their necessary provision have of the great Lord ten or
twelve Aspres a day. Of these like wrastlers strong and big set men I have
seen a great many in Alger in Barbary, many wrestlers in Alger
which daily about vhe going down of the Sun, do present themselves in the
place near unto the haven before the great Mosquee making place for all comers
and there do wrestle after a fine and strong manner for to make a show and
pastime unto the assembly and beholders, which therefore do give unto them a
piece of money being fouresquare in the moorish speech called Giudith, being
worth about 4. deniers of our money. The Prester ^an king of Ethyopia has also
of these wrastlers, as lately has written Francisco Aluarez in his voyage of
Ethyopia, whereby is to be known that the people beyond the South and East
seas do as yet observe the Palestres, and exercise of wrestling after the
antiquity of the Olmipicke games, Invention of wrestling.
instituted by the valiant Hercules, which in the same country of Mauritania
and Afrike challenged and overcame with wrestling the mighty Giant Antheus: and
nevertheless Lactance firmian in his first book, does attribute the first
invention of the Palestre unto Mercury as likewise he does the playing on the
fiddle.

In these figures following I have lively painted out unto you these
Peluianders (as I have seen them in Constantinople) in the form as they
wrestle, and in the other figure as well of their making ready to the wrastlyng,
as after the game, and finally of their ordinary appparrell, which they wear
without the exercise Athletique: and likewise have represented unto you the
draught of three drunkardes, who after they have well tippled themselves with
their drink, which they call Sorbet, or after they have eaten of their powder
Opium, go howlyng about the stre^tes like unto Dogs, and then it is evil
for the Christians too be near them, because of the peril they should be in
of being well beaten.

Pleuianders wrestling.


Pleuianders wrestlers.


The Drunkardes.


Of the Cooks and other officers of the Kitchen of the Great Turk, and the
ordinary manner of the eating of the Turks.

Chap. 10.
IT shall not be impertinent nor out of my purpose, if I do speak and entreat
of the estates, officers, duties, wages, and services of Cooks and other
officers of the kitchen of the great Turk, and therefore is to be understood
that ordinarily he keeps within his Sarail 150. cooks, as well masters as
boys Azamogla^s, amongst which the best and most expertest are chosen and
ordained for the privy kitchen of the great Lord, and the other for the common
sort. The Master cooks have for their stipend 8. or 10. Aspres a day, and the
boys 3. clothed every one of the^ once in the year: those of the privy kitchen
have their furnaces apart for to dress and make ready the meat without smell
of smoke, which being sodden and dressed, they lay into platters of purcelan,
and so deliver it unto the Cecigners, whom we do call caruers, for to serve the
same unto the great Lord, the taste being made in his presence: the other
cooks for the common sort, do deliver their meat unto those which have the
charge of the distributing thereof throughout the Sarail according to the order
made by the officers thereunto committed, for over these two kitchins, privy
and common are set and ordained four superiors, of which the first being in
their language called Hargibassi, is appointed to the charge and keeping thereof,
4. Officers se^ over the Cooks.
and to pay the cooks their wages, and has for his pensio^ 60. Aspres a day,
amounting to the value of a ducat, and every year a gown of silk. The second
is cal-Emimmutpagi, which is to say, chief kater, ordained for the disbursing
of all the money and charges of the kitchen, and has 50. Aspres a day, and a
gown such as it shall please the Turk to give him upon the day of the great
Bairam, which is their Easter. The third is the Chechaia or Stewards, ordained
to ouersee all that which shall go out or into the kitchins, and to take order in all differences, which might arise amongst the cooks, and is provided in wages
like unto the Emimmutpagi. The 4. and last is called Muptariapagi, who keeps
the books and accounts of the whole charges of the kitchins, and has the
charge to ordain from day to day, the meat for the diet of the great Lord: and
for this office he has but 30. Aspres by the day, and this is the estate of
the Cooks and other officers of the kitchen of the great Turk and of his
Sarail.

Now there rests to speak of the dressing of their meat and the ordinary
manner of eating of the Turks which far differs from ours, Great difference
betwixt the Turks and us in dressing of meat.
being so superfluous, curious, and delicate, and our Cooks dressing the same
accordingly: whereas to the contrary theirs is scant, bare, and gross, without
any diversities of lardings, dressinges, sawces, ioyces, and confections:
their Cooks being very simple dressers of meat, as being neither dainty nor
delicate in ye dressing thereof. For the Turks do content themselves with slight
meats and easily dressed, Meats of the Turks.
so as they be nourishing or restoratiue: as Bucks flesh, Goats flesh,
Mutton, Lamb, and Kidde, and certain Hens, whereof there they have as fat
and as sauery as in any other place, where I have been. They do eat little
beef, and less veale, for they say that the cow having her calfe taken away
from her would loose her milk, and thereby should lack butter, cheese, and
other whitemeat, they hold the sheep feet for a very delicate meat, which
ordinarily in diverse shops at Constantinople are set forth to be sold ready
sodden and dressed with pilled garlike, which is their common sauce at all
times, there are also to be sold pies of minced meat, and rice dressed with
butter and almonds very sauorie and of a good taste: as for the flesh they
will rather eat it roasted then sodde, and do roast the same in manner
following: They have a great Iron pot of the bigness of a ketle, in the
bottom whereof they do lay red burning coals, and over it a gredyron, upon
the which they do roast their flesh through the vapor and heat of the
coals, Water is the most common drink of the Turkis
which can neither be wholesome nor dainty. And to be short their kitchins and
Cooks are nothing like unto ours: as for their drink, their most usual and
common beurage is that which is natural unto al beasts in the world, too
wit, fair and clear water. But they have notwithstanding other drinks
artificially made and confectioned of diverse sorts which they do sell in
sundry places of the city. Some made with water and barley after the manner of
Ale* some other of pears or apples, or with the seething together of plummes,
reisons, figs* pears, peaches, and other like fruits, and of the beurage
which they do call Sorbet, they do much use to drink in the summer with yse or
snow to cool the same. They do also drink much Aqua vitae both at and after
meals which they call Archent. As for natural wine, notwithstanding that by the
Mahumetical law, the drinking thereof is forbidden them, yet do they for all
that leave it nothing at all, taking of it oftentimes so much in, that scarce
they are able to bear it. But it is when it costeth them nothing, for there is
no nation in the world which seek more their own advantage then these
Turks do, specially when they may get it of the Chrystians, because they do
spend more and keep better cheer then they of their nation do. For example
whereof, I have often times seen diverse of them, and of the principallest, as
Secretaries, Dragomans, and other officers of the great Turk which came to the
lodging of Monsieur Darramont our Ambassador, to banquet and make merry, and
without any courtesy drunk as much as pleased them, which nothing was refused
them, but to the contrary the Ambassador well knowing their natural
inclynation, forgotte nothing which might serve for their good intertainment,
as well with delicate meats, as diverse sorts of good wines both Malmesies and
Muscadels, whereof they do stuff themselves so full, that oftentimes in going
home to their houses the largest and broadest streets in the city are too
narrow for them. And are so far from shame and honest ciuility, that they do
not think they have made good cheer, nor attribute any honor unto those that
have feasted them, except they be made beastly drunk. Notwithstanding that by
their law as I have said, they are specially forbidden to drink wine or to be
drunken, whereat they make no great scruple and less sin, so as they may
drink free without their cost. They have another order to make themselves drunk
without wine which is with their Opium, Opium will make them drunk.
being a composition made with a white stuff, whereof the Turks do not only
use, but also the Persians and other people of Leuant, through the opinion
which they have, that it makes the^ to forget choler and melancholy, and so
causes them to be joyful and merry, and in the wars more stout and hardy.
Of which Opium after they have taken in of it about a Dragma, does so work
with them, and makes them so out of square, that they loose both their wits
and understanding, for they go reeling about the streets, holding one of
another, as the other Drunkardes do, foming out of the mouth like unto chafed
boares, making fierce and terrible cries and howlings like unto dogs. And
being in this case, it is not good for Jews or Christians to meet with them,
least they should be well beaten with fystes or cudgels. But those which are
most to be feared in the meeting are those 3. kinds which in the former chapter
I have lively described unto you: to wit, the Azamoglans, the Leuentis, and the
Azappis being renied Christians, and mortal enemies unto all Christians, and
those which do unto them the most wrongs and outrages, and thus ye have heard
of the manner of eating and drinking of the Turks, far differing from ours.
But because I will not forgette to touch the manner of the apparel of these
Cooks, I will say that they do wear a long coat of marokin or leather closed,
and shutting the same upon the breast with great flat buttons of tin instead
of silver, wearing on their heads a white Zarcole like unto the Ianissaries,
but without any fringe of gold or other enrichment in all respects as the figure
following does represent unto you.

A Cook of Turkey.


Of the Physicians of Constantinople.

Chap. 12.
IN Turkey and principally at Constantinople, are found diverse Physicians
professing the Art of physic, and exercysing the practyse thereof, but a
greater number of the Jews then Turks, Jews excellent in physic and why^
amongst the which there are many that are skillful in Theorica, and
experimented in practice, and the reason wherefore in this Art they do
commonly exceed all other nations, is the knowledge which they have in the
language and letters, Greek, Arabian, Chaldee and Hebrewe. In which languages
as to them partly, peculiar, and original, have written the principal
Authors of physic and natural phylosophie and Astronomy, being the
sciences meet and necessary for those that study physic. Besides, the common
Physicians which the Turks call Echim, the great Lord has of his own proper
and ordinary, waged with great stipendes, and intertainments, whereof part are
Turks and part Jews. He which in the time that I was in Leuant, had the
first dignity and authority, amongst the order of Physicians was of nation an
Hebrew called Amon, Amon ^^ Hebrew Phisitio^.
of age above sixty years, a personage great of authority, and much
esteemed, as well for his goods, knowledge, and renown, as for honor and
portlinesse. They are moreover besides those aforesaid within the Sarail of
the great Turk, ten common Physicians, Ten Physicians for the commons of the
Sarail.
which for their salarie have every one of them ten aspres a day, and meat
and drink, their charge being such that so soon as there falls any sick
within the Sarail, one of them goes unto the great Turk to ask license to
heal him, (for otherwise they dare not take him in hand) which having
obtained, he causes the patient to be brought into a place which within the
Sarail is ordained for sick folk, and is bound to visit him four times a
day, until such time as he have recovered his health: but if it chance the
sick to wax daily worse and worse: then all the other Physicians are bound to
come to his assistance. As for the apparel of the Physicians of Turkey, it
does not differ much from that of the common people: but yet from that of the
Jewish Physicians for insteede of a yealow Tulbant very near like unto the
Iewishe nation, they were a high topped cappe, died of read scarlet, after the
manner as ye may behold in the figure following: A Physician Jew.


Of the Grecian Peisants or husbandmen called Voinuchz.

Chap. 13
THe Voinuchz or Grecian village men, are of a province of Graecia on the
borders of Bossine, Voinuchz neighbors unto Bo^sinian.
comprehended as the other are under the dominion of the great Turk, although
that the men, notwithstanding they are Christians, are not tributorie in any
gabels or money taxes: yet are they pressed with a more grievous tribute of
their own persons or o^ their Children, for they are subject to obey a Sangiac
Turk (whom we call a Governor) which every year leuyeth a thousand of
them: and sends them to Constantinople to be presented at the gates of the
great Turk, every one bearing on their shoulder a satchell full of hay in
token of their bondage and service. Now after they have bin seen of the great
Lord, they are sent unto the Imbreorbassi, being as it were chief groom of
the stable, which causes them to be provided of lodging within the stables of
the great Lord thereunto appointed, in time of peace to feed the horses in
the pastures, and in time of war to follow the camp, to mow grass, and to
make hay thereof, for the daily food of the horses. And if any should fail to
be at such commandment and service, he should be constrained to hyre and pay
another in his place, for that these poor Voinuchz must serve of their own
charges: and being very pour people, after they have done their work
appointed them, they do employ that small time of the rest of the day, to make
pastime unto the people for to get some money, making an assembly throughout
the streets, with a great baggepype made of a goats skin, A Baggepype.
(being such a one as ye see here painted in the figure following) and with a
sound thereof they dance certain daunces, with such a nimblenesse of the body
and legs, that the pleasure thereof is not small unto the beholders. And
after they have well daunced and leaped, they have some small pieces of money
given unto them which is their only advantage and sustentation of their
poverty.

They have besides this another mean and practice to get something by, in
making an assembly of six or seven of them in a company, disguysing themselves
with certain masquerie, as with heads and Cranes necks, and other most
antike foul and straungest in the world, which (if God do preserve my life) I
hope to set forth unto you in my third Tomb, where I will entreat of the
whole estate of the house of the great Turk that now reigns.

A Peisant or man of the country being a Greek.


Of the Cadilesquers great Doctors of the law Mahometicke and chief Justices
of the Turks.

Chap. 14.
I Was not determined to have entreated in this first tome any thing belonging
unto the religion of the Turks, pretending to have reserved the same for the
second part, where I hope by God his grace too declare, as before I have
proposed, all that which may concern their religion and ceremonies of their
justice and administration thereof which with the same is conioynct. But having
afterward considered that the strange diversity wherewith these doctors of
their law do disguise themselves: and also their Priests, Monks, religious
Heremits and Pilgrims, would no less delight the spirits and sight of the
Readers, the^ the curious desire to understand of their brutish lives and
abominable superstition, I thought it not impertinent to set hear in order
only the pourtractes and figures of the principallest amongst them with a
brief description and declaration upon every of their figures, beginning with
the two Cadilesquers, great doctors of their law and chief of their justice,
the one of them being ordained for the administration of Grecia, and the other
for Natolia. 2. cadilisqu^^ one for the ^^tolie and on^ for Grecia
These Cadilesquers are reputed amongst the Turks, in the estate of religion,
of like dignity and reverence, as the Metropolitans are in the church of
Grecia and the Patriarchs in the Roman Church: and in the exercise of
justice, as Chauncellours or chief Presidentes, being created and elected unto
this dignity and authority not by favorable ambition* but through honorable
election out of the first and most learned doctors of their law, because they
should be approved so pertinent and sufficient in knowledge, that they
themselves be provided of wisdom, counsel, and good judgment, before they
will counsel or judge others, which they could not do, and less should be
possible unto the^ to decide justly, an arrest of Justice, in matter or weight
and of great difficulty, if they were adorned with good knowledge, great
learning, and prudent judgment: and therefore are they chosen of ripe age and
consistant, too the intent the heat of youth should be passed and cooled with
them, or the fire of carnal love of the one sex to the other (which
detestably in those countries is used) should not cause them to sway or stray
from the true way of justice, whereas to the contrary, if they were chosen
young, that the old men should not have occasion to esteem them, that even
as they were young of years and age, they should also be green of sense and
judgment, which so commonly is not found to be amongst old men, ripe of age
and years, unto whom the number of years and long experience ought to have
brought more wisdom and ripe doctrine well and duly to administer Iustce which
ought not to be peruer^ed nor corrupted by any friendship, favor, kindred,
or any other alyaunce, and much less through insatiable avarice. The estate
therefore of these worthy Cadilesquers is very stately and honorable, besides
that they daily and ordinarily do follow the court of the great Lord (which
they call the gate) and through the honor, reverence, and dignity, they do
go before the Bascha, for all that their authority is not so great. They are
executors of the laws, and with the consent of the Baschas they do constitute
and depose the Cadis which are Judges of the provinces, and also take
acknowledgement upon the appellations interposed upon the sentences and
judgments of the said Cadis, according to their provinces and circuites: to
wit, the one for whole Graecia, and the other for the Natolie, which is very
Turkey. Their annual wages for their estate and office as well for the Church
as administration of justice, Vages of the Cadilesquers.
is about seven or eight thousand duccats besides their ordinary gaynes, every
of them entertayning for his service two or 3. hundred slaves, and besides have
given them and kept at the charges of the great Lord, ten Secretaries, and two
Moolurbassis, which are busied about the horses.

Apparel and ^anner of the Cadilesquers.
As for their apparel, they love to be clothed in chamblet, satin, or
damask, of sad colors, and more honest, as russet brown, tawny, or dark
purple. The sleeves of their gowns be long and streit: upon their heads they
do wear a Tulbant of a marvelous wideness and bigness, having the midst
(which they do call Mogeuisi) more lower and straight then the other ordinary
are: going through the Country or City, they do ride most commonly on Mules
or Mulets, or sometimes on gelded horses covered upon the croup^r, with a cloth
of purple color guarded with silk fringes, as in the picture following ye may
see: and if it happen that they do go on foot they go with a grave, fair, and
soft pace, wearing their beard long and fierce, showing in the^ a great
gravity, joined with a fained holiness, casting forth but few words, but
such as are of their law and religion altogether, with evident and meare
hypocrisy.

Cadilesquier a Judge in spiritual and temporal matters.


Of four sundry religions of the Turks their manner of living and pourtracts
of the religions: and first of the Geomalers.

Chap. 15.
IF the belief and faith of the religious Hermites and Pilgrims, both Turks
and Moors Mahometistes, were as good, holy, and true, as it is in false
appearance colored with most evident hypocrisy and damnable superstition,
they might a great deal better assure themselves of their salvation, then they
do: for their manner of living is so beastly and far from the true religion
under color of their fained holiness and vain devotion, that by comparable
reason it might better be called a life of brute beasts then of reasonable
men: we will therefore discover here a little of their four hypocritical
religions, 4 orders of (...) Religious G^^ma^ers, Cale^^ders, Doruis^ Torlaquis
being a Sectarie vile and abhominab^^
and of the obseruatio^s thereof, of which in the end of every description, ye
may see the figures naturally drawn out. These four orders of false
Mahumeticall religion are in their language called Geomalers, Calenders,
Deruis, and Torlaquis. The life of the Geomalers (to begin first with them)
is not much different from that of the worldly sort, for that the most part of
them are fair young men and of rich houses, which willinglye do give
themselves to run about the country, and to travel through many and diverse
regions and provinces, as through Barbary, Egypt, Arabia, Persia, the Indies,
and the whole land of Turkey, for to see and understand the world with great
pleasure at other men's charges, under color of their pilgrimage and religion:
the most part of these are good artificers, and the other given to reading,
and to describe all their voyages, the lands and countries which ^hey have
run through and travailed. During these blind and straying peregrinations,
they carry none other apparel, then a little cassock without sleeves being of
purple color, made and fashioned like unto a deacons coat, so short, that it
comes but to above their knees, gyrt in the midst with a long and large
girdle of silk and gold of no small beauty and valor, upon the ends whereof
are houng certain Cimbals of silver mixed with some other clear sounding
metal, and they do ordinarily wear six or seven of these as well about
their girdle as under their knees. And besides the coote, in steed of a cloak,
they are covered above the shoulders with the skin of a Lion or Leopard being
whole and in his natural hair, which they do make fast upon their breast by
the two former legs. All the rest of the parts of their bodies are bare:
saving that in their ears they do wear great rings of silver or of other
metal* and on their feet a kind of shoes made after the fashion of those
which the Apostles did wear, bound together with coardes* and to be the more
disguised, and appear more holy, they let their hair grow very long and wear
the same spread out upon their shoulders as the brides do in these Countries.
And to make them grow and to show the more longer, they use by continual
artifice Terebinthe and vernish, laying sometimes for to make it the thicker,
goats hair whereof the chamblets are made. And in such superstitious
apparel raunging about the country, they do bear in one of their hands a
book written in the Persian language full of songs and amarous sonnets,
compounded after the usage of their rhyme* And being many of the^ in a company,
their belles and cymballes, both near and afar of make such a pleasant tune,
that the hearers do therein take very delectable pleasure. And if by fortune
these jolly loving religious do in the streets meet with some fair young
strippling, streightwayes they do set him in the midst of them, cherishing
him with a fair and sweet music of their voices and sound of their
cymballes, which to hearken unto every one runs, and true it is that whilst
they do sing, they do sound only with one of their belles or cymballes, every
man keeping measure and time unto the voice of the other, and then afterward
do sound all their belles together, and in this order they do run about,
visiting the artificers and other people for to allure them to give them some
piece of money.

Amongst these devout pilgrims of love, there are some which secretly and
under pretext of religion do of a fervent love draw unto them, the hearts of
many fair women, and likewise of the fairest yonglings, of which they are no
less amarous then they are of the woman kind, so much are they given unto the
abominable sin of luxury against nature. Thus the^ they do go triumphing
upon their love, voluptuousnes and pleasure, giving the^ selves betimes to
wander throughout the country at their pleasure, in such sort that under this
color, they are called of some Turks, the men of the religion of love, as in
effect they in very deed are, so as if there were such an order and profession
amongst us, Why the G^^malers are called men of (...) religion of love.
I believe that the most part of our youth, would sooner give themselves to the
auowing and profession of such a religion, then to that of chastity and
observance.

Geomaler a religious Turk.


Of the second sect of the religious Turks, called Calenders.

Chap. 16.
THE religion and manner of living of these Calenders, is far different from the
aforesaid religion of love: namely, for that the religious and obseruatours of
the same, for the most part contrary to the Geomalers, say themselves to be
virgins, making their boast and glory not of lasciuitie and luxury, but of
very straight abstinence and pure chastity, which if it be not holy, is at the
least fained* they have for their dwelling certain little churches, abstinence
and chastity of the Calenders.
which they call Techie, over the gates whereof they do write these or like
words, Caeda normas, dil ersin cusciunge al cachec ciur: which is to say in
our language, he that will enter into this religion must do the same works,
which they do and observe, to wit, in virginity and abstinence like unto
them. These Calenders are clothed with a little short coat without sleeves
after the fashion of a hair cloth made of wool and horse hair, and do not
let their hair grow long as the Geomalers do, Apparel of the Calender^^
but cause their hairs to be cut, covering their head with a felt hatte, like
unto the priests of Graecia, about which they hang certain stringes, hanging
down the breadth of a hand, being strong and rough, being made of horse hair,
in their ears wearing great rings of iron, and likewise about their neck and
arms, and under their privy members they do pearce the skin, thrusting through
the same a ring of yro^ or silver of an indifferent bigness and weight, to the
intent that being thus buckled, they can by no manner of means use luxury,
although they would and had thereunto commodity. These also go reading of
certain songs and common rymes co^pounded by one of their order called Nerzimi,
The first martyr of these religious.
who^ they repute and take amongst them to have bin the first Saint of their
religion, who for having spoken certain words against the law of Mahomet, was
in Azamia, which is Assyria flaide quick, and by these means the first martyr
of their religion.

Calender a Religious Turk.


Of the third sect of the religious Turks called Deruis.

Chap. 17.
A Great deal more strange and beastly is the life and manner of doings of the
Deruis, altogether diverse, and other then that of the Geomailers and Calenders,
for these go bare headed, and cause their hair and beard to be cut with a
raser, and generally all the other parts of the body, where as any hair
grows, and moreover burn and scauld their temples with a whot Iron or an old
piece of cloth burnt, having their ears pierced, wherein they do wear
certain great ringes of Iaspe, of diverse colors and rare beauty. All their
clothes are two sheep or goats skins, Apparel of the Deruis.
the hair thereof being dried in the Sun, putting on the one before, and the
other behind, embracing the body in form of a girdle: the other parts of
their body are naked, whether it be in Winter or Summer: they dwell without the
cities in suburbs and villages in diverse parts of Turkey. And all the Summer
long go running throughout the Countries from one village to another, doing
under the color of holiness and religion, infinite knaueries and robberies,
for they are all of them great thieves, Spoils under pretext of religion.
fornicatours and spoylers making no conscience to rob, kill, and murder (if
they find themselves to be the stronger parties) those who^ they meet withal on
the way with a small hatchet, which they bear under their gyrdles, and with the
same to assault and spoil the strange wayfaring men of what law or nation
soever they be. Besides which inhumanitie, they are also full of diverse unhappy
vices for they are wonderfully given to the detestable sin of Sodomitrie,
notwithstanding that for to cover their loathsome filthiness, Matslach an
herb of pestilent operation.
and to shadow their hypocrisy and for to show some godliness to be in the^,
they do going through the country, eat of an herb called Matslach, the
violent operation makes them to become mad, enraged, and out of their wits. So
as through a certain furour, they with a certain knife or rasour do cut their
neck, stomach, and thighs, until they be full of most horrible wounds,
which for to heal, they do lay upon them a certain herb, letting it lie
upon the hurt until it be altogether consumed and become unto ashes,
suffering in the mean space an extreem pain, and that with marvelous
patience. And this they do to show themselves true immitatours of their
Prophet Mahomet, saying, that during the time that he was within the cave or
den through the great abstinences which he used, fell one day into such a
fury, that he would have cast himself down headlong from the top thereof,
and for this cause they have fools in great reverence, saying that they are
acceptable unto God. These devout Deruis live of alms as the other religious
do, which they do beg with these words, Sciai Merda nescine: which is to say,
give an alms in the honor of the valiant man Haly brother in law to Mahomet,
which was the first that exercised arms amongst us. They have moreover in the
Natolia, the sepulcher of another Saint by them called Scidibattal which they
say, to be he that has conquested the most part of Turkey, and about the
place of his sepulcher is an habitation and covent, where do dwell a great number
of these Deruis, and there once in the year they kept a general chapter of
assembly, in which their Priour or Superior is president, a foolish temeritie
of one of these Religious.
whom they do call Assambaba, a name signifiyng father of fathers. These good
religious people are not very welcome at Constantinople, for that a while ago
one of them durst take upon him with a short Rapier, which he carried hidden
under his arm to have killed the great Turk Sultan Mehemet, the second of
that name: notwithstanding because the Turks have above all things charity
in great recommendation, they do not leave to give alms unto them for God
his sake.

Deruis a Religious Turk.


The fourth sect of the religious Turks, called Torlaquis.

Chap. 18.
THe Torlaquis by others called Durmislars, cloathe themselves with sheep and
goat skins, like unto the Deruis, above the same, they wrap about them in
manner of a cloak, the skin of a great Bear with the hair, Apparel of the
Torlaquis.
made fast upon their stomach with the legs: upon their heads they wear a
high bonnet of a white felt, folded with small pleights, having the rest of
their bodies altogether naked. They do also burn themselves on the temples
with an old cloth burned for too take away and dry up the humors of the
brains, and too let that they should not fall down upon their eyes, and take
away their sight. The Libians, as Herodote in his fourth bo^e does write, had
the like custom, to burn the veins of the brains or of the temples of the
young children when they were come to be four years old, with wool or cotton,
to prevent the falling down of the Catharres so long as they lived, and were
of opinion that the same made the^ a great deal more healthful.

The form and manner of living of these Torlaquis, Beastliness of these
Torlaquis.
is more rude and beastly, then the life of the brute beasts, for they know
not, nor will learn, to read, write, or do^ any civil or profitable act,
but do live Idly upon alms, as the others do. And most often go roging
alone through the towns and villages following the bathes, tauernes and
assemblies, for to have free shot and cheer. But going in great troops
through the deserts, if they find any at their advantage, wearing good
apparel, they will stryppe them and constrayne them too go stark naked as
they do, and by such vagabounde beggerie, they make the poor and simple
people of the Towns and Villages believe, that they can foresay and divine
the good or evil fortune by lockyng in the Palm of their hands, as if they
had good skyll and knowledge in the art of Chiroma^cie or Palmestrie, for the
beastliness of this barbarous people is so lewd and gross, that these poor
idiots do come running on all sides unto these abusers, as if they were
Prophets, having an opinion and false persuasion that they are endued with the
spirit of prophecy. And above the rest the simple women, who for to have of
these ^oothsayers some vain prediction or feigned promise of their desires,
either for the time present or to come, do bring unto them great quantity of
bread, eggs, cheese, and other victuals, being no less welcome unto them then
necessary. But these imposters Torlaquis under color and pretext of their
false religion, do further commit many other more greater abuses, not only
false and inconuenable, but enorme and most blasphemous against the divine
providence, for that oftentimes they lead amongst them an ancient old man,
whom they reverence and worship like a God: and being come into any town or
village they do lodge themselves as near as possible they can in the best and
richest house, placing themselves round about him with most faygned humility,
and hypocritical reverence. Afterward, this good hypocrite, being no less
grown in knavery then in age, fayneth himself to be ravished in spirit,
pronouncing at sundry times a few words, and those full of gravity and
spiritual commandementes, and as if he were in a trance, lifts up his eyes
unto heaven, and afterward by little and little turning himself toowardes
his disciples speaks unto them in this manner: My well-beloved children I pray
you too take me away, and carrye me out of this Town, for in lyftynge up
mine eyes unto heaven I have both seen and understood by divine Revelation
great tribulation too be prepared for the same. And then these gentle
disciples being well instructed and taught in this sort of knavery, do
altogether with great affection desire him to make his prayers to God, that he
would appease and mitigate the ire which justly he had determined against such
a desolate city, and the inhabitants thereof. The reverend old man showing
himself by their prayer to be won, and well inclined to do the same with
his simuled holiness, begins to make a feigned prayer unto God, desiring
him to forbear his threatened fury, and evil eminent. Then this poor barbarous
and ignorant people being feared with the divine threatening, and comforted
through the deprecation of this reverend reuealer and Intercessour, do run
toward him from all parts, giving so much faith unto the masked hypocrisy
of this old fox, that they are fully persuaded, that all these devilish and
abused works are divine miracles. For which by charitable admiration, they do
bring unto them so many alms, that these false religious at their departure
from that place, have like unto Somners, as many brybes as they can carry away.
And having thus spedd they return to their houses triumphing of their
impostrie, and making merry cheer at the costs of these too much credulent
people, which do give the same unto them, of whose foolish simplicity they
go mocking and scoffing amongst themselves. They do also eat of the herb
called Matslach like unto the Deruis, The Torlaquis do use also of the Matslach.
and do sleep upon the ground, no less naked of shame then bare of clothes,
using their damnable and abominable, sodomiticall luxury, the one with the
other more beastly and unnaturally, then would do the brute and wild beasts.
And thus then under pretext and appearaunce of their holiness, yea but rather
of their feigned and abused religion, these beggars going a begging do commit so
many horrible and execrable abominations.

Torlaqui a religious Turk.


Of other religious Turks leading a solitary life amongst beasts.

Chap. 19.
THere are moreover throughout whole Turkey another sect of religious, dwelling
within the towns and villages in certain shoppes: the walls whereof they do
cover with skins of diverse wild beasts: as of oxen, goats, hearts, bears
and wolves. And about the walls thereof they do fasten and hang upon the
horns of the same beasts a great number of tallow candles. And in the midst
of this their sacred shop stands a stool covered with a green cloth or
covering, and upon the same a great latten candlestick without any candle or
tape: which show they make to declare themselves true followers of the law of
Mahomet.

Moreover, they have painted a Cemiterre, houng by the midst, in memory and
reverence of the brother in law, and successor of Mahomet called Haly, of whom
they do say, as we do of Beuis of Hampto^, miraculous fables, saying that with
the same Cemiterre he cut the mou^tains and rocks asunder: moreover, to show
themselves more strange and marvelous, they bring up and feed certain wild
beasts, as wolves, bears, hearts, eagles and raue^s to declare that they have
abandoned the world, to live a solitary life amongst beasts: wherein their
false hypocrisy is too openly showed, for whereas they say they do live a
solitary life, they resort and frequent in the midst of most populous towns
and villages, and professing to live solitarily amongst wild beasts, they do
tame the^ and accustom them to live with them for they do not dwell in
Hermitages solitarily, but amongst great assembly of people, and likewise do
not live with the wild beasts, but the wild beasts do live with the^, except
they do mean that these beastly and barbarous Turks, their companions are the
same wild beasts, amonst the which they do say they do live. These good
religious people thus living on the profit of their shop, and when soever that
there is not brought sufficiently unto them for the maintenance of their idle
life, the^ they come forth out of their den, (even as the wolf pinched with
hunger comes out of the wood) and go about the streets asking of alms,
leading in their hand a Bear or Heart with a bell about his neck, as ye may
see in the figure following. Behold then how under color of religion, they
do disguyse their damnable and more then evident hypocrisy. And of these
gallaunt companions I have seen a great many in Constantinople, but many more
in Andrinopole.

A religious Turk.


Of those which do call themselves kinsemen to Mahomet.

Chap. 20.
THere are diverse amongst the Turks, which do call themselves and for such are
reputed, kinsemen of Mahomet, whereof some do wear a green Tulbant, and the
other a Muzauegia, which is to say, a bonnet which they do wear under the
Tulbant being of color green: Mahomets kinsemen do wear a garment and
Tulbant several to be known from others.
and all the rest of the Tulba^t white They do wear such color for that they
say their Prophet ware the like on his head, and contrary to the Turks. The
Sophians which are the Persians, wear read ones. Sophy is not the name of
the King of persia (as some do think) for this name comes of their sect and
religion, which commands them of an humility, not to wear on their heads
any habit; more precious then wool, and for that in the Arabian tongue wool is
called Sophy, those which are of this sect are called Sophians, and in derision
the Turks do call them Kesulbach, which is to say, read heads. The Turks and
the Sophians do say that it were not reasonable to cover the dishonest parts
of the body, with the color which the Prophets did wear on their heads. And
therefore is no more permitted unto the Turks to wear green hose, then unto
the Sophians to wear red hosen: and whosoever should wear them, should be
esteemed amongst them as an heretic. And therefore is not permitted unto any:
but unto such as do say themselves to be sprung of the kindred of Mahomet, to
wear a green Tulbant, and therefore are called Iessilbas, which is to say
green heads. They are also commonly called Emirs, which may be interpreted,
kinsemen of the Prophet, and are holden in such reputation for holiness of
life that in judgment, the testimony or witnessing of one of them is allowed
for 2. others. But they are so mischievous and unhappy, that for money they will
make no conscience to bear such false witness, such as ye will have the^: and
specially if he be a Jew or a Christian unto whom they are mortal enemies.
Some of them are very rich, and go honorably apparrelled. The other are poor
handicraftes men, or sellers of fruits, candles, and vinegar, whereof I have
seen a great many in Constantinople and Andrinopl^. Likewise diverse of them
come with the Hagis pilgrims of Mecque, making often with them through great
hypocrisy, their prayers in the midst of the place. And for that they are of
most perverse and abominable nature diverse amongst these barbarous and
rusticall people, are constrained more for the fear which they have of their
false witnessing, then for the holiness which they know in them, to bear unto
them great honor and reverence.

Emir a kinseman of Mahomet.


Of the Pilgrims of Mecqua by the Turks called Hagislars.

Chap. 21.
THe Turks, Moors, and all other such barbarous nations, living under the
observance of the law, and commandment of the false prophet Mahomet, find
written in diverse places and passages of their Alcoram, that God has promised
unto all Musulmans which through devotion should go to visit the temple of
Mecqua by the Arabians called Alcaaba, that he would never send their souls
into perdition. Upon confidence of which promise they will gladly go on such
pilgrimage, leaving undone al other household or common affairs, and foreseeing
the difficulty of the voyage, by reason of the long deserts and sands, whereby
they must pass, do begin these pilgrimages, some soon, and some later,
according to the distaunce of the Country, because they will be at Mecqua
against Easter, which they do call Chucci Bairam. But before they do depart,
because their voyage should be the more lucky, they do ask one another
forgiveness of their offenses. And then the day of their departure being come,
they do assemble in great companies, taking their way, first toward the city
of Damas or of Caire, which the Arabians do call Alcair where the crewe does
assemble: for they will not depart lightly, except they be at the least thirty
or forty thousand in a company, with a good number of Ianissaries appointed
for the security, conduct, defense and safeguard of them, and to take regard
that the same be not pilled and saccaged of the Arabians, which day and night
are watching in the deserts to spoil and take the pilgrims and trauaylers. And
besides that, the company having to pass through so many desartes, sandye,
wythered, unfruitful, and lacking of all things necessary for man's
sustenance, order is taken for the loding of many Cammels with great provision
of victuals, fodder and water, as well for the persons, as for the Cammels and
other beasts, for that in these sandye and dry wildernesses no drop of
water is found but from three days to 3. days journey, which
notwithstanding they must get with force of arms from the Arabians, which keep
and defend the same: having then thus passed these deserts, and the Pilgrims
arrived at Medine Thalnabi, which also has bin called Tribic, or as others do
say Iezrab. They do go unto the temple and there lay their Alcoram upon the
sepulture of Mahomet. And after that, the hour of service being come, the
Maizins begin to cry upon the towers as their custom is, to call the people
together to come unto their ceremonies, and there remain in prayer the space
of 3. hours, which ended, they repair unto a mount near unto the town called
Arafetagi, upon the which they do strippe themselves stark naked, and go to
bathe in a river near unto it, even to the neck, mumbling out certain long
prayers: which ended, they go out of the water to put on their clothes
again: and the next morning they proceed on their way toward Mecqua, being
3. small days journey from Medine: where they being come, do enter into the
temple to say their prayers. After which they go turning seven times about a
fouresquare tower, at every circuit kissing the edge thereof, from thence they
go unto a pit of salt water, which they call Birzenzen, being closed within a
Tower, being from the other, ten or twelve pases, pronouncing these words. All
this be to the honor of God which is most merciful, God forgive me al my
sins. These words being ended, certain mynisters there appointed to draw
the water do cast upon the head of every one of them three small buckets full,
without sparing of their clothes. These beastly Mahometistes thinking through
such outward washing to be cleansed and purged of their inward sins.

Moreover, they say, that the tower which they seven times do go about, was
the first house of prayer which Abraham builded through the commandment of
God. Now when they are in this tower well washed and bathed, they go to do
their sacrifice upon a mount near unto it, presenting for an offering many
sheep which being immolated and sacryficed, they do distribute amongst the
poor for God his sake. The sacrifice being thus ended, a Sermon is made unto
them by the Cady Muselman, and that beng done, every one of them do go to
cast 2. stones in a place, where they say the Devil appeared to Abraham when he
builded the temple. From thence they return to Mecqua to say diverse other
prayers, desiring God to exalt them as he exalted Abraham to the building of
the temple. All these ceremonies being accomplyshed* they depart to go
toward Jerusalem, which they call Cuzumobarech, and there do visit the holy
mount where the temple of Solomon was, which they hold in great reverence. In
this place they do celebrate another feast, and there exercise new ceremonies.
At the departure from the temple of Solomon every one takes his way to return
homewards or else where he does think good. And thus they go in troops
carrying great banners with a pyke and half moon in the top of the staff,
going about the towns and villages* singing the praises of their great
Prophet Mahomet, and asking of alms for the honor of God, and that which is
given them they do eat altogether, being set down in the midst of the
common place, and after they have thus eaten with a great hypocrisy and show
of holiness, they do openly make their prayers. The most part of these pilgrim^
(which the Turks call Hagislars) are Moors, clothed poorly enough although
that diverse of them do say to be descended of the line of Mahomet, as the
Emirs above mentioned. And of these I have seen a great number at
Constantinople, apparrelled after the manner, as here I have represented unto
you in the figure following.

Pilgrim Moors returning from Mecqua.


Of the Sacquas carriers of water, being also Pilgrims of Mecqua.

Chap. 22.
IT is found in the Alcoram that Mahomet prophet of the Turks, Wine forbidden
by Mah^met and why.
does forbid al his ^ectators Mahometistes to drink wine. For that he did
esteem it a true nourishment of all evils and sins: and also as diverse have
written, to keep the Arabians with such severe prohibitio^ in greater
sobriety, who for the natural heat which is in them, taking the wine in too
abundantly, would not so easily suffer themselves to be tamed nor brought
under subjection: by reason of these defenses, are thorowout whole Turkey,
Graecia, and other provinces under the obeisance of the great Turk, a great
number of Turks and Moors called Sacquaz, which daily go by the streets,
places and assemblies of the cities, towns, and suburbs of the said
provinces, with a scrippe of leather full of fountain or cestarne water, hou^g
on their side, and covered above with a fair cloth embrodered with leaves
about it or else plain: and in one hand, a cup of fine Corinthian latten
gilded and damaskined out of the which of great charity they do offer and
give to drink, al them that will: but yet for to make the water seem more fair
and delectable to drink, they put within the cup many and diverse stones of
Calcedonie, Iaspe and lapis Azuli, bearing in the same hand a lookingglasse
which they hold before the eyes of those to whom they give to drink, exhorting
and admonishing them with words demonstratiue to think on death: for doing the
office of this gentleness, they will ask no payment nor recompense; but if
through honest liberality some piece of money be given unto them, they will most
gladly receive it, and in manner of thanks and congratulation, they pull out
of a budget or poke which hangs at their girdle a vyollfull of sweet smelling
water, which they cast on the face and beard of him that has given them money.
I have in a morning at Constantinople seen fifty of these Sacquas in a
company, all furnished with their scrips, large girdles, cups, glasses and al
other their instruments, which thus apparelled went through the city dema^ding
their new years gifts of al those they met withal, whether they were Turks
Christians, or Jews in the honor of one of their saints, whose feast they
celebrated that day. And the more to provoke men to give unto them, presented
to the one an apple, to the other an orange, or as I have said, did cast sweet
water in their faces, for you must understand that the liberality of the Turks
and Moors is so great that they will hazard to give the value of a Mangor,
which is the 8. part of an Aspre, to have two or three Aspres again for it. The
same day in the afternoon these woorshipful Sacquas with their ornature came
unto me to the house of my Lord the Ambassador, where then I was lodged, he
being then in Andrinopole, to see as they said, the picture which the day
before I had made of one of their companions, which brought them thither. But
the end was, that they would not depart without having of me some present,
alleging by their reasons that they had done me great honor, in coming to
visit me with the best of their stuff and apparel, so as for to ridd my self
of them I gave them about 20. Aspres, and so being very well contented, they
returned to the place from whence they came. Now to return unto my first
purpose, some of these Sacquas, do this office of charity through devotion,
which they have received at Mecqua, but the others do it for hope of a gain,
which they pretend to get thereby, for besides that which is given unto them of
alms, they are waged either publicly, or of some in particular. There are
moreover diverse other which in that order do keep before their houses great
vessels of marber full of water, covered, and under lock and key, and about
the botto^ thereof is a cock of brass to draw water out of, with a cup of
latten damasked, fastened unto it, with a small iron chain, to the intent that
every on may drink thereof at his pleasure or going to the Mosquee, likewise
wash his hands. So as this charity is in such recommendation amongst the Turks,
that there are no artificers keeping shops, which have not commonly great
vessels or artificial fountains full of water standing upon their stalle^, for
the common commodity as before I have amplye declared.

Sacquas, of nation a Moore, a bearer of water, and a Pilgrim of Mecqua.


The fourth book of the Nauigations and Peregrinations Orientals of N. Nicolay
of Daulphine, Chamberlain and Geographer ordinary unto the king of France.
Of the ancient Laws and manner of living of the Persians.

The first Chapter.
XEnophon in his first book of Cyropedie, which is to say, of the life and
institution of Cyrus, speaking of the ancient custom of the Persians, says
that they had a certain great place called the place of liberty, whereas was
the Palace royal, and other houses public; and that the same place was
divided into four quarters. The first, being for the children: the second, for
the young men: the third, for men of perfect age: and the fourth for the
ancient and aged men unfit for the wars. Every one of the aforesaid degrees
were by the laws constrained to repair at a time and hour appointed in his
quarters. To wit, the children and perfect aged men at the point of the day:
the ancients at certain days and hours for the affairs of the common
wealth. The charge of the young men was in the evening to present themselves
in arms, and so to pass about the houses public, except those which were
married, which were not bound to appear except they were thereunto specially
commanded. Every one of these quarters had twelve Prouosts of the most wise
and grauest that could be chosen, for that the nation of the Persians was
divided into twelve lines. Over the children were appointed certain of the
most ancient, wise, and best advised for to bring the^ up in virtue. To the
young men, well to instruct the^: to the me^ of perfect age, others were
committed and deputed for to accustom and keep them in ^re, for the due
obeisance toward their Prince. The ancients also had their superiors, which
admonished them in the perfection of their duty: unto the Prouosts, was given
the charge and administration of justice, to do right unto every man, to
condemn the offenders and false accusers, but above all other vices,
ingratitude was most severely punished: for that they knew ingratitude to be
the spring of al vices, the enemy of nature, poison unto sweetness, and
destruction of benignity. They did moreover take great pains to make their
children patient and obedient toward their superiors, and able too endure
both hunger and thyrst, They never went to take their repast without leave and
permission of their superiors and never did eat in the sight of their
mothers, but in presence of their masters, having none other meat then bread
and other small pulaunce, and for their drink nothing but clear water: their
exercise was to cast the dart and to shoot: and being thus brought up from the
age of 6. to 17. years, and came unto the degree of young men, under which they
remained 10. years more, passing as I have said, in the nights to go about
the streets and houses, as well for the watch and surety of the town, as for to
make the^ strong and able to endure pains, and to withdraw them from vice and
voluptuousnes. In the day time they did represent themselves before the
Governors to be employed in the public affairs, as was commanded unto them:
and whenever the king would go on hunting (as every month he did,) he took
the one half with him, set out and furnished with bows and arrows a skayne
with a buckler, and two darts to throw at length, and the other weapons to
fight at hand. And in this exercise they were instructed by the king as if it
had been in the wars, so as he would not hunt himself alone, but had also
a careful regard that his men should do as he did, saying and esteeming,
hunting to be a true exercise of things requisite for the discipline of
wars, as being an argument and occasion to use men to rise betimes to
forbear heat and cold, hunger and thyrst, and to travail and run a long
while: they also took their meat with them, and dined not, before the hunting
was ended, nor yet had they that which they had taken, nor yet their
Cartadanne, which is to say, their accustomed fee. As for the other half of
the young men that were left in the town, whilst these were a hunting,
exercised them selves in those things which in their infancy they had
learned, to wit, to cast the dart, and shoot in companies. And if any occasion
fell out to take thieves and robbers, they were bound to wait on the
Maiestrate, and to assist him in the watch. Afterward having spent ten
years in this order of discipline, they were put amongst the degree of the men
perfect in age, in which state they remained xxv. years more. And if need
required to go to the wars they carried no more arrows nor darts, but all
sorts of weapons to fight at hand, as the corslet on his back. The shield in
the the one hand, and the sword in the other hand. The Maiestrates were chosen
and elected out of this degree, except the governors that had the charge over
the children, who after they had thus lived and attained unto the years of
fifty or above: they resorted with the elders and were no more subject to go
unto the wars out of their country. And might freely return to their houses
to Judge of the affairs both common and private, give sentences of death and
to chose Maiestrates. In those days the common wealth of the Persians
contained about six score thousand men of which none was excluded from
coming to the said estate honor and dignity, for unto every Persian it was
lawful to put his children to the schole of the laws, if he had wherewithal
to maintain and keep them, or else they brought them up in the learning of
some science or occupation. The children that had been brought up in the laws
might haunt and frequent amongst the young men, afterward might also be
acquinted with the perfect men, and atchieue (according to their virtue) unto
honors and dignities. And the men perfect, accompany amongst the old men, to
be preferred unto the government of the common wealth, so as they had passed
their time and years without reprehension.

Of the religion and Ceremonies of the ancient Persians.

Chap. 2.
AS for their religion and ceremonies, they esteemed it for a great shame,
openly to spit, blow the nose or to piss, or else to do any other like thing
in public: they called the heaven Jupiter, worshipped the Sun, which they
called Mitra, and honored the moon, Venus, the fire, the earth, the water and
the wind. And bare such a reverence unto ^he water, that they would at no
time bathe themselves in any river nor cast any carrion or dead thing into it.
They did sacrifice near unto some lake, river or fountain, making a hole in
the ground, within which was killed the beast that they would sacrifice: taking
a special heed, that no drop of the blood should fall into the water, least the
same should thereby be polluted and uncleansed. And after this oblation was cut
in pieces and dressed under some Bay tree or Laurel. Their Mages put the flesh
into the fire by them made of small branches or barks of trees, and after some
imprecations made, anointed their sacrifice with oil, milk and honey mixed
together, Their king was created out of a certain family amongst them, to
who^ if any were disobedient, for his transgression and rebellion, had his head
stricken off, and his body was left unburied. Every Persian (besides the number
of Co^cubines which they kept:) for to increase their stock and lynage, took
many women in marriage. And to her that brought forth most children in the
year was by the king lawfully authorized marriage. Such was the ancient
manner and living of the Persians, whose kings having possessed the Monarchy
after the Medes for the space of 250. years were afterward through many
battayles overcome and vanquished by Alexander the great, who surmounting
Darius, were co^streyned to give place unto him in the Empire.

The ancient weapons of the Persians.

Cap. 3.
THE Persians, (according to Herodote his saying) which went under the army
of Darius, at the ouercomming of Grecia, were armed after this manner, they had
on their heads bourgonets, strong and inpenetrable, and upon their bodies
curates of shelles of diverse colors, with half Targets, and in steed of
shieldes, bare targets of steel, (as at this present day they yet do) under
which, houng their Cemiter. Their darts were short, but their bows and
arrows made of Cane Reed, were long. Moreover, they had their Woodknife or
skaine hanging at their girdle, beating on the left thigh.

Of the religion of the Persians used now adays.

Chap. 4.
PResently all the Persians are Mahometistes, like unto the Turks, which two
nations, notwithstanding that they both have one faith, yet are different in
Ceremonies and opinions, for that Haly (which was cousin unto the false
prophet Mahomet) or as some say his son in law having married his daughter
Fatoma or Fatma) being the second Calyphe would no more bear this name, but
would be called a messenger of God, as great or more then Mahomet, whose
institutio^s laws and ordinances, he changed and disanulled and made new
ones, whereby it came to pass that the Mahometists were divided, for those
which followed Mahomet made a Caliphe in Egypt, and the other dwelt in Persia
with Haly, which, of these two peoples was holden in such reverence, that unto
this day the Turks do call upon him next after Ma^omet, saying Alla Mehemet
Haly, which signifies, god Mahomet Haly: and such has been the division of
the Mahometistes in their religion, which unto this present continues betwixt
the Turks and the Persians, which has been the chief and beginning of all
the wars which they have had one with another unto this present day.

From Haly are descended the Sophis which nevertheless (as I have said in the
description of Emir) is not the true name of the kings of Persia as some do
think, but this name of Sophy comes of their sect and religion, which
commands that of an humility they should wear no array on their heads
being more costly then is the wool* and for that in the Arabian tongue: wool
is called Sophy, those being of that sect are called Sophians. These must
always live in poverty and abstinence of wine and meats, and be in continual
watchinges and prayers. They are also called Etnazeri, for that their custom
is to wear a Talbant high topped before divided with twelve pleites or folds,
and that Nazerin the Arabian language signifies twelve: they are also in
derision called Kesulbach, which is to say, read head. So as through diverse
causes and accidents, this sect has gotten and obtained diverse names.

Of the estate of the wars of the Persians nowadaies.

Chap. 5.
AS for the state of the wars of the Persians: there are very puissaunt and
warlike, having a good number of horsemen. Their men at arms are armed with
curats, of shelles, bucklers, roundels and targets of steel. Bourgonnets and
headpeeces of iron, garnished with feathers, having the right arm and hand
armed, and do fight with a lance or light spear. Their horses are great and
courageous, and are barded with leather. Moreover, they are set forth with
strong and large bows, shooting arrows like unto those of the Tartaries, and
are so given unto the service of their king (as well for ye opinion that they
have that he has some heavenly and divine spirit in him, opinion of the
Persians toward their King.
as also for the oath that they owe unto their religion) that there can be no
danger so great, wherein they will not hazard themselves without any fear of
death. The deputed of the guard of the Sophia, are maintained at his charges and
expenses, and at a time appointed, they have by ancient custom, given amongst
the^ armor, horses, gowns, tenthes and victuals, when he marches in the
field he is environed with them for the surety and guard of his person. And
often changing his place, seeking the most fruitful grounds of his regions
for fouriage, does visit the most noblest towns of his provinces. Afterward
at the point of the wars, the Dynastes Barons, Tetrarches, and vassals of the
ancient nobility are by public edict called together to do that which they
shall be commanded, and in time ordained, do repair to their ensigns well
appointed. Of these there may be about 50000. on horseback, part of them armed
as before I have said, and part of them with some privy coat made of diverse
plates of iron. They fight with spear and dart, covering their bodies with
their shields and targets. There are moreover those which are named to be of
the royal city Sciras (in the which are made armors most excellent, which are
the most esteemed, and nearest like unto the Assyrians in valiantness,
hardiness, dexterit^e, and renown, more then any other nation of the East
parts. As for the Armenians being subjects unto the Persians they do fight
the most part of them on foot, and coming in the face of the enemy, having
fixed in the ground a long row of darts, do defend themselves as with a
ramparde against the furious brunt of the horsemen, and do fight with arrows
and short weapons. They have moreover for their aid the Iberians and Albanians
inhabiting on the mount Ca^case sent by their kings unto them being friends
and allied unto the Persians, and neighbors unto Medea and Armenia, the
greater part whereof being half christians do bear unto the Turks the like
hatred, which they of Persia do.

Of the wanton and voluptuous life of the Persians.

Chap. 6.
THE aforesaid Persians now adays contrary to their ancient customs, are
much given to all pleasure and voluptuousness, apparrelling themselves very
sumptuously as the figure following does show, using singular perfumes, and
taking pleasure and delight in all Jewels and precious stones. By their law it
is permitted unto them to have many wives* which because they are very jealous
of them, they keep shut up under the keeping of the Eunuchs, and
nevertheless like unto the Turks and other nations of the East parts, they
are so given unto the detestable sine against nature, that they take it for no
shame, but have places appointed and ordained for the same. I have seen and
practiced with diverse Persian gentlemen which had given themselves into the
service of the great Turk and spoken with them by interpreters, and Dragomans,
as I have likewise done with diverse merchants and artificers dwelling at
Constantinople: but to say truth, I do find them without comparison, more
noble, more civil, more liberal, and of better spirit and judgment then the
Turks are, unto whom (what countenance soever they do show) they are mortal
enemies, I think that I have now sufficiently described, the laws, customs,
religions, and manner of living as well of the Antique as Modern Persians, and
rests now to describe unto you the cituation of their country, whereunto to
attain fully, I am deliberated (as hereafter ye shall understand) to follow
the most ancient, famous, and modern Geographers and Historians, which are
found to have theereof written.

A Gentleman of Persia.


Description of the kingdom of the Persians.

Chap. 7.
THE kingdom of the Persians (according to Ptolome is a region of Asia (so
named Persea after the name of Perseus the son of Jupiter and Danae) which on
the North part bordereth with the Medes, on the West with Susiana, on the East
with the two Carmanies, and on the South with a part of the Persian sea or
Goulphe. In Persia are found many ancient and modern Cities, whereof the
most ancients are Babylon, now called Baiadet. Suse which is altogether
ruined, except the Castle, whereof as yet a part stands: the great city of
Procopolis or Percepolis upon the flood Araxes, in times past destroyed by
Alexander the great. Likewise the City of Scyras, which remains in her
autiquitie, containing in circuit with the suburbs, twenty thousand paces.
Moreover the City of Alexandria (otherwise called Isia, cituated upon the
river Syria) and Arion, lying all on the foot of the mount Caucase, upon the
river Euprates (which the Arabians call Aforat) are the Cities of Ioppe and
Nicephore, the Castle of Isse, where Darius was overthrown and discomfited.
The Cities of Thesiphon and Carra, where was broken the army of Marcus
Crassus, in which place are as yet seen diverse sepulchers and antiquities,
which the Inhabitannts do say to be of the Roman Senators, which dyed in
the same overthrow. The Cities of Persogade, Opine and others, bordering upon
Armenia the greater, being under the dominion of the Sophy. In which Armenia
upon the river Euprates, are many towns inhabited of Christians, Georgians,
being me^ valiant at arms. The names of their cities are, Tunis, Masestan, and
Derbent, lying upon the Caspian sea, or sea of Bachau, there are likewise the
Cities of Artassetta, Asimosia, and Micopoli.

As for the Modern Cities of Persia the pincipallest where most often the
Sophy dwells, is the noble City of Thauris aunciently called Phasis, or
Terua, and by the Persians vulgarly Teuris (being notwithstanding in Armenia:)
within the same is used great traffic of diverse marchandises, of cloth of
gold of silver and of silk, and of al sorts of fine stones, and an infini^e
number of merchaunts do resort thither of al parts of the world as from the
Indies from Baldac, from Molsuc, from Cremesol and from the country of the
Latins: the other are Bagadet, whereof I have spoken before, and Cambalech, a
great city Basta, Mulasia, Va^ta, Drecherin, and Saltamac: All which cities are
in the country of Chelmodate betwixt the river Euphrates and the Tigre, upon
the side of the mount Cortestan, called by the ancients the mount of Taur. Upon
the said river of Euphrates lies the city of Adene, and the castle of Bir.
The Cities of Merchin, Assanchef, Sair, Chesfen, Vastian and Coy, all being
cituated on the top, and about the mount Cortestan. Gies also being a great
city six days journey distant from the goulph of Persia, otherwise called the
Misidan Sea: upon the which lie also the isle and city of Ormus, where great
trade of merchandise is used with the Portugals: and whereas are fished great
quantity of Pearls. Likewise the cities of Sultania, Saban, Cassan, Come, and
Iex, being all cities of great Persia, well traded with merchandise, and whereas
is made great quantity of silk, which is carried throughout all Suria, and
into Bursia (aunciently called Prusa) being the principal city of Bethinia,
cituated at the foot of the Mount Olimpe. Upon the borders of the flood
Indus, as ye go too Calicut, is the great city of Querdy, near the Persian
gulf, and upon the river Bindamach the four cities following to wit, Vergan,
Maruth, Sana and Nain, and on the North side from the Sea Caspium unto Thauris,
Coy, Rey, Sidau, Billan, Strana, Barbariden, Madranolan, Samachi, and the city
of Arben, which has gates of iron, sometimes builded by Alexander the great.
And upon the border of the same Sea, is the fair and rich city of Bacach.
Moreover, toward Armenia the greater in Persia, are the cities of Ansenga^,
Maluchia, Sio, Ere and Meson. These are the fairest and most famous cities,
which at this present are under the dominion of the Sophy: as for the rivers
the most renowned in all Persia is Bindmir, of the ancients called Bragada,
whereupon is to be noted that the distance from the sea Mayor unto the Sea
Caspium, is.

Of the Persian women

Chap. 8.
IF amongst the women of the East parts, the Persians have of all auncestrie
obtained the laud and praise to be the most gentle, and proper in their
apparel and clothing, so are they likewise no lessefull made in proportion of
their bodies and natural beauty: namely, and above al other, those of the
ancient and royal City of Sciras, which are so praised in their beauty,
whiteness, pleasant civility and shamefast grace, that the Moors of an old
and common Prouet be will say, that their Prophet Mahomet would not go to
Scyras, for fear that he having once tasted of the pleasures of those women,
his soul after his death could never have entered into Paradise, we have
moreover sufficient testimony of the singular beauty of these Persian women
by Alexander the great, who keeping the daughters of the king Darius, as his
prisoners, would never salute them but with his eyes looking downwards, and
besides so seldom as he could, for the fear which he had of being overcome
with their beauty, and would say sometimes unto his familiar friends, that
the daughters of the Persians did great harm unto the eyes of those that
looked upon them.

The Persians in their habit go very honorably clothed, and like unto the
Turks and Grecians wear long gowns, closed and buttoned before, and attire
their heads with sundry bands of diverse colors, the ends whereof hang down
very low before and behind over their shoulders, in the form and manner as
the picture following does show unto you, which I have naturally drawn out in
Constantinople, with the favor of a Persian with whom I was entered in
friendship, but it was not without cost, great difficulty and danger, for that
there is no nation in the world, which are more loath to let their wives be
seen, not only unto strangers (like as I was unto them) but scarce they will
trust them with their nearest parents, whether they be father or brother, so
full are they of suspicion and Jealousy. The first Sibille (called Sanabete or
Sambetha) of whom Nicanor makes mention, describing the deeds of Alexander,
was of nation a Persian, notwithstanding that some do say a Chaldean, having
too her father one called Berose, and her mother being called Erimanthe, she
compounded four and twenty books and prophesied the miracle of the five
loaves and two fishes as more amply is treated in the book of the Sebilles.

A Woman of Persia.


Description of the three Arabies, and first of the rockie, or stony.

Chap. 9.
To come to the more easier knowledge of the laws, manners, customs,
religion, and manner of living of the ancient and modern Arabians, I have
taken in hand first to begin with the description of their country, which
according to ptolomie and other Geographers as well ancient as modern has bin
divided into three provinces, to wit, Arabia the stonye, Arabia the desert, and
Arabia the happy: Arabia parted into three provinces.
Arabia the stony was thus called of the name of the old and famous city of
Petra (called in Esaie the stone of the desert) and presently according to
Voleteran, Arach. Notwithstanding that the vulgar Arabians do call it Rabach,
cituated upon the brook Arnon: and whereas aunciently was the seat royal,
namely in the time of the most puissant king Areta, which about the coming of
our savior into the world was king. Or else this country is called stony,
because of the great mountains and rocks which enuirone and close the same in.
Notwithstanding, that within the same are found diverse fountains abounding of
very good waters: she bordereth on the West with Egypt, almost in the midst of
Istma, being between the castles of Posside, presently called Ara, and
Rinocorura, lying upon the further parts of the red sea, or the Arabian sea,
and on the part of our Mediterane sea, the lake of Syrboni, between which
space (whereof Pliny makes but 125. miles) the seas coming from diverse parts
do divide themselves. And the third part of the world which is Asia the
greater, joins there with the firm land of Egypt above Istma, at the mouth
of the red sea, which appertains unto this Arabia, and extends beyond the
gulf Elanitick, and the city Elane of whom this gulf has taken his name. Of
the East and the south it is environed with mou^tains, which divide the same on
the one side from Arabia the happy: and on the other part from the desert. On
the North it bordereth with Syria entering unto the lake Asphaltide (so named
because of the abundance of the Asphalte which it produces: which is
gathered upon this lake, of which is made the Greek fire, some do call it
Stercus Demonum, for that the smell thereof stinketh very much) Philadelphe
and Batanee, and in none other place is the said Arabia more fertile then in
this, This Arabia was in times past through the great heat and barre^nesse of
the fields, little esteemed of the ancients, but we ought otherwise to think
thereof, for the memory and reverence of the dyuine things which there have
happened: for be^ingly she received and kept the children of Israel: for the
space of forty years, after they had maruellously passed dry foot through the red sea. And likewise the same time the City of Madian nourished Moses, his
wife and children. Likewise within the same is the mount Sinai, or Oreb, which
Ptolome calls Melane, and the Moors Turla* upon the which the law was given
unto Moses. Near unto this mount is the stone, which being touched by the
said Moses, cast forth water abundantly to the great alteration of the
children of Israel. Likewise toward Egypt is the mount Casie so renowned for
the sepulture of Pompee the great, which there is. Plynie calls the people of
this Arabia, and of the desert Scenites, because they dwelled under tents and
cabbynes, without having any other houses or buyldinges, and like Vagabondes
went straying with their cattle from place to place, staying only at the
place where abundance of pasture bade them. Their most famous and ancient
neighbors are the Nabathees, so called by the name of Nabaioth the son of
Ismael, neighbors also unto the Amouerats.

Of Arabia the desert.

Chap. 10.
THe second Arabia, which is the desert, is of great compass and Solitude,
which on the West part (according to Ptolome) bordereth upon Arabia the
stony, and on the East with the Sea Persick and along the Chaldees is divided
from Arabia the happy, being on the North side, with the river Euphrates,
which comes from Comaigene: she is inhabited with diverse peoples, whereof
those which are called Naba^^ees, which do dwell in the East parts the most
desert, and without water, go straying like unto thieves through the fields,
making many incursions upon their neighbors, and unto the Carouanes, which
thereby do pass to go to Medine and to the Mecqua. For in all Arabia the
desert, there are but these two Towns, and the place called Metach, where
Mahomet wrote his Alcoram, but there are many small castles: the Country is so
barren, that it brings forth neither trees, fruits, nor waters but very
little. But the inhabitants, which do none other occupation then to rob and
steal do dig there certain pittes which are unknown unto the strangers, and
by that means do eschew the danger of their enemies, and cannot be
overcome* likewise have always lived with all liberty without at any time to
have been subject unto strange kings, but under certain Captains unto whom
they obey. Many have written that besides these great desartes, there is
another called the sandye sea, the greatest whereof which is called Benahali
is in breadth twelve days journey, being all white and loose sand.

These said deserts are called sea, for that like unto the sea, they are
subject unto the fortune of the wyndes, so as those which do conduct the
Carouanes, are constrained to help them selves with the card and compass as
the mariners do upon the sea. And he which is the guide goes before mounted
on a cammel: but if through misfortune the wind come contrary unto their way,
diverse are found buried in the sand: and whensoever that happens few do escape
the peril: these dead carcases being by succession of time discovered, are
curiously taken up, and carried unto the merchants, who buy the same, and is,
as diverse do affirm, that which is called Mumie. Plutarch wrytinge of the life
of Alexander makes mention, that in this great desarte remained dead under
the sands fifty thousand men of the army of Cambises, this sand being moved
with a storm which blew out of the south. And that which is worse in all this
sandy sea, is found no water, but those which do pass through it, must carry
the same upon their Camels: with all other things necessary for the sustentation
of their bodies: for, during these twelve days journey there is nothing to be
found but white sand. The principallest places of this Arabia, near unto the red Sea, are the City of Zidem, the port of Mecqua, and the isle of
Camarran, The people thereof are of complexion nearer the black then white,
and are all Mahometistes.

Of Arabia the happy.

Chap. 11.
THe third Arabia so called of Arabo the son of Apollo of Babylon, by the
Graecians called Eudemon which signifies very happy, separateth Judea from
Egypt, and deuideth it self from Arabia the desert at the port of Zidem, and
within the firm land stretches unto Arabia the stony, she has at the
mouth of the Sea, the city of Adem, which is in greatness, strength,
quantity of people, and traffic of merchandise, the most famous, not only of
this province, but likewise of al those other parts. Moreover, Fatarque the I Will
of Maeyra, at the cape of Reselgati, Calha, Masquati and Curia on the side of
the straight of Ormus: and also amongst the mountains are diverse other
Cities, Castles and Villages. The people are very apt for the arms, because
they are ordinarilye exercised in the wars: Their horses are the best in the
world, and have great number of Camels and Oxen, whom they use in carrying of
fardles and burdens, and other things necessary. Of nature they are
presumptuous and proud, notwithstanding do obey unto a king which for the
most part of the time, has wars with certain people of the other Arabies.
The part of this Arabia bordering upon Ethyopia by the ancients called
Trogloditick, begins upon the red sea, toward the coun^^ie of the Abissins,
and ends at the isle of Madagassar otherwise called the isle of S. George, and
extends near unto the isle of Delaque: some do say that it extends no
further then unto the cape of Guardafumi, which if it be so, she has without
the straight Zeila, Barbora: and within Delaque Laquari, being a port not
greatly peopled; from whence if it were not for fear of the Arabia^s, which
assail and rob the Carouanes that pass along, ye might by land go over in
6. days unto the river of Nyl. The richest and best peopled nation of this
region are the Sabees. The Metropolitan City whereof is called Saba, cituated
on a high mounted in which their king was in times past created by succession
of lineage, with great honor and rejoicing of the people, whose life although
the same seemed to be happy for that he might do al things, and had every man
at commandment without giving account or reason of those things which he
did, it was mixed with a great many of perplections: for that it was not
permitted unto him to go out of his palace upon pain (that attempting the
contrary) to be forthwith stoned by the people, being an ancient
superstition and observance which they had by an oracle of their gods. This
region above all the other in the world, is the most pleasant and abundant of
things precious and Aromaticke. Moreover it bears corn abounda^tly, olives
and all other excellent fruits, and is watered with diverse rivers, and most
wholesome fountains. The South part is furnished with diverse fair forests,
full of trees, bearing Frankincense and mirrhe. Palm trees, Cinamond, Casse
and Ledanu^, the savor of these trees being unto the smelling of men of such a
sweetness: that the same seems rather to be heavenly then earthly or humane.
So as it might be said, that nature consulted there to gather together so many
good and sweet smelles. In the same forests are a great number of redd and
venomous serpents, which leaping upon men do byte them with poison most
dangerous and mortal. They make fire of the branches of mirrhe, The smell of
mirrhe unwholesome,
but the smell thereof is so pernicious, that if they did not remedy the same
with the smoke of Storax, it would engender unto the^ sicknesses incurable.
They which gather the Frankincense (dedicated unto divine honors) are called
sacred or holy, for that during the time of their gathering, they do abstain
from women and burialls, esteeming, that by that kind of observation and
ceremony, their marchaundise will increase the more; Diverse have written, that
the incense is not found in any other place then in Arabia. But Pedro Gesa of
Leon, in his second part of the history general of the west Indies, says: that
near unto the river Marannon, is found great quantity of Fra^kincense, better
then that of Arabia. In this place are also found the Sardonique stones,
Molochite, and those which are called Iris, being of color as clear as
crystal, the Andromede also and the Pederote, which Pliny calls Opalius: it
is said also, that there is bred the bird Phaenix, which lives as some do say
^40. years: but Pliny says 660. years; and Manilius, Senator of Rome
affirms, that with the life of this bird, the revolution of the great year is
made, which diverse (as Solin) say to consist, not in 540. years, but in 12950.
years. Let him believe it that will as for me, I think that to speak of the
Phaenix is none other thing then the telling of a fable; unto the ports of the
said Zeila, Barbora, and Delaqua, come to traffic, the merchants of Cambaia,
of Ade^, and of the whole Arabia. They bring thither small clothes of diverse
sorts and colors, and other things from the said Ca^baye and Ormmus, and for
their marchandises, they receive again raisons, dates, gold, Iuorie and
slaves, and do their traffic at the port of Zeila, and Barbora* unto which
ports likewise do come they of Chiloa, Melinde, Braua, Madagassar, and Mombaza.
And thus by these two ports are dispersed the merchandises throughout the
countries of the Abissins, and even into Turkey and Graecia, where I have seen
diverse merchants of Arabia, clothed and apparrelled as the figure following
does show.

A Merchant of Arabia.


Of the ancient manner of living, laws, and religion of the Arabians.

Chap. 12.
IN old times the Arabians had amongst them diverse manner of living and
different ceremonies, they wear long hair, and wear on their heads a cloth
wreathd, shauing their beard with a rasor, suffered no hair to grow, but only
the moustaches betwixt the nose and the mouth as they do yet at this present.
As for arts and sciences, they kept no school, but lived after the
instructions which they had received of their fathers. Unto the most ancient
of them was given the puissaunce and government over all the other, having
nothing particular, but lived al in one comminalty: using their wives which
they took of their lynnage, in common, yea even of their own mothers and
sisters, esteming themselves in that manner, as al brethren together. And such
amongst them as used carnal company with any other woman, then as was of his
own blood, was punished by death as an Adulterer. They had in great observation
the sole^nity of others, for whensouer they would swear amity and
confederation with any other, they set in the midst of the 2. parties, some
certain person who with a sharp cutting stone, cut them in the hand as near
the thumb as might be: and afterward took the hair and flocks of their
coats which he dipped within the blood, and there with rubbed 7. stones, which
were laid between both the Iura^ts, calling upon Bacchus and Vranie, (for
they had an opinion that there were none other gods, then these: calling
Bacchus, Vratalt, and Vranie Alilat) and then the mediator of such a peace and
amity, admonished the 2. parties carefully to observe and keep the pacts and
couentions between them made and sworn. The Arabians as before we have said,
are crafty and proud, and do believe that in valor and hardines they do
surpass all the other nations in the world: for the present they are al
obseruators of the sect of Mahomet, and the most part are subject and
Tributories unto the great Turk.

A Slave Moore.


Of the adventurers called Dellis or Zatasnicis.

Chap. 13.
DEllis are adventurers, like unto light horsemen, whose profession is to seek
their adventures in the most dangerous places, Dellys.
where by warlike feats of arms they make proof of their strength and
manhood, and therefore do love to follow the army of the great Turk, without
any wages (like unto the Anchises) but that the most part of them are kept and
entertained at the charges of the Basshas, Beglierbeis and Sangiaques, which
every one of them have a number of the brauest and valiantest in their trayn.
These do dwell in the parties of Bossine, and Seruia, bordering upon Graecia on
the one side, and on the other, Hungary and Austria, and at this present time
are called Seruians or Crouats, which are the true Illirians, whom Herodian in
the life of Seuerus, describes to be men most valiant, of great stature,
well shapen, and big set, their color being yealowishe, but of nature most
malicious, and of custom more then barbarous, of gross understanding, and
easy to be deceived. Notwithstanding they were in great estimation with
Alexander the great: yea, so that oftentimes they durst undertake to take in
hand the occupying of Macedonia. The Turks do call them Dellys, which is to
say hardye fools: but amongst them they call themselves Zatasnicis, which
signifies in their language, defyers of men, for that every one of them are
bound to fight against ten (before they can attain to the name and token of
Delly, or Zatasnici) they challenge always body for body, to break the spear
upon their enemies, using in their fightes many guyles and crafts, which are
remained to them from their ancestors, with such dexterity and hardines, that
most often they remain victorious. The first Delly, that I saw, was in
Andrinopole, being then with the Lord of Arramont, in the house of Rostan
Basha, too whom the said Delly was retaynour, who not only at my request:
but also in hope to have some present, as he had, did follow us unto our
lodging, where whilst he was making good cheer, I took the extract of his
person, and of his strange habit, which was such as follows, his doublet
and his long and large hosen, by the Turks called Saluares, were of the
skin of a young bear, with the hair outward: and under their Saluares,
boots, or buskins of yeallowe Marokin, sharp before and very high beinde,
shodde underneath with iron, and compassed with long and large spurs. Upon
the head he had a long cappe after the Polonian or Georgian fashion, hangyng
down over one of his shoulders made of a Leopardes skin well spotted, and
over the same before the foreheade for too show more ferefull, was fastened a
long tail of an Eagle and the two wings nailed upon the target with two great
iron nails, which he carried in a scarf about his shoulders: his arms were
the Cymiter or skayne, and the dagger: and in the right hand the Busdegan,
which is to say, the mase of arms well damaskaned. But certain when he
departed from Andrinopole, with the forces which Achmat Bascha (which since
the great Turk caused to be strangled in his bed) carried for the great
Lord into Transsiluania, I saw him mounted on a fair Turkey horse decked with
the whole skin of a great Lion, fastened with the two foremost feet before
upon the breast, and the other two hanging down behind, his Busdegan hung at
his sadle bow, and in his right hand bare a long lance, the poleaxe at the
point being well steeled, altogether being as ye may lively see in the
picture following. I was moreover curious to ask him by a Dragoman of what
nation he was, and what religion he kept, whereupon wisely he gave me to
understand that he was of nation a Seruian, but that his grandfather was
descended of the Parthes, a people sometimes renowned and esteemed to be the
most warlike in all the East parts: and that as for his religion
notwithstanding that he dissembled to live with the Turks according to their
law, yet was he from his birth of heart and will, a christian, and the better to
make me believe it, he said in the vulgar Greek, and in the Esclauon tongue,
the Lords Prayer, the salutation of the Angel, and the Symbol of the
Apostles. Furthermore I asked him why he did apparel himself so strangely,
and with such great feathers, his answer was, that it was to show and appear
unto his enemies* more furious and fearful. And as for the feathers, the
custom amongst them was, that to none other it was permitted to wear them:
but unto such as had made some memorable proof of their person for that
amongst them the feathers were esteemed to be the true ornament of a valiant man
of war, which was all that I could learn of this pretty Delly.

Delly which signifies fool hardy.


Of the men and women of Celicia, presently called Caramania.

Chap. 14.
WIthin the city of Constantinople, near unto the 7 towers there is a great
street for the most part inhabited by the Caramanians (by the ancients called
Cilicians) living as other strange nations do under the tribute of the great
Turk and exercising marchandises or handicraftes, wherein they are very
ingenious and cunning, specially in goldsmithes work, and imbrodering. The
Goldsmithes keep their shops near unto the Bezestan, which is, as before I
have said, a hall, whereas al sorts of costly marchandises are sold, as of
gold, of silver, of stones, furs, cloth of gold, and of silver and silk,
slaves, Cammels and horses unto him that most bids: Amongst which
Caramanians are the most excellent and richest works.

The Caramanian women, principally those of quality, do but seldom go
abroad, as the other Graecians do, except it be to the bathes or to the
Church: but keep themselves ordinarily enclosed within their houses, employing
their time in making of diverse fair needleworks upon cloth, which they put to
be sold at the Bezestan or other common markets. But the other women of less
estate, for to get their living and for relief of their necessity, give
themselves to sell openly within the city, eggs, chickins, cheeses, and
herbs, and go apparrelled as ye see in the figure ^ollowing. But the richer
sort go more bravely and costly apparrelled, for they wear their Doliman,
either of velvet, satin or damask, and on their head a long myter, figured
with flowers of diverse colors, covered with a great cloak, hanging down
behind to the ground: the men are apparrelled after the fashion of the other
Graecians, observing the same faith and religion, and obey unto the Patriarche
of Constantinople.

A woman of Caramania.


Of Cilicia presently called Caramania.

Chap. 15.
AS for the country of Caramania, first called Cilicia, of the name of Caelix
the son of Agenor, according to Herodote, Hipachea, Cilicia of Cilix.
is described by Ptolome in his fifth book as a province of little Asia, having
for her borders toward the East, the mount Aman, presently called the black
mountain, of the North the mount of Taur, of the west side a part of
Pamphilia, and on the other part of the South the uttermost parts of the
goulph Issique, which now is called ^asse. This region is enuyroned with high
and sharp mountains, from the which drop toward the sea, diverse rivers.
And of these mountains the issues are very narrow, and straight* of the one
and other side environed high with mountains, first called the ports of
Armenia, afterward the mountains of Caspie, and presently of Silicia: through
which narrow streights, Alexander the great going into the East parties, with
great perilles and dangerous hazard, made his army to pass. The principal
and Metropolitan city of this country is Tharse* vulgarely called Terrase,
being the place of birth and household of S. Paul, which first was founded by
the noble Perseus son of the fair Danae. Although Solin, and pope Pius
attribute her first edification unto Sardanapal the last son of Anacindaraxe,
and last king of the Assyrians: through the midst of the same Country runs
the fair river Cydne or Ca^ne, by the Fre^chme^ called the river of Salef,
which takes her spring from the mount of Taur and wherein was drowned the
Emperor Frederike Barberosse. Vitruuius in his eight book and third chapter
says, that if they did wash their legs within this river Cydne, that
incontinent after they should find them selves cleansed and healed of their
disease. The Tarsians were in times past so given to philosophy, that they
excelled the Athenians and Alexandrians, notwithstanding that the Athenians
were more famous and renowned in strange countries, and that their City was
more frequented with all sorts of people. Nevertheless, the Tarsians were in
philosophy more excellent, and of their city took origin, Antipater,
Archelaus, Antenor, Marcel, Diogenes, Artemidore, Dionisius, and Crates the
Grammarian. Besides Tarse the head city of Cilicia, there is another renowned
city of the ancients called Coryce, and of the modernes Curth, of all sides
environed with a haue^ of the sea, saving of one side being very straight which
joins unto the firm land. Above this city there is an Antherne, a cave or
den, A cave very strange.
which Pomponius Mela says to be made by such singular artifice of nature,
that the admiration, excellency, and sovereign beauty thereof, carries those
that enter into it out of their proper senses and memory and almost rauisheth
and takes away the spirits of those, which upon the sudden enter intoo
it. But after they are come to themselves, they cannot satisfy them of the
pleasure which is there. For, for to come to the bottom of this heauenlike
den, you do descend by a fair stare, about 3. quarters of a mile
indelectable and shadowed, where is heard a harmony more then human, certain
sounds agreeing, and sounding like unto symbals or other melodious instruments,
which greatly abasheth and seems marvelous to those that first enter into
it. So as in times past the inhabitauntes of the country by superstitious,
opinion did think, that this sounding cave was the sepulchrall bed of the
valiant Giant Typhon. In the plain fields, which are about Coryce or Curth
grows abundance of very good saffron, giving more smell, and being more like
unto the color of gold, and more profitable in medicines, then any other, and
has for the singularity thereof by the ancients been called saffron of
Coryce. Tarse therefore and Coryce are two the most famous and renowned Cities
of Cilicia or Caramania, although there be diverse others of good and antique
name, as Selimontis in the honor of the good Emperor Traian after his death
consecrated in his name, and called Traianopolis. There is also Satalia
cituated upon the sea coast of Cilicia, whereof has taken the name the goulfe
of Satalia, aunciently called Issa, and presently Iasse: about this place
Alexander the Macedonian vanquished and overcame the great Darius king of the
Persians, by reason whereof the City was called Nicopolis, which is to say,
town of victory. Moreover in the same region, is as yet resting the ancient
town of the Sun called Heliopolis, or to say better, Solos or Soloe, for that
Solon one of the seven sages of Grecia, was founder thereof, and afterward by
the name of Pomp was called Pompeiopolis, for that in the time of the
triumphaunt Rome, the Cicilians dwelling along the coast of the Mediteran sea,
a people being acquainted with the seas, and exercising the navigations,
Pirates, Coursaries, and Skummers of the sea, stood up in so great number, and
so strong men given to piracie, and of vessels and ships necessary for that
purpose, as Foysts, and Brigantins, that they possessed and kept the Sea side
in such distress, that they did not only let and anoy the merchaunts ships,
and ships of war, but likewise kept the ports and passages so shut, that
they kept away the corn and victuals from all Italy, whereby the Roman
people were in danger of being famished. Wherefore (as Flore writes in his
Epitome) Pompee was sent against them with an army, which through marvelous
diligence and speed within forty days overcame them, and chased them clean
out of the sea, and in the end having on the land taken them into mercy, sent
them into certain towns and lands in Cilicia, far from the Sea, there to
dwell and live, and too the end to purge the sea: and namely assigned new
inhabitants in the town then called Soloe, and since upon this reason
Pompeiopolis.

The Cilicians were in times past called Tarses (as Josephus writes) their
denomination having taken that name of Tarse, nephewe unto Iaphet, who first
gave them the order too live, bearyng over them the principality and
government. Likewise, called after his name their chief city Tarse. Now a
days the whole Cilicia is as I have said, called Caramania, a country
reduced under the puissaunce and domination of the great Turk, which before
was a kingdom so puissaunt, that the kings of Caramania, might have brought
intoo the field forty thousand men on horseback, yea that Orcan Lord of
the Turks son, and successor of the first Othoman, who made himself
chief of the Turks, and that first gave the name of his nobleness to their
Emperors, durst well, for to make himself more noble to take in marriage the
daughter of Caraman king of Caramania, so called after his name, after he had
conquested and overcome the same.

Of the Merchant Jews dwelling in Constantinople and other places of Turkey
and Grecia.

Chap. 16.
Jews great usurers.
THE number of the Jews dwelling throughout all the Citities of Turkey and
Grecia, and principally at Constantinople is so great, that it is a thing
marvelous and incredible, for the number of these, using trade and trafique of
merchandise, like of money at usury, does there multiply so from day too day,
that the great haunt and bringing of merchandises which arrive there of all
parts as well by Sea as by land, is such, that it may be said with good reason
that at this present day they have in their hands the most and greatest
trafique of merchandise and ready money, that is in all Leuant. And likewise
their shops and warehouses the best furnished of all rich sorts of
merchandises, which are in Constantinople are those of the Jews. Likewise they
have amongst them workmen of all arts and handicraftes most excellent; and
specially of the Maranes of late banished and driven out of Spain and
Portugale, who to the great detriment and damage of the Christianity, have
taught the Turks diverse inventions, crafts and engines of war, as to make
artillery, harquebuses, gunne powder, shot and other munitions: they have also
there set up printing, not before seen in those countries, by the which in
fair characters they put in light diverse books in diverse languages, as Greek,
Latin, Italian, Spanish, and the Hebrewe tongue, being too them natural, but
are not permitted to print the Turkey or Arabian tongue: they have also the
commodity and usage to speak and understand all other sorts of languages
used in Leuant, which serves them greatly for the communication and trafique,
which they have with other strange nations, to whom oftentimes they serve for
Dragomans, or interpretours. Besides, this detestable nation of the Jews, are
men full of all malice, fraud, deceit, and subtle dealing, exercising
execrable vsuries amongst the Christians and other nations without any
consciences or reprehention: but have free license, paying the tribute: a thing
which is a great ruin unto the country and people where they are
conversant. They are marvelous obstinate and stubborn in their infidelity*
attending daily their Messiah promised, by who^ they hope to be brought again
into the land of promise: they have the vale of Moses so knit before the^ eyes
of their understanding, that they will not nor by any manner of means can see,
or acknowledge the brightness and light of jesus Christ, whom through
misbelief, envy, and unmeasured rage, they condemned and caused too dye on the
cross, and charging themselves with the offense and sin committed toward
his person, wrote unto Pilate, his blood be upon us and our children, and
therefore their sin has followed them and their successors throughout al
generations, so as where they would not receive his salvation, the same for
ever shall be kept from them, to their great mischief and confusion, for since
their extermination and the vengeance upon Jerusalem unto this present day,
they had at no time any certain dwelling place upon the face of the earth,
but have always gone straying dispearsed and driven away from Country to
country. And yet even at this day in what region soever they are permitted to
dwell under tribute, they are abhorred of God and men, and more persecuted of
the Turks, which in derision call them Chifont, then of any other nation, who
have them in such disdain and hatred, that by no means they will eat in
their company, and much l^sse marry any of their wives or daughters,
notwithstanding that oftentimes they do marry with Christians, whom they
permit too live according to their law, and have a pleasure too eat and be
conversant with Christians: and that which is worse, if a Jew would become a
Muselman, he should not be received, except first leaving his Iudaical sect he
became a christian. The Jews which dwell in Constanstinople, Andrinople,
Bursia, Salonica, Gallipoli, and other places of the dominion of the great
Turk, are all apparrelled with long garments, like unto the Gretians, and
other nations of Leuant, but for their mark and token to be known from others,
they wear a yealow Tulbant. Those that dwell in the I Will of Chio (which are in
great number under the tribute of the Seigniorie) in steed of a Tulbant do
wear a great cap of credit, which some do call a bonnet of Arbaleste, being
also of yealow color. This which I have drawn out is one of those that carry
cloth to sell through the city of Constantinople.

A Merchant Jew.


Of the Armenians.

Chap. 17.
THE Armenians are conversant in Turkey and Grecia like unto strangers,
chiefly at Constantinople and Pera, being the most part merchants, do great
trafique of merchandises of Leuant, as Chamblets, Mockados, Says, and Carpets
of Suria. The poorer sort of them are artificers, or else do give them selves
to dressing of gardens and vines. Their garments are long, like unto the
Grecians and other nations of the East parts, and on their heads do wear a
blue Tulbant, mixed with read and white, for that it is not permitted unto
any then to the Turks to wear a Tulbant being white only.

The religion and manner of living of the ancient Armenians.

Chap. 18.
IN times past, the Armenians in their laws, customs and manner of living,
did not much differ from the Medians, nor likewise in their religion, wherein
the most part followed the error of the Persians, nevertheless the Persians
worship one Goddess only called Tanais, Tanais a goddess worshipped by the
Armenians.
unto whom they builded in sundry places, diverse temples, and dedicated unto
them not only their men and woman servants, but likewise their own
daughters of the most noble houses: their law being such as constrained them
too put them forth publikelye, and a long time unto all comers, before they
might be married, and there was none that for this matter would refuse too
take them in marriage, which to contract, they did as follows. The bride
grome did cut of the tip of the right ear of the bride, A strange fashion of
contracting marriage,
and the bride of the left ear of her husband, and by this mutual consentment
without any other ceremony, was the marriage contracted and observed between
them, and published to all the world. But when they would vow any great and
solemn oath, they took of the blood of their right ear, and so drunk it with
wine, as is written in the nienth book of Valerius Maximus. Josephus in his
first book of the antiquity of the Jews, writes, that Otree the son of
Aram, was he which first gave the law and manner of living unto the Armenians.

Modern religion of the Armenians.

Chap. 19.
AS for their faith and modern religion, they are christians, having their
church and ceremonies a part, as all other not being Turks have, al which the
great Lord does permit, to live according to their mind, their law and
religion, paying unto him the Carach or tribute of a Ducate for every head by
the year. Notwithstanding the ceremonies of the christian Armenians are far
different from those of the church of Rome, and a great deal more from the
Grecian, for that in steed of a pope of Rome, or Patriarch of Grecia, or else of
an Abyma, chief of Ethiopian church, and the country of Prester Johannes,
they have a catholic Lord, being both temporal and spiritual* to whom as well
in ecclesiastical reverence as temporal justice they do equally obey. Their
priests are married according to the liberty of the oriental church, and of
the Ethiopians, which in apparel do show themselves modest, of countenance,
grave and venerable, being shaue^ on their head with a large crown, wearing
their hair ha^ging down very long and likewise their beard. They celebrate
their office after the manner of the latin church, but not in latin nor greek,
but in the Armenian tongue, to the end without any difficulty to be better
understood of the sta^ders by, which do answer the^ in the same vulgar
language. And when they do rise to hear the gospel read, do cross them
selves, in sign of peace and reconciliation, making their sacrament according
to the Roman manner, with a round cake, with a challice of glass or wood.
Amongst the annual feasts they do not celebrate the nativity of our Lord
Jesus Christ, but on the twelfth day, use great feasts and solemnity* As for
the Lent they do fast and observe the same as we do, but with greater and
streighter abstinence, not only of earthly flesh and fish: but likewise of all
other substances wherein life has been, and of all nourishing and delectable
liquors of oil and wine, using none other food, the^ simple meats without
fatness, as herbs fruits, and certain lean pottages. True it is that for to
show themselves more different from the Grecians, the Emulators, at certain
days on the friday, they do eat flesh and drink wine, and use of all other
meat and drink that pleases them. And amongst all the holy Apostles of the
catholic church, they take S. James the greater, for their great patron and
protector. Their ecclesiastical men in their manner of doing and outward
appearaunce, do show a great sanctimonie, devotion, modesty, and simplicity
of life, as well in their garments, fashion, and ornaments of the body, as in
gesture, port, and manner of going, if they were not furred with too great and
mischievous hypocrisy, for under such devout pretext of holiness and religion,
they do not only without any shamefastnes exercise usury as the secular men
do, but also give themselves to the art magic, and all other sorts of
southsayings and Nicromancies, altogether contrary to the true and christian
religion.

Of Armenia.

Chap. 20.
TO come now to the original country of the Armenia^s, you must understand
that Armenia is a region in Asia, so called Armenia by the name of Armene,
otherwise called Thessall, companion of Jason the Thessalonia^ in his
expeditio^ Argona^tique, and is divided in two parts, to wit, Armenia the
greater, now called Turcomania, and Armenia the lesser, which yet reserueth
his name. In this region (as Isidore says) is the mount Ararat, otherwise
called the mount Gordian, upon the top whereof rested and remained the ark of Noah, after the great deluge was ceased. Through the playnes of Armenia
passes the river Araxe by them called Arath, and likewise a great part of the
renowned Ryuers of Euphrates and Tiger. The Euphrates which in the Assyrian
tongue is called Almacher, through his inundations (as Nilus does in Egypt)
makes the country fruitful and abundant, in the channel and decourse
whereof are found many precious stones of great price and value. Ptolome in
the first book of his Geographie, and pope Pius in his 3. part of ye
description of Asia, describe Armenia after this manner: on the North side it
has a part of Colcide, now called Calpurt of Hiberia and Albania: on the West
it has the great course of the river of Euphrates, which on the left hand
leaves Capadocia* Armenia the lesser, Sira, Comegena, and toward the Euxine
the mounts Mosquises. On the East it is termined with part of the Sea Hircanum,
and of Media, toward the which are the Caspian mountes: and on the South side
has Mesopotamia and Assyria. The most famous mountains of Armenia are the
Mosquises, which stretch toward Capadocia upon the part of Periade, whereas
are the springs of Euphrates, Araxes and Antitaure, which is the half part of
the Euphrates, and runs through Media and Armenia, and at the end of his
course is called Albus: the Cordicque out of which the Tiger grows and
extends unto the pales of Tospie the Taur, and the Niphante, which divide
Mesopotamia and Assyria from the Armenians, the Caspiens which decline to the
Medes and the Caucases, which shut up the North parts toward Iberia and
Albania* As for the rivers most renowned in Armenia* the 4 principallest are
these which follow: Cyrus which growing from the mount Caucase, leaves on
the left hand Iberia and Albania, and on the right hand Armenia, and so
falls into the Hircan Sea: Araxe, (which as we have said) falling from the
mount Periade, takes his course far Eastwardes, afterward enclineth
toward the North, and having run so a great way, deuideth into two
streams, whereof the one keeps his course Northwardes, and falls into
Cyrus, and the other toward the East, casts out into the Sea Caspium: the
Euphrates which issues out of the same mount toward the West, runs unto
the Mountes of the Mosquice, and to the borders of Capadocia, and from thence
takes his course far toward the South, returnyng too Antitaure parts the
same from Armenia the lesser: afterward taking his right course toward the
South; the flood Mela, which falls from the mount Arga, after cutting the
Taur in two, leaves Syria on the right hand, and Mesopotamia on the left,
extending unto Arabia the desert, and then again having run along course
toward the South, and te^ding again toward the East and West, separateth
Babylon from Mesopotamia, and of new returning toward the East, not far from
Selencia, boweth toward the South, and makes a great course by Apamia: and
afterward running once again toward the East, mingleth with the Tiger,
which also takes his origin in Armenia, from the mount Cordicke: and running
with him toward the south, enters into the goulph of Persia. The most famous
cities of Armenia the less, according to Pliny in his sixth book the nienth
chapter, are Cesaria, Asa, and Nicopoli. And of Armenia the greater, Arsamote,
which Ptolome calls Arsamosate near unto Euphrates, and to the Tiger
Carcachiocerte. In the mountains is Tigranocerte, and in the plain near unto
the flood Araxe, Artaxete. Ptolome speaks of a great many more which I leave
behind for eschewing of prolixity, but only that I will say, that at this
present day, Armenia the greater has the first place amongst the countries of
Sophy, as being ennobled of his royal city of Tauris or Terua, as Ptolome
says, or else as it seems unto some Hebrews very well experimented in
languages, and assieties of countries, the famous and ancient city of Susa.
But as for Armenia the lesser, the most part thereof is now under the yoke and
dominion of the great Turk, and Armenia the greater, under the puissance of
Sophi king of the Persians.

A Merchant of Armenia.


Of the Ragusins,

Chap. 21.
THe Ragusins generally are rich: for that they are very covetous, enclining
their mind to nothing more then to the gain of merchandise, and to make ready
money. Besides this, they are of nature so proud, that they do not think to be
more knowledge or nobleness in any other nation then is in them* And to speak
truth they do deserve great praise, considering that the cituation of their
town being in such a sharp place, and so straightly extended, by their only
virtue and industrye, yea almost in despite of nature, they have opened the way
to all commodities necessary. The apparel of the me^ is such, that some do
cloth themselves after the Venetian, and others after another manner, as ye may
see by yt figures following, to wit, the mercha^ts and the foot posts, as are
the Fantes carrying of letters, whom we do call messe^gers which carry ye
ordinary dispatches from Raguse to Constantinople, and from Constantinople to
Raguse, as well of the Ambassadors of France, as of the hostages of the
Venetians and Florentins. Their common language is the Sclauonian speech, and
do also speak certain broken Italian, more lewdly then the Venetians do.
Their women are not very fair, and apparel themselves but homely, wearing
ordinarily on their head an high attire made of fine linen cloth, but the
nobler sort wear it of white silk, having their hosen even to the heels:
they do go very seldom abroad out of their houses, but do love to be looking
out at the windows to behold the goers by* As for their daughters are kept so
close shut in, as they are not to be seen by no manner of wise.

Of the policy and government of the Ragusins.

Chap. 22.
THE politic estate of the Ragusins, is Aristocratie, or a common wealth
governed by the Lords, out of which, is created every month a president which
remains in the palace, and has twelve counsailers by whom the congregation
is called Pregai or Pregadi, unto which do resort an hundredth or more of the
ancients of the city. And besides these aforesaid, they have moreover the
great counsel, unto which are assistant, all the nobles of the age of twenty
years and vpwardes. They are tributaries unto the great Turk of twelve
thousand ducats, which they are bound to send unto him every year with two
Orators to Constantinople, or else where he shall be.

A Merchant of Raguse.


Fante of Raguse, or a carrier of letters.


Of the City of Raguse.

Chap. 23.
RAguse (which Ptolome calls Epidaure is a city very ancient and noble,
although the same which presently is called Raguse, is not the old, for that
was destroyed by ye Goths, but of the ruins thereof the later Raguse was by
the inhabitauntes builded ten thousand pases from the old, which for the
present is but little inhabited, but the new is so much the more ^requented and
better peopled, edified in most fair cituation upon the coast of the
Adriatique sea, being notwithstanding within the precinct of the Dalmatian.
The haven is very little and wrought with hands. On the upper part there is a
mount of great highness and sharpness: at the foot whereof the city is
founded, she is very subject unto winds and Earthquakes, and also in Winter
season is very cold. There are diverse fo^ntaines taking their beginning of the
next mountains, the water whereof is very sweet and wholesome to drink. About
the distance of a mile from the city, there is a fair and delectable place
called Grauosa, set all along with houses builded by most fair and ingenious
Architecture, accompanied with diverse gardens and pleasaunces, planted with
Orange trees, citrons, lemons and other excellent fruitful trees of diverse
sorts. There are also seen many clear and fair fountains dyuinely wrought,
which through conduits and pypes they make to come forth where it pleases
them. And this fair place of Grauosa stands on the edge of the sea, which
there makes a goulph after the fashion of a port very pleasant, and able to
receive a 100. Galleys.

Description of Thracia.

Chap. 24.
THracia which first was called Perca, and since Scithon, is a province in
Europe (counted amongst the regions of Scithia, most ample and of great
compass, but of an ill temperature, the air being unwholesome, and not
healthful, the ground also barren enough, except it be in the places near
unto the sea. It was named Thracia, after the name of Thiras the son of
Iaphet, or else as others say of Thrax the son of Mars, and by this reason
(seeming to be the most apparent) was by Euripides called the house of Mars, at
this present day is called Roman, and is divided in 2. parts, the one whereof
is called Thracia only, and the other Thracia Chersonese. On the East part
bordereth upon the sea Exinum, and Propontide, on the south the Sea Aegeum, the
flood, Strymon, presently Redino, and the fields of Macedonia: on the North the
river Istre, being the Danube or Danoe, and on the West the mountains of
Peonia a part of Pannonia, and the river of Save, as Pliny and Strabo have
written, who do affirm Thracia to be divided by the mount Eme, and that the
Triballes Dardanes (a fierce and proud people) and the Mysia^s inhabited
Thracia, but the Triballes possessed the part presently kept by the Rastians,
whom we do call Seruians. After the Triballes are the Bulgares, from the East
unto the sea Euxinum, and dwell between Istre and the mount Eme, extending
toward the south alongest the sea coast unto Hellespontus, and is that which
presently is called Romanie. The rivers of Thracia are, Bathynia, Athyras,
Arsus, vulgarly Chiarelech, Melas, whereof takes the name the gulf of Mela,
otherwise the gulf of Caridia, Hebrus now Matizza, or Valisa, Nesus or Neste,
and Strimo^. But the most famous are the three last. Of the most renowned
mounts ye have Eme, which separateth the Thracians from the Triballes, which by
some has been called the chain of the world. Rhodope, so called by Rhodope
Queen of Thracia, out of which do spring the rivers Neste, and Hebrus, and the
mount Orbel, much celebrated for the sacrifice of Bacchus* and through the
congregation of the Menades under the conduct of the Poet Orpheus. Amongst
these mountains Eme is of such a height that from the top thereof (which as
Pliny recites is 6000. paces) is seen the sea of Exinum: there is moreover the
mount Athos of the Latins called Monte santo, because it is altogether habited
of the Caloeres, Greeks, which are (as most curiously writes M. Peter Bellon
in his observation) in number 5, or 6. thousand, and have 23, or 24.
monasteries al well fortified, for that they should not be molested of the
Coursaries and Pirates on the sea, and al these Caloieres live under the
obeisance of the Patriarch of Constantinople. This mount Athos is so high, that
it passes the skies, so as diverse have written that from thence the sun
shining, the shadow does extend to the isle of Lemnos, being distant one from
another 70. M. pases. And nevertheless Xerxes the great king of the Persians,
going against the Graecians, caused this mount to be cut through on the side
that joins unto the firm land, making the sea to pass underneath it in such
sort, that easily he made it round about nauigable* The Thraces (as Herodote in
his 7 book writes) have the way whereby Xerxes passed his army, in such
reverence, that never since that time they would till or sow the same. Plutarch
in the life of Alexander the great, makes mention of a certain Stacicrates,
an ingenious master, who being sent for, to come before the said Alexander,
proposed unto him that if his pleasure were, he would make to be cut in humain
figure, the mount of Athos, with such art and industry, that with his left
hand, he should sustain a City habitable for 10000. persons, and with the
right hand should power out a great river: which should run down into the sea.
But Alexander taking it for a jest would not believe it. As for the cities of
Thracia, the principallest and most ancientest are Bisia, sometimes the
fortress of the kings of Thracia, but odious unto the swallows for the
detestable sin of Thereus, Phinolopis, Curnubisance, presently Pera or
Galatha, and Bizance, now Constantinople, cituated upon the Bosphore Thracian,
(whereof I have before made particular description.) Ye have afterward Opisime
at the foot of the mount of Eme, Valla, Orcelis, Tonsus, Caliba, Nicopoli,
Ostamphus, Arsus, Carpudemon, Bergula, presently Bergas, Plotinopolis,
Drusipara, Selimbria, otherwise Selions or Solombria, Perinthe or Heraclee.
About Propontide, Praside, Terta, Penetropolis: at the foot of the mount
Rhodope, and afterward of his foundator Philippopoli: and finally,
Adrianopolis, which I cannot pass without description, for that the great Lord
keeps oftentimes his residence there.

Of the City of Andrinopole.

Chap. 25.
ADrianopolis which sometimes was called Stratomcie, Odrysus and Trimuntium:
vulgarly Andernople, Andernopoli or Andrinople, was a city most ample and
fair, as by the ancient walls may be seen, her cituation is in a plain:
but about, it has many fruitful hills. All the houses, except the ancient
churches of the Christians, and the Mosquees and bathes of the Turks, are
builded after the Turkey fashion of wood and earth, Sultan Selim builded there
for a dwelling place, a fair and sumptuous Sarail, for that it was the place
of his most residence: as also is of Sultan Soliman, that now reigns, namely,
in Winter, for the commodity of hunting, wherein he greatly delights. There
is besides another Sarail for the lodging of the Azamoglans or Ianissaries, but
the fairest and most sumptuous building of all is the Mosquee of Sultan Amarat:
at one of the entries of the city, ye pass over a great bridge of stone of
Marbre, very high, on the one side whereof as also along by the Sarail passes
the river Hebrus, vulgarly called Matizza, and on the other side the Tuns,
which rivers by the turning in their course have made near unto the city
many fair and pretty yles, no less pleasant then profitable, as being trimmed
and dressed into most fair orchardes (full of all sorts of excellent
fruitful trees) and delicious gardens. The city is peopled with a great
number of Christians Greeks having there their Metropoli: who having lost
their liberty, and seeing them selves destitute and dispossessed of all they
had, are retired thither, some to give themselves to some trade of
merchandise or handicrafte. The other having yet left some mean to live by, go
up and down thinking of their former estates and degrees. There are likewise an
infinite number of rich Jews, and great traders, with merchandise and ready
money, to give and deliver out by gross upon excessive usury. But the number
of the Turks is the greatest of all, and specially of excellent woorkmen,
which is the occasion that the city does abound of all sorts of merchaundises,
and fair works, of saddels, bridles, and al other furnitures for horses, which
there are made very fair and perfect: likewise fine damaskened needles, and
the fair maroquins and skins of al sorts* of lively colors, strange and
diverse above al other places in the world.

As for the manner of the garments of the inhabitaunts, I have hereafter
presented in order the lively drafts of a woman of estate of Graecia, of a
Turkey woman of mean estate, and of a maiden of joy or a common woman, or
strumpet* (of whom not only the city, but likewise the whole country is full.)
And as for the men, Turks, Jews, or Christians, they go apparrelled after
the manner of those of Constantinople, and other cities of Thracia and Graecia.
To return now to our first points of Geographie, you have also in this region
Traianopoli, Apri, Bizanta, now Rodesto or Rodeste, but according to Pliny,
Macronticke, Partyra, Lysimachia, which is cituated at the foot of the great
chersonesse: within the which is Gallipoli, builded by C. Caligula, Maditus
presently Maytho^, abou^ding of very good wines, Ceste against Abide: Cretee
and the port Cele, where was foughten on the water the battle betwixt the
Athenians and the Lacedaemonians, in which place are the marks of the ruins
of Lacedemonia. There is again found Cinosseme the sepulcher of Hecuba: after
that Hell being the end of Hellespont, and likewise the place where Xerxes,
made a bridge to pass over his army out of Asia into Grecia: there is also
the promontorie Mastuce, and the flood Egee, memorable because of the shipping
of the Athenians. Afterward returning into the land Aphrodise, Cipselle,
otherwise Capsilar, whereas is found great quantity of fine allom, Aen^
builded by Aeneas in the time of his fleeing after the ruin of Troy, Sardique
presently Triadisse, Pergame, Nicopolis, Abdere or Polystilo, where Democritus
the Philosopher was borne, Ene a free City, within which was erected the
sepulcher of Polidore, Fisique, Dyme, Marogne, Pantalie, Topicis, Gazore
Phillippi, Oesine, Neapolis, which besides is called Cristopolis and Stagira,
the native country of the great Aristotle.

Moreover about the beginning of the banks Pontick, whereas the river Istre
enters into the sea, are many fair cities* as Istropolis of the Melesians,
Ionie, Celatin or Acernete, Heraclee and Bizone, which was swallowed up
through an earthquake. About the rivers Mela and Hebrus are the Cicones, and
more further the Dorisques, which is the place where Xerxes not being able to
number his army, measured the circuit of the ground which they ouerspreade.
After that is the promontorie Serree, in which place Orpheus, through the
sound and harmony of his voice and harp, moved the trees and beasts to give
^are unto him. Beyond that is the city of Tinde, where the cruel Diomedes was
borne, which through his unnatural cruelty, made certain of his cruel
horses too eat the flesh of strangers, which by a mischaunce fell into his
hands. But in the end he himself was devoured being overcome by Hercules,
and was cast before his horses. Between the river Strymon, and the mount of
Athos, is the tower Calerne, and the port Crapule the city Acanthe, and
Oesine, and betwixt Athose and Pallene, Cleone and Olinthe. Thus much as
concerning the description of Thracia. Now rests to treat of their laws,
fashions, religion and manner of living of the Thracians, as well aunciently as
nowadayes.

A Graetian woman of estate of the city of Andrinople in Thracia.


A Turkey woman of mean estate as she is in her Chamber.


A maiden of pleasure or common Woman of Turkey.


Manners, laws, religion, and ancient order of living of the Thracians.

Chap. 26.
HErodote father of the Historians in his 5. book says, the nation of the
Thracians to be next after the Indians, the greatest of all the countries on
the earth, and that if the same were governed by one head, should be
invincible, or if they agreed amongst themselves: but that it would be hard to
bring them to that point, for that at al times they have been esteemed amongst
all the other people of Europe the most cruel, spiteful and inhumaine,
proceeding of their nature, for that part of them are true Graecians, and the
other come of the Scithes, a people most barbarous: their eyes are hollow their
countenance furious, and the sound of their voice fearful, exceeding all
others in bigness of body and force of members, and are of long life, their
custom was to sell their children, to be carried hither and thither amongst
strange nations. And permitted their daughters to forsake them, and have
company with such men as they thought good, or with him that first prayed them.
But as for their married women, they were very carefully looked unto, by reason
they bought them at a great price of their fathers and mothers, specially the
fairest: which being once set at a price none could marry them, except they
first paid the price, they were rated at. And to the contrary, those which
lacked beauty, were constrained to give great presents unto those that would
marry them. Amongst them it was esteemed a fair and noble thing to have the
forhead stigmatized* and not to have it, was esteemed great shame and villainy.
They had likewise in great honor, and commended it, to live in idleness
without doing of any thing, or else in theft and stealing, and esteemed it a
great shame and dishonor to labor the ground, or do any husbandry. Diverse
amongst them that knew not what it was to drink wine, had a custom to turn
round in taking their repast about a great fire, upon the coals whereof they
cast a certain seed, the smoke whereof was so violent, that forthwith it
made them so dissy, that it seemed they were drunk in very deed, and out of
their wits, and in such follies they took a singular pleasure and pastime.

Of the ancient opinion of the Thracians, touching the immortality of the
soul.

Chap. 27.
AS concerning death, the opinion among the Thrasia^s was very diverse, for some
thought that the soul being departed out of the body, suddenly entered into
another, or else if she returned not, did not therefore die, but passed into
another life more sweet and happy the^ was the first. Others with great
pertinacy affirmed, that the soul died with the body, but yt such death was
better then a life full of bitterness and perplexity. And upon this occasion the
Trauces, a people of Thracia, did at the birth of their children, with weeping^
crying, and sighing, lament their coming into the world, pitifully rehearsing
the travels and calamities which they had to suffer in this miserable world,
during the small course of their life: and to the contrary if any of them came
to die, they brought them to their grave with all kind of plays and ^eastings,
reciting and singing altogether, the evils, torments and adversities, whereof by
the tribute of death, they were delivered. For like as man is borne of a woman
in dolor and anguish: so he lives in misery and calamity unto the end of his
days: and for that they had many wives, if any of them came to dye, they fell
in great discord the one with the other, to know which of them had bin the
best beloved, and she to whom the honor and praise was adjudged, was of al men
greatly honored, and afterward being by her next parents brought unto the
sepulture of her husband, clothed and set out with her richest garments, was
there buried by him. And as for the other wives, they brought over the rest of
their life in mourning and displeasure, as if some great misfortune had bin
happened unto them. But when it came to pass some nobleman to be buried, the
body was buried for three days, about the city, sacrificing al sorts of
beasts, and then after a great feast made, consumed the body into ashes, and
that being done, set forth all sorts of ^urnoyes and cumbates in honor of
the deceassed. When the Thratians perceived it thunder or lighten,
incontinently they shoot their arrows toward heaven, threatening of their
god, for they thought that there was none other God then theirs, which was
Zomolixis, being the first that instituted them laws to draw them to
civility, such as he had seen by the Ionians, being with the philosopher
Pithagoras, unto whom he had been a disciple: and did besides commonly worship
Mars, Bacchus, and Diana, and did swear by the only name of Mercury, whom
they had in great honor and reverence for that they esteemed themselves to be
descended of him. Their kings wear chosen by the voice of the people, and not
by nobility and above all things had a regard, that he should be of a ripe
age of good life and manhood, and that he had no children, for fear least in
the end the kingdom should come to an hereditarie succession. Likewise they
left unto him no absolute power to command, for they ordained forty
counsailours too govern him, and if question of death chanced upon one
criminal person, or many, he alone had neither power to judge nor condemn.
And if by fortune their king him self was found attainted and convinced of
capital crime, without having regard to his dignity, he was punished by death
as a private person, but not by handye execution, but they forbade him the
usage of any kind of meat, and so through hunger was constrained to die an
unhappy death.

The ancient arms of the Thracians.

Chap. 28.
AT the time when the king Darius had war with the Thracians, they used the
arms following: their headpeece was made of the skin of a Fox, and they
carried Darts, pauoyses, and little daggers, using shooting with great
dexterity, whereof the do vaunt themselves to have been they first inue^tors:
those which dwelled in Asia, did wear for their arms, little shields covered
with ox hides, with two hunters spears, and on their heads had sallets of
leather, and upon the same horns like unto Oxen. Thus ye have that which
Herodote does write in his seventh book. Their language is like unto that of
the Scithians. But at this present their speech, their garments, religion,
manner of living miserable calamity and servitude, is conform and like unto
the other Grecians, which are under the same puissaunce and tyrannous
obeysaunce of the Turk.

A woman Jew of Andrinople.


A maiden Jew of Andrinople.


The description of Grecia.

Chap. 29.
GRecia amongst other countries in Europe, is the most noble, A general
description of Grecia.
and most famous, and was first called Helles, of one of the sons of
Deucalion and Pirrha, and afterward Grecia of a king whose name was Grecus,
and is so ample, that she exte^deth and joins with the sea Mirtee (so called
of Myrtile the son of Mercury) drawing by great circulation, from the North
to the South, from the East toward the sea Egee, and from the West, to the
sea Ionie, until she comes to ingulfe 5. miles within it, so as it lacks
very little but that in the midst it is cut and divided. Then again enlarging
her, sometimes of one side and sometimes of another principally toward the sea
Ionie, and then again coming intoo a less breadth then where she takes her
beginning draws in ye end to be almost an island, which aunciently was called
Appie and Pelasgie, and since Peloponese by reason of the gulfes and
promontories, wherewith they are parted and divided. But by the modernes is
called Moree, being in figure almost like to a pla^tin leaf: the circuit of the
Peninsula, according to Plini^ and Isidore is five hundredth seventy and three
paces, but if all the creekes of all the gulfs and promontories should be
reckoned, would contein little less then twice as much, notwithstanding
(according to Polibe) besides the borders, contains about four thousand
stadias or paces, and from the East to the West forty thousand and four
hundredth. Ptolome bordereth the Pelopo^nesse of the North, with the gulf of
Corinthe, presently called the gulf of Lepanto* and with Istine, and from
thence with the sea Creticque. Toward the West and the South, bordereth with
the Adriaticque sea, and on the East with the sea of Candia, sometimes called
Cretique.

The country of Macedonia first called Emathie of Emathias that was king
thereof, afterward Macedonia of Macedon, the son of Deucalion, or according
to Berose, the son of O^yris, by valiant strength of the great Alexander,
obtained before the Empire and Monarchy of the most part of the world
habitable, for, having passed Asia, Armenia, Iberia, Albania, Capadocia, Siria,
Egypt, the mountains of Taur and Caucase, subdued the Bactrians, the Medes,
and the Persians, and in the end vanquished and overcame all the East parts:
and moreover was victorious over the Indians. The Macedonians do say
themselves to be come and descended of Sethim, the son of Iaon, and their
provinces are Thessalia* which (according to Pompone and Pliny) was first
called Emone of the king Aemon, since Pelasgie: and again Hellade and
Myrmidone, by reason whereof Homer gave three sundry names unto the
Thessalians, to wit, Mirmidons, Helenes, and Achees, but at the last was called
Thessalia of Thessale, which possessed the kingdom* The principal city is
Thessalonia vulgarely called Salonicke, unto which people S. Paul the apostle
of Jesus Christ, wrote many godly Epistles. This city is as yet most ample and
rich, inhabited of three sundry sorts of people, to wit, Christian Greeks,
Iewes^ and Turks: but the number of Jews (being mercha^ts very rich) is the
greatest: and there are 80. synagogues: their attire on their head is a yelow
Tulbant safroned, that of the Grecian christians is blew, and that of the Turks
white, for that through the same diversity of colors, they should be known the
one from the other, and are all clothed in long gowns as the other Orientals
are. In Thessalia is the mount Pernassus, consecrated unto the god Apollo, unto
which the people retired at the time of the deluge in this region, and in the
riegne of Ducalion. There is also the mount Pelion upon the which was
celebrated the marriage of ^he king Peleus, with the Nymph Thetis. Near unto
Thessalia is Magnesia. Moreover Ethiotes, Dorie, Locre (whereof the inahbitants
were called Ozoles) Phoce, Beoce, having taken that name as Pliny writes, of
an ox which there was sacrificed by Cadmus the son of Agenor. In this
province near unto the river Erimne, are two fountains of such virtue that
the water of the one of them gives and increases memory to those that drink
of it, and the other takes away the memory. Beoce stretching from the East to
the West, touches the sea Eboique, and the gulf Etanee famous through the
goodly reuowme of the city of Thebes. In this province is the mount Citharee,
the river of Ismenee and the fountains of Irce and Aganippe, and was the place
of birth of the Muses at the wood of Helicon, the native country of Hercules,
and of the father Bacchus (who taught the Thebans to plant the vines and the
usage of wine) moreover she was the productrice of the strong and valiant
Epimanondas. As for the city of Thebes so much renowned by the ancients is at
this present but a small castle of little estimation, as likewise presently are
the most part of the other Cities of Macedonia, which are altogether desolated
and ruined. In Macedonia is the fou^tain of Susistige, out of which issues a
poison being of such a strength, that it will not be kept in any other thing
the^ in the hoof of a horse foot, and is thought of diverse that Alexander the
great was poisoned with the same: Ye have moreover Attique which took such a
name of one of the sons of a king named Attis, who after Cecrops, succeeded
in the kingdom, or else of Athis the son of Cuba, king of the Athenians, but
according to others Actique of the king Actron, or of Arcte, which signifies a
coast. And likewise Megare, a region so full of woods and mountains that the
most part of the inhabitants are shepherds and keepers of cattle. Of all these
provinces Attike is the principallest and most famous. In Peloponese which
sometimes was called Rocque, and the most noble province of Grecia, are the
regions of Argole and Laconia, which before was named Oebalia, in the which is
the city of Amicle, being the natural country of Castor and Pollux. There is
the cape Malee of the modernes called the cape of S. Ange, being a great enemy
unto the seafaring me^, as before I have described in the first chapter of the
second book. There is moreover Messenie, which by the Sparthes was brought
under servitude, for that oftentimes it was given to reuolting and seditions,
which was the occasion, that they were more rudely entreated the^ other
servants to take away al their means and strength of reuolting^ After that is
Achaie aunciently called Egial, because of the cities in order cituated al
along her borders, Ele, Arcadie which has the name of Arcade the son of
Jupiter. In the same is the Palude learn where Hercules killed ye serpent Hidra
that had seeuen heads. There is also the great and impetuous flood of Erimanthe
(greatly remembered by diverse Poets and Historiographers) taking his origin of
the mount Erimanthe, whereof it has taken his name. Moreover, there is Etolie
and Acarnie before called Carte. Epire goes even to Adrie, in these regions
the places and cities far from the Sea, the most notable, and that do merit
to be set out, are Thessalia, Thessalonique and Larisse, anciently Iolque, in
Magnesie, Antronie, in Phiotide Phithie, in Locree, Syne, and Calliacre. Pliny
in his fourth book, the first chapter, says, that the Locrians have been
called Ozoles. In Phocide, is the city of Delphe, cituated at the foot of the
mount Parnasus, and watered with the river Cephisusi: within the same city was
in times paste a temple, within the which Phoebus or Apollo, the God of
deuination according to the error of the ancients was worshipped. In Beoce,
Thebes, which at this present has but a little castle stibes, and Citheree,
much celebrated by the fables of the Poets, and in Atticque, is Eluse,
consecrated unto Ceres. But the most renowned city of all Grecia is Athens,
which was builded by Cecrops Diphies, being in the days of Moses, which
called it Cecropia: afterward was called Mopsophie of Mopsus, and Ionie the
son of Ion, the son of Xuthe, or else as Josephus recites of Ianus the
son of Iaphet: and finally of Minerua, for the Grecia^s called Minerua,
Athene, she was the inuentour of all good arts, and industrious liberal
sciences, mother and nurse of diverse excellent Philosophers, Orators, and
Poets, which through their labors and memorable works, have gotten immortal
praise. But by change of time and unsteadfastness of fortune this so
flourishing a city is brought to such extremity and ruin, that at this
present there is nothing of estimation left of it, but a little castle, which
is called Sethine, builded on the leauinges of the walls of the ancient and
renowned temple of Minerua. In Migare otherwise called Niscee, is the City of
Megare, in which was borne Euclide, prince of the Geometrians, and this City
gave the name unto the province, as Argus did in Argos. In Argolide is Argos
and Micene, and the temple of Juno much renowed as well for antiquity as
devotion. In Laconie is Terapne, Lacedemone (the seat and habitation of the
king Agamemnon) which also was called Sparthe of Sparthus, the son of
Phoroneus, but presently is called Mysithra. There is likewise Amicde, distant
twenty stadias from Lacedemon, a country abounding of all good and excellent
fruitful trees and other goods, and in the same is the temple of Apollo the
most excellent of all others in that country, as well in riches as cunning
building, set in that quarter of the town, which is toward the sea and the
mount Tayget. In Messenia, Messene, and Methon, or Modon, at the siege whereof
Philip king of Macedonie, father of Alexander the great lost one of his eyes,
with the shot of an arrowe. In Achie is, Pise of Oenomae, Elis, and the
Olimpia^ temple of Jupiter, much renowned because of the Olimpian games, and
tho row singular devotion, and a great deal more, because of the excellency
of the image made by the hands of Phydias. Arcadie is round about environed of
the Peloponesians, and her principal cities are Psefe, Tenie, and Orcomene.
The mountes Pholoe, Cillene, Parthene, and Menale: the ryuers Erimanthe, and
Ladoen. In Arcadia greatly flourished Prometheus the son of Iapetus, who
being a man of deep knowledge taught the rude men to live ciuillie, he
invented the natural pourtractes with the fat earth, and was also the first
that stroke fire out of the flint stone, and that taught the Grecians
Astrology and therefore the poets do feign that he held up the heaven. In
Etolie is Naupacte vulgarely Lepanto or Epacto. In Acarnania presently called
Ducte or Ducat, or Duche, the castle Strate. In Epire is the temple of Jupiter
Dodone, and the sacred fountain, which is of such a virtue, that putting into
it any burning thing: is suddenly extinguished: but putting into it a bundle of
straw, it is forthwith set on fire. Passing beyounde the coasts of the
promontorie Sepie, by Demetrie, Boic, Pitheleon and Echine, is the passage
toward the gulf of Pagase, which having embraced or environed the City of
Pagase, receives into his haven the river Sperchie, and this place is renowned
for that the Minies acco^paning Jason when he went to Colchos to conquer the
golden fleese, did there go on land, and delivered their ship Argo, to go and
drive upon the great sea, which voyage is so celebrated, that the poets have
feigned this ship Argo, to have been taken up into heaven and upon this reason
do put it amongst the Celestial signs. It is needful and of force that
they which this way will go unto Sunio first to pass the gulfes Maliabe and
Opunce of which are the Trophies, sometimes by the Laconians there discomfited
and killed) and come unto the straights called Thermopyles, which cross
through the midst of Grecia, like unto the Appenin hills of Italy. The
mountains are so high that it seems almost a thing impossible to get up
unto them, but between both, there is a valley about threescore paces wide, by
the which only ye can get up unto them: through which means these mountainnes
have been called Pyles, which is to say, ports, and by reason of the whot
waters that run out of the same Thermopyles. They were so renowned by the
great discomfitures of the Persians done by the Greeks under the conduct of
the valiant Leonidas the Laconian, who brauelye withstoode the impetuositie and
furor of Xerxes, but in our time they have not been able to resist or shut up
the passage unto the Turks, of who^ all the Grecians have been overcome and
subued. It has again Scatphie Cnemides, Alope, and Larymne. Besides Aulide,
where the assembling of the army, was made by Agamemnon and other princes of
Grecia after the league by them made to go to the siege of Troy. There is also
Marathon, a true testimony of diverse noble prowesses^ celebrated since the
victory of Theseus, and by the great foil which the army of the Persians
received there. ye have moreover there Rhamne, a little city, but famous,
because of the temple of Amphia^aus, and the Nemesis of Phidias. Thorique and
Brauron, were there sometimes good cities, but now there is nothing left of
them but the name. Sunio is a promontorie bordering and running along by the
sea side of Hellade or Greece, on the side that is toward the East, and from
thence unto Megare a city of Atticke, does turn toward the South. The
fields of the Megarians come unto Istine, being of a long and straight
exte^dure of the space of 5000. paces, and enters into the sea Egeum, and the
sea Ionie. There is the castle Cenchree, the temple of Neptune and the famous
games called Istmetiques, instituted by Theseus upon envy of those which
Hercules had instituted in Olimpe. Corinthe which in time passed was so notable
of riches, first builded by a Brigand called Sisiphe the son of Eolus in the
four score year of the age of Moses, and was called Corcyre or Certhyre and
a^terwardes Ephire, after that she was augmented, was ruined and builded again
by Corinthus the son of Orestes or Jupiter, which after his name called it
Corinthe, which signifies administration or publicque safegarde, and since
was again destroyed by the Romans, and restored by Auguste Caesar, within this
city of Corinthe there was sometimes a temple of great beauty and excelle^cie^
dedicated unto the Goddess Venus, to whom belonged above ^ 1000. whores of
renown dedicated to this goddess according too the Heathen custom, which
were common unto all comers. But now Corinthe is but a little village called
Cara^ tho. In the region of Corinthe is a place now adays called Sydrocapsa,
whereas be many fine mines of gold, of which the Turk receives an inestimable
riches. This province brings forth the most fine copper of all Europe,
whereof are made vessels very excellent and of great prise. From the most high
tower of the fortress, called Acrocorinthe, are seen both the seas, to wit,
of Ionie and Egee. The mouth and rinage of Peloponese, is divided with many
gulfes and promontories, too wit, toward the East with Bucephalus,
Cherchonese, and Scilee, toward the South Malee, Tenare, Ac^ite and Ichtis,
and toward the West Chelonate and Arasse: from Istmus to Scilee, do dwell the
Epidaures famous and renowned, for that they have the temple of Esculape and
the Trezenia^s, Illustred, for the faith which they always obs^rued in the
confederacies which they made with the Athenians. There are the ports
Saronique, Scemte, and Pagone, but as for the towns which are on the sea
coasts, Epidaure is cituated on the side of the gulf Saxonique of nature
beset and environed with high mountains. The sick folks which went^ unto
the temple of Esculape for to be healed, slept there in the night and said
that Esculape in this manner did heal them in their sleep. Troese and
Hermione are also cituatid and placed on the border of the sea Betwixt Scilee
and Malee, is Argolique and betwixt this and Tenare, is Laconique, from thence
to Acrite, Asinee, and from thence toward Ichtis, Cyparissienne. In Argolicque
the rivers known, are Erasine, and Inaque, and the Castle of Learn. In
Laconique, Githie, and Eurotas rivers: but in Tenare is the temple of Neptune,
and a cave or Antre, like unto the same of Pont called Acherusienne. In Assine
is the river Pamisse, and in the Ciparissenne Alphee. And every one of these
are called after the names of the Cities, cituated upon the sea coast. Cilene
and Callipoli, are upon the river of Patras, which aunciently was called Aroe,
in which place Saint Andrewe an apostle of Jesus Christ, received the crown of
his martyrdom. In Epire sometimes called Molosse, by reason of the people
Molosses, which sometimes have reined there, there is nothing more singular then
the gulf Ambritien. In this province are the towns Action, Argy, Amphiloche,
Ambratie and Buthroton, vulgarelye Butrinto, the royal city of Aeacides and
Pirrhus. The Partheneans and Dessaretes used for their habitation the first
countries, amongst which the principal towns are, Orique and Dirrachium, by
the ancients called Epidamne, but the Romans changed the name thereof, for
that it seemed unto them almost a Malum Auguriu^, and an unhappy encounter to
them that went thither, because that Damnum in their language signifies
damage. Near unto Epidamne is Apollonie, Salone, Iadere, Narone, Tragure, the
gulf Polatique and Pola, sometimes (as is said) inhabited of the Colques. But
since as all things in the world are chaungeable and inconstant, became the
Colonie of the Romans. The rivers thereof are Eas and Nar, and the Danube,
which is in that place, and having changed or lost his name, is called Ister.
Eas runs alongest Apollonie Nar enters the Pyreans and Lyburnians, and
Ister through the Istrians. Tergiste, lying beyond it in the midst of Adrie,
closes and ends the Illiricque.

Of the manner and ancient order of living of the Grecians.

Chap. 30.
THe Graecians in their ancient manner of living were very uncivil and
barbarous, for they lived and dwelled with the beasts in all idleness, having
no meat more daintier for their nourishment then the fruits of wild trees, to
wit, acorns and other mast. But through long succession of time, they became so
to be framed and ordered unto al humain society and good manners, that amongst
all other nations they were reputed to be the most civil, wise, and valiant in all Europe. Nevertheless, for that in diverse countries of Graecia, the men not
thinking them selves sufficiently assured, neither upon the high ways nor in
the houses, because of the fear they had of the Pirates and rouers on the sea,
which in great number dwelled along the seaside, went always armed,
according to the custom of the Barbarians, for the defense and conservation of
their goods, their families and persons. The Athenians were the first that left
off to go so armed, and framed themselves to lead a life more honest and
civil. And true it is that for a certain time the ancient men did cloth
themselves most simply, and above all others the Lacedaemonians, who
notwithstanding that at al times they had bin esteemed the most rich and
wealthy of all the Graecians, did notwithstanding go all apparrelled equally
and after one sort, as well the meaner as the richest sort, and have been the
first, that for the wrestling have stripped themselves naked and anointed
their bodies with oil, whereas they which used the like exerci^e in Olimpe,
covered the shame fast^members with small clothes. And as yet presently the
Barbaries, Asians, and Affrica^s, being appointed to wrestle for the game, do
wear breeches of leather, and do anoint their bodies and arms with oil, to
the end their adversaries should fasten the less hold upon them, even as I have
before amply declared, in the description of the ordinary Wrestlers of the
great Turk.

Of Lycurgus laws given unto the Lacedaemonians.

Chap. 31.
LYcurgus perceiving the Lacedaemonians to live without any honest form of
policy was the first that instituted laws unto them, having first abolished
all the corrupted customs, which they had before amongst them. First, he
confirmed the people in the obeisance of their princes, and the princes to the
true justice of the Empyres, through the mean of a Senate of 28. Counselors,
which he constituted as a bar and bulwark unto the popular temerity, and
again to the contrary, to foresee likewise, that the Princes should not usurp
upon tyrannous force* to divide and equally part the lands and possessions, to
the end that in goods and heritages, the one should not be esteemed more
wealthy then the other but only in this, that they should surpass one another
in virtue and manhood, and that by this means they should live altogether as
true brethren. He took away and abolished al kinds of money, of silver and
gold: and instead thereof made iron to be coined: which notwithstanding he
made to be tempered and extinguished being red hot in vinegar, to the intent to
make it soft: and by that means, to be unfit for all other works: he
banished out of Lacedemon all handicrafts and arts not necessary, and
instituted banquets and common feasts, to the intent to refrain superfluity
and dayntinesse: unto which as well the poor as the rich were called and
welcomed, both with one place and one kind of meat and they called these
banquets Phiditia and by the Candiots were named Andria he forbad the often
attempting of wars against ones self party or enemies, for fear least they
should be constrained often to defend themselves, and in the end become
valiant and good fighters, he commanded that the maidens should exercise them
selves to run, wrestle, cast the dart and throw the bar, to make them
through such exercise: the more strong and able to bear children, and when
there was any great feast or solemn sacrifice, willed them to sing and dance
amongst boys stark naked, which was done with all honesty, without any fear
or shame: and ordained also that the maiden virgins should be married without
any dowry of money, for that the men should marry them for their virtues and
good manners, and to get children, and not for cou^tous getting of money.
Moreover, it behooved, that those which would marry, should not have too do
with wives, whilst they were little, young, and of a tender age, but with such
as were strong and able to bear children. He also further permitted to those
that were fair and well disposed to lie with other men's wives, for to labor
in them as in a fruitful ground, and to engender children in common, and it
was esteemed a matter of no reproach to an old and decayed man* having a fair
and young wife, to choose some fair young man seeming agreeable unto him, to
make him to lie with her, and so to get her with child, and raise up seed
unto him, which child he took and brought up as his own, and yet it seemed
unto him a very foolish and strange matter in other nations, which so
carefully got fair dogs to line their hot bitches, and sought the fairest
stoned horses to spring their mares: and notwithstanding with great care kept
their wives so closely under lock and key, for fear least they should get
of their neighbors, whereof sometimes their jealous husbands could not
furnish them. The great honors he ordained to be given according to the
degrees of age, and not according to the abundance of goods and riches. And
for that some of his laws seemed to be too rigorous and straight, by reason of
their corrupted manner, he feyned that he had instituted the^ by the
commandment of the God Apollo, which had invented the same, and this did he
because they should be received of the people with more renerence, and by oath
bound the city to keep the same inuiolated, without diminishing any part
thereof until his return from the Oracle of Delphis, whether as he said, he
went to consult what should be good to be added or taken away. But he went
intoo Crete, where he ended his days in voluntary exyle, where after his
death, as writes Aristocrates the son of Hippa^chus, his body by some of his
friends was consumed into ashes and according to his decree were thrown into
the Sea, for fear if they were brought unto Lacedemon, the Sparthans should
not think themselves to be free of the oath which they had sworn, for the
inuyolable observation of his laws. Thus ye have summarily that which
Plutarche writes of the life of the same Licurgus.

Of the Athenians.

Chap. 32.
AS for the Athenians, Iustine in his 12. book recites, that they were the
first that taught the art of spinning of wool, making of wines and oils, to
plow the ground, and to sow corn: for at the first they fed on nothing but on
acornes, and for their dwellings had none other lodgings, the^ little cabbins
and caves. Doxius was the first that builded houses in Athens, which (following
therein the manner of the swalows) he builded of earth. In the days of
Deucalion, Cecrops reigned as king over the Athenians, and is he whom the Poets
have feigned to have 2. forheads because he was the first that joined the men
and the women by the right line of marriage. After him succeeded Granaus, which
had a daughter called Athis* which gave the name unto the region. After that
reigned Amphitrion, which first consecrated the city unto the goddess
Minerua, and named it Athene. In his time was the great flood and inundation of
the waters, which marred and drowned the most part of Grecia, and in this great
deluge, were only saved those that could get up to the mountains* or the other
which were conveyed toward Deucalio^ king of Thessalia. By whom according to
the feinings of the Poets, the world was by order of succession restored. The
kingdom being since come unto Eristheus, during his reign the sowing of corn
was brought in and invented in Eleusine by Triptolemus, and therefore in
remembrance of this good thing the nights were sacred unto him. The Athenians
being esteemed the wisest amongst the Graecians (for that the administration of
their common wealth was governed by the sage and wise doctrines of the
Philosophers) made a law that to every one of them it was permitted to take
two wives, but thereby were straightly forbidden to keep any concubine, saying
it to be a thing without all honesty, to keep other men's wives, and to give
unto his own an ill example of living. And this they did for the opinion which
they had that a man could not live without women and company: and when the one
was brought to bed or sick he might go unto the other, or else if the one were
barren the other might be fit to bring forth children and succession, and to
her that was fit to conceive, the government and administration of the house
was given, and the barren woman was unto him as a servant. Pliny is one of
his Epistles says, that the Athenians were wont to marry the brother with the
sister, but not the Uncle with the nephew, alleging for his reason, that the
marriage of a brother with the sister was an even match: but the Uncle with the
nephew was the marrying of the old with the young.

The laws of Solon given to the Atheninians.

Chap. 33.
SOlon being by the common voice of the Athenians, chosen for the general
reformer of their laws, and of the whole estate of their common wealth, to
confirm or abolish that which he thought reasonable, first revoked and made
void all those which Dracon had made, except certain touching murdering and
deaths of men, for that they were too severe and rigorous, for, for all sorts
of crime he had almost ordained but one punishment only which was death, so as
if any had bin found in idleness, or if he had stolen fruits or herbs out of a
garden, he was as well condemned to death as if he had bin a murderer, or
sacrilege, which gave occasion unto Demades, that the laws of Dracon were
rather written with blood then with ynke. Secondly he ordained that the rich
citizens should have the offices of magistrates, and that the meaner sort of the
people should have their part in the authority and government of the city, he
made generally to be estimated the goods of every one particularly, putting
into the first order those which were found as well in grayn, as fruits of yearly
revenues the quantity of 500. minots liquided, and those he called
Pentacosiomedimnes, which is to say, having 500. minotes of revenue, and those
which had 300. and might maintain a horse of service, were put into the
second degree, and were called knights, and those which had but 200 were put
into the 3. rank, and were called Zeugites, but the other being under 200. were
put unto the fourth rank, and he called the^ Theles, as who would say,
mercionaries, and would not permit these to exercise any public office, nor yet
to enjoy the right of Burgesie, but to have voices in the elections, assemblies
of the city and judgments, in which the people were sovereign judges.
Notwithstanding, the bettet to provide for the weakness of the people: he
permitted unto every one that would, to take in hand the quarrel of him that
had bin wronged. Above the counsel of the Areopages, which he had established,
he set another second counsel of 100 men, for the matters of estate, which he
did choose out of every degree, whereof 4. were chosen to consult upon matters
before they were proponed unto the people. He willed moreover, that if any had
married a rich and young heir, and that afterward he was found not able to
live with her so fleshly, as his youth required, that the^ it was permitted to
the woman to choose to her help the nearest kinsema^ of her husband such as
should plese her, and to couple her self with him, so that the children which he
should beget, should at the least be of the blood and lineage of her husband.
Furthermore, he took away the dowries of other marriages, willing that the men
should have with their wives three gowns only, and certain other small
moueables of little value, thinking it a thing neither just nor reasonable, that
marriage should be made a traffic to be gained by, as by other merchandises,
but wished that it should be done of a hearty love toward the common children.
He forbad the speaking evil of the dead, and expressly not to wrong or injury
the citizens, either in word or deed, upon pain of three dragmes: the one to be
given to him that should be offended, and the other two to be for the common
purse: he permitted unto every one to make a will, and to take such an heir, as
he should think good: so as he had no children. He permitted also the killing
of the Adulterer being found with the deed, but only condemned him that took a
woman of free condition by force, in a 100 drachmas: he forbad that none might
sell his daughters or sisters, except that being married, they were found in
adultery. To those yt won the prise at ye Istmick games, he ordained out of the
common purse 100. dragmas, and those that had won at the Olimpicke, 500. and
to him that brought in the head of a woolfe, was given 5. dragmes, and one
dragme, for the head of a she woolfe, he would not that the freedom of the
City should be given unto any stranger, except he were banished his Country
for ever, he made many other goodly ordinances, which I pass with silence,
referring unto the reader, to see that which Plutarch has written of the life
of the said Solon, but will declare only that after he had authorized the
laws for a 100. years, he made them to be written in boords or roundelles of
wood (which roundels, according to Aristotle, were called Cyrbes) and feigned
that the Goddess Minerua had inverted the same: and afterward having made the
counsel and common people to swear the observation thereof, because of the
opportunity which some daily used to take away or mittigate some of them, he
took leave of the Athenians for 10. years, and by sea went into Egypt, where
he remained a certain space: afterward returning into Cypres in the end
returned to Athens, where he found such troubles, seditions and partialities
amongst the inhabitants that in the end they opened the way unto Phisistratus,
to usurp his tyranny to the great grief of the said Solon, which
notwithstanding lived unto the time that Hegestrate was provost of Athens.

The arms of the Macedonians.

Chap. 34.
THe Macedonians in times past, were amongst the other Graecians in feats of
war most valiant and flourishing, they had their Phalanguelike unto a
fouresquare battle of footmen, joined togethet with their arms, Phalangue.
being long pykes called Sarisses of 18. foot long: with the which they opened
the battles of their enemies, their headpeece was of a raw ox hide, their
curasse cuilted with flax, the shield of leather, the iauelin and sword short:
and thus were set out their Phalangue, which as Vegece writes, were at the
first but 8000. men, but according to Dion of the life of Antonie Caracole,
every Phalangue Macedonique in the time of Alexander the great, was 16. M. men,
and did not set in order their legions as the Romans did, which did make one
ra^ge to enter within another, but made only a soldier to enter in the place
of him that was slain, and by such warlike order did many high and memorable
feats of arms. But after the disco^fiture of the Persians, through the
marvelous increase of their power, they fell into such a vainglory and
arrogance (even as at al times pride and presumption are accusto^med to
accompanye great prosperities) that in place of most honest government, which
they had in their common wealth: they gave themselves to a life disordered,
corrupted, and full of al villainy, and abominable dissolution: whereupon ensued,
that during the time of this monarchy, the Graecians had between themselves
many great and long wars: yea such, as in the end, this so noble Graecia was
altogether ruined and destroyed: for every one atte^pting upon it of al sides,
was in the end given as a pray unto all strangers. By the figure following is
to be seen, what the manner of apparel is of the Macedonian women nowadayes.

A woman of Macedonia.


The ancient religion of the Grecians.

Chap. 35.
THe same Graecians, through their marvelous industry and subtlety of spirit,
were inuenters of many monstrous manners of superstition and idolatry, for
every one of them had their God, prayers, and ceremonies proper unto
themselves. Jupiter was honored amongst them for a remedy of storms and
tempests, Mars for to eschew the perils and fortune of wars. They honored
Juno for to get riches, Pallas to obtain wisdom, and Venus for to have
descent, and a 1000 like follies which amongst them were observed, so as they
fell into such infamy, that in the end they established their solemn feasts
impure and dishonest: at the which it was unto every one indifferently
permitted, under pretext of religion and holiness, to ravish and defloure
women and maidens: such were the brave solemnities of their false gods, by the
Graecians aunciently observed under color of religion, and so deeply were
their hearts drowned in error and idolatry most abominable, through ignorance
of true understanding, and knowledge of the most highest Lord. Cecrops* of whom
before mention is made, was the first amongst them that called on God under the
name of Jupiter, who invented the images, and dressed the altars for to offer
sacrifices. And Orpheus was he which produced and celebrated the first
sacrifices unto Liber Pater in the mountain Boetia, near unto Thebes, whereas
Liber Pater was born. Wherefore they were called Orpheique, and in the same
Orphee was afterward taken and torn in pieces. And likewise amongst the
Thebans, the Eagle was in opinion thought to be of such divinity, that because
she did fly so high, they supposed her to have some communication with God.
The Athenians also had their religion in such honor and reverence, that they
banished out of their city the Philosopher Diagoras, for that he durst write,
that he doubted whether there were any gods, and if there were any, what kind
of ones they might be. These also condemned the wise Socrates, for the
suspicious opinion they had in him, that he would have brought into their city
a new religion, which Socrates when it was reported unto him, that the
Athenians had condemned him to die: and they (quoth he) are undoubtedly
condemned by nature. Behold, thus have ye the ancient manner of living and
religion of the Graecians.

The modern religion of the Graecians.

Chap. 36.
ABout the time that the savior of the world suffered death and passion on the
cross, with his own blood to buy again the sin of our first father, the true
religion and knowledge of God began to show and take root amongst the
Graecians, through the means of the holy preachings of the disciples and
Apostles of Jesus Christ, namely, by the Apostle S. Paul, which by divine
inspiration in Thessalonia, Athens, Corinth and Achaia, preached and announced
Christ to be the true Messiah, and through many godly miracles, so multiplied
the christianity, that in the end, leaving their damnable superstition, the
woorshipping and calling on their false gods (which so long time had held them
in obscurity and dark damnation) they acknowledged their faults, and opened
their eyes to take the right taste of the light to eternal salvation, wherein
they have always persisted, until such time, as through the invention and
cursed venim of Satan, they fell (in succession of time) into many errors and
damnable heresies, as into that of the Manicheans, which affirmed that there
were 2. gods, the one good and the other evil, which both were eternal,
that Jesus Christ was not the true God. They boasted also that they could give
the holy ghost, they forbade marriages, Heresy of Donatus.
and al superior puissa^ce* and as for the books of the apostles, they would by
no means believe in the^, but made doctrines of themselves, which they called
gospels of Jesus Christ. They were also infected with Donatus sects, which said
the son to be less the^ the father, and the holy ghost less the^ God and the
son: afterward following the heresy of Nestor Bishop of Constantinople,
affirmed that the virgin Marie was not the mother of God, but only the mother
of a man, in placing two persons the one humane and the other divine: with the
heretic Eutiches Abbot in Constantinople, said the divinity to be with the
humanity, and consequently from the time of Constantin the Emperor, they stuck
unto the infected heresy of Arrius, which was no less pestiferous then other,
for they taught that Jesus Christ was not borne naturally God, and diverse other
most blasphemous things more amply wiritten in the first book of Theodorete
Bishop of Cyropolis, whereby in the end through god his myraculous work, the
author of the same sect was punished according to his deseruings for being
pressed in his belly as he was going to the stool he burst through the midst
of his belly and so died miserably, and notwithstanding that all their errors
have been rejected and convinced by many Synodes and Councels^ yet do they at
this present err in many things from our faith, for they maintain that the
holy Ghost proceeds from the father and not from the son* they do nothing
agree with the Latins, for they will by no means acknowledge the Pope of Rome
to be the head of their church and much less do esteem his commandments.
But to the contrary do say that the Popes (whom they esteem with all their
adherents, as heretics and schismatiks) have corrupted and violated the
gospels and other books of our religion, to add or take away that which
seemed good unto them, for to serve their insatiable and damnable avarice.
Moreover they say themselves too be the first that were converted unto the
faith, and that because they believe purely and simply the true traditions of
the primitive church, as by the Apostles it was preached and anounced unto
the^. They have four patriarchs in four several provinces, which do command
and have power of the oriental churches, whereof the first and principall^ is
he which is at Constantinople unto whom as unto their chief superior, they
do obey with all honor and reverence. All the Christians of Grecia,
Macedonia, Epire, Thracia, and the yles of Archepelague, and other count^ies
subject unto the Constantinopolitan Empire, yea and over the Muscouites. The
second recedith at Caire, and has under him Egypt and Arabia. The third
commands over Judea, Damas, Barut, and Tripoli in Suria, keeps his seat at
Jerusalem. The fourth and last has his place of abode in the city of Antioch,
and has puissaunce over the Grecia^ church of Suria. These Patriarchs are
chosen and created by the Metropolitans of the provinces as the popes are by
the Cardinals, and above all things they have a regard to choose amongst the^
those which they think to be of a perfect age, witty, manfull and holy of
life. And notwithstanding they have the full power and authority over their
churches, yet do they not possess either towns, castles or fortresses, nor
yet do entertain men of war or archers for the guard of their persons. They
do not also apparel themselves in cloth of gold, purple velvet, crimsin
satin, or any other cloth of silk, but do live in all simplicity and
modesty, having none other reuenew, for their entertainment or living, books
and apparel, the^ about the sum of 200. d^cates a year, which are ordained
and distributed unto the^ by the churches, over which they do command, and
their garments are nothing different nor more rich, the^ those of a simple
mo^k, whom they do call Caloier, but that upon their head instead of a three
crowned myter, they do wear a great felt hat, whereupon is laid a large band of
cloth of gold cross wise. Their priests did wear long beards, and were
married to one woman only, which coming to die they might not marry another,
and if they were found in adultery, they were punished by their superiors
without any mercy. They do celebrate the mass in their vulgar language to the
intent to be understood of all men, and communicate the L. supper under two
kinds, and do it indifferently as well unto the great as lesser sort. They do
not put any water into their wine: they deny the purgatory, and say, that
prayers, fastings and alms do nothing help the souls of the disceased and will
not suffer any carved images of saints in their churches, but on flat pictures
painted. These patriarchs have besides an other custom very strange, which is
that every year on the good friday, they do anathemise and excommunicate the
pope and al princes and christian people obeying unto the traditions of the
Rom* church. They do observe two Lents with great abstinence, where of the first
begins on the fat mu^day, being ix* days before the le^t of the Latins, and
during these ix. days, they may eat eggs, cheese and fish: but after that,
until Easter they do abstayn from al kind of fishes and other meat that has
blood in it. The other Lent they do solemnise in the time of the Aduent, and
the^ do fast 40. days with like abstinence as at the first. And finally, they
have many other ceremonies far different from the Roman Church, and
although in their religion they do observe many good things, yet do they in
many things differ much from the primitive Church, I mean such as have bin
taught us by the Apostles. By reason of which their errors, as for diverse other
vices, wherewith they have bin and are entangled: it is not to be marueiled at,
though this Grecian nation, which has been the most flourishing in all Europe,
as well in government of common wealth as administration of justice, good policy,
full of excellent captains and good soldiers and expert philosophers, yea that
rightly it might have been called the just spring, and fountain of all
philosophy and liberal sciences: and now through the variable course of
nature, and unsteadfastness of fortune, the most desert, barbarous and desolated
country, habitable on earth* as being fallen into ignominious calamity, and
miserable servitude under those that are more barbarous. For besides the great
vices wherein first they were so deep drowned, being in the chief of their
monarchy and magnifice^ce, after they had overcome the Persians, feeling
themselves rich and puissant because of such a spoil, they fell into such
pride and presumption, that not being able to live in peace one with another,
had between them many long and cruel wars, upon which followed the ruin,
saccagement, and desolation of their country, burning of their cities, cruel
murdering of their ancient citizens, and other inestimable losses. So as by
the same, Graecia was altogether destroyed, marred and ouerthrown, yea that
after, it was set as a pray and open passage to those yt would invade ye same,
and in the end from honest common wealths, and politic government, the
inahbitants were brought under tira^ny, and forthwith under kingdo^s. And after
they had remaind under the subjection and obeisance of the romain empire, unto
the last Co^stantin for making up of their last calamities, by divine
permission and for punishment of their vices and detestable sins, after they
had lost their Emperor and the imperial city of Constantinople, his wife,
children, parents, friends, and riches to the whole ruin of the oriental
empire, they being all destroyed dead or captives, seques^red of their rightes,
immunities, traunchises and liberties too the most shameful confusion of
Princes, and Christian potentates and contempt of divine religion. These
wretched Graecians are left under the miserable servitude of these miscreated
Mahometists, constrained to insupportable tributes, yea to pay the tenth person
of their own children, as before in the description of the Azamoglans I have
declared: such are the righteous judgments of GOD toward the misbeleeuing,
and those that abuse his gracious gifts.

I have before lively set forth the figure of a woman of Lacedemonia, to wit,
of those which upon the high ways near unto the villages do sell bread unto
the passers by, and hereafter I do represent unto you, the Gentleman and the
Merchant of Graecia, and the Gentleman's hat must be black, as that of the
Albanoys, and the tulbant of the merchant must be sky colored, ye have also
here the portraite of a woman of the country in Graecia.

A Gentleman of Graecia.


A Merchant of Grecia.


A country woman of Grecia.


A Table of the Chapters of this book of Nauigations and Peregrinations
Orientals, of Nicolas de Nicolay of Daulphine, Chamberlain, and Geographer
ordinary of the king of France. The first number signifies the Chapter, the
second, the Folio.
Chapters of the first book
THE departure and voyage of the Lord of Arramont (Ambassador for the king
toward the great Turk) from Constantinople to return into France. Chap. 1.
Folio. 1. The departure of the Lord of Arramont from the Court, to return in
his Embassage into Leuant toward the great Turk. 2.1. Of the yles Baleares,
now called Maiorque and Minorque. 3.3. Of the yles auncienly called the
Pitious, and now Ieuisse, and Fromentiere. 4.3. Navigations from the yles called
Pitious to the city of Alger. 5.3. Of our arrival in Alger. 6.4* Of the great
perilles and dangers we were brought into by the means of certain Christian
slaves that were escaped. 7.5. Description of the city of Alger. 8.7. By what
means Cairadin Barbarouse came to the king of Alger. 9.12. Of the further
proceeding on our navigations. 10.12. Of the the town Teddel, and the
inhabitants thereof. 11. 13 Of the city of Bone aunciently called Hippon, of
which saint Augustine was bishop. 12.13. Of our arrival at the isle of
Panthalaree. 13.14. Description of the isle. 14.15. Of our departure from the
isle Panthalaree toward Malta, 15.15 Description of the isle of Malta. 16.17. Of
our departure from Malta toward Tripoli. 17.19. Foundation of the City of
Tripoli. 18.20. Of the Bazar where the christians were sold, taken in the yles
of Sicile, Malta, and Goze, and of their manner of trenches, Gabions, and
batteries of the Turk. 19.21. Of the composition and giving over of the castle
of Tripoli, unto Sinan Bascha. 20.24. Description of the ruins of Tripoli.
21.26. Of our return from Tripoli to return to Malta. 22.28.
The Chapters of the second book.
THE departure of the Lord of Arramont Ambassador for king Henry the second,
toward Soliman Emperor of the Turks, from the isle of Malta, to proceed on
his voyage toward Leuant. 1.31. Description of the isle Citharee vulgarely
called Cerigo. 2.32. Antiquities by the author observed in the isle of
Citharee. 3.32. Of our departure from the isle of Citharaee or Cerigo. 4.34. Of
our arrival at the isle of Chio. 5.34. Description of the isle of Chio. 6.35. Of
the city of Chio. 7.36. Of the government of the isle and city of Chio. 8.41.
Of the isle of Metelin. 9.42. Of our navigations from the isle of Metelin to
Galliopoli. 10.43. Of the city of Galliopoli. 11.44. Of the foundation of
Bizance now called Constantinople. 12.47. The reedification of Byzance by
Constantine the great Emperor. 13.48. Of two marvelous fires happened by
chance at two several times within Constantinople. 14.49. Of two earthquakes
happened within Constantinople. 15.49. Antiquities of Constantinople. 16.50. Of
the castle of 7. towers by the Turks called Iadicula. 17.50. Of the Sarail
wherein the great Turk dwells. 18.51. The great Sarail or Sarail of women.
19.53. Of the most famous temple of S. Sophia and other Mosques of
Constantinople. 20.57. Of the bathes and manner of washing of the Turks. 21.58.
Of the women of Turkey going unto the bathes, and of their apparel and manner
of cleanness. 22.59. Of the place called Bezestan, and other public markets.
23.62 Of the City of Pera or Galata. 24.65. Of the women and maidens of
Grecia, and of the Peratins Franques of Pera or Galata. 25.65.
The Chapters of the third book.
OF the origin and bringing up of the Azamoglans* being children of tribute
leauied upon the Christians being subjects and tributaries unto the great
Turk. 1.69. Of the Azamoglans rusticke. 2.71. Of the origin and first
institution of the order of Ianissaries. 3.73. Of the Ianissaries which are
continually about the gates of the great Lord, or at Constantinople. 4.7^. Of
the Bolucks Bassis, being captains over a hundredth Ianissaries. 5.78. Of the
Ianissarie Aga, Captains general of the Ianissaries. 5.79. Of the Solaquis
archers, and of the ordinary guard of the great Turk. 7.80. Of the Peicz or
Lacquaes of the great Turk. 8.82. Of the apparel, custom, and manner of
living of the ancient Peicz or Lacquaes of the Emperors of Turkey. 9.84. Of
the wrastlers of the great Turk called Guressis or Peluianders, 10.86. Of the
Cooks and other officers of the kitchen of the great Turk, and ordinary
manner of the eating of the Turks. 11 90. Of the Physicians of Constantinople.
12.93. Of the Grecian Peysants or husbandmen called Voinucz. 13.95. O^ the
Cadilesquers great doctors of the law Mahometicke and chief Justices of the
Turks. 14, 97. Of four sundry religions of the Turks, their manner of living,
and portraites of the religious, and first of the Geomalers. 15.99. Of the 2.
sect of the religious Turks called Calenders 16.101. Of the 3. sect of the
religious Turks, called Deruis. 17.102. Of the 4* sect of the religious Turks,
called Torlaquis. 18.104. Of other religious Turks, leading a solitary life
amongst beasts. 19.106. Of those which do call themselves kinseme^ to Mahomet.
20.108. Of the Pilgrims of Mecqua by the Turks, called Hagislars. 21.110. Of
the Sacquas carriers of water, being also pylgrims of Mecqua. 22.112.
The Chapters of the fourth Book.
OF the ancient laws and manner of living of the Persians. 1.113. Of the
religion and ceremonies of the ancient Persians. 2.115. The ancient weapons of
the Persians. 3.115. Of the religion of the Persians used now adays. 4.115. Of
the estate of the Persians now adayes^ 5.116. Of the wanton and voluptuous life
of the Persians, 6.117. Description of the kingdom of the Persians. 7.118. Of
the Persian women. 8.119. Description of the three Arabies, and first of the
rocky or stony. 9.121. Of Arabia the desert. 10.121. Of Arabia the happy.
11.122. Of the ancient manner of living, laws, and religion of the Arabians.
12.125. Of the adventures called Dellis or Zatasnisis. 13.126. Of the men and
women of Cilicia presently called Caramonia. 14.128. Of Celicia presently
called Caramonia 15.129. Of the merchant Jews dwelling in Constantinople, and
other places of Turkey and Grecia* 16.130. Of the Armenians. 17.133. Religion
and manner of living of the ancient Armenia^s. 18.133. Modern religion of the
Armenians. 19.133. Of Armenia. 20.134. Of the Ragusins. 21*136. Of the policy
and government of the Ragusins. 22.136. Of the city of Raguse. 23.139.
Description of Thracia. 24.139. Of the city of Andrinopoli. 25.140. Manner,
laws, religion, and ancient order of living of the Thracians. 26.145. Of the
ancient opinion of the Thracians, touching the immortality of the soul.
27.145. The ancient arms of the Thracians. 28.146. The description of
Graecia. 29.149. Of the manner and ancient order of living of the Graecians.
30.153. Of Licurgus laws given unto the Lacedaemonians. 31.153. Of the
Athenians. 32.154. The laws of Solon given to the Athenians. 33. 155. The
arms of the Macedonians. 34.156. The ancient religion of the Graecians
35.158. The Modern religion of the Graecians. 36.158.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson.


